FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10536

21 May 1982

Translation

OPERATION OF

SHIPBOARD HYDROACOUSTIC STATIONS

By

V.A. Pokrovskiy and G.A. Shcheglov

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
“OTB

JPRS publications contain inforntion primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Haterials fron foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[l are supplied by ”RS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
nation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses vere not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as

given by source .

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.8. Government.

COPYRIGl‘l' MUS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING WRSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BB RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10536
21 May 1982

OPERATION OF SHIPBOARD HYDROACOUSTIC STATIONS

Leningrad BKSPLUATA‘I‘SIYB SUDOVYKB GIDROAKUSTICEESKIKB SWSIY in
Russian 1980 (signed to press 19 Sep 80) Pp 3-4, 78-19].

[List of symbols, sections 2-5 of chapter 3, chapters 4-7, conclusion.
references and table of contents from book “Operation of Shipboard
Bydroaconstic Stations”, by Vladlen Anatol'yevich Pokrovsxiy and
Gennadiy Aleksandrovich Shcheglov, Izdatel'stvo 'Sudostroyeniye',

3500 copies, 192 pages]
comm

List of swola........................................................... l
3.2. Instrunent oscillators.............................................. 2
3.3. Sound pressure meters. 11
3.5. Equipment for malyzing phae ad spectral d1aractaristios.......... 27

mapper lo. lbthoés of Making Hydmaoomtic masuremnts During
Operation of the Hydmacoustic Station........................ 36

10.1. Basic principles of noting hydroaonmtic and electronic
nuummteooeooooooosooooaosoonscope...00000000000000.0000ooooee-o 36

6.2. )bthods of measuring parameters of the reception part of the 88..... M.

4.3. Methods of measuring paranetars of the transnidtng part of

theHS 0000000000000000 to.oOooa...ooooo...0.0.0.000000000IOOOO'OOOOOO 51

(hapter 5. Methods of Planning the Level of Interference to
Operation of the Bydroacoustic Station........................ .‘52

5.1. Electrical interfemnoe to operation of BS and nthods of

-‘un'nCOocoacoo-Ocoooooooone.acoo0000000!oooeocooasooooooccoooao 52

5.2. Acoustic interference in HS operation and neasureunt nethods....... 57

-a- [I-USSR-G-POUO]

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Clapter 6. locating and Eliminating Malfmctions in lbdulss and
Oowments of Bydroacoustic Stations........................... 61

6.1. Factors that determine restorability of hydroacoustic stations....... 61
602. mublcshooting ”aloha-oases.osoooaoaooo.aoocaoaaacaooooaoooooooooo 67

6. 3. lb thods of correcting principal nalfmctions of ncmponents and
suhassedalies in shipboard hydroacomtic stations. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 75

Olapter 7. Ergonomic Factors and Possibilities for Taking 'nnn Into
Consideration 1n the Process of Operating lydroaooustic

statim....o....o.....o..ao....o.o...o...o...oo...............

$2

7.1. lble of the operator in the m-uadtins maplex................. ....

7.2. Some human operator characteristics with regard to receiving and
processing displayed information..................................... 85

7.3. Accounting for ergmonic factors during operation of hydro-
accmtic stations...0.00D....OOCOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOUOCI0.0.0000...I... 91

cmclusim.OOOOCOIOOOOIOOOO0.0.0.0....IUOOOOOOOOOOIDOIOOOUOOCOOOOOOOODOOIOO 95
References................................................................. 96
mtents...0.00.000....OOOIOOIIOOIO0....I.00......IOOOCOIDOCIUOOOOI.0000... 1m

MWLIBEONLY
roe OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

[Text] List of Symbols

s--l) probability of error of the first kind (false alarm); 2) proba-
bility of erroneous rejection of produced items (systems) due
to unsatisfactory test results of some part of them (manufac-
turer's risk);
0R. ac. (gr-temperature coefficients of change in values of resistance R.
capacitance C. inductance L;
snl) coefficient of spatial attenuation; 2) probability of error
of the second kind (niesed signal); 3) probability of erroneous
acceptance of production items (systems) due to satisfactory
test results of some part of them (customer's risk);
r-antenna concentration coefficient;
6—discrimination coefficient in sonar equation;
ctr-sensitivity angle of antenna directivity;
t... Ar—accuracy of coordinate determination (for direction s and distance
1‘ 3
Awoverall amplitude-phase nonidentity of electroacouatic antenna
transducers;
ca,a--ac0ustic antenna sensitivity;
crusensitivity of hydroacoustic facility as a whole;

n--ef f ic iency ;
“6’ vr-resolution of hydroacoustic facility with respect to direction and

distance;
e-width of principal naximum of directivity pattern;

n--bu1k modulus of elasticity;
x-—1) wavelength; 2) failure rate of elements and nonrestorable sys-

tens;
A—failure rate of reatoreble systems;
p, v—designation of linits for field of tolerance on parameter a (an.

av) ;

FOROFI'ICIALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

p—naterial density;
o—root-«aean-aquare deviation;
1--instantaneoua time displacelent, pulse duration;
¢-spatia1 angle;
Mines angle;
tar-angular frequency;
ai—l) i-th parameter of hydroacoustic facility; 2) linear dimension;
Af—anoualy factor;
c—velocity of sound;
c--capacitnnce;
d—linear dinenaion, diameter;
D-l) range of action of hydroacouatic facility; 2) detonation coeffi-
cient;
E—Young's nodulus; electronotive force (elf);
f—frequency;
f (a)-probability density function of instantaneous values of parameter a;
F(a)—distribution function;
g—acceleration of free fall;
G(f)—spectral density of power;
G—sensitivity of antenna to random errors;
h—depth;
n--anount of information;
J—acoustic signal intensity;
I--current;
k—coef ficient;
Z—linear dinension;
L—inductance;
q—signal-to-noise ratio;
Q-l) inteiferenca inunity; 2) storage factor of oscillatory tank cir-
cuit;
p--sound pressure
P--probability;
Panacoustic pover;
r—distance, radius;
Ila—equivalent radius of target;
R(¢)—directivity pattern;
S—area;
SUM—amplitude spectrum;
twelapsed tine
‘r—tine interval, duration;
u—dvoltage;
v-ovelocity;
V—l) value; 2) probability of recovery;
u—control confidence coefficient;
“SH—electric power;
X. y. z—coordinates;
3--efficiency.

”.2. Instrument oscillators

In technical operation of hydroacoustic facilities. instrument oscillators
are used to handle two major jobs: setting up a scund field in water jointly

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR (ll-1'10“]. USE ONLY

with the measurement emitter to determine electroacoustic parameters of the
reception channel of the hydroacoustic station. and forming an electric signal
calibrated with respect to amplitude, frequency. duration and so on (standard
signal) to measure electric parameters, check operability of the electronic
part of the equipment and locate malfunctions.

The principal technical characteristics of instrument oscillators are: the
nature of the generated signal (shape. frequency spectrum and so on); dynamic
and frequency ranges; graduation error (with respect to frequency. amplitude
and the like) and stability of output signal parameters; output impedance;
output power; coefficient of nonlinear distortions.

Each unit of the oscillator used in hydroacoustic measurements (Fig. 3.2)
must meet specific requirements.

 

Fig. 3.2. Block diagram of instrument oscillator: 1-
audio oscillator; 2-frequency meter; 3-crystal-controlled
oscillator; b-pulse modulator; 5-switching circuit; 6--
line amplifier; 7-output attenuator; 8--power amplifier;
9-bandpsss filter; lO--noise generator

The master oscillator determines the nature of the generated signal. the
frequency band of the oscillator, the error of frequency calibration and signal
frequency stability. In technical operation. hydroacoustic stations typically
use sine-wave master oscillators with continuous frequency tuning. and fre-
quency spectrum oscillators (noise generators).

Type RC oscillators are widely used as master sine-wave oscillators. The
advantages of these oscillators are wide frequency band. uniform scale. high
stability of signal parameters. simplicity of circuitry and construction.

The accuracy of frequency setting and readings is improved by using special
scales: either a mechanical scale of great length determined by the transfer
number of the vernier ("CV-1H").. or an electronic scale with continuous
monitoring of the signal frequency by a built-in digital frequency meter
("Generator").

The major requirement for master noise oscillators is continuity of the signal
spectrum over the entire frequency range, and frequency independence of each
frequency component ("white" noise). Noise generators based on thyratrons.
and especially on semiconductor diodes have come to be most extensively used
in special hydroacoustic equipment. The noise signals used in hydroscoustic

FOP OFIHCJAI.USE1ONLY
FKII()FFIC]Al.lh5E2(MVLY

facilities usually have a limited frequency spectrum. and therefore to in-
crease the spectral density of the controlling noise signal, provisions may
be made in the circuitry of instrument oscillators for inclusion of bandpass
filters to isolate the necessary frequency band from the wide-band noise.

Pulse measurements play an important role in hydroacoustics. and therefore

a pulse modulator is included in the oscillator circuit to shape square pulses
via a switching circuit that are filled with sine-wave or noise signals. The
pulses used in hydroacoustic measurements have durations from a few millisec-
onds to several seconds. and a recurrence rate of no more than a few hertz.
There are no rigid requirements on the enumerated parameters. and pulsers

are made in the form of simple switching devices in the output signal circuit
of the master oscillator.

The signals generated by the master oscillator are sent to e preamplifier.
for which the major requirement is uniformity of frequency response. This
amplifier should have gain control (in the "one-volt" circuit) for setting
voltage of a given value at the output. A built-in voltmeter is used to moni-
tor this voltage.

The attenuator. or output divider. is a precision potentiometer with scale
graduated in microvolts. The attenuator scale can be used after a voltage
calibrated by voltmeter has been set at its input. usually equal to one volt.

From the standpoint of matching to the load. the attenuator must have minimum
Output resistance. The lower the internal impedance of the oscillator output
as compared with the impedance of the external circuit. the closer will be
the correspondence between the voltage drop across the external circuit and
the reading of the attenuator scale. For practical purposes. the output re-
sistance of the output divider should not exceed 10 ohms. To reduce the in-
fluence of electric pickups at low output voltages. the attenuator is relia-
bly protected by a massive shield.

The power of the signal taken from the attenuator output (fraction of a volt)
is totally inadequate for excitation of the emitters that produce the sound
field, and therefore the signal from the preamplifier output is fed to a power
amplifier. The following principal requirements are imposed on the power
amplifier: uniformity of frequency response; minimum coefficient of nonlinear
distortions (no more than 1-32); capability of matching the oscillator output
to different loads.

The last two requirements are interrelated since improper matching of the
power amplifier Output to the loads leads not only to a reduction of effi-
ciency, but also to distortion of the sinusoidal waveshape, which inevitably
produces harmonics in the signal spectrum. Hatching involves ensuring equal-
ity of the normalized impedances of the power amplifier output and the emitter
input. This is usually done by using a wide-band output transformer that

has a sectionalized secondary winding. Depending on the impedance connected
to the emitter output. more or fewer turns of the transformer winding are
tapped. Hatching is checked by an oscilloscope connected in parallel with

the emitter. in accordance with the sinusoidal waveahape of the display.

FOR‘OFFKJA1.USE|DNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Since emitter impedance depends on frequency. the matching of oscillator out-
put to the load should be checked not only when changing emitters. but also
when there is a change in output signal frequency. The power amplifiers of
portable sets designed for signal power or lore than 10 H are usually made
as separate instruments.

The requirement for high accuracy of frequency readout (to 0.11) lead. to

the necessity for periodic or continuous calibration of the master oscillator
frequency scale. The various methods of calibration reduce essentially to
measuring the frequency of the master oscillator by a crystal-controlled oscil-
lator and frequency meter. The built-in frequency meter can also be used

for measuring the frequency of external sources through a special input.

Specialized oscillators and power anplifiera are used in practical tectmical
operation of hydroacoustic stations. Let us consider some of these.

The "CV-1H" wavemeter oscillator (Fig. 3.3) produces standard sinu-
soidal signals: cw, pulsed and All. The built-in frequency meter (wave meter)
of the device enables measurenent of the frequency of cw signals and the fill
factor of pulse signals of external sources.

   
   
 

x ocalibrati

 

m 175 u
I“ 'pulser
DJ "Ilof
n a
' om lI-ZmoduIation
“ qua:tz “ ' o

.; 13na11\%:€r§m9

Fig. 3.3. Block diagran of "CV-1H" instrument: Ins-aster
oscillator; 2. lZ—buffer stages; 3—electronie switch;
4--linear amplifier; S--attenuator; 6, ll. 16--aixers; 7--
nodulator; 8--monitoring voltmeter; 9-voltmeter display;
lO--amplifier; lJ—crystal-controlled oscillator; III—clock
nultivibrator; lSuduration nultivibrator

The oscillator of the instrument can operate in three modes: unmodulated
sine waves, amplitude modulation, and pulsed.

In all nodes. the master oscillator in RC circuit fora generates sine-wave

signals with frequency that can be continuously tuned from 0.3 to 100 His
in five sub-bands. Over narrow limits. the frequency of the naater oscillator

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

can be tuned by the "calibration" regulator. High precision of frequency set-
ting (0.12-0.25!) is achieved by using a long spiral scale (up to 1.2 m) cali-
brated by a crystal-controlled oscillator.

The one-volt potentiometer to which waveforms are sent from the master oscil-
lator output is used to set a voltage of l V across the output divider. The

voltage setting is monitored by a VTVH that should have the pointer set at
the l V mark.

The oscillator has two outputs: "1 volt" from which the voltage set on the
voltmeter scale is taken. and "W" from which a voltage is taken that is con-
tinuously variable from l W to 0.1 V. The impedance of the "IN" output is
10 9 on all stages of the divider except the last (XIOOOO).

The pulse oscillator is connected by the pulsar switch and shapes square pulses
with durations of 2.5. S. 10 and 20 ms with recurrence rate of l e.

The amplitude modulator is connected by the modulator switch. and provides
continuously variable modulation up to 802 for a sine-Have signal on constant
frequency of 600 as. In the H1 position of the modulator selector, the VTVH
is connected to the modulator output for checking percentage modulation. A
high-frequency filter suppresses the audio frequency of the operating modu-
later.

The output divider and VTVH of the device can be used to get a calibrated
voltage from an external source that does not have its own voltage diviier.
To do this. the signal toggle switch kills the power from all units of the
device except the VTVH. Voltage from the external source is fed to the "one
volt" jack. its magnitude is displayed on the 1 V scale of the voltmeter.
and the required output voltage is taken from the W plug.

The wave meter of the device is connected by the calibration selector. and
operates in two modes "cal." and "mm."

In the "was" mode. the wavemeter measures the frequency of the signal from

an external scurce connected to the "mm" input. 'mo signals—from the ex-
ternal source and from the master oscillator—are sent simultaneously to the
wave meter mixer. A low-frequency filter isolates the difference frequency

of the signals~-the beat frequency-and the difference signal after amplifica-
tion is sent to a telephone and through a detector to an electric eye cathode-
ray tuning indicator tube (6YeSS). The master oscillator is tuned until "zero"
beats are achieved on both indicators. corresponding to the difference fre-
quency. At this point. the earphones give ninimt- loudness. end the "pupil"
of the electric eye is opened to the maximum. The value of the measured fre-
quency is taken from the frequency scale of the master oscillator. Sensitiv-
ity with respect to the wave meter input is 0.5 V, and it can be reduced by
the "amplif." regulator.

The scale of the master oscillator is calibrated in the "cal." mode. This

involves establishing exact correspondence between the scale reading and the
actual frequency of the master oscillator. In this mode. a crystal-controlled

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

oscillator with resonant frequency of 5 it“: is connected to the mixer input
instead of the external source. The voltage of the crystal-controlled oscil—
lator is purposely limited. and the frequency spectrum contains a large mnber
of harmonics that are multiples of 5 kHz; therefore zero beats are observed

at corresponding points of the master oscillator scale. Less pronounced zero
beats can be observed on frequencies of the master oscillator that are multi-
ples of 2.5 kHz as well, which is attributed to the presence of second hereon-
ics of the fundamental frequency in the voltage of the master oscillator.

For example. for a scale point of 12.5 kHz. zero beats can be observed between
the second harmonic of the 12.5 kHz frequency and the fourth harmonic of the
quartz crystal.

For calibration. a scale value is taken that is a multiple of 5 kHz in the
band in which the measurements will be made. and the "calibration" control
is used to set the frequency of the master oscillator to give zero beats.
which will indicate exact correspondence of frequency to the value of the
scale.

The "CV" instrument differs from the "CV-1M" in scale design and calibra-
tion procedure. In calibrating this instrument. zero beats are first obtained
near a scale point that is a multiple of 5 Idiz. after which the cursor of

the scale is brought to this point.

    

17 ﬂ . a
gal w {”3
tpu t
I s coarse
u ignition &.ﬂ°‘;’o$%¥‘
71 -0ff 7‘ 11
as J 0

Fig. 3.1.. Block diagram of "ShGU" instrument: l--noise
generator; 2. 4. 5. 6—amplifiera; 3—bandpass filter;
7. 8--power supplies

The "ShGU" noise-generator amplifier (Fig. 3.10) shapes a sound field
in water jointly with an emitter incorporated into the device. Besides. the
instrument can be used as a power amplifier for any electric signals in the
frequency range from 0.5 to 100 kHz.

The instrument can be used in three modes: wide band. narrow band and ampli-
fier.

In the first and second nodes. the master noise generator based on a thyratron
generates noise voltage in the band of frequencies from 0.5 to 100 kHz. The
thyratron fires upon pressing the "ignition" switch. After preamplification.
the noise signal is fed either directly to the next stage ("wide band" mode)

or to the interchangeable bandpass filter ("narrow band" node) that limits

the frequency spectrum of the noise. An inverse-phase stage enables continuous

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

control of signal power. a built-in VTVH with two measurement ranges being
used to monitor the voltage sent to the emitter.

In the "aplifier" mode. the master oscillator is disconnected and an external
signal source can be connected to the input jacks. After power nplification.
this signal can be sent to the emitter and simultaneously taken from the out-
put jacks. If the emitter is not connected. the power amplifier can be dis-
connected from work by a contact block in an output coaxial plug to protect
the output tubes from the open-circuit state.

In addition to the emitter with stand. the instrument is equipped with s set
of eight interchangeable bandpass filters and a boom for holding the emitter.
The documentation furnished with the instrument includes curves for the mutual
dependence of output voltage. sound pressure and distance.

The emitter of the instruent is a tubular magnetostriction transducer made
of a tube of Nicosi alloy accomdating a permanent rectangular magnet with
winding having 15 turns of wire with cross section of 0.55 an. The resonant
frequency of the transducer lies in a range of 25-35 kHz.

00/ ”E .
l7

     
   
 

' frequencies 3/ .

coarse" s
fine
‘0 . K, I, a“ K‘
synchrony}. - n '

frequency . Hz {3 I

filter supply
(only in position 303)

Fig. 3.5. Block diagram of "Generator" device: l--mixer;

2--frcquency meter; 3—audio-frequency oscillator; b-wulser;

5--electronic switch; 6--buffer stage; 7-woltmeter circuit;
8--attenuator; 9—amplifier

The "Generator" oscillator-frequency meter (Fig. 3.5) produces standard
cw sine-wave and noise signals as well as pulse signals with audio filler.

The built-in frequency meter measures the instantaneous frequency of the master
oscillator and the frequency of signals of external sources.

The technical data of the "Generator" are similar to those of the "CV-1H".

The difference is the great expansion of capabilities of the pulse generator
and increased precision of frequency readout.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The instrument can be used in five modes: "wave meter", "tone", "pulse".
"noise 1" and "noise 2".

1n the "tone" mode. sine-wave voltage from the master oscillator (audio-
frequency oscillator K1) is fed from selector 3!. through a plate to the fre-
quency meter that acts as an electronic four-digit scale of the oscil-
lator. and through a plate of the same selector to the "output regulator"

(R7) that sets a voltage of l V on the Output attenuator. The voltage setting
is monitored by a voltmeter on the 3B [3-volt] scale. The attenuator design
is analogous to the "CV-1H" instrument; a standard signal is taken off from
the "u " coaxial output.

The circuitry of the instrument includes a final amplifier (Kb) for power
amplification of the signal and transmission to an emitter connected to the
output Jack. Supply to the final stage is fed through switch 36A only in
the 303 [30-volt] position. The voltage supplied to the emitter is simul-
taneously monitored in this case.

In the "pulse" mode. voltage from the output of the audio-frequency oscillator
is fed to the "output regulator" through a switching circuit controlled by

the pulse generator. The pulse generator includes an auxiliary "synchropulse"
output for synchronizing instruaents (oscilloscope and selector) connected

in the channel of the measurement hydrophone.

In the "noise 1" and "noise 2" modes. a noise generator is connected to the
output regulator instead of the audio-frequency oscillator, the frequency

meter and pulse generator are not used. and the other circuits remain unchanged.
In the "noise 1" node. the signal from the output of the noise generator is

fed directly to the output regulator. i. e. in a wide frequency band; in the
"noise 2" mode it is fed via a bandpass filter formed in the ”filter bloc'
device (see §3. 3). The filter block is connected to the "filter" plug on

the rear panel of the instrument.

The "wave meter" mode is used for rough meamrement of the frequency of cw
and pulse signals from external sources by a zero-beam method. and for exact
measurement of the frequency of cw signals by a digital frequency meter.

To realize the zero-beat method, mixer K5 is provided to which signals are
sent from the output of the audio-frequency oscillator and from the "Vave
meter" plug -— from an external source (through the output regulator in the
Wave meter" mode. and directly in the "pulse" mode). Headphones are used
for detecting zero beats by ear.

The digital frequency meter (Fig. 3.6) of the instrument is used to mea-
sure the frequency of cw sinusoidal signals of an external source and of the
master oscillator. The instruaent uses the method of counting the masher

of voltage periods of the frequency being measured in a standard time interval.

The time-mark generator is a crystal-controlled oscillator with resonant fre-

quency of 10 kHz. The frequency meter has three measurement ranges: XOJ.
XI and XIO, for which the measurement times are 10 s. l s and 0.1 s respectively.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

    

”.7 .
L _ finfrfi _m:1_t__4 discrete for scales

KI and x10

Fig. 3.6. Digital frequency seter: a—block diagram b—

voltage diagrm; l-cryetal-controlled oscillator; 2. 3-

frequency dividers; loudelay nultivibrator; 5--coincidence

circuit No l; 6—preparatory flip-flop; 7-reset Iulti-

vibrator; 8—controlling flip-flop; 9-coincidence circuit
No 2; lO—decade counter

The integer part of the masher is separated fro. the fractional part by a
decimal point with position that depends on the selected neasure-ent range.

On the xo.l neasureaent range. the frequency of the crystal-controlled oscil-
lator is divided by 105. end pulses with interval of 10 a go to the prepara-
tory flip-flop and delay nultivibrator (diagran I and Is). The preparatory
flip-flop is flipped (diagram III) and a negative differential triggers the
reset mltivibrator that pulses the four-digit counter to zero (diagran V).

At the ease tine. the preparatory flip-flop sends an enabling potential of
negative polarity to one of the inputs of coincidence gate 5. The delay nulti-
vibrator delays the tine-earl: pulse by 100 us. which is necessary for resetting
the circuit to zero. The delayed negative pulse (diagree II) flips the con-
trolling flip-flop for 10 s. i. e. until arrival of the next delayed pulse
(diagrae V). The negative enabling pulse of the controlling flip-flop is

fed to coincidence gate 9. and the "counter on" light is si-ultaneously lit.
The signal being neasured goes continuously to the second input of coincidence
gate 9. and for 10 s passes through the open coincidence gate to the counter.
The second delayed pulse of the tine-earl: generator returns the controlling
flip-flop to the initial state. CO‘MLehnc. gate 9 is blocked. counting stops
and the light is extinguished. At the ease tine. a positive differential '

of the controlling flip-flop pulse through the second input returns the prepa-
ratory flip-flop to the initial state (the preparatory flip-flop does not react
to the second positive pulse of the tinednarlt generator). The neasureeent

10

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USP. ONLY

result is fixed on the counter before arrival of the third pulse of the time-
nark generator (display tine). With arrival of the third pulse of the tine-

nark generator the process is reputed. Thus the total working cycle on the
"XOJ" scale is 20 s.

0:: the "Kl" and "XIO" scales. the preparatory flip-flop also enables operation
of coincidence gate 5 within 10 s. but since the controlling flip-flop is
flipped only for the tine between delayed pulses of the tine-Isrk generator.

the counter is on for l s or 0.1 s respectively. Thus in these ranges the
total working cycle is 10 s.

   
 
     

input 'fine gain '
control

 
 

0!! out at
nce. a

Fig. 3.7. Block diagran of "Power amplifier" set: 1--
aitter follower; 2--prealplifier; 3-final amplifier; 6-
voltneter circuit

The "Power anpl if ier" set (Fig. 3.7) anplifies signals sent to its input

and sets up the sound field in water jointly with the enittere that are part
of the device.

Gain is controlled by the "coarse” and "fine" gain potentialeters. The load
of the final aplifier is an output transfer-er with tapped secondary for
matching the output of the amplifier to the load. The umber of turns is
deter-iced by the setting of the "output impedance. 9" selector. The voltage

at the output of the set is sonitored by a built-in voltmeter with two nee-
surenent scales.

53.3. Sound pressure neters

Measurement of sound pressure is the nest typical task in hydroscoustic nea-
surenents. The neasureaents are based on converting sound pressure to elec-
tric voltage by an instrunent hydrophone (see §3.l). The sensitivity of in-
strunent hydrophones is relatively low - from units to tens of uV/dyne/cn2
and therefore direct measure-eat of the emf at the hydrophone output is prac-
tically impossible. Instrunent amplifiers (i. e. amplifiers with gain exactly
detersined throughout the frequency band) are used to anlify the enf developed
by the hydrophone. An rns Ac voltaeter is generally used for display.

The sound pressure p is defined as

I!

where u is amplifier output voltage neasured by the voltmeter. k is enlifier
gain. and Clin is the sensitivity of the hydrophone.

11

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OWAL USE ONLV

If It and Clim are determined beforehand. the voltmeter scale can he graduated
in units of sound pressure neasurenent.

The devices assenbled into the block diagrma corresponding to Fig. 3.7 have
been given the name of "sound pressure meters."

The principal technical characteristics of sound pressure meters are: fre-
quency response. amplifier input impedance. level of electrical set noises.
gain. dynamic range, coefficient of nonlinear distortions.

The nonuniformity of the frequency response of sound pressure meters should
not exceed 1-2 dB over the entier working frequency band. The shape of the
frequency response curve is determined primarily by the propertie: of the
hydrophone used in the sound pressure meter. The hydrophone can be treated
as a voltage generator that has a certain internal inedance ‘int and that
develops an eef B. The input impedance of the amplifier ‘in is the load in-
pedance of the hydrophone. impedances ‘int and 'in must be eatched on the
basis of conditions of ensuring a sufficiently uniform frequency response
and neximizing the ratio of signal voltage to the voltage of noises at the
asplifier input.

The maximum pover presented by the generator to the load is ensured by satis-
fying the equality ‘int' :13. It can be shown [Ref. 51] that for piezoelectric
sensors working outside of resonance. :1“: l/uco. i. e. the internal impedance
of such hydrophones depends on frequency. and the condition of optimum energy
matching cannot be met for a wide frequency band.

Fron Fig. 3.8 we can see that

lain
'in+ ”int.
Expression (3.6) implies that to reduce the influence of an; on the voltage
across the load it is necessary to satisfy the condition

 

“in ' (3. lo)

zm’lmt e (305)

In this case. the voltage across the load will be close to the emf developed
by the hydrophsne under no-load conditions.

It can be shown that satisfaction of condition (3.5) reduces thernal noises
in the circuit including the hydrophone and the amplifier input. The level
of electrical set noises of the maplifier normalized to the input should not
exceed a fee nicrovolts.

The internal impedance of spherical piesoceranic receivers usually does not
exceed a few hundred oils. and condition (3.5) is easily satisfied for these.
It may be difficult to match high-frequency hydrophonsa because of the fa-
creased internal capacitive reactance for mall-sired spheres.

Condition (3.5) may be violated when the connecting cable between hydrophone
and amplifier is very long (more than 50 n) as a consequence of the shunting

12

POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOI.0FF1C1AL.USE'0NLN

action of the distributed capacitance of the cable. Therefore in deepdwater
measurements preamplifiers are used that are combined with the hydrophone

and power supply in a unified sealed enclosure. The preamplifier also compen-
sates for signal attenuation in the cable and increases the signal level with
respect to possible electrical pickups on the cable route. To reduce the
level of acoustic interference of external sources during measurements. band-
pass filters are used that are included in the instrument amplifier circuit.
The passband of the filters is selected on the basis of the condition of un-
distorted transmission of a signal that has a finite spectrum. For example.
for undistorted transmission of a pulse signal of duration 1 the passbsnd

of the amplifier may be selected from the condition Af- 1.51.

The gain of the instrument amplifier must be exactly defined throughout the
working frequency band since it is only in this case that the scale of the
instrument can be calibrated in sound pressure units in accordance with formula
(3.3). Therefore the gain is adjusted by calibrated attenuators and provision
is made in the sound pressure meter circuit for calibrating the amplifier

to compensate for variation of gain due to aging of components, influence

of external conditions and the like. Calibration is done with the hydrophone
connected to the amplifier input.

The dynamic range of the amplifier determines the range of input signals that
can be transmitted without distortion to the display. The dynamic range of

the amplifier that is part of the sound pressure meter must not be less than
the dynamic range of the hydrophone. i. e. as wide as 120-160 dB. The dynamic
bandwidth is determined mainly by the properties of the amplifier input stage
in which sufficient gain reserve must be ensured at minimum interference level.

Deviations of the amplitude response from linear within the dynamic range
give rise to nonlinear signal distortions. These are evaluated by the coef-
ficient of nonlinear distortions

Vug+u§+ .1

“1

her:

where u1. u;. u,.... are the effective values of the first. second, third.
etc. harmonics of the signal being studied. The coefficient of nonlinear
distortions of sound pressure meters must not exceed 1-21.

electronic voltmeters incorporated into the instn-ent amplifier are used

as the displays in sound pressure meters. The voltmeter circuit must provide
capabilities for measuring voltages of both sine-wave and noise processes.
This requirement is met by rms voltmeters with readings corresponding to the
effective value of the measured voltage regardless of waveehape.

Pulsed sound pressures are usually measured by an electronic oscilloscope
connected to a special output of the instrument amplifier.

"12D" [sound pressure meter] and "Voltmeter" sets are most extensively used
in practical operation of hydroacoustic facilities.

13

FOI‘OFFKJAI.USE(NNLY
l-‘OIOMCIALWEONLV

 

Fig. 3.8. Block diagram of ”121)" set: l—hydrophone; 2.

lo. 7. 12. Iii—amplifiers; 3. llo—sttenuators; 5. 6--filters;

8-csthode follower; 9. 10. ll-woltmeter circuit; lS—cali-
bration oscillator

The “121)" set (Fig. 3.8) is used for measuring both continuous and pulsed
sound pressures. This set includes a spherical hydrophone. instrument ampli-
f ier and VT“! unified into a single instrument. and eight interchangeable
bandpass filters.

The first amplification stage is based on a tube with high transconductance.
providing a dynamic range of up to 120 dB. The lover limit of measurable

sound pressure is l dyne/cm’. A step attenuator provides signal attenuation
by 120 dB in 10 d3 steps.

The frequency response curve of the maplifier is shaped by interchangeable
bandpass filters that are connected in a break in the signal circuit in the
"narrow“ node. In the ”wide" mode the amplifier passes a wide frequency band
that is limited on the low side (300 Hz) by high-frequency filters. The ampli-
fier circuit includes two special outputs for connecting a chart recorder.

an oscilloscope or other instruments. The signal goes to these outputs through
cathode followers; the level of the signal sent to the chart recorder is ad-
juateble.

The voltmeter circuit includes a diode rectifier. an integrating circuit and

a measurement bridge with meter indicator connected in one of the diagonals.

The voltmeter characteristics are determined by the values of the components
that make up the integrating circuit; the combination of components can be
varied by switching the instrument to the different neasurement modes: "pulse".
”noise" and "tone". The amplitude of singly recurring sound pressure pulses
can be measured in the "pulse" mode. In this mode. a storage capacitor is
nearly instantaneously charged through the voltmeter rectifier. and the voltage

1‘

MWMONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

across the capacitor is neasured by the voltmeter. After each measurement.
the capacitor must be discharged by pressing the zeroing button. In the ab-
sence of a signal. the measurement bridge is balanced by the "zero set" con-
trol.

The display scale is graduated in dynes/cn2 and dB. The zero level of the
(logaritlnic) scale is taken as a sound pressure of l dyne/cm'l. The instru-
ment readings taken from the logarithmic scale are sued with the "mess.
range" index of the step attenuator. Due to considerable nonuniformity of
the "121)" frequency response. the readout results must be corrected by a cali-
bration curve given in the instructions for the instrument. The calibration
curve is plotted with the hydrophone connected. and therefore no other hydro-
phone can be used than the one included with the set.

The gain of the "IZD" asplifier is 100 (60 dB). to cospensate for the change
in gain resulting from aging of components. changing tubes and so on. provision
is nade for calibrating the instnnent by a special heterodyne. In the "bet.”
mode a calibration signal is sent directly to the voltmeter. where it is nea-
sured. In the "cal." node. a signal fro- the heterodyne goes to the amplifier
input through the connected hydrophone. The position of the 140 d3 attenuator
corresponds to gain of unity. and the readings of the inatrusent in the "hat."
and "cal." modes should coincide. Otherwise. the awlification of the set
must be adjusted by the calibrate control until the readings in both modes
agree exactly.

In contrast to the "120", the "Volt-star" set can be used as a sound pres-
sure neter. rms M: voltmeter and instrument amplifier. In addition to the
neasuring instrunent. the "Voltmeter" device includes a set of three spherical
hydrophones for measurement in different frequency bands.

 

Fig. 3.9. Block diagram of “Voltaeter” set: l—preanpli-
tier; 2. 7. 8—buffer stages; 3—attenuator; A. Swampli-
tiers; 9—squaring circuit; lO--calibrator

The instrument (Fig. 3.9) has three measurement scales: "xo.l". "XI" and
"x10". Measurements on the "xo.l" scale use a prenplifier with gain of 10.

15

FOIOFFICIALUSEONLY
FOR OFFIOAL USE ONLY

For operation on the ".10" scale. a voltage divider based on resistors RI
and R2 is connected in the signal circtit.

Provision is ends in the anplit'ier circuit for connecting bandpass filters
that are unified into a separate "Filter block”. The Iain nplifier of the
"Volt-eter" set has s gain of 1500. which can be regulated over a wide range
by the "calibrate" control. An oscilloscope can be connected to the output
plug when asking pulsed unsure-ants. An rns volt-eter (units [6 and K7)

is used in the set.

The nplifier is calibrated by a pulse signal free a calibration oscillator
(unit K3) that generates square-wave voltage with stable anplitude of 100 IN.
The signal is sent to the aplifier input by pressing the "cal." button.

frequency band setting. the

‘P--—-7 P's—L--.'

I !mnr I .

          

   

N71;

.""'"" ;------7 f
qggg gﬁzf ﬂ: «2:; ﬁlter
12 ‘7
in 'IZI ' ‘3' I
P“ f' - — -- - 7 " """ 7 output
:2!

,____, ,--__,

ﬂ ' m '
,-__-, , _-,
I m I m

,_
m
Fig. 3.10. Block diagraa of "Filter block"

The "Filter block" is used in conbined operation with the "Voltneter" or
”Generator" (see §3.2). This device (Fig. 3.10) is a set of series-connected
lower-frequency and upper-frequency filters with cutoff frequencies in each
group differing by l octave. and the cutoff frequencies of the groups stag-
gered by H-octaves. By switching filters in the necessary conbination. the
psssband of the amplifier can be restricted to a H-octave.

63.4. Display and recording devices

Display and recording devices are used for observing. measuring and recording
processes at the output of hydroacoustic stations.

In the operation of hydroacoustic facilities. electronic volt-stars and oscil-
loscopes are extensively used as displays. and signal-level chart recorders
and tape recorders are widely used for purposes of registration.

16

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Electronic voltmeters are used to measure voltages resulting from conver-
sion of acoustic processes to electrical. and also for monitoring the working
state of hydroacoustic stations by taking voltage measurements at control
points. Electronic voltmeters are used in combination with with hydrophones
for measuring sound pressure (see §3.3).

A specific requirement to be met by voltmeters used in hydroacoustic work

is the capacity for measuring voltages of complicated waveshapes. This re-
quirement is satisfied by rns voltmeters. In addition. in order to be capable
of measuring voltages at different points of hydroacoustic stations. the volt-
meters used must be universal. i. e. suitable for measuring both DC and AC
voltages.

In §3.3 we considered the specialized ”Voltneter" set that is an electronic

AC voltmeter. Monitoring and measurement instrumentation uses a general-
purpose type "III" voltmeter (signal level indicator).

input =

 

Fig. 3.11. Block diagram of "III" instrument: 1. 7--output
circuits; 2--amplifier; 3. lo. S—voltnetcr circuitry; 6-
limiter

The signal level indicator (Fig. 3.11) measures the rms value of sine-
wave and noise voltages and DC voltages in the circuits of hydroacoustic sta-
tions. It has measurement ranges for AC voltages from 0.03 to 100 V, and

for DC voltages from 1 to 1000 V. A potential of 10 ml! is taken as the zero
level of the logaritlnic scale.

The functional circuit of the "IU" instrument contains separate DC and AC
voltmetera and a canon display. The AC voltmeter circuit contains a cathode
follower loaded by a voltage divider, a wide-band amplifier and a square-law
detector. The use of a cathode follower with low internal impedance ensures
linearity of the stage up to 100 V. obviating the need for a high-impedance
input divider with large capacitance. The low input capacitance keeps the
high input impedance of the voltmeter constant at 0.5 m up to a frequency

of 100 kllz. In turn. the frequency response of the low-resistance (30 k0)
voltage divider that is used is nearly independent of the capacitance of the
following stage.

17

FOROFHCIALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Fig. 3.12. Disgr- of voltmeter in "m" set: swan; b—Dc

In measuring AC voltage. a square-lav half-wave detector is used (Fig. 3.12)
that is based on one half of duodiode 111. The second half 11: is used for
coapenaating the initial current of 111 under no-signal conditions. Meter

V is connected to the output of the instrulent through the voltneter "neas.
node" selector in positions "I'" or "noise" (see rig. 3.11). In the "noise"
position. capacitence C (Fig. 3.12) is nultiplied by six. giving a display
tine constant of 40-6 s.

A bridge neaeurenent circuit is used in the no voltneter (rig. 3.12b). To
limit the current through the display neter. a diode liniter is included that
shunts the input of the bridge circuit when the voltage across it exceeds '
3.8 V. For convenience in using the instrunent. a selector is provided for
switching polarity of the displey neter in accordance with the polarity of

the input signal .

Electronic oscilloscopes are videly used for neasuring anplitude and dura-
tion of pulse signals. for determining the frequency of signals by Lissajou
figures. and also for on-ths-spot nonitoring of signal veveshape to detect
nonlinear distortions. clipping distortions and the like.

Bydroacoustic Iessurenent practice uses general-purpose oscilloscopes that
met nest special requirenents. and in particular the frequency responses
of awlifiers nust per-it operation at cooperatively low frequencies (free
no to mndreds of Idle). the CRT is selected to have long persistence. and
a horizontal scanning range that is netched to the ties pare-eters of pulses
to be neasured (durations from a fraction of a nillisecond to 10 seconds).

'frhese requirenents are net nost coepletely by the 81-6 and 8-19 instrusents.
"and by other low-frequency oscilloscopes. nonitoring and neuurseent instru-
ne'ntation includes the ”01" (oscilloscope aster). '

The "01" instrunent (Fig. 3.13) enables observation of vaveshape and nes-
eurenents of nplitude and duration of AC pulses; observation of waveshape
and ensue-ants of anplitude of periodic signals; frequency neasurenent by
the Lissajou figure nethod in conjunction with the "av-m" instmnent or some
other audio-frequency oscillator. .

n

MUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

    

5.‘ a oscan amplitude
‘3 “c W‘s“. m U oshift left. right

7': . fine
ginning

Pig. 3.13. Block diagram of "OI" inetruent: l—attenuator;
2. 3. S. 6. 9~amplifiers; 6, 7—cathode followers; 8—ecan
oscillator; lO-Ac calibrator; ll—DC calibrator

The process to be studied is sent to the "vertical input” terminals. The
input attenuator ["attenuation"] per-its signal reduction by factors of 10.
[00 or 200'. First-stage amplification in the vertical deflection amplifier
can be controlled by adjusting a fine-tuning gain potentiometer.

The amplitude of the signal arriving at the "vertical input" terminals can

be measured by an amplitude meter. when the "calibrate" button is pressed.

the investigated signal going to the amplifier input is replaced by a voltage
of controllable magnitude on the line frequency. the aplitude being indicated
on a built-in meter. By using the "calibrator control" potentiometer to adjust
the calibration voltage, the image on the screen is made to coincide with

the investigated signal, after which a meter reading is taken. The voltage
fed to the instrument input in deternined by multiplying this reading by the
input attenuator index.

The amplitude of DC pulses is measured by using a special input on a side
panel of the instrument from which a signal is sent to the cathode follower
of the vertical deflection amplifier. The measurement is taken by comparing
the magnitude of been dflection under the action of the investigated signal
with the calibration voltage of +2 V that is sent in place of the signal when
a button is pressed under the input jack.

The horizontal scanning generator provides five modes depending on type of
scanning: continuous. driven-sweep with variable duration. and driven-sweep
with three fixed durations. The frequency of continuous canning and the dura-
tion of the driven sweep can be regulated in stages by using the "scan. as"
selector.

Horizontal scanning is synchronized by a signal sent from the first stage
of the vertical deflection amplifier through a synchronization awlifier with

19

MWWONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

gain that can be controlled by the ”sync" potentioneter. The gain of the
horizontal deflection channel is adjusted by the ”scan .plitude" potential-
eter. when a scanning voltage is sent fron an external source. the scanning
generator is autonatically disconnected by a nicroavitch installed in the
'horiz. input" jack.

It should be borne in'nind that the "shift left. right" potentioueter acts
only in the continuous and variable driven-sweep scanning nodes. In the fixed
driven sweep node the spot goes off-screen. and the leading edge of the ob-
served pulse is brought into registration with the zero point of the scale

by the “scan a-plitude" potentioneter.

Signal level chart recorders are used in case of necessity for prolonged
recording of the envelope of an investigated process (1. e. the signal level).
The advantage of chart recorders is the capability for keeping a graphic record
directly during neasurenent. enabling on-the-spot monitoring of research re-
sults. In operating hydroacOustic stations, the use of signal level chart
recorders in conjunction with other instruments enables auto-sting a amber

of labor-intensive jobs such as measuring directivity patterns. reception
interference level. frequency and spectral characteristics and the like.

The nost widely used chart recorders in hydroacoustic neasureunts are the
Soviet 13-110. and the Danish Bruel and Kjor instruments types 2306. 2305 and
2317. The design of these instrunents is essentially the sane. reducing to
an automatic control circuit that enables continuous tracking of changes in
the level of voltage sent to the input of the instrument.

 

Pig. 3.14. Block diagran of n-uo chart recorder: 1-

input attenuator; 2--functional divider; 3-~a-plifier; IP-

detector; Swadder; 6—reference voltage source; 7—liniter;

8-DC anplifier; 9—stator winding of notor; lO-rotor

winding of motor; ll—vibrotrenaducer; 12-400 as oscil-
lator; 13-40 W calibrator

The 8-110 chart recorder (Fig. 3.16) has three operating nodes deternined
by the position of the "bode" svitch:

20

FOIOFHCIALUSIONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

-recording voltage level on audio and ultrasonic frequencies (from 20 E:
to 200 kHz) (selector in "~" position);

--recording instantaneous voltages that vary slowly in the range from 0 to
S “a (switch in "-" position);

--mode of automatic stabilization of the level of physical quantities such
as sound pressure that have been converted to voltage (selector in middle
position).

As a rule, only the first mode is used to measure parameters of hydroacoustic
stations.

In all modes the signal goes to the attenuator input that attenuates the signal
to 50 dB in S-dB steps. In all attenuator positions the input impedance of

the chart recorder remains constant at ‘0 ha. The voltage from the attenuator
output is sent to functional voltage divider 2. which is a wire-wound tapped
potentiometer that acts as the sensing link in the automatic control system.
The voltage taken by the sliding contact from part of the functional divider

is amplified by AC amplifier 3. rectified by detector 6 and sent to adder

5 in negative polarity; the adder also receives no reference voltage in posi-
tive polarity from reference voltage source 6.

The difference signal taken from the adder output is snplified by DC amplifier
8 and sent to motor winding 9. Pastened to one side of the motor armature

is the recording pen. and on the other side is the sliding contact of the
functional divider. The armature shifts the sliding contact in the direction
that reduces the voltage difference at the adder output. Motion stops when
the rectified signal voltage becomes equal in absolute magnitude to the con-
stant reference voltage. Any change in the input voltage causes a motor con-
trol signal to appear at the adder output, shifting the sliding contact to

the point of the functional divider where the signal voltage corresponds to
the compensation voltage. In this way. the voltage across the sliding contact
is held constant during operation. This property of the chart recorder is
used in the mode of stabilization of physical quantities; the "div. output” '
and "amp. input" plugs are provided in the circuit for realization of this
mode. Obviously in the absence of an input signal the sliding contact will
be moved by the reference voltage to the end position (the upper position

in the diagram). 1. c. it will lock out, while application of the compensation
voltage to the functional divider will shift the pen to the zero point of

the scale. For the N-llO recorder. this voltage is 10 mV, and readings of
the voltage level are taken from this point in decibels on a logarithmic scale.
In the "-" mode. the contacts of vibrotransducer 10 driven by oscillator 12
that generates voltage on a frequency of A00 Rs are switched into the signal
circuit. Thus in this mode a DC signal is converted to AC voltage. The ini-
tial recording level is selected by feeding ac voltage from a special source
through the "const. voltage" control.

The nature of the scale is determined by the law of resistance distribution
lengthwise of the functional divider. The chart recorder is equipped with
a set of interchangeable dividers: three logarithmic having a dynamic range

21

FfHI(NﬁN(1Al.lEﬂE(NVLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

of 25. 50 and 75 dB. and one linear with dynamic range equal to that of [vibro-
transducer] 11. The dynamic range Du for the logarithmic scales is defined

by the expression 1).,- 201g (nun/W, where u.“ and nun are the voltages
corresponding to the final and initial readings of the scale (“ain' 10 mV).
For the linear divider. the dynamic range '1' is defined as 1""max/‘hin- The'
level of the voltage fed to the chart recorder input relative to “min' 10 ml
is defined as the sum of the reading taken from the chart recorder strip and
the reading corresponding to the selected position of the input attenuator.

To convert the result to a zero level equal to l V. 60 d3 must be subtracted.

It should be emphasized that normal operation of the chart recorder depends
primarily on the state of the co-utator field and the sliding contact of
functional divider 2. Corrosion. contamination and mechanical damage of these
components cause an abrupt increase in measurement error. and disrupt stable
operation of the follow-up system.

Amplifier 3 of the chart recorder has a "zero level" control that can be used
for gain calibration of the .plifier. For calibration. a voltage of 10 mv
is fed to the chart recorder input from an internal source. Calibration is
done by setting the pen to zero on the scale with the input attenuator com-
pletely removed.

Capacitor C is connected in parallel with the detector load. and realizes

time averaging of the rectified signal. A change in value of this capacitor
shifts the lower limit of the chart recorder passband. An increase in capaci-
tance expands the frequency response in the low-frequency region and reduces
the static error of measurement. 0n the other hand. increasing the capacitance
increases the time lag of the follow-up system. resulting in an increased
dynamic tracking error, smoothing of level fluctuations. limiting pen displace-
ment velocit; (recording rate) and impairing stability of the system. Thus
the position of the "lower freq. limit" control must be chosen to conform

to the nature of the process.

Potentiometer R is the detector load. and at the same time performs the func-
tion of adding the signal and reference voltages. The "div. limit" control
has been introduced to compensate for the change in transfer factor of the
chart recorder when functional dividers are changed. The transfer factor

of the chart recorder increases with expansion of the dynamic range of the
divider. An extreme increase in the transfer factor may lead to intensifi-
cation of self-oscillations of the system. while reduction smooths out the
processes being recorded. Therefore the position of the "div. limit" control
must be matched to the rating of the working functional divider.

The last link of the follow-up system--the actmting motor with DC amplifier 8
--is covered by negative velocity feedback. The feedback circuit includes

the tachogenerator motor winding 10. and the "recording rate" feedback depth
control. The velocity of armature movement increases as feedback weakens.

An increase in recording rate is advisable only if it has not been previously
restricted by capacitance C. An extreme increase in recording rate may put

the system out of the stable state. and therefore the positions of the "later
freq. limit” and "recording rate" controls nust be matched. The maximum possi-
ble recording rate is determined by control signal limiter 7.

22

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFIGAI. USE ONLY

The N-llo chart recorder leaves a record on paper tape by scratching a mag-
nesium coating with a needle. The paper is 50 mm wide. Paper of two types
is used: A--with black backing and white coating to get a contrasty image,
and B-dwith transparent backing and red coating to produce photocopies by
contact printing. The paper is moved at constant velocity by a tape-transport
mechanism driven either by its own electric motor. or by an external device
through a special shaft. The tape transport speed can be varied from 0.003
to 100 tun/s. The tape transport mechanism can be used to activate a variety
of mechanisms used in conjunction with the chart recorder such as a frequency
spectrum analyzer. audio-frequency oscillator and the like. To do this. two
rollers with right-hand and left-hand rotation are provided with speeds that
can be varied from 0.108 to 3600 rev/hr. The set has a can switch driven

by one of the rollers and enabling two processes to be sent alternately to
the chart recorder input.

Tape recorders. or instruments for magnetic recording and playback of
acoustic waveforms are extensively used for recording signals of complex shape.
Their advantage is the capability for repeated playback of a stored process
without repeating a complicated experiment. This is particularly convenient
in cases where the environment in which the recording is done does not permit
the use of cumbersome analyzing and recording equipment. In hydroacoustic
measurement practice. tape recorders are used to record the noises of ships.
hydroacoustic interference. and signals with the aim of subsequent processing
and analysis of the recording in the laboratory.

The principle of magnetic recording (Fig.
3.15) is based on altering the magnetic
state of a sound-recording medinn by using
an alternating magnetic field. The median
-- magnetic tape -- is moved at constant
velocity past three heads: Elk-erasure;
RIF-recording; I’ll—playback. The tape
is moved by a drive roller 0 against which
the tape is pressed by pressure roller R.
Alternating current from the output of
recording amplifier RA flows through the
winding of the recording head. The vol-
Fig. 3.15. Block diagram of tape tage of the signal to be recorded goes
recorder to the input of the recording amplifier.
The magnetic field of the recording head
magnetizes the tape. Thus a time change in current is recorded on the tape
as a a change in residual magnetization with respect to length. To ensure
linear dependence between the signal current and the residual magnetization.
current of higher frequency is simultaneously sent to the recording head from
magnetizing oscillator 01.

 

Residual magnetization forms a magnetic field around the tape. and as this
tape passes the playback head. the field induces a flux in the core of the
head that is proportional to the residual magnetization. The emf induced
in the winding of the head in proportion to the rate of change of the flux
is amplified by playback amplifier PA and transmitted to reproducers as a
copy of the signal recorded on the tape.

23

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
FOIOFFICIALUSEONLV

Before recording. the tape nust be denagnetised. i. e. the previous recording
must be removed. The function of tape denagnetiaation is performed by the
erasure head. Current is sent to the winding of this head from erasure oscil-
lator 02 that generates a waveform with frequency Inch higher than the upper
frequency of the signal to be recorded and with anplitude sufficient to astu-
rate the tape.

Thus the following principal components can be distinguished in any tape re-
corder: sound-recording mediun. tape-transport uchanin. magnetic beads.
recording and playback nplifiers. magnetizing and erasure oscillators and
reproducers. As a rule. the recording and playback functions in co-ercial
tape recorders are performed by general-purpose heads and uplifiers, and
the erasure and napetizing currents are generated by the an oscillator.

The sound-recording nadir. for east present-day tape recorders is powder-
oxide magnetic tape. Host extensively used are two-layer tapes consisting

of a base and a working layer. The base naterial is acetylcellulose or lylar
fill. Ferric ga-a-oxide and iron-cobalt ferrite (001e303) are used for asking
the working layer. Particle size is no larger than 0.!» ms. The powder is
applied to the surface of the backing by a special lacquer. The working side
of the tape is polished to reduce head wear due to abrasive action of the

file. and also to enhance sensitivity and inprove lengthwise uniformity of
sensitivity. The nonworking side of the tape is dull to improve winding qual-
ity.

Existing standards provide for production of nagnetic tapes with total thick-
ness of froe 12 to 55 an. Thickness of the working layer ranges from 6 to
16 us. The trend toward decreasing tape thickness results from the attempt
to maximize the duration of continuous recording. The limiting factor in
this trend is the tensile strength of the tape. and also extensibility under
load. The standard width of magnetic tape is 6.25 n. The use of old tapes
6.5 to 6.35 II wide my be detrimental to the directional properties of tape
recorders. Cassette tape recorders use tapes 3.81 m wide.

Magnetic tape quality is characterised by the following principal electro-
acoustic parameters: sensitivity and nonmifonity of sensitivity. frequency
response. level of nonlinear distortions and noise level.

Sensitivity (efficiency) characterizes the ratio of the residual magnetic

flux to the intensity of the low-frequency field of the recording head. In
practice. relative sensitivity is taken as the ratio of sensitivity of the
tape that is used to the sensitivity of a standard tape. expressed in decibels.
Variation in uniformity of sensitivity by :1 dB is heard as a change in loud-
ness. and is unacceptable for using tapes in measurements. Tape sensitivity
increases with increasing thickness of the working layer.

Frequency response of tape depends on many factors. Chief aeong these are
the “penetration effect" and "self-demagnetization". which show up as a drop
in frequency response in the high-frequency region. In the self-denagnetisa-
tion effect. elementary sections of the magnetic tape are demagnetised by
an external field with lines of force directed contrary to the internal flux.

26

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The intensity of this effect increases with decreasing ratio of the length
of an elementary nagnet to its thickness, 1. e. the shorter the wavelength

in depth of penetration of the magnetic field into the working layer of the

tape with increasing signal frequency. This effect is compensated by reducing
the thickness of the working layer.

In practice, the frequency response of the tape is defined relative to acne
standard tape as the difference between the ratios of efficiency on the upper
cutoff frequency to efficiency on the reference frequency. which is taken

on a linear section of the frequency response curve for both tapes.

Nonlinear distortions of the magnetic tape make the greatest contribution

to the overall nonlinear distortions that arise during mspetic recording.

These distortions are due to nonlinear dependence of remnant induction on
nagnetic field strength. Linearity of this dependence is considerably improved
by sending a high-frequency nagnetizing current with enlitude considerably
greater than that of the signal being recorded to the recording head simul-
taneously with the signal. Tape sensitivity during nagnetieation is consid-
erably inproved together with the increase in linearity of the renenent magneti-
zation curve (Ref. 31]. The negotiation at which tape sensitivity is' sari-\-
is called optimum magnetization.

The nsgnitude of distortions is usually evamsted with respect to the level
of the third harmonic expressed in percent relative to the level of the funda-
nental frequency.

Tape noises show up as an enf that appears at the output of the playback head
when a tape passes that contains no recording. They are caused principally
by nonunifornity of the structure of the working layer.

Tape noise can be reduced by shielding the tape and heads fro. the action
of external nagnetic fields. balancing the nsgnetizing current and setting
current at the opti-m value.

One special kind of tape noise is print-through. The essence of this effect
is in nutual magnetization of tape layers in contact on the reel. During
playback. the signal will be acconpanied by weaker copies of itself that may
lead and trail. The relative level of print-through on present-day tapes
is from -50 to ~56 dB.

In neasurenent practice. consideration nust be taken of such a tape property
as reduction of the recording level after the first few playbacks. For exam-
ple after the first playback the recording level decreases by about ”I; the
falloff in recording level stops after about ten pleybacks. Therefore. in
especially important cases a control signal of known level should be recorded
on the tape.

The tape-transport nechanisn ensures high constancy in the rate of nov-ent
of the aagnetic tape past the heads in the recorder. Standards provide for
the following nominal tape speeds: 38.1. 19.05. 9.53. 6.76 and 2.38 cn/s.

25

MMUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The instability of tape notion due to different nechenical conponents of the
tape recorder is characterized by wow and flutter defined as

Dr rune:
V

 

X ‘mxe

where Av.“ is sexin- drift of tape speed fro. nominal, and v is noninal
tape speed.

How refers to fluctuations of_tape speed of less than 10 a: frequency. and
flutter refers to fluctuations at a frequency greater than 10 Ila. Wow causes
periodic shifting of the frequency spectra and is heard as "wavering" of

the sound; flutter causes frequency "chopping" and is perceived as "warbling"
of the sound. 1"». wow and flutter of laboratory tape decks should not exceed
10.12.

In addition to handling its Iain job, the tape transport nechanisn also pro-
vides fast-forward and fast-ravind nodes. high-quality reeling and fast stop.

The recording head is a ring-type electronagnet ends up of two half-rings.

The forward or working gap contacted by the loving napetic tape is filled
with a thin layer of nomagnetic neterial. The width of the gap is nade ap-
proxinately equal to the thickness of the working layer. A relative reduction
in gap width leads to frequency distortions due to the "penetration" effect.
and an increase in gap width increases nonlinear distortions. The possibility
of overloading the recording head is reduced by a rear gap in the core that
increases reluctance. In addition. the rear gap reduces the level of noises
that arise as a consequence of rusanence of the core.

The playback head is analogous in design to the recording head. The difference
is absence of a rear gap since the low currents in playback cannot cause satu-
ration of the core. -

g- b

The playback head is the conponent that 3r

ukes the greatest contribution to non- 3'
linearity of frequency response of the
record-playback chamel.

One of the najor causes of frequency

distortions in playback is the finite

size of the head gap. It can be seen

fron Fig. 3.16 that as the wavelength

l of the recorded signals decreases,

the eef induced in the head decreases. Fig. 3.16. Effect of gap die-
and vanishes when a whole wave fits tortions: a—wavelength greater
into a section of the tape equal to than gap width; b—wavelength
the width x of the gap. This can be equal to gap width
attributed to cancelling of the oppo-

sitely directed eagnetic fluxes of elenentary sections of the tape of length
x12. These are called gap distortions. The position of the first linin-
that occurs on the frequency response curve as a result of gap distortions
is deter-iced by the ratio of the width of the working gap of the head to the

26.

MWLUSIONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

wavelength of the signals recorded on the tape x/l. wavelength is defined
as A-v/f. and consequently the upper frequency limit of magnetic recording
can be raised by reducing the width of the working gap and increasing tape
speed. In the general case. the width of the gap should not be greater than
half the wavelength of the upper frequencies of the signal. Frequency dis-
tortions similar to gap distortions arise when the working gaps of the heads
are skewed; they should be perpendicular to tape notion and parallel to each
other.

A second cause of frequency distortions
is direct dependence of head efficiency
on frequency an». sin wt. where u is
angular frequency. and 0. is the enli-
tude valm of magnetic flux.

The resultant frequency response of

‘ the record-playback channel is shown

Fig. 3.17. frequency response of the in Fig. 3.17. The falloff of the curve
record-playback channel at low frequencies lakes it difficult

to play back infrasonic signals.

 

The erase head differs in a such wider working gap (100-250 an) and higher
current (tens of IA). During travel past the head. each section of the nag-
netic mediu- is subjected to the alternating sagnetising action of a nagnetic
field that rises snoothly to saturation and then falls to zero. The frequency
of the erasure current is selected so that the upeticing force changes by
no nore than 11 during a period.

"mt. an

In addition to their usual function of signal .35
amplification. the record and playback aspli- '20
fiers also handle the no less important job "a ’ 4
of correcting the frequency response of the 0 V‘
channel comprising the recording head. sound- -10 7
recording 1|qu and playback head (Fig. 3.18). '2‘

' The amplifiers in tape recorders used for mea- "’0
surement purposes must be equipped with cali- m m m
bration devices. step attenuators for ampli- f: a!
fication control. and neters for neaeuring Fig. 3.18. Amplifier fre-
record and playback levels. quency responses: l—record;

2--playback; 3—resultant
It should be borne in mind that the sane tape
recorder must be used for recording signals and for playing then back during
analysis since each recorder has its own frequency response peculiarities.

§3.5. Equipment for analyzing phase and spectral characteristics'

The basis of directed action of hydroacoustic stations consists in accounting
for and making use of the phase structure of the acoustic signal field. Cal-
culation and design of receiving and sending acoustic antennas and devices

for directional action boils down to calculating phase relations in the elec-
tric circuits of equip-eat and antenna structures. Therefore rather severe

27

FOIOFFICIALISEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

requirements are imposed on the phase characteristics of hydroacoustic equip-
Ient. and particular attention mat be given to checking them. Phase esters
are used for analysing the phase characteristics of hydroacoustic equipment.

Phase meters neasure the phase shift between two voltages, and in hydro-
acoustic measurement practice they are used to verify phase identity of ulti-
channel receivers and amplifiers. Besides. phase eaters nay be incorporated
into sound speed asters based on using the phase method of measuraent. And
finally. nearly all hydroacoustic direction finders are devices that in one
way or another measure the phase difference of acoustic waveforms received

by separate coqonents or reception groups of an acoustic antenna.

M techniques are used for measuring phase difference in hydroacoustic tech-
nology: the compensation nethod. and the method of converting a phase shift
to a proportional time interval.

The compensation aethod involves using a graduated phase shifter to cancel
the phase shift between two voltages. Phase equality is determined by a null
indicator. and the sought phase shift is read out from the scale of the phase
shifter. The method is realised in hydroacOustic stations for determining
the direction to a signal source. where the phase shifter is a compensator
coupled to the course angle scale.

The method of converting a phase shift to a proportional tine interval is
used in lowfrequency phase esters for direct measurements in the circuits
of hydroacoustic stations. One of these. named the "Phase shifter". is in-
cluded in a special set.

 

Fig. 3.19. Block diagran of "Phase shifter" set: luphase shifter; 2. 3-

output attenuators; 4. Salimiter asplifiers; oncoincidence gate; 8-volt-
meter circuit

28

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The "Phase shifter" set (Fig. 3.19) measures the phase shift between two
sinusoidal waveforms from external sources. and splits the sinusoidal signal
from an external oscillator into two voltages phase-shifted through a continu-
ously variable angle. The phase shift is monitored by the scale of the phase
meter in the phase shifter.

The phase shifter (K1) is made in an RC circuit. To get the required frequency
band. the values of the circuit components are selected by the "frequency has"
switch that has three positions. Output voltages phase-shifted by 10-90‘

are sent to the "channel I" and "channel II" plugs through calibrated attenu-
store that are analogous in construction to those used in the ”Generator”

and "av-m" devices. The voltage sent to the attenuators - l V -- is moni-
tored by built-in voltmeter K5 in selector position B3-"IV". The phase shift
is checked by the phase meter with selector 31 in the "internal" position.

The phase meter of the instrument contains two identical limiter amplifier
channels K2 and K3 that convert the phase-shifted sine-wave voltages sent

to their inputs into square pulse sequences that are time-shifted relative
to one another. The time of coincidence of negative polarity of both series
of pulses is fixed by coincidence gate [4. Obviously. pulse duration at the
output of the coincidence gate is proportional to the phase shift. A meter
connected to the output of the coincidence gate in the "180'" position of
the B3 selector measures the average current of the pulse series. enabling
calibration of the instrmaent scale in degrees of phase shift from 0 to 180°.
Zero phase shif t of the input voltages corresponds to complete time coincidence
of negative-polarity pulses. and the average current of the coincidence gate
is maximum; therefore the zero of the meter is on the right.

The phase meter has provisions for three auxiliary modes switched by selector
B3. In the "zero set" position. both inputs of the coincidence gate are open
and the millivoltmeter needle is zeroed by the "zero set" potentiometer. In
calibration modes "IX" and "IIK'. voltage from an external source can be sent
to the input of the device. Calibration involves setting phase identity of
both channels by simulating zero phase shift alternately for each channel.

An exceptionally important place in hydroacoustic measurements belongs to
spectral analysis of complex signals, ship noises and interference to recep-
tion of hydroacoustic information. Theoretically. a caplet function can

be represented by a Fourier series consisting of separate harmonic components.
The procedure of resolving a complex waveform into components of definite
frequency and amplitude is called spectral analysis. Spectral analysis can
be used to solve such problems as objective classification of signals. locat-
ing sources of elevated noise and interference and the like.

Modern nethods of spectral analysis can be divided into two groups: filtra-
tion methods and Pourier transform methods. Filtration methods. which have
been more widely used in practice. have three varieties: direct filtration
methods. methods with preheterodyning and nethods with time compression of
the signals being studied. Instruments for spectral analysis are divided

into harmonic analyzers for sequential analysis of the spectrum. and spectrom-
eters for simultaneous or parallel analysis.

29

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

lnstrusents for sequential analysis may be based on using the method of direct
filtration and the method with preheterodyning.

The former method is used in selective amplifier circuits with working princi-
ple that consists in sequential tuning of a frequency-selective negative feed-
back circuit of a wide-band amplifier to separate frequency components of

the process. As a result of action of the feedback circuit. all frequency
components of the signal will be suppressed except those that correspond to

a dip in the frequency response curve of the feedback circuit at the given
instant. The width of the passband of selective RC amplifiers is constant
relative to the tuning frequency. 1. e. Af/fo-const throughout the frequency
band. Readout is usually by a meter with scale graduated in decibels or per-

cent of the measured frequency component with respect to the fundnsntal har-
monic of the signal.

In connection with expansion of the absolute band of analysis in the high-
frequsncy region. the use of selective amplifiers is limited to the infra-
sonic and audio ranges. The frequency band of analysers can be expanded into
the high-frequency region by using heterodyning to convert the frequency spec-
tru.

The working principle of the heterodyne analyzer consists in continuous shift-
ing of the investigated process relative to the narrow passband of a filter
with fixed tuning. The spectrum is shifted by a heterodyne with frequency

fh mixed with the signal frequency f.. The narrow-band filter isolates one

of the side frequencies fh+ f. or fh- f8 at the nixer output. The level of
the isolated frequency component is measured by a display. Since the width

of the filter passband does not change. the absolute width of the passband'

of heterodyne analyzers does not vary throughout the frequency band. This
limits the use of heterodyna analysers in the low-frequency region.

Instruments for parallel analysis are designed on the basis of using a direct
filtration method. The working principle of- devices of this type is based
on using a system of narrow-band filters with inputs connected in parallel.
and outputs alternately switched to the display by an automatic ccusutator.
The overall frequency response of the spectrometer is a "comb“ made up of

the frequency responses of individual filters intersecting on the level of
70! decline of the curve from the laxilllll value of the transfer factor of

the filter. When the investigated process is sent to the filter inputs. all
frequency components of the spectrua of this process that are isolated by
the filters will be observed simultaneously at the outputs. The spectrometer
filters have a constant relative passband width measured in fractions of an
octave.

The principal characteristic of the spectral analyzer is its resolution de-
fined as the capacity of the analyzer to distinguish adjacent components with
near frequencies. Quantitatively. resolution is evaluated by the smallest
frequency interval within which two adjacent cowonents are observed with

a dip equal to 50: of the maximum value. Resolution is primarily determined
by the parameters of the analyzing filters. and corresponds approximately

to the interval between average frequencies of spectrometer filters or to

the analysis bandwidth of the harmonic analyser.

I)

l-‘OIOFFICIALISEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

An advantage of harmonic analyzers over spectrometers is high resolution of
the instruments with fairly simple design. The cubersome selective system
of spectrometers on low audio frequencies precludes the use of filters with
bandwidth of less than 1I, of an octave. A considerable disadvantage of se-
quential-action devices is the limitation on rate of analysis that depends
on the duration of transient responses that arise in the selective part of
the instrusent during retuning.

It can be shown [Ref. 53] that the time necessary for rise of a signal to
952 of the steady-state value for a tank circuit with paaaband width Af is
defined by the relation

tl- l/Af, (3.6)

i. e. t; is the time necessary for analysing an individual frequency component.
The time required for analyzing an entire spectrum by the sequential-action
instrunent with absolutely constant analysis band at in the case of continuum
and uniform tuning of the analysis frequency can be found as

4(f -f ~
e: 2 lower . (3.7)

where fun," and f 10.,” are the limiting frequencies of the band being studied.

1.)

Thus for values of Af-6 n2. flower'zo a: and fupper- 20 has the mini-1m per-
nissible analysis time is 38 minutes.

In instruments of simultaneous analysis used for studying standard processes,
the rate of analysis is nearly unrelated to parameters of the filters used

in the selective system of the spectrometer since the investigated process

is continuously sent to all filters during the entire time of observation.
and the waveforms in the filters can be taken as steady-state for steady-
state processes. In this case. the maxim: pernissible rate of parallel anal-
ysis will be determined by the time constant of the display that is used.
Spectrum analysis may be practically instantaneous when electronic displays
are used in combination with high-speed col-utators.

Use of the eethod of time compression of the signal in sequential-analysis
devices increases the rate of analysis alnost to the level of parallel-action
devices while retaining high resolution. It can be shown [Ref. 55] that tine
compression of the process leads to nultiplicative transfer of its spectra
as a result of multiplication of the frequencies that make up the spectra-
by the time-scale transformation factor. or compression coefficient kt (Fig.
3.20):

Ti.r_ fc.r
Tc.r fi.r

 

 

- kt’ (308)

where T13. Tc“- are the durations of the investigated and converted realisa-
tion. f1.“ ch are the frequency components of the investigated and converted
spectrum.

Using (3.8) to transform (3.7) we get

31

FOIOFHCIALIJSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

“ktfu 4

r ' kt‘louer) 0qu, ' hover)

Expression (3.9) implies that the tins of analysis of a coqressed signal
decreases in proportion to the increase in the time-scale transfornation fas-
tor. Physically. acceleration of the process of analysis can be attributed
to the fact that s kt wider analysis band can be used for the expanded signal
spectru- vhile retaining the forner resolution by reducing the duration of
transient processes in the filter kg times. For example. in accordance with
(3.6) the time of analysis of an individual frequency conponent in a band

of 0.025 ll: should be I00 s; after signal compression with kt- 1.00000, the

band of analysis can be increased to 10000118. and the tine of analysis re-
duced to 0.1”.

 

Fig. 3.20. Deformation of spectrum in time compression:
anrealization and spectrum of process before conversion;
b-sfter conversion

Any time-scale converter includes a re- dela

cording device. storage unit and readout. “("59 11. ’ _ ‘

Signal compression is realized by increas- ' us

ing signal readout rate by In; times over input. _ output
1 2

the recording rate. Miniature equip-ant °—|'
nost frequently uses a delay line as G
the storage unit (Fig. 3.21). inr
Fig. 3.21. Block diagram of tine

The input of the device receives a signal
that is converted by switch St to a se- caprossor

quence of individual sanples (Fig. 3.22). According to Kotel'nikov's theorem.
the sampling period At ”is determined by the condition

1

“‘27—. (3.10)
upper
where fun,“ is the highest frequency contained in the spectrun.
If duration 11., is given. the umber of samples is defined as
Ti.r
“>T. Kappa-11“. (3.11)

MOWUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Fig. 3.22. Illustrating ’
tine conpression princi-

ple: sninput signal; I ‘
h--output signal ‘ '

\I
:1~

Each sample reading goes simultaneously to the output of the device and to
the input of the delay line where it is shifted at a finite rate. During the
tine between two adjacent salple. switch 8‘: (see Pig. 3.21) is in position 2
ensuring circulation of the given eagle in a closed ring with period ‘l'd equal
to the tins of the delay line. After tine ’14 the eagle shows up at the out-
put of the delay line and is fed to the output of the device and to the input
of the delay line. The idea of the method is that the secondary occurrence
of sanple l at the output of the device should precede the instant of switching
of 9w to position 1 by a tins AC"At/kto This is possible if Td-At-At'u-
At(l- l/kt). If switch a: is in position 2 for tine rd. and in position 1
for tile At-‘l'd- At' (switching tines are indicated by the broken lines on
Fig. 3.22). a col-pressed copy of the signal that is greduelly acct-ulsted

in the recirculation ring is sent to the output of the device. If the signal
is presented in the fore of N sslples. after N cycles a couplets copy of the
signal will appear at the output of the device that consists of the “-1 san-
ples stored in the delay line. and one last sasple caning directly fron the
input. Excluded fros further work in this cycle is the first reading that
goes to the output of the device but does not enter the delay line input.
since at this instant switch Sw will be in position 1. In all subsequent
cycles the last reading will be replaced by the next to last. and the co.-
pressed copy of the signal will "slide" in tine. Obviously. the necessary
capacity of the delay line is nuaerically equal to Nd-N- l-kt- 1.

This arranganent has cone to be used in epectrun analysers of sequential type
(Fig. 3.23). As the resolution of the instrument increases. analysis is done
on a fixed rather than a sliding tine interval. For this purpose. a second
recirculating ring is added to the tine-scale converter circuit. This addi-
tional recirculstor stores the cospressed copy of the signal produced in the
Iain conpressor ring. Switch II; is in position 1 at the instant corresponding
to terninstion of shaping the couplets signal copy in the cospressor. and it

33

“OFFICIAL!“ONLY
me OFFICIAL USE ONLY

111.2

 

Fig. 3.23. Bloch diagra- of heterodyne spectrue analyser with
tile co-pressor: lutine coIpressor; 2-buffer store; 3-
einer; Alf-tunable heterodyne; S—narrow-band filter

renains in this position for tine At during which the signal copy passes to
the eixer and to the delay line of the buffer store. after which switch n,
is changed to position 1. Delay tine in the buffer store is taken as At.

the coepressed signal circulates there K- 1 tines. and at each occurrence

of a copy of the signal one frequency conponent of the spectrm is analysed.
Thus the total analysis tine is Atli. i. e. it is equal to the tins of signal
observation. During this ties. the next copy of the signalhss been for-ed
in the conpressor. and the procedure is repeated. The heterodyne is auto-at-
ically tuned by steps before each successive signal copy appears at the liner
input. It can he concluded that operation of the device diagr-ed in Pig.
3.23 is equivalent to operation of an analyser of parallel type that contains

II filters with absolutely constant passband width Af- l/At. i. e. analysis
is done in real tine.

 

Fig. 3.26. Bloch diagran of 202” analyser: lnattenuator
and filters; 2-co-|utator; 3-anslog-digital converter;
b—cospressor; S--buffsr store; 6—digital-analog converter;
7-clock unit; Onlow-frequency filter; Writer-frequency
generator; lO-«nirer; llwvoltsge-controlled oscillator;
lZ—linsarly variable voltage oscillator; l3-bandpasa filter;
ld—dual liner; lS—heterodyne; lG—correction link; 17-
tanh circuit; ls—squsring circuit

The tine coepression principle is used in the 3368 spectru- analyser eade

by hruel and Kjor. The instruent consists of three nodules: the 203). which
is. the analyzer proper. the 6701—a conversion device. and the 67lO-an elec-
tronic display. The spectrue analyser 2030 (Fig. 3.26) operates as a

MWWONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

heterodyne analyzer with time compressor on a fixed tine interval. A dis-
tinguishing feature of the circuit is use of a shift register instead of

a delay line as storage element. This sakes it possible to change the com-
pression factor for different frequency bands. The input signal must be pre-
sented in digital code [Ref. 55].

The analyzer has 11 frequency bands (Hz): 0-10, 0-20, 0-50. 0-100 and so

on to 0-20 000. The input signal goes to an attenuator and to eleven low-
frequency filters (one for each band) with cutoff frequencies corresponding
to the upper limits of the bands. Co-Iutator 2 saples the signal in accord-
ance with (3.10) and (3.11). The frequency of the sanples is stipulated with
sons reserve. and is equal to 3f‘I p“. In analog-digital converter 3. each
value of the sa-ple is converted 0 an 8-place binary word and fed to contes-
sor 6 where a compressed copy of the signal is formed.

The total number of samples (3.11) depends on the minim required time for
analyzing one frequency conponent (3.6) and on the master of frequency compo-
nents that can be distinguished in analysis. Regardless of range. the analyzer
has the capacity for distinguishing 600 discrete conponents, which is equiva-
lent to parallel connection of 600 narrow-band filters with resolution defined
as 3- ﬂipper/600. Taking the frequency of suples as ”upper and mini-u:

tine for analysis of one component Ti.r' 1/AfI US. we can get from (3.11)

N - ”mar

B 0
Substituting 8- Emma/boo in (3.12). we can find that to analyze one fre-
quency component it is necessary to accusulate 1200 sasplea. and therefore
buffer store 5 has a capacity for retaining 1200 8-p1ace binary words.

(3. 12)

Data readout is at a rate of 12 HR: regardless of band. which is determined
by the crystal-controlled oscillator in clock unit 7. Since the data input
rate is 3””... we can find the conpression coefficient for each band as

kt- b.10‘fu r. Thus for the end bands of 0-10 and 0-20000 11: the compression
factor is 1.88300 and 400 respectively. Thedigitsl inforaatian taken fraa the
buffer store is converted by digital-analog converter 6 to analog form. The
analog signal goes to low-frequency filter 8 with cutoff frequency of to tax.
which corresponds to a shift in the fupper of the signal spectrun regardless
of band f “/kt- 4.10‘ Hz. The signal with spectrum 04 101: goes to mixer
10 of the merodyne analyzer. in which heterodyne 11 has a frequency in the
range of 16.26-20.25 HE: under the influence of linearly variable voltage
oscillator 12. At a transcription rate of 12 His, circulation of 1200 sauples
in the buffer store is conpleted within 100 us. the tine necessary for analyz-
ing one coaponent; therefore the couplets cycle of heterodyne tuning is

100 uax 600- 60 ns.

The difference frequency of 16.25 lilz is isolated by bandpass filter 13 with
passband width of 10 kHz. corresponding to 81:; for any band. The signal is
then subjected to double frequency conversion, reducing the frequency to
250 kHz. In the tank circuit tuned to the signal frequency, the positive
half-period is sampled every 10 has of frequency tuning of heterodyne 11.
i. e. 1000 times in a 60 ns cycle. The resultant 600 "maples corresponding

35

POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

to the separate frequency components are sent to the analyzer output. The
complete cycle of analysis. including resetting the heterodyne. is 65 ms.

Conversion module 6701 averages the signal. and also stores the remltsnt
spectra in two parallel memories. This enables on-the-spot comparison of
two spectra: the running spectrum and one stored in muory, or two in storage.

The display of the device is based on a 12" (231. The 65 ll: horizontal scan
frequency is synchronized with the heterodyne tuning frequency. The display
also provides digital readout of the levels of the 1.00 components.

The 3348 instrument is for matching to a chart recorder. Provisions are also
made for data output to a 7506 digital computer. '

CHAPTER lo: METHODS OF MAKING HYDROACOUSTIC MEASUREMENTS DURING OPERATIM
01' m HYDROACWSTIC STATION

“.1. Basic principles of making hydroscoustic and electronic measurements

All technical parameters that are measured in the course of operation of hydro-
acoustic stations can be divided into two groups: electroacoustic. and special
electronic parameters. Measurements of parameters in the first group are asso-
ciated with the necessity of doing an experiment in water. i. a. they can

be classified as hydroacoustic measurements; measurements of the second group
involve only electrical parmters. For exane. the first group might in- "
clude the overall sensitivity of the station. directional characteristics,
sound pressure on the axis of the radiator and the like. while the second

group would include gain. frequency and phase responses of different compo-
nents. level of electrical interference and so on. Bydroacoustic measure-
ments are the more difficult, and as a rule involve complex checking of hydro-
acoustic stations.

Practically all hydroacoustic measurements done under shipboard conditions

are aimed at deternining sound pressure in some point of the acoustic field
that is excited either by the measuraent emitter in measuring parameters

of the station in the passive mode. or by the station's own antenna when mea-
suring its parameters in the active mode. A generalised diagr. of hydro-
scOustic measurements is shown in Fig.
4.1. The essence of the measurements
boils down to determining the sound
pressure p set up by the emitter at

a distance r. i. e. at the hydrophone
location. As was remarked in ”.1.
sound pressure is measured by converting
it to electric voltage, and therefore
the process of hydroscoustic measurements
also reduces to measurement of electric
Fig. 4.1. Generalised diagram of quantities: the voltage applied across
measurement of acoustic parameters: the emitter, and the emf developed by

   

emission
channel

l-—oscillator; 2-emitter; 3-«re- the receiver. Nonetheless, hydroacoustic
ceiving transducer; Ionamplifier measurements are specifically typified
36

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

by the characteristics of the measure-ant transducers and by the conditions
of their operation under water.

Rydroacoustic measuruent errors are minimized by satisfying certain require-
ments on the measurement site. relative placement of transducers and the sta-
bility of their characteristics. linearity of the reception part of the equip-

ment and selection of signal-to-noise ratio. Let us consider these require—
- ments in more detail.

The measurement site is chosen with consideration of the necessity of
setting up conditions of sound propagation as close as possible to a free
field. Such conditions can be brought about in a space of large dimensions
sufficient for eliminating reflections from its boundaries. The principal
reflecting surfaces are the bottom and the surface of the water. and therefore
the critical dimension of the body of water used for measurements is local
depth. The maximum permissible depth depends on the frequency band of the
measurements: depths of 8-15 m are considered acceptable for measurements
on frequencies no lower than 1 1:32; the depth should be increased for lower
frequencies [Ref . 5]. The bottom at the measurement site should be even and
have good absorbing properties. If hydroacoustic station [as] parameters
are being measured in a harbor. consideration must be taken of reflections
from horizontal baundaries of the body of water as well: wharves. piers and
other port structures, and also nearby ships.

The water at the measurement site must be free of inhomogeneities that may
cause refraction or scattering sound (temperature inhomogeneities. currents,
marine organisms and the like).

The level of acoustic interference or the noise background at the measurement
site must be low. If the measurements are being done on a special test site,
its noise background is determined by sea noises due mainly to surface waves
and the noises of passing ships. Therefore the location of such a test site
mat be chosen in a region shielded from winds and far away from heavy traffic.
The noise background of harbor waters is due in large measure to industrial
activity of port enterprises and heavy boat traffic. and it may be so high
that measurement of the parameters of the HS becomes impossible.

The relative placement of transducers is determined by the minimum
permissible distance between them and the necessity of lining up their acoustic
axes. Here the acoustic axis is taken to mean the direction corresponding

to maximum sensitivity of a transducer.

The distance between the transducers being used in measurements is a quantity
that appears in computational formulas, and therefore it must be measured
exactly. It should be borne in mind that the distance must be determined
with respect to the acoustic center of the transducer. 1. e. the imaginary
point from which the radiated sound waves emanate. The acoustic centers of
spherical and cylindrical measurement transducers coincide with the center

of their geometric symetry. The acoustic center of flat antennas corresponds
to the center of their active surface. For circular antennas the acoustic
center coincides with the center of the virtual active surface corresponding

37

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Fig. 6.2. Diagra- of verification of choice of the acoustic
center: l—eslected center; Z—true center; 3—conpensated
sector

to the conpensated sector. The acoustic center position on antennas of any
configuration can be experinentally checked by neasuring the way that the
sound pressure created by the antenna depends on distance (Pig. $.2). If

the position of the assumed acoustic center coincides with the true position.
then the scum! pressure under free-field conditions varies in inverse propor-
tion to distance. i. a.

Pit: " Pzrz- (6.1)

In the case p1r1>p2rz the assuned center is shifted backward relative to

the true position. and if p1r1<p2r2, the displacenent is forward. Similar
arguents hold for pensive antennas in which the acoustic center is defined
as the center of the surface (real or imaginary) that receives the vaveforns
of the acoustic front of the sipal. Bxperinental verification of coincidence
of the seemed and actual acoustic center of the antenna in this case is done
by shifting the neasurenant enitter along the acoustic axis of the' antenna.
criterion (6.1) being replaced by the expression

“out!“ ' uoutzt‘z o (4.2)

where “out: and "out: are the voltages measured at the output of the station
and corresponding to distances :1 and r; of the radiator fro: the antenna.

The nininun pernissible distance between the acoustic antenna and the
hydrophone lust be selected on the basis of the condition of hydrophona lo-
cation in the field of the spherical wave radiated by the antenna. It can

be shown [Rah 5] that the sound pressure on the acoustic axis of a flat redi-
ator corresponds to a spherical wave at sane distance from its surface that
depends on the ratio of the largest dinension of the radiator d to wavelength
A. Closer to this distance one observes alternation of pressure mine and
ninina due to interference of waveforms set up by different sections of the
radiator surface. This part of the acoustic field of the emitter is called
the Fresnel zone, or the near field. The distance of the last pressure nuisan-
fro. the emitter surface is dzlx. Beyond this distance begins the far field.
or Pramhofer zone. in which sound pressure falls off in inverse proportion
'to distance. i. e. in accordance with the lav of a spherically diverging wave.
Based on the principle of reversibility. analogOus arguments are valid for

38

FOBOFFIGALIYSEONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

a passive antenna located in the some! field of a point radiator. Shifting the
emitter at distances from the antenna exceeding dz/A causes a change in the
sound pressure. and consequently in the voltage at the output of the station
that is inversely proportional to distance. This behavior is not observed
when the nitter is shifted in the near zone of the antenna. In practice.

the distance between the acoustic antenna and naasursment transducers is chosen
on the basis of the relation

9!
'> ‘ . (‘03)
where d is the greatest dinension of the active part of the antenna.

Relation (6.3) is also valid for the case of location of the hydrophone in
the field of a cylindrical neasurement seitter that has vertical dimension
d when seasuring the sound pressure developed by this emitter.

A necessary condition of relative placement of transducers during neasurasents
is coincidence of their acoustic axes since the major parameters of hydro-
acoustic stations -- overall sensitivity and sound pressure - must be de-
termined in the direction of their maximu- values. Inaccurate orientation

of the acoustic axis of a narrow-band antenna relative to the position of
measure-ant transducers may lead to appreci-
able errors in measurement. In sane cases.
deviation of the hydrophone from the acoustic
axis of the emitter may cause an apparent ef-
fect of pressure increase with increasing dis-
tance due to a reduction of the angle between
the direction to the hydrophone and the acoustic
axis of the antenna (Fig. 6.3).

h 5 man
acoustic axis

     

Pig. m. Choosing depth of
Bringing the acoustic axes into line. or estab- i-ersion of hydrophone
liehing coaxiality is done first in the vertical.
and then in the horizontal plane. Coaxiality in the vertical plane is estab-
lished by selecting the depth of inersion of neasurenent transducers. In

A)

Fig. 6.1.. Establishing coaxiality of the reception antenna
and enitter direction: a—correct; b-incorrect

doing this. the acoustic axis of the antenna must first be established hori-
zontally (Fig. 4.6). The instant of coincidence of the acoustic eases is

39

I70! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
MOMCIALISEONLY

deterained froa the sexin- signal level at the output of the hydroecoustic
station and the hydrophone operating in the node of reception of the sound
field of the radiator. or fron the sari-u voltage level at the output of
the bydrophone that receives signals froa a hydroacoustic station operating
in the active node.

Bstablisbent of coaxiality in the horizontal plane is done by rotating the
directivity pattern of the antenna until the minus signal is attained at
the output of a station operating in the passive node. or at the output of
a hydrophone that receives signals of an actively operating station. if the
station has a stationary directivity pattern. coaxiality in the horizontal
plane is established by shifting the aeasur.ent transducer relative to the
acoustic center of the antenna at the sane distance sway.

Consideration should be taken of the fact that spherical and cylindrical trans-
ducers in the horizontal plane as a rule have a real directivity pattern that
does not correspond to circular. Therefore in such transducers the direction
of the acoustic axis aust be chosen beforehand in the sector that corresponds
to the noothest change in sensitivity. This direction is indicated by a
reference line that is ends on the transducer housing and is used to estab-
lish coaxiality of the transducers. I-ersion of the neaeur-ent transducer

in water and orientation of its acoustic axis should be done by using a rigid
her.

The stability of characteristics of aeasurenent transducers to a consid-
erable extent deteraines the error of the entire neasursnent. For uawle,

the fretjuency response of the sound pressure aster is used to correct the
readings of an instruent in the neasuraent process. Frectice has shown

that hydrophone characteristics change with tile. which lust be taken into
consideration in doing calculations. and in this connection. aeamreaent hydro-
phones should be calibrated at least once a year.

The stability of neasuraent results also depends on preparation of the nea-
sursaent transducers. before insersing in the water. the surface of the trans-
ducers aust be carefully cleaned and degressed to ensure better wetting of

the trnasducer. Before doing aeasureaents. the transducer is held in water

for the tine required to equalize the transducer and water tenperatures.

Particular attention aust be given to secure fastening of the transducers

to prevent then froa shifting relative to the acoustic antenna of the station
during neasurenent. Even slight shifting of the transducer (as a result of
rocking of the ship) in the field of an antenna with sharp directivity charac-
teristic relative to the platfora to which the transducers are secured causes
considerable fluctuation of the signals being neasured. If it is not possible
to avoid signal fluctuation. the mdasr of readings aust ensure the capability
of statistical processing of neesurenent results.

Linearity of reception and nplification channels of a hydroacoustic station
is one of the necessary conditions for accuracy of seesurenents of paraseters
that have the physical sense of the transfer ratio: overall sensitivity.
frequency response and directivity pattern. hessurenent of these par-eters

roe OFFICIAL WE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

involves deternining the ratio between the output and input quantities. i. e.
between the voltage “out at the output of the channel and the sound pressure
p acting on the antenna. In the given case. the requiranent of linearity
of the reception and a-plification channel is formlated as the condition

non/p - con-t . (4 .6)

i. e. the output quantity is proportional to the input. and the ratio of these
quantities does not depend on the absolute value of either of then. Graphi-
cally, the concept of linearity of a channel is illustrated by a linear segasnt
of its anplitude characteristic. Linearity of a channel is lost if the in-
put signal quantity goes beyond the limits of the linear section of the anpli-
tude response curve (Fig. b.5s). This leads to nonlinear distortions of the

 

Fig. 6.5. Illustrating linearity of trananission: a-
nonlinear signal distortions; buselection of gain; c-
selection of signal nagnitude

the output signal. and increases neasurenent error. And at the s-e tine.
violation of conditions of nonlinearity is the most frequent and worst nistake
of beginning specialists.

There are two ways to ensure conditions of linearity: selecting the nagnitude
of the input signal while keeping the gain of the channel constant (Fig. b.5c).
or selecting the gain of the channel while naintaining the signal nagnitude
constant (Pig. 6.5b).

The first method is used if there is no calibrated gain control in the recep-
tion channel. in this case the fine-tuning control is set at the position
of aaximaa gain. and the sound pressure is selected so that variation over

a snail range causes a proportional change in the voltage at the output of
the station.

The second method is used if there is a calibrated stepwise gain control in
the reception channel. The fine-tuning gain control is also set in the po-
sition of minus gain. and the nagnitude of the input signal and position

of the step control are sequentially selected so that a change in position of
the control by one step causes a certain change in output voltage. For axa-ple

61

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL [SE ONLY

if a change in control position by one step produces a change of 6 dB in the
gain. then the output voltage should be changed by s factor of two. 0n the
anplitude response curve. the change in gain corresponds to a change in the
angle of slope of the linear section. The signal-to-noise ratio at the point
being checked should be chosen fairly high for certain indication and neaaure-
nent of signal paraneters (at least 5).

“No kinds of interference are nost typical in measure-ant of the pars-stars
of hydroscoustic stations: wave noises. or interference resulting fron
reflections free the botton surface. harbor structures and the like. and the
noise background of the body of water. Have interference is difficult to
recognize if the signal is radiated directly. One of the nethods of recog-
niaing wave interference is to determine the way that voltage depends on fre-
quency at the output of a hydrophone located in a field of sinusoidal wave-
forns Ref. S] (Fig. b.6b). The graph of Fig. 4.6b shows the interference

Fig. 5.6. Interference achsae:
a—path of direct signal (1)

and signal reflected free surface
(2); bnfrequency dependence of
hydrophone output for direct
signal (1) andtbesuofthe
direct and reflected (2) signals

 

pattern resulting from su-ation of the direct wave and the wave reflected
froe the surface. If the paths traveled by these waves differ by An. the
phase difference at the reception point will be Ae-kAx- ZsAx/l. If the fre-
quency shift Af corresponds to a change in phase shift by 2!, i. e. hull-2s.
and

A! ' «.5)

Conparing the quantity found from (6.5) with distances to seal-ed objects of
reflection. one can find the source of interference. It has been shown that.
5] that for the first reflection free the surface the path difference Ax is
determined by the expression

man/WW4
(h and d in the synbols illustrated by Fig. 6.6).

Have interference can be reduced by selecting optinua placsnent of the trans-
ducers relative to reflecting boundaries. The greatest effect is fron using
a pulsed node of operation that enables separation of the direct signal and
wave interference in tine. i. e. that realizes tine selection of the signal.
fine selection or gating of the signal can be realized by using a special
conponent - a selector.

The selector is an electronic switch in the pulse signal tranuission circuit
(fig. 6.7) that is opened by s strobing pulse for a tine equal to the received

62

FOIOFHCIALUSEONLY
NI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Fig. 5.7. The ”Selector”

set: a—block diagraa; b—

voltsga diagram 1. 6. 8-

qlifiers; 2. 5-slave ulti-

vibrstors; 3. 6. 7. 9. 12-

enitter followers; 10. ll—
electronic switches

 

signal duration. The strobing pulse delay tine and its duration can be con-
tinuously varied over a range fron 0.5 to 50 as. The delay nultivibrator

is triggered by a synchronising pulse fro. a pulse generator. The leading
edge of the gating pulse is used to synchronize scanning of an oscilloscope;
the voltage of the signal isolated by the selector is fed to the vertical
input of this oscilloscope. Thus only the direct signal free of wave inter-
ference can be observed on the oscilloscope screen.

Noise interferences. including the noise backgromd of the body of water.
electrical interference proper and pickups act directly. in contrast to wave
interferences. The level of noise interference can he reduced by connecting
bandpass filters in the signal reception circuit. The filter peesband in
the case of pulse neasurenents is limited by Af>2/r. where r is the duration
of the pulse. The signal-to-noise level is established by an indicator con-
nected ‘to the output of the station by regulating the neasurenent oscillator
signal anplitude. which nust rennin within the linits of the linear section
of the amplitude response of the reception channel of the hydroacoustic ste-
tion. The fact of nornal signal tran-ission aust be established by periodi-
cally switching off the aeaeureeent oscillator signal. in which case the
readings of the output display drop off sharply.

Su—ing up, we can conclude that in preparation for hydroacouetic nemrenents
it is necessary to verify the following rules:

I) there nust be no reflections froa boundaries in the water;

2) the distance between neasureaent transducers and the acoustic antenna of
the station auat be chosen in accordance with condition (5.3);

63

FOIOI'I'ICIALUSIONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

3) the acoustic axes of the eeasurenent transducers and antenna lust be nede
to line up;

lo) the signal anplitude and gain nust be chosen on the basis of the condition
of linearity of the reception channel;

5) the signal-to-noise ratio at the point being checked should be at least 5.

The lost universal nethod of checking satisfaction of these rules is to change
the distance betveen the acoustic antenna station and the neasurenent trans-
ducers while verifying that relations (4.1) and (6.2) are set. which corre-
spond to the law of attenuation of a spherical wave. Violation of any of

the enuerated rules will have an effect on satisfaction of these relations.

“.2. Methods of neasuring para-stars of the reception part of the as
A. Acoustic neasurenents

The reception part of the hydroecoustic station is rather well characterised
by the set of technical par-eters leasured as diagrs-ed in Fig. 10.8. This
set includes: station sensitivity; eeplitude ad frequency responses; direc-
tivity pattern; threshold sensitivity.

 

Fig. 4.8. Diagra- of instrument hookup for neasuring the
acoustic paransters of the reception part of the 88

Let us consider the technique for ensuring these paruseters.

The sensitivity t; of the station is defined as the ratio of the voltage
“out neasured at the output of the reception-aeplification channel to the
sound pressure p perceived by the antenna.

n
”"9925. (10.6)

In contrast to detereination of hydrophone sensitivity (see {3.1). when nea-
suring station sensitivity the sound pressure on the surface of the antenna

46

FOIOFFICMLISBONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

will be greater than that in the free field as a consequence of sun-nation

of the direct and reflected waves on the antenna surface. The sound pressure
on the antenna surface is set up by the measurement emitter excited by the
power amplifier to which an input signal is sent from the instrument oscil-
lator. As a rule, a sine-wave signal is used to measure overall sensitivity
with frequency corresponding to the average frequency of the station working
band. Direct measurement of the sound pressure on the antenna surface is
nearly impossible. and therefore pressure measurement is done with an "120"
set in which the hydrophone is placed on the acoustic axis of the antenna

at a certain distance from its surface. Distances r and ru must satisfy con-

dition (4.3). Attention must be given to meeting all other requirements of
34.1. and in particular (4J0).

The voltage at the output of the station is determined by a voltmeter that
measures the rms value. Usually the headset output of the as is used in doing
this. If the measurements are done in the pulse mode, an oscilloscope is
connected to the output of the 12]) sound pressure meter and the station.

Sensitivity of the BS is calculated by the formula

““1: Natl
.. 4.7
C; Pm tr, ( )
where p. is the pressure measured by the 120. A is the coefficient of reduc-
tion of the signal in one step of the station gain control. N is the total
umber of control steps. I: is the number of the step on vhich the measurements

are made. rr and r“ are the distances from the emitter to the hydrophone and
to the antenna respectively.

The need for coefficient A is explained by the necessity of meeting rule (6.6).
This coefficient is used to adjust measurement results to the maximum possible
overall sensitivity. which is usually given in the station specifications.
Cofsctor ru/r, is necessary to normalize the sound pressure measured by the
hydrophone with respect to the antenna surface in accordance with (6.1).

He should emphasize the importance of the maxim- possible accuracy in mea-
suring overall sensitivity since this parameter. as will be demonstrated in
55.2, appears in formula (5.2) for calculating the acoustic interference level
that has a direct effect on the range of action of the station. and hence

the confidence of predicting the range of action will be determined to a con-
siderable extent by the error of measuring overall sensitivity.

Having measured the sensitivity of the station. we can calculate the sensi-
tivity of the acoustic antenna which is defined as the ratio of the no-load
output voltage 3 at the output of the antenna to the sound pressure at its
input. Direct measurement of antenna sensitivity is practically impossible
in virtue of the seallness of B. The sensitivity Ca.a of the acoustic antelma
is calculated by the formula

‘s.a- ‘2 o (10.8)
km-

 

65

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

where is the maxim- throughput of the recaption-anplification channel
(see 56. B). The acoustic antenna sensitivity is expressed in uV/Pa.

The amplitude response of the reception-amplification channel is defined
as the dependence of voltage measured at the channel output on the sound pres-
sure at the active surface of the antenna. The asplitude response is deter-
nined by measuring the voltage at the station output while slowly varying

the voltage fed to the measurement -itter at constant signal frequency. The
measure-ant hookup is shown in Pig. 5.8. Sound pressure is eeasured at the
one time. Measurement results are plotted on a curve (Tig. 6.9a) that usually

3m

   
    

lower upper!
Fig. 6.9. Amplitude (a) and frequency (b) response of IS

consists of three sections: a central linear segment. a lower section de-
tersined by the action of acoustic interference. and an upper section formed

by processes of saturation of components of the reception-uplification channel.
The slope of the linear section is numerically equal to sensitivity. and its
length is daternined by the dynamic range of the channel: up- 20 lg Pmax/Pnin
d3.

It nust be understood that excess of the signal amplitude over p.” inevitably
leads to nonlinear distortions, and therefore when operating the station care
must be taken to see that “out does not exceed u: , which must be determined
beforehand for every station. Signal reduction ow “sin may lead to nissing
the signal because of masking by interference. The nature of the lower section
is closely tied up with the threshold sensitivity of the station. Considerable
nonlinearity of the central section may also lead to nonlinear signal distor-

tions.

Frequency response is defined as the dependence of voltage measured at

the channel output on the frequency of the acoustic signal while the sound
pressure on the antenna surface is held constant. The frequency response

is determined by neasuring the voltage at the station output while slowly
varying the signal frequency of the measurement oscillator. The "no" set

is used to monitor constancy of the sound pressure (see Fig. he). The result
is plotted on a graph (Fig. 0.91)). A logarithmic scale should be used for
wide-band channels. and a linear scale for narrow-band channels.

The frequency response curve can be used to determine the passband width in
the for:- of the frequency interval between output voltages differing by 3 dB

66

MOMMIBBONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

from the naximum value (or what amounts to the same thing. the exponents
0.7%“). A change in pasahand width may take place as a result of malfunc-
tions in the frequency-selection circuits of the station. Expansion of the
paeahand leads to a reduction of the interference suppression in reception.
while narrowing of the paashand leads to loss of signal due to straying beyond
the passhand limits. e. g. due to the Doppler effect. A shif' of the passhand
along the frequency axis as a rule takes place due to drift .‘ heterodyne
frequencies. and leads to distortion or total loss of the signal spectrum.

Distortion of the shape of the frequency response within the limits of the

paashand may disrupt conditions of optima reception and cause frequency dis-
tortions of the signal. '

The directivity pattern is defined as the dependence of voltage measured
at the channel output on direction of incidence of the wavefront on the sur-
face of the antenna relative to its acoustic axis at constant frequency of
the signal and intensity of its source.

The directivity pattern is measured in the horizontal and vertical planes.

The technique of measurement for hydroacoustic stations that have antennas
with movable acoustic axis is different from that for stations with static
'acoustic axes of the antenna. For stations of the former type. after measuring
sensitivity the acoustic axis is slovly rotated relative to the initial posi-_
tion that corresponds to maximum output voltage. - Over certain intervals that
depend on the sharpness of directional action of the antenna. the output vol-
tage readings are recorded. The results are plotted on a graph. usually in
polar coordinates (Fig. 5.10). enabling evaluation of the accuracy of direction
finding. the magnitude of additional marina and other characteristics.

 

Fig. 6.10. Polar patterns: s-for naxim method of direc-
tion finding; h--for phase method of direction finding at
difference channel output

“out

     
 

Fig. I. .11 . Direction- ports“.

finding characteristic
at output of phase-
sensitive detector

67

FORWUSBONLY
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

At the output of difference channels in stations that realise the phase and
phase-amplitude methods of direction finding. the directivity pattern contains
two main lobes, and the angle s between these lobes characterizes the accuracy
of direction finding. Constant voltage is taken from the output of the phase-
sensitive detector. and the directivity pattern measured at the output of

the channel that realizes the phase-amplitude method of direction finding

is usually plotted in rectangular coordinates and is called the direction-
finding characteristic (Fig. 6.11).

The method for measuring the directivity pattern of stations that have antennas
with fixed acoustic area is much bore complicated. Essentially. the technique
consists in shifting the nessurement emitter around the antenna at a fixed
distance away. and taking voltage readings at the station output that corre-
spond to certain directions toward the emitter relative to the acoustic axis.
This method requires the use of a motor launch or rowboat for making the mea-
sure-ants. The main difficulty is in keeping the distance constant between
the measurement uitter and the acoustic center of the antenna.

Threshold sensitivity is a parameter that characterizes reception-squin-
cation channels containing threshold circuits. The threshold sensitivity

is defined as the minimum value of the sound pressure that acts on the an-
tenna (under the previously considered conditions of measuring overall sensi-
tivity) to cause operation of the threshold device. By definition and in
essence. this parameter is the closest thing to a recognition coefficient.

Measurements are done in the arrangement disgraned in Fig. 6.8. By analogy
with measurements of the aplitude response. the sound pressure set up by

the emitter is gradually increased from zero. The instant of operation of
the threshold circuit is determined from the response of the corresponding
display. and is noted by the "1:0" reading. The result is normalized in ac-
cordance with (6.1) to the antenna location point. This pressure value corre-
sponds to the threshold sensitivity of the station.

3. Special electronic measurements

The electroscoustic parameters considered above give a rather complete charac-
terisation of the state of the reception part of the channel. and if they

did not go beyond set tolerances. this would constitute the sum total of the
neasurements. However. in view of the complexity of the equipment and the-
difficulties of organising hydroacoustic measurements in practice. this is
rarely the case. and special electronic measurements must be made. Among

the electrical parameters of the reception part of the station that are subjuct
to periodic measurements are the throughput. amplitude and frequency responses.
aaplitude and phase identity of multichannel aqlifiers. electrical inter-
ference. resistance of antenna insulation and power circuits.

The throughput of the reception-amplification channel is defined as the
ratio of voltage measured at the channel output to the voltage fed to its
input through an equivalent acoustic antenna:

k. “out/"11V (keg)

48

FOIOI'FICIALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Fig. 6.12. Diagram of equipment hookup for measuring the
throughput

Keasurements are taken by a voltmeter connected to the channel output and
by an instrument oscillator with Output connected to the input of the pre-
anifier through the antenna equivalent R. (Fig. 6.12). As noted in 63.2,
the output impedance of the oscillator muatqhe considerably less than the
eaternal circuit impedance; otherwise. the oscillator will have to be connected
through a voltage divider. and the resistor free which "out is taken must be
much less than Re . Signal frequency is taken as equal to the average fre-
quency of the chagnel passband. Before measurement. in accordance with the
requirements presented in 56.1 it is necessary to check the signal-to-eoiae
ratio and the working state on the linear section of the amplitude response.
The maximum possible gain is calculated by the formula

a... =. uh“. (I. .10)

Connection of the oscillator through the antenna equivalent reduces the output
voltage. and consequently the throughput calculated by (10.10) is less than
the true value. This enables us in calculations by formula (5.8) to get the
no-load sensitivity of the acoustic antenna. In direct connection of the
oscillator to the amplifier input. the throughput calculation will give a
large value, and the calculated value of antenna sensitivity will be less
than the real value. The most convenient method is to connect the oscillator
in a break in the "neutral" wire of the antenna (Fig. 6.13). In this case

the control signal is sent to the preamplifier inputs through all transducers
of the antenna.

 

Fig. 6.13. Diagram of equipment hookup for measuring gain
and checking phase identity of multichannel nplifiers

69

POROFl-‘IGALUSEONLY
non OFFICIAL [BE ONLY

Amplitude and frequency responses are measured by the same arrangement. The
measureaent technique is analogous to that considered in section A.

Verification of identity is essential for nultichannel preamplifiers. The
scatter of gain and phase responses of preamplifiers determines the distortion
of the shape of the station's directivity pattern. When checking the amplitude
identity. the gain of each of the preamlifiers is measured in the hookup

shown in Pig. 6.13. This same arrangeaent is used for checking the phase
identity of multichannel amplifiers. The first input of the phase leter is
connected to any amplifier. whose output voltage is taken as the reference.

and the second input is connected alternately to the outputs of the remaining
amplifiers.

The technique for measuring the level of electrical noises will be considered
in §S.l.

The isolation resistance of the acoustic antenna is an electrical parameter
that can appreciably influence antenna sensitivity. Conditions of operation
in'seu water necessitate special attention to systematic meawremsnt of this
puameter. Damage to the hermeticity of transducers results in sea vater

getting into the works. 1-. e. "inleakags". and consequently to shunting of
the input of the nplifisra.

The isolation resistance is measured with a megol-eter (Fig. 4.14). The
isolation resistance Ki, of the entire antenna disconnected fron the as is
aeasured between the "neutral" wire and '
the housing; in doing this. the jumper that
connects the "neutral" wire to the housing
nust be removed. The isolation resistance
a“ of the individual receivers is measured
between the signal terminal of the receiver

disconnected from the preamplifier. and
the housing.

 

'ro neasure cable isolation (Fig. 6.15),
Tig. 6.16. Diagram of measure- steps aust be taken to compensate for the
ment of isolation resistance of influence of surface currents I. on the

acoustic antenna neasurement result. To do this. terninal B

    
   
  
 

O

+ -.- .7 .

_ . . _ __
. . . xv,
0.74m //\\

im-

 
   

«I,
Fig. 14.15. Diagram of measurement of cable insulation re-
siatancs
50

FOROFI’IGALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL [SE ONLY

of the megohlneter is connected to a loop wound around the cable insulation.
As a result. surface currents flow past the measurement coil P of the 01::-
meter. A tester cannot be used to measure the isolation resistance of recei-
vers and antenna since the influence of electrolysis when sea water gets into
the transducers can coapletely distort the measurement result.

54.3. Hethods of measuring parameters of the transmitting part of the 118
A. Acoustic measurements

The acoustic parameters of the transmitting part of the hydroacOuatic station
are the sound pressure on the emitter axis and the directivity pattern of

the antenna. The hookup of instruments for measuring these parameters is
diagr-ned in Fig. 4.16.

 
   
     
 

- ' -
output horizontal
input'
° hydrophone

Fig. 4.16. Equipment hookup for measuring acmstic parameters
of transmitting part of the 115

The sound pressure on the acoustic axis of the antenna characterizes
the acoustic power of the station. Measurements are made by the "120" and

an oscilloscope connected to its output. The hydrophone of the "121)" is lo-
cated on the acoustic axis of the antenna at the distance determined by (4.3).
The measurement result must be normalized to a distance of l m from the an-
tenna by a formula obtained from (4.3):

p-pnrr. (4.11)
The method of measuring the directivity pattern of the antenna and
processing the measurement results is analogous to the technique explained
in 54.2 for the reception part of the hydroacoustic station.

8. Special electronic measurements

The transmitting part of the BS is characterized by electric power of the
oscillator. working frequency. pulse shape and duration.

Electric poser is determined by measuring the voltage at the output followed
by calculations by the formula w-u’ln. where a is the value of the resistor

51

FOROFFIC‘IALUSEONLY
POI OHIO“. USE ONLY

across which the voltage measurement has been taken. A resistor of low value
is connected in series in the signal circuit.

To measure the working frequency and determine pulse parameters. use is made
of a voltage divider or a special instrument transformer. which are usually
incorporated into the oscillator circuitry. The working frequency is measured
by the "CV-1H" wave meter or an oscilloscope using Liasajou figures.

An oscilloscope is used for determining the parameters of radiated pulses
by a conventional procedure.

CHAPTER 5: METHODS OF HEASURIﬂG TEE LEVEL OF INTERFERENCE T0 OPERATION OF
THE HYDROACOUSTIC STATION

§S.l. Electrical interference to operation of as and nethods of measurement

The electrical interference to as operation is defined as voltage measured
at the station output when the acoustic antenna is disconnected. with norma-
lization of the measurement result to the input.

Electrical interference can be divided into three major components according
to the nature of origin: set noises. supply line background, and spurious
pickups.

The set noises are caused by the noisiness of tubes. transistors and other
active electronic components. As a rule. these have a continuous spectrum
and a comparatively low level.

The supply line background shows up at the station output as a voltage
with frequency that is the same as the line voltage of the station, or a mul-
tiple of the line frequency. This background depends on the quality of the
smoothing filters in the ractifiers.

In a general sense, spurious pickups refer to transmission of electric
voltage from one component to another that is not intended by circuit design.
but is due to the specific construction and configuration of the equipment.
Spurious pickups are due to stray coupling, 1. e. coupling that appears be-
tween separate components of the equipment (Ref. 11]. Spurious pickups are
divided into internal and external. In the former case. they may lead to
self-excitation of amplifiers on a frequency determined by the pars-stars

of the components with stray coupling. Spurious pickups of this kind are
eliminated on the stage of equipment design. and as a rule are not observed
in operation. The greatest difficulties under conditions of shipboard power
line operation are encountered in controlling external spurious pickups, i. e.
spurious background pickups. ‘l'hese spurious pickups show up at the out-
puts of equipment as voltages and currents that do not correspond to its in-
tended purpose, and that have frequencies equal to or multiples of the line
frequency. Spurious background pickups are the result of stray coupling be-
tween the electronic part of the equipment and the power line in conjunction
with the overall system of electrical equipment on shipboard.

$2

FORWUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

External spurious pickups represent a hazard to hydroacoustic equipment since
their spectrum lies in the audio frequency range. 1. a. it is in the passband
of the stations. This reduces threshold sensitivity and is detrimental to
the classifying capabilities of the stations.

By their nature. spurious background pickups are harmonic components of the
line frequency that arise as a consequence of deviation of the current wave-
shape in the power line from sinusoidal. The primary sources of background
pickups are the electric generators that power the equipment. and this does
not necessarily mean the particular equipment that shows the pickup at its
outputs.

It is nearly impossible to give the supply voltage the ideal usveehape. and
therefore the existence of harmonic components that are multiples of the fre-
quency of the supply voltage is inevitable in the supply circuits. It has
been demonstrated [Ilef. (.5) that voltage of a generator working without load
contains harmonic components of odd multiplicity (e. g. 50, 150. 250 as. etc.).
with amplitude that decreases with increasing number of the harmonic (Fig. 5.1).

a b
" a

u w as 750 3505,11; 73' ”an:

Fig. 5.1. Harmonic components in line voltage: a--gener-
ator withOut load; b—generator under load

however, the pattern of amplitude distribution changes sharply when the gener-
ator is connected to a load, and each change in the load. e. g. switching

the working mode of the station, changes the spectra: of harmonics in the
supply circuit. The selective properties of equipment make their on contribu-
tion to the resultant spectrum of possible pickups. and may cause the occur-
rence of even harmonics of the funcamental frequency at the station output.

In the process of operation. the level and spectra: of spurious background
pickups may change appreciably even with a slight change in wiring. relative
placement of individual instruments or malfunction of interference-rejection
units. Only service personnel who have a good idea of the physical essence
of the problem effect can deal with the influence of sources of interference
and the variety of types of stray coupling that carry spurious background
pickups.

Three kinds of stray coupling can be distinguished that give rise to background
pickups: coupling through a canon resistance, capacitive coupling. and in-
ductive coupling.

53

POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR10FFKJAI.USE(NVLY

The common resistance of different equipment components may be the internal
resistance of the power supplies. common connecting wires of supply. control
and monitoring circuitry. the common section of the instrument chassis or
grounding lines. This kind of coupling shows up frequently as "non—equipoten-
tiality" of the housings of different instruments. 1. e. as s certain potential
difference between the grounding points of the instruments. This effect is
elininatad by selecting the grounding points of the instruments and of various
points of the wiring.

Capacitive stray coupling is equivalent to connecting a parasitic capacitor
between the source and receiver of the pickup. This capacitance serves as
a source of action of the electric component of the electromagnetic field

of the pickup source on the equipment components. Capacitive stray coupling
is reduced by using electrostatic shields in the form of cable brading or
special metal cans. Electrostatic shielding can be treated as closure of
the electric field to the metal surface of the shield and transfer of the
induced electric charges to the housing of the instrument.

Inductive stray coupling is characterized by the mutual inductance between
circuits of the source and receiver of the pickup. and is a cause of action

of the magnetic component of the field of the pickup source on the equipment.
Inductive stray coupling is reduced by using magnetoatatic shields with working
principle based on closure of the magnetic field within the shielding wall‘
made of high-parmeance metal. Shielding from the magnetic component is more
complicated than for the electric component since it is necessary to make

the shield fairly thick to reduce reluctance.

It should be borne in mind that the shielding action of protective devices
of both types is considerably reduced when breaks are present. Particular
attention should be given to the reliability of bridging between the housing
of the instrument and cable braiding. between pipes and the hull of the ship.
and between the separate parts of the shielding.

Capacitive and inductive stray coupling can be considerably reduced by seps-
rating the interference-sensitive devices from power-supply units and power
cables. The level of pickups depends on the placement of the signal strands
in the cable relative to the neutral wire. Experience has shown that it is
optimum to use the central strand of the cable as the neutral wire.

To prevent harmonics from penetrating into the instruments through the supply
circuits. filtration is often used by connecting large-value capacitors between
the wires of the power supply line. However. this technique has considerable
disadvantages: when harmonics from one part of the spectrum are reduced.

there say be an increase in the level of harmonics from another part. as well
as an increase in the magnetic component of the field of the harmonics with

an increase in their currents through the low resistance of the capacitor.

A much more effective means is to deter-ins the paths of penetration of the
pickups into the equipment. and to provide shielding and filtration inside

the instruments.

The overall level of electric interference is measured by an rms voltaeter
connected at the output of the hydroacoustic station (Fig. 5.2). The action

56

IN)! (MHHKJAI.IEHE(H‘LY
MWUSEONLY

‘ mm 5-— mm

Pig. 5.2. Block diagr- of measuring the level of electric
interference: a—measurement of set noises; haunt-ant
‘ of overall noises

of acoustic interference is elininated by substituting a du-y load for the
station antenna. The gain of the reception channel is selected so that the
voltage neasured at the station output is within the lieits of the linear
sepent of the amplitude response.

The measurement technique depends on the kind of interference to be measured.
For crawls, interference caused by internal sources (aet noises and line
background) is neasured under conditions that ninimiae the action of external
pickups. To do this. as my electrical nechanisaa as possible are turned
off on the ship. The artificial antenna is connected directly to the preamli-
fier input to prevent the influence of pickups on the cable connecting the
antenna to the station. The overall interference level including external
spurious pickups is measured under conditions where all shipboard electrical
mechanisms are in operation. The dumy load is connected as close as possible
to the acoustic antenna.

The interference voltage u out measured at the station output is normalized
by reference to the station input according to the fomla

 

un e- -“°‘It x 10‘, (5.1)

where “ne is the level of electrical interference normalized to the station
input. W. and It is the gain at which the neasurements have been taken.

If the interference level found from (5.1) exceeds the value stipulated in

the station specifications. steps must be taken to find the sources of the
excess interference. The percentage of each kind of interference can be found
by subtracting the level due to internal sources free the overall interference
level. and then determining the region of search for the source of interference.

To find internal interference sources. which night he noisy tubes. transistors.
self-excited amplifiers. nalfunctioning smoothing filters and the like. it

is sufficient to use an oscilloscope. since interference of this type either
has a continuous spectra or exists on a single frequency. The interference
spectrum from external sources is more coqlicated and is discrete in nature
(see Fig. 5.1). and location necessitates the use of a spectrum analyzer that
enables messurenent of the level of each harnenic amount of background

pickup.

. According to technical data, a V6-2 selective voltmeter is the most suitable
device for use under shipboard conditions. The instruent makes direct

$5

mmussomv
MWLUSEONLY

. p ' b “out - I
uin {'l I 1" “out
0

Fig. 5.3. Test filter: a—schenstic diegran; h—frequency
response

nessureaents of the useful signal in the transmission circuits. ﬂarnonic
cosponents in the supply line can be measured only when a test filter is
connected to the input of the instrunent. This filter is calculated for the
fund-ental harnonic frequency (rig. 5.3) by for-ole

l
"'1?

where f. is the fundamental her-Ionic frequency (i. e. the line frequency).

Per ample. for 'a frequency of SO lie. the par-eters of the filter conponente
Iust he 3-150 k9. 6-0.02 at. A single such filter section suppresses the
funds-sate}. her-onic by a factor of 500. Harmonic. conponents nsasured by
using a test filter net he enlituds-corrected with consideration of the
known frequency response of the filter.

The instrunsnt can he used to measure the negnetic component of the ”pickup
field. which is nost hatedardous for hydroacoustic equipnent. To do this.

it nust he equipped with s circulsr coil nade of inmlated copper wire 0.3-
0.6 u in disaster. The coil has 100-1000 turns with aversge dianeter of
80-20 - respectively. 'lhe coil nust have an electricsl shield ends of Intel
foil with a circulsr slot 1-2 1- wide. The coil is connected to the input

of the selective volt-eter. and is loved around the investigated instrment

to look for the pickup source. The coil has directionel properties. end there-
fore it nust be “nod for the naxinun voltmeter reading during neswrenent.

In case no slell selective voltneter is available. spectrel analysis of elec-
tricel interference can he done in s leborstory provided with the necessary
equip-ent. To do this. the interference nust be recorded on magnetic tepe.
To record hemnic conponents directly in the supply line. it is reco-ended
that e test filter he used (see Fig. 5.3) that is Bede up of two identical
sections. Interference recording should be preceded by recording of an audio
frequency oscillator signal calibrated with respect to both frequency and
alplitude.

56

MWWONLY
55.2. Acoustic interference to as operation and leasureaent methods

As was pointed out in §l.l. interference to signal reception is one of the
nest important factors that are detriaental to the output characteristics

of hydroacoustic facilities. Their Iain component is shipboard acoustic inter-
ference or set noises Ref. 3. lb]. leaning the background noise produced

by the carrier vessel and received by the acoustic antenna of the station.
interfering with signal reception. Acoustic interference shows 11) as voltage
neesured at the station output under conditions of linin- sea noise in the
absence of useful signals.

Acoustic interference should be distinguished froa the shipboard or radiated
noises that constitute the priasry acoustic field which is defined as the
send pressure aeasured in the free acoustic field of the ship and normalized
to a unit field of l n (Ref. 16].

The Iain sources of acoustic interference are the screws. nechanisns and fair-
ing with associated part of the hull plates. Depending on the source'and

the paths of its action on the antenna. we can differentiate principal cowo-
nents of acoustic interference: ' noise. hydrodynamic. vibrational and struc-
tural.

The noise conponent of interference is the result of action on the antenna
by the nearby acoustic field produced by operation of the screws and mecha-
nisns. The level of noise interference increases with increasing velocity.
and with particularly great intensity starting at sane critical velocity where
screw cavitation begins (Fig. 5.1:). Especially strong interference results
fron "singing" of the screw on discrete
frequencies that are a consequence of
resonant excitation of the screw blades.
The spectra: of the noise component

at velocities greater than critical

is continuous. At slower velocities.
discrete couponents are observed in

the low-frequency part of the spectrun.
The frequency of these components is
determined mainly by the "blade" fre-
quency of rotation of the screw (Ref.
69] fbl -anv/60, where n is the nuaber
of screw blades. n is the masher of

the her-onic of the blade frequency.
and v is the screw speed in rple.

 

Fig. 5.6. Level of shipboard acou-
stic interference as a function of The level of noise interference can .
ship velocity: l-level of elec- be reduced by using special screw design
trical interference; 2-interference by putting as such distance as possible
free nechines and nechenisas; 3-- between the antenna and screws. and
hydrodynaaic interference; bnnoise by using a sound-absorbing cover to
conponent; 5--overall interference shield the stern side of the antenna.

level To prevent ”singing" of the screws.

a constant watch must be kept on the

57

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I70. OFFICIAL USE ONLY

state of the blades. It is recs-ended that practical use he made of hydro-
acoustic stations at ship speeds below critical.

The hydrodynamic coqonent of interference is caused by excitation of the
fairing and adjacent hull plates by caunterflow of water. The spectrum of

the hydrodynamic component is continuous. and the level increases uniformly
with increasing ship speed. Deterioration of the state of the fairing surface
nay cause a sharp increase in the level of the hydrodynamic conponent of inter-
ference. and therefore care should be taken in the operating process to see
that the fairing surface is kept free of cracks. dents. fowling and so on.

The vibrational and structural components are the result of action of
vibrations of operating shipboard mechanisna and devices. including the gearing
and shafts of the screws. In this connection. the vibrational component is

due to the action of vibrations on the fairing. and thence through the water

on the antenna. while the structural component is caused by the action of
vibrations directly on the antenna transducers. The level of these coqonents
has cooperatively little dependence on the ship velocity. and the spectrun

is discrete (Fig. 5.5) [Ref. 69]. A reduc-

tion in vibrational and structural compo- P-
nents is attained by inroving the design

of mechanisms. isolating them from the hull

be special shock absorbers. acoustic de-
coupling of antenna components from the

hull. and locating auxiliary mechanisms

as far as possible fro. the antennas.

During the operation of stations. it is
necessary to nonitor the state of acoustic

decoupling of mechanism. devices. pipe n m Mf’ n‘
claws and so on. A watch should also be Fig. 5.5. Exemplary spectrua
kept on the state of the mechanisms thea- of shipboard acoustic noises

selves since imbalance of rotating parts.

wear of gear teeth and the like can sharply increase vibrations. when sta-
tions are in use. it is recon-landed that aechanisas be shut off that are not
in use at a given instant. especially if they are situated close to acoustic
antennas.

In addition to the enmerated components. random acoustic interference can
arise from local sources. e. g. as a result of crew activities. blows from
objects that are not fastened down and the like. which must also be taken
into consideration in implementing steps aimed at reducing the level of acou-
stic interference.

Practice has shown that acoustic interference is markedly directional (see
Fig. 1.2). In the sternward direction. noise level increases as a rule due
to the screw noise coaponent. while in the direction of the how there is an
increase in the action of the hydrodynanic coaponent when the ship is asking
headway. In other directions there may be an increase in interference level
due to the action of localized isolated sources. heat reception conditions
'are found in sectors that correspond to ninimm interference levels. which
should be considered by the pilot during aaneuvers.

S8

FOROFFICIALUSEONLY
Acoustic interference is a para-eter that is subject to considerable varia-
bility due to the action of any factors that are difficult to account for.
Therefore. thorough periodic nonitoring is necessary. Acoustic interference
should be checked in two stages. The first stage consists in neasuring the
integrated level of interference as a function of direction (headway) for
different ship speeds. and has the goal of verifying that the acoustic inter-
ference level is within set notes. The second stage includes analysis of
acoustic interference. and is carried out if the first stage has shown elevated
interference levels. The purpose of the second stage is to locate sources
of elevated interference on the basis of fine spectral analysis that reveals
discrete coaponents caused by operation of specific nechanises and devices.

Heasure-ents on the first stage reduce essentially to neasuring the sound
pressure of interference acting in the vicinity of the acoustic antenna. 1. e.
the neasurenent algoritb should conforn to the arrenganent shown by the sound
pressure neter in Fig. 3.7. In practice. the acoustic station itself is used
as the sound pressure aster since in this case the working conditions of the
given station are taken into account autoneticelly with consideration of all
components of shipboard acoustic interference.

The acoustic antenna of the station. whose sensitivity is known fron specifi-
cations or can be deternined during measure-eat of overall sensitivity (see
56.2). is used as the neasuranent hydrophone. The role of instrument upli-
fier with bandpass filter is played by the recsption-anplification channel
of the station. the voltage across the output (usually a headset) being nea-
sured by a volt-star or by a signal-level chart recorder.

Since the rsception-nplification channel is used as the instruent anplifier.
it eust be calibrated before unsure-ent. i. e. its gain (see §lo.2) and level
of electrical interferences (sec 55.1) must be determined. The neasur-ents
:hould be done on a body of water that neets the require-ents specified in
6.1.

Voltage measure-cots are ends at anchor and at various ship velocities; in
each state of notion, the output voltage is found as a function of the course
angle by rotating the directivity pattern in the seeming sector. headings
are taken over certain angular intervals depending on the required degree

of detail. The position of the gain control should ensure neasurenent on
the linear section of the channel uplitude response (sec 56.1).

In the case where an rns voltmeter is used. the interference p1 is calculated
by the formula

p1I—A . (5.2)

The quantity calculated on the basis of equation (5.2) includes the level

of electrical interference. To find the value of acoustic interference alone.
the level of acoustic interference calculated by forlula (5.1) must be none-
lized to mite of sound pressure neasurenent as

us.i
ca.a

 

pe.1- (593)

59

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
MWLUSCONLY

The level of acoustic interference Pa.i can he found as
I’s.i""l’i‘ Pad.-

lieaeursnent results are tabulated. and can be graphed in polar coordinates
(Fig. 5.6) or rectangular coordinates (see Pig. 1.2).

 

Fig. 5.6. Shipboard acmstic interference as a function
of course angle: 1, 2—sectors of optim- signal reception

Expression (5.2) enables evaluation of reception conditions for a specific
station carried on a given vsaeel. ‘l'o conpare working conditions of hydro-
acoustic statione on different vessels independently of station par-eters.
the results are nor-alired. i. e. they are referenced to a band of Af- 1 Br.
average frequency f.-l Idle. and non-directional reception by the fomla

' . (Se‘)
P, Pi -/—lA-f—.
Where f is asaeured in his. and Af - in Ex.

Expression (5.6) can be used only for interference that is isotropic indirec-
tion as otherwise the concentration coefficient 1 loses neaning as a para-star
for evaluating interference resistance (Ref. 59]. Therefore if the sources
and paths of interference propagation are undeterained. it is reco-snded

that data obtained froa (5.2) he used for calculations.

The neesureaent process is considerably speeded up if a chart recorder is

used instead of s voltneter. In this case the directivity pattern of the
station should be rotate” at constant velocity to get a uniforn scale of couree
angles lengthwise of the recorder chert.

Voltage level readings u: taken fron the chart recorder tape in dB nuet be
converted to sound pressure interference levels relative to a reference pres-
sure of 2010"~ dyne/cn’ or 2-10" Pa. to carry out the conversion. it ie
reco-ended that a foraule he used that is obtained by taking the logaritI-
of expression (5.2):

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
roe oer-inst use ONLV

pi-ut+(N-n)A-201g c;+36. (5.5)
I!
where ut- 20 1g0—:.-3—:- 201g Hour!» 40; ~201g(;2/2-10")- -20 lg c;- 7b.

1: 2-10" Pa is taken as the reference pressure. the last tern is replaced by
5 d3.

To carry out the second neasurenent stage, the acoustic interference voltage
is analyzed by a spectroaeter with fairly narrow analysis band. Analysis

in a ‘Ig-octave band precludes isolation of discrete conponents belonging to
individual lechanians (Fig. 57). [Ref. 3]. Therefore it is necessary to use

gnu-II...-

 
      

Fig. 5.7. Results of spectral analysis: a—using 1Ig-octave
filter; b-fine spectral analysis

heterodyne harnonic analyzers, or analyzers with tine compression of the sig-
nal. In case portable instruments are not available. the interference is
recorded on nagnstic tape together with a calibrated control signal for sub-
sequent laboratory analysis.

CHAPTER 6: WTING AND EWING “FUNCTIONS IN ”3901.38 MID CW
01’ HYDROACOUSTIC STATIG'S

56.1. Factors that determine restorability of hydroacorztic stations

The increasing complexity of modern electronic equipoent. and in particular
hydroacoustic equipment. is to a great extent outstripping the inprovenent

of system reliability. This reduces the lean ties between failures and in-
creases ths down tine of equip-ant during restoration of operability. The
problem of hardware recoversbility is of considerable interest for both linkers
and users. 0n the production stage. it is resolved by attaining a given level
of hardware repairability typified by patterns of prevention and elinination'
of failures. i. e. by the technical aspect of repairability. According to

61

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

mica-ho 9133.30! v3.83: .3338— oﬂououn changoﬂauuuﬂogq In»:
28.3.». 03260.0qu
no humans—303 03333 :5 3308 no 8333335 4.0 .9".—

63 an»

I.“ u :3 .
”he?

    

 

uni an
.00 “Bag
ummmusvm . 9:338 I

3.30:3

         

   

2:332.
33.2;

=30: Hug—33.38

. 33qu- ouuoaoooouvha 32x— .3.
«0 33.31.33: median: :30..—

62

FOB! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
COST specifications [Ref. 36]. repairsbility is the term given to the property
of a system that consists in adaptability to prevention and detection of the
causes of failures, dansges and elimination of their consequences by carrying
out technical servicing and repairs. The organizational aspect of the problem
is more in evidence on the operational stage. i. e. abinistrative and material
support and training of service personnel. Fig. 6.1 shows the classification
of factors that deter-ins restorability of equipment.

The influence of various factors on operability of equipment enables us to
use operational experience to determine the necessity of carrying out so-
called planned repairs. 1. e. repairs provided for in normative documents
(Ref. 1.8]. Elimination of sudden failures that arise usually when the equip-
ment is being used for its purpose is handled i-ediately after detection

by unplanned repair.

Depending on the particulars of operation. degree of wear and the technical
state of equipment. as well as the labor inputs for regulatory work, a dis-
tinction is made between navigational repair, routine maintenance and overhaul.

Navigational repair. which is sometimes called preventive maintenance. is
done during preparation for the voyage. and consists in upgrading the level
of equipment operability by replacement or restitution of individual compo-
nents utilising the efforts of service personnel over periods that usually
do not exceed a few days.

Routine maintenance involves restoring the output functional characteristics
of a systen by carrying out repairs or replacing malfunctioning components
with elimination of detected problems. Routine maintenance is handled by
repair facilities -- electronics shops or the electronics departments of ship

repair plants.

Overhaul has the purpose of restoring operation of equipment and total or
nearly total restitution of the work life of the system with replacement or
restitution of any components. which may amount to more than 501 of the entire
equipment. This kind of repair is done by lend-based repair enterprises.

After routine maintenance and overhaul. a complete check is run, and the equip-
nent is aligned with measurement of electroacoustic parasters inediately
after repair, and neasurement of output parameters on a shekedom cruise.
Guaranteed time of trouble-free operation of equipment after repairs is usu-
ally indicated in the repair-release documentation; otherwise the warranty
extends to three months after routine maintenance. and to six months after
overhaul. Times between repair for equipment that has undergone routine main-
tenance or overhaul are shortened by 20-30% [Ref. 2].

Unplanned repair is also provided for by normative docusentation. only without
stating times. Depending on the extent of damage to the equipment. a distinc-
tion is made between running and emergency unplanned repairs. Running re-
pairs can be handled by service personnel using spare components, units and
modules. As a rule, emergency repairs require the facilities of repair orga-
nizations and more components than are avaialble in the ship's inventory.

63

FOR OFFIGAI. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

If equip-ent has failed during the warranty period. it is the right of the
users to aka a clain against the manufacturing enterprise. In doing this.
a clai- sheet is filled out stating the coeplaint against the nanufacturer
regarding deviation of working quality of a hydroacouetic station fro- tech-
nicsl specifications during the warranty period.

Flaws that are cause for a clain are: prensture wear or breakage of parts,
coeponents and nodules of the equipment. and also malfunctions of the device
as a whole that cause it to fail; considerable deviation of para-stars from
the norn that cannot be elininated by following operating instructions for
adjustments and alignments.

The claim sheet is to be coepilcd by the nanufacturer's representative; if
this is not done within 10 days of notification of the defect by telegram.
the claim is compiled by the chief of the electronics service on the meal.
signed by the captain and presented to the an}? [expansion not given] which
transmits the claim to the manufacturer. The plant met elininate the defect
at no charge by repairing or replacing the failed conponent.

The level of repairability of narine hydroacoustic stations is seemed to

be characterized by quantitative indicea that can be grouped into two cats-
gorisa "Ref. 2]: operational (temporal) and economic. Operational indicee
include: average recovery tine 'r,, probability of restoring operability within
a'predeternined tine P(t.). and operability restitution paraneter u(t.). The
tins of restoring operability of equipment is conprised first of all by the
active repair tins. and secondly by the time for warring repair. Calculation
of the active repair tins for any facility is based on knowledge of the failure
rate of its coeponents and the tine necessary for repairing these coeponents.
On this basis. the average repair time '1" is found from the relation

a II .
T. 'a 4/01 - a AI’d/E' 1)-

where q is the conditional probability of failure of el-enta of the j-th
group; is is the active repair time upon failure of elenents from the j-th
group; n is the amber of groups of alenents.

As we can see the quantity that deteraines the average tins of restitution
of operability is tine taj' This tine depends to a considerable degree on
the type of failed conponent. the complexity of the equipment and its design
peculiarities.

In the case of a large volune of statistical data. such a point evaluation ‘
can be used. but in the case of fee data it is necessary to dateraine interval
eetinetes by known nethods of probability theory. For a rough estinate of
repairebility. particularly on the design stage. use can be made of statistical
data obtained in the operational process or on tests of equipment of sinilar
types or purpose. Sons of these data for individual electronic coqonents

are smariaed in Table 2 [Ref. 7].

Analysis of operational experience with marine hydroacoustic stations has
enabled us to define the reliability of restitution tins among other

FOR OFFICIAL [SE ONLY
TABLEZ

Statistical indices of restoration of operability
of electronic equipment by types of failed components

 

 
 
      
 
    

Detection

hype of failed component t 1*, hr

Vacutn tubes
Oscillator tubes

Resistors 0.98
Capacitors 1.7
Tuning controls «-
Switches 1.06
Motors 5.13
Tanks circuits 2.8
Hiring -
Fuses 3.2

quantitative indices. For example, for the Paltus-H hydroacoustic station
this index is 2. lo hr, for the most reliable Soviet fish-locating hydroacouatic
station -- the Kal'nar -- it is 0.75 hr. and for the sonar unit in the Pribor-

101 fish-locating set with little cumulative operating experience. it is
3.4 hr.

The proi .bility of timely restoration Ht. )- Probl1.< i. e. the proba-
bility that the running recovery time 1. will not exceesl a predetermined tine
t.. is found from the expression

Pa.) - I Mr.) 41..

where “1” ) is the probability density function of recovery time. For exslple
in the case of an exponential law

r(r.)- -,'— up (—UT.)

probability P(t') - l - exp (-t,/'1',) .

 

Fig. 6.2. Histogram of tine of recovery of operability of
the Paltus-H hydroacoustic station

65

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Statistical data on the times of recovery of operability for the Paltus-ll
hydroacoustic station have been used to plot a histogram of the distribution
of these times (Fig. 6.2) in accordance with the relation

I(:.)-n(~..)1~(t.) AI...

where At“ is the i-th interval of grouping of values t,; nut“) is the amber
of values of t. in the i-th interval At.; Mt.) is the total umber of re-
coveries.

The flow of recoveries u, characterizes the recovery rate. or the number of
repairs that have been made in a unit time. This quantity can be determined
from statistical data for n failures as the reciprocal of the average recovery
time ug-N(t.)/t,. In the case of an exponential law of distribution of the
probability density of recovery time. ”('53) - 111‘,- const.

Generalization and dissemination of experience with equipment operation as
well as a nube: of technical measures are improving u(t,) with a correspond-
ing reduction in t,. which can be illustrated by the way that this last quan-
tity (yearly average for the Paltus-H hydroacoustic station) depends on oper-
ating time:

Year of operation 1970 1971- 1972 1973 1976
:3, hr 0 a e s a e 2.3 1-8 2a! Its 005

Econonic quantitative indices characterize the expenditures of labor
and material resources on restoring operability of equipmrnt. These include
[Rah 2]: repair cost. average repair cost. and also the coefficient of
recovery coat. The repair cost depends on a large number of factors. among
which are: cost of components. materials. electric energy. depreciated coat
of equipment. payments to repair agencies. Obviously this is a random quan-
tity. but the average cost of repair can be deduced from operational experience
as the nethematical expectation of the cost. Depending on expenditures for
restoring operability in the case of a specific failure. equipment can be
categorized as either repairable or nor-repairable. Advisability of repair
can be established from the ratio of expenditures for repair c, to the cost
of making and installing the given equipment Opt, 1. e. from the coefficient
of recovery cost krc'cr/c r° Depending on remaining service life and other
factors. the critical or threshold value of this parameter that corresponds
to making a decision about advisability of repair may range from very small
values to nearly unity. In the latter case. the decision about advisability
of repair is made when there is no possible way to replace the failed compo-
nent. unit or nodule.

Let us note possible ways of improving the repairability of technical sys-
tems: improvement of the method of locating failures; using automated moni-
toring systems; optimizing the spareparts inventory; improving the skill

of service personnel; improving repairability of equipment; improving the
method of predicting failures; improving technical docuaentation.

66

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR10FFKJAI.USE(MVLY

{6.2. Troubleshooting methods

The process of running repair of equipment can be divided into four stages:
determination of failure; establishing the nature of the failure and localizing
the malfunction; correcting the malfunction; post-repair check of operability.

These stages are common to all known methods of repair regardless of the method
of recovery of operability--automated or manual. Analysis of the steps taken.
and also experience in operating hyd.. coustic equipment. have enabled de-
termination of the average proportion of time expenditures with respect to
each of the stages. According to Ref. 4. the average time of preparing moni-
toring and measurement equipment and localizing malfunctions in electronic
equipment takes up about 772. correcting the malfunction -- 151. and post-
repair check -- 81 of the technical time of recovery. which in turn takes

up only about k of the total recovery time. More than 701 of this time goes
for nonproductive expenditures. e. g. various steps to organize repair. in-
cluding down time due to lack of spare parts. Analysis of statistical data
over five years of operation shows that proportion of required time expendi-
turea for finding and correcting malfunctions in hydroacoustic stations. for
example in fish-locating gear. is 31: and 69% respectively for the Paltus-H
hydroacoustic station, and 42 and 582 for the Priboy-lOl set. As we can see.
a considerable part of the active repair time goes to locating the malfunc-
tions. This fact makes it necessary to optimize the algorithm for locating
malfunctions so as to reduce the pinpointing time.

The location of malfunctions in modern hydroacoustic equipment is increasing-
ly difficult because of growing complexity. which increases the time for check-
ing the working state and determining the causes of a failure. The search
algorithm can be simplified if certain a priori data are available on the
properties of the equipment: probability of failure of given components.

time for checking operability of these components and so on.

Analytical determination of the optimum check sequence in locating a failed
component involves the following assumptions: the equipment consists of n
components with independent failures; q: is the probability of failure of
the j-th component; r5 is the time spent in checking the component.

It can be shown (Ref. 7] that in the case of equipment failure. the conditional
probability q} of failure of the j-th component leading to equipment failure
is determined by the relation

07 - (en/p.) a My.

where q and p are the a priori probabilities of failure and trouble-free
operation of t e j-th component. and n is the number of components. when
the number of the component coincides with the number of the check over time
13. the time for locating a malfunction when the i-th component has failed is

Q ,.=::S g, and the average time for pinpointing the failure is defined as
[-1

the mathematical expectation in the form

67

FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE(NNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1.. . - '2' [WM ‘2' n] / é. culm-

‘rhe optinue sequence for checking operability of conponente. or the optim-
algoritb for pinpointing a failure. is found by solving the variational prob-
1e- on mini-icing that. giving condition twdq.<r,p.lq,<. . . <1..,p,..lq.-..

If the tine for checking operability of coeponente is not ”aimed. or is
approrinstely the sane for all coQonents. then the criterion for selecting
the optim- eequence nay be the condition for getting mim- infomtion
on the state of the systen. which is satisfied in the case of equiprobability
of events. Consequently the nest infornation. and hence the opti-- check
sequence. can be obtained in the case of verifying the operability of the
syatea at the point that divides the section of a circuit being checked into
parts that have equal probabilities of failures. 1. a. with eo-called binary
division (Fig. 6.3). This nethod gives a gain in the number of checks as
compared with the neth of unorganized trials that is eetinated by the ex-
presaion

h =- Mg..m;..-(n—1)n.43 In n-O.1(n—l)iln n.

 

Pig. 6.3.' Sequence for pinpointing ulfunction by binary
division

where Egg. 3:“ represent the naxim nuber of checks of a failed co-ponent
anong n the neth of unorganized tests. and by binary division respec-
tively.

This gain increases uith an increase in the masher of conponenta: at n- 8.
k-2.35. and at n- 15. k- 6.

In the practice of using hydroacouetic equipeent for locating nalfmctioning
coeponents upon occurrence of a failure. sonstinae tables of typical nslfunc-
clone-are used. although the increasing coeplexity of equip-mt precludes
inclusion in these tables of all possible nalfunctiona. and the albiguity
of reasons for failures lakes it difficult for service personnel to use such

tab lee .

The ways nentioned above for deternining the optinu sequence in checking
for operability of coeponente uhen localizing a failure. i. e. when searching
for a failed conponent. are used for the main reliability hookup. and are

68

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OMCIM. USE ONLY

.8330 03263893 33.3.2. muons mo 39.53% 300.3 3.0 .3..—

. - I. shadow” oumwam _ nova—32 _
553.8 _ .II_|_
uououw p.339;
nuaom

nun: «ﬂu-3T0 IITouauaHo}

 

 

 

 

     

wagon—3.,

 

 

  
 

 

   
 

   

 

undo-.598 ~030qu cocoa—Boo _
nmwuuooao .Tﬁuuoﬁuo |l_ _
38500.1 .. _ 3.5.38 . ~28."

.3343. _

 

 

uoquON Alo.|w :00 nauozuouo

an _ h Balls... own—".—
__. oven» .- 3:28m uwsuuau 3.5.50 3.330 253.0»
Madman—u. |||_._I. quad—lo .3309 L8.—
«alu— “ u _

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

_wa«=an lam—4|

5.23:. - lulullocomaoo I 2.3

{WWEF Eul— ulsu emacuoLmH . «3 E:
o couuooam

uovuooou Ilu.u..—h|£o .ulluau: H33» candid ,

 

 

 

69

m3 OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

unsuitable for the kind of systems with branched structure representative
of most present-day hydroacoustic statiohs (Fig. 6.6) (Ref. 29]. It is this
factor that has determined the choice of a sequence for locating a failed
component based on logic. and designed both with regard to the structure of
the system and the results of verification of components on each step.

Thus while the search algorithm may already be defined before checking starts
for the main reliability hookup. each step of the check sequence mat be based
on the results of the check on the preceding step for a system of comic:
branching structure. and not only that. it must be band on the functional
relation between the component being checked and the adjoining components.
Such a method of verification when looking for malfunctions in electronic
systems is known as the method of functional teats lief. 27. 18]. In accord
with this method. the components of the hydroacoustic station are divided

into two grOups — functional and power components - the former being those
that receive. convert or transmit information. while the latter are sources

of energy. Depending on number of inputs and outputs. functional coQonents
are divided into information sources (output only). information converters
(one input and one output). data-gathering components (several inputs and
one output) and information sharing conponents (one input and several outputs).
Functional and power components are interconnected. and depending on the func-
tions that they perform these connections may also be either functional or
power connections.

Analysis of the components and the connections between that enables formal
representation of the hydroacouatic station as a structure that can also be
of the functional or the power type.

The logic that defines the structure of the algorithm of localizing a malfunc-
tion is based on the following information concerning malfunctions of func-
tional and power components:

-when a functional component fails. the signal at the output is absent or
distorted with normal input signal. while failure of a power component causes
a deviation of output power from the norn:

-as a consequence of failure of these components. there is an interruption
in functioning of conponents that receive power or information from the failed
components;

--the generalized index of failure is the change in output parameters of the
systa that shows up as abrupt deterioration or cessation of functioning of
the system. and also indication of a failure.

Use of the method of functional tests to find a failed component in a system
with series functional structure can be illustrated by the example considered
above (see Fig. 6.5). Determination of the sequence for locating the failed
component is based on the probability density function for occurrence of a
failure f(n) as well as the probability distribution function P(n). If a
functional test has given a positive answer ("signal present". "signal ampli-
tude within the norm". etc.). the formal search diagran places the point of
the next test further to the right or closer to the output. while a negative

70

(«a 0L| 0

FOR OFl-‘IGAI. USE ONLY
ii

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

response shifts the next test point
further to the left or nearer to the
input than the point of the preceding
test. As can be seen from the figure.
a tree-like fornal diagran is obtained
for combined search by developing the
points transferred to the axis of ab-
scissas by test numbers. and joining
them together. Bach branch of the dia-
gram, 1. e. the sequence of tests cor-
responds to only one state of the chan-
nel. and leads to one failed component.

The difference between search in systens
containing nodal elenents and in systens

Fig. 6.5. Disgra of search for a with series structure consists in the
failed component with respect to fact that in the former case it is in-
laws of failure probability distri- possible to use the principle of binary

but ion

division. and a priori information can
be taken into consideration only for

renmbering the components of a group in descending order.

Systems or channels that contain data-gathering components are analyzed when
locating nalfunctions with consideration of the condition of impossibility or
very low probability of simultaneous failure in two or nore parallel indepen-
dent circuits. An example of realization of the method of functional tests
in checking a data-gathering component 3 with two inputs from units 1 and 2
is shown on Fig. 6.6 [Ref. 27].

    

I10

 

Signals l. 2 Signal 1 at
_“m‘“1£“§2°f . input of unit
no I yes no I,“

 

 

ailed

ignal 2 at output
of unit 3? '

TLmL—s—

faile

ignal l at output
of unit 3?

no yes' I

    

Signal 2 at input
of unit 3?

     
 

yes

  
 

  

   

I

F” 1:2! Coupling
ailed Ifailed Eiiflﬁ‘

 

 

 

 

Fig. 6.6. Realization of method of functional tests in
localizing a malfunction (exawle)

71

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Localization of nalfunctions in power components has a certain peculiarity
that consists in the fact that these components are connected to practically
all the functional elenents. and operation of at least one of the latter is
an indication that a power conponent is functional. At the ease time. func-
tional connections have little influence on power conponents. being deter-toad
nainly by secondary failures. Besides. the strong influence of these coupo-
nents on operability of systena as a whole predeternines their saturability
with external monitoring devices. The sinplicity of power components permits

easy prevention of component failures by using fuses or other more couple:
protectors to disconnect the load.

Pinpointing the failure of a power component usually entails no difficulties
since the nunber of parts in these components is ordinarily not large. The
probable causes of failures of power components for different states of the
load protector and readings of nonitoring devices are amrised in Table 3.

TABLE 3
Causes of power component failures

        
   
    
   
      
       
     
     
   

Readings of monitoring devices

 
  
 

 
 

State of load Input voltage within note :10 01:3:
protector ' voltage
Output voltage No output
within norn voltage

   

 

    
  
 

   
   

Normal Break of power Break of power No voltage
or functional connection in in supply
connection in secondary voltage circuit

the load circuits

   

Bnergized Overload in Overload in .
functional power circuits
circuits of load and

power systen

A block diagram of locating malfunctions by the method of functional tests for
a power structure is shown in Fig. 6.7.

The proposed technique can be easily realized when locating a malfunction
with respect to external signs and test results in the power supply of the
Paltus-H hydroacoustic station diagramsd in Pig. 6.8.

After selecting the optima sequence for checking operability of the parts
and conponents of the systen. the checking nethod itself must be worked out.
In hydroacoustic equipment operational practice. conponent operability is

verified by methods of external inspection. conparison. internediate tests
and replacement.

72

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02109: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500060049-7

mu oincm. use on“

| No signal at output of l
function]. oyste-

Does nonitor show voltage
at output of r

component

      
       
   
 

Check inforut:

In there voltage at
and power conne:

input of power con-

 

  
 
 

 

 

    

ponint? in an 10“
no - l yes
- 1 |
Check operation of Check power con
protectors output volte
circuit

energized i normal
I I

| Check actuation of
:protector circuits when
power co t is
_ on in no- oed etete

 

Check for br'ee
input voltege ci
of power conpo

 

 

   
    

 

energized I noml

Overloed in power Overload in
component circuits circuits of th

 

 

Fig. 6.7. Diegren of localizing malfunction h
functional tents for power etmcture

; 7'3

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP02-00860R000600060049-7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Pig. 6.8. Sche-stic of power supply for the Psltus-K hydro-
scoustic station

External inspection reveals eslfunctions with causes that show up on the
outside. and not just visual. e. g. fro. the change in color of coating of
the cosponents. defornation of the casings. absence of filament glow in tubes.
but also by sound. touch and snell. e. g. overheating of trensforner and
coil housings. change in flexibility of wiring at a break point. or the snsll
of overheated insulation coverings. paint. rubber. etc. This sathod can be
quite effective. although realisation necessitates considerable practical
experience on the part of service personnel.

The essence of the neth of conparison is identification of vorlring condi-
tions of conponents and nodules classified as salfunctioning with units of

the ease kind operating in the ease or sinilar conditions. Portable seasuring
instrunents - sultiseters and oscilloscopes - can be of considerable assis-
tance here. The forner are used to check electrical conditions at like points
of the circuits being conpared. end the latter are used for visual conparison
of voltage vaveforss. The nethod can be used to find nslfunctions in nulti-
channel lines of hydroacoustic stations. ‘

The nethod of internediate nessuresents consists in neasuring the electrical
and acoustic psrneters of conponents or circuits in the equipment. The oper-
'ator should be firsly convinced by such seam-ants that the par-stars sea-
sured are within the necessary allowances. Although this method takes the
longest tine. it gives nan-all infornation on the technical state of the equip-
sent.

The seth of replacenent is used vhen there is no chance of neasuring the
paraneters of caponents. mbassenbliss and nodules by instruents. and at the
sane tine there is a high probability that the nalfunction has arisen in this

76

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I’OII OFFICIAL USE ONLY

particular conponent. subassembly or module. In addition to locating aalfunc-
tiona. this method simultaneously corrects than by replacement of the failed
component.

It should be pointed out that it is practically inpossible to say beforehand
which method should be used to locate malfunctions in a specific device. In
practice, these methods are generally used in conbination adapted by service
personnel to the particular operating conditions. but in pursuit of a canon
goal -- mini-icing the troubleshooting time.

Let us note the principal stages of designing search plans by the method of
functional tests [Ref. 27]:

«grouping elements by the functional and power label. and unifying then into
a sequence of channel sections;

"choosing the method of checking the elements that comprise separate sections;
-aaking up functional search plane;
--passing on to elenents of search on lower levels.

56.3. Methods of correcting principal nalfunctions of conponents and subse-
senblies in shipboard hydroacOuatic stations

The circuitry of present-day hydroacoustic stations contains a large nunber
of electrical and electronic aubassenblies. conponents and parts. The diver-
sity of their working principles. operating conditions. and responses to ex-
ternal stimuli predetermines diversity both in causes of failures. and in

the methods used to restore operability. Let us consider typical features

of malfunctions and methods of correcting them in the most extensively used
components and parts of hydroacoustic stations.

I. Bleetroacoustic Transducers. A peculiarity of using electroacoustic trans-
ducers as active components of acoustic antennas is that they are subject

to the continued action of sea water. the salts dissolved in it. considerable
differentials of hydroacoustic pressure and variable mechanical loads (vibra-
tions and accelerations), as well as the action of oils and petroleu products.
and encrustation of surfaces with a variety of microorganisms. This situation
makes severe demands on the construction and installation of antenna compo-
nents with respect to strength. hermeticity and effectiveness of shock mount-
ing. These requirements are satisfied in most cases. which determines the
comparatively high reliability of the elements of acoustic antennas, and
failures of these units account for 32 of the total nuber of failures in

the Palms-H hydroacoustic station. and lo! of the total for the Priboy-IOI
fish-locater. However, as opposed to other conponents and modules of hydro-
acoustic equipment. in the overwhelming majority of cases electroacoustic
transducers, especially piezoceranic elenents. cannot be restored. and there-
fore repair is handled by replacement. which requites drydocking in the case
of a stationary antenna located below the waterline. Particular attention
during replacement must be given to observing polarity when installing leads.
and ensuring that current-carrying components are watertight.

75

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLV

2. Resistor. The main parameters of resistors are: noninal value; pernic-
sible deviations of resistance from the nominal value in percent; working
temperature range: permissible relative humidity; temperature coefficient
of relative change in resistance; aaximun working voltage.

According to construction and purpose. resistors are divided into fined.
variable and adjustable. According to the type of current-carrying aaterial.
resistors are divided into carbon. borocarbon. metal-film. wire-wound and

so on.

Malfunctions of resistors in hydroacoustic stations are of two kinds: elec-
trical and mechanical. Electrical nalfunctions show up as a break in conti-
nuity of the conductive layer due to burn-through. an increase in resistance
due to current overload or aging. and a reduction of resistance due to partial
or total breakdown through the current-conducting layer.

Mechanical nalfunctions that lead to failure of resistors show up as damage

of lead-ins. abrasion of the current-conducting layer by contacts. and also

breakage of the stops on the rotating sector in variable resistors when per-
nissible forces are exceeded.

It should he noted that the percentage of failures of hydroacoustic stations
by reason of resistor failure is low. and such failures occur chiefly in nod-
ules with a high load factor. For example. failures of the Paltus-M hydro-
acoustic station for this reason count to 7.51. of which 6! Mn” t0 1'"
eistors in the oscillator (oscill \tor failures account for 611 of the total
number of failures).

when resistors fail. operability of equipment-is tutored by replacing than.
and only in a few cases can variable and open wire-wound resistors be repaired.
The state of resistors is checked and they are replaced with the equipnent
turned off. and mandatory disconnection of the shunting circuit from monitor-
ing. A failed resistor is replaced by soldering in one of the same type with
at least the same power dissipation rating and precision. Malfunctioning
variable resistors are replaced with identical units. In case a spare resistor
of the use rating is not available. the failed resistor can be replaced by

a parallel or series. hookup of two or more resistors with consideration of

the power dissipation of the resultant circuit.

3. Capacitors. Capacitors show the greatest diversity of types among elec-
tronic coeponents. For sample with respect to change of capacitance. they
may be fixed. variable and trimers; with respect to characteristics of the
dielectric .. paper. mica. car-1c. file. electrolytic. air. glass-encel.
etc.; with respect to purpose — isolating. feedthrough. filtering. storage.
etc. In addition. capacitors differ with respect to capacitance rating.
precision. breakdown voltage. temperature coefficients. fastening. etc.
within one class there may be several types. for example electrolytic capaci-
tors are produced in the following types: [8. acre. BM. 31‘. am. etc.

Malfunctions of capacitors. like resistors. say be of electrical or uchanical
origin. Electrical malfunctions are caused by internal breaks and shorts

76

MOMLUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

between the separate parts of the capacitor. Mechanical malfunctions show
up as dmge to the housing. bends and breaks in the leads. Data of opera-
tional results with the Paltus-H hydroacoustic station have revealed that

the failures of this station by reason of capacitor failures average 132 of
the total amber of failures. and most of these are in the oscillator unit.

Capacitors are checked for operability by measuring the electric circuit for
a short (in the case of breakdown) or an open. and also for leakage current.
This check is done with an olmlseter or megohssneter. which Jill show a reading
of zero or infinity for a malfunctioning capacitor in the absence of a shunting
circuit. lypically. an operable capacitor shows initial deflection of the
meter needle to zero with a gradual increase toward infinite resistance. the
rate of change in the reading increasing with decreasing capacitance. The
equipment is repaired by replacing the failed capacitor with an operable one.
It should be remembered that each of the types of capacitors has a preferred
field of application. and violation of this rule when replacing capacitors
may change the electrical characteristics of devices. For example, electro-
lytic capacitors are used in circuits with direct or pulsating current. and
they have polarity. Ceramic capacitors are used chiefly in high-voltage cir-
cuits with low working voltages. Sealed capacitors with paper dielectric

are used in scanning circuits and anode filters. and are not reocuended for
use in intermediate circuits because of considerable leakage currents. Mica
capacitors are most frequently used in intermediate circuits. shapers and
delay lines.

when replacing a failed capacitor with an operable one. it is necessary to

pay attention to the capacitance value and the breakdown voltage. If the
required rating is not available, compensation can be made by parallel or
series connection of capacitors of other ratings. using the following relations
for computing the capacitance C: and breakdown voltage "us:

0 a
--for a series hookup l/C,=z.‘, (1/6,); Un-F'Uu:

(-I

I
--for a parallel hookup C;-‘2‘.' C1: Usz-Undn‘

lo. Transformers. Chokes. Inductances. A co-non feature of these electronic
components is the presence of a winding with a core laminated from transformer
sheet iron. a solid core. or no core at all. The parameters of these elements
are determined by their purpose. the power to be transferred or converted.

and functional peculiarities.

For example. transformers may perform functions of signal conversion (func-
tional component) and functions of converting and redistributing energy (power
component). In the former case, the transformers are mostly low-power units.
with the exception of transformers in the output stages of oscillator devices.
where failures may arise due to a break in the winding, or breakdown of the
anode voltage. In the latter case. the transformers are cowonents of recti-
fier units. and though they are generally protected. nevertheless they do
malfunction due to opens and shorts. The latter is more conon; for example

77

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

during operation of the Paltus-h station about 102 of the failures occurred
by reason of failure of the TR-58 transformer in the oscillator unit.

Power transformers are usually not repaired under shipboard conditions because
of the considerable difficulties of repairing. but rather are replaced with
operable unite from spare parts. In replacement. it is necessary to adhere
strictly to the correspondence between lead nubering and connection point
since otherwise the transformer may fail along with other components of the
device. or there may be a change in the functional characteristics of the
hydroacoustic station. For example improper connection in the primary and
secondary circuit of the beginning and end or centertap of the sum and dif-
ference transforner of the two-channel amplifier in a hydroacoustic station
causes a sharp change in the functional characteristics of this unit and of
the station as a whole. Transformer operability is checked by measuring the
continuity of the circuit and the resistance of windings with elimination

of the shunting action of other circuit elements. and checking shorts between
windings and also between the chassis and the windings. When data are not
available on the winding resistance. it lust be approximately evaluated from
the nuber of turns of wire. its cross sectional area and the resistivity

of the material since an olmneter can usually tell resistance starting from
units and tens of ohns. and the resistance of some windings. for example fila-
nent windings. say be a fraction of an ohn. and an incorrect decision may be
made on the basis of measurement results that the winding has a short circuit.

The principal nalfunction that leads to failure of transformers is shorting
between turns. producing an internal circuit in the form of a shortened coil
with an abrupt increase in current. Usually transformers with this kind of
trouble are not repaired. but are replaced with a good transformer from spare
parts. In this case as well. it is mandatory to observe the marking of the
output ends of the windings.

Transformers and chokes are repaired by rewinding. beginning with the windings
situated on the outside of the coil form and ending with the winding that has
failed if there is no doubt as to the operability of subsequent windings. In
doing this work, it is necessary to observe conventional electrical engineering
rules on coil form manufacture. coil winding. finishing and narking leads.
cable-paper and varnish insulation between layers and between windings. shield-
ing and final installation of the coil in the housing. The work is usually
done on special coil-winding nachines. but may be done nanually in the case

of a snall nmber of turns of wire with large diameter (nore than 0.6 In).

The post-repair check is done first without current. when an oh-eter is used
to check the internal resistance of windings and absence of shorts between
turns and between windings. as well as between the windings and the chassis.
With current switched on. a check is made of correspondence of voltages to
predetermined or calculated values. electrical strength of the insulation.
and no-load power consumption by checking for overheating of windings. Over-
heating dt is calculated from the change in resistance of the windings a.

(before energizing) to Rf (after two hours of operation) in accordance with

R - R
the relation “-66.71%. and then compared with the value given in the tech-

nical specifications.

78

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Verification of chokes is done by measuring their inductance with special
devices that simulate working conditions in the actual unit.

As contrasted with other components of the hydroacoustic station, repair of
inductances under shipboard conditions and subsequent alignment of channels
is difficult because of the lack of special measuring equipment; however.
in an emergency inductances can be made by the service personnel.

Analytically. the inductance of coils L (in uh) can determined from the follow-
ing relations [Ref. 25]:

--single-layer coil

hem.

LID... + o.« '

—-mu1 tilayered coil

L _ spastic-3

ao.,+91+m'

where Z is the length of the winding in cm. h is the number of turns. D3 and
D“ are the outer and inner diameters of the winding respectively.

D..-%(D.+D..); 1550(1).»

When a core is used. the inductance Lc of the coil will be defined in terms
of the actual permeability of the core uc in the form Lc-ucL. the Q of the
core with the coil being approximately A]: times greater than that of a coil
with the same inductance but without the core.

5. Switches. Relays. The principal trouble that leads to failure of switches
is wear of rubbing parts. deformation of locators. breakage of nonmetallic
components. These faults usually occur as a result of long service. but
sometimes are due to violation of rules of technical service by personnel.
The set of spare parts usually includes most of the types of switches that
are used in the equipment. and failures that arise in these components are
gradual in nature. which makes it important to carry out preventive main-
tenance so that they can be forestalled. In this connection. particular at-
tention should be given to switch contacts since charriug increases the re-
sistance of the circuit being switched, and this circuit may be broken. In
this case the contacts must be cleaned. and then coated with gold or silver
by rubbing with an object made of these metals. When replacing switches.
particular attention should be given to proper marking and installation of
the wires to be switched. -

Relay malfunctions are mechanical and electrical. Hechanical malfunctions
are determined by damage to the moving and stationary relay components.

Electrical malfunctions are differentiated as follows according to their
nature:

79

FOR OFHCIAI. USE ONLY
KING 380 1VDL-ﬂ0 80.!

08

-01o '81111111903 9811111 10910031 1111110 's1ap1ooa1 anon-.1313 111 m1“: 8u11oo1g
-31) 3111 8111111101 ‘110111111113111 go 3181111 01111 9181111 9911103 01 13311301 1111A 11011
-oaz1p 10110111 3111 111 110111 8n1£o1dap 'swuaaun 8111131101 put 81119191 g0 su0110ung
0111 Inog10d 01 93111110. 11119 e1uauodnoa 113111 111 0111011159 01191131111 11311131161100
£111” 9111111 9110111110 01191103901951; 31111": 11139011 'a1uauoduoa 31111-3111] "

~(xg'9) 10111101 auua1ue 3111111 1010- 12915 9111 0319 11119 “(331111

—1vg go 101111111 111101 3111 go “-1) po1ou uoaq 3111111 191110001 1111110 0111 111 1010‘
zgz-aav 3111 go o1n11ag g0 can: ‘11011919 311911031101qu 11.811113; oqg 811111110110
g0 asaoo1d 0111 111 's1uan0duoo 1111111011119 101110 p11: 08111111011 3111 111 19°01
8u1111m1 3111 p113 ‘10191111-03 0111 u1 21'6 '101319 0111 111 111300 09111119; so: go
20! "3‘13 910' '(179) "3} "‘13 51‘1“?” 111111111 P09 3‘11”!“ 10301 9'13 51“!“ 9"
11 801111101111 1019111111100 111 ~01um13 191111311119 131110 111111 981111an 3111 01
511149 sa1n1111g 8mm: 0111 p112 ‘aaqemq p118 81111111111 10101 3111 111 and 031111
30101113 0111 go “-9 9111111 ‘8u1pu1n 1011113 3111 u1 111030 01011111111100 1110111141
33111110": 111 (:15) oa1n1111g 0111 go 13011 ‘91; gas 0: 81111110339 autumn 1011
‘Iuog11m 1011 91 9011111311. 31110313 111 sauouoduoo £11 3311111” go “1111111111111;
3111, ~£11p1unq pun 3111111311131 5111111111 ‘a1o1oag 1111110131: go 1101109 0111 13pm
11011111119111 01 0811-39 :1 93111113311 11101110313 go so1n11ug go 3111100 10;“ 311.1,

-ouo11oouuoo 1110111111133. go
8111193111 331010111 put 910111131108 go 1181111111111 go 81111931113110 1m: 81111111011 9111
01 110011199111 2111111911: 3111:1010 go 8111139111 2091111101111 go 9111mm: [1311011
an p111? 811111011 nomoq 131111100 01113019 g0 8u1111n1q 2911119113 31110310 go
8111130111 :3111 11111311011303 0110111 go an no 1111112113119 eu011oung1n 1od1o1111d 911,1,

'910111131108 pm: 91010. 3111:1913 on 11011113

-10gau1111 £81m 10g pau81oap 911131100110: 13501! 3111111 'e1an10gouv11 911111111101
”11159109 an uo11m0gu1 go «‘1 8u1u10gsuo11 go asod1nd 3111 1111A sump
111110119110; “aw-mt: 10; '01113110111100 1011011 10 1au011oung 1311113 011 on 09111110911
01110313 ‘91101111111 3111111001101qu 1119011111110 111 pmognd 011 01 su011oung 3111 no
Summation °911na11a 9113 “01100111100 11101111111330 91111 3110118": '11101113919 go
9011003111 3111 .(q 9321191091311: 0112 9110111113 011011091101qu go s1um1a 393111,
1881311: 1301110310 g0 810110111100 pun 0101011 01113013 «910111131138 131911011311:
‘s1an10gsuo11 31q11111101 'eu‘sps 0111110111 99911.1, $3111qu 11101110313 -9

«1111101 8111u1m1 3111 go (no 1131101 1011 1911- un8 3111

‘09301 511131 11111 go 3110 8111139109 111111 8u1zvaq 11mm 'p1110q 0111 go Man 3111
1313109 pus my 3111 111111 000 01 51119330011 91 11 '31111 811101) 111 ~11 001 1111111
3101: 011 go 1311011 111111 11118 11 £11 p1uoq 3111 go aoag1nn 0111 301g Kano I10 o°z-g°1
go 331191011: 11 13 1101119100 (1111131138 3111 911331 591311 ~o1uo11110 811111011

-1100 go 081131 8111111011 0111 111 '31:“ 811111011 3111 go 1118110110 1331119110011 3111 go
1113-1011(1): 1111119140011 01 113118 aq 1on- 110111131111 put '911111! ands 1101g 0111111
31111113110 .(q 1100111131 9111 11111 ‘pa1111da1 1011 3111 953131 931111; 993110 190- 111

«181111111111 53101 111 3110110 10 911900”

2911101111: 38191
111111 1111110110 g0 811111113111 91111 8111111111 811111111 111031110: g0 8111113118 10 81111110»-

sag-mono
pmplw go 11011111111119 :0 3011938180: 01: 389010111 91111 03333003 go (1111:3011-

A‘INO 38f] ”IVDHJO 80:!
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The principal malfunctions of mechanical components in these systems are
jamming. slipping and unnecessary play. Jamming occurs when there is a shift
in the shafts of rotating parts or when foreign metallic objects get into

the kinematic system. Slipping. or the absence of the expected effect at

the output of systems when mechanical forces are applied at the input. occurs
in the case of worn gear teeth and loose engagement. displacement of gear
centers. sliding of couplings. damage to stop pins. Increased play is also
caused by component wear. weakening of spring elasticity, increased backlash
of control mechanisms.

Failures of hydroacoustic stations by reason of malfunctions of the antenna
rotator take second place after failures due to oscillator units. For example.
malfunctions of the antenna rotator of the Priboy-lOl fish locater amount

to about 38: of the total number of failures. Among such problems have been:
shearing of the rotator shaft pin. deformation of the worm drive. breakage

of shaft pinions and so on. For the Paltus-H hydroacoustic station. malfunc-
tions of the antenna rotator make up 28.51 of the total. Repair of mechanical
components of kinematic systems of modern hydroacoustic stationscunboard ship
is very difficult because of the lack of necessary spare parts. complexity

of diaassembly. assembly and subsequent adjustment of the system. Therefore
repair of kinematic systems with rare exceptions is done on shore or in float-
ing shops by skilled specialists.

Hires and Cables. An important part in hydroacoustic equipment production

is played by installation of wires and cables as connecting components be-
tween outboard units and devices located inside the ship. and also for modular
construction.

All cables and wires can be classified into the following major groups: low-
voltage, high-voltage. watertight. and special (towing cables, guy cables
and the like).

Like most components of hydroacoustic equipment, cables are also subject to
failure: leaky seals, broken strands, abrasion of the sheath. Failures occur
most frequently in cables that are used for moving installations of hoisting
and rotating units and systems between devices.

The principal grades of wires and cables used in the manufacture and operation
of hydroacoustic equipment according to COST specifications have the following
designations and purposes:

-PGSh. PGESh - rubber-covered wires with copper conductors in rubber sheath-
ing and shielded wires used for moving and stationary installations that may
be either in open air or in sea water; these are repaired by using 8615 rubber
or P1-3S insulation and 5-572 hose;

-~PGVO and PVDN -- watertight wires with copper conductors and rubber insula-
tion in a rubber oil-resistant sheath designed for the windings and wiring

in electric devices to operate in sea water and MVP oil; they are repaired

by using 8615 rubber or PI-3S insulation and hose material according to speci-
fications;

81

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL [SE ONLY

“KShG. KShm -- watertight cable with copper conductors in rubber insulation

with overall rubber cover for stationary wiring bemen inetruents in systole
with cowponents located in open air and in sea water; repaired by using Pit-35

rubber. or 8615 insulation and 8-572 hose;

”KW. me (when conductors have individual shielding -- m. mos) -
watertight cable with copper conductors in rubber insulation and rubber-
coated overall. designed for intraship and outboard stationary installations
for wiring between systens operating in open air and in sea water; repaired
by using ”-35 rubber or 8515 insulation and 8-572 or 3-576 hose;

ms, HPMG -- watertight cable with copper conductors in polyethylene
insulation in overall PVC sheath designed for intraship and outboard instal-
lations and wiring between instruments operating in open air and in sea water;
repaired by using PZOOZKA polyethylene and 38-1-81: Mber.

The repair technique depends on nany factors. including the type of wire or
cable and the extent of danage. and also the working conditions (on-board

or outboard connection. working voltage. clinatic conditions and the like).
For ample. breaks and burns in wiring between conponents are repaired by
cleaning off the wires to be spliced. soldering than and insulating the splice
with grade 230 or 2331' PVC tubing. High-voltage wires and rf cables are usu-
ally totally replaced unless they are included in a harness and the wiring
gets in the way of repair.

Power cables and special cables between devices usually have spare conductors
that are inactive in the wiring. and when a breakdown or rupture occurs in
an active conductor the problen is corrected by connecting a spare conductor
in place of the failed one.

In addition to the problens already noted. there say be cases in operation

of hydroacoustic stations when the hose covering is danaged on cables going
to outboard components by covers torn fro. the fastening and by foreign objects
that get into the cage or enclosure. In these cases. outboard water nay enter
under pressure along the cable into the junction box inside the ship. or into
the antenna. Such a cable nay be replaced during routine naintenance in dry-
dock if the antenna is below the water line and is not raised. In case it

is necessary to use a hydroacoustic station having this kind of problen. first
the dansged section is sealed off by vulcanization. If vulcanization is in-
poesible. a temporary seal can be ends by winding the damaged place with an
overlap of 8-10 on using several layers of rm-oao of mm ('11! Rh?
2898-55) PVC tape alternating with layers of 00 gauze. When the insulation
of the cable has deteriorated. it can be inproved after sealing by sending

a direct curren.‘ of 0.1-0.3 IA between the conauctor with poor insulation

and the hull from a low-voltage source (IKZIo V).

When doing lost kinda of repair on hydroacoustic equipment. service personnel
have to replace failed electrical and electronic coeponents with operable
ones. which involves deinstsllation of the for-er. and installation of the
latter. The work entails the use of welding. soldering. counting. as well
as fastening ale-snts like screws. bolts. nuts and the like.

82

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

welding is a process of joining parts made of metallic and sons nonmetallic
materials by local fusing of contacting surfaces. A certain percentage of
the structural elements and units of marine hydroacoustic stations are made
by welding. but the need for welding arises comparatively rarely in the pro-
cess of operating hydroacoustic stations.

Soldering is a process of joining two or more aetallic components after pre-
lisinary aechanical fastening by using nolten solder in the presence of flux.
The flux is intended for renoving the oxide film from the surface of the
metals being joined and fron the solder. which enhances wetting of the netsl
surface by the solder and reduces the surface tension of the nolten solder
on the metal-to-solder interface. Depending on the melting point of solders.
fluxes are divided into two classes: for solders with melting point lower
than 450°C. and for those with a higher aslting point. Besides. fluxes may
be resinous. based on borax or boric acid. and also based on chlorides and
fluorides. The following fluxes are used in repair of hydroacoustic equip-
ment:

-FKSP (10-402 rosin. 60-902 ethanol) -- for soldering wiring components of
copper and other metals plated with tin. silver. and also for tinning and
to protect surfaces;

-protective flux (3-51 rosin. 0.05-0.55: wax. 3-52 ethanol. hydrazine dihydro-
chloride 0.25-0.312. and solvent No 646 - 86.5-901) applied by dipping in
the flux or by brushing.

Solders are alloys of tin. antimony and lead. Depending on requirements for
strength of solder joints. as well as peculiarities of the laterials. soft
(less than 450°C) and hard (more than 450°C) solders say be used. For exasple
POS-él (tin-402. antimony—0.82. lead 39.21 in accordance with (381‘ 1499-54)
is the most widely used solder; ros-ao (tin—402. antimony—2X. lead-682)

is used for soldering items not to be heated above 150'0. e. g. for hot-timing
polarized piezoelectrics with heating no higher than 65’0. Among the hard
solders are silver-copper-zinc alloys PSR-45 and PSR-ZS (252 silver. 40%
copper. 351 zinc). These have high strength and ductility but require a high
temperature for fusion - up to 750'6. '

"hen cementing certain materials used in the electronics industry. glues and
compOunds with and without electrical conductivity are used. For exnple.

to secure active piezoelectric components to steel. brass and so on. current-
conducting epoxy adhesive compOund 08-65 is used. Components are secured
without maintaining contact by ”1-5-65 cement. 05-65 adhesive is a composite
based on ED-S epoxy resin ([00 parts by weight). silver vitriol (350 parts

by weight) and triethanolamine ([4 parts by weight). Gluing temperature is
65'C. tine 24 hours. resistivity 5.6-10" mm.

The following laterials are also used in repairing hydroacoustic equipment
[Ref. 25]: acetone 0081' 2168-69 and ethylene dichloride cos‘r 1942-74 as
solvents; 317-4 adhesive. nth? 1367-49 and AIL-20 adhesive. Rh? 720-41 for
securing filament banding. casings. conponents on boards; RINK-2a cement.
HKhP 101463-56 for fastening PVC tubes; cellulose nitrate varnish 5236-50 for

83

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
‘II‘OR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

covering solder joints; 83-15 varnish. th 2875-54 for noiature-proofing wiring;
81057-22644 hydrolytic alcohol for cleaning solder joints and renoving char;
varnished cabric isulation 6081' 2216-78 for winding and wiring naterials;
harm-201. 221 lubricant for rubbing parts; cotton thread 0081' 6339-73 for
applying banding. tying up wiring and harnesses.

CHAPTER 7: 0W0 PACE” All!) POSSIBILITIBS 1’08 mm Tm mo 00F-
SIDBRATIOII III nu PROCESS 01' OPERATING nmoacousnc WINS

_§7.l. Role of the operator in the nan-aachine couple:

Designing engineers and operators are now coaing to the conclusion that special
reconendations of psychologists. physiologists. hygienists are no longer
sufficient. since a need is being felt for a unified systen of requiruents
with consideration and evaluation of the effectiveness of ergatic systems.

i. e. systens in which one of the conponents. nost frequently the final one
that aakes decisions and perforas control functions is a huan operator. In
the technical literature. such systens are called "nan-nachine systems" or
ms.

The problen of taking account of hunan influence on the success of problea
handling by a technical systen that is controlled by a hunan operator has
given rise to the following research areas:

«describing the characteristics of the huaan operator as a conponant or
link in the technical systen;

«discovery of the peculiarities of designing facilities with which the huaan
being interacts;

-optinizing the distribution of functions between the human operator and '
automatic technical facilities.

The first area involves processes of huan perception of infornation. neuory.
decision asking. the dynamic and frequency band of actor functions and the
like. The second area involves dealing with such questions as deteraining
the optima characteristics of such facilities as displays. control units.
conputer input units and so on. The third area entails only the distribution
of functions between the huaan operator and the autonatic device so as to
mimics the effect of the ms as a whole.

The approach to the given set of problens as a systea is the'basia of ergonoa-
ics (argon—work. nonoa—law) - the science dealing with "the study and plan-
ning of labor activity to optinize tools. conditions and the work process. as
well as professional nastery" [Ref. 18]. This science is intimately related
to others that in one way or another involve people as a topic of investigation
such as engineering psychology. systens analysis. psychology. physiology. work
hygiene and so on.

A systea with a husn operator. in contrast to autonatic devices has a nut)»
of distinguishing features. and therefore its description requires more

86

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

parameters that influence operational efficiency than for automatic systems.
In accordance with the definition introduced in “.4. we will take the ef-

f iciency of the HHS to mean the degree of correspondence of the results of
using the system to its goal designation under predetermined conditions. The
indices of efficiency depend appreciably on how well the characteristics of
technical devices are matched to human perception. motor activity and memory.
what conditions of habitability typify the work site. what psychological state
the operator is in. etc.

we now have a large volume of experimental data that allow us to assign given
functions to the operator or to automatic equipment. Some of these functions
are given in Ref. 18. In particular, in virtue of their greater flexibility
and adaptability to the signal processing algoritlml during detection and clas-
sification. lower threshold values of the signal-to-noise ratio, greater vol-
ume of storage for informalized information and so forth. the hmn sense
organs (eyes and ears) are utilized in observation systems as the final de-
cision making element.

As already noted in §l.lo. quantitative evaluation of effectiveness of using
observation systems is possible when their goal designation and results of
functioning can be quantatively represented - range. accuracy of determining
coordinates. etc. Consequently. to evaluate the efficiency of a hydroacoustic
station as an ergatic system necessitates quantiative evaluation of the ef-
ficiency of ham performance of working functions in the process of the desig-
nated use of the hydroscoustic station.

57.2. Some human operator characteristics with regard to receiving and pro-
ceasing displayed information

The conditions of human performance of working functions. or the factors that
influence the functional efficiency of ergatic systems are unified into the
following groups (Fig. 7.!) (Ref. 2]: design peculiarities of the system;
conditions of functioning of the system; organization of functioning; peculi-
arities of human perception.

The design pseuliaritiea of ergatic systems have as their purpose the attain-
ment of maximum matching between the output characteristics of display and
other devices and the characteristics of the human operator. In this connec-
tion, one of the important peculiarities that determine functional sucess

of the system is the volume and rate of access of information. As it turns
out. with either too little or too much information the operator makes more
mistakes than for an intermediate amount.

Mistakes may be of various types: missing a signal; delay in transmitting
different signal components; reduction in the amount of perceived information;

failure to handle a job.

The numerous attempts of researchers to establish exact quantitative charac-
teristics of the optimal information load for operators to perform various
functions run up against difficulties in formal representation of the signifi-
cance (value or risk of a decision) of messages. At the same time it is known

85

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Fig. 7.1. Classification of ergononic factors

at: l—Pactors that detenine efficiency of functioning of ersatic systems
Zubesign peculiarities lS—Duration and alternation

3—Infornation load of work and rest
4—Characteristics of imaging facilities lG—chel of physical load

S-Characteristics of control facilities l7—1ntersction of operators

6-4171» of work place la—Individual characteristics

7--Vol|-e of operator's working functions of operator

8—Punctioning conditions l9-Psycbological character-

9—Clinatic conditions istics of perception

lOnSound and sight stinuli ZOnShort-ters and long-tern

l l—Vibration nenory

maladiation and classical environ-sot 21--Rssistsncs to external

l3-0rganisation of functioning stinuli

[lo-bevel of mental load 22—1.».1 of training and

. breaking in '
86

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
m:

we OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Fig. 7.2. Classification of factors that deteraine efficiency
of intonation representation facilities

l--Pactors that deteraine efficiency

of data imaging facilities

Z—Bfficiency of infatuation Iodel

3-Display configuration

lo--Hodel flexibility

SnData volt-e

6--Presentation rate

7—Languase of representation

8--Accuracy of representation

9-Par-neters of data i-agins
facilities

lO—Audible signals

ll—Londness

l2-Frequency band

U—Spectm shape

87

[lo—Interference level
lSuDistortione
16--Visual displays
l7-Bri3htneee
ls—IlluLnation level
l9--Contraet

ZO—Color
Zl—Ruolntion
22--Geoaetric dinneione
Zia—Flicker rate

FOROFI'ICIALUSEONLY
FOR OMCIAI. USE ONLY

(Ref. 2] that nan receives 87: of his information through the visual channel.
122 oy hearing. and about I! through the other channels. Some authors propose
that in this case the operator load factor n be used. which is defined by

the relation

a] - l —r,l1',

where 1' is the total time that the operator is at the work place. and 1', is
the pure time of processing incoming intonation.

The optimum value of the operator load factor lies in a range of 0.10-0.75.
and outside these limits there is insufficient or excess information.

There is a fire relation between the degree of infatuation loading and optimi-
zation of the construction and teclmical characteristics of representational
facilities. which in hydroacoustics use two channels of perception: sight
and saund. Fig. 7.2 shows the classification of factors that influence the
efficiency of functioning of information display facilities. Unfortunately.
not all imaging facilities can be quantitatively evaluated at present. For
example the signals used in audio indicators require two characteristics for
description - energy and frequency -- whereas more such characteristics are
required for most visual displays. This coeplicates their formal or analyti-
cal dascription. and determination of the quantitative characteristics of
imaging facilities.

With respect to the way that the huaan operator interacts with control facili-
ties. they can be represented mainly by characteristics of motor functions:
range of mechanical efforts with respect to switching. moving and rotating
controls. the spatial limitations on them. tactile memory and so on. Some

of these characteristics in qualitative form are presented in widely known
reference papers lug. 12. 18]; however. in the general case our knowledge

in this area is sketchy.

Under conditions of functioning of ergatic systems. we include all external
non-informative stimuli that act on the human organism as an element of the
systee. Physiologists long ago established the range of characteristics of
climatic and other conditions of habitability under which there is no impair-
ment of performance of working functions by an operator. These data have
been given by many authors. and specifically in Ref. 18.-

Organizetion of functioning of a hydroacoustic station. as shown by operational
experience. has an appreciable effect on the efficiency of utilization. For
example. no solution has been found for the problem of determining the optim-
duration of a shift when the hydroacoustic technician is working with different
displays under different travel conditions. even though some data are known on
duration of the period of exhaustion or adjustment. constancy of working ca-
pacity and its decline. By way of specific recoI-endations used in operational
practice with hydroacoustic stations. we can mention a shift duration ranging
from 2 to lo hours (depending on the strain or the number of targets being
simultaneously tracked. and the interference level) with a 10-20 minute over-
lap when two operators are changing shift.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Practice has shown that individual peculiarities of infornation perception

by different operators considerably extend the limits of parameters when aver-
aged over a large nusber of operators. Therefore the chief of the electronics
service of the ship should know the quantitative characteristics of informa-
tion perception by the operators in his jurisdiction when they are performing
given working functions so as to optimize the distribution of such functions
among operators. and to maximize the efficiency of utilization of observa-
tional facilities. This applies both to the thresholds of perception. i. e.
the minimum detectable incraent of a signal against a backgrOund of inter-
ference on various indicators. and to the probability of a false alarm -—

an erroneous decision that a target has been observed when such is not the
case. For example the spread in signal detection thresholds by ear may reach
12 dB at a confidence coefficient of 0.8. while a change in probability of

a false alarm depends on the specific conditions under which an experiment

is sing done. but in some cases reaches values of 0.1-0.1!) [Ref. 18]. In
some measure these values can be attributed to the considerable difference

in signal detecting efficiency by different operators that is well known from
experience in using hydroacoustic stations. In addition to these quantities.
there are certain other human psychophysical characteristics that should be

known in operating and designing the displays of hydroacoustic stations. Let
us briefly take up the major ones.

When working with audible signals. hydroacoustic station operators use headsets
or loudspeakers. The strong dependence of threshold intensity on interference
when working with loudspeakers makes headsets preferable in most cases. reserv-
ing loudspeakers for alarm use. “hen working with a headset. the operator

uses the gain control to set the loudness level corresponding to normal audi-
bility and mini-nan fatigue. The optim- level lies in a range of 60-80 dB.

Differential sensitivity with respect to frequency and intensity. 1. e. the
maximum [sic] change perceived by the operator in the parameter. enables the
operator to detect an echo signal from a moving target against a background

of reverberation interference due to frequency difference. as a consequence

of different Doppler signals, and also intensity. Masking of adjacent tones
within the limits of the so-called criticalband considerably impairs the caps-
bility for recognizing wide-band signals by ear in which the informative compo-
nents might be beyond the limits of this band. When designing audio indicators
consideration must be taken of the fact that the masking effect is more pro-
nounced for higher signals. Spatial pinpointing of audible signal sources

is determined by the binaural hearing effect -- the capacity to compare the
phase shift between signals that arrive in both ears within the cerebral cor-
tex. This effect was used at the dawn of hydroacoustics in the first noise
locater stations.

Visual perception of displayed information can be most completely character-
ized by the criterion of visibility. In this case. the signal is a change
in brightness, shape. color of the display. and the interference is the back-
ground against which this change takes place. and also the brightness. color
and toher stimuli on the visual analyzer from the surrounding space. The

level of signal intensity during the process of its perception by the visual
analyzer is characterized by visual brightness: the greater the brightness of

89

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OHIO“. USE ONLY

the object. the sore visible it is. This perception involves the dimensions
and shape of the light source: it increases with an increase in the ratio

of candlepower to area. Quantitatively. the perception of brightness can

be represented by a certain range of values -- fro. the threshold of luinous
sensitivity to the level that causes the narinun sensation -- blinding. The
range of brightness fluctuations within which satisfactory visual observation
is possible is linited by values from 6.36010‘7 to 1.59-10s cd. i. e. about
120 dB lief. 18]. Such a range is detersined by the capability of vision

to adapt to the background. 1. e. to suppress or enhance the perception of
background intensity of luminous flue depending on brightness. The degree

of difference in brightness (color) of two or more objects is called luinous
(color) contrast. Detereination of the presence of contrast with respect

to brightness and shape is the Iain job of the hydroacoustic station operator
when detecting signals with respect to brightness of a pip on a €33 screen
and on chart-recorded tapes. So far we do not have adequately precise recon-
nendations on optimue brightness characteristics of visual displays. and the
operators the-selves set the brightness level. adapting to it during perfor-
mance of their functions.

Visual perception of space is characterized by angular dimensions of the field
of view of 120-160° in the horizontal direction. and SS-60° upward and 65-72’
downward in the vertical directions. In the case of color perception. this
sector is considerably narrowed. Consequently. in hydroacoustic station oper-
ational practice the operator cannot be asked to keep track of objects outside
of this range of angles. Spatial perception of the characteristics of objects
is represented among other parameters by the visual acuity. i. e. the minimum
angle at which two points can be distinguished as separate. For exanple at

an illumination level of 0.01 1:. visual acuity is 7'9". at 0.1 1: -- 3'b5".
at 1.1 1: -- 1'13" and so on [Ref.'18]. Contrast sensitivity is considerably
influenced by extraneous objects that draw the operator's attention. and light
sources that enter the lateral field of view. It is for this reason that
electronic displays are generally equipped with tubes. and as a rule no signal
lights or other visual indicators are located next to the screen.

Visual perception is also characterized by the unique capacity for distin-
guishing image color. i. e. the visual analyzer perforns spectral analysis
of signals. or responds differently to signals that differ in frequency.
with consideration of this parameter. 1. e. the color of the screen and the
pips from targets. an attenpt is made to choose a color that ninimires the
signal-to-noise ratio at which the operator detects a signal. and also to
reduce visual fatigue when the operator is working with a given type of in-
strueent.

0f considerable interest for designers and operators are the tine character-
istics of perception. The dynamics of the change in brightness sensation
during the tine of action is characterised by the ties constant of “visual
inertia" which is equal to 0.1-0.2 s for central vision. and 0.2-0.32 s for
peripheral vision. Along the tine characteristics of visual perception is
dependence on the kinenatics of the object of observation. in our case for
the pipe froe targets on screens and displays. scans. pointer deflection and
the like. The threshold of perception of rate of displacement of an object
of observation lies in a range of fron 1-2 to 15-30 ang. nin/s.

90

FOR OFFKJAI.USE(NQLY
FOR‘DFFNJA1.USEi0NLN

The psychophysical characteristics of perception are closely related to the
characteristics of short-term (operational) and long-term memory. Despite
some known data. the mechanism of memory is not completely understood. and
is the subject of careful research by scientists.

The level of training and breaking in is characterized by the degree of devel-
opment of skills by the operator in performance of working functions. Operator
training starts with vocational selection when people are chosen from a given
contingent for their paychophysical characteristics corresponding in the
greatest degree to qualities needed by the hydroacoustic station operator.
Further instruction includes theoretical studies of equipment and rules for
using it. and also acquisition of skills in performing practical functions

on the part of the station operator. Perfection of skills in technical aer-
vicing and utilization of the equipment for its purpose is completed in study
halls and on hydroacoustic stations installed on ships. In this training.

it is forbidden to break in the operator on troubleshooting with artificial
malfunctions (simulation).

§7.3. Accounting for ergonomic factors during operation of hydroac0ustic
stations

Ergonomic factors in the process of operating the hydroacoustic station have
an effect on nearly all operations of technical servicing of facilities and
utilization for the specified purposes. It is natural that accounting for
ergonomic factors should be based on analysis of the working functions to
be performed by the operator. Therefore. let us analyze steps for operating
the hydroacoustic station from the standpoint of quantitative or qualitative
evaluation of the role of the human operator.

1. Analysis of measures in technical operation of hydroacoustic facilities
shows that the principal working functions performed by the servicing personnel
are:

-investigation of the layout of technical systems. monitoring facilities,
rules of servicing them and restoring operability when failures take place;

--storing, protecting and installing the facilities on the vessel or in land-
based stations and testing facilities;

--monitoring. preventive maintenance and repair of technical facilities.

It should be noted that the working functions are performed by a collective
of operators rather than by just one. and are distributed among them either
with flexibility or on a rigid basis.

It was noted above that the influence of ergonomic factors on performance

of working functions by an operator can be quantitatively evaluated from re-
sults that are themselves quantitatively represented. For example the mastery
of devices and rules of servicing them by operators is evaluated qualitatively
or subjectively -- quantitatively (in points); steps taken to support storage.
installation and tests can be quantitatively evaluated only in part. Inspection.

91

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

preventive maintenance and repair are characterized. as pointed out above,
by a rather large umber of paraneters that in turn permit quantitative eval-
uation of ergonomic factors.

An exanple of ergonomic evaluation in this case might be evaluation of the
influence of ergonomic factors on effectiveness of monitoring the technical
state of equipment. Determination of the necessary accuracy of measurement
devices is based on the way that the probability Pom of error in maaauraaent
depends on its permissible value in the for.

‘v ‘I-‘l "
Pe-=.I “(01) I ’s(aa)das+‘{fu(¢s)dat]d‘|+
“ ﬂ

‘ ‘V"! - '1":
+ L in (an) [5L1 ’s (as) 401]“: +1 ’1 (0;) [5L fs (0.) due] day.

In carrying out a quantitative analytical or experimntal evaluation of the
percentage of the error PM.“ introduced by the hman eleaent into the mea-
surement process relative to the total error. we can determine the efficiency
of inspection 3 n of the technical system by s hmn operator as a a moni-
toring componeng‘gn the form of the probability of no operator error. i. e.

3“,...al—Pm4r

2. Steps on using hydroacoustic facilities include (see Fig. 1.1) first of
all analysis of the conditions of application and selection of optimum working
conditions of the facilities and maneuvering of the ship. and secondly direct
servicing of the facilities in the process of application.

The influence of ergonomic factors on handling jobs in the first group can
be evaluated in the main qualitatively in virtue of the incomplete correspon-
dence of mathematical models to the algorithms that they describe -- the
methods of decision making.

Solution of problems in the second group is nore nenable to quantitative
evaluation since the problems in this case involve the relation between psycho-
physical and psychomotor characteristics of data perception and behavior on
the one hand, and the physical characteristics of displays and control on

the other. i. e. in either case with characteristics that can be quantitatively
represented.

Let us consider an example of evaluation of the influence of ergonomic factors
on the efficiency of detection 3D and direction-finding 3A by the noise-
direction finding channel in a hydroacoustic station with he operator as

the final link that makes a decision as to the presence of a target. taking
as criteria of success the detection range D and the accuracy of determining
direction A0 no worse than predetermined values. 1. e.

30- Prole) ”pred}; 359' nous“ “91:ch

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The probability of satisfaction of the given conditions in turn can be found
by integrating the probability density distribution of range f(D) and direction
finding error f(As) within given limits. 1. e.

an ‘9
a, = D] {(0)411}, 3., - 2 rnAquq.
“I

[suhznript aan - predetermined]

Consequently. ergonomic evaluation of efficiency of the noise-direction finding
channel of the hydroacoustic station necessitates analytical expressions that
relate the range of action and accuracy of direction finding to properties

of operator perception of displayed infornation in the station and statistical
characteristics of these properties. As the latter we take the probabilistic
characteristics of signal detection against a background of interference as

a function of the signal-to-noise ratio R5 at the input of the display device
f (k ). and detection of deviation as of an electronic target pip free the
sigﬁting line f (A0). These characteristics can be experinentally detersined
for all computational operators of the hydroacoustic stationby using siaulstion
of signal and noise under controllable conditions. i. e. at known nagnitudes
of signal and interference.

It was noted above that most psychophysical characteristics of human perception
confore to a log-noml law since the properties of perception in the nain
have logarithmic scales. 1. a. response is proportional to the logaritln of

the stimulus. Then the probability density function of k6 accordingto log-
nornal law will be represented by the expression

_ l _ (Isle—ism.» 1
NM" 2,3Vﬁo,.a, ex"[ 20:. J

where Ilk and 0k are respectively the mathematical expectation and m devia-
tion in éhe non-31 law of distribution of lgkg.

As the analytical dependence of the detection range as a function of threshold
coefficient k5 we use the expression

D= '

3 Pee ' .6
0'” (an) elm/KIT
where PM is the normalized pressure of interference; p; is the normalized
pressure of the signal at distance r. from the source; Af. T are the passband
and integration tires that characterize the reception channel; g is the coef-
ficient of proportionality in the expression for the concentration coefficient
as a function of frequency

 

welt.

b is the coefficient of proportionality in the expression for attenuation
of sound B-bf’.

93

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Then the density distribution function of detection range. seeming that all
other factors are deterministic. will be represented by the expression

D _ 1 _ Hummu- 31*
“ ’ o.n¥ﬁoo,. ”9 2.: '

 

where

Substituting into the resultant expression the values of par-eters of the
hydroacoustic station to be evaluated. and also the values of the level of

the priaary field of the target ship and the interference at the input to

the hydroacoustic station. we get the probability density function of target
detection range for the given station under the seamed conditions. And finally
integrating this function within the required range. 1. e. fron Dean to in-
finity. gives the operational efficiency of the hydroacoustic station with
consideration of the properties of perception expressed by the probability
characteristic of the threshold coefficient kg in the fore of the relation

U
F(D)=o.5+7‘ﬁ-I exp(—D‘I2)dD.

where ’J=.L(|¢L_ ).
o D’
’0‘

Analysis of this expression enables us to evaluate the variation of target
detection range due only to the probabilistic properties of operator percep-
tion of information displayed by the hydroecoustic station. For ex-ple.

for a coefficient of variation of the threshold coefficient °k5,"kc'°°ls’

the range variation will be / -0.08$. i. e. about 102. which cannot be
disregarded in operation of Re droacoustic station. With the purpose of
accounting for this. it is necessary to deterline the probabilistic character-
istics of the threshold coefficient of all operators when they work with dif-
ferent indicators of the station for naxisun efficiency of utilizing the sta-
tion for its purpose by sprint- distribution of operators by working functions.

In evaluating the efficiency of direction finding of targets by the hydroacou-
stic station. a. g. in the noise-direction finding ends. it is necessary to
find an expression for the probability density of the error of direction find-
ing due to the probabilistic characteristics of coincidence of target pipe
with a sighting line corresponding to a definite direction. when we know

the relation between errors of such coincidence and errors of target direction
finding. and also when we know or can experinentally detersine the probability
density function of the error of coincidence. we can find an expression for
the probability density of the error of direction finding. For ex-ple when
evaluating the efficiency of direction finding of targets by the phase nethod
with the aid of an electronic display. the accuracy of direction detenination
as is related to operator error in registering the najor axis of an elliptical
target pip with a vertical sighting line Ad by the expression

96

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

As-ndAYWt

Assuming that the law of distribution f(Ap) of the error of registration is
normal with zero average ‘Ap"°' and experimentally determined rms deviation

of 0A.. 1. e.

[(AV)-__'__ _£ ,
Vﬁ‘av exp( 2‘11)

we find the probability density function of the direction finding error in
the form

1 130
“Vﬁan exp ( MIR").

 

H69) -

Substituting into the resultant expression the parameters of the noise-direc-
tion finding channel A and d. and also the parameters of psychophysical charac-
teristics of the operator working with the given display. and integrating

over the predetermined range. i. e. (0. Aos‘n). we get the probabilistic esti-
mate of satisfying the requirements to be met by the direction finder under

the assumed working conditions of the hydroacoustic station.

Thus. as operational experience with hydroacoustic stations has shown. the
scatter of psychophysical characteristics that represent the properties of
perception of information displayed in hydroacoustic stations is quite con-
siderable. Consequently. both the efficiency of the facilities for hydro-
acoustic observation in which the operator is the final decision-making link.
and the successful handling of the job by the ship carrying the station depend
appreciably on the characteristics of information perception by the hydroacou-
stic operator. This necessitates quantitative evaluation. or where there

is no such possibility at least qualitative evaluation of the perception prop-
erties of each operator on duty for the purpose of optimizing the distribution
of operators by the working functions that they perform.

CONCLUSION

Development of hydroacoustic technology. and in particular marina hydroacoustic
stations. necessitates improving nethods of operation. Solution of this prob-
lem requires comprehensive analysis of basic factors that influence the at-
tainment of maximum efficiency of hydruacoustic stations. as well as quanti-
tative evaluation of the extent to which such efficiency is realised. Achieve-
ment of quantitative evaluation requires the development and introduction into
hydroacoustic practice of an engineering computation technique. one version

of which has been proposed in this book. Practical implementation of the

given technique will enable optimisation of measures on technical servicing

and purposeful utilization.

The consideration of steps in checking the technical condition. preventive
maintenance. provisioning with spare parts and accessories and routine repair
has been based on common features of utilizing electronic equipment as a whole:
because of the wide variety of types of hydroacoustic stations it has not been

95

FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE1DNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

possible to consider the operational peculiarities of every one of them. This
situation is compensated by accessibility of the required information in the
working documentation of each model of hydroacoustic equipment.

Hydroacoustic measurements occupy an important place in applied hydroacoustics.
The considerable number of random factors that influence measurement results
have so far precluded an appreciable improvement in reliability. which necesc
sitates further improvement of facilities and methods of measurement.

An examination of the problems of restoring operability of hydroacoustic sta-
tions -- methods of finding and correcting malfunctions —- shows that in-
creasing the efficiency of utilization requires designers to correspondingly
increase the level of monitorability and restorability of hydroacoustic sta-
tions. as well as to optimize the modes of operation under different working
conditions.

Analysis of the influence that properties of perception of displayed infor-
mation by human operators have on the output functional characteristics of
hydroscouatic stations is aimed at optimizing their design to maximize ef-
ficiency of utilization of the hydroacoustic station. At present. this prob-
lem is still far from a final solution. However. research in this area and
analysis of the experience of operation of hydroacoustic stations will doubt-
leasly make an appreciable contribution to the development of hydroacoustic
facilities as ergatic systems.

Our presentation leads us to hope that the book will be an impetus to further
improvement of operational efficiency of marine hydroacoustic stations as
they are used to carry out the important jobs of the ships carrying them.

REFERENCES

l. Averkiyey. V. P.. "Sudovyye rybopoiskovyye i elektronavigataionnyye
pribory" [Shipboard Fish-Locating and Blectronsvigation Instruments].
Leningrad. Sudostroyeniye. 1975.

2. Aleksandrov. A. 1.. Bobrovnik. G. A.. "Ekspluatatsiya rsdiotckhnicheskikh
kompleksov" [Using Electronic Equipment]. Moscow. Sov. radio. 1976.

3. Al'bers. V. H.. "Gidroakusticheskiye pribory i iamereniya" [Bydroacoustic
Instruments and Measurements]. Moscow. Mir. 1972.

6. Belov. F. 1.. Soloveychik. F. 8.. "Voprosy nadezhnosti radioelektronnoy
apparatury" [Reliability of Electronic Equipment]. Leningrad.
Gosenergoizdat. 1961.

S. Bobber. R.. "Gidroakuaticheskiye izmereniya" [Hydroacoustic Measurements].
hoscow. Mir. 197“.

6. Bolgov. V. H.. "Physical Causes of Unsteady Acoustic Interference to Oper-
ation of Bydroacoustic Station on Industrial Ships". RYBNOYB KBOZYAYSTVO.
Ho 10. 1975s P 56.

96

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
9C

10.

ll.

12.'

13.

110.

15.

l6.

17.

18.

I9.

20.

21.

POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Bykadorov. A. K.. Kul'bak. L. l.. Lavriyenko. V. Yu.. "Osnovy
ekspluatatsii radioelektronnoy appartury" [Principles of Operation of
Electronic Equipment]. Moscow. Vyashays shkols. 1968.

Brodkin. V. H” ”Hekhaniny nagni .t’onov" [Tape Recorder Mechanisns].
Hoscou. ﬁnergiys. I977.

Bykhovskiy. G. Ye.. Pokrovskiy. V. A.. "Gidroakusticheakiya isnsreniya"
[Bydroacoustic Measurements]. Leningrad. Sudostroyeniys. 1971.

"Vlazhnost'. Imereniye i regulirovka v nauchnykh issledovaniyakh"
(Moisture. liessurenent and Control in Scientific Research]. Leningrad.
Gidroneteoizdst. 1968.

Volin. M. P.. "Parazitnyye svyazi i nsvodki" [Stray Coupling and Pickups].
Hoscov. Sov. radio. 1965.

Budson. U. Ye.. Kanover. D. V.. "Spravochnik po inahenernoy psikhologii
dlya inzhenerov i ldmdozhnikov-konstruktorov" [Handbook on Engineering
Psychology for Engineers and Drafts-en]. Koscov. uir. 1968.

Gerahgal. D. A.. Prim-an. V. M.. "Ul'trasvukovaya spparatura pronyshlennogo
naznacheniya" [Industrial Ultrasonic Equip-ant]. Hosea. Bnergiya. 1967.

Giyes. I... Sabate. F.. "Osnovy akustiki morys" [Principles of Acoustics
of the Sea]. Leningrad. Gidroosteoizdat. 1967.

Glukhov. A. A.. "Ekspluatatsionnyye imereniys i kontrol' v provodnou
veshchanii" [Operational Measure-cuts and Honitoring in "ire Broadcasting].
Hoacov. Svyaz'. 1971.

Golenho. z. 3.. "Information Systeas in Control Problsns" in:
"'rekhnicheskaya kibernetika" [Teclmical Cybernetics]. Vol 6. 1975. book 2.
p 6.

Grodnev. I. 1.. Sergeychuk. K. Ya.. "Ekranirovsniye apparatury i kabsley
avyazi" [Shielding Conunication Equipment and Cables]. Hoscov. Svyas'»
izdat. 1960.

Zarakovskiy. c. It. Korolev. B. A.. lhdvedev. V. 1.. "Vvedaniye v
ergonooiku" [Introduction to Ergonomics]. Moscow. Sav. radio. 1974.

Zinov'yev. A. I... Fillipov. L. 1.. "Wadeniye v teoriyu aignalov i tsepey"
[Introduction to Signal and Circuit Theory]. Hoscov. Vysshaya shkola.
1975.

Zinchenko. V. 1.. Zakharov. V. 1.. "Snizheniye shuns na sudakh" [Noise
Reduction on Ships]. Leningrad. Sudostroyeniye. 1968.

Kslinchuk. B. A.. Pisstro. V. P.. "Analizatory infrazvukovykh sluchsynykh
protsessov" [lnfrasonic Randon Process Analyzers]. Leningrad. Energiya.
1973.

97

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
22.

23.

2‘.

25.

26.

27.

28.

29.

35.

36.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

amp. I... ”Podvodnaya skuetiks" [tinder-water Acoustics]. Moscow. Mir. 1972.

Klyukin. I. 1.. Kolesnikov. A. 1.3.. "Akusticbeskiye inereniya v
s'ndostroyenii" [Acoustic Measurements in Shipbuilding}. Leningrad.
Sudoetroyeniye.

Kolesnikove. I. Ye.. kuynskaye. I. A.. "canwy gidroakuetiki i
gidroakusticheskiye stentsii" [Principles of liydroscoustics. lydroacouatic
Stations]. Leningrad. Sudostroyeniye. 1970.

Varlanov. R. 6.. ed.. 'Iretkiy sprevocbnik konetruktora radioelektronnoy
apparatury" [Condensed Handbook for Blectronic Equip-eat Designers].
Sov. radio. 1975.

Kostyuk. V. 1.. Khodanov. Y. Ye.. "Sisteuy otobraeheniye infomtsii i
inzhenernsya psikhologii" [Data Imaging System and Engineering Psychol-
ogy]. Kiev. Vysshsys shkola. 1977.

Ksenz. S. P.. "Poisk neiaprsvnostey v radioelektronnykb sisteaakb aetodoe
funktsional'nykh prob" [Troubleshooting in Electronic Systeas by the Method
of Functional Tests]. Moscow. Sov. radio. 1965.

Ksena. 8. P.. Yartsev. A. M.. "Teoriys elupluateteii radioelektronnykh
aisten" [Theory of Operating Electronic Systeas]. Moscow. Voyenirdat. 197$.

Loginov. K. Ye.. ”Gidroekusticbaskiye poiskovyye pribory" [Mydroacoustic
Locators]. Moscow. Pishchevaya proayshlennost’. 1971.

burgov. V. A.. ed.. "Magnitnaya zapis' :vuka” [Magnetic Sound Recording].
Moscow. Iskusstvo. 1956.

"Magnitnaya rapis' elektricheskikh signelov" [Magnuic Recording of Elec-
tric Signals]. translated by A. I. Vicbeea. Moscow. lnergiya. 1967.

Maro. Ya. A.. 'Magnitnaye lente" [Magnetic ‘l'epel. Moscow. Bnergiya. 1968.
Mikhaylov. A. V.. "Bksplustatsionnyye dopueki i nadeehnost' radioelektronnoy
appsretury" [Operational tolerances and Reliability of Electronic Equip-ant].
Moscow. Sov. radio. 1970.

Moror-N. M. 6.. "Calculating Moise Spectrua Pith consideration of Defor-
aetion Caused by Sound Daping During Propagation”. mum Amsncnsroco
IISTITU‘IA. No 13. 1970.

Poslave'aiy. 0. P.. "Maderhnost' voyennoy radioelektronnoy apparatury"
[Reliability of Military Blectronic lquipaent]. Moscow. Sov. radio. 1969.

”Madezhnost' v tekhnilns. rerniny i opredeleniya" [Reliability in Tectnol-
ogy. ‘raras and Definitions). 0081‘ 13377-75. Moscow. Ird-vo etandartov.
1975.

98

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
37.

38.

39.

60.

lol.

62.

63.

66.

’05.

46.

(07.

48.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

'rsvetkov. E. 1.. Shereshchevskiy. S. A.. editors 'Wekotoryye voproey
prikladnoy akustiki" [Sane Problaes of Applied Acoustics]. translation
froe English. Hoscow. Voyenizdat. I962.

Orlov. L. V.. Shabrov. A. A.. "Raachet i proyektirovaniye antenn
gidroakueticheskikh rybcpoiskovykh stantsiy" [Calculation and Design of
Antennas for Bydroacoustic Fish-Locating Stations]. Piahchevaya
proeyshlennost'. Moscow. 1976.

Pavlov. E. V.. "Kiberneticheskiye netody tekhnicheakogo diagnoza" [Cyber-
netic Methods of Technical Diagnosis]. Roscow. Keshimstroyeniya. 1966.

"Regulations on Procedure for Develop-ant. testing of Experimental liodels
of Fish-Locating Equipeent. and Certification of Acceptance" in: "Sbornik
noreativnykh doktnentov po radiomaei. elektronavigatsii i
gidroakusticheskoy poiskovoy teklmi " [Collection of Nor-native Dom-ants
on Radio Col-unications. Electromigation and ﬁydroacoustic Locating
Equipeent]. Leningrad. Transport. Vol 2. 1975. p 332.

Polyanov. A. K. . "Progran for nodeling Couple: Systems” in: "Doklady
Vsesoyuznoy nezhvuzovskoy konferentsii po fieicheakonu nodeliroveniyu

i kibernetike energeticheskikh sistu" [Reports of the All-Union Inter-
collegiate Conference on Physical Modeling and Cybernetics of Power Sys-
tems]. Baku. 1972. p 86.

"Prsvila tekhnicheskoy ekapluatatsii elektroustanovok potrebiteley i
pravils tekhniki beropasnosti pri ekspluatatsii elektrouatanovok
potrebiteley" [Rules of Technical Operation of Consumer Electric Plants.
and Safety Rules When Using Consuesr Electric Plants]. Moscow. Atonisdat.
1973.

Rinskiy-Korsekov. A. V.. "Elektroskuatiks" [Electroacoustics]. Moscow.
Svyaz'. 1973.

Ryabinin. I. A.. Kireyev. Yu. 1.. "Nadezhnost' sudovykh
elektroenergeticheskikh sister 1 sudovogo elektrooborudovsniya" [Reliability
of Harine Electric Power Systans and Marine Electrical Equipnent]. Leningrad.
Sudostroyeniye. I974.

Ssrapkin. V. V. . "Ponekhi v raspredelitel'nykh elektricheskikh setyakh
dlya ksnalov telefonnoy svyazi i telenekhanilni" [Interference in Electric
Distribution Networks for Telephone Conunication and Renate Control
Channels]. Kiev. 'rekhnika. 1969.

Stashkevich. A. P.. "Akustika norya" [Acoustics of the Sea]. Leningrad.
Sudostroyeniye. 1966.

Stopskiy. S. 3.. "Akusticheskaya spektrouetriya" [Acoustic Spectra-stray].
Leningrad. Energiya, 1972.

"Shornik nomativnykh dokmentov po radiosvayri. elektronavigatsii i
gidroskusticheskoy poiskovoy tekhnike". Leningrad. Transport. Vol 1-2. 1975.

99

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
109.

so.

51.

52.

$3.

$6.

55.

S6.

S7.

58.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Suryehev. 11. D.. "Rapravlennoet' stdroakuaticheekikh antenn" [Direc-
tionality of Hydroacouetic Antennae]. Leningrad. Sudoatroyeniye. 1973.

'raraeyuk. Yu. 11.. Caravin. G. 14.. "Gidroakuaticheekaya tale-etriya" [Hydro-
acouetic Teleutry]. Leningrad. Sudoetroyeniya. 1973.

'l'aranov. E. 3.. Tyurin. A. 14.. Staehluevich. A. P.. "Gidroabutichcekiye
imreniya v okeanologii" [Bydroacouetic Heaeuranente in Oceanology].
Icningrad. Gidroaeteoirdet. 1972.

Kharkevich. A. A.. "Spektry i enalir" [Spectra and Analyeie]. Hoecov.
Goetekhirdat. 1963.

Eborbenko. I. 6.. "ul'trazvuh v voyennon dale" [Ultrasound in Military
Science]. Hoecov. Voyenizdat.

Kharton. D. I.. "Oenovy gidrolokateii" [Principlee of Sonar]. Sudprongiz.
1961.

Chernit. er. V. 14.. Eaduk. D. c.. "Preobrazovateli vrenennogo naeehtaba"
[Tine Scale Transducers], Moscow. Sov. radio. 1972.

Chernyak. E. I.. "ﬁaeullicheekiye neterialy v audovoy elektro- i redia-
tekhnicheakoy apperaturo" [Nometallic Hateriale in Marine Electrical
and Electronic Equip-eat]. a handbook. Leningrad. Sudoatroyeniye. 1970.

Shirokov. A. 11.. "Nadezhnoet' radioelektronnykh uetroyetv" [Reliability
of Electronic Devicea]. Minot. Vyeahaya ehkola. 1972.

Shiehonok. 11. A.. napkin. V. In. Darvinekiy. L. I... "Oanovy tearii
nadezlmoeti i ekepluetateii radioelektronnoy tekhniki" [Princeplee of
Reliability and Utilization of Electronic Equipment]. ”occur. 80v. radio.
1966.

S9. Ulrich. R. J .. "Principlea of Underwater Sound for Engineera". New York.
1967.

Contente page
Lint of Symbola 3
Preface 5
Introduction 7

CHAPTER 1: «mm CHARACTERISTICS 01' mm! mane STATIORS
MID ran mm 011 VARIOUS FACTORS 11

1.1. Pactore that influence output characteriatice of hydroacouatic
atatione --
A. Acouetic fields of objecte of obeervation -
3. Influence of the narine environment 15
C. Interference to eignal reception 19
D. Technical etate of hydroacoueti: station 21

‘00

FOR OFFECIAI. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1.2. Interaction of output and technical characteristics of hydro-
acoustic stations
A. Range of action
3. Direction finding accuracy and resolution
1.3. Influence of operating conditions on technical state of hydro-
acoustic station
A. Extent of depletion of work life
3. Electrical. load working conditions of exponents and units
of equipnsnt
C. Climatic conditions
D. Radiation
1.6. Efficiency in operation of hydroacoustic stations

CHAPTER 2: PRIﬂCIPAL STEPS n! TBCBRICAL OPERATIW 01’ MARINE WSTIC

STATIOMS
2.1. Major concepts. Putting hydroacouatic equipment into operation
2.2. Checking the technical state of hydroacoustic equip-eat
A. Principal quantitative characteristics of nonitoring
3. Principal steps in nonitoring and efficiency
C. Peculiarities of checking the technical state of hydroacoustic
stations
2.3. Preventive aaintenance steps in the process of technical servicing
of shipboard hydroacoustic stations
2.4. Providing spare parts and accessories for hydroacouatic equipment

CHAPTER 3: PABILITIBS ma 1011113011106 PARAMETERS 01' mmcousnc STATIG'S

3.1. Electroacoustic instrument transducers
3.2. Instrument oscillators
3.3. Sound pressure enters
3.2.. Display and recording devices
3.5. Equip-eat for analyzing phase and spectral characteristics
CHAPTER 6: muons 01' MAKING EYDEOACOUSTIC MEASUREMENTS DURING OPERATION
OF THE EYDEOAOOUSTIC STATION
6.1. Basic principles of asking hydroacoustic and electronic measure-
ments
5.2. Methods of nsaauring per-eaters of the reception part of the as
A. Acoustic leasurenents
E. Special electronic measurements
6.3. Methods of measuring para-stars of the tun-sitting part of the is
A. Acoustic neasurenents
D. Special electronic measure-ants
CIIAPTER 5: METIDDS 0P MEASURING m LEVEL OF INTERFERENCE TO OPERATlm
01’ T11! HYDRDACOUSTIC STATION
5.1. Electrical interference to operation of as and nethods of aeasure-
lent
5.2. Acoustic interference to ES operation and neaaurenent aethods
CHAPTER 6: LOCATING AND ELIMINATIMG MALPUNCTIONS II! MODULES AID 00M-
POEEM‘S OP EYDEOAOODSTIC STATth
6 1. Factors that determine restorability of hydroacouatic stations
6.2. Troubleshooting methods
6 3. Methods of correcting principal nalfunctions of components and
subsssenblies in shipboard hydroacoustic stations

0

101

l-‘OIOFFICIALIBEONLY

23
23
29

37
39
63
lob

SB
59
63
66

71
7A

78

96
107

117

126

132
136

135
136
141
146
152

161
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CHAPTER 7: ERGONOHIC FACTORS AND POSSIBILITIES FOR TAKING TEEN INTO CON-
SIDERAIION IN THE PROCESS OF OPERATING EYDBOACOUSTIC STAIIONS 171

7.1. Role of the operator in the nan-enchine complex -
7.2. Sons human operator cherecterietice with regard to receiving end
processing displayed infornntion 173
7.3. Accounting for ergonomic factors during Operetion of hydroecouetic
otatione 179
Conclusion 186
Referencee 186

COPYRIGHT: lzdntel'otvo "Sudoetroyeniye". 1980

6610
080: 8166/0781

102