FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/ 10546

27 May 1982

West Europe Report

(FOUO 34/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
m

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language scurces
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and

other character '.stics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each iten, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. “here no processing indicator is given, the infor-
‘ antion was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark arid enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical nttes vithin the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as

given by source .

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.8. Goverment.

COPYRIGiT MUS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING WHERSNIP 01'
HTBRIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
NEST EUROPE REPORT

(POUO 34/82) ‘

CONTENTS
TERRORISM
ITALY
Revelations by DR Leader Enrico Penzi
(Enrico Fenzi Interview; EUROPEO, 19 Apr 82) . . .
BOOMIC
FRANCE
Economic Poll Shows Socialist 'Discouragenent'; Gattaz Reacts
(vms AWS, 12‘18 Apr 82) cocoaoeeeoeoaeaasoaea
Poll Results, by Philippe Durupt
Gatta: Expresses Worry, Yvon Gattaa Interview
Hauroy Issues Letter on 1983 Budget: Employment Main Goal
(VALBURS ACTUBLLES, 22-28 Mar 82) .....................
GNP? Stresses Basic , Industrial Research, Innovation
(unﬁmm, m: 82) 00'O88.00.080.000.00000IOOOIOI.
SPAIN

Continuing High Uneaploynent Hay Radicalize PSOE, PCB
(CAHBIO 16, 12 Apr 82) ...............................

POLITICAL
FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF GERMANY

Labor Leader Attacks Schmidt' e Policies
(Leonhard Hahlein; STERN, 22 Apr 82) .................

-a- [III-WE-J

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OFHCIAL USE ONLY

I TALY

Survey of Public Opinion on Poaaible Early Electiona
(Donate Speroni; 11. mm, 9 Apr 82) .................

USSR Sean Trying To Regain Pct 'Solidarity'
(Franc Barbieri; LA STAHPA, 16 May 82)

MILITARY

FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF GERMANY

Briefs
New Military Intelligence Chief

FRANCE

Maintaining sm'. Part of Peacetine Navy Minion
(Alain Duthoit: MES D'AUJOURD'IIUI, Apr 82) anaconao.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
MR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

TERRORISM ITALY

REVELATIONS BY BR LEADER ENRICO FMI
Milan EUROPEO in Italian 19 Apr 82 pp 6-11

[Interview with Enrico Penzi, Red Brigade leader, by Harcella Andreoli; date
and place not specified]

[Text] The terror is over-I‘ll tell you why. "The
armed struggle has lost." The errors, the fanaticism,
the madness of the Red Brigades denounced by Enrico
Penzi, protagonist of our "years of the bullet."

Enrico Fenzi, 65 years old, father of four children, professor of Italian
literature at the University of Genoa, was one of the leaders, one of the
"professors" of the Red Brigades. Arrested the first time in the spring of
1979 by General Carlo Alberto Dalla Chieea, he was acquitted by the court:

it maintained that the charges were unfounded. But in April 1981, after re-
pentant terrorists frca Genoa had explained his role inside the Red Brigades,
Enrico Fenzi was caught redhanded: he was in the' company of Mario Moretti, BR
[Red Brigade] leader in Milan. '

Brother-in-law of Giovanni Senzani, the recently arrested Red Brigades
criminologist, separated husband of Maria Grazia Ghelli who was arrested 15
days ago by the Digos for armed organization, and romantically involved with
Isabella Ravazzi, a young researcher for the National Research Council who was
arrested and later acquitted of charges of participation in the Red Brigades,
Enrico Fenzi has decided to disassociate himself from the armed struggle.

In this interview with L'BUROPBO, he has agreed to explain the reason for his
choice. It is a long, often original and always lively reflection on the tragic
error of armed sturggle, the failure of the Dozier kidnapping, the inexorable
decline of the Red Brigades.

Question: why have you, too. decided 'to disassociate yourself from the armed
struggle?

Answer: All the other questions are in that one. I shout) tell all that I

think about the Red Brigades, about armed sturggle in Italy.... Hell, my
separation from the Red Brigades began after the arrest (the second one, in

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Milan with lioretti); its inediate origin was the question of defense: I
intended to defend myself in court, refusing the so-called guerrilla-trial.
This i-ediately put me out of the Red Brigades line and brought about my
suspension.

I think this subject (the attitudes in court and everything concerning them)
is very important, and that what has been written about it has been hurried
and imprecise. It should be discussed better: but I won't do that, becuase in
my case, the problem was hidden inside another more important one: the very

participation in the political plan of the Red Brigades and my basic convic-
tions.

As soon as I emerged from isolation following my arrest in June 1981, I
imaediately learned from the other prisoners that the Red Brigades were
splitting apart, and that a terrible internal struggle had broken out. Con-
tradictory messages continued to arrive from the outside that urged us to line
up on one side or another, but it was really difficult to understand what was
going on. There is more: it was obvious that there were great differences
because of the very manner of the four kidnappings then in course: Cirillo,
Sandrucci. Taliercio, Peci. And some of these (Peci and Taliercio in particu-
lar) caused a reaction of political and moral rejection that ended up involving
the entire practice of the lied Brigades.

The smer passed, marked by messages saying that the divisions were gzowing
irreparably deeper, and that the problems posed by these four kidnappings

were blowing up, almost by their own momentum, with no one able to do anything
about it. My state of "suspension" permitted me to have emery information,
but at the same time left me out of the fray, free to reflect completely alone.
Finally, the arrest of Senzani and his group. the Prison Front, and the fail-
ure of the Dozier kidnapping, with the chain of other arrests, repentances and
disassociatinns were the last, probably decisive blows to an already crumbling
edifice that was full of cracks from top to bottom.

Question: But that still does not explain your disassociation.

Answer: True, even if it war. a period full of dramatic moments. I think it
was the result of more general considerations and of personal and moral re-
actions which, for the moment, I would like to leave out. As I have already
said, I am convinced that armed struggle has demonstrated itself to be incap-
able of giving a political program, and that this, despite efforts made par-
ticularly by the Red Brigades, is the principle cause of the downfall.

The explanation should be very long, but I will try to summarize it. Armed
struggle, given conditions in Italy, ruins any possibilities for developing a
poltiical project because it rapidly consumes its social roots, repudiates
the workers' struggle, and precipitates into a pure and absurd logic of war.
Question: Can you explain what you mean with some examples?

Answer: I think a star example is the destiny of the so-called activists of
the Prison Pront and Naples, who started out with great social ambitions and

2

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

with a good dose of denagogueryitoo, but ended up note militaristic than the
others. Aside from theoretical contrapositiona, the margins for political
differences are annulled inside the arsed group, and all that is left is a
strange war, inpoasible to win in which alnost nobody believes, and with re-
spect to which there is neither adequate strength nor strategy. And finally,
there is not even a "why," given that the why of every war rests in the close
and concrete prospect of victory, in a time cmensurate with action and per-
sonal constituent, and not to the undefined time of a generic transition to
couunisn.

Destroying is not enough

At this point we case across one of the greatest contradictions of the Brigade
theorization. On one hand, to justify arned sturggle and the type of organiza-
tion that must direct it, one mast naturally maintain that by now, the capital-
istic crisis has cone to the point to which any social route is closed, and
that only a war relationship remiss. (All struggles, such as those of the
unions, and, in the broad sense, social struggles, are therefore declared
pas'se, useless). 0n the other hand, given that such a crude and antihistorical
schematization is totally abstract and concretely inapplicable, they also invent
the theory of "long-term struggle," that is, an almost philosophical concept of
war as a permanent condition of social develOpoent; in this concept. the notion
of victory vanishes and is lost in the idea of historical progress in the uni-
versal category of "transition."

Question: Do these motives explain so such disassociation from terrorism?

Answer: Yes. I believe that this discussion, which I probably do not know
how to carry out very well, is not as abstruse as it seems, but has great
political consequences. And then, all one needs to do is read the docuents

of the Red Brigades. They state with ever increasing insistence that the
objective of the war. the armed struggle, is not a, how can you say it, a
normal objective. Not a struggle for houses, salaries, services, not even

for the collapse of the goverment, a policy of alliances, the formation of a
new social block, a series of interventions in productive sectors, the reforn
of structures...nothing like that! And yet even the guerrillas of El Salvador
have their representatives in Washington, and they are extremely flexible on the
political plane! Instead. the objective of the Red Brigades is the destruction
of the "way of capitalistic production," maintained possible because the diffi-
culties of this way of production would have already brought it to a convulsive
agony.

what does not function in this simplistic reasoning is that the "way of pro-
duction" is not reducible to the lowest cot-non denoainator of a formla that
explains everything, and when cancelled with s brushstroke will cause the whole
world to change suddenly. And I do not think that ass have ever, repeat. ever
struggled directly against a "way of production"; I believe. rather, that they
have always struggled and worked to have more food. more life, more wealth,
nore liberty for themselves and their children.

One does not go out in the norning with a pistol in his pocket to conbat a
historic category that eta-latices the entire set of relationships between men

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and between men and nature in its historic development and in enormously rich
and complex ways. One does not move alone, externally, to attack the social
universe as if it were a single and compact dead body to burn. This body, in-

stead, has never stopped living and changing, it is also our collective body.
its historical reality, its needs.

Question: And yet, the Red Brigades maintain that the capitalistic crisis is
grave....

Answer: Yes, and that the devastation that it generates is even graver. Yet
this does not happen because the formula of the law of value contains in itself
a type of mathematical paradox that confuses the calculations of the capital-
ists, but rather, because the dynamic between classes is something alive, in
continuous motion: it is inside the social universe, in the forces that move
it, and in the concrete struggles passing through it. that the "way of produc-
tion" is contorted in its crises, but also denies itself, mutates, alters its
primitive features.

To deny all that, and fossilize reality into a huge dead and hostile body
means not only the denial of history, but also the murder of politics, the
condemnation of oneself to defeat, the growth of desperation.

Question: But the entire theory of the Red Brigades rests on the postulate
that the passing of the way of capitalistic production to that which will
succeed it must come about through an instant and traumatic break.

Answer: Yes, they state it clearly in the document "Subjectivism and Mili-
tarism." That passage, they affirm, must come about precisely through armed
struggle because the two "ways" have nothing in common, one is the negation
of the other. Different from what came about in the passage from feudalism
to capitalism, two "-isms" that struggled and lived in strict symbiosis for
centuries, there would not be interaction and passage between capitalism and
communism. Thus, after one contradicts more or less the entire history of the
Twentieth Century, he can avoid explaining what the future "way" will be,
given that in the blocked and a historical present of capitalism, it is pre-
cisely this “way" that does not exist and about which one cannot really say
anything. That is why the practicing spirit of the Red Brigades is the
"theory of collapse," which becomes the irrational hope for total upheval, if
not exactly the wait for the third world war.

And then, only this type of faith can make the risks of the armed struggle
bearable, certainly not the acceptance of history's long terms. One can say,
therefore, that historical dynamics become pushed to one side, away from
reality, and that the brigade member constructs his own world. accelerated by
more or less imaginary phases and categories that would justify what he is
doing, and in sight of which he defines the "epocal leap.”

I remember very well the explanations that were given in the autumn of 1980

for the fact that almost all those arrested in Genoa collaborated with the in-
vestigators in various ways: they did not understand that they were not fight-
ing for the immediate. but that they were part of a program of history.

I.
FOR OFFKJAI.USE(MVLY
Question: In short, armed struggle is waged because the collapse of capital-
ism and the dictatorship of the proletariat is just around the corner?

Answer: Certainly, and the only conceivable social activity would be war.

But every time one realizes that things are more complex and perhaps different,
one also discovers that the struggle is "long term," and this is a "transition"
phase. In short, tomorrow, the most abstract schematisation and social dialec-
tic, the needs, experiences and the hisotry of people will all disappear. That
is why the ever more frequent arrests put everything into question: they are a
sort of forced return to reality, the general reality of social relatioships,
and naturally, one' a personal reality.

Question: But isn't there, more simply, some calculating: the least amount
of time in prison, the better?

Answer: Yes, certainly, but this one element does not have much significance
by itself.' This increased desire to get out of prison is determined by many
specific causes. In persons who are extremely ideologized, the collapse of
their convictions and programs assumes a fundamental value. Their very defeat
becomes the sign of a more general crisis that involves the relationship be-
tween means and ends, and therefore renders senseless what they were doing
before.

Hhen they got Moretti

This is not all reducible to pure and simple regurgitation of bourgeois
“individualism": that is an explanation that explains nothing politically.
What happens is that the captured brigade member undertakes a sort of really
terrible double mortal leap. First of all, his capture puts him face to face
with reality as it is and destroys his plans. But at the same time, incarcera-
tion denies him that newly found reality and again makes it unreachable.

Question: With what consequences?

Answer: Many. For example, the impact with the microcosm of prison masks
many illusions that also concern the internal dynamics of his group and the
firece and asphyxiating incarceration in a dimension in which nothing of one' s
political and human ideals is found. And the weakness of many recruits must
also be taken into consideration, for it reflects the political crisis of
armed struggle. Metropolitan disintegration causes those individuals who make
the great leap to armed struggle to have extremely different and often vague
reasons for doing so. Desperation suggests that there is no social relationship
other than that expressed through armed struggle, and the person who does not
accept standing on the sidelines and who wants to be somebody is pushed to
make that leap by a form of often very strong psychological blackmail. Yet it
is also because of this that now many of those who have made that leap, once
they are captured, seem to have awakened from a nightmare, and liberate them-
selves through the confession of blackmail denuded in its elementary but
efficient mechanism.

Question: Do you think that the Red Brigades are through? That their politi-
cal plan is finished?

5
F0R10FFKJA1.USE20NLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Answer: You have to make a distinction. I think that the Red Brigades, as
they have existed up to now. are finished. Yet the principle reason for their
weakness, that is, the lack of a political plan, can, on a different level,
become a reason for their survival.

Aside from the obvious consideration that the causes producing the social
phenomenon of armed struggle are still present, I would say that the awareness,
even if confused, that the world risks precipitating into the catastrophe

of nuclear war, and that the crisis of the economic capitalistic system is
deep, provokes a natural and unsuppressible push towards anything that appears
to be an acceleration of the course of history, towards something that can
make us take that great leap over the abyss, taking us to safety on the other
side.

A philosophy that wagers on that leap can always be successful, no latter
what the criticism is about returning to the present and to the realism of
politics. Except that you're not talking about a political project. if
anything, you're talking about the contrary.

Question: That is...?

Answer: One recent Red Brigade document speaks of the "death of politics":

a death caused, let this be clear, by the armed struggle for the "epocal leap."
This is a difficult, even desperate hope, but can one live without hope? The
question that comes out in every discussion criticizing armed struggle is,

"But then, what else?" when the letter of Bonavita (editor's note: he is one
of the original leaders, now repentsnt) was discussed in prison, the same phrase
always returned: "OK, but what does he propose?" It is true then, that a
chapter is finished and that these Red Brigades have been defeated, but as

long as someone asks that question and does not get an answer, the armed
struggle will keep its power of attraction, even if it is only as sort of a
moral model for those who will not carry it out personally.

Question: what judgment do you make concerning Giovanni Senzani. your brother-
in-law, who was violently attacked in the Red Brigades?

Answer: I do not want to make personal judgments about anybody. As far as

the criticism is concerned, it is not tied so much to the person of Senzani

as it is to the affair which brought about the splitting up of the Red Brigades.
There are people who attack Senzani and people who attack with equal harshness
Senzani's attackers...it depends on what side one is on, so the discussion
cannot be limited to him.

Question: And a judgment on Mario Horetti?

Answer: Again, no personal judgments. Yet I can add that Horetti has been
attacked many times, but that because of his experience and maturity he has
always represented a higher reference point, above the factions somehow.

Question: But then what did the arrest of Moretti represent to the Red
Brigades?

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Answer: It represented a lot, certainly. But one cannot say that what
happened later was the result of his arrest, no matter how important it was.

In 1978-79. with Horetti free and active, an extremely harsh political clash
took place between the so-called "historical group" in jail and the Red
Brigades, and this clash was a determining influence on the history of
successive breaks inside the organisation. Then a complete break was made in
1980 with the Halter Alasia column in Milan. Finally, the Genoeee column
collapsed, revealing an extremely deep political crisis, not analysed or under-
stood then.

In short, what happened after Horetti's arrest was only the evolution of

what existed before, which neither he nor the others could prevent. To attri-
bute the defeat of the Red Brigades to the absence of Horetti is as puerile,

I think, as attributing it to the single "infamy" of a series of arrests.

Question: what is the difference between movementists and militarists in the
Red Brigades?

Answer: A movementist is defined as one who interprets the armed struggle as
a natural, spontaneous phenomenon that flowers inside the class struggle and
always remains an intimate and faithful expression of it, directly connected

to the needs and tensions of the masses. A militarist, instead. would be one
who considers the armed struggle something artificial and constructed. as a
purely political construction that causes a knowledgeable break with the normal
forms of the class struggle. and which places itself at the forefront as a
model: a model of how one must fight, of how one must be organized, of what
must be hit.

Roughly, the movementist sees the organization as a type of people's militia,
he accents its informal richness and tires to see that it is continually kept
up to date with the contents of the great mass struggles, while the militarists
sees the organization as a real army. separate from the civil population. and
completely autonomous in the elaboration of its strategies of war: its
principle problem with the masses would be, if anything, recruitment.

The Red Brigades have always tried to operate on two levels, working out subtle
theories to explain the relationship between equality-difference that runs
between the proletariat and its avantguard gathered togehter in the party-army.
Something like what the Church did to explain the mystery of the Trinity,

made up of three equal and distinct persons.

The Dozier Defeat
Question: And how have the Red Brigades solved the problem?

Answer: Despite all their efforts, they haVe always been condemned as mili-
tarists. The entire history of armed struggle has been guided by this in-
exorable logic. The impossibility of formulating any project that goes
beyond killing, sabotage, generates a contradiction that is reflected inside
the organization and that in fact, chooses the military line, exaults the
logic of war. And so the ties and reasonings of classes are torn apart.

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Question: What did the defeat of the Dozier case mean to the Red Brigades?

Answer: The Red Brigades obeyed and carried to completion the internal
logic of their war with the kidnapping of the American general. They did not
make any social demands (for example, that the Cosimo base not be built, or
that military spending be reduced) because they did not want and were not
able to do so: that was not the intimate nature of their actions, their
politics, their general aims. Hhat existed for the Red Brigades was only
their army and the enemy army: therefore, one was dealing with only a two-
sided challenge made by a purely military party.

I read later that they were going to ask for an exchange: Dozier for a prison-
er. I believe that this is possible because it fits in perfectly with military
logic, and has always taken place between opposing armies: we exchange our
generals or our spies. And this was the only conclusion that such an action
could have. other than to propagate certain widely-known opinions on NATO and
to launch a call to other European organizations in the name of an abstract,
invented internationalism.

Question: Really invented?

Answer: Let us say an internationalism that was simply the mere rhetorical
expansion of one's very limits. I want to be extremely clear. I am not at
all maintaining that the Dozier kidnapping should have been carried out in
another manner: I am not criticizing the act as I suppose other members are
doing. No. Instead, I think that the incapacity of armed struggle to con-
struct a political program, the mentality that favors the particular vacuum
around it and in which it is lost are all elements that have necessarily
brought about those results. That they are exemplary and definitive results.

No matter how many follow-up actions there are, the Red Brigades will not be
able to survive the Dozier kidnapping. There is more. The Dosier kidnapping
was also, above all, a challenge to the peace movements that have shaken
Europe during the past months. It wanted to say, "Yours are stupid illusions,
maneuvered hopes! The call is not to mobilisation of the masses. There is
nothing left but war. The war that only we, the Red Brigades, wage."

The loss of all social sensitivity has therefore turned into presumption and
contempt. Armed action was punctually undertaken to strangle mass mobiliza—
tion in order to create better the illusive space of its own military mystifi-
cation. Thus, for the Red Brigades, imagining themselves alone against the
state, against NATO, the negation of all that exists outside themselves
becomes irresistible. And so, having lost on Dozier, they have lost on every-
thing.

Question: Do you believe in the existence of the Grand Old Man?

Answer: No, but it is easy for me to believe that someone imagined one, or
that someone introduced himself as such in the market of intrigue.

Can the Red Brigades Rise Again?--we hear the opinions of two judges.

FOR'0FFﬂﬂAl.USEZONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Is terrorism finished? Is the crisis of the Red Brigades irreversible? After
the liberation of General James Lee Dozier inflicted a very harsh blow on
organized destruction, the phenomenon of repentant terrorists has assumed
visible proportions: are we dealing only with a symptom of the decline of
the Red Brigades, or is this the verification of a clamorous failure? Enrico
Fenzi. one of the most illustrious of those who have disassociated themselves.
says, in this interview, that "the Red Brigades have been defeated," but that
if the cuases which generated the armed struggle are not removed, “they can
maintain their power of attraction intact."

An alarm, then, has been sounded by the repentant members. What does the
other side think? In talks with two judges, Alberto Bernardi and Gianfranco
Avella, (the first took the depositions of Patrizio Peci and Roberto Sandalo
in Turin, the second took that of Michele Viscardi in Bergamo, all three were
famous repentant Brigade members), we have gotten the impression that both
sides still basically think that the game goes on.

Bernardi affirms: "The political program of terrorism has certainly failed:
it did not obtain that consensus from below that all terrorists want; from
this, one can also subtract two fundamental strong points: the solidarity
pact that fell apart when the terrorists decided to confess-confessions which
gave life to a now widespread phenomenon; and the impenetrability, broken
down because now the methods and strategies of the Red Brigades are known."

But what is in store for us in the future? According to Bernardi, the phenome-
non of the so-called repentsnt ones is irreversable. "By now, a diffused
identity crisis involves a good part of those who are still clandestine:

they are not able to rebuild new terroristic structures, and because of this,
the legislative initiatives aimed at favoring disassociation have been decisive

instruments."

However, attention. "The socio—politico-economic causes at the roots of
terrorism have not disappeared,“ says Bernardi, "nor has the danger of new
action been reduced. Groups which try to appear organized are still operating
in many big cities, even if they are unable to elaborate destabilization pro-
grams. And then there is prison, a real walking mine, a propulsive center
that is able to gather, direct, organize and hit both internally and exter-
nally.

The judge maintains that there are three routes to follow to prevent the re-
founding of the Red Brigades: "In prison, prevent the weaker inmates from
being influenced by the stronger ones; promote real cooperation between the
police forces which are presently divided by often intollerable rivalry in

the fight against terrorism; give faith back to our citizens through a coura-
geous cleanup of the government and an attempt to carry out the popular request
for greater justice and higher morality in public life."

Gianfranco Avella maintains that if we can now ask if terrorism is defeated,
this is due to the pehnomenon of the disassociated and repentant members.
Because of this, disassociation should also be rewarded, "as long as the law
makes a certain distinction between benefits to the repentant ones and to the
ones who have disassociated themselves, keeping in mind that the contribution
of the latter is important. Think of the disassociation of Professor Fenzi:

9

FOR OF1NC1AL.USEZ(XVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

by talking about the reasons for the birth of armed struggle. he helps those
who are still involved in it to think about their fate and about the value of
the choices they have made. And this is an extremely relevant fact."

Why then, centinually criticize repentance, as some do? Avalla speaks
brusquely: "Repentance cannot be seen as mere inforning because it is a
collective phenonenon, and as such. is undoubtedly the result of a precise
political defeat, a defeat that has two fundamental reference points: the
basic failure of the kidnapping of Aldo Moro and the 7 April inquiry on
"Autononia operaia," conducted by my colleague Pietro Calogero. It was a
cardinal point for successive investigations of terrorism. Could it be that
many of those who talked oculd have done so if there had not been this blow?"

COPYRIGHT: 1982 Rizzoli Bditore

9941
cso: 3104/180

10

FIHIIHHHCJAI.USEGDNLN
ECONOMIC POLL SHOWS SOCIALIST 'DISCOURAGEHENT'; GATTAZ RBACTS
' Poll Results

Paris VALEURS ACTUELLES in French 12-18 Apr 82 pp 14-17

[Article by Philippe Durupt: "Concern Changes Camps"]

[Excerpts] Economic concern is resurfacing and creating a certain amount of
discouragement within the socialist camp.

The left lost the cantonal elections. Opposition morale received a shot in
the are. One has but to consult the results of this seventh IFOP [French
Public Opinion Institutel-VALEURS ACTUBLLBS survey. The poll began on

16 March. two days after the first ballot of the first ballot of the cantonal
elections on the 23d [sic] and two days after the second ballot.

The overall index of satisfaction for the most fortunate and the least unfor-
tunate therefore registers the immediate reaction of the persons polled (one
clarification: for a year, IFOP has not questioned the same person twice in
order to make up its sampling). This index measures differences observed
based on answers to the first survey made on the eve of the presidential elec-
tion. In passing. we would recall the difference between the figures for the
month of January compared with those for Aoril 1981: PC, up 33.5 points
(31.2); PS, up 9.2 points (12.8); UDF, down 2.6 points (- 9.3); and the RPR,
down 12.7 points (-30.5).

Political "Glasses" (in percentages. those who believe that....)*

Standard of Living Hill Decline

 

January March
PC 19 23
PS-HRC [Leftist Radical Movement] 21 29
RPR 60 66
UDF 62 53
Employers 48 51
Upper-level personnel 38 49
workers 31 37
11

llll(ﬂﬂﬂ(1Al.USEiﬂVlY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Unemploynent Hill Increase

 

 

January Harch
Pc 20 37
PS-HRG 30 36
RPR 70 55
U0? 63 S6
Employers 63 62
Upper-level personnel 51 51
Workers 65 53
It Is Not Reasonable To Save
Januar March
PC 62 62
Ps-umc (figures rounded off) 65 50
RPR 58 62
U0? S7 58
Employers 60 56
Upper-level personnel S6 66
workers 65 61

* These three tables detail answers to questions 2, 3 and 6 by political fan-
ilies and social categories. The poll was made after the cantonal elections,
which affected leftist voters.

Synpathizers of the urn (17.8-point increase) reacted the most strongly to
the scores of the cantonal elections, which confirned the ability of their
party to mobilize the opposition. They manifest it by a very clear decline
in their political pessimisn.

0n the other hand, within the majority, the socialists (down 3.6 points) are
disappointed by the defeat of the left, but connunist synpsthiaers (up 2.3
points) do not seen affected by that of the PC.

Less politicized than fornerly, they seen. on the contrary, more sensitive
than followers of the other groups to the naterial manifestations of change:
an increase in the $810 [Interoccupational nininun growth wage], a strong
increase in family and housing allocations. Their election mobilization by
the PC was therefore only rendered more difficult.

The sane index of satisfaction based on responses by socioprofessional cate-
gories showed significant variations: white-collar workers, up 6.7 points
(10.6); blue-collar workers, up 6.2 (5.9); farmers, up 2.5 (- 11.1); inactive
persons, up .6 (- 6.5); employers, down 3.3 (+ l); and upper-level personnel,
down 8.6 (- 7.7). '

workers and the inactive continue to react well to the "change" from which
they benefit.

12
FOI1DFFIJA1.USE(NULY
Prices and Employment: the "Change" Without Effect

1. In the.course of the coming months and compared with what is now happening,
will the price_increase be:

 

Apr 81 Sep 81 Mar 82
Less rapid 6 10 13
As rapid 52 50 54
More rapid 27 30 23

No answer 15 10 10'

2. Over the months to come. will the standard of living of the French:

 

égr 81 Seg 81 ' Her 82
Improve 7 16 11
Stagnate 38 36 50
Deteriorste 38 38_ 39
No answer . _ 17 10 10

3. In the months ahead, do you think that the number of unemployed will:

 

Apr 81 Sag 81 Mar 82
Go down 8 12 12
Stay the same 19 29 32
Increase 58 52 69
No answer 15 7 7

Our curves resume the percentages of the answers_to the first three questions
of our seven polls. 0n the other hand, out of a concern for simplification,
our tables show only three figures: those of the April 1981, september 1981
and March 1982 surveys, or the evolution of a year in sinmonth periods.

1

Even if they remain in the-lead, white-collar workers (down 3.9 points) mani-
fest the beginning of disappointment.

This disappointment is only growing for upper-level personnel and members of
the liberal professions. '

The strong increase in farmers (up 13.6 points) is the decisive trait of
these recent weeks. It undoubted1y expresses the feeling of comfort which

the result aroused in rural areas, but it may also be based on more objective
elements.

13
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOI1OFFKJAI.USE(MVLY

After plunging into a gloomy pessimism. the agricultural world now has a
better perception of the future, whether it be a question of the evolution in
its standard of living or in its financial situation.

The measures already taken by the government and the attitude of firmness it
promised and held to in the Brussels negotiations are without a doubt related
to this new view.

However, generally speaking (combining all categories), the renewed confidence
that can be perceived in January gives signs of sagging.

The French people are more concerned about the unemployment trend (49 percent
think it will increase, compared with 45 percent) and aboat the standard of
living (39 percent, compared with 35, expect it to deteriorate).

Inflationary expectations seem stable (23 percent -- no change -- expect a more
rapid price increase).

This apparent stability stems from the answers of farmers: Only 22 percent,

compared with 36 percent. fear an acceleration of inflation. In contrast,
small businessmen and upper-level personnel are more pessimistic than they

were in January.

In addition, the number of those who believe a slowdown in inflation possible
fell from 18.1 to 13.4 percent.

Consequently, the confidence Delors enjoyed is therefore dwindling, while the
fight against inflation is only beginning.

Small business and industry owners are divided between two unequal trends:

One is pessimistic, with 51.2 percent (compared with 47.7 percent) believing
there will be a new drop in their standard of living. The other is more opti-
mistic, with 11.1 percent (compared with 6.8 percent) expecting an improvement.

This recent cleavage in the business world may be the consequence of the
government's financial policy. Most are worried about the increased charges
of all kinds (see commentary by Yvon Gattsz), while a small minority appreci-
ates public aid to industries in difficulty.

The resurgence of worry is manifested among the white-collar workers: upper-
level management personnel and liberal professions, intermediate-level person-
nel and office workers. Especially among the first group -- 49 percent com-
pared with 37.7 percent -- the fear is that their standard of living will

decline and 28.5 percent. compared with 15.8 percent. believe their financial
situation will get worse.

Indiscretions with respect to credit requests by spendthrift ministries (there
is talk of a potential deficit of 210 billion francs) bring the threat of a new
turn of the tax screw. which would spare very few persona, whence the atmos-

phere of apprehension. a new phenomenon, beginning to reign among intermediate-
1eve1 personnel and office workers.

INJI1OIIICJAI.IISIZCIVLY
Savings: Stability

4. Considering the economic situation and the wage and price trend, do you
think it is reasonable to save at this time?

 

Apr 81 $32 81 liar 82
Certainly not 47 49 49
Probably not 47 49 49
Yes, perhaps ' 40 37 40
Definitely 40 37 40
No answer 13 . 14 11

S. In the past 6 months. how has your financial situation changed?

 

Apr 81 , Sep 81 Mar 82
Improved - 9 8 9
The same 51 56 54
Not as good or worse 34 32 34
No answer 6 4 3

6. what is your current financial situation?

 

Apr 81 SQ 81 Mar 82
Saving a fair amount of money I 2 l 1
Saving a little money 26 28 30
Just making ends meet - ‘ 52 53 52
Going into debt, using savings -- .ll 11' 11

No answer . 9 7 6

7. In the months ahead, do you- ”expect your financial situation to:

Apr 81 Sep 81 _H_a_r_8_g_
Improve ' 15 17 18
Stay the same 50 49 52
Be not as good or worse . 20 22 19
No answer 15 12 11

(The results presented- in this document are from the seventh installment of

the IFOP-VALEURS ACNELLES economic barometer: Some 1,987 interviews were
conducted from 16 to 23 March 1982, with a national sampling representing the
French population over the age of 1-5.)

Pessimisn about unaployment manifested among employers in January (63.8 per-
cent compared with 57.5 percent in November) now extends to white—collar

workers (48.5 percent in Harch compared with 41.6 percent in January) and
blue-collar workers (52.8 percent compared with 44.8 percent).

15
momuscmv
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLV

l'essinisa is growing anong cosmunist sympathizers (36.6 percent compared with
20.1.), but is declining among followers of the RPR (54.5 percent compared with
69.6). This phenomenon is a spectacular illustration of the differences in-
interpretation depending on the "political glasses" of each: the conviction,
anong Chirsc's followers, that the government will prevent layoffs by artifi-
cial measures; and the fear among comunists that it cannot or will not do so.

Responses concerning saving intentions reveal a great stability masking pro-
found modifications based on socioprofessional categories.

Inactive persons (42.8 percent compared with 39.9) and blue-collar workers
(43.8 percent compared with 42.6) are more numerous among those expecting to
save. .

Answers are more diverse among -ployers. divided by the same split with. on
the one hand, an, increase in those who expect to save "perhaps" (30.9 percent
compared with 24.7). and on the other hand. a confirmation (34.3 percent com-
pared with 21.9) of the intention not to save, expressed doubtfully in the
previous poll.

The response is frankly negative among upper-level personnel and the liberal
professions: 39.8 percent compared with 30.7 say they will definitely not
save. Only 6.6 percent, compared with 11 percent, are of the opposite opinion.

The ebb in saving exclusively affects socialist sympathirers, only 62.6 percent
of whom .. compared with 67.5 - deem it to be reasonable.

The reaction of these savers with relatively high incomes and'who are more
likely than others to invest at a risk is very likely the cause of the slump
in the Stock Exchange since the beginning of. March. These clients are those
most interested in the conclusions of the Dautresme report expected this week.

If one compares this decline in the intention to save on the part of upper-
level personnel (and intermediate-level as well) with the very high increase
in their spending on leasure and entertainment, one conclusion is inevitable:

At all levels of responsibility, management personnel is going through a
crisis of demobilization.

Gattaz Expresses Worry
Paris VALEURS ACTUELLBS in French 12-18 Apr 82 pp 18-19.

[Interview with Yvon Gattaz. president of French employers, by Jean-Francois
Gautier; date and place not given]

[Text] The president of French employers met with Jacques
Delora Thursday morning and was received at the Elysee on
Thursday afternoon. On 16 April. he will meet with Pierre
Hauroy. 0n the agenda: business expenses. Yvon Gattaz

details them for us. while consenting on our survey of the

st onuy .

l6
ma WI. WE ONLY
[Question] 0n the whole, how do you analyze the'results of the poll?

[Answer] I shall first of all make two preliminary observations based on your
figures.

To begin, I would note that after a year's time. the personal concern of the
French people are nearly the same. whether it be a matter of the standard of
living or job security.

Next, I would say that the country's economic problems seem neither more nor
less troublesome this year than a year ago.

[Question] How do you interpret this?

[Answer] The minirecovery in consumption that we experienced between Septem-
ber 1981 and February 1982 had a calming effect on opinion. Hithuut it, I
believe that the results of your poll would definitely have been less good.

Indeed, purchasing power has not dwindled. 'On the contrary. it rose for cer-

tain categories. Consumption is quite good but the French people are not
asking whether the products they are buying are imported..which is, on the

other hand, one of my main.concerns. 0n the whole, this minor recovery has
acted as a smoke screen masking the gravity of the situation.

The French people are therefore unaware of the real situation. They do not
realize that this recovery could be only temporary. I am struck by the lack
of knowledge of the French people concerning the general phenomena of the
economy. That is one of the revelations of this poll.

[Question] How do you explain the fact that persons who feel that their jobs
are threatened are fewer in number?

[Answer] Wage earners feel "safe" because of a certain number of measures
taken in the hope of maintaining employment in enterprises: Aid to investment,

accompanied by a condition to hire, additional limitations of all kind, legal
or paralegal. placed on layoffs: All these things may have created a false

feeling of security, for these frail railings will collapse if the enterprises
go down.

In this area, we must not use backward reasoning. It is employment that is the
consequence of prosperity, not the opposite. He must be careful not to create
artificial Jobs that are administered, subsidized and in the end. paid for. by
taxpayers. The only lasting jobs are profitable jobs!

[Question] Our poll reveals a slight tendency to spend more. ﬂhat do you
think of this?

[Answer] The average purchasing power of the French people has increased
50 percent in 13 years. Everywhere else it has declined or remained the same.

In Great Britain. for example. it dropped 2 percent last year. Consequently.
here in France we are in a totally exceptional situation.

17
INDR OIIWCJAI.IEHECHWLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

However, I am not sure that this is any guarantee for the future. I fear that
this may be only an easy. short-term policy. I am afraid we chall have to
choose between purchasing power and job power. We must know whether the
French are willing to demonstrate solidarity, whether they are ready to under-
stand that the increase in purchasing power may be at the cost of jobs.

Most of the great industrialised countries, beginning with the United States.
have understood that even if the word "austerity" is not very popular, we have
to know how to use it. '

Growth in purchasing is an essential dogma of our society. It is difficult to
question it. But it may turn out to be an obstacle, a hindrance to our eco-
nomic recovery.

[Question] You would then substitute an active pessimism for the calm optimism
of the French?

[Answer] Business executives are not of a pessimistic bent. This is contrary

to the determination to undertake anything. They are realists. but realism
forces one to look around. to see difficulties and obstacles. those apparent

in the immediate future and those shaping up on the horizon.

We are now worried. deeply worried,overthe months ahead. Re fear that busi-
nesses may fail and that layoffs will result. I am afraid that the poll you
make in a year will have very gloomy results!

[Question] How can you-say that so soon?

[Answer] I have four reasons to be worried: First of all, the expenses of

businesses are multiplying and reaching abnormal levels. This is particularly
true of additional social expenditures imposed on us since the beginning of

the year.

I would put that bill at 93 billion francs for the next 12 months. These.
overwhelming burdens compromise the survival of our businesses and could lead

to many failures. with the resulting disappearance of the jobs of those em-
ployed there.

My second concern is that investments are declining; eaten away by the accel- -
station in social. fiscal and financial charges. The competitiveness of busi-
nesses will suffer and the less competitive we are, the less we shall be able
to invest. especially since the production capacity of industry is only being
73 percent used. when we know that there can be no investment without at least
85 Percent.

My third concern is foreign trade. It is a tangible, undebatable barometer.

It reveals a deficit that has gone from 3 billion francs a month at the be-
ginning of 1981 to 5 billion by the end of the year. It has oscillated between

S and 8 billion francs since that time. This is double last year's figure and
it can be particularly serious for our country's economy and currency.

18
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Finally, there is the accumulation of all kinds of limitations burdening the
management of enterprises and getting in the way of decisions. All the re-
cent neasures, even those reputed to be not very costly, hurt the flexibility
of enterprises. And yet, flexibility. the adaptability of a business to the
problems of the moment. to circumstances. international coapetition and teché
nological changes. is the very secret of competitiveness. And naturally. in
the long run, it is always jobs that will bear the cost.

Addition of the ON?! [National Council of French Employers]
(Balance sheet of the increase in business espenditures during the year)

Amount Available (in billions of francs)

National budget drawn up in'1982 - 16.7
Professional tax (anticipated increase for 1982) 8.6
Social security (November 1981 measures) . 12
Fifth week and 39-hour week (annual cost) 45

For 1982 36
Effect of Auroux Reform (assuming an effect limited to ,

1 percent of wage mass) - 13
Total 93.3

To these figures one must add the measures to finance Social Security antici-
pated for next summer and the effects of retirement at age 60. beginning in
March 1983. These two headings were not included.

COPYRIGHT: 1982 “Valeurs Actuelles"

11.464
CSO: 3100/582

19
F0!‘0FFKJA1.USE(NVLY
roe OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MIC rm

MAURO? 188038 1m ON 1983 sows-r: mwvm MAIN (13M.
Paris VALEURB m in French 22-28 Mar 82 p 20

[Text of letter from Premier Pierre Hauroy to his ministers and secretaries of
state on the 1983 budget]

[Text] Following the meeting of the Council of Ministers on 10 March 1982, the
president of the Republic asked that the government. in preparing the 1983
appropriations bill, give top priority to mloyment and keep the next year's
government budget deficit at around 3 percent of the gross domestic product.

The initial budget preparations for 1983 show that in order to carry out this
decision the government will have to be disciplined, imaginative and determined.

Economic growth is still limited, even supported by the policy carried out
since last year. and will lead to only a moderate increase in government
resources, while some unavoidable expenditures will continue to rise rapidly.
Maintaining control over public finance will, in these conditions, entail
some difficult choices.

The purpose of the initial and current stage of preparing for the 1983 budget is
to provide the government with the information it needs to make these
choices (...). You must first compute the "carryover' budget or. in other words,
maintain in 1983 the means stipulated in the 1982 appropriations bill.

Horeover, you will compute the savings which should be realised over the pre-
vious budget, as a result of indepth questioning of the orientations of the

prior government. and as a result of any measures you may suggest to 31191in

or reduce duties or procedures. This real questioning or challenge of the
approved services that I am asking you to conduct with the greatest determination
is absolutely essential. It is the only way the government will have the means
needed to implement its priorities.

You will then figure the cost of the new measures required, over and above
those carried over. so that the activities that you believe the government might
approve can be assured of financing.

The following points should serve as a basis for your work:

20

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
l. The carryover budget will not be subject to any increase in operating
resources or to a net increase in jobs.

It will represent an updating of 1982 endowments on the basis of assmptions
of price trends or civil service indices that will be sent to you by the
ministry in charge of the budget. It will reflect the deletion of nonrenewable
appropriations or appropriations for exceptional operations(...).

2. Your proposed cuts should reflect the new orientation of the 1983 budget.
The 1982 appropriations bill is in fact still deeply marked by the weight of
decisions made by the previous government. Your questioning of prior policies
should lead to an elimination of activities which are now pointless or inappro-
priate. What you must do is to find the means for financing government
priorities so that the budget, a major political vehicle, will reflect the
desire for change behind our action. I am asking you to personally supervise
this exercise, which should not in any way be regarded as routine and should
lead to truly significant results.

You must proceed in particular, and systematically, to review the numerous
and varied government aid programs (aid to business, export aids, aid of a

social nature. housing aid, and so on...) and in general all government
financing schemes(...).

I will also ask the minister in charge of the budget to show me the items where
he thinks he can realize some savings(...).

3. Proposals for new measures (expenditures and appropriations) which you con-
sider necessary should be made in a highly selective way. Only those requests
you classify according to a clearly defined order of priority will be considered.
Resources that could be allocated to finance these measures will in fact be
severely restricted, because taxes cannot be increased. After the considerable
leveling of the corrected appropriations bills for 1981 and the 1982 budget,

the 1983 appropriations bills should reflect a continuity in government activity,
but at the same time take into account the difficult situation of public finance.

In this spirit, I have not ruled out the possibility of spreading some objectives
out over time, withoutjeopardising the main programs agreed. You should also
try whenever possible to relieve the national government of financial respon-
sibilities that could be handled by others, and particularly by government
enterprises.

4. Throughout your work you should be guided by one primary goal: to preserve
and increase employment. This means that for every expenditure you should ask
yourselves whether it is the best way to help bring down unemployment, or if
there may not be other preferable choices(...).

The 1983 budget should be characterized more by a change in the content of
government expenditure than by an increase in the amount of this expenditure.

1 am counting on every member of government to make a personal effort to be
disciplined and imaginative in this task. I am asking everyone to weigh the
stakes carefully.

COPYRIGHT: 1982 "Ialeurs Actuelles"

9805 21
C80: 3100/524

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR¢0FFKJAI.USE(NNLY

ECONOMIC FRANCE

CNPF STRESSBS BASIC, INDUSTRIAL RBSEAICH, INNOVATION

Paris LA RECHERCHE in French Mar 82 p 298

[Text] The National Council of French Employers (CUFF) has gradually becoee
aware of the strategic importance of industrial research. In Strasbourg a
little over a year ago. some 2,000 business executives marked their agreement
with the slogan "Innovating today for tomorrow's market." On 5 January,

Guy Brena. vice president of the CNPP, and Georges Boudeville. chairman of its
committee on innovation and research. presented a veritable plan of action in

order to be up to the stakes advanced by the government with respect to re-
search.

The work of the CNPP on research and development took place at the sane time
as that of the national colloquium, not on its fringes. because the employers
constantly make reference to the objectives of the minister of research and
technology. This is not in a totally integrated fashion. however. because
business executives have not been very assiduous in the operations of Jean-
Pierre Chevenement. Nevertheless. the employers' representatives make the
essential objectives announced by the governnent their own. In particular.
they agree to take up the challenge of raising the contribution of enterprises
from 1.1 to 1.5 percent of the GNP for research and development.

The CNPP marks its admiration for the organization and technological results
of Japan -- what could be more normal for industrialists! -- but it notes that
that country is in the process of considerably accelerating its basic research
effort and that one cannot do without such an effort. This is a new remark
coming from officials on Avenue Pierre 1 de Serbie.

"Industrial research is the responsibility of industrialists." The CNPF could
scarcely state the opposite, but in the current context. this should nean that
business executives commit themselves to implementing a strategy of innovation
in order to come out of the crisis without asking for assistance from the
government. In fact. without rejecting aid finalized by the government (Armed
Forces contract. from the PTT [Postal, Telegraph and Telephone Service) and
from the Ministry of Research). the CNPP recommends the adoption of "horizon-
tal." neutral and automatic measures in order to stimulate technological
development. The list of these measures is long and sums up all the proposals

drafted in the past several years by the departments of the Ministry of Indus-
try and also by the Hinistry of Research. These proposals did not receive the

22

FINIIDFIHCJAI.IXSEICHVLY
backing of the government at that time: promoting the transfer of research
workers; doing away with the professional tax applied to research centers;
putting into effect a procedure to facilitate the marketing of new products,
and so on; and promoting collective research. In the field of professional,
partnership and collective research. employers are in fact changing their
approach. After having been forgotten, even fought by the big enterprises,

the technical centers now see their importance recognized for the dissemination
of technical culture. Not only will their role vis-a-vis the small and medium-
size industries be strengthened, but the CNPF suggests that the government
could entrust the foremanship of certain major projects to technical centers.

"An economic necessity, innovation is also a social need. with respect to

an improvement in the quality of life. working conditions and our environment,"
stated Guy Brana. who. in conclusion, makes change dependent on a financial

measure, however. Following the model of Japanese practice, "all enterprises
should be able to enjoy tax incentives for research and development. based on

an annual increase in research and development spending or on the annual hiring
of research workers and technicians and charged to the value-added tax." In

November 1981, Jean-Pierre Chevenement proposed cooperating with his colleague
in Finance in studying a similar tax proposal. It would not be exception for
the Rue de Rivoli, in response to circumstantial political pressure, to agree
to increase public spending'on research from one year to the next. Automatism.
neutrality (no direct intervention of officials anxious to meddle in the busi-
ness of enterprises) and constant tax incentives for research cannot fail to
arouse the fears of public accountants.- The adoption of this measure would

be a definite test of the government's will to insert research into the produc-
tion structure. . ‘ '

COPYRIGHT: 1982 Societe d'editions scientifiques

11.464
CSO: 3100/582

23

FOR(MHWCJA1.USEGMVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

scomn IC SPAIN

COMINUIM HIGH UNWLOWT HAY RADICALIZB PSOB, PCB
Madrid CAMBIO 16 in Spanish 12 Apr 82 pp 60-63

[Text] It is difficult to pull out of the crisis. But much more so in a
country that is disillusioned, discouraged, sunk into disinterest and apathy,
that does not know where it is going. These last 7 years, with their legacy
of 2 million unemployed, prices gone through the roof, bankrupt companies,
controlled wages, a drop in investment and slackness in demand, have done great
damage to the morale of the Spanish people. There is a relinquishment of re-
sponsibility, a lack of initiative, a disinclination to take risks, generalized
apathy. People are functioning day by day, without prospects for the future,
every member of society filling his role to the minimum extent, only in order
to survive.

And there is no one to get the country moving forward. The Spanish economy

is not doing well, it is at a standstill, with a zero growth rate, and turning
out more than 1,000 unemployed persons a day. Demand is falling, and invest-
ments are not being made, so that the 150,000 young people who enter the job
market every year are m: finding openings. And the 2 million officially un-
employed continue without jobs; half of them not receiving unemployment bene-
fits. As if this were not enough, another lo million Spaniards who should be
working or looking for work are idle, "discouraged," and are no longer even
taking the trouble to look for employment.

In order not to lose jobs there would need to be a growth rate of at least lo
percent per year. But at the present time that is impossible. All the ex-

perts, of one kind or another, realise this. As a result, unemployment has
become a fact that will be with us at least until the middle of the decade.

It is growing daily, along with general discouragement.

The latest unemployment figures are a source of real concern. There are
already 2 million Spaniards who were officially out of work at the beginning
of 1982, according to the National Institute of Statistics (INK). Although
this makes us the fourth country in Europe in total masher of unemployed, we
are the country with the highest rate of unemployment (15.39 percent of the
active population.)

This reveals a serious basic problem in the Spanish economy: its very low
rate of activity. 0f the 38 million people in Spain, 26.7 million are of

21.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

working age (16-66 years). Then, out of this potential labor force, only 48.2
percent are working or looking for work. The rest are idle. In other European
countries. the percentage of active persons is much higher-up to 81.4 per-
cent--with the result that, although some have a higher total of unemployed,
their rate of unemployment is less serious than in Spain.

And if the 2 million unemployed are considered as we look at the percentage

of those employed, the figure is hair-raising: at the beginning of 1982 only
10,848,000 Spaniards were employed in the strict sense of the word. Hhat this
means is that we are living in a country where approximately only one out of
every four people is working. The low rate of activitiy in Spain is due to

a lower rate of female employment compared with other countries (20.7 percent
as opposed to 32.7 percent in France, for example), and to the existence of a
large number of Spanish people (especially youths) who are not even trying to
get work, given the difficulty there is in finding employment. They are the
so-called "discouraged ones."

This situation shows us that there is tremendous ”hidden unemployment," people
idle today, who if the economic situation should improve tomorrow would hasten

sources that we have in Spain: almost 6 million people who should be working,
and are not working. if we continue the level of activity of other developed
countries.

There are three indications which show unequivocahly that the problem of unem-
ployment is not improving. First, the decline in the number of employed per-
sons: if in the third quarter of 1981 only 2,600 jobs were lost, in the
fourth quarter the decline in employment was 91,100. Secondly, the increase
in the number of the unemployed: in the third quarter of 1981 the unemployed
increased by 96,300, and in the fourth quarter of the year they increased by
110,400. And thirdly, the number of unemployed registered (those who take the
trouble to register in an employment office) increased by 42,794 in the month
of January 1982, as opposed to a monthly average of some 22,000 new registra-
tions throughout 1981. And the figure was 30,214 in February.

However, the situation is somewhat less dramatic than it was a year ago, and
the growth of unemployment has been slowed: the number of people employed

fell less in the fourth quarter of 1981 than in the same period of 1980, and
unemployment has grown somewhat less than it did a year ago (110,600 as opposed
to 125,800 persons). All in all, the most positive news has come from the con-
struction sector, which only lost 2,100 jobs in the fourth quarter of 1981, as
against the 53,000 which it lost a year before. It appears that the results

of the triennial housing plan are beginning to be felt. The service sector

has also improved: only 6,900 jobs were lost in the fourth quarter of 1981,

as opposed to 32,000 a year before. But where it is going terribly badly is

in industry and agriculture. The restructuringof'industry and the plans for
modernization have involved a fall in employment of 55,600 persons in the
fourth quarter of 1981 (there were 39,000 in the fourth quarter of 1980).

And in the rural area the loss in employment stood at 26,000 persons (as
against 17,500 in 1980).

25
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The provinces with the greatest rates of unemployment at the beginning of

1982 were Branada and Seville (23.5 percent), followed by Cadiz (23 percent),
halaga (20.9 percent) and Badajoz (20.1 percent). The growth in unemployment
among women is greater than that among men; and, by ages, there is an increase
among those older than 55 (early retireaents). Finally, there are already
356.191 Spanish homes where the head of the family is out of work, and there
is no other person working in the household.

Spain is one of the countries which spends the greatest amount on unemployment
relief in relation to total production (GDP). However, at the beginning of
January only 38.8 percent of the unemployed people registered were collecting
unemployment benefits, which is the lowest rate of coverage of any industrial-
ized country. And, moreover, there are great differences in the coverage be-
tween some provinces and others.

The 061‘ [General Union of Horkets] union has just demanded that the goverment
"iamediately put into effect the measures which have already been agreed upon
and established as regards unemployment coverage,” although the issue definite-
ly runs up against a lack of funds. The idea of the unions seems to be to
expand the coverage to 100 percent for unemployed persons over 25 years of age,
and to structure other assistance, linked to education, for younger unemployed
persons. The unemployment problem is ravaging all the indsutrailized countries,
where the rate of growth of the economies is so low that it does not allow the
provision of work for those who are entering the job market. But the unusual
feature about Spain is that, as well as not creating work, it is abolishing
jobs, which is not happening in other countries. Since 1977, the number of
jobs lost has risen to 1,200,000. And Spain is the only industrial country
which has lost jobs, year after year, since 1976. The majority of the coun-
tries of the OECD have created jobs, however few, or only have lost them for
an isolated year.

With all this in view, it seems probable that the promise of the National
Agreement on Employment (ARE) to create 250,000 jobs will not be fulfilled

at the end of the year. Perhaps. if there is growth of 1.5-2 percent, instead
of abolishing some 300,000 jobs this year, we will manage to lose only 100,000.
This is going to bring about an extensive debate on the significance of the ANS,
which the P808 [Spanish Socialist Horkera' Party] and the PCB want to bring up
in Parliament in June. And so it is that reality is demonstrating that the
modernation of salaries in 1981 has not resulted in the creation of jobs, which
could increase the discouragement and disunity among those who for 2 years
have been losing purchasing power-the workers. Looking to the future, little
can be done for some years. According to a comprehensive report made in 1981
by the Center for Economic Forecasting, which is connected with the University-
Business Foundation, the growth in the working population up to 1985 will be
nil, and then after than, the rate of unemployment will be 17 percent, with

the situation beginning to improve in the second half of the decade. While

the government appears to be cautiously optimistic about the battle against
unemployment, emphasizing that it is growing at a slower pace, the Left and

the businesmen agree that the issue, although it has no short-term solution,
cannot be surmounted with the current economic policy which the government is
carrying on.

26
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The business experts think that the strategy must be changed, and a series

of measures to double its growth must be set in motion. Measures which Jose

Diego Teijeiro, economic advisor of the banking employers' organization A23
"hat Goes Along With Unemployment

Total funds devoted to unemployment in percentage of GDP(1980)

Spain * 2.02
Canada 1.08
Germany 1.25
France 1.19
United Kingdom 1.04
United States 0.64
Italy 0.60
Japan 0.39

* In Spain only 38.8 percent of "registered" unemployed persons collected un-
employment benefits in January 1982.

sums up this way: restabilization and strengthening of the health of the
economy, reduction of production costs. liberalization of prices to make invest-
ment profitable. establishment of a financial consolidation program for business-
es, and liberalization of the financial system. "with these five measures it
would be possible to grow by more than 2.5 percent this year. and the foundation
would be laid for 6.5 to 6 percent growth in coming years," Teijeiro says. Prom
another point of View, the socialists are calling for an increase in growth and
rationalization of public investment. for an adjustment of the work day in

some sectors, reducing the price of non-salary labor costs. changes in the
system of community employment, increase in coverage and establishment of
specific progress for unemployed workers who lack benefits and for youths.

In any case, there is one topic which is beginning to cause serious concern:
the extremely low working p0pulation in Spain. And on the day when we begin
to supply employment for the 2 million unemployed, those 6 million discouraged
people are going to start to "emerge." They will be the unemployed of the
second half of the decade. we're in for it.

COPYRIGHT: 1982, Informscion y Revistas, S.A.

8131
650: 3110/122

27
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
men LEADER Al'I'ACKS SW'S POLICIES
Hamburg STERN in German 22 April 62 p 210

[Article by Leonhard Hahlein, chairman of the IG Druck und Papier (Printing

and Paper workers Union) and amber of the 8?!) since 1957: "Get Straight,
Helnut Schmidt"]

[Text] Anyone attending the SPD congress at Mich and looking for an easy
explanation of the drastic loss of confidence in the Social Democrats will
put the blame on this or that hapless cabinet neaber. But this would only
be a political shell game. Kerr Lanbedorff would not be able to constantly

humiliate Minister of Labor Ehrenberg if he did not have the backing of the
Federal chancellor.

It is the politics of the Social Democrat head of government that are respon-
sible for voters deserting the SPD. Bel-at Sci-idt is

«for peaceo-while creating the "suns buildupz"

--for environmental protection—yet nature is being neglected, violated and
exploited because cu-ercial interests almost always have priority over
ecological ones;

--for social justice--though the distribution of wealth and income today is i
less equitable than it was in 1969;

«for democratic freedonsnwhile the rights of people with dissenting opinions
are being more and more curtailed and opposition from such quarters as the
peace movement is being slandered; the minister of defense orders soldiers

of the Bundeswehr, demonstrating in favor of disarment while in uniform,

to be led off in handcuffs like co-on criminals. Is this Social Democratic
policy, Genoske Apel'! (Genosse [Comrade] the traditional term of address
among Social Democrats; Gustav Noah was the SPD minister of war who ordered
troops to open fire on workers in 1919).

We trade unionists don't want a different government, what we want is a dif-
ferent brand of politics. Because power can also be gambled away by abandon-
ing one's principles slice by slice, just for the salts of remaining in power

a little while longer.

28
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

I an not going to tell the delegates to the party congress what resolutions
they should pass. But I would like to warn then against one danger: if we
Social Denocrsts continue to ignore the interests of working people, not only
will we lose our capacity to govern but even our capacity to sit in the
opposition.

My demands on the credibility of the Social Denocrat Party are:

-an eeploynent progren with an incons tar surcharge for civil. servants,
self-enployed persons and all persons with an annual incone of over 60.000
harks (narried persons 120,000 narks). We nud sore and better growth but
not at the price of tax breaks for private businesses. what we need is a
govern-eat funded investnent progran.

“Repeal of the rearnansnt resolution. that it will bring is more eras-ants
rather than less. The least that I expect free the SPD congress is a resolu-
tion that will halt the production and deploy-ant of nuclear sissiles and
warheads until the Geneva conferences are concluded. The S?!) has got to
remind its Federal chancellor that he hinself proposed just such a norstoriun
just a nunber of years ago.

Certainly coepronise belongs to the rules of politics. But there can be no
conpronise on this issue of our survival! A eilitary eras buildup in the
Federal Republic is being pronoted at the expense of cutbacks in social
progress. He don't need any Reagan/Thatcher brand of politics in the PEG,
what we need instead is a battle against unenploynent that nust be waged not
with pay cuts but with the creation of new purchasing power. According

to estinates of the IG htall (Metal Workers Union). businesses will enjoy
a reduction in taxes of 2.9 billion narhs between 1982 and 1985, while work-
ing people will be shouldering a burden of $8.5 billion narks. This is the

wrong way.
Get straight, Belmt Sci-idt.

COPYRIGHT 1982 Gruner + Jehr AG & 00.

9878
(SO: 3103/ “0

29
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Vote again? What for? The consensus behind the
present government is strong and growing, so voters
are decidedly opposed to early elections. There
are new factors, though, on the left, as the MONDO-
Makno survey reveals; one of them is the PCI...:

Opposition to early elections, approval of the present government,
hardening consensus among the parties supporting it. The data culled
from the 5th MONDO-Makno opinion poll might have been specially pre-
scribed as tranquilizers for worried majority party leaders. Prime
Minister Giovanni Spadolini can bask in unprecedented personal appro-
val among respondents,almost a third of whom picked him for the re-
cord as the best of all possible prime ministers. PSI secretary Bet-
tino Craxi rejoiced at his party's beating out the PCI in a sensa-
tional finding which, as we shall see, calls for some prudence in

its interpretation. DC party secretary Flaminio Piccoli can find
some indications in the poll findings that would confirm a substan-
tial gain in the electorate's perception of his najority party's
image and voter approval.

The poll [Osservatorio] (see earlier poll results in IL HONDO, n0 24
in 1980, and nos 5, 26, and 46, 1981) is based on a sampling of some
2,000 people, selected at the beginning of the series on the basis
of criteria representing the nation's demographic and social makeup,
to which the Makno organization turns at intervals for answers to a
set of political questions. This procedure makes it possible to keep

abreast of shifts in opinion with a very low margin of error.
Early Elections

Only a little over 10 percent of respondents wants early elections
(see Figure l). The processed data, when broken down, make it pos-
sible to come up with a Composite picture of the Italian citizen who

30
FOR¢NWKJALI£HEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

would like a chance to vote early: he is male, lives in the central-
south portion of the country, and belongs to the middle class. On
the other hand, almost 63 percent ofrespondents are flatly opposed to

that idea. And a good 43 percent of those opposed say they are "de-
cidedly opposed.‘l

The Government

Spadolini's pepularity, which was evident even in the survey prior to
this one, is confirmed now by a remarkable fact: for the first time
in the history of this survey a government enjoys a higher approval
rating than the opposition parties (Figure 2). Not only does the
Spadolini government's approval rating of 35 percent tap the 28 per-
cent it won in October: it is actually twice as high as the rating
granted preceding DC-led governments -- never topping 17 or 18 per-
cent -- while negative ratings ran around 50 percent.

The favor with which the present government is looked upon is borne
out again in respondents‘ choice of the [cabinet] formula best suited
to solve the nation's problems: the current makeup (a five-party

Table l). which prime minister do respondents favor? Sgadolini (see
Figure 3) got more than 31 percent approval. In June 19
choice of only 3 percent of respondents, but by October he had risen
to 17 percent. Bettina Craxi is holding steady at the comfortable
level he won in the past, with around 23 percent. The other lay-party
leaders, who were all riding high in October, arebarely holding their
ground or losing it today: Valerio zanone has slipped from 3.7 to

3.5 percent, Parco Pannella from 5.9 to 4.8 percent, Pietro Longo from
4.7 to 3.5 percent; Giuseppe Saragat has gained -- up from 2.5 to 3
percent -- while Bruno Visentini slipped fro. 5.7 to 2.1 percent.

In the little knot of likely Christian Democrat candidates, there is

a pronounced absence of new contenders for the prime minister’s seat.
Only Giulio Andreotti (up frOm 14.1 to 14.5 percent) has shortened
the odds in his favor, while the rest have seen the odds lengthening:
Francesco Cossiga's approval rating has dropped from 7.9 to 6.7 per-
cent, Amintore Fanfani's from 7.9 to 6.9 percent, Benigno Zaccagnini's
from 10.9 to 8.8 percent, and Arnaldo Forlani's more sharply from 9.7
to 4 . 4 percent .

Among the opposition ranks, Giorgio Alnirante still has his following

(down from 5.7 to 5.3 percent), but the most significant finding is

the continuing decline -in Enrico 'Berlinguer's stock from 18.6 to 15.4.
31

FORlﬂTKJALUSEONLY
KEY to Figure l : What Do You Think of Early Elections?

(2)

Mod-um. Imam

(1) Strongly in favor (5%)

(2) Moderately in favor (5.7%)
(3) Moderately opposed.

(4) Strongly opposed

(5) No response

(6) Don't know

(7) Don't care menuvb (4)

 

KEY to Figure 2: Is the Present Government the Right One
to Deal with the Nation's Problems?

l'aﬂualo govom e odallo

(1) “5 odulvoro I prolﬂoml dol poo“?
(2) N0 .. warm?
(3) Don't know ' " 5(4) (5) <6)

(4) June (80,81)
(5) October 81

.19. -. cm'r'mnu

(6) Mal‘Ch 82 -- .' v-' o. '..:-!>1%Da$7m

 

(7) in percentages

32
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

It should be noted, though, that the PCI secretary's ratings in the
polls have always been marked by sunny peaks and dark valleys.

The Parties

In addition to Berlinguer's decline as a leader, there are other
events that demonstrate the PCI's ongoing state of crisis, a state of
affairs still more alarming to Botteghe Oscure in view of the fact
that the survey was taken only a few days prior to UNITK's sensa-
tional stroke of bad luck on the Cirillo case. All the PCI's pet
patterns for government are on the decline: national unity (see

Table l) skidded from 10.6 t0 4.5 percent, the various alternatives
declined from 25.5 to 21.1 percent, and the experts cabinet idea plum-
meted from 18.8 to 9.9 percent approval. Most significant of all,
though, is the withering away of PCI voter support: by comparison
with their standing in the October survey, the communists are down

by about 5 points (see Table 1). In quantitative terms, however, the
communist losses are hardly the stuff of tragedy: the percentage data
are not all that significant, since it is widely known in politically
sensitive circles that many communists (unlike republican or social-
ist sympathizers) are reluctant to say how they voted. Further, that
19 percent of support voiced for the PCI is more or less compatible
with the share of votes the Hakno sample predicted for the PCI in the
last elections.

IL MONDO and the Makno organization also decided to look further into
the effects of the PCI's break with Moscow over what is happening in
Poland. 0n the whole, even after the schism with the Bast, opposi-
tion to the PCI's sitting in the cabinet was still very strong (37.7
percent). Clearly readier to go along with allowing communists a
voice in government, though (see Table 2), are males from 25 to 44 in
central-southern Italy who are part of the working population (i.e.,
those who have or are looking for work), especially executives, busi-
nessmen, white-collar workers, craftsmen, and shopkeepers. 0n the
whole, though, over all the social classes and all age-groups, the
nos outnumber the yesses.

One finding that doesn't change from survey to survey -- which leaves
a broad margin for error in the event of early elections -- is the
high percentage of "don't known responses to all political questions.
The "don't knowll column has been expanding steadily. Figure 1 shows
46.4 percent of respondents saying that none of the parties comes
close to their way of thinking or actually refusing to answer. That
figure was 43 percent 5 months ago. There are a great many undecideds
in central Italy (50.9 percent), though there are fewer in the south
and on the islands (40.5 percent); most of them are women (49.7 per-
cent) of just about every age-group and, understandabl , there are a
lot of them among the unemployed(58.3 percent, no less . Another
factor related to the uncertainty of early elections is what seems to
be increasing readiness to shift party allegiance (Table 2). There

is unquestionably a rise in the number of respondents stating that the
party they voted for had not performed as expected (12.9 percent is

33

F0R40FFEJAL.USE(NVLY
the highest level yet recorded); increasing fastest of all are the
numbers of respondents who say that their own party behaved so badly
of recent months that they will never vote for it again: this dras-
tic view was voiced oftener'by males than by women (8.7 to 3.4 per~
cent), and most frequently by students, craftsmen, and businessmen
(all with percentages around 10). All right: who does have clear
ideas, and who is willing to say openly how he will vote, and why?
The data that emerge clearly from the survey (Table 1) show, in ad-
dition to the PCI's decline, the solid position of the PSI which, with
close to 23 percent approval, consolidates and even improves on its
already sensational standing in earlier surveys, and the brisk reco-
very of the DC which, with 30.8 percent approval, comes close to its
track record in the last elections. The minor lay parties are more
or less stable, with a slight decline for the PRI from 8.2 to 6.6
percent, thereby demonstrating that Spadolini’s popularity is his
personal advantage, not shared with his party. Even so, the PR1,
viewed in the context of shifts over the first three surveys and com-
pared with the outcome of the last elections, is on its way up.

Declining are the radicals and the groups to the left of the PCI (7.3
percent overall, as compared with 10.2 percent 4 months ago), while
the MSI actually gained 2 points, thus turning around what had been
gradual decline.

The most sensational recovery, though, had to be that of the PCI, for
which the approval rate rose from 7.7 to 17.7 percent, while the nega-
tive replies dropped from 27.5 to 24.7 percent; these data, when
combined with the others described above, show that the PCI is losing
votes among its own membership, but that it is at the same time improv-
ing its image among citizens who do not vote its ticket. As for the
PSI, its image as a party is still moot. It is the party that tal-
lied more approval (21 percent as against the 19.7 percent it won last
October); but it is also the target of a high percentage of disappro-
val (26.5 percent).

The Issues

Again, they are terrorism, inflation, unemployment, and the housing
shortage. The survey confirmed, in the same order, the four issues
found by the survey 4 months ago (which differ somewhat from the ones
Spadolini sees as most urgent: terrorism, inflation, moral issues,
and international order). Terrorism was perceived by respondents to-
this survey as one of the four prime issues to be dealt with (see
Table 3). The importance of this issue rises with respondent age,
from 55.4 percent of those below 19 to 68.4 percent among those over
55. Inflation still holds second place, with 51.3 percent of respon-
dents finding it vital. Again, this issue is more acutely perceived
among the elderly, and less so among the young. The picture is
neatly reversed when it comes to unemployment, which almost 70 per-
cent of the youngest voters and students perceived as THE issue.

34

FOR(NW“3ALI£HEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

0n the whole, the trend over the past several months would seem to
show a slight decline in the importance of economic issues (inflation,
unemployment, and even the dismal pitch of labor relations -- down
from 5.2 to 4.6 percent), and a contrary rise in the perceived import-
ance of social problems: housing, pensions, and health care). Hous-
ing was singled out as an issue by 39.7 percent of respondents (and

it is in first plaCe, ahead of terrorism and inflation in towns with
more than 250,000 population). Pensions accounted for 31.9 percent

of complaints, as compared with 29.5 percent 4 months ago. This is-
sue is cited particularly among respondents in the northeastern re-
gions.

Growing demand for better health care is emerging with increasing
clarity: from 23.6 percent in June, it has risen to 30.8 percent as

of now. Complaints about health care are particularly prevalent in
central Italy (36.7 percent). Least intense are indications of dis-
content with school reorganization (down from 16.7 to 13.5 percent).
Still high on the concern index is drug abuse, although it too suf-
fered a slight decline from 32.9 percent to 28.5. Those respondents
most concerned about the issue of drug abuse are the youngest (37.2
percent), housewives (39.5 percent), and the unemployed (47.4 percent).

Among bther issues cited by respondents to the survey, there was a
clear hecline in complaints about law enforcement: calls for restora-
tion of the death penalty dropped from 12.4 to 6.8 percent, and those
for police reform from 7 to 3 percent. Also declining are complaints
about reconstruction in the earthquake-devastated areas (from 16.1

to 14.3 percent), as are calls for world peace (down from 18.8 percent
to 13.3). Just about holding their own are the issues of amendments
to the Concordat (up from 3.7 to 4 percent), updating the civil and
criminal codes (down from 10.7 to 8.4 percent), and electoral reform
(down from 6.4 to 4.6 percent)), the establishment of a presidential
republic (up from 2.3 to 2.5 percent), the fight against pornography
(up from 3.1 to 4 percent), the injection of morality into politics
(down from 15.2 to 14.3 percent). Slightly on the upswing (from 1 to
3.2 percent) is respondent demand for a new abortion law.

The Unions

What do voters think of the performance of the CGIL, CISL, and UIL of
recent months? Not much different from what they thought when the
October poll was taken. Approval rating inched up from 12.2 to 12.3
percent over October, while 31.6 respondents felt that the unions are
doing some things right and some things wrong (29.8 percent were ambi—
valent). Approval ratings were highest among the very young (19 per-
cent) and among retirees (20.5 percent). Fewer respondents (13.3
percent as against 16.7 percent in October) thought organized labor's
activities irrelevant. A good many (up from 14.7 percent to 19.3-per-
cent) were uncertain, while those who took a dim view of labor's ac-
tivity declined from 26.5 to 23.5 percent.

35

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FIGURE 4. Which Political
Leader Would Make'
the Best Prime
Minister?

(Choose 1 or 2)

W “*0 ~.
A? J3 __ w.‘ _ 0'“ .
.‘Wnﬁ

‘ I
wrmum ﬂ,

Ill

ll

vacuum)»
u. an- zu u

n!
I!
WWW“)
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

National Institutions

Respondents generally were more tight-fisted than in the past when
asked to name the national institutions that do the best job in fur-
thering the general well-being (Figure 6). Not all respondents
took advantage of the option offered them of naming two preferences.
and 17.7 percent declined to answer at all. That said, most respon-
dents continued to approve of the presidency as an institution, and
thus, even though its approval rating slipped from 29.3 to 25.3 per-
cent, it came out on tOp, followed by the Church (down from 26.8 to
25.1 percent) and the independent press, which lost its first-place
standing and tumbled from 33.5 to 23.7 percent. It should be admit-
ted, though, that Opinion of the press has always had its ups and
downs. The press is still seen in a better light in central Italy and
in the South (37.3 and 27.7 percent, respectively), in big cities
(42.6 percent), by white-collar workers and executives (34.8 and 43.3
percent) and, oddly enough, by the unemployed (42.1 percent).

Respondents continue to look with increasing favor upon the courts
(up from 15.4 to 17.4 percent), while the police and carabinieri are
right up there with 16.8 percent approval. Confirmed again is public
diffidence vis—a-vis the political forces: approval of political
parties is down from 11.2 to 9.6 percent, while the labor organiza-
tions have fallen from 18.1 to 15.4 percent in the public confidence.
The youngest of us, though, still have hopes for politics: 23 percent
of them place the party in second place among sound institutions ~-
right behind the press and ahead of the Church.

The DC Was Never So Clean

The DC is among the parties doing the best job at rooting out scandal.
That statement may raise an eyebrow, but it is what emerges from ans-
wers to a specific question in the survey (see Fig. 7).

A year ago, it was the PCI that was perceived as most effective in
combating scandals.

The same question propounded today reflects a changed political cli-
mate. The negative answers conbined with the don't-knows are down

to 46.3 percent. The PCI is still in first place with 23.1 percent,
but the DC has bounced up to second place, with 15.7 percent, beating
out even the PSI's 15.5 percent. The radicals dropped a bit (8.7
percent) edged out even by the republicans (9.6 percent). Analysis
of the individual data shows that the DC's efforts to change its
image for the better were a good move, winning support even among the
very young voters (20 percent) and along their elders over 55 (22.7

percent). In the South and on the islands, Piccoli's party is right
on top, with 20.4 percent.

The data on the PSI show marked disparities among parties and along

class lines. The socialists' policy stand on the moral issue appeals
strongly to executives and businessmen (23.7 percent).

37
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE: In each section of Top bar refers to June 1980

the graph: Bar 2
Bar 3
Bar 4

refers to June 1981
refers to October 1981
refers to March 1982

 

W

FIGURE 7. Which Political Parties Are Working Most Effectively
To Root Out Corruption in Public Office? (Pick one or two)

RESPONSES in order, top to botton:

Christian Democrats (DC)
Communists (PCI)
Socialists (PSI)
Republicans (PR1)

Social Democrats (PSDI)
Radicals (PR)

Proletarian Unity (PDUP)
Proletarian Denocrats (DP)
None of the above

NOTE: In each section of the graph,
the top bar refers to the
January 1981 survey, while
the second refers to the
March 1982 poll.

38

 

INHROFFKIALLSE(MVLY
TABLE 3. IS ANTICOMMUNIST PRBJUDICB A THING OF THE PAST?

 

 

 

ANSWERS YES NO DON'T UNDERSTAND DON'T
Tue QUESTION KNOW
W
TOTAL 24.1 37.7 23.0 15.2
§§l
Men 31.6 44.0 13.2 11.1
Women 1603 3103 33.0 19.4
AEE
15-19 14-6 5102 2608 703
20-24 24.2 32.3 22.6 21.0
25-34 31.4 41.0 19.0 8.6
35-44 28.7 35.0 20.0 16.2
45-55 21.6 32.4 25.7 20.3
Over 55. 18.2 38.4 26.3 17.2

 

GEOGRAPHICAL AREA

Northwest 18.7 44.4 25.6 10.3
Northeast 19.0 34.9 26.7 18.6
Center 28.0 26.7 25.3 20.0

South and Islands 27.3 39.3 18.6 14.8
TABLE 1. Which Party (or Mix of Parties) Do You Think Would
Do Best at Solving the Nation's Problems?

The one we have DC-lay parties (no PCI)
with PSI prime minister

All-DC
DC-PSI-PRI
DC-PCI with others

Government with no DC
DC-lay parties + PCI,

with DC prime ninister Technocrat government

Dc-lay parties + PCI Leftist government
with PSI prime minister

Other
DC-lay parties (no PCI)
with DC prime minister Don't know

 

TABLE 2. Which Party Do You Feel Closest to Your Own Opinions?

ELECTIONS MAY JANUARY MAY OCTOBER MARCH
1979 1980 1981 1981 1981 1982

UNDECIDED

(no answer or
no party
choice)

 

FOICWTKJALIﬂﬂEONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500060059-6

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

TABLE 4. HOW WOULD YOU RATE THE PERFORMANCE
OF THE PARTY YOU VOTE!) FOR?

Jan 1 Jun 1

 

Lived up to my expectations 24.9 16.4

 

Did not behave as I thought it
would 12.0 11.5

 

Did some things right and
some things wrong 26.2 30.0

 

Did such a poor job that I
would never vote for it

 

 

again. _ 3.4 4.3
Did the'beat it could 21.6 25.9
Don't know 1200 1109

 

COPYRIGHT: IL some 1982
6182
cs0: 3104/186

101
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/00: CIA-RDP82-00050R000500000059-0
USSR SEER TRYING TO REﬁAIN PCI 'SOLIDARITY'
PH171301 Turin LA STAHPA in Italian 16 May 82 pp 1-2
[Commentary by Frane Barbieri: ”Moscow's Penitents"]

[Text] Moscow is asked [PCI Secretary General] Berlinguer for a truce. This
can be inferred from statements by Moscow representatives reported in Hestern
newspapers and from the interpretations given by the Kremlin to the leaders
of various communist parties. It can also be deduced from the Leningrad
delegation's unexpected visit to the PCI's Hilan Federation. In all these
cases the Soviets have tried to diminish the importance of the conflict with
the Italian party. Their arguments run something like this: Berlinguer

was wrong, but the PCI remains a major fraternal party, important in the
joint strategy, and therefore the CPSU does not want to pursue the polemic
and the only thing that it will be unable to tolerate from now on will be

any further attempts to denigrate the socialist countries. Berlinguer
probably did not reckon on such an outcome when he questioned the socialist
character of the regimes created in the eastern bloc. Perhaps his challenge
was not designed to cause an outright rupture, but the challenge itself
undoubtedly took into account the possibility of a rupture. It could not
have been otherwise.

On all similar and previous occasions the Soviets have reacted to a challenge
with a rupture. With Tito and Has they used excommunication, subsequently
insisting that all parties honor the condemnation of the excommunicates.

For whole decades no communist conference or congress was held without pro-
nouncements first against Tito. then against Mao. Berlinguer expressed
opinions no less sacrilegious than those of the Yugoslav or Chinese leaders.
Indeed. his criticism of the distortion of the October ideals was in some
respects more far-reaching. It was part of Soviet-Communist logic that he
should be labeled a heretic. Now, instead of the excommunication, the Kremlin
is making a reappraisal (perhaps partly because it is still not clear whether
Berlinguer's sudden swing is a tactical device or a strategic choice of camp).

Q
Is Moscow changing style or losing strength? It is probably a case of both
together. when a power declines it is obliged to change its approach. The
Kremlin leaders succeeded in keeping the hostile front of the so-called
world communist movement united against Tito and Mao. The condemnation of
the Titoist and Maoist revisionists and renegades was virtually "monolithic."

42

FOR‘OFFNJA1.UBI1MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

However. the Kremlin has lost both those contests. It became apparent that
an autonomous form of conunism could survive without--and even against—
Hoscow. Krushchev was forced to recognize this with regard to Tito. Brezhnev
is moving toward the same recognition with regard to Mao's heirs.

Hith Berlinguer, a conflict exacerbated to the extent of an excommunication
would have had the same outcome. Moscow would have had to acknowledge for
the third time its inability to reassert its authority over a breakaway

party. It has already been seen that the use of "dummy" parties [partiti
~"talpa"] is not very productive.

Having discerned no foreseeable benefit from an excommunication. the Politburo
decided it would be more useful to attenuate the conflict. It is not simply
a case of the Soviets abandoning their reprisals against Berlinguer: The
necessity above all is to halt Berlinguer. Never before in the international
context has the cacuity of the Kremlin‘s ideological formulas appeared so
tangible; never before has the discrepancy between real needs and theoretical
plans been so plain; never before has Moscow had so few answers to so many
growing questions; and never before has the artificiality of the Soviet
system been so close to absurdity as it is now.

Berlinguer has raised all these issues. They are so real and so burning
that Brezhnev can no longer even label their spokesman as a heretic. But
neither can he discuss them openly. A debate would lay bare even more of
the flaws of the pachyderm that is now as much a burden on itself as it is
on others. Therefore an attempt is being made to nullify the polemic, to
persuade Berlinguer, within the context of a woolly [ovattata] interna-
tionalist solidarity, to abandon his extraordinary opinions about the
nature of Eastern-bloc regimes. from which he may gain nothing, whereas
Moscow has everything to lose. [First deputy chief of CPSU international
department] Zaglsdin issues the following advice to him in LA REPUBBLICA:
He would do better to combat the deployment of new missiles in Italy.

In the Kremlin there has been a reappraisal not only in determining the
tactic for absorbing the new revisionist. There has also been some reap-
praisal of the substantive issues raised by Berlinguer's critical assessment.
This is reflected in the implications of Andropov's complex report to the
academy [as published] on Lenin's birthday. Two things were said for the
first time in that speech: First, that pluralism can be admissible even

in a socialist regime: and second. that the Soviet model must not be applied
or applicable in other countries.

It is difficult to tell whether this departure from ideological dogmatism
was facilitated by Suslov's death. Had he heard it, Suslov would certainly
have died a second death. Be that as it may, no politburo member has ever
ventured so far. Furthermore, the man concerned is head of the KGB, the
security committee. It is true that Andropov introduced the new concepts
into theoretical outlooks partly to limit their scope. In fact. with regard
to pluralism, he added that ”since there are no antagonistic classes" within
socialism "no organised opposition can ever emerge."

b3

IIIIIIHHCIAI.USB(MULY
Along the same line, while insisting that every country must inplement its
own forms of socialism without following the Soviet model. he warned that
there are still "general laws," nonobservance of which leads to vague
fantasies about the substance of socialisn." Despite the restrictive inter-
pretations, the fact still renains that Berlinguer's spectacular challenge
inserted a gnawing doubt into the “lovable certainties of the Moscow ide-

ologists. At one time it was inconceivable, except to be categorically
refuted.

Pros: these aspects, Berlinguer has nsnaged to win his challenge to Moscow,
at least for the time being. He has prompted the Kremlin leaders to make
more substantial reappraisals than the Soviets have managed to inculcate

in the PCI. However, Berlinguer could begin to lose his challenge if he
allowed himself to become involved in the maneuver to nullify the conflict—
whether by following Zagladin's advice to abandon the polesic in the supreme
interests of socialisn or by backtracking in the face of this warning from
Andropov: "He will repel attelpts to denigrate the experiences of the
peoples that have taken the path to socialism." Moscow seems to have dis-
covered many reasons for silencing the PCI--the same ones that should
persuade Berlinguer to continue talking and challenging.

COPYRIGHT: 1982 Bditrice LA SWA S.p.A.

C80: 3104/ 206

106
won OFFICIAL USE ONLY
was

new MILITARY MIME Chm—Bmgeorg Model, 55, brigedier generel in
Benbnrg, will become director ‘of the secret service ”Ant fner Rechrichtenvesen
der Bundesvehr" [Armed Forces Infornetion Services Agency] in Bed Reuenehr.
Under the direction of lbdel, a son of Field Hershal Halter Model of the
former Wehmcht, about 500 military experts will, in the toner "Ahrblick"
senatorial, collect end enalyre intelligence dete concerning ections end plans
of the Hersev Pect end the arned forces of so-called Third World countries.
The Ministry of Defense expects lbdel to furnish "responsible essessnents of
the situation." In this manner, the defense ninistry's 'etretegists hope to
become more independent of the intelligence reports of the l’ederel Intelli-
gence Seryice in Pnllech. which are nore oriented toward foreign policy rether
than military utters. [Text] [Hamburg STERN in German 29 Apr 82 p 298]
[COPYRIGHT: 1982 Gruner + Jahr AG 8 00.] 9273

CSO : 3103/ 663

105
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
MAINTAINING SNLE'S PART OF PEACETIHE NAVY MISSION
Paris ARHEES D'AUJOURD'RUI in French Apr 82 pp 36-37
[Article by Rear Admiral Alain Duthoit: "The Operational Support of Forces"!

[Text] The operations connected with national deterrence re-
present two-thirds of the activity of the maritime forces of
the second region. They are organized and led by the maritime
prefect who is commander-in-chief for the Atlantic.

Some 15 years, the assignments of the maritime prefects were modified. Previ-
ously. their mission was often the operational and logistic support of forces.

In effect, France at that time did not really have its own strategy, because of
its membership in the integrated NATO organization. The naval forces' activity
was devoted exclusively to training and services. No purely national operation
was envisioned, or any peacetime operation.

Real Operations on an Ongoing Basis

Strategic nuclear weaponry changed all that. since the assertion of the stra-
tegy of deterrence and the withdrawal from the integrated organisation of NATO,
the Navy has received important national missions to be carried out in peace-
time. The first of these missions is the deployment of the missile-launching
nuclear submarines (SNLE's), whose home port is Brest. The maritime prefect of
the second region is responsible for ensuring the security of the SNLB's at the
tine of their departure and their reentry into port, and in a more general way,
is responsible for organizing and carrying out the operations of support for
the SNLE's. In parallel, the strategy of deterrence has required a clearer as-
sertion of national sovereignty in the maritime zones of priority interest to
France--that is, roughly speaking, the approaches to the national territory.
Since deterrence is exercised every day, operations of alert, tracking of in-
truders and surveillance that make it possible to know what is happening off
the borders of the national territory and to prevent, as the case may require,
French interests from being disputed or threatened, must be conducted on a per-
manent basis.

Today, nearly two-thirds of the activity of the forces of the second maritime
region are devoted to these real operations:

46
ﬁOI‘OF'IClAl.USE(NVLY
FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE(MNLY

--the security and support of the SNLE's;

-~maritime and aerial surveillance of the approaches;
--mcaitoring of commercial navigation;

--rescue at sea.

That is why the maritime prefect has been given operational command of the en-
tirety of the forces that participate in these operations.

A Very Vast'Theater of Operations

In time of crisis and on the order of the government, the maritime prefect of
the second region would take on the functions of ”commander-in-chief for the
Atlantic" (CECLANT). But in peacetime, it is advisable to prepare for such an
eventuality by establishing the appropriate plans and organizing close coopera-
tion with the commanders of the nearby maritime zones and with the maritime
commands of the allied countries and of NATO.

Thus in is that PREMAR Ill maintains close relations with PREMAR Il (Cherbourg)
(zone ), with COMAR-Dakar2 (zone 9), with COMAR-Fort-de-Prance (zone 8), all
of whoh would come under the command of CECLANT in time of crisis.

I

Likewﬁte, close cooperation is maintained with the allied commander-in-chief
for t Atlantic (SACLANT, in Norfolk) and the allied commander-in-chief for
the Chhnnel (CINCHAN, in Northwood), as well as with the navies of friendly and
neighboring countries: Belgium, The Netherlands, Great Britain, the United '
States, Spain and Portugal.

A Constantly Manned Center of Maritime Operations

All the operations that come under PREMAR II are progranned, organized, coordi-
nated and carried out by the Center of Maritime Operations (COM-Brest). Con-
stantly manned by officers and petty officers of all competences (surface, sub-
marine, aeronautical, meteorological. signaling), COM-Brest has all the means
necessary for directing sea operations, involving defensive operations, major
exercises. or public-service operations (monitoring of fishing and commercial
navigation, combating pollution, etc). It has facilities for liaison with ves-
sels and aircraft at see, but also with all the organisms, civilian or mili-
tary, French or foreign, that may be led to cooperate with it.

The permanent functioning of this command instrument for preparing and conduct-
ing real operations at all times with forces that are entirely available is the
best guarantee of PREMAR II's capacity to take on without difficulty, in the
event of serious crisis, the functions of commander-in-chief for the Atlantic.

Rear Admiral Alain Duthoit. who entered the Naval Academy

in 1948, took part in the Indochina operations from 1951

to 1953. Qualifiedinsignalingandcertifiedbythe ESGNIAdvanced
School of Naval Warfare], and having taken Courses in the

 

l. PREMAR II: maritime prefect of the 2nd region
PREMAR I: maritime prefect of the 1st region

2. COMAR-Dakar: commander of the Navy at Dakar

67
FOR OFFKJAI.USEINVLY
CHBH [Center for Advanced Hetal Studies]
and in the IHHDH [Institute for Higher
National Defense Studies), he has counsnded the "Chan-
penois," the "Aconit" and the "Duquesne." He has taught
at the Higher School of Naval warfare (1968-1971). He is
currently "operations" assistant to CECLANT.

)0/ 600 m

68

POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY