FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS U10626
30 JUNE 1982

Japan Report

(FOUO 37/82)

FBIS FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

Q

POI OFHCIAL USE ONLY
ms

JPRS publications contain information primarily fro. foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also fron news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials fro. foreign-language
sources are translated: those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and Interial enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original infornation was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
nation was smarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or nanes preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original out have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as

given by source .

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.5. Goverment.

COPYRIGlT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING WSHIP 01"
MATERIALS REPRODUCED “EREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
0F IRIS PUBLICATION BB RESTRICT- FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY .

JPRS L/10626
30 June 1982

JAPAN REPORT
(rouo 37/82)

CONTENTS
POLITICAL AID SOCIOLOGICAL

Rumor of Pukuda-Kolnoto Secret Pact Reported
(YOMIURI SHIMBUII, 21: my 82) 1

Difficulties of Labor mification Committee Reported
(mm mm SHIlBllI, 3 May 82) 3

MILITARY

Status, Potential of Defense Indmtry Discussed
(Kntsuto Uchihashi; amen smmu , May 82) 6

BCOHOMIC

Agriculture White Paper for 1981 Rule-ed
(“mom KOGYO SHIMBUN, 12, 15', 19, 22, 26 my 82)............. 22

SCI ENCB AND TECHNOLOGY

MITI Policy Guides Planning in Various Industries
(Various sources; various dates)... 33

Coal Liquefaction Technologies
Petrochemical Industry Reorganization
Stodcpile of Rare Metals

Facilities Investmnt in 1982

Copper, Lead, Zinc Production

Autombile Parts Industry's Struggle Investigated
(mm sumo salmon, various dates) 39

Problems of Automobile Parts Industry Discussed
(NIKKEI SANGYO 831mm. 6, 7, 1h, 20, 21 Apr 82) 55

- a - [III - ASIA - 111 2000]

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
RUMOR 0P FUKUDA-KOMOTO SECRET PACT REPORTED
Tokyo lOMIURI SHIMBUN in Japanese 26 May 82 p 2

[Text] The Suzuki and Tanaka factions of the LDP took the drastic central
strategy measwre of calling for a long extension of the present Diet session.
Behind this move is the rumor that a pact has been nade between former Prise
Minister Pukuda and Director of the Economic Planning Agency Komoto in
connection with the upcoming election for LDP party president this fall. This
rumor of a "secret pact between Pukuda and Komoto" has been circulating
recently in government circles.

' and

Fukuda and Komot say that "the very idea of a secret pact is ridiculous,‘
laugh it off. However, three factions, Suzuki, Tanaka, and Nakasona, are

getting very nervous about the true state of affairs.

The content of the secret pact rumor is as follows. Komoto visited Pukuda in
his office in Tokyo on the afternoon of 27 April. After discussing issues
related to management of the economy and government finances, the two men had
a discussion on the present political situation.

Fukuda is reported to have seriously criticized the Suzuki government:
"Recently. many people in the party are saying, 'Ue cannot understand what
Prime Minister Suzuki is doing in either foreign or domestic policy.’ If
things keep going this way, circumstances may be such that the prime minister
will have to resign in the middle of his term amid great difficulties."

In response, Mr Komoto said that he understood the import of what Mr Suzuki
had said, but he said only that the problem was a very serious one and avoided
a more direct reply. However. it is reported that he was in virtual agreement
in his attitude toward the Suzuki govern-eat policies.

In addition to this discussion, the rumor has gone so far as to describe the
content of the "secret pact" as a plan for former Prime Minister Pukuda to
take over as a relief player if Prime Minister Suzuki fails to be reelected
and resigns and then for Komoto to take over a year later.

Observing this movement, the Suzuki and Tanaka factions were afraid that the
government would fall at once if the Public Election Law revision bill
advocated by the Fukuda and Komoto factions were not passed. During the

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

period of the Hay holidays, Kuniyoshi Saito, a close associate of the prime
minister. met with former Prime Minister Tanaka and Party Secretary Nikaido.
Following the Hay holidays, on the evening of 6 May, Prime Minister Suzuki

and Party Secretary Nikaido talked for approximately 2 hours at a Tokyo
restaurant. After this discussion with the prime minister, Hr Nikaido went
directly to the Meijiro residence of former Prime Minister Tanaka and conferred
with former Prime Minister Tanaka and Masaharu Gotoda (chairman of the
electoral system study committee). The decision was: "we will give full
support to passage of the Public Election Law proposal. A long extension of
the Diet session is unavoidable."

Informed sources say that the source of the rumor of the "Pukuda-Komoto secret
pact" is the leadership of :he two factions. The rumor began going around at
the beginning of this month. The following facts are offered as a basis for
this speculation although they are only circumstantial evidence. 1) Although
there have been other people present at previous discussions between Fukuda
and Komoto, this time they talked alone for 50 minutes. 2) The discussion
was not announced until the day it was held. 3) Mr Komoto has recently been
rather forward in making statements in meetings of party leaders and cabinet
meetings. He has had frequent clashes with Administrative Management Agency
Director Nakasone, his rival for the position of prime minister after Suzuki.
4) Pududa's mentor, former Prime Minister Kishi, has stated that "we cannot
get through the present difficulties with Suzuki. How about bringing back
Pukuda? " '

An old politician unaffiliated with any of the factions says: "He will soon
find out whether this secret pact rumor is true or strategic propaganda. The
political world right now, both the ruling and the opposition parties. is in
pandemonium." The movement by the Suzuki and Tanaka factions to forcefully
push through a policy of "reelection of Suzuki" is especially active recently.
0n the evening of 21 Hay former Prime Minister appeared at a gathering of
Diet members in the Suzuki faction who have been elected three or four times
and said: "Prime Minister Suzuki will be reelected in the fall elections for
president of the LDP." Also: "Next year the elections of both the upper and
lower houses will take place on the same day." Contact between the two
factions has been frequent.

Future developments in political power will depend on whether a collaboration
develops between Fukuda and Komoto. and this circumstance gives rise to
speculation.

COPYRIGHT: Yomiuri Shimbunsha 1982

9651
cso: Alas/121

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
DIFPICULTIBS OF LABOR UNIFICATIOR OOMHH'TBB REPORTED
Tokyo 1mm KBIZAI SEMI)“ in Japanese 3 May 82 p 4

[Text] The nesting of the labor front unification preparatory conittee

came to a standstill over the problem of participation by the second group

of Sohyc (General Council of Trade Unions of Japan) unions. However, on

8 April approval was finally given for inclusion of seven single-industry
Sohyo unions including the General Federation of Private Railway Workers
Unions of Japan. This was a major progressive step in reorganization in
preparation for the inauguration of a ”private-sector union conference"

this fall. No" the preparatory comittee will shift the focus of debate to
the najor issues of policies for action and an operating platforn based on

the "fundamental concept of unity." However, the second group of Sohyo unions
is critical of the "fundanental concept" itself, and sons unions nintain that
participation in the preparatory committee is separate fron participation in
the conference. Therefore, further complications involving a power struggle
between Sohyo and bowel (Japan Confederation of Labor) are expected before

the conference is organized.

Douei Disregards Small Differences

Seven single-industry Sohyo unions applied to participate in the preparatory
comittee on 26 March. These include the General Federation of Private
Railway Workers Unions of Japan, the National Trade Union of Metal and
Engineering workers. the Japan Goal Miners Union, Zenjiko, Senir'oren,
Zendenryoku, and the Federation of Paper and Pulp Workers Unions. However,
at the preparatory connittee directors meeting on 27 Hatch, the Donei single-
industry unions strongly affimed that: 1) the fact that the seven Sohyo
unions have not made an official resolution of support for the fundamental
concept is unacceptable and 2) it is unnatural to approve of block
participation by only the second grOup of Sohyo unions, and separate judgments
should be node for each case.

Domei single-industry unions (such as Zenkin Donei, Zensen Dolei, and
Dcnryoku Soren) are in competition with six of the Sohyo single-industry
unions--all of them except the General Federation of Private Railway Workers
Unions--so the confrontation was emotional and resistance stiff.

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In the general meeting on 1 April. only two points were confirmed: 1) that
the factual proceedings of the preparatory co-ittee up to that point would be
honored. including decisions that "action policies and the operating platform
will be discussed on the basis of the fundamental concept" and that "a
conference will be held within the year," and 2) that adjustments would be
made between single-industry unions which are in a competitive relationship.
This coordinating and adjustment process was entrusted to the director in
charge. Chairmn Nakamura of the Federation of Iron and Steel Industry workers
Unions.

The Domei single-industry uniOns, such as the Zenkin Domei, continued the
attack, saying: "An official resolution should be passed to the effect that
the factual proceedings will be honored." however, the National Trade Union
of Metal and Engineering workers decided to participate even while it
retains an internal faction owosed to the preparatory co-ittee. Therefore.
Chairman Tabuchi of the Nippon Express Cowany union has said that the demand
of Zenkin Domei is "inpossibly difficult" to carry out.

Because of this situation, the first Sohyo group of five single-industry
unions (including the Federation of Iron and Steel Industry Horkers Unions
and the Japanese Federation of Synthetic Chemistry Workers Unions) walked out
of the directors meeting on 16 April to demonstrate their stern attitude to
Domei. Part of the Sorengo, including the Denki Koren, made a hardline
proposal to act in concert with than. So there was a bad atmosphere in the
meeting for a time.

Following the directors meeting. no definite date was set for the preparatory
committee meeting and it became doubtful that the conference could be
organized within the year.

Because of these developments. Domei increasingly came to believe that it
should "disregard small differences and cling to large areas of agreement."
Therefore. in the 8 May directors meeting a decision was made to permit the
participation of the second Sohyo group.

Enemies On Board the Same Ship; Stormy Conditions.

With this decision, 47 single-industry unions (with 6.3 million members) were
brought together in the preparatory comittee, thus assedling all of the
important private sector unions. As the foundations of Sohyo weaken,
conditions have been created for building the core of a new labor mvement.

The preparatory conittee may transform itself into a private sector union
conference as early as this fall, so it will now begin serious debate on
action policies and an operating platform. 0n the basis of this action policy
and operating platform, each single industry will decide whether or not it
will participate in the conference during general meetings and central
comittee meetings which will be held in the period from super to fall.

however. there are several mre hurdles which the preparatory comaittee must
cross before it can make the leap to becoming a conference.

1;
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
One problem is that the connittee now contains seven single-industry Sohyo
unions which are critical of the "fundamental concept of unity." Therefore,
the situation for debate on the action policy and operating platfora, which
should be drawn up on the basis of the fundamental concept, will be that of
“bitter enemies placed together on the same ship." It is highly doubtful that
the proceedings can be completed in time for the sumer meeting.

The paper and pulp union, for example, attached a "Basic Policy for Participa-
tion" to its applicatiOn for participation in which it stated that ”it is
necessary to point out specific problems and clarify the points that should
be criticized in the fundamental concept" and clearly presented five
criticisms. Chairman Kurokawa of the General Federation of Private Railway
Workers Unions is ready for the attack: "Hhen the preparatory conittee
meeting begins, we will have our say (about the fundamental concapt)."

Chairman Kurokawa is also chairman of the Sohyo council of private sector
unions, so he is aware of the existence of 18 other Sohyo single-industry
unions, and it is nor at all likely that there will be an easy compromise
on the action policy.

Opposition to Rapid Organization of the Conference

The second group of Sohyo single-industry unions are nor only skeptical about
easily reorganizing into a conference. they are making a sharp distinction
between participation in the preparatory comittee and participation in the
conference. For example, the "Basic Policy for Participation" mentioned above
states that "we do not favor a quick inauguration of the conference" (General
Federation of Private Railway Workers Unions) and "participation in the
preparatory comittee and participation in the future conference are separate
problems" (Zendenryoku).

Chairman Kurokawa of the General Federation of Private Railway Horkers

Unions states: "We will think of the preparatory co-ittee as an opportunity
for expansion of joint struggle. He will decide whether or not to participate
in the cOnference after seeing how the preparatory committee grows and after
judging its level of maturity."

The transformation of the preparatory comittee into a coaference will be quite
difficult. It will be a steep cliab overcoming differences to grow further
from 1! conference to a federation and then to a national central organization
which can overpower Sobyo.

COPYRIGHT: Nihon Keizai Shiutunsha 1982

9651
cso: 4105/105

5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MILITARY

STATUS, PMENTIAL OF DEFENSE INDUSTRY DISCUSS-
Tokyo BUNCH SHUNJU in Japanese Hay Special Issue 82 pp 150—161
[Article by Katsuto Uchihashi, economic critic]

[Text] If Japan desires it, the country can become a highly
competitive arms exporter within a short time, and the world
is taking precautions.

Although Defense Expenditures Ara Said To Protrude....

Every New Year's Day, the Japanese Arms Manufacturers Association holds a New
Year's get-together at the Japan Industrial Club in Otenachi, Tokyo.

If each member company went to the Defense Agency and other government offices
to deliver its New Year's greetings individually, the waste of various kinds
would be enormous. In order to economize. the Japanese Arms Manufacturers
Association decided to bring people from the government offices together in one
place 20 some years ago.

For the last 3 years. the ntnlber of people attending the New Year's party has
been increasing rapidly. The nulber of participants exceeded 600 both this
year and last year.

"Since the old site became too small. 3 years ago we changed the location of the
party to the Japan Industrial Club, which has a large hall," explained Jinshichi
Hirano, the association's managing director.

"However, we are not in high spirits. No conpany is pleased to have increased
work." he adds cautiously. Nevertheless, there are not many industry organiza-
tions with only 99 participating companies that can easily gather 600 executives
in one place at one time.

On the other hand, Gskuji Horiya (a counselor to Mitsubishi Heavy Industries),
chairman of the Federation of Economic Organization's Defense Production Com—
mittee and the general controller of the Japanese defense industry, says that
the present atnosphere in defense industries reminds him of the fever 30 years
ago around 1952, when resumption of aircraft production was permitted as a
result of the signing of the peace treaty.

MWWMY
"We began with the repair of u.s. military aircraft, and then moved on to
licensed production of fighters, training airplanes, and escort ships. I
remember the atmosphere of that time. Although the market was small, every
manufacturer was trying to plunge into the field (arms production) with almost
abnormal energy...."

At that time, Mr Moriya was engaged in the just resumed aircraft production at
the Nagoya Aircraft Factory of the New Mitsubishi Heavy Industries Company.
According to him. related companies, parts makers, and subcontractors all
rushed daily to the New Mitsubishi Heavy Industries, pleading "let us help,
let us help."

"Even though they asked us to let them help, the work itself was very little....
Nevertheless, they were very enthusiastic. I now sense the same atmosphere
that was generated 30 years ago."

Mr Moriya says what everybody else in defense industry says: "Although people
clamor against protrusion of the defense budget, there is no other country
with a defense budget within 1 percent of its GNP. There is no way for the
defense industry to experience a boom or fever." Empahsis was placed on the
last sentence.

How true is the phrase: "The arms industry is always hungry"? The following
words of Kenji Ikeda (managing director of Mitsubishi Heavy Industries), chair-
man of the Federation of Economic Organizations' Defense Production Committee
Policy Subcommittee, seem more or less to represent the attitude of business
leaders related to the defense industry: "I do he; expect Japanese defense
demand to expand by much. Although people clamor against the protrusion of the
defense budget, the ratio of Japanese defense spending to the total general
account was actually 5.1 percent last year and 5.24 percent in 1980. It is

5.2 percent this year. which is about the same as 1980 or even a little less.
In the past, there was a year when it was 13 percent. The reality is that the
ratio of defense spending to the total general account budget has been gradually
decreasing. Even if it has been increased from 5.1 percent to 5.2 percent, it
has not shaken up our budgetary system at all." Mr Moriya's way of thinking
seems to be the same. He says: "I do not like the ratio relative to GNP."

Not the ratio relative to GNP but the ratio relative to the total general
account, moreover, not an absolute amount but a percentage-this is the consen-
sus among leaders of the defense industry.

Of course, even though the percentage remains unchanged, the absolute amount
increases. In the case of Japan, where arms exports are not permitted, no
matter how the defense budget is expressed--whether in percentages or in abso-
lute amounts-—the only market for the defense industry is in the defense budget.
or the defense budget, what directly affects the business of defense-related
companies is "equipment expenditures."

Mr lkeda declares that "the ratio (of equipment expenditures to the total defense
budget) was 26.5 percent last year and it is 24.4 percent this year. Precisely
speaking, it has been decreased rather than increased. Under these conditions

a defense industry boom cannot happen."

7
FINI‘MWWCJAI.IEHECNNLY
FIMI()FF1C1AI.USIZ(MHLY

The condition of arms makers belonging to the Japanese Arms Manufacturers
Association seems more or less the same. 'ﬁhe ratio of Defense Agency sales
to total company sales is only 1.6 percent on the average for member companies.
The fact that we have been conducting a petty business for the Defense Agency
in a tiny corner of a huge company has not been changed from earlier days,"
emphasizes managing director Hirauo.

At the same time, however. the Japanese Arms Manufacturers Association has been
receiving applications for membership one after another. Just recently, four
special steel makers are said to have applied for membership, saying that "we
want to resume production of shells since the prospects for automotive demand
for steel are gloomy."

In spite of defense industry leaders' denials of a defense industry fever, the
Japanese defense industry seems more flourishing than ever.

Briefly speaking. although those responsible for the Japanese defense industry
see the market neither having expanded substantially in the recent past nor
assured of rapid growth in the near future, it is also true that the atmosphere
surrounding the defense industry is astir with excitement as it was 30 years
ago.

"by is it astir? Mr Moriya gives us a hint.

"Companies seem to have an eye on 'futures.’ Everybody knows that a company
cannot suddenly get a huge contract and earn a huge profit. We cannot entirely
deny that there was an expectation of 'dremms come true once again' 30 years
ago. This time, however. no one has such expectations. Then. what aspect of
the defense industry's future does everybody have an eye on? I think it is
technology. For years now. arms have been such that they have had to be based
on the most advanced science and technology of the time. A feeling that new
technologies are emerging now and that we should not fail to catch them.... I
think that is it." The economic slump is worldwide. Japan's exports are
tapering off. Under these conditions. we cannot completely deny the industry's
hopes for defense demand. which at least will not decrease in the future.

If the defense industry fever is caused not by interest in the size of the
market or the possibility of growth, but instead in the technologies involved.
it tells us that the Japanese arms industry is moving into a completely new
phase today.

Advancing Autonomous Development of Military Technology

In fact, the desire and concern to obtain an accurate grasp of the actual con-
dition of the Japanese defense industry has been rising in foreign countries.

THE FAR EASTERN ECONOMIC RBVIBH. an economic journal issued in Hong Kong, in

the second week of December 1981 published a detailed special article on
Japanese defense industry, entitled "Industrial Japan '81: Space Age Samurai."

FOIJOFMKJA1.USEIIVLY
It even has a list of the 20 companies, such as Mitsubishi Heavy Industries and
Ishikawajima-Harima Heavy Industries, with the most contracts with the Defense

Agency.

FOREIGN AFFAIRS, a special journal on diplomatic relations issued in England,
published a paper which predicted that "by participating in world arms export
competition, Japan will violate the American sanctuary." The paper also re—
ported that "Japan will have nuclear arms in the not too distant future"

(winter 1981-82). The U.S. Council on Foreign Relations (David Rockefeller,
chairman, a research organ on international problems) perhaps expressed the most
obvious interest and concern about the Japanese defense industry which has been
becoming stronger at a high pitch.

In a 352-page report published in January 1982, the Council on Foreign Relations
is said to have warned that "how to hold down the Japanese defense industry will
he one of the most difficult tasks facing Europe and the United States for the
rest of this century" (ASAHI SHIMBUN, 25 January 1982).

(The previously mentioned paper published in FOREIGN AFFAIRS is "Arms Sales:
The New Diplomacy," which is a summary of the 4-year study written by Dr Andrew
Pierre, a senior researcher at the Council on Foreign Relations.)

"There is no field impossible for the Japanese arms industry to handle. Once a
political decision is made, Japan can become a middle-ranking arms exporting
country almost overnight." "If the pressure on Japan to increase defense power
is too strong, it will create the fear that Japanese defense industry will start
running independently on its own." This common recognition can be observed in
many foreign papers.

while those who are responsible for the Japanese defense industry are saying
"Oh. no." the United States, a military superpower unrivaled in the scale of its
defense industry, watches the Japanese defense industry carefully.

They are not interested in the peripheral matter of the quantitative increase in
the size of the Japanese defense industry, but in the potential value of its
military technologies.

we must pay attention to the coincidence of their interest in technologies and
the suggestion of Mr Mariya.

Such recognition by the United States and other foreign countries seems to have
reasonable grounds. They have certainly recognized with a considerable degree
of correctness the new phase the Japanese defense industry is entering.

First. the Japanese defense industry is trying to escape as much as possible its
past dependence on licersed U.S. technologies. The Japanese defense industry

is beginning to proceed intentionally toward "autonomous development" of mili-
tary technologies.

Second, widely applicable civilian technologies, which are the bases for our
dnmestlc military technologies, have reached a high level. In the areas of

9
IN)! OIWWCJAI.IISE1(H‘LV
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

electronics and production technologies, in particular, the trend is obvious.
In the case of Japan, which has a unique mechanism of technology transfer from
civilian to military use, raising the level of civilian electronics and pro-
duction technologies means strengthening potential capability in military tech-
nology.

Third, Japan has begun to possess a system for "militarizing technology," which
enables transfers of high-level civilian technologies to military uses in a more
efficient manner.

The above—mentioned three trends have been progressing simultaneously. Under
these conditions the Japanese defense industry has gained more capability than

anticipated, and for this reason the Japanese defense industry is moving into
a new phase.

At present, the Japanese defense industry is at a stage where the primary
interest is not on the size of the defense budget-the size of the market--but
on the high-level quality content of Japanese military technology.

First of all, let us use a familiar example to illustrate the mechanism of
transferring a widely applicable civilian technology to military use.

What Is the CCD upon which Intent Gazes Are Focused?

Neither film, development, nor printing is required. An image on a TV picture
tube can be recreated the moment a picture is taken. Sony's announcement that
it has succeeded in the development of the "Navies," the world's first magnetic
camera, was reported not only by Japanese media but also by foreign media.
BUSINESS “EEK reported Sony's announcement together with a two-page commentary.
The story created a worldwide impact last summer.

Another foreign journal specializing in cameras revealed the magnitude of the
shock by writing that a camera not requiring film would be something like a
water tank not requiring water for fish.

The designers of the Mavica were able to separate the camera and the film, which
were supposed to have an inseparable relation, simply by placing a small magnetic
disc in a camera box

Instead of being recorded as a volume of light on silver film, as in an ordinary
camera, images are magnetically recorded on a disc small enough to be held in
the palm of the hand.

"Video is intended for motion pictures whereas Mavica is intended for station-
ary pictures. As Sony itself explains, Mavica's magnetic disc may be considered
something like a long tape for tape recorders and video recorders that has been
chopped into small rectangular pieces (the dimensions of a piece are 3 nmlin
thickness. 5h mm in width, and 60 mm in length, and it can record 50 pictures).

When a tape is played in a taperecorder, sound recurs. When a video cassette
tape is played, visions are regenerated. In the same manner, a magnetic disc
can recall stationary pictures on a TV picture tube as many times as desired.

10
HOR(IHNCJAI.USE(MVLY
Reports on filmless cameras have followed one after another. This year, Sony
has reported the establishment of a firm footing in the practical application of
a printer which w0u1d print pictures as cardsized photographs.

Considering that 8 mm cinemascope was replaced by video cameras. it is no wonder
that Fear of the decline of opitcal cameras spread throughout the camera, film,
and DPE industries.

When the news was reported, however. professional technologists must have
recognized immediately that a seemingly revolutionary magnetic camera was in
fact based on only three elementary technologies.

The first technology is a precise processing technology that enables the packing
of an enormous number of parts into a space as small as an existing camera,' The
second technology is a series of technologies which enable high-density visual
signals transformed into magnetic signals to be recorded on a magnetic disc.

But. more than anything else, it requires the technology of an elemental device
which can receive optical energy from the object on which a camera is focused
and transfer it with high precision onto a magnetic disc.

The third technology. which plays the most important role. is a CCD (charged
coupled device).

A CCD is a completely new type of semiconductor which. after receiving the
optical energy of a subject, transforms it into electrical signals and then
stores them as they are or transfers them somewhere else. Thanks to a CCD,
the Mavics could replace film with a magnetic disc and eliminate film from the

camera. It is quite natural that engineers gazed intently at the CCD used in
the Mavica.

"How analytically capable a CCD can Sony mass-produce at how low a cost?"
asked engineers around the world. Soon it became clear that military engineers
were among them.

An immediate reaction came from the British Ministry of Defense. It asked Sony
about the possibility of providing the British Defense Ministry with the CCD
technology as well as requesting a sample of the CCD.

Since the Defense Ministry made the request, there is no dOubt that its inten-
tion is to use the CCD for military purposes.

It was later reported that MITI. unofficially consulted by the British, said
that "the three principles for arms export" made export of the technology
impossible.

The theory of the CCD was originally discovered by Bell Laboratories of the
United States. As usual. however, its practical applications were developed
first by the Japanese. A CCD was used as the eye of VTR camera instead of a
pickup (camera) tube, a kind of vacuum tube. Not only Sony but also Nippon
Electric Company, Toshiba. Hitachi, Mitsubishi Electric-almost all of the

11

ETHICMHNCJAI.USEGUNLY
IN)! 0$T1CIAI.IISEZ(MQLY

Semiconductor makers--have been mobilizing engineers to compete vigorously in
the CCD field. Nevertheless, the high wall of high production costs has yet to
be breached.

Sony is said to be one step ahead in the CCD, including the development of new
materials for the CCD.

A CCD is a semiconductor only about 1 cm square in size (an ordinary semicon-
ductor is 5 mm square). and at a glance it looks just like a piece of something
filled with an enormous number of dots (vision elements--currently about 200,000
can be placed on a chip. The more vision elements there are, the higher the
analytical capability.). Can such a semiconductor really be transferable to
military uses? The question does not need asking; the Japanese Defense Agency
is already seriously engaged in development of military applications for the
CCD.

Its intention is to develop an IR-CCD (CCD with infrared sensor), which is a
combination of a CCD and an elemental device capable of detecting infrared rays.
and to apply it in the homing device of a missile (it is possible to apply the
CCD as it is for military use).

The course a missile with an IR-CCD eye will follow after launching is clear
from the previous explanation of the magnetic camera.

The missile detects infrared rays from an enemy fighter by sensor and concurrent-
ly recognizes and memorizes the image of the enemy fighter by CCD. Once the
image is memorized. the missile will chase the enemy fighter and constantly
correct its direction until it hits the fighter.

The Defense Agency has commissioned Toshiba, Mitsubishi Electric, and Fujitsu
to do the research. If the IR—CCD is perfected, it will also be used in a
hand-carried SAM (a small surface-to-air missile that Toshiba has been develop-
ing with its own technology).

Thus. a revolution will occur in the precision with which a missile hits its
target.

No Distinction between Civilian and Military Uses

Needless to say, the CCD is only one example of electronic high technology that
can be converted to military applications. The opitcal fibers, the laser, the
VLSI. the photoelectron-all possess the same capability.

"The roots of the radar, sonar, and automatic control technologies widely used
.3 civilian technologies today are military technologies developed during World
War II. The military technologies were developed for civilian applications.
Recently, however, new advanced technologies intended for civilian use and
supported by enormous demand in civilian industry have been progressing remark-
ably. The number of these technologies which are convertible to military
applications has been increasing. Some technologies can be used for military
applications without adding special specifications. Some technologies can be

12

FOIGMﬂﬂllAl.USB(HNLY
converted to military use by raising the grade to military specifications.
Today, very strict, high-performance qualities are required even for industrial-
use technologies. Thus, the basic conditions for converting civilian tech-
nologies to military applications through qualitative improvement can be said to
have been already established in Japan" (Keiichi Fukuizumi, manager of the In-
duction and Photoelectron Department of NBC).

Taking the case of the VLSI as an exmaple, the only differences between civilian
applications and military applications are: l) "the temperature range" varies
at the time of use, and 2) “guarantees of reliability" are required in military
applications.

Revolutionary electronic products have been introduced into the peaceful world
of hobbies.

Under the inner cover of those products. high-level technologies convertible to
military uses are concealed.

Both civilian and military technologies have been radically electronieized.

This trend will continue. This is a characteristic of modern technology. Thus.
the line separating civilian and military technologies has been growing smaller
and smaller.

"Except for certain strategic arms, military technologies will be deeply eon-
cealed among all—purpose civilian technologies just like urban guerrillas
hidden in cities. 0n the other hand, military technology will swallnw the
advanced civilian technologies of the world and hungrily try to adapt them."
So explain the experts.

In Japan, which has achieved a high level of technology in the electronics
field in particular, foreign countries see the image of a country with the
world's biggest collection of potential military technology. Considering the
current conditions and trends, this is natural.

These conditions also give us a clue to understand the true intention of the
United States when it requests a "Japan-v.5. military technology exchange."

To Make Our Arms by Ourselves

"...For instance, when we are manufacturing a fighter under license from the
United States. could Mitsubishi do it by itself if the license was suddenly
cancelled? if we are asked such a question. we must not be in a situation
where we have to answer 'no.‘ Even manufacturing under license. we should be
prepared to manufacture by our hands with our own technology any time we are
asked. Such an attitude is necessary. This is our philosophy." Although
Mitsubishi Heavy Industries has been manufacturing aircraft from the F-106
through the F-lSJ under license. it has always kept the strong will and inten-
tion to move toward "autonomous development of technology" at the bottom current
of licensed production, according to Mr Ikeda.

13

lNDIICHﬂﬂCJAl.lﬂiE(NHLY’
FOI‘OFFKJAJ.USE(HVLY

"When we were engaged in manufacturing the F-104, we considerably advanced our
knowledge. when we suggested producing the P-104 domestically, the Defense
Agency laughed at us and did not trust us, saying that such a thing could hard-
ly be reliable. when we were manufacturing the P-b-the next aircraft-eunder
license, we again suggested that we could make that sort of aircraft by ourselves.
But the Defense Agency did not trust us then, either. At last, when the Defense
Agency wanted the T-2 (a supersonic training aircraft), it told us: 'If you

want to do that much, we will let you try.‘ Finally we were able to manufacture
aircraft by ourselves with our own technology."

There was a fear that it would become a seller's market if Mitsubishi did not
possess the capability to develop technology by itself. More than the economic
reasons, however, what contributed most to this attitude was the Mitsubishi
engineers' inheritance of Mitsubishi's prewar philosophy "to make our arms by
ourselves."

It has been pointed out that nowadays the urge toward “autonomous development
of arms" has been felt in the entire arms industry. The Japanese defense
industry is beginning to stand and walk by itself.

I must describe here the postwar history and characteristics of domestic arms.

With the wartime defeat, the old military forces were dissolved. Armament
factories were completely abolished. This is what many Japanese believe.

The facts, however, are different. The military industry did not die. Con-
cealed from the occupation forces, large numbers of military engineers were
carefully retained within Mitsubishi Heavy Industries, Mitsubishi Electric
Company, and Toshibn. Using those military engineers as a seed, the postwar
Japanese military industry, which changed its name to the defense industry,
was reborn like a phoenix.

There may be a small number of people who know that the philosophical trend
toward "autonomous development of arms" has, up to the present, been establish-
ed mostly by those engineers.

For example, the aircraft engineers of Mitsubishi Heavy Industries spent the
postwar period doing the following.

They were at the dispersed factories in Matsumoto, Nagano Prefecture, when the
war ended. At the instruction of the company, they secretly dispersed them-
selves and moved to five factories throughout the country. The first group
left for the Mizushima (in Okayama Prefecture) and Kyoto factories. The second
group went to the Kobe and Nagasaki dockyards.

Because experimental facilities such as wind tunnels and water tanks remained
in both the Kobe and Nagasaki dockyards. engineers in the field of aerodynamics
were sent there. The rest of the engineers went to the Kawasaki factory.

After a time, they began moving again. This time engineers were gathered at
the Kyoto and Misushima factories. Hhile polishing their skills there, they
waited for an opportunity to practice their old skills.

1h
FOI:0FFKJAI.U§I(MNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"The company kept about 160 to 150 engineers in all areas ranging from tanks

to aircraft. Of them. about 70 engineers moved to the Nagoya factory (an air-
craft factory) when aircraft production was resumed in 1952," testifies Hr Ikeda,
who was one of them.

Soon production of aircraft was permitted. Then, production started under
license from 0.8. companies. Taking advantage of their past experiences which
enabled them to compare the 0.5. licensed aircraft with Japanese aircraft of

the past, they coped with design diagrams, specifications, and other complicated,
high-level instructions sent from the United States.

"Although the knowhow associated with the key technologies for licensed produc-
tion was not taught at all, they were able to understand the contents to a cer-
tain extent once they got started. Later, the knowhow they gained in this pro-
case was utilized. It was totally different from starting from nothing."

Soon they turned their attention to their own technology and developed the OCH

(a gas turbine) and the HU-Z. a ground starter for the 17-101.; the T—2, a high-
performance training airplane solely developed and manufactured in Japan, and
the ASH-l (an air—to—ship missile) were also developed and produced domestically.
Now. they have taken up the challenge of developing domestically the Nike-
Phoenix, a surface-to-sir missile.

They say that not only technological accomplishments but also inheritance of the
"make our own arms by ourselves" philosophy resulted in the present condition
of technology in the defense industry.

The ASH-l, a Domestically Developed Missile

Associated with the domestically developed ASH-l missile is the story that
"engineers of the U.S. military forces were astounded at the high accuracy with
which it hit the target.“ Taking the case of the ASH-1 as an example. let us
examine the characteristics of our domestic arms.

The ASH-l was perfected by Mitsubishi Heavy Industries as the prime contractor.
Its homing head was developed by Mitsubishi Electric Company and its rocket
section was developed by Nissan Motor Company (Space and Aviation Division).

One characteristic of Japanese military technology is, first of all, that the
ASH-l was completed with very low development costs compared to the same type
of u.s. missile.

Compared with the Harpoon, its 0.8. counterpart. the development period was
one-half. the development costs were one-tenth, and the production costs per
missile are said to be 60 percent.

How could this be possible?

Actually, the domestically developed ASH-l missile was born after a certain
incident that was the beginning of the so-called Japan-0.5. missile war.

15
FOItOIIWCIAI.lEﬂ!(lULY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Prior to the development of the ASH-l, Mitsubishi Heavy Industries, which had
started to develop missiles on its own, succeeded in developing a missile
named MM-Z. Its rival was the 0.8. Falcon. Since the Falcon could be carried
by the F-lo Phantom, Mitsubishi also designed the AAM-Z so that it could be
carried by the F-6 Phantom.

The performance of the MM-Z was superior to that of the Falcon. This became
clear in the tests conducted by the Defense Agency. The accuracy was twice
that of the Falcon (in other words, the ANS-2 could hit within a circle one
half that which Falcon could hit).

The conclusion was, however, that the AAM-Z had to be abandoned without being
adOpted.

Those who know the situation reveal that "the rival Falcon was suddenly sold
at a bargain price."

Judging that the Falcon could no longer be employed in the United States, the
makers of the Falcon decided to start a bargain sale in order to dispose of
their inventory of Falcons.

The AAM-Z could not compete in cost with the bargain price of the Falcon, and
Mitsubishi Heavy Industries had to swallow its tears.

When Mitsubishi started planning the next missile, the Am-l, it decided from
the early stage on the basis of its bitter experience with [LAM—2 that "there
must be a significant difference in quality and in price in order to compete
with American-made missiles." From this, we can understand that the development
of Japanese military technology has taken the same course as automobiles and
color TV sets.

In order to develop a missile with low production costs, Mitsubishi engineers
chose the Harpoon (an air-to-ship missile) of the United States as a rival and
rushed to develop a missile under the slogan "a domestic missile for half the
price of the Harpoon."

In order to cut production costs thoroughly, Mitsubishi established a strict
cost management structure which involved related enterprises and subcontractors.
From the production of trial models, Mitsubishi engineers went to every vendor
and parts maker and gave direct instructions on how to produce the parts.

The result was what I have already described. The ASH-l was adopted as a
domestic missile with extraordinary competitive power.

Based on their past experiences, Mitsubishi engineers have started to go into
the area of surface-to-air missiles. They are going to develop the Nike-
Phoenix.

The exanple of the ASH—l can apply more or less to the development method of
every domestic weapon.

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 051WC]AI.USE<DNLN

This method puts an enormous number of subcontractors, which form the footing
or the defense industry, under a certain strict discipline and control. It
brings them into a checking structure that extends to technology, production
sites, machines and tools, and parts supplies.

Thus, quality control and cost control are thoroughly carried out.

having had a great deal of trouble with sabotage at the subcontractors' level,
the American military industry is losing its competitive power, and for that
reason much of the Japanese defense industry is becoming competitive in the
Japanese arms market.

On the other hand, in calculating personnel expenses for design engineers and
other engineers engaged in research and development of military technology. a
significant difference exists between Japan and the United States. This is
one secret of a low-cost Japanese weapon. This fact is not known widely.

In brief, highly qualified engineers in the Japanese defense industry are
employed at a cost astonishingly lower than their American counterparts.

A time change per hour is calculated by analyzing the standard work of every
engineer and researcher in the United States. In addition to time used for
research and development. even idle time is charged to a client as a chargable
cost if the cause is related. This is the American method of calculating
personnel expenses.

The Japanese method is customarily called "gross cost." Engineers, mechanics,

designers, and researchers are not clearly distinguished from one another and
they are all paid by the salary system. Often they work extra hours for which
they are not paid overtime.

Comparing the two structures, a difference in cost and price competitiveness
is naturally created at the stage of the final products, which are modern
weapons.

As long as Japanese weapons possess a strong price competitiveness deriving from
the Japanese method, the Defense Agency, a user, has to move in the direction
of buying Japanese arms.

High technology, especially in the electronics field, is joined to price com-
petitiveness and the spiritual backbone of making our own arms by our own
hands. Therefore, autonomous development of arms seems destined to go forward
as a chaser would with a tailwind.

Dr Andrew Pierre has predicted that Japan—v.8. friction would increase in the
Japanese arms market in the future. He has also warned that "Once Japan desires,

it can become a highly competitive arms exporter within a short time." We feel
as though we must pay respect to his sharp eyes.

17

IIIlCHNHCJAI.lEHECHILV
INJI‘0F1WCJAI.USZ(M§LY

The Purpose of Japan-U.S. Military Technological Cooperation

The Japanese defense industry has begun to walk purposefully toward autonomous
development of military technology. I have written a rather long explanation
of the situation background because I had to write about the Japan-U.S. mili-
tary technological cooperation, an issue that has been changing its form and
shape and reappearing at every opportunity, like a persistent ghost, since
early last fall. The United States has reportedly asked Japan to provide mili-
tary technology. Concerning the intentions of the United States and the con-
tents of the request, all Japanese defense industry executives have said that
"We can't understand its real intentions," and "We can't think of any Japanese
technology worth providing to the United States."

What the U.S. Department of Defense expects Japan to provide is said to be
high-speed operation elemental devices, lasers, electronics technology for use
in radars and surface—to-air missiles, optical fibers, robots, and CCD's (IR-
CCD's, if successfully developed). Various speculations have spread through
the defense industry.

As I have already written, it is undeniable that U.S. interest and concern

toward Japan's highly advanced civilian technology in the electronics field has
been increasing.

0n the other hand, there is another story here. "Originally. Japan, not the
United States, asked the United States to provide military technological
cooperation. Now, it is Japan that wants to break the three principles of arms
exports. The United States is, on the other hand, in a position to take a
precaution. If Japan starts exporting military technology to the United States,
it may start exporting it to other countries too."

In fact, it has been reported that former Defense Agency Director General Omura
brought up the issue when he visited the United States in June 1981.

The truth is elusive.

Nevertheless, the important fact is that the Japanese defense industry's mili-
tary technology has become a great potential power. At the same time, even if
this is true, it is limited to the extent of individual subsystems and compon-
ents. It does not extend to broad military systems like those possessed by
the United States or an entire design philosophy.

Ikeda, the managing director of Mitsubishi Heavy Industries, says: "If
Japanese and U.S. military technologies are compared, the U.S. technologies
are definitely better and greater. There may be some areas where Japanese
technology is competitive or ahead by one step. They are, however, only
limited, local areas of military technologies."

Therefore, he says: "As far as Mitsubishi Heavy Industries is concerned at
present, we have no technology to export to the United States, and the United
States does not expect such localized technologies, either."

18

INIIIOIIICIAI.IIHE(NVLY
What does the United States think of and want from military technological;'
cooperation? '

"Some technologies that Japan has spent an enormous amount of money to develop
[tr civilian uses are very localized but slightly ahead. The United States
seems to be requesting the freedom to buy and use such technologies. This is
only my personal guess" (Hr Ikeda). "It is hard to think that Japan possesses
technologies that the United States wants to absorb into its military system in
large quantities. If there are any individual technologies which are cheap
and applicable to the U.S. military system. the United States wants to buy and
use them on a commercial basis. I think that is what the U.S. request means"
(Mr Fukulzumi). "Japan lacks critical technology (the technology that forms
the heart of a system). The recent theory of establishing a technology-based
state is aimed at remedying this lacuna. Under the current situation where
the level of Japanese military technology has risen, Japan possesses the caps-
bility of easily becoming a large military power if we decide to integrate
available technologies and can add critical technology to them. However. as
long as Japan lacks a huge military system and its software, U.S. interest
naturally turns to obtaining low-cost, good-quality components" (Yuji Haauda.
lecturer at Hosei University).

After all. the 0.3. request in a form of asking for military cooperation seems
lo have been an aberrant intention.

As I have already written. the primary U.S. interest is in civilian technologies
that are transferable to military uses and some components.

"The subcontractors which support the military-industrial complex of the United
States have been exhausted and their capability has fallen down in respect to
performance, on—time delivery. and quality. Frankly. we want Japan to supple-
ment that area." As an executive of an American company says, the second in-
tention seems to be procurement of individual hardware parts from Japan or
contract production of them in Japan.

Under the current law, even procurement of parts is prohibited by the three
principles of arms exports as long as they are used by the military.

Here. however, I must emphasize the following assumption, which can be con-
sidered to he the third intention of the United States.

There is an implication that the United States intends to involve Japanese
researchers and engineers specializing in civilian and military technologies

in Japan-”.8. joint research on military technology.

As I have already mentioned, there is a significant difference in the personnel
expenses paid to excellent researchers and engineers in Japan and in the United
States.

Instead of employing one American researcher. it may be possible to obtain better
fruits in terms of cost efficiency by using several brains in Japan.

19

lili¢ﬂﬂﬂ€1kl.USE(N'LY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A varied forms of subcontracting brains may come to pass.

Finally, it has been reported that voices asking Japan to share the required
development cost of military technology have been rising among U.S. military
contractors.

All the things that I have mentioned tell us nothing except that the Japanese
defense industry is moving into a new phase. “bile general electrical machinery
manufacturers have become well known for delivering various home appliances.
office automation equipment, and new hobby and entertainment-related products

to consumers, they have also occupied a large foothold in the military industry
by using a wide range of military technology as an intermediary. This phenomenon
has been accepted as quite ordinary in our industrial world. Mitsubishi
Electric Company has been much talked about in the consumer goods market for

its hit products such as quilt dryers and clean heaters. The company also is
proud of being the Defense Agency's number one supplier in the area of electron-
ics, which excludes Mitsubishi Heavy Industries or Ishikawajima-Harima Heavy
Industries.

Hitachi Limited, which announced its participation in a bidding war to get a
contract for the Badge X (the next automated air defense warning and control
system), established a Defense Technology Promotion Headquarters within the
company 2 years ago. By permanently assigning 60 researchers and engineers,
it has been busy researching and developing military technology.

Fujitsu, number one in the computer industry, also started the Fujitsu Systems
Integration Laboratory at the beginning of last year. It is hustling "to
double its contracts in the defense market within 2 or 3 years." One hundred
thirty researchers and engineers are engaged in developing military technology
at the Fujitsu laboratory.

Nippon Electric Company, known for its slogan of computers and communication
and as Japan's largest semiconductor maker, is said to be supplying the Defense
Agency with almost 290 parts and products under contract annually. In addi-
tion, it has over 50 subcontracts to supply to prime contractors engaged in
arms manufacture.

"For both civilian and military uses, technology will become more complex,
higher level, and more advanced in the future. We don't have to neglect the
high technology we have achieved in civilian applications. We want to utilize
this technology in military applications. And then we want to feed back our
accomplishments in military applications into civilian applications," opines an
executive of a general electrical machinery maker with an easy look.

Now, "a market of 1 trillion yen" is beginning to reveal its entire features
before the defense industry.

It is also certain, however, that the semiconductor makers can see a huge swamp
called "company risk" ahead of them.

20
FilltlﬂﬂC1A1.1Eﬂ!(MVLY
In the VLSI battle of the 6k kilobit or lore, the capital investment for one
plant is said to reach 20-30 billion yen. They have to recover these huge
investments within 2 to 3 years. They are stuck in a surprisingly'rieky busi-
ness.

He cannot completely deny that one of the motivations urging the. tounrd
autonomous developnent of military technology is company risk. It in not sane-
thing which can be talked about in a bright world free iron worry.

COPYRIGHT: Bungei Shunju Ltd 1982

9896
CSO: 6105/11b

21

FOR OlﬂﬂCIAl.lElI(NVLY
ms OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ECONOMIC

AGRICULTURE Hum: PAPER ma 1981 REVIMD

Tokyo NIHON RDGYO SBIMBUN in Japanese 12, 15, 19. 22, 26 May 82
[12 May 82 p 3]

[Text] Development of National Economy and Agriculture

Food Supply and Agriculture

The national food demand increased rapidly during a period of high-level growth;
rice demand decreased while fruits and animal products increased. Likewise.

the form of food consumption moved in the direction of an increased tendency

to rely on food consumption service, i.e. the weight of restaurant food and

high value-added food, such as processed food, increased. As a result, the
ratio starch occupies in the daily per capita supply of caloric value declined
from 63 percent to 52 percent during the period from 1965 to 1973, and the ratio
of protein and fats increased. 0n the average, the diet content has improved

in that balanced nutrition has been acquired.

In answer to this, agricultural production continued a selective expansion,
centered in products for which demand has increased rapidly. Faced with the
previously unknown problem of having a structural excess supply of rice in 1968
and later, with regard to the inevitability of having regulated basic production
since 1971. domestic production of wheat, soy beans and the like gradually
declined and the supply of these products relied mainly on imports. As a re-
sult, the agricultural food products overall self-sufficiency ration dropped

to a little more than 30 percent.

As for such a decline in the overall food self-sufficiency ratio, there is the
problem of insuring Japan's food security. while the Ministry of Agriculture
and Forestry worked to maintain and strengthen the overall domestic food self-
sufficiency capability continuously in FY-8l, it also decided to insure the
stability of imported agricultural products and promote countermeasures for
reserves of agricultural products.

In the process of changes in national food demand, the food supply structure
has become a double structure in which products with an extremely low self—

sufficiency ratio coexist with products which have a high ratio. Agriculture
must create a stable supply in answer to the food demands of the future also,

22
IIIICNHHCIAI.USB(MNLY
but the white paper offered a working plan for improvement in productivity by
means of: 1) development and dissemination of agricultural technology; 2)
efficient agricultural investment; and 3) reform of the agricultural structure.

. __—___._. _——..

grammar; <1)
Lﬁ$0m
(40'5”.ﬂ )

.3
m 5*

p.15

  
      
     
   

  

  

  

_(9) 6* m‘wmam 4m

WW
‘ .. 450.37% .

  

1. Comparison of Rate of Increase in Material Labor Productivity in Agriculture
in Several Countries (annual rates for the years 1965-1980)

2. Agriculture

3. Manufacturing

4. Japan

5. West Germany

6. United States

7. France

8. England
9. N.B. Agricultural production index and manufacturing production index

divided by the index of employed population for each.

The improvement in agriculture's physical labor productivity is an indispensable
factor for maintaining and strengthening the overall food self-sufficiency
capability: the rate of increase was high, 5.6 percent per year, during the
period from 1965 to 1975 and can rank with that of the United States and
European countries. However, some distinguishing characteristics can be seen

in the tendency of productivity during this period: 1) in contrast to the fact
that in the United States and European countries,the increase in agricultural
productivity exceeded that of manufacturing, it was just the opposite in Japan;
and 2) the tendency of Japan's agricultural productivity to depend greatly on

23
FINICHHHC1A1.USE(H'LY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the growth of the capital-intensive agricultural sector, such as small-to-
medium sized animals and institutional horticulture, and progress in labor-
saving technology in the land use style agriculture sector is impeded by a petty
land retention structure and not enough efficiency is demonstrated.

Because of this, it has gradually become difficult to achieve an income differ-
ential between agriculture and manufacturing with an increase in agricultural
productivity, and the tendency to rely on an increase in the price of agricul-
tural products to insure an agricultural profit has intensified. The production
cost of agricultural products had a high increase ratio of 9 percent annually
between 1965 and 1975, but because relaxation in demand during the period from
1975 to 1980 worked to inhibit the price formation, it was rather small, an
annual rate of 4.1 percent, compared to the previous period.

In an international comparison of agricultural product prices, there are such
problems as the influence of export subsidy measures on international prices; for
example, when Japan's agricultural product costs are compared to the world's
average import costs, Japan is high in such items as the land use style agri-
cultural sector's rice, wheat and meat, but is at the same level or lower than
international prices in such things as chickens and eggs.

More important, since 1977, in contrast to the fact that the tempo of price
increases for domestic agricultural products has slowed down, international
prices have increased, and there is a trend toward a reduction in the range
of disparity with international prices in expensive items.

[15 May 82 p 3]
[Text] Trends in AgriCultural Product Demand
Diet and Health

As pointed out in the first article, the content of the national diet has
changed greatly, and compared to the diet of the United States and Europe, the
Japanese diet has several distinctive features; an individual diet pattern which
must be called "a Japanese style diet" continues.

According to the white paper, those distinctive features are as follows:

i) The caloric supply difference. In contrast to the fact that the national
annual per capita caloric supply in the United States and Europe is more than
3,000 kilocalories, in Japan it has remained almost constant at approximately
2,500 kilocalories. 2) Compared to the United States and Europe, the ratio
starch occupies in the caloric supply is high, about half. 3) The ratio animal
protein occupies in protein supply is low and even in animal protein, the ratio
of fish and seafood is 65 percent, remarkably high compared to the rate of less
than 10 percent in the United States and Europe.

2h
FOI‘O!IN(1AI.lEﬂi(MHLY
(1) marsmnntammu- ,
( )(maac'mam 'W-h‘OI
. 1H3: .' EF4“I(4)
49:)?(6)
7x )7) (6)
B 15(7

maze ‘.-:..m1- " T H

    
     

  

1. Relationship Between Per Capita Food Consumption and Agricultural Production
2. (Amount of per capita food supply in kilograms)

3. (Agricultural production distribution ratios in percentages)

a. West Germany

5. Italy

6. United States
7. Japan

8. wheat

9. rice

)0. vegetables
11. meat

The result of such food intake is that a proper balance has been obtained in the
ratio calories found in the three great nutritional elements--protuins, fat and
carbohydrates-—occupy in the caloric supply, and the so-called "Japanese style

diet" has taken root.

In Japan, a diet which has added various types of fish and seafood, animal pro-
ducts, vegetables and fruit to rice, the core of the diet, has been formed.
Likewise, the ratio of Japan's caloric intake has been improved in the form of
fat substituting for carbohydrates; on the average, the rate is at a desirable

level.

On the average. the diet of presentday Japan has reached a nutritional balance,
but problems exist in terms of the individual diet. The greatest problem is
the possibility of a nutritional imbalance depending on the tempo of change in
the diet. Likewise, there is the fear that the diet will move in the direction

25
FOI!OFFMJA1.USE(NULY
liﬂl(lﬂﬁ(JAl.US£‘0NlN

of a diet unrelated to Japan's climate and natural resources. Concerning a
diet imbalance, according to the Ministry of Health and Heliare's "National
Nutrition Survey," a wide dispersion can be seen, such as the fact that 27
percent of households have an intake of more than 3,000 kilocalories, 20 per—
cent greater than the average required daily caloric intake of 2,500 kilocalor-
ies for the adult male; and in contrast to this, there are about 10 percent of
the households with less than 2,000 kilocalories, more than 20 percent below
the required caloric intake.

In recent years. the lengthening of the average lifespan is due greatly to
medical achievements, but at the same time it is due in no small part to im-
provement of the diet. For example, it is reported that people with a longevity
of more than 100 years have dietary habits rooted in agriculture and fishing

in the districts with lightly seasoned fish, eggs and vegetables and with rice
as the staple. Consequently, it is important to strive to give root to a
Japanese-style diet which has as its core rice and such products rooted in
Japan's natural features, by means of promoting food product measures in league
with nutrition measures and cultural-educational measures.

[19 May 82 p 3]

[Text] International Agricultural Products Supply and Demand and Japan's
Agricultural Products Trade

International Agricultural Products Supply and Demand and Food Supply

In the fifties and sixties, the international supply and demand for such pro-
ducts as grain underwent a transition with a basic surplus, but in the seven-
ties this supply and demand became generally unstable and arrived at the
present situation. The reduction in grain and the like due to worldwide abnor-
mal weather conditions in 1972. and the large-scale purchases of grain by the
USSR and others completely changed and caused a tightening of the international
supply and demand from a basic surplus up until that time, and brought about
the sudden rise in international prices. After that, there followed a poor
harvest in the United States in 1974 and crop failure in the USSR in 1975, so
the worldfs total grain stock was 120 million tons at the end of 1975-76. (At
the beginning of the sixties it was 190 million tons), so the stock ratio fell
to 12 percent.

Even though the international supply and demand for grain since 1976-77 has

on the whole been blessed by good weather and stabilized because of production
increases, inasmuch as there was increased production in the United States and
a sharp reduction in production in the USSR in 1979-80 reductions in production
in both the United States and the USSR in 1980-81, and a bad harvest in the
USSR and a bountiful harvest in the United States and Canada in 1981-82, the
international supply and demand in grain increased its degree of instability in
comparison with the previous periods, and the range of fluctuations in inter-
national prices was great.

The international supply and demand in grain and the like destabilized. And
in the midst of this, the white paper enumerated as questions which should be

26

ﬁOI¢NHﬂC1A1.USE(INLY
regarded in connection with the long-term view of the world's future food
supply and demand. such major destabilizing factors as: 1) increased fluctua-
tions in harvest amounts due to weather conditions; 2) increase in supply and
demand of feed grains because of population increase; 3) increase in Soviet
and Chinese imports; and a) rise in the position of the United States in the
world grain market. These are factors not allowing optimism about the future
of international long-term supply and demand.

Hhile considering many important factors surrounding such a world food supply
and demand. the white paper has the following long-term view of the world-food
supply and demand.

Looking at the increase in food supply and demand accompanying the population
increase and economic growth, and the food production possibilities. it seems
the degree of imbalance in food supply and demand by region will increase still
more. According to estimates of the FAO (Food and Agriculture Organization of
the United Nations), the grain shortage amount in the developing countries
(trade amount) has the prospect of expanding from an average 36 million tons in
1978-79 to 150 million tons in the year 2000.

In the developing countries. despite the increase in production and imports,
not much of an increase in per capita consumption can be anticipated because
of population increases. In the developing countries, that part of the amount
of increase in demand by the year 2000 allocated to per capita consumption
increase will be no more than 20 to 30 percent.

The arable land limitations will be severe. and with that. grain production
cannot help but rely even more on single harvests. According to the 0.8.
Government's "The Earth in the Year 2000." the world's arable land area will
increase only a percent by the Year 2000, and in answer to the expanded demand,
there will be more hope placed on increased use of fertilizers.

Marginal land will be cultivated, and the intensive use of arable land will
advance. As a result, the instability of grain production will increase. 0n
the one hand, the expansion of cultivation to marginal land will increase the
influence of weather fluctuations; because the degree of intensity of land use
will rise. there is concern about the creation of such problems as the decline
of certain regions. soil erosion, the making of deserts and salt accumulation.

with regard to Japan, it relies on foreign counties for many products, such as
grain and soybeans, and it is possible to envisage interference in the overseas
food supply due to some kind of unforeseen situation. Consequently, it is
important to work for the stabilization of imports of those products for which
we must rely on imports together with providing as much as possible through
domestic production those agricultural products which can possibly be produced
domestically. while working for an improvement in production. Parallel with
thls, it is necessary to insure food security, including international emergen-
ry reserves in many countries against unforeseen situations.

F0.‘0FFHJAI.USE(M‘LY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Key:

1. Changes in International Supply and Demand in Grain

2. 1 million tons

3. production amount

4. consumption amount

5. ratio of stock on hand at the end of the period

6. 1980/81 (tentative)

7. 1981/82 (estimated)

8. N.B. FAO has set the criteria for a safety reserve level of wheat at 2h-26
percent and feed grains at 15 percent; based on the structure of wheat and
feed grain consumption, the safety reserve level for grain (except rice) is
18-19 percent as a weighted average.

[22Nay 82 p 3]
[Text] Price of Agricultural Products and Trends in Food Industry

Price of Agricultural Products and Agricultural Production Materials and Con-
sumer Food Prices

Agricultural producer prices are moving narrowly upward because overall supply
and demand for agricultural products is basically easing. The rate of price
increase in agricultural products which are the subject of pricing policies,
such as rice, wheat, milk, swine and beef cattle, is being held down.

Japan's agricultural producer price increase rate (an increase rate of 5.3
percent in the period April through December 1981 compared to the same period
the previous year) was high in the mid-sixties to mid-seventies, but from the

28
FOI‘OFFHJMI.USE(MNLY
mid-seventies on it has been rather low. This is the result of agricultural
product pricing policies having been applied properly from the standpoint of
prevention of excessive price changes, introduction of agricultural products
corresponding to demand. and maintenance of agricultural income.

Also. the price of agricultural production materials, which showed an upward
tendency reflecting increases from such overseas factors as light and heat,
fertilizer and feed in FY-80, showed a quiet movement in which the increase
rate in the period April through December 1981 compared to the same period of
the previous year was 4.3 percent, due to the fact that in FY-81 the price of
composite feed and fertilizer was reduced. '

Also, according to the "Agricultural Household Economic Survey," agricultural
management expenses, such as the expense of agricultural production materials,
are tending to increase compared with the sluggiahness in growth of agricultur-
al gross earnings; and even though the comparative ratio of agricultural man-
agement expenses versus agricultural gross earnings declined a little, from 68
percent in 1970 to 45 percent in 1975, it rose to ‘1 percent in 1980 because
gross earning leveled off due to the -nfluence of cold weather damage. when a
breakdown of agricultural management expenses is viewed by category of the scale
of cultivated land managed in cities, towns and prefectures, the smaller the
scale. the greater the proportion which farm machinery and equipment expenses,
especially depreciation costs, occupy in management expenses. The white paper
pointed out: ”In order to stabilize agricultural management hereafter, it is
important to use invested material efficiently, especially farm machinery and
equipment, along with stabilizing the cost of agricultural production materials.

Next. according to the “Manufacturing Statistics Survey: the average scale of
industries supplying agricultural materials, excluding the agricultural machin-
ery and equipment manufacturing industry, far exceeds the average of all manu-
facturing industries both in amounts shipped and value added amount. Likewise.
when the recent earnings of the main enterprises are viewed, even though
earnings of all manufacturing industries are comparatively favorable, including
the chemical industry and machinery manufacturing industry. there is a great
difference in the favorableness and unfavorableness depending on the industry.
In industries supplying agricultural production materials, profits have been
low in the chemical fertilizer manufacturing industry, farm machinery manufac-
turing industry and composite feed manufacturing industry. In particular, the
chemical fertilizer manufacturing industry, whose overall competitive power is
weak due to the difference in raw materials used, is showing a move to reor-
ganize the industry because the industry continues in an organizational de-
pression and a growth in demand is not anticipated.

Agricultural producer prices have given indication of a relatively restrained
movement, but the overall increase rate in consumer prices has dropped greatly
since 1976. In 1980, the overall increase rate in consumer prices was 7.8
percent; in contrast, food product prices remained at 5.3 percent. Even though
food prices for the period April through December 1981 increased 5.1 percent
over the same period the previous year, when prices were relatively steady and
food prices changed and exceeded overall consumer prices, recently there has
been almost no difference.

29

ROIIOIWHCJAl.lEﬂE(HVLY
IKIICNNWCJAI.USE(NVLY

 

l$€::.llll;1}il'l r}.r

a . 4
is 6-7! SIGN-‘2‘ 2 3 0 3-37 I} com:

(a) small mum-u

 

Key:

1. Changes in Consumer Food Prices (fluctuations compared to previous year,
same month)

2. overall

3. food industry products
4. food

5. perishable food

6. 1980

7. 1981
8. Data from Prime Minister's Office's "Consumer Price Index"

The reason food prices have changed steadily is that besides the fact that
agricultural food product prices have basically changed with a bearish tendency.
their movement has also steadily changed in terns of processing and distribu-
tion. Even when compared with the United States and the major European coun-
tries, the increase rate of Japan's food prices is the lowest increase rate

after "est Germany.

[26 May 82 p 3]

[Text] Agricultural Product Prices and Trends in Food Industry

Trends in Food Industry

0n the whole. a slowing down tendency continues in the growth of food demand,
but in that, because the growth in expenditures for processed food and foods
eaten out. which have a high degree of service added, was relatively high.

the proportion processed foods and restaurant foods occupy in food consumption
costs continued to increase, and reached 60 percent in 1980.

IKIICHHWC1A1.USEINVLY
1hr Inud Industry in that sector, such as the processing and distribution of

Inna prnducts and restaurant food industries, which link production of agricul-
tural products and food consumption, is functioning as a stable supply of food,
standing side by side with agriculture and the industry supplying agricultural
production materials, and occupies an important position in the national economy.
Even though the proportion the food industry occupies in total industry has
declined slightly in terms of production, it is still 8 percent, and in terms

of people employed is is 10 percent. In the food industry, the weight of the
food products industry has dropped and the weight of restaurant service has
risen.

According to the "industrial Statistics Survey," the scale of the food products
manufacturing industry OCCupies a large proportion, 11 percent, of total manu-
facturing industries, with 84,000 places of business, 848,000 employees and=21
trillion yen in amount of products shipped. Its major characteristics are that
the value added rate is low and the rate of raw material usage is high. This
tendency is especially remarkable in the basic raw material type industries,
such as flour mills and the oil industry. However, in recent years, reflecting
the diversification of diet, there has been great growth in high value added
industries. such as the processing industry, and seasOnings and prepared food
manufactures where there is an especially large amount of service added.

    
 

( 1) IEIWMBII '

. g? 1. Composition of Final Consumer
(2 ugh) Gszkhﬂzuswwz )( so)

Spending for Agricultural Food
Products
2. (imported food)
3. (domestic agricultural products)
a. (food processing expenses)
5. (restaurant service)
6. (distribution expenses)
7. Japan-1965
8. Japan-1975
9. U.S.-l977
10. Breakdown for Japan (1975)
ll. (Ratio in the form of final con-
sumer spending)
12. agricultural products
13. processed products
lb. restaurants
15. domestic agricultural products

16. imported food products
17. food processing expenses

 
       

[8. distribution expenses
[9. restaurant service

A recovery in food manufacturer earnings has been slower than that of other
manufacturers, but it is understood that this is due to the fact that growth
in demand in processed foods has slowed down recently, and in the midst of the
movement to a basic easing of manufactured product supply and demand, cost
increases could not be shifted easily due to the sudden rise in oil prices and
the drop in the yen.

IIIICINWCIAI.USE¢MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Likewise, comparing the productivity of the food manufacturing industry in
terms of the per-capita employee value added amount with all industry, in the
years 1970 to 1972 they were at about the same level, but the differential ex-
panded to 90 percent in the years 1973-78, and to 80 percent in 1979. It can
be seen that the major facotrs are that until 1979 the differential expanded
in relative terms in both value added ratio and labor and equipment ratio, and
furthermore, since 1979, hand in hand with a leveling off in sales, the mater-
ial fixed assets turnover dropped in relative terms.

Thus, the economic environment surrounding the food industry is severe, but
there is a trend toward developing many new products, such as high-grade pro-
cessed foods and health foods corresponding to the changes in consumer needs.
For example, there is enthusiasm for the development and introduction of new
technology, such as vigorously wrestling with cooperative development of an
aseptic replenisment system of the food industry as a whole is at a low level
compared with other manufacturers, a ratio of l to 2 researchers per 10,000
employees, and a ratio of l to 3 in research expenditures per cmany.

Based on the actual situation of such food industries, the white paper concludes
that "while planning to raise the base level of technology of the food industry
as a whole, including small-to-mediul enterprises, and to introduce ultramodern
technology from other fields to the food industry, it is vitally important to
strengthen the management basis of the food industry via the development of
high-value-added products which precisely meet consumer needs more than pre-
viously.

COPYRIGHT: Nihon Kogyo Shimbun 1982

91000
650: (0105/10?

32
MWLSEONLY
MITI POLICY GUIDES PLANNING IN VARIOUS INDUSTRIES
Coal Liquefaction Technologies
Tokyo ASAMI SHIMBUN in Japanese 27 Apr 82 p 8

[Text] The Ministry of International Trade and Industry [MITI] and the New
Energy Development Organization [NEDO] have set a policy of unifying, within
2 years, the three types of domestic coal liquefaction technology undertaken
by Japan's energy industry. Until new development efforts have been scattered
in fostering new technology, but the intention now is to develop technology
efficiently as the scale of plant operations grows larger. There is a world-
wide oversupply of petroleum, and European and U.S. interest in coal lique-
faction technology has diminished. But Japanese technology, which has grown
with financial aid from the government, is facing a period of reorganization.

There are four varieties of coal liquefaction in Japan: the "direct hydro-
genation" method of Nippon Kokan xx and Mitsui Shipbuilding and Engineering Co,
the "solvent extraction" method of Sumitomo Metal Industries, the ”solvolysis"
method of Mitsubishi Heavy Industries. and the KDMINIC project of Kobe Steel
Ltd and others. The first three methods are to be integrated.

A direct hydrogenation experimental plant handling 2.6 tons per day was just
completed on 20 April, and l-ton per day experimental plants were completed

in December 1981 (solvent extraction) and December 1981 (solvolysis). Research
on improvements will continue until FY-83 for each of these, and data will be
gathered on coals and solvents used, and on proportions of liquefaction pro-
ducts.

As for future development plans. MITI intends to bring together the superior
aspects of the three technologies and complete an experimental plant with a
capacity of 250 tons per day by the second half of the 1980's. The intention

is to cut expenses and concentrate technical personnel, but the various firms
are making every effort to have large parts of the technology they have develop-
ed incorporated in the experimental plant. Fierce competition over development
can be expected to unfold in the next year or two.

In the United States, construction of the SEC-II commercial plant planned by

Gulf and others has been stopped, and Exxon has slowed down development of its
EDS method. The primary reason for this is that oil prices are down, making

33
ROI OIIICIAI.IEHI(INLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

prospects for early realization of relatively expensive coal liquefaction dimmer
than ever. Japan is the only advanced country which is enthusiastic about de-
velopment of alternative sources of energy, but even in Japan the government

is not able to supply unlimited funds.

As for the KDMINIC project, construction of a SO-ton-per—day plant has already
begun in Australia, but because this uses only Australian lignite, MITI has
decided it should be developed separately from the other three technologies.

COPYRIGHT: Asahi Shiabunsha 1982
Petrochemical Industry Reorganization

Tokyo NIHON KBIZAI SMIMBUN in Japanese 10 May 82 p 1

[Text] MITI considers it is necessary to greatly reduce production costs in
order to restore the competitiveness of Japan's petro-chemistry industry, and
has firmed up a reorganization plan which will cut in half the number of ethy-
lene production sites at the 15 petrochemical complexes across the country.

The smaller and older facilities which make up about 30 percent of total capacity
will be closed, consignment production and cooperative production will be en-
couraged, and ethylene production will be concentrated at six or seven plants
at locations such as the coast of the Inland Sea, the shore of Tokyo Bay and
Yokkaichi District. To bring this about, MITI wants to incorporate its policy
in the final report of the chemical industries subgroup of the Industrial
Structure Council at the beginning of June. Its recommendations on taxes and
financial measures necessary for dealing with the facilities to be closed are
to be brought together in a "Materials Industries Revitalization 8111" (working
title) by the end of the year, and submitted to the next regular session of the
Diet.

Under MITI's concept, industrial concentration is a method by which the govern-
ment can allow the industry to create a plan to eliminate excess facilities by
closing inefficient ethylene plants and promoting commission production at large
plants with capacities exceeding 300,000 tons per year. In principle this would
all be left to voluntary action by the industry, but MITI has a general goal of
reducing the number of ethylene centers--15 at present--by about half.

If the specifics of this concentration are considered region by region, the
northernmost location is the plant Mitsubishi Petrochemical Co will operate
independently in Kashima District. In Chiba District, Mitsui Petrochemica
Industries, Sumitomo Chemical Co, Maruzen Petrochemical Co and the new Idemitsu
Petrochemical Co will carry out integrated ethylene production. In Kawasaki
District, operations by Tonen Sekiyukagaku xx and Nippon Petrochemicals Co will
be integrated; and in Yokkaichi District, operations by Mitsubishi Petrochemical
Co and New Daikyowa Petrochemical Co will be integrated. The five existing
centers on the Inland Sea and Kyushu coasts (Mitsui Toatsu Chemicals and
Izumikita; Mitsubishi Chemical Industries and Misushims Manufacturing Co; Asahi
Chemical Industry Co and Misushima Manufacturing Co; Idemitsu Petrochemical Co
and Tokuyama Soda Co; and Shows Denko KK and Oita) will be concentrated into
two or three centers.

I0!‘0¥FKJAI.USE(IMLY
The candidates for complete closure are the plants with poor energy efficiency
and relatively high production costs, such as Sumitomo Chemical's Bhime plant
and Hitsui Petrochemical' s Iwakuni and Otake plants. In districts in which
there are both 300, GOO-ton facilities and facilities of 200, 000 tons or less,
the smaller ones will be shut down. =

Japan's total production capacity for ethylene. which is regarded as a basic
raw material, is about 6.2 million tons at present, and the total capacity of
active facilities is abcut 5.6 million tons. However, actual production in
1980 was 6.8 million tons, and in 1981 it dropped even further to 3.6 million
tons. Pressure from imports of foreign petrochemical products is expected to
continue to increase, and it is the view of a MITI official that after 1985,
"it will be all Japan can do to produce a million tons.a year."

In such circumstances, MITI expects the closing of facilities with a total
capacity of 1.74 million tons: about 840,000 tons in obsolescent facilities
which are actually closed already plus about 900,000 tons in smaller facilities
(under 200,000 tons per year) which will soon be fully depreciated. As a re-
sult, total ethylene production capacity will be reduced to about b.5 million
tons and, if high-efficiency operation in large-scale plants becomes possible,
the international competitive strength of Japan's petrochemical industry will
be increased.

To support the reorganization of the petrochemical industry H'TI is consider-
ing a "materials industries revitalization bill" which will incorporate tax
incentives for shutting down facilities, and measures to provide low-interest
loans through financial institutions with government ties and to relax applica-
tion of antitrust laws.

In April 1981 the Industrial Structure Council convened a working group on the
petrochemical industry which is now deliberating revitalization of that indus-
try. The interim report of December 1981 recommended improvement of the
mechanism for purchasing raw naphtha (crude gasoline), which is available only
at prices higher than those in Europe and the United States, and review of the
disorderly industrial structure in which there are too many firms. This would
include a raw materials policy in which price-setting is linked to international
price trends in order to eliminate raw materials situations which are unduly
unprofitable. But the influx of relatively cheap foreign imports has continued;
it is urgent that Japan's petrochemical industry, if it is to survive, be con-
centrated to restore its international competitive strength by means of de-
cisive cost reductions.

COPYRIGHT: Nihon Keizai Shimbunsha 1982
Stockpile of Rare Metals
Tokyo NIKKAN KOGYO SHIMBUN in Japanese 20 Apr 82 p 1

[Text] MIT! has firmed up its intentions to create a national stockpile of
rare metals, and has begun concrete preparations. Rare metals are essential
materials for products of advanced technology and a broad range of industrial
products, and stockpiles are being accumulated in Europe and the United States;
although belated private stockpiles will be started with government assistance
this summer, these will be inadequate in terms of economic security, so it was

35
FOI‘OFFKJAI.USE¢NYLY
FOIIOFFKJAI.USE(NVLY

decided to promote stockpiles on a national basis. There is, however, disagree-
ment in both governmental and private sectors regarding fiscal measures, eco-
nomic feasibility, and the necessity of such stocks. Thus the emphasis of
MITI's preparatory work will be on informational activity and creation of a
theoretical framework; promotion of national stockpiles will be incorporated in
a new policy in FY-83 at the earliest.

Although there is no clear definition of rare metals. those involved include
cobalt, chrome, molybdenum, strontium, tungsten, and nickel. These are the
"vitamins” of modern economic society in that they bring out the utmost capa-
bilities of materials and equipment, and are indispensable in industrial pro-
ducts.

Many of these metals, however, are found only in specific regions, and in more
than a few cases they are concentrated in regions of political instability.

Therefore, the United States and the countries of Europe began long ago to
accumulate these metals to assure a stable supply from the perspective of
economic and military security. The United States, France and Sweden, for
example, have established large stockpiles on a national basis (a 3-year
supply in the United States) in preparation for a cutoff of supplies from
producing countries, and Britain and West Germany have also begun consideration
of national stocks. In such circumstances, it has been decided that Japan,
too, will finally begin private stockpiles with government aid in FY-82. To
accomplish this. the government will provide interest subsidies for two-thirds
of the interest on stockpile coats to the Metal Mining Agency (the stockpiles
will actually be run by an ad hoc association for metal stocks); the budget
impact will be 10.5 billion yen. It is a 9bmonths budget, so the stockpile is
to start in July; the immediate plan is to acquire lO-day stocks of nickel,
chrome, cobalt, molybdenum and tungsten.

Although MITI considers private stockpiles with government assistance to be a
step forward in terms of economic security, they will not be adequate from the
perspective of real strength, and MITI has begun promotion of national stock-
piles. But as in the case of the petroleum reserve, there will be problems in
that national reserves of resources naturally mean an increased burden on
national fiscal resources and on the private sector, and industrial circles
have a growing desire to engage in research and development of new materials in
order to escape dependence on rare metals.

COPYRIGHT: Nikkan Kogyo Shimbun 1982

Facilities Investment in 1982
Tokyo NIKKAN KOGYO SMIMBUN in Japanese 28 Apr 82 p 1
[Text] MITI has surveyed the 1982 facilities investment plans of the major
businesses under its jurisdiction, and it made a summary report to the financial
subgroup of the Industrial Structure Council on the 27th. The main points are

that (1) on a project basis, 1982 facilities investment plans total 11.926
trillion yen, up 8.2 percent from actual investment in 1981; (2) most of the

F0. OFFKJAJ.USE(NMLY
increase will be in steel, electric power and leasing--other industrial sectors
will increase only 0.3 percent; (3) investment in the last half of FY-8l was up
19.1 percent from the previous half, but that in the first half of 1982 will be
down 1.5 percent from the previous half, and the second half of 1982 will be up
2.0 percent from the previous half, so investment in FY-82 will be at about the
level of the second half of 1981.

On receiving this report, the financial subgroup pointed out, with regard to
1982 facilities investment, that (1) the rate of growth has fallen off; (2)
there is little desire to replace aging facilities; (3) the tendency toward
self-financing seen in recessions has begun to appear. The subgroup also
advised the minister of international trade and industry of the necessity of
flexible economic management policies and individual measures for the materials
industries.

COPYRIGHT: Nikkan Kogyo Shimbun 1982
Copper. Lead, Zinc Production
Tokyo NIKKAN KOGYO SHIHBUN in Japanese 28 Apr 82 p 5

[Text] This year's supply and demand estimates for copper, lead, zinc and other
metals came out on the 27th. According to MITI's report to the financial sub-
group of the Industrial Structure Council, copper production will be 1,071,000
tons (up 1.9 percent from estimated production for the previous year), and ship-
ments and domestic consumption will be 1,332,000 tons (down 1.6 percent). Lead
production will be 227,000 tons (no change), and shipments will be 256,000 tons
(down 4.3 percent). Zinc production will be 658,000 tons (down 0.6 percent)

and shipments will be 673,000 tons (down 2.9 percent). Because of the economic
downturn, demand cannot be expected to increase, and demand will show negative
growth in any case. But production was at a record high level last year, and
the estimate of a further increase is striking.

Estimated 1982 Nonferrous Metal Production and Domestic
Demand (shipments) in Thousands of Tons

Metal Year Produced Change from Shipped Change from
previous year previous year
Copper 1982 1,071.0 +1.92 1,332.0 -1.61
1981 1,051.0 +2.52 1,353.6 +2.22
Lead 1982 227.0 02 256.1 -&.32
1981 227.0 +2.21 267.72 +2.82
Zinc 1982 658.0 -0.62 673.2 -2.91
1981 662.0 -6.62 693.6 -1.51

This year's estimated supply of copper, including domestic production, imports
and reprocessed metal, will total 1,382,000 tons (down 28,000 tons from the

previous year). Demand, including 50,000 tons in exports as well as domestic
demand, will also total 1,382,000 tons. The overall supply will be down slight-

37
FOI‘OFFKJAI.USB(NVLY
FOR'OFFﬂﬂAl.USEIMVLY

1y from last year, but consignment refining for America's Anaconda Copper has
increased yearly since domestic production reached the million-ton level in
1980, and a new record is expected to be posted this year. It was thought
that the closing of important mines overseas would mean an ore shortage and
reduced production, but HITI says it will be possible to procure enough ore to
produce 1.7 nillion tons.

In 1981 demand was strong in the electrical wiring and electrical machinery
sector. but there were cutbacks intherolled copper sector; domestic demand
reached a record high. This year, however, good materials are lacking for both
electrical wire and rolled copper, and a slight reduction from last year is
expected. Export levels will remain unchanged. The refining capacity of the
eight copper producers is 1,247,000 tons. Each year refineries have operated
closer to full capacity; because of a slight increase in consignment refining,
they are expected to reach a high-level 85.9 percent of capacity this year.

This year's estimated lead supply, with 36,00 tons of imports in addition to
domestic production, is 263,000 tons (down 2,700 tons). Total demand, with
6,000 tons of exports in addition to domestic demand, is to be 263,000 tons
(down 9,800 tons). For the last 5 years lead production has stayed in a range
of about 22,000 tone; the tone of the market has not really changed.

The refinery capacity of the six lead companies is 297,000 tons per year and
this year, at least year, they will be operating at 76.41 percent of capacity.

This year's estimated zinc supply, with 37,000 tons of imports in addition to
domestic production, is 695,000 tons (up 2,500 tons). Total demand. with
36,000 tons of exports in addition to domestic demand, is to be 709,200 tone
(down 3,600 tons). Zinc production has fallen since 1980 because of depressed
demand and inadequate ore supplies, and will continue to decline this year.
Demand for galvanized iron sheeting. which accounts for 40 percent of domestic
zinc demand, remained low in 1981 because of depressed housing construction
and exports to the United States. Demand for galvanized iron sheets is not
expected to recover this year, and demand for zinc for copper rolling and die
casting will also remain poor; demand this year is expected to be even lower
than last year.

Thus the six zinc producers will operate at only 64.5 percent of their annual
refinery capacity of 1.2 million tons; this will be a record low.

COPYRIGHT: Nikkan Kogyo Shimbun 1982

9601
C50: 4106/102

38
FOI‘OFFMJAI.USE(NVLY
AUNHOBILE PARTS INDUSTRY'S STRUMLB INVESTIGATED

Tokyo NIKKEI SANGYO SHIMBUN in Japanese 23, 26 Feb, 2, 16. 17. 24, 30, 31 liar
82

[23 Feb 82 p 8]
Stanley Electric

[Text] Last suller Honda Motor Co developed an "electro gyrocator," a
nicroconputerized (nicon) driving guidance systen and surprised people in
the automotive industry. It was because Honda had steadily maintained a
negative attitude toward car electronics until the time of disclosure that
it was so shocking. However, the development of the systen was mre than a
mere symbol of Bonda's "transformation." It was in fact an event in which
the new start of Stanley Electric, which cooperated with Honda as a partner,
was announced to the world.

Stanley Electric is a major car lamp maker which receives part of its capital
from Honda Motor. The business picture was favorable until the first half of
last year. but the winds of fortune turned away starting about the time the
voluntary restriction of autonobile exports to the United States was decreed.
Requests fron automakers to cut the unit purchase price were steadily heard.
Furthermore, the company decided to open a plant in America at the request of
Bonds. which added to its liabilities. Accounts settled in Hatch of this
year are expected to show a 9.8-percent increase in sales compared to the
previous term. but a drastic drop in operational profits, by 28 percent to
3.1 billion yen. is also expected. "We nust do soeething; otherwise a
long—term strategy will be inconceivable," was the grunble overheard (Vice
President Tatsuni Doi), and Stanley strenuously undertook various naneuvere
to change the precarious condition in which the coepany found itself.

One of the "crystals" of the struggle was the "electro gyrocator" disclosed
by Honda. It is not an overstate-ant to claim that the device synboliaed the
start of a full-scale car electronics strategy as far as Stanley is concerned.

The "electro gyrocator" is a systee developed by renodeling inertial navigation
technology for aircraft to suit automobiles. It is the first car electronic
device to integrate a 16 bit microcomputer. The device accurately detects

the driving direction of the car and displays pictures of the driving track

39
FOR OMCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

on a TV type Braun tube. It is designed to indicate to the driver the current
position of the car and the shortest course to the destination when a
transparent sheet road map is placed over the screen. The microcomputer was
supplied by Alps Electric, but the system itself was developed by the
Honda-Stanley combination from the basic research to the final product.

Stanley is, after all. an old established semiconductor related product
manufacturer. Since the company began with the manufacture of resistors in
1935 and selenium rectifiers in 19(00, it has earned a reputation of its own
as a semiconductor maker. During the war, the company also dipped into the
manufacture of radar systems, and the accumulation of these experiences
blossomed as the "electro gyrocator." Hith the development of the system as
a springboard, Honda has embarked on a serious car electronic strategy lest
it be left behind the times, while Stanley has snuggled deep into Honda's
embrace. Honda also has a close relationship with Nippon Denso and Old.
Electric Industry, but it seems to have chosen Stanley as a valid partner.

Supplying semiconductor elements is one thing, but it is important to keep
secrets when developing strategic merchandise. Nippon Denson is a maker in the
TokyOta Motor group. That is why Honda, which holds 5 percent of Stanley's
stock, chose Stanley as a valid partner.

Since the development of the "electro gyrocator," the two companies have taken
joint steps in the development of basic technology. For instance, they have
begun to work to produce new car electronic devices as they exchange infor-
mation through engineers leased out for several maths. From the standpoint
of Stanley, the new partnership gives the company a chance to make the most
of semiconductor application technology and car lamp technology, and what is
more, it offers plenty of business opportunities. This arrangement "kills

two birds with one stone."

Nevertheless. it requires Stanley to be well "fortified with logic" to conduct
joint research with Honda's technical camp, which bodards Stanley with ideas.
Stanley has selected a special staff of engineers and has started to send them
to universities and research institutes in Japan and to private electronics
research institutes overseas. For the next few years, these engineers will
undertake intensive learning so that the competence of Stanley's technical
camp will be improved.

Furthermore, Stanley is presently negotiating with the largest American general
electrical machinery maker, 68 (General Electric), about working together on
car lamps. These business talks were initiated by 63, which indicated a
desire to supply lamps through Stanley to Honda" a passenger car plant in Ohio.
Stanley is steadily preparing for the deal, hoping to learn something of 63' s
advanced technology.

"He must waste no time in building up another foundation of business which
can be equal to the car lamp business." Stanley is frantically trying to
fortify its car electronics strategy. It my not be able to expect an
ismediate improvement in business results, but new business opportunities will

‘60
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
slip by before its eyes and it will be washed away by the waves of selection
unless it invests ahead of time. The environment surrounding Stanley is that
austere. .

[26 Feb 82 p 9]
Nifco

[Text] The largest automobile fastener (locking device) maker, Nifco, has
joined the fashion industry. The company has begun to sell plastic fasteners
for handbags and mountaineering sacks. Grins President Toshiaki Ogasawara:
"Although the same fasteners are used, the unit price of fasteners delivered
for fashion use rises every year almost without fail." Annual sales are still
barely around 500 million yen, but the company has set its heart on ”making
fasteners into its mainstay item in the near future at all costs."

Nifco is currently so busy as to be envied by other automobile parts makers.
This is because the demand for plastic fasteners has continuously increased due
to the progress of miniaturization and weight reduction of automobiles. For
example. in the case of the "Corona" of Toyota Motor, the fitting of plastic
fasteners which cost 680 yen per car a half-year ago is now 1630 yea. For
Honda Hotor's ”Accord," the same charge was inflated from 980 yen to 2500 yea.
Nevertheless. regarding fasteners for automobiles, a request for a cut in the
unit purchase price is persistently getting louder, while, on the other hand,
demand increases. True, it is busy, but the profits from the work are not as
great as they should be.

"Somehow we must realize larger profits if we want out business to grow,"
thought (president Ogasawara), and he made an entry into the fashion industry.
At present, automobile-related business is on the upswing, but the company
reportedly would beixudifficulty if this demand were to start slowing down.
According to President Ogasawara's explanation, the fashion industry is
fortunately a conglomeration of small businesses and therefore, he says, a
newcomer need not expect a great many counteroffensivea from existing makers.
It does not appear to be a dream for Nifco to incorporate the fashion
fastener business into its main sector much earlier than expected if the
correct approach is taken.

lecu is an automobile parts maker which was organized in 1967 by the joint
venture of the former Nichiei Bussan and a large American industrial fastener
maker. 119 (Illinois Tool works, Inc; capital subscription ratio 32.1 percent).
It has been is years since the cempany started, and in that short time the
company has established its status as the largest automobile fastener maker.
Partially the success is attributable to the lack of competitive makers, but
the significant factor was that the Nifco fasteners were a new idea.

The company introduced easy-to-fit plastic fasteners unthe world one after
another as products replacing metal bolts and nuts. The majority of the
products are derived from an idea similar to the "Columbus egg," and that's

what made the business a success. The sane concept seems to have driven the
company into the fashion industry. Besides automobile fasteners, the company

kl
FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

also manufacturers fasteners for keyboards of VTRs and computers, and lids for
plastic food and detergent containers. Profit can hardly be realized unless
the products are sold in large volume. since the unit price of each article

is low. Among the various channels where the company has tried to seek
business opportunities. the fasteners for the fashion industry appear to be
promising.

The price of fashion products rises with the change in style, and the price of
parts such as fasteners also follows that upward move. An effort to reduce the
cost of automobile fasteners will be reflected to some extent in the cut of

the unit purchase price. However, such a practice is rarely seen in dealing
with fasteners for fashion products. With luck, it is said, the same fasteners
wil‘ be purchased at a higher price than the previous transaction because of
the price hike in the products to which the fasteners are to be fitted.

As rosy as it may sound, in nerchandising, new ideas must be constantly created
to expand the level of demand. Hhen it runs out of ideas, it is certain that
Nifco's business growth will he dampened. with this notion, it is emphasizing
technical development. It frequently holds meetings and seminars in order to
concentrate the knowledge of the technical community. It is said it tries

to merchandise any trivial idea if it sounds interesting at all.

Ideas spouting from the mouths of the technical staff members are steadily
inflating: Let us not stop with handbags and mountaineering sacks but grab
the demand greedily for any parts that "fasten things together," starting
with fasteners for women's coats.

Likewise, the company entertains plans to advance eventually into overseas
markets. At present, it is not possible to advance directly into overseas
markets because of the relationship with ITH, the partner in the joint venture.
However, recently 1TH conveyed its intention: "We are not unwilling to reduce
the capital subscription ratio down to around 20 percent in the near future."
If 1TH were to drop its capital subscription to around 20 percent, President
Ogasawara, who holds 29.2 percent shares, would become the biggest shareholder
and c0uld launch his own overseas strategy.

How much fruit will be borne by the attempt of Nifco? The next 2 years will
be the critical time for the well being of the company.

[2 Mar 82 p 81‘
Aishin Seiki

[Text] The real ability of Aishin Seiki in the field of functional parts is
in the top class, needless to say, among the companies in the Toyota group
and also in the entire industry. Now, however, President Norio Nakai is
intensively studying the next course for the company to take. The president
remarked: "The conditions surrounding the automobile industry are so austere
as to necessitate the joining of Toyota Motor and Toyota Sales." The company
is preparing to ride out that hardship by implementing a plant reorganization
plan ahead of schedule and by speeding up development of new products.

h2
FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE(NVLY
All through Pebruary, President Nakai energetically visited the 98 cooperating
campanies that constitute the Central Regional Association for Cooperation
with Aishin. During his hardest schedule, he is said to have visited 10
companies in a day. he visits with them every year "to express gratitude

for the cooperation of the previous year and to exchange views with the top
administrators of the cooperating companies." however, the enthusiasm of
President Nakai has escalated this year compared to an ordinary year since the
company plans to achieve the goal of the "V85 project“ before the end of next
year.

The "V85 project" is a medium-term operational project of the company in which
“-85 was initially designated as the final year. however, judges President
Nakai: "we might be too late to be competitive if our goal is set on 1985
when, reportedly, the peak of the world's small car war will be reached." Last
year, the president accordingly gave the order to his company to realize the
project 2 years ahead of the original timetable.

The two major pillars of the project are plant reorganization and development
of new products. The company has seven plants, including the Anjo plant
(Anjo-shi, Aichi-lten) for production of home appliances. Reorganization will
be carried out in five plants engaged in the production of automobile parts
amng these holdings.

First of all, the water pulp and oil pulp production line of the Kariya plant
(Kariya-shi) will be transferred to a new workshop added on the grounds of the
Nishio plant (llishio-shi), and the emptied space of approximately 18,000
square meters in the Kariya plant will be utilized as a research and develop-
ment facility that includes a trial workshop. As a result, the trial workshop
of the Shintoyo plant (Toyota-shi) will mve to the Kariya plant, and the
mole production line of the Shintoyo plant (ﬁekinan-shi) will be transplanted
to this workshop site, while the assedaly line for parking brakes and seats
of the Shinkawa plant (Hekinan—shi) will be brought into the emptied former
mole production line.

The space created in the Shinkawa plant will be occupied by the seat adjuster
welding process which currently exists within the same plant, and the entied
space will be remodeled so as to double the size of the present mechatro
product workshop. Also, an addition will be built to the Shiroyama plant
(Nishio-shi) to increase the production of small-truck transmissions.
Production of transmissions for small trucks will be vested entirely with
Aishin, including those that were produced by Toyota Motor itself. The current
production of approxirmtely 20,000 transmissions per month will be inflated
more than two times to 60,000 to 45,000 units by the sunset of nut year.

Among the results of expeditious product development, a recent public announce-
ment of low-cost metal short fiber can be named. Mass production of this fiber
became possible for the first time in the world due to the "fine vibration
cutting method" developed by the company. The manufacturing cost of the fiber
was reduced to one-third to one-fifth of the conventional manufacturing process.
For the time being. the fiber will be mainly used as reinforcing material

to be mixed with synthetic resins, but the company expects it to be widely

1:3
Iron omcm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

used for blocking interfering radio waves with the further advancement of
car electronics because of its high electromagnetic wave protective effect.

It appears that this series of Aishin business operations for "initiative and
ultimate victory" which started last year will become increasingly sophisti-
cated in the future.

According to the medium-term operational project, after the achievement of the
"V85 project." involvement in merchandise which has a promising growth among
automobile parts has been explicitly selected. The main products of choice
are nechatronic products and passenger vehicle power steering systems.

Electronics is being introduced to the controls of mechanical parts produced
by the company, such as pups and automatic speed-change systems. Aishin is
trying to strengthen its electronical engineering ability in order to make
the most of it in manufacturing products. Last year, the company acquired
approximately 200,000 square meters of land in Ranbe, mate-ken, which was
also administered in expectation of building a plant base for mechatroaic
products "that will reach 60 percent of the entire production by 1990."

Furthemre, in respect to power steering, which is steadily improving in the
passenger vehicle installation ratio, the company is getting ready to expand
the canventional truck power steering business to cover power steering for
passenger vehicles. Aishin is also investigating a plan for construction of a
mass-production plant on approximately 330,000 square meters of company
property in Hande-shi, Aichi-lren, for when the passenger vehicle power steering
business is getting into smooth running order.

[16 Mar 82 p 9]
Toyota Gosei

[Text] "A cat on a hot tin roof" is the phrase which describes a leading
Toyota group parts miter that is due for rationalization under the severe
pressure of the drop in parts unit price.

In the past few years, the unit price of parts has dropped without choice every
half-term, in spite of the basic inflationary mood. Unless efforts for
rationalization are made more intensively than during the previous term,

parts makers will experience innediate cuts in profit. These days, even an
influential parts maker of the Toyota grOup such as Nippon Denso is reporting
the falling of the operational profit ratio just as others do. Every company
is encountering a time of hardship and perseverence in the face of "minus
growth." when Toyota Hotor is curtailing its car production.

Toyota Gosei. a major automobile rubber and plastic product manufacture, turned
into a lOO-billion-yen business in the fiscal term ending in April 1981, and
it will be in a minority group which expects an increase in profits also in
this term. Says President Sohei Kata: "It was a very austere environment

but we did well because, in a word, we eliminated waste by our all-out efforts

within the company . "

Ha
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Rationalization effects of the fiscal term ending in April 1979 produced ‘

1 billion yen. and 2 years later, in April 1981, 2 billion yen. In this fiscal
year. profits are expected to be 200-300 million yen more than the previous
figure. it considers that its higher profits from rationalization efforts
ccmpared to other companies in the same group derive from the fact that it

had that much "more waste to be eliminated than other companies" (Executive
Director Hiroshi Nozawa), which is a typical response that can be expected
from the honor student of the group. The company gives the logical explanation
that the rationalization effects are the source of current profits.

Toyota Gosei is a general parts maker which deals both in rubber and plastic
parts; the favorable wind of the exhaust gas regulatiOn and weight reduction

since 1973 helped the company to grow fast, enabling it to double its sales in
the past 8 years.

However, production increase after production increase left the previously
pursued QC (quality control) practice neglected. Says Executive Director
NOzawa: "Due to a quality control blank for as long as some 10 years. we
cultivated a high-growth type corpulent constitution." To deal with this,
the company moved the former vice president of Toyota Motor. Taiichi Ohno,
the founder of the Toyota-style production method, to the office of chairman
in 1978. and started to review the organization. personnel and production
line.

The first showing of a large profit due to rationalization, in 1979. coincided
with the introduction of the Toyota-style production method. It is because
the effects of the constitutional reform started 4 years ago now reflect on
the operational results as a specific remedy that the company takes a
relatively positive attitude in profit projections among the parts makers,
which are experiencing a sense of crises in the shadow of minus growth.

The rationalization theme of this fiscal year. started in May of last year,
was "rebuilding of sectors which do not break even in spite of the promising
outlook." The essential issue was to improve the margin of profit to be
earned by the Inazawa plant (Inazawa-shi, Aichi-ken), the main factory of
the plastic sector, which was a typical unprofitable sector.

The plant manufacturers steering wheels, which claim the top of the industry
in the market share, radiator grills and plastic fasteners. and establaihed
itself as Japan's largest plant that exclusively produces automobile plastic
products. Plastic products are manufactured on the basis of the same raw
material costs and almost the sane injection mold production capacity as in
other companies. "What determines the price ultimately is the difference in
labor costs," says Executive Director Nozawa. Due to the lack of technical
competition, a bloody price competition will be unfolded against other
companies.

In addition, rationalization is an imperative issue in the time of "slowdown“
in view of the fact that Toyota Motor is also trying to manufacture plastic
products in its own plants. Therefore, the reduction of cost at this time

25
ron omcm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

was dependent upon the improvement of the yield ratio by means of reducing
the defect rate. which was once said to have reached more than 10 percent.

To solve this problem. the comany spent half a year accomplishing the overall
transformation of the plant structure and production line. Says Executive
Director Nozawa: "It took only 1 year to cut the defect rate in half and
more. which edged this sector into profitability.“

As seen in the example of the Inazawa plant, the strength of this company is
found in its ability to draw a chart showing that "rationalization - profit."
Conversely. the company is vulnerable to the appeal from Toyota Motor: "There
is still room to reduce the unit price through rationalization."

In its present goal of strengthening its corporate structure, Toyota Gosei
currently receives lessons throughout the company through efforts to win the
Deming Prize this sunset. Explains Executive Director Nozawa: "Compared to
3 years ago, intra-corporate QC circles have doubled to 500 circles, and the
proposals that materialized have also doubled to over 1000 cases. The Deming
Prize will put a finishing touch to our efforts.”

A long—term project (5-year plan) being coupleted through rationalization on
the basis of these 00 activities naturally takes the form of a rolling plan
which will be yearly corrected. The framework of the project currently being
charted consists of: (1) expansion of the non-automotive sector from the
current 5 percent to 10 percent, (2) upgrading of the technical level by
importing technologies fro-a European and American chemical makers. and (3)
reviewing of profitability and future possibilities of parts which currently
list 12,000 items. -

All these programs are based upon the assumption of low automobile industry
growth, and are aimed at compensating for the slump with import technology,
development of new products. etc. "Rubber and plastic products cannot avoid
price competition. While we nurture a corporate structure strong enough to
endure price competition, we must, as a specialty maker, develop merchandise
which cannot be produced within Toyota Hotor's plants" (Executive Director
Nozawa).

Can Toyota casei. which has emerged as an honor student of rationalization,
also be an honor student of technology? Great hopes are placed on the company
as it stands as the nucleus of the non-metal parts field in the Toyota group.

[17 Mar 82 p 9)
[Koito Manufacturing]

[Text] The largest car lamp maker, Koito Manufacturing, succeeded last sun
in supplying FPC (flexible print control) to both the American Ford and Boeing
companies. The electronics sector, which was promoted as a link in the chain
of multiple operations, has now wan worldwide "recognition." with this
success from orders received as a mmentum, Koito is striving to challenge

the electronic parts field. President Toshiro Otake nude an explicit
statement: "At present, FPC is only slightly over 1 percent of the total

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

sales. but we intend to raise its sales to the level of 10 percent as soon
as possible."

It was 5 years ago that Koito began to explore the electronic parts field.
The company was motivated to create new products based upon car lamp
technology. At that time, as Koito was too technically immature to be able
to tell "left from right," the company concluded a technical tie-up agreement
with Oki Electric Industry and gained extensive knowledge of electronic
technology. FPC "recognition" by American business. for example, and thick
film lc (integrated circuit) resulted from the knowledge gained following the
technical agreement.

The company receives guidance from Oki Electric in the advanced semiconductor
technology field, but recently it has been consolidating cooperation with CID,
the major labor-saving machine maker. Koito is also a shareholder which holds
670,000 shares (share holding ratio, 1.7 percent) of CDK's outstanding stock.
CKD is a maker which handles a range of products from oil air pressure parts
to NC (numerical control) machine tools. In addition to the so far harmonious
alliance, Koito contemplates boosting cooperation in the areas of technology
and production. including production on commission basis.

What Koito is now pushing forward in cooperation with CKD is a car lamp
electronic control system. This system controls the volume of car lamp light.
adjusting to the outdoor darkness during driving. This is a coamodity demanded
more and more with the progress of car electronics. Up to now, the basis,
system has been purchased from Nippon Denso and aitachi Ltd. and Koito has

only installed the systems. The cooperatiOn with CKD makes it possible to
handle everything from the basic system to the final product.

FPC started under the guidance of Oki Electric, and the car lamp electronic
control system initiated through cooperation with CKD has gradually become
popular on the market and is being sold. With the deliveries of PFC to
American companies as a turning point, PFC inquiries are also starting to
come in once in a while from the domestic camera and watch industries. It is
certain that Knito's challenge is getting closer daily to the deserved time
of harvest, as seen by the rapid rise of an expectant mood making it ready
and ripe for inventing a new car electronic device based upon the lamp
electronic control system.

That is not all. Koito, along with its West German technical tie-up partner,
Heller, is preparing for advancement into the United States. where they plan
to handle electronic parts in the future in addition to car lamps. They
believe there is no reason to hold them back from entering into the American
electronic parts market using the present deliveries of goods to Ford and
Boeing as a lever.

With the West German Heller, Koito will proceed for the time being with joint
production (mainly knockdown) of car lamps using Heller's plant in the

United States. but the company hopes for a future commitment to produce
electronic parts in the joint venture company set up in the United States with
Heller.

h?
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Nevertheless. intense hardship is expected to make a success out of a
challenge into a new field. That necessitates the pursuit of rationalization
of the car lamp sector in order to squeeze out the funds essential for research
and development as much as possible. These days, when the demand for car

lamps continues to decline, it is not possible to invest a large sum of money
in research and development. Grulbles President Otake: "It's difficult to
make ends meet."

As a risky countermeasure to problems, Koito began to make various industrial
robots which make a small turn and placed them on the production line. "Robots
that cost as much as 8 figures in yen per unit are beyond our means. We are
making all kinds of robots using our wisdom acquired in the workshop."
(President Otake)

By the introduction of home-made industrial robots, Koito is bringing down the
production cost of car laws, and in the meantime, it is pushing efforts to
challenge in the new field. How far can the development of the new field go
from its current state 0f just about getting a clear prospect? Simply because
they are sailing out to the sea jam packed with various large and small car
electronic device makers, they must be prepared for counterattacks from the
existing makers when they attempt a quantitative expansion.

[210 Mar 82 p 8]
Ksyaba Industry

[Text] The potential to develop technologies ahead of others to meet the
market needs--this is an absolute must for the survival of parts makers in
the slowdown period. Today, after the end of high growth, the leading
companies at the top of the parts industry and practically in the direct line
of major autombile makers have no choice but to be on the move. visiting
other automobile makers and looking for new deals. In such a severe environ-
ment, it can hardly be said sufficient if one resorts only to the conventional
method of improving product quality and reducing costs.

Kayaha Industry, as of 1 March, decisively executed a structural reform with
essentials such as the new construction of an automobile technology research
institute and mechatro center. One of the purposes of the action taken as
precisely to build such a corporate setup as mentioned above.

The goal of the structural reform is focused on the following three points.
First, the organization will be reformed to a more market-oriented body than
before. The organization will be structured so as to be able to monitor
accurately the needs of customers and to take instant countermeasures.
Second, the organization will have a system—oriented approach. Early
assessment of needs will be wasted unless it is connected to the commencement
of specific parts production. In particular, there is an urgent need to
bolster the research and development sector. Third, it is necessary to cope
with the science of mechatronics (electronification of machines). A need has
emerged to build a center functioning as a central nervous system which
concentrates on developing oil pressure control systems.

146
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The director of the technical center, Pumio Ogasawara, emphasizes: "Each
corporate department has made separate efforts to deal with these issues in
the past. However, the need has emerged to deal with them more comprehensively
and systematically."

For example, let us look at automobile oil pressure buffers (shock absorbers),
the main commodity of the company. The internal mechanism of the shock
absorber has become complex since the microcomputer-controlled body-level
adjustment was adopted as a result of the progress of car electronics. It

is necessary. it appears, to pursue a course of action which will facilitate
in-depth research from the aspects of operability and safety, and consequently
to find the best way to improve the shock absorber. Although technical
development and research were pursued separately for two-wheelers and four-
wheelers at the North cifu plant and the South Gifu plant in the past, research
will be carried out using the experimental equipment of the North plant for
the time being following the establishment of the technical research
institute. However, the company plans to build an integral setup which will
unify the equipment and personnel of both plants in the future.

Of course, it is not that the company was left behind others in these new
technologies and new product development in the past. Some tens of oil
pressure devices for construction and industries are said to have been improved
every year by raising the pressure, reducing the size and saving energy.

Says the assistant director of the Accounting Department, Kazunori Abe: "Our
achievement was unnoticed because of the lack of advancement into fields quite
different from our existing products."

Kaysba Industry estimates sales of 150 billion yen for the fiscal year ending
this March. This will be the first time its sales have exceeded the
lOO-billion-yen level. After-tax profits will be 1.05 billion yen, which
appears to undercut the previous after-tax profits (1.088 billion yen).
However. the operational profits are estimated to reverse to a profit increase.
The fiscal year ending in March 1981, which showed an operational profit
decrease for the first time in 5 years, was strongly affected by the second
oil shock that invited a price hike of steel materials, 011 and aluminum.

In contrast, the fiscal year ending this March showed early results of the
rationalization activities promoted since the latter half of PY-80. Also,
the TQC (total quality control) activities introduced since the spring of
1981 won the operational award of the Deming Prize. with the perfection of
these corporate orders, the company intends to return the level of equipment
investment starting in PY-82 to that before FY-80 by appropriating about 5
billion yen on the basis of orders filled, compared to a ceiling of slightly
over 3 billion yen in FY-81. Equipment investment will be focused on: the
construction of an addition to the North Gifu plant, the main shock absorber
production plant which has been extended little by little; reorganization of
the production lines; and construction of an addition to the Mie plant, the
main plant for production of ship machinery and equipment such as hatch
covers and winch control systems.

'19
ron OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Kayaba Industry aggressively engages in overseas business operations. It has
local plants in three countries, Indonesia, Philippines and Thailand. In
Indonesia. the company started new construction of a specialty plant which
assembles final products in order to pursue production rationalization and
inrovement of capacity in conjunction with improvement of the Indonesian and
domestic made ratio. Also. concerning exports, which had been promoted mainly
by the overseas operation department, Executive Director Yozaburo Emmi
expresses his view: "We encourage all seven corporate sectors to investigate
the possibilities for overseas operations. In the past, there was a mod. so
to say, which allowed our people to indulge in domestic operations."

Ksyaba Industry will celebrate the 50th anniversary of its founding in 1985.
The sales goal for that year is 150 billion yen. Although it would like to
increase the sales of its oil pressure shock absorbers for two- and
four-wheeled vehicles, it is hoping to reduce its percentage of total sales
froa about 50 percent at present to a 40-percent level. It is an urgent task
to improve its technical capability in all fields of corporate operations in
order to achieve this goal.

[30 Her 82 p 9]
[Toys Radiator]

[Text] In Toyo Radiator's ﬂatano workshops, slightly away from the streets

of Hatano city at the foot of massive Ht Tanzawa. Kanagawa Prefecture, where
the severity of winter is beginning to ease, large radiators (heat exchangers)
for trucks and buses and for industrial machinery are daily produced at a

pace of 15,000 units/month. Furthermore, there is no doubt that this workshop
will increase its importance in the future for the independent maker, Toyo
Radiator.

President Hiroshi Iwasaki reveals a bleak outlook for the future quite
contrary to his usual gentle expression: "We are deterIIIined to confront the
business environment where a cold wind will continue to blow for some time

to come." It was only the fiscal year ending in March of last year when the
company's sales went above the ark of 30 billion yen, but an income drop of
about 2 billion yen is expected for the fiscal year ending this March. Forty
percent of the total sales are for autombile radiators, including oil coolers,
which breaks down to approximately 80 percent for trucks and buses and about
20 percent for passenger vehicles. It appears that the company received a
heavy blow with the drastic drop in demand for trucks.

That does not mean at all that President Iwasaki wants to "sit and wait" for
the wheels to turn in his favor. with the view that "price competition in
automobile radiators is very tough. but it serves as a strong stimulus for

the improvement of technology in respect to performance and weight
reduction." the percentage of the autombile radiator business has been raised
since last year. As a result, the company successfully received a new order
of radiators for Honda's "civic" passenger car and an order for the same
Honda's "City" last sunset. Also, Toyo Radiator expects success in
negotiations for a new passenger car radiator order to be received from

50
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Mitsubishi Motors. As the company projects "radiators for two-wheeled
vehicles offer a promising future market" besides the above-mentioned
prospects (President Iwasaki), it is prepared to undertake aggressive business
efforts. However, in concluding the business deal for a passenger vehicle
radiator order to be received from Mitsubishi Motors, the company was told as
a "condition" that a part of the truck radiator deal which had been almost
monopolized by Toyo Radiator should be transferred to other radiator makers.
The order to be received is evidently accompanied by delicate bargaining over
parts selectiOn and corflicting policies pursued by finished car makers.

Today's automobile parts business is no longer necessarily interchangeable
as it used to be, pursuing passenger vehicles if trucks were not profitable.
It is because the "company widened its horizon preparing to grow into a
business equipped with various heat exchanger technologies" (the same) that
Toyo Radiator launched a policy to "push efforts for passenger car radiators”
in spite of the situation wherein the domestic car production expansion is
inevitably capped. Taking this opportunity, it is trying to saw many seeds
that will bring fruit in the future, which can be described as a "head-on
breakthrough tactic." The structural reform of 1 April is aimed at enriching
the planning office.

Change of materials is also one of the hurdles that it must pass over, although
it will squeeze profits for a little while. Three or four years ago, the
company already changed the conventional copper material sheet metal to resin
sheet for passenger car radiator tanks. In the Nagoya workshop (Nagoya-shi),
the central plant for passenger car radiators. it was naturally necessary to
scrap the sheet metal equipment as a result of introducing resin solders. It
seems Toyo Radiator is largely transforming its manufacturing system due to

the expansion and diversification of customers and the change of material.

simultaneously, the company is now thinking of proceeding with a plan "aimed
at quantitative expansion by cultivating markets other than the automobile
market" (the same). Already, the company is close to monopolizing
receivable orders for construction machine radiators from Kamotsu Ltd.
However, in the future, Toyo Radiator will engage in aggressive business
operations in the field of electrical and industrial machine heat exchangers
for ships, emergency power generation systems and gas coolers. For the time
being, it is busy getting ready to propose a project for producing jointly
developed commodities for large electrical and industrial machine
manufacturers.

The president's order to "return to the original point of heat exchanger
technology before committing ourselves to the development of commodities and
cultivation of markets" is heard throughout the company. There are many
issues regarding the corporate order--for instance, "vitalization" of
technical research institutes and building of a non-automotive sales network.
HoweVer, its strength indeed partially stems from the fact that it is not
specializing in the car radiator business. At the Hatano workshop, which
single-handedly manufactures large products, it manufactures at most only
some 300 units in what it considers a high lot (production unit), and only a
few units in what it calls a low lot. This workshop. compared to the

51
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Nagoya Workshop. is rich in knowhow regarding miniproduction of various
types of goods.

The Hatano Horkshop plans to expand the laboratory and has also scheduled an
investigation into a high-efficiency technique for miniproduction of various
types of goods in "-82. The radiator for a lZO—ton dumptruck is a large
product that weighs 1 ton. Toyo Radiator can be regarded as a slightly

unusual corporation among the automobile parts makers, which usually like to
stake the business on quantity. Whether this characteristic can be the
"weapon" of the company in the future may depend upon whether or not the
effective strength of the conpany has the capacity to implement the president's

policy.
[31 Mar 82 p 9]
Shows Manufacturing

[Text] "This year will be the year of a more accelerated overseas strategy."
Showa Manufacturing, a shock absorber maker of the Honda Motor group, has begun
to move rapidly in preparation for new advancement overseas. Up until now,

the company supported local production concurrent with parent Honda's advance-
nent overseas. Hith Honda's active interest in producing two-wheelers
overseas, the company had no choice but to go abroad, particularly to the
Southeast Asian nations which do not approve shock absorbers unless made
locally.

However, in contrast to the previous advancement overseas, which was primarily
to Southeast Asian nations such as Formsa, Thailand, Indonesia and the
Philippines, the recent overseas strategy has become more global. The current
first try was the start of production in Brazil: Showa do Brasil Limited,

an incorporation established by 68 percent investment of Shows, 49 percent

of Honda and 3 percent of local capital. A plant being built in Hanaus by
this local company will be completed and operated for the first time this
June. At present the production goal is set on 20,000 shock absorbers for
Honda's ﬁlo-wheelers.

Furthermore, for two-wheelers, local production of shock absorbers in Nigeria,
Saudi Arabia, Africa and the Middle East has been chosen as the subject for
investigation. Also, in view of the fact that Honda Hater will start
passenger car production in Ohio, in the United States, at the end of this
year, the company sits ready for the move: "If they ask us to move into the
United States, we must give it serious consideration.“ For the present,
however, Showa plans to deal with the need by exporting from Japan as long
as the 11.5. import duty rate remains at the current level of 3.3 percent,

for fear that the production costs will be comparatively high once it jumps
into production in America.

On the other hand, in Southeast Asia, the company will build a new plant in

Indonesia, and will double the production capacity in that country at one
stroke. Already, a new plant site of approximately 26,000 square meters has

52
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
been purchased. With the completion of the new plant, the monthly production
capacity will jump from 15,000 up to 60,000 shock absorbers for two-wheelers.

Shows Manufacturing estimates the sales of the fiscal year ending this ﬂay

to be 45 billion yen, a 9.2-percent increase over the previous period (4l.l97
billion yen). The financial status is expected to reflect an increase in
income and an increase in profits, which amounts to an operational profit of'
1.68 billion yen (fiscal year ending previous Hay, 1.35 billion yen) and
after-tax profit of 710 million yen (the same term, 669 million yen). The

ratio of sales of shock absorbers for two-wheelers and four-wheelers is about
6:10.

Sales according to customer indicate that Honda Pbtor takes an ovewhelming

68 percent of the sales, followed in order by 12 percent for Suzuki Motor, 7
percent for Kawasaki Heavy Industries and 5 percent for Yamaha tbtor. Although
it sees some increase in deliveries to Fuji Heavy Industries and Toyo Kogyo,
Showa's biggest domestic problem is the expansion of the four-wheeler market.
Fortunately, from the beginning the company adopted the strat system

essential for PP (front engine, front drive) cars, which are about to become
the mainstream of small vehicles worldwide, to the production line of shock
absorbers for four-wheelers. This feature can be said to be the ultimate
strength of the company.

Nevertheless, "when dealing with different automakers, equith which
accomodates each customer's need must be enhanced" (Executive Director
Tashiro). Therefore, the company is investigating the feasibility of building
additional plants. It will undertake the construction under the policy of
appropriating approximately double the amount of depreciation expenses to
equipment investment, which interprets an estimated appropriation of 2.4
billion yen for the fiscal year ending this May and about the same for the
following term. The appropriation will be largely divided into normal
equipment investment, which amunts to the sum within the depreciation
expenses, and investment which takes the remaining funds for in-house
promotion of production.

In-house promotion of production is imperative for improvement of technology
and product quality, and has the merit of convenience in changing the quality
of materials. However, the pursuit of this action in this company does not
take the form of eliminating employment for smaller subcontractors, but rather
the form of handling at home the process that had been contracted out to
larger makers.

Showa Hanufacturing's plants are spread out in three locations. Those three
are: the Saitama plant (Gyoda-shi, Saitama-ken) focusing on four-wheeler
shock absorbers, the Nogoya plant (Kasugai-shi, Aichi-ken) specializing in
two—wheeler shock absorbers, and the Asaba plant (Asaba-cho, Shizuoka-ken)
producing two-wheeler frontforks completely from raw material to assedwly.

Under this setup, the research and development sector is subdivided into a
two-wheeler section in the Asaba plant and a four-wheeler section in the
Sniram plant, and each section retains a staff of about 100 at present. The

53
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOII OFFICIAL [Isl-Z ONLY

company injects 1.5 billion yen per year for technical developmnt expenditure.
However. in the present state of the company, it is very difficult to hope for
development of an outstanding comdity which can con-and the four-wheeler
market, although a new tendency is seen in tun-wheelers, such as integration

of an oil cushion unit in the rear.

If that is the limitation, how far will sales to domestic automakers go in
the days to cone, after the past inch-by-inch progress in expanding the Iarket
share, granting that the colpany can follow its original path to a certain
extent in overseas strategy? That holds the key. so to speak, to the next
great stride of Shova Manufacturing Conny.

COPYRIGHT: Nippon Keizai Shinbunsha 1982

8940
cs0: 4106/96

Sh
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
PROBLEMS OF AUTOMOBILE PARTS INDUSTRY DISCUSSED

Tokyo NIKKEI SANGYO SHIHBUN in Japanese 6, 7, 14. 20. 21 Apr 82
[6 Apr 82 p 8]

Nippon Oil Seal Industry

[Text] "Nonautomotive" Applications To Be Increased to 50 Percent; Coopera-
tive System with Subsidiary Companies a Problem

'Whe 0.8. demand has cooled more than expected, so an effort to increase
production at the plant on site has come to a standstill," President Takaaachi
Ueyama of Nippon Oil Seal Industry (NOR) is blue these days. After the plant
was recognized last year by General Motors as the best parts plant, NOK's
confidence in its technology related to oil seal devices was greatly enhanced.
Therefore, the fact that it cannot put this confidence to good use in the 0.8.
market is especially irritating.

Domestic Market To Be Developed

Chairman Hasaware Tsuru of "OK. who serves as chairman of the Association of
Japanese Automobile Parts Industry. has constantly insisted that "the auto-
mobile psrts makers must have their eyes not only on the domestic market but
also on the overseas market and must prepare themselves to cope with an era
of internationalization." Therefore. it is natural that President Ueyama
should be concerned about production and sales in the European and American
markets. in addition to the marketsinthe industrializing nations such as
Singapore and Brazil. However, his plan is to "strengthen the domestic
system further” while leaving overseas strategy to Chairman Tsuru to handle.

NOK hired approximately 1,000 graduates of the new school system in 1965. Its
high rate of growth was marveled at by interested business circles, because
the number of graduates hired by Toyota in the same year was 600 or so.

However, the number of its staff peaked at 5.800 in 1973 and has been on the
decline since then. The number is approximately 3,300 today. President
Ueyama explains the direction in which the business management is steering:
"He will try to develop by maintaining the present system."

55
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The goal for increasing production in the recent years has been set at an
annual rate.of 10 percent, which is quite high. However, accomplishment of
this goal is to be attempted through a companywide TQC (total quality control)
drive and an aggressive investment in equipment as leverage. As part of its
intermediate-range management project of the first period from 1977 to 1979.
the company, centered around its plants, implemented the following specific
items: 1) innovation in operational method and production flow. 2) full
utilization of the existing facilities in production, and 3) development of
software for the new rational production format. Starting in 1980, estab-
lishment of an efficient system for each department, including headquarters,
management, and the design department. was undertaken patterned after this
model. This movement was called the 12 movement (from the initials of "Isoro
Zero" meaning "no freeloaders"). The 12 movement at the plants is leading
other departments, so the utilization rate of the existing facilities is
nearing the limit.

Therefore. in 1981, approximately 4.6 billion yen was invested in facilities
centered around automatic and labor-saving machines. This amounted to an
increase of about 90 percent over the previous year. 'ﬁhe investments to be
made in 1982 and the following years are also aimed at the same level or
higher" is the plan (President Ueyama).

Fields of Activity To Be Adjusted

"Since the growth of the automobile industry has reached a bending point“
(Chairman Tsuru) "we are reevaluating our merchandise series, and cultivation
of new capital products is going to be one of our major goals" (President
Ueyama). The capital products of “OK, oil seals, hold a large share.
approximately 80 percent, of the domestic automobile market. However. its
growth rate will be dragged along by the growth rate of the automobile, so the
rapid growth enjoyed in the past cannot be expected any more. Therefore. the
company is planning to exert more efforts in the development and expansion of
the sales of general industrial products such as industrial rubber products
(including synthetic rubber) and valves, which occupy approximately A0
percent of the total sales today, and to bring them up within 3 years or so
to the same level as the products for automobile applications (including
everything besides seals).

The problem that it may encounter in doing so concerns how to maintain a
cooperative relationship with its subsidiary companies. The company has so
far established six subsidiary companies domestically, including Eagle
Industry, which manufactures plant machinery (headquarters: Tokyo; president:
Kazushiro Tsuruda; capital: 540 million yen) and Nippon Hechatron (phonetic)
which manufactures electronics parts and special synthetic rubber
(headQuarters: Tokyo; president: Ikuo Tanaka; capital: 600 million yen).

These enterprises were built one after another upon the foundation of the seal
technology and in cooperation, in part, with overseas enterprises. However,
they constitute important strongholds to which NOK has entrusted its advanced
technological fields. Therefore, how the product fields will be distributed
between NOR itself and its subsidiary companies in the future and how well it
will be able to maintain good relations with its subsidiary companies seem

to be a problem.

56
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Profit Power Up

The long-range goal of NOR consistsixlpart of achieving by 1984 a total sales
amounting to 120 billion yen (estimated sales in the first quarter of 1982 is
83 billion yen), self-capital rate of more than 50 percent (67 percent in the
first quarter of 1982), and an ordinary profit rate of more than 6 percent
(5.8 percent in the first quarter of 1982). Moreover, the oil seals in the
products composition will be reduced to 63-45 percent (47 percent today; its
total group composition is to be reduced from 30 percent to approximately 25
percent) and the proportion of general industrial machinery will be
increased. President Ueyaaa's dream of expansion is very colorful: "It should
be interesting to be involved in electronics parts for cameras and copying
machines."

NOK has developed its enterprise along the line of utilizing the technological
knowhow gained through the development of a "simple" part. the oil seal, to
the fullest extent, because the company was able to appropriate the profit
made thrOugh increased production of seals to the development of the new
fields. However, reliance on the profit from seals in the future cannot work
any note. All efforts must be concentrated on increasing the profit through
sales of industrial machinery.

[7 Apr 82 p 10]
Kidogawa Rubber Industry

[Text] Production Line Arrangement Reevaluated; System for Development of New
Products Organized

The main office plant of Kidogawa Rubber Industry is located in Naganuma-cho,
Chiba City. The empty spaces marked here and there by tape inside the plant.
in which the odor peculiar to rubber is wafted, were very conspicuous. This
cempany is currently undergoing a reevaluation of the production lines at its
three plants: the Chiba plant, which is the main office plant; the Haoka plant
located at Haoka City, Tbchigi Prefecture; and the Kyushu plant located at
Nakazu City, Oita Prefecture. A portion of the production facilities at the
Chiba plant were transferred to the Haoka plant; then the utilization of the
vacant spaces thus created in conjunction with the new layout for the
production line of the Chiba plant was being reevaluated.

To Lower the Cost

President Shojiro Fujita declared that "increasing the sales while lowering
the cost" is the only way to ride out the harsh environment surrounding the
automobile industry. For this purpose, after the cost reduction committee
which was started last spring, the company established a layout committee to
reevaluate the production line layout at these three plants.

According to the president of the Chiba plant, Executive Director Noboru
Sato: "During the rapid growth period we were pressed by the need for

57
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

production equipment. so the necessary equipment was installed wherever space
could be found inside the plant." Now that a period of steady growth has
arrived. the demand for cost down made by the automobile makers has been
getting stronger and stronger, and a drastic reevaluation of the plant layout
has become necessary. Because if the production equipment is not arranged
properly. circulation will be poor and pileup of work pieces will increase,
which is connected directly to the cost up. "An era has arrived in which
investment in equipment must be based on a long-range plan which looks far
ahead into the future," says Executive Director Tomiichiro Enami. The list
of products of Kidogawa Rubber includes antivibration parts such as engine
mount and strut mount, automobile body parts such as weather strips used on
the doors, windows. and trunk; bumper parts, various types of hoses, and the
construction materials.

To Expand Sales to Other Automakers Besides Nissan

Reevaluation of the plant layout is centered around readjustment of the list
of products for each plant and concentration of the entire process from
production to inspection of each item in one place. lbreover, introduction of
labor-saving production equipment and undertaking internally the finishing
process which used to be carried out by the subcontractors are to be pushed
forward. This company is one of the enterprises subjected to joint settlement
of account with Nissan Motors. Its dependence on the Nissan grOup, if
expressed in terms of its sales, is as high as 90 percent. Nissan has demanded
a cost down of 10 percent within 3 years. However. "the cost—down effect has
already begun to show in overall performance," according to President Fajita.

As to the other probl- of Kidogawa Rubber, consisting of boosting the sales,
the following specific measures are considered the keys: 1) expanding the
sales of existing products, and 2) developing new products. The president
spoke of the company's aspiration as follows: "We would like to improve the
performance of the functions of our products so that sales may be expanded to
automobile makers other than Nissan and also the sales of nonautomtive parts
expanded at the same time. We already have the potential."

As part of an effort to build a research and development system, the
construction of a technical development center, into which approximtely 1
billion yen has already been invested, was finished by the end of March. The
Staffs of a number of departments such as technical development, design, and
trial manufacture—160 in nuﬁer-n-have been concentrated in the center. and the
system is beginning to take shape. The center consists of a four-story
reinforced concrete building (with a total floor space of 6,600 square meters).
On the first floor are the dynamic testing laboratories; the second floor
contains the trial manufacturing laboratories; the third floor, the static

test laboratories; and the fourth floor, product design laboratories, offices,
and merchandise display rooms.

Development of Construction Hateriels

This year. an additional 300 million yen has been budgeted for the purchase
of testing equipment. At present. the merchandise list consist of

58
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
approximately 60 percent rubber products and approximately 100 percent resin
products. The major objectives of the development include bringing down: the
cost of rubber products and improving the performance of the resin products.

As to the new products, an increase in the d-and for the feruspan (phonetic)
expansion joint used in the joints of roads can be expected. Its sales'in the
first quarter of 1982 are estimated at 28 million yen, which is only a very
small fraction of the company total sales of 68.7 billion yen for the same
period today. However. negotiations are under way for exporting it to Korea.
The company wants to increase the sales of feruspan and other construction
materials, such as window frame sealing material. plus the sales of autombile
parts to automobile makers other than Nissan in the first quarter of 1983 to
14 percent of the total company sales (it is estimated at 11 percent in the
first quarter of 1982).

Reevaluation and rationalization of the layout of the production lines and

the development of new products--these operational efforts are expected to show
a great effect in l or 2 years. However, President Pujita is anticipating

a potential development of the company thrOugh intracompany competition. in
its good sense, between the rubber and the resin teclmologists.

[14 Apr 82 p 11]
Ichimitsu Industry

[Text] To lower the Cost Through TQC; To Increase the Added Value of Capital
Merchandise

Starting in February this year, Ichimitsu Industry began to deliver parts such
as rearview mirrors to Honda Motor Co. Thus it has business interaction with
all but Isuzu Motors of the 11 domestic automobile makers. Its dependence

on the Nissan group, including Nissan Motors, Nissan Diesel and Fuji Heavy
Industries, is still heavy, 60 percent of its total sales. However, its urket
is being expanded gradually.

Profit Power Inferior

Nevarthelesa, its profit picture is quite bleak. With a total sales in the
previous quarter of 66 billion yen, the ordinary profit was 1.35 billion yen
and the after-tax profit was 670 million yen. The profit mde by the Koito
plant, thus. was inferior to the other companies in the same line of business.
The company drafted the following four consolidated measures as the new year's
gniaeuues for the purpose of further strengthening the structure of the
enterprise: 1) lower the overall original cost, 2) implement 'rqc (total
Quality control). 3) drive for technological development, and It) strengthen
the management of establishing the new products.

Development of new products and nnagement for their establishment in
particular are important themes adopted today. President Tetsuya Tsukatani
anticipates that "the sales will be increased through improved product

59
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

performance and greater added value." Mirrors vhose angle can be set by
remote control and Iirrors with wipers have been developed and co-ercialized.

Prevention of Trouble

The mat recent trend in the autombile lamp is the great variety of headlamps.
Pron round to square to unusual shapes, the variety of mirrors follows the
steps of the autombile model engines, and they are characterized by smaller
production of a larger variety. It is essential to reduce the number of
troubles that may occur during the process of designing and producing
according to the basic design of an automobile maker, especially during the
early production stage. Therefore. management for starting a new product has
becone more inportant than ever.

Efforts to lower the cost such as VA (value analysis) and VB (value engineering)
introduced in the past are no longer limited to the production stage alone;
lore detailed analysis and control have becone essential. ImplementatiOn

of 106 was introduced to serve as an aid and it is to be implemented company-
wide starting in April. In order to achieve thoroughness in reeducating

the staff on matters related to TQC, instructing lecturers have been engaged.

The makeup of Ichinitsu Industry's merchandise sales is as follows: Lamps
occupy more than 60 percent; mirrors, sore than 20 percent, and the total
sales of these two categories come to nearly 90 percent of the total sales.
The balance, slightly lore than 10 percent, consists of seat adjusters.
ashtrays, wipers, and wheel covers. At present, the sales of the capital
products including lamps and mirrors are on the rise; "investment in equipment
has been concentrated on the capital products; and the sales are also
concentrated on the capital products," according to President Tsukatani.

Changes for the Horse in the profit picture case as a result of high-level
investment in equipnent of over 6 billion yen in the years 1980 and 1981,

and a consequent rise in the repayment burden plus a rise in the raw material
cost and personnel expenditure which could not be absorbed all at once. of
the funds invested in equipment, the investment in molds in particular
increased considerably since 1979 as a result of diversification of lamp
shapes. The 1985 investnent in equipnent is expected to stop at the level of
3 billion yen, of which, 1 billion yen is to be earmarked for general
equipment and the balance for the mlds.

A production system capable of producing a large variety of products has
already been established. The Isehara plant located at Isehara City, Kanagawa
Prefecture, nanufactures sealed beam lamps. standard headlamps, and seat
adjusters. The Hasuda plant in Saitama Prefecture specializes in the
production of headlamps of unusual shapes. The Fujioka plant in Gun-a
Prefecture is in charge of manufacturing rearviev mirrors, lamps. wipers,

resin products, and ashtrays. The three plants constitute the principle
plants of the company. There are two other plants: Oizumi plant and
Nakazugaua plant located in Gunma Prefecture and Gifu Prefecture, respectively.

60
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Oizumi plant produces lamps, while Nakazugawa plant produces small lamps,
various types of switches, and parts for household electric appliances.

Centered Around the Principle Products Today

The operating rate of a portion of the production lines has become worse as a
reSult of diversification of the headlamps, so reevaluation of the production
lines will be necessary. A round of large-scale investment in equipment,
however, has just been completed. The urgent need for the company at the
present stage may be said to consist of cost down and the development of new
products. However, President Tsukatani expressed the company's fighting
posture centered around the principle products it produces today: "We do

not intend to diversify into a brand-new field which does not have any
connection with our present merchandise structure. Us will stick with the
existing merchandise and push for its improvement."

[20 Apr 82 p 8]
Kokusan Metal Industry

[Text] Reduce Subcontracted work to 5 Percent; Select Subcontractors Carefully
To Achieve Division of Work

Kokusan Metal Industry (headquarters: Tokyo; president: Yasukura Mada;
capital: 220 million yen). which manufactures door handles and automobile
keys mainly for Nissan Motors, will officially start operation of its long-
awaited Yokohama plant (Kanezawa-ku, Yokohama City) on the 23d of this month.
Construction work for this plant was started in October last year at a site
approximately 10,000 square meters in area. The two-story building, with a
total floor space of 5,300 square meters, was built at a cost of 2.2 billion
yen. The plant has a production facility capable of manufacturing 100,000
sets of automobile keys per month, and a production line capable of producing
50.000 steering locks with keys per month.

Yokohama Plant Becomes the Principle Plant

Between the 23d of this month, when the completion ceremony is held, and the
6th of next month, transfer of the key set manufacturing equipment (monthly
production capacity of 200,000 sets) from the main office plant (Ota-ku.
metropolitan Tokyo) will be completed. Then, the Yokohama plant will
literally become the principle plant of Kokusan Metal. Moreover, by 1985.
production of the steering lock is planned to be expanded to 300,000 items

a month, and second-stage construction work involving a new casting process
as part of a continuous production system will be undertaken starting next
year.

Kokusan Metal used to carry out assembly of keys and final finishing work at
its main office plant. Part of the process was carried out at the Tsurumi
plant (Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama City), and approximately 15 percent of the total
machining work used to be done by subcontractors. At the Yokohama plant, the
entire process of key set production from the raw material, machining, to the

61
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

final assedily will be carried out in a continuous production system. As a
result. the work done by the subcontractors will be reduced to approximately
5 percent, and “the production efficiency will be improved significantly"
(Executive Director Toshio Sugimori).

The subcontractors. slightly less than 20 in number. which used to get work
from the main office plant will have no further business interaction with the
plant in the future. "The consent of all subcontractors has been obtained."
according to Executive Director Toahio Sugimori.

At the Gunma plant (Habbayashi city. Gunma Prefecture). which is the principle
plant manufacturing door handles. those parts having relatively large
production volume will be manufactured internally and those parts having a
relatively small volume will be mnufactured by the subcontractors. Namely. a
"divided work system" will be employed and implemented thoroughly. In other
words. the role of a complementary plant is being reevaluated and good
subcontractors are being screened. lbre than 30 subcontractors belonging to
the Gunma Plant Cooperative Association will be "processed" in turn, and only
those with a competitive edge will be retained in the future.

Overseas Expansion

"As 10ng as the nuwer of passenger cars manufactured domestically cannot

grow rapidly. the autombile parts makers are obliged to renovate their
structures" (President Hada). A big reconstruction project within Kokusan
Metal is expected to be carried out rigorously in the future. however. just
doing this may not be sufficient to prepare for the future. Take the overseas
strategy. for example. zinc alloy door handles are being exported to the Ford
Motor Co at the rate of 100.000 per month. and a resin handle. "neobrite,"
having metallic luster, developed by this cowany, received a request from
General Motors to submit seamles for inspection. However. the future of
product exports is expected to be limited.

Therefore, for the present. overseas expansion will be focused on two areas in
Europe where the technical cooperation between the automakers of Japan and the
United States. which have actual export results. is in full bloom. "Overseas
expansion could not be contemplated in the past due to the restrictions of the
company systn. However, under the present situation in which trade frictions
are problematic and increasingly mre accoaplished automakers are attempting
overseas expansion, we will make preparations for overseas expansion at any
rate" (Executive Director Sugimri). Overseas offices will be established

and staffed. and information will be gathered and market conditions investi-
gated. On the other hand. technical cooperation and joint production ventures
are also being contemplated.

Fight with Quality

The long-range strategy of Kokusan Hetal consists of. domestically.

implementation of a continuous production system for realizing efficient
production incorporated with the readjustment of subcontracting system. and

62
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
overseas, development of production bases. In addition, development of new
technology and new products such as the resin door handle is also considered
indispensable for improving the competitive edge. Therefore, the space
vacated in the main office plant, from which the key set production lines have
been removed and transferred to the Yokohama plant, will be turned into an
intensive research center consisting of the main company office and the R&D
department.

It is expected that automobile door locks operated electronically will soon
appear. Kokusan Metal. which relied heretofore on mechanical locks only, has
also begun to undertake the development of electronic door locks. This spring,
90 new graduates were hired. As a result, the total number of staff has
increased to 1,370. However, on matters related to human power, too, Kokuaan
Metal chooses to fight with quality rather than with quantity.

[21 Apr 82 p 10]
Nippon Carburetor Co

[Text] Pushing Unmanned and Automatic Equipment; Conditions for Expansion into
United States Being Prepared Steadily

-Nippon Carburetor Co saved 12 percent of its operational expenditure recently
through an emergency countermeasure consisting of zero overtime in the
operations department and a 70 percent cut in overtime in the indirect depart-
ment. This is because the volume of orders began to show a decline when its
major customers such as Nissan Motors and Toyota Motors began to reduce
production in the second quarter of this year.

Confident of Profit Power

Managing Director Tskeo(?) Kobayashi stressed: "There will be absolutely no
danger of going in the red if only the situation is handled shrewdly,
anticipating bad times when the market is good, and anticipating a worse
situation when it is bad." In the background of this was the first oil shock
and the measures taken to strengthen the structure of the enterprise. As
long as the measures are maintained well in the future, it is confident of its
profit power, which cannot be swayed so easily.

To be sure, it received a painful blow from the first oil shock, which
exposed the weakness of the structure of the enterprise, and a loss was
registered in the first quarter of 1976. After this failure, it aggressively
implemented various measures to strengthen the structure of the enterprise
and to rationalize the management.

First of all, regarding investment in equipment, it embarked on making
equipment which requires only one-third of what used to be required in
expenditure, area, and persOnnel. To do this, equipment design and fabrication

of machinery were undertaken internally as much as possible, and it started
making equipment in accordance with the structure of the company. Second,

63
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

it pushed ahead a completely labor-saving system. The company set up a
guideline to achieve 8 percent labor-saving every 6 months, and the

guideline is still in force today. More than 15 percent labor-saving is
achieved every year. when a new product is to be manufactured. a new standard
time is assigned to it by the manufacturing department. and 8 percent labor-
saving based on this standard will be attempted every 6 months.

Lively Proposals

These activities are supported by the innovative proposals made by the
employees. The term TQC (total quality control) is not used at Nippon
Carburetor Co. However, it set the goal of having an average of 2.7 innovative
proposals per employee per month, and 3 innovative proposals per mloyee

per month are said to be submitted today. Managing Director Kobayashi said
proudly: "The employees take 8 percent labor-saving and writing innovative
proposals as a matter of course."

Moreover, they have improved the flow of production stage through the use of
the KP (carburetor product) format. which is similar to the ”billboard format"
of Toyota Motors. As a result, the inventory assets have been lowered to 0.47
of the mnthly sales volume today. The present goal is to lower it to 0.3.

Starting this year, the investment in equipment will emphasize unmanning and
automation of the production line in general. and automation of the asseably
line in particular. Automation of the production line has the merits of
lowering the cost and increasing the quality. The company is attempting to
"kill two birds with one stone," by amlting preparations for future overseas
operations. It is definitely interested in making inroads into the 0.8.
urket. However, in order to be able to compete with the carburetor made
internally by the 0.8. automobile makers, reducing cost and improving quality
by unmanning and autonmtion have become the necessary conditions.

As to making inroads into the u.s. market, it has successfully negotiated

the export of a total of approxiutely 31,000 carburetors for ordinary engines
to two companies: a lawn mwer and generator maker and a motorboat maker.
Based on these actual results, they have drafted a slow but steady schedule
consisting, for the present, of dispatching resident staff members,
establishing service stations, and construction of a maintenance plant and

assembly plant .

President Inejiro Yoshida observes: "The aftereffect of this worldwide compact
car war will no doubt drag the parts industry into it. He must expect to

come face to face with tougher and tougher problems, and to be able to ride out
these crises. the overall strength of the enterprise, including technical
development, improved quality, reduced cost. improved productivity and expanded
sales, is what speaks.”

Emphasis on Electronic Control

In the area of new product development, popularization of the electronic
carburetor (feedback carburetor) is being ewhasized. A feedback carburetor

6h
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
made by another maker is being adopted and used on engines having a large
amount of exhaust gas as an antipollution measure. The key to popularization
in compact cars hinges on the balance between fuel economy and cost. However.
this company believes it will become popular scener or later. The company
has completed 90 percent of the development work. and it is at the stage of
being tested on the actual cars by the automobile nkers.

”He would like to increase the number of our customers by taking superior
products which the automobile makers will accept eagerly and to which our
rivals will consent" (Managing Director Kobayashi). The activities related
to the improvement of quality and reduction of cost are expected to become

much busier as long as the company is determined to compete with an emphasis
on product quality.

COPYRIGHT: Nikkei Sanyo Simbunsha 1982

9113
cso: 1.1061103 an)

65
FOR OFHCIAI. USE ONLY