FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10298
3 February 1982

West Europe Report

(FOUO 6/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency.
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines. editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
I] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. "here no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the U.S. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
NEST EUROPE REPORT
(rouo 6/82)

CONTENTS

economic
FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF GERMANY

Steel Induatry 'Outaidera ' Plan Survival Tactica
(Michael Gntemnn; CAPITAL, Dec Bl)

FRANCE
Delore Interviewed on 'Brake on High Salariea'
(Jacquea Delora Interview L'EXPRBSS, b Dec 81) . . . . . . . . .
POLITICAL
FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF GERMANY

Possible SPD Chancellor Candidatea Aaaeaaed
(Nartin Bernatorf; CAPITAL, Jan 82) ..

FRANCE

Poll Bxaninea Attitudea on International Affairs
(LATITUDE AIIJOURD'IIUI. Nov 81) ..........................

SPAIN

Alleged Plotting Behind 'Hanifeato of the 100' Deacribed
(cmto 16. 21Mc81)OOOOOIOOOOOOOIOOOOOOOOOOOIOOCOOOOOO

Military. Reporter. Fleet To Diacuaa Differences
(cmm 16, 28 Dec 81)

-a- [III-WE-ISO

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I‘UK 0"“.th 03!. URL!

FRANCE

Recent Apparent Illneu of Hittetrmd Viewed
(PARIS mm, 21 Nov 81) 0....00....OOOOOOOOOOQOOOOOOOOOO

-5-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICML USE ONLY

ECONOMIC FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF GERMANY

STEEL INWSTRY 'OUTSIDBRS' PLAN SURVIVAL TACTICS
Hamburg CAPITAL in German Dec 81 pp 30-31

[Article by Michael Gatennann: "Steel Industry: Those Who Are Declared Dead Live
Longer")

[Text] In the ailing steel industry, illnesses are being used to indicate moods.
"hen reporters inquired about the health of Roesch boss Detlev Karaten Rohwedder,
whose appendix has been operated on. his information office gave this tip: "Consider
it to be evidence of the degree of agreeaent." The boss of the desired candidate for

the steel merger, Krupp steel boss Alfons Goedde, had had his appendix removed 6
weeks before.

A third elesent would only disrupt so much harmony. Ernst Pieper, chairman of the
board of the federally owned Salzgitter concern and supporter of a three-way steel
marriage, renains outside. Now I’ieper, just like Herbert Gienow of Kloeckner, mt
give thought to how his company an survive competition with the new giant (sales in
l980-altogether 9.7 billion marks, 61,000 eaployess). But the Big Pive_('l‘hyssen.
Kloecltner. Salzgitter, Boesch and Krupp) registered losses of approximately 2 billion
lurks in business year 1980. Since 1977, 50.000 steel workers have lost their jobs
in the Rhein-Ruhr area, and the steel expert of tho Metal Workers' Union, Rudolf
Judith, had figured out from the firm.‘ plans. "In the next 6 years 30,000 more will
have to go."

withdrawals from the umbrella organization. wrangling about the timing of a price hike
and ruors about other competitors accentuate the disunity in the crisis-ridden
industry. At least Dieter Spethnann would like to demonstrate harmony. At 55,
Spethmnnn is manager of the Economic Organization of Iron and Steel and head of
'l‘hyssen Inc., the largest Germn steel cospany (steel sales in l980-ll.7 billion
marks. 69,000 employees). Thyssan produces 60 percent of all west German steel.

As the last genuine "Ruhr baron" (born in Essen) among pure strangers to the Ruhr
area. Spethmann praises his business as the one remaining steel producer. "'lhe others
have all handed steel over to subsidiaries."

That does not seem to be good for business. l‘hyssen is the only coapany that I\as
lived through the steel crisis that began in 1971 without substantial losses. though
annual production is down 28 percent, Spethmnn is optinistic about the future.

"We can even make a profit from 12 million tons of steel a year."

' 1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
INDI‘OFF1CLAL USEIDNLY

The Thyssen boss is annoyed about the accusation that he deliberately postponed the
steel price hike planned for October because he could afford it. "k-decided that

in our association only on account of our customers." he denies. "Thyssen was always
a pioneer in raising prices." The postponement is costing the companies, says
Spethmsnn, a total of 20 million marks; there is no point in becoming excited.
Herbert Koehler, CDU deputy and manager of the Economic Organization of Iron and Steel.
of which Spethmann is chairman, estimates the loss of income at 33 million marks.
Gienow, head of the suffering Kloeckner Company (sales in l980--6 billion lurks,
32,000 employees). alleges that the loss of sales amounts to something like 100
million marks. Since he left the Eurofer cartel last year. the 55-year-old Hamburger
has been the black sheep of the sector. he is no longer a member of the Economic
Organization. just like Baden steel manufacturer Hilly Korf.

For years Cienow has been fighting the production quotas assigned Kloechner by the
Common Phrket authorities in Brussels. "The commission's problem in setting quotas
was whether it should provoke a battle with the French Republic and the giant Thyssen
Company or us." he reasons. High interest rates (cost in l980-258 million marks)
were such a severe blow to Kloeckner that in May 1980 Gienow was left with only a
capital cut with subsequent refunding. That put 230 million marks in his treasury.
but in the opinion of experts. this was just enough to last one more year. Then it
would be over for Kloeckner. "Those who are declared dead," Gienow rejects all
prophecies of doom and recommends. "You can conclude from my calm what our profit
situation is." After January's price increase he is going to be is the black again.
A rationalization program will save him 300 million marks a year. "It is not so

easy to come up with something else to improve," Cienow says in praise of the structure
of his company and therefore is not looking for a partner at the moment.

However. Ernst Pieper. 52. head of the Salegitter concern (2.? billion marks in steel
sales. 16,000 employees) shows tremendous need for support. he desired the
partnership with Hoesch and Krupp Steel because his business seems too small to him
for real rationalization. But his marriage proposal was ignored. Therefore. Pieper
has to plan his survival without a partner. He already know how. "we are going to
bring in a business consultant--Mcxinsey or someone like thet-—and will correct old
errors." Processing and finishing are his priorities. The Salsgitter boss sees the

consequences as follows: "There will be parallel investments of hundreds of silliona
of marks."

The course of the next ruinous competition has been determined.

COPYRIGHT: 1981 Gruner + Jahr AG 5 Co.

9873
cso: 3103/166

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ECONOMIC ' FRANCE

DBIDBS INTERVIEWS!) 0!! ‘BRAKB 0“ HIGH SALARIES'
Paris L'BIPRBSS in French 4 Dec 81 pp 108-109

[Interview with Jacques Delors, minister of economy and finance, by Noel—Jean
Bergeroux and Patrick Arnoux, date and place not specified]

[Text] [Question] In your opinion. will the purchasing power of professionals be
maintained in 1982?

[Answer] If economic growth surpasses 2.5 percent, it should be possible to maintain
the purchasing power of the vast majority of professionals, except for those with
very high salaries. However, the priority of our econonic and social policy remains
to preserve, on the average, the purchasing power of salaried employees. Growth
surpluses and gains in productivity should be divided among financing invest-ants,
creating new jobs, and raising low salaries.

[Question] Do you favor tightening up the range of salaries by curbing, or even
freezing, high salaries?

[Answer] For the time being, measures limiting the nominal increase of high salaries
would, in my opinion, be welcome. Society cannot be changed by decree in this area.
I remain staunchly in favor of contractual policy. If, during this or that salary
negotiation, the unions discuss tightening up the salary structure with management,
then they should come to an agreement among themselves. But these annual boardroom
discussions, too infrequent in the private sector, should be based on an overall
policy: salary structure and associated benefits, possibilities of internal pro-
motion, work conditions and duration, and employment and training policy.

[Question] Today the professionals' mood is more one of discontent than consensus,
isn't it?

[Answer] let ne point out first that professionals were equally unhappy during the
preceding administration. This is an attitude, a concern that has several facets.

The present financial system seems unjust to them. Professionals have the impression
that non-salaried individuals don't pay as much tax as they do. I have always thought
it necessary, at equal levels of responsibility and comparability of work, to ensure
that non-salaried individuals pay the same tax as salaried workers. The budget min-
ister's goal is to clarify this question. Once this is done, professionals will be
able to concentrate on their own problems. Unlike what is happening in other

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR‘0FFNJAI.USEIDNLN

European societies, a worker in France can have a good salary, a very interesting
job. and a high social standing. In our firms the management structure is thicker,
that is, denser, than in other countries. In those countries professionals, of
course, have possibilities of promotion in an interesting job, but the connection
with the social standing hierarchy and such high salaries is looser than in France.
In other countries, by the way, professionals pay higher taxes than in Prance. Some
of these countries have even gone too far. and have established withholdings that
were too high and that have discouraged some professionals. He have not reached
that point. ~

[Question] The risk of discouraging French professionals doesn't worry you?

[Answer] Yes, it does. I am very aware of management psychology, even beyond

that given by union organizations. Their vehesence sometimes seems to me to be re-
moved from reality-~personality rivalry notwithstanding--but I know French pro-
fessionals well. A small proportion of them think too much of themselves because
they went to the well-known schools, but the majority started out very modestly.
They have benefitted from the breathing room economic growth provided. They also
have the feeling that they deserve a relatively high salary, an interesting Job,
and everyone's esteem.

The path towards greater social justice, towards greater equality through a different
division of responsibilities, must take place with their agreement and not against
their wishes or with indifference towards their feelings. Those who would do other-
wise would be asking a big mistake. Professionals must be fully involved in the
changes. During my last meeting with the unions I proposed. with the agreement

of the minister of labor, a series of round table discussions to examine these

issues in depth. I am against excessive elitism in French society, but eight out

of ten professionals are not a product of this elitism.

[Question] You have proposed new rules for salary policy. Aren't they inflationary?

[Answer] The idea is simple. A first step can be taken by going from a price in-
crease of 14 percent to one of 10 percent, which can be done just by an effort of
collective temperance. The prevalent skepticisn, caused both by past political
failures. including those of Raymond Barre, and by generalised indexing. which guar-
antees your purchasing power no matter what happens, must be overcome. No one feels
involved or concerned by the fight against inflation; behavior will have to change.
we have to show that you can live better at 10 percent than at 10 percent, and prices
should set the example. I hope that we will see a slackening in the rate of price
increases as early as the fourth quarter of 1981, and that this will continue
steadily and gradually untzl a level around 10 percent is reached. This will not
prevent us from attacking tne structural causes of inflation at the sane time. But
during this slow-down phase of nominal movements we are suggesting a contract for
salaried workers, by offering them an advantage to offset this new experience:
salaries will not catch up with prices, but there will be_sn advance estimated on
the basis of an annual price rise of 10 percent. And twice a year we will make
adjustments, thanks to a protection clause. Salaried workers will have nothing

to lose and they will be assured of keeping their purchasing power. however, this
new policy must be tried within the framework of free salary negotiations. Its

k
FOR OFTICTAL.US£1DNL¥
success depends primarily on the mood of contractual policy. Unlike my predecessors,
I am not making any startling announcements about the standards to aim for, and much
less about the goals.

The ball is on management and lsbor's side. Union or management organizations cannot
agree with one hand, and refuse to sign with the other; this would demonstrate their
hostility towards freedom of salary negotiation and towards contractual policy. I
would call on public opinion as my witness, so that everyone's responsibilities would
be well defined.

[Question] How do you envisage the concrete application of this new method?

[Answer] Agreements will be signed in each firm. In France, the CH?! [National
Council of French Employers], which is always so prompt to denounce state inter-
vention, is still waiting for public firms to set an example.

In this respect I am happy to note that this new salary and social program was the
basis for negotiations held at the SNC? [French National Railroad Company] and the
RAT? [Independent Parisian Transport System]. The results that were obtained are
encouraging from three points of view: a positive change within the unions, which
previously have rebelled against this type of agreement; but, in accordance with their
wishes, a widening of the field of discussion to areas not covered until now; and
prudence of the criteria retained for the nominal advance in salaries, accompanied

by the protection clause. These first steps are very encouraging. I hope that labor
and management will use them as a foundation in other areas and in the maximum
number of firms, where negotiation and contracts should be the rule for new social
relations.

This withdrawal cure must be done gradually. It would be best to initiate the 1981
adjustment this coming 1 January and expect the first advance around 1 March so that
the system doesn't cause any telescoping.

[Question] Does the INSEB [National Institute of Statistics and Economic Studies]
index seem to you to be a good measure of price increase at the present time?

[Answer] Frankly. the scientific quality of this index is admired by experts the
world over. If, for reasons of trust between labor and management and the state,

it seemed necessary to discuss it technically, I wouldn't be opposed to it. But it
is very well done. Of course, the day will come when it will have to be updated.

It is in our interest not to mix apples and oranges: on the one hand a perfectly
clear index established by independent experts (INSBE); and on the other hand, dis-
cussions on income, salaries, and purchasing power, which are conducted equally
clearly on the basis of objective data from the economy and from firma' performances.

[Question] You stated you were in favor of a pause in the announcement of reforms.
In your opinion, does this pause jeopardize financial or national health service
reforns?

[Answer] Not at all. I simply said that we should, through patient work, initiate
three structural reforms: expansion of the publis sector and, based on this, an
industrial policy and a reform of our credit system; decentralization, which aims

5
FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

to "put democracy within hand's readh"; end the inplenentation of an active eqloy-
uent policy (solidarity contracts, job sharing, flexibility in the job mrket, pro-
fessional and social integration of youth...). Here are three exciting tasks for
attacking the challenges of the new industrial revolution and the basic disease of
unelploynent, and for promoting a better division of responsibility. This will not
prevent us fron adopting our fiscal policies (starting with the professional tax)
and the national health service structure in order to inrove it gradually and
fundenentally. That is the role of a government action which is careful to ezplain
future directions and to determine precise rules of the gene.

LOPYRIGHT: 1981 s.a. Groups Express

9720
C80: 3100/ 180

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
F"! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLHIOAL mama arm!

mmmmmmmmmm
mmmmmamszn‘Is-n
[ix-um by mu: non-tort: mun-Mn my

mmmmnw-ummm
,thomlltionporﬁoohmboontmingontbom
unquuﬂmoIomm.mhﬁommorodomd1-
«to to offer: Haul-Mama: Gmohoz.

”80m. Kant woman“ hum-tot. or health mm-
mmwnomtunng'oovonmtnmldm”Wham.”

mt3mhhm1tmmtﬂo1ntnh1uhommiod.mmnu,1n
mmroxsmamoru-nam.mmuommm
mama-pintodommm.

amutonhooolhpud.hohuuidbom1m1:tomfocmnor
gunm1m.-mu1umm,-um.mom/munmqun
lanthanum."

Inthouontm.ﬂupo11mtmthotmly}3pmontotﬂapopnhuon
mldvoto fathom, Holoctimoma unmm. 81”»th
oleotoddinotly, tboohnoollorwmrmboohhtoolouthovmom
bottom this low popularity nun; ad in “Into New“: for tho oozution—
mmuotmunlwommmohmmmnguum.

SM”. woo-ruin not. of bank ur‘. ﬂu poor 81’!) toting. Inn 51m rho
to 11101: lpooulotion in Bonn. m:- In two basic cocoa-loo: ﬂu ohmoonor
light 20.101 during this 1031013133. uluon. ﬂat in prior to tho 1904 cho-
ttonn, torhodtbmormhohuhotm tutohwmincﬂu
gown-out. 31th”, harm. anathema Monty form-towni-
ruigntion. 0r, hodooomogtlntnﬂutntnmmpootmm-
m.

Both semio- oro podium on tho «caption tut tho «mum V111 ho].
thatthoSPDhndﬂnubordl)vmmtho198401m1onogunndvm
not

odlodnpontohoodthogonmon.8poonlauouvhiohm .-
tormﬂthoqm motommandiutotocohmoouormooutho
up

01:1
oution mm on! tho 8?]! 10m. tho conﬂuent.

n:
.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
For years. this issue did not seen to be e problea. Tine and again st least one
of the lesdim SP1) politicians was being touted as a successor to Schlidt. And
this even while the chancellor appeared to be in good health and certainly in
good spirits—the chips were not down by any stretch of the iaagination. Now
that the chips elacst were down, no one of ”chancellor caliber" is sitting on
the bench. Schaidt's political foster son Bans Apel has incurred the wrath of
the left wing of the party not only because of siennsgensnt of the financing
arrangements for the “tornado" enper~fiditsr but also. noet likely. because of
his unconditional sllegiance to NATO. Ever since the left wingers booed his in
Haaburg'e 8t Jones church he no longer qualifies as a. oonproaise candidate the
entire party slant agree on. for acne tine, for-ea.- sinister of Justice Hans—
Jochon Vogel figured to be the secret top choice after Schmidt. But now that
Yogel obeyed the party's call to go to Berlin in order to save the SPD sense
as lord ssyor and lost the election ineteed. he no longer has such appeal,
.1wre

111st loaves Kane htthoefor escng those nost often sectioned. ﬁancee are. he
would be Sohaidt's first choice st this tile. ‘l'he fact that the finmce minister
could be identified with the series of budget deficits running into the billions
does not bother the chancellor, who shores this political responsibility, very
mch. no: that ﬁtter, he is ispressed with the elegant toy in which Netthoefer
nnoges to describe over new budget shortfalls as the soot natural ooouronoee

in the Mlde

There is only one person she spooks against mtthcefer as s successor to Schmidt
and that is Hatthcofer hissslf. Libs Schnidt. he suffers fro- srrhythais occa-
sionally. And he says he wants to be a good finance sinister and nothing else.
But what he does not ssnticn is that he would hste to lend the SP1) as chancellor
to certain defeat in the 1994 election (as things look tom). The intensive
search for a successor to the chencellor beooaes all the sore difficult once

the three men sectioned drop out of the rose. ‘nu few bender still gowenxed by
the BPD boast of alsost no reserve personnel. In Hesse. upright Bolger Boomer
heeorousedtheireofall leftwingere. Inhensn. Eansxosohnickhsebeen
cutting a rather weak figure as heed of the city govenseent. Hamburg is burned
onttosuchanertont thathnnhsdto eendinlcrdaawornauswonnohnawi

to try to put out the fire.

mt leaves only one strong 81’!) bastion: north Westphalia whose sinister
president Johannes has is beginning to look like the party's last hope by now-
or rather is being touted as such. To be sure. has, too, has e budget deficit
which runs into the billions snd Dusseldorf opposition leader Kurt Biedsnkopf
is saying that he does not have I'a clear View of thisge.‘ Dot asst recently.
has has developed into a Jovial popular leader. a kind of bargain besenent
Hilly Brandt.

In Bonn, soot social dsnoorats speak sell of Ban. Party chair-an Brandt likes his
for reasons of elective affinity. Party aanager Peter Clots—who is .rtor

than all the other'bandidatos' but has not acquired enough stature as yet—

eings the praises of "ﬂashes who can tell a job better than anyone." tissues

as s nodal of integration-he could be a consensus chancellor but does he al-
readyhavoenomexportisetoholddownsnohejob?

8

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
“mute, councdnootlytmtho ohnoonot'o hooploglxoca. honorooolvod
wmmmmmmtmm.mmonm.mmuotoz
tmiatnvolbohndhin. I14owouldourtolmilgvloooovollooIohlumloo:owon»
Woﬂommmum out. M. oohhtthootor'o coo, hon-o1!
pntothohnhooonopooulotton.m,ohoiodoooubodbymbocootthooobmot
u 'uti-vock but o hood drmhor.‘ dooo not wont tho Job or ohonoollor.

01- ot loot not yot. In, too, on ooo a commando 81’!) oloottoh dofoct canine
In 1984. to: hhoolt, ho lo hoping to: o kind of BPD 'noututtoh noted-r in
North Rhino-ﬂown ono you: um. Vlth that ﬁnd”? ht. bolt, ho would—01th
mMthmttomthM/Mmmm1m.hthot
tho. mmdliblyhanmmw-h lo ooidtobovhotvuly
Brandt woulduho to ooo—ud oauldot loulutrountto hothpooto mono-n.
Tho point being thst it one Sohlldt'o no” novor to hu'o Mt tho chum-
chip.

Underway. Johonnoo Ru would not nut to dootroy thlo won-Md
unmooooooryoorly eta-t. Outhoothorhond. non onldhmdlytm
don, uttonlodonttohintnpootootnood.ltnohonooormoy
the party wt hhvo to outlook o moot low thing-o. It malt hm
hard and uoopt ocuoono 11h Apel or V0321 in tho om. Hinton: one
ﬂat now only. o «Incision mld homo to ho undo in o ton-11h oott
doom tutor» or which comet ho toroooon by mono.

E

by

potty
m

oo
mallow
ono

t1
the

E?

38

E

llonottor mt tho circa-ounces vorounduvhloh tho ohonoollor vouldhooo to
ho noploood, the In? would ploy in role mum: no mantles: in tho
mould-m: schntdt normally. Andooumthot totoﬂldqtho too
mmmowommrwt ottdmtogothorndocroo, tortho
ookoofholdingontothoooauuou,thntonootthonvonldhmtohoortho
moo. And it tho SPD would tolento 1mm“): Gonoohor would not hool-
toto for o oooond to ooouno tho poo: of ohmoollot.

comm: 1982 Gmor 4» Job: AG 8- Go.

9478
030: 3103/210

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL FRANCE

POLL EXAMINES am'runzs 0“ INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS
Paris LATITUDE AUJOURD'HUI in French Nov 81 pp 11-13

[Report on a French Public Opinion Institute-LATITUDE exclusive poll: "The French
People and Foreign Policy." based on questions asked of 2,059 persons, 18 years
old and 'over, from 15 to 22 September 1981]

{Text} Worry over the American monetary policy. which cones before Soviet expan-
sionisn in the concerns of the French people. Continuation of the preferential
ties with the Federal Republic of Gernany, whose chancellor. Reliant Schnidt. is
regarded as ”the most likable" of the three RAID leaders. Rapprochenent with the
Third-World countries, especially the ones in Africa or Latin Anerica.

These three main topics of the exclusive IPOP [French Public Opinion Institute]-
LATI'l‘UDB poll—"The French People and Foreign Policy"-should contort Francois
hitterrand in his analysis of international problens. They are. in fact. an out-
right approval of the policy being conducted by the president of the Republic since
25 Bay, going back, Eros this point of view, to the sources of Gaullisn.

At the start, a remark. This poll offers a new fact: the French people are such
more concerned over international problens than is sonetiaea said. And they are
more aware. A snall third of the persons polled did not pronounce thenselves on
France's bilateral relations with a given nation. But only 17 percent find no
special concern among the three proposed concerns.

East-west Relations: Partisan Divisions Predoninating

Rance is in no way safe from the neutraliet tenptation whose manifestations. violent
at tines on the other side of the Rhine. are being observed at present. at the
persons interviewed by the IFOP. #3 percent believe, in fact, that Anerica's nonetary
policy is nore dangerous than Soviet expansionisn. Only 24 percent unite the opposite
choice. 0n the other land. the yellow peril causes little worry: 16 percent of

the persons polled place Japan's econonic policy at the head of the perils.

United States President Ronald Reagan reaps personally the unpopularity of his

interest rates: only 29 percent of the French people find him nore likable than

llelmt Schmidt. At the sane tine, almost one Frenchman out of two (61 percent)
belivee that Franco-Amrican relations should he nore independent.

' 10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

But the attitude of rim French pcnplv with regard to the United States--or as a
counterbalance to the Soviet Union--is not uniform. 0n the other questions (re-
lations with Germany or the Third World)¢'a real consensus that disregards parti-
san differences emerges, as will be seen. 0n the other hand, the nature of the
East-west relations is perceived differently depending on the domestic partisan
options.

Thus, Soviet military policy worries 39 percent of the 00? [French Democratic Union]
voters and 32 percent of the RPR [Rally for the Republic] voters, compared with
18 percent of the socialists and 7 percent of the communists. As a consequence:
52 percent of the followers of Giscard d'Bstaing (but only #2 percent of the Gaul-
list voters) believe it necessary to strengthen France's ties with the United
States. And half the opposition voters (RPR, 54 percent; 00?, 49 percent) want
France’s policy with regard to the Soviet Union to be more independent. 0n the
other hand. more than half the majority voters (PS. 52 percent; PCP, 56 percent)
want a little distance to be placed between France and Uncle Sam. In the opinion
of 66 percent of the communists. the USSR would even become a completely suitable
replacement.

Depending on whether you are a communist or a follower of Giscard, a socialist
or a follower of Jacques Chirac, the eyes of Chimene [heroine of Corneille's "Le
Cid") will gleam on America or on Russia. 0n the other hand. the gaze is less
passionate--or. at least, passion is common to a whole people-when we come back
to western Europe or when we take off for the poor countries.

Continuation of the Franco-German Axis

It is known that Francois Hitterrand, as head of the French opposition. did not
have the best relations with Helmut Schmidt. Since his election, on the other
hand, he has continued and even developed the ties between France and the Federal
Republic of Germany. The French people approve him enthusiastically. Franco-
German relations, regarded as very satisfactory by one Frenchman out of two. should
be strengthened. Even the Gaullist voters appear to advocate this agreement (64
percent). but the communists do not lag behind (51 percent). And by an overwhelm-
ing majority. they consecrate the West German chancellor as the most likable chief
of state.

Relations with the Third world: Between Generosity and Commercialism

The chapter of France's relations with the Third-World countries seems marked by
several contradictory feelings. First of all. pardon. The rancor created by de-
colonization and especially the Algerian War seems to be softening with time. In
fact, almost one Frenchman out of two wants ties with the Maghreb to be
strengthened.

Second feeling: generosity. Over half of the persons polled want cooperation
to be developed with the countries of Latin America. Africa and India. This feel-
ing is more pronounced among socialist and communist voters.

Finally. the import of France's economic interests is not absent from answers by
the persons polled. This was already perceived in the concern with regard to
American economic policy. It is still more noticeable in the desire to see our

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ucing countries strengthened. Ralf of the persons

‘elations with the Arab oil-prod
d followers) want to see ties with the Persian

luestioned (slightly fever Biscar
3u1f developed and improved.

the relative indifference displayed with regard to countries as

t of the persons polled did not express an opin-

ion on relations with the country of the ayatollahs), or even israel. With regard
to Israel, a third of the persons polled believe that relations are satisfactory,
a third vent to improve them and a third are indifferent about then.

Final remark:
different as Japan, lrsn (b5 percen

be drawn from a reading of this IPOP-LASITUDE poll.
eased information

Therefore, three lessons to

t in foreign problems. requiring incr
by the citizens. LATITUDE will apply itself to that. without demagogy or jargon.
A great concern over economic matters: the tie betueen outside causes and doeestic

causes is. therefore. established in apprehension over the econouic crisis.
Finally a desire to see France sake the voice of the poorer countries heard.

Question: For each of the following Question: And for each of these groups

different countries or groups of coun- of countries, do you want France. in its

tries, do you think that the relations foreign policy, to be more independent
toward them. or to strengthen its ties

d with then by France should

naintsine

be improved, or do you think that these of cooperation?

relations are satisfactory at present? [Key: 1. overall; 2.'Left Radical.Hove-
3. sore independent;i6. strengthen

[Key: 1. overall; 2.-Laft Radical Hove- went;
went; 3. improve relations; a. relations its ties; S. no opinion]

satisfactory; 51 no opinion]

The French People Great Powers .‘

___——

  

and the

   
   

ranch People and Europe
eople and the Trouble Spots

 

The French P
INJR OFWﬂCJAl.USEZ(NVLY

The French People and the "Nonveaudricheﬂ Countries

 

Question: The following are three con- Question: Of the following three leaders
cerne for French policy: Japan and its who are France's principsl allies, Ronald
economic policy. the USSR and its de- Reagan. Helnut Schmidt. Margaret Thatcher,
fense policy, the United States and its which is the one whose personality is most
Ionetery policy on interest rates (rise likable to you?

in the dollar). Which one scene to you [new 1. no opinion]

to be of lost concern to hence?

[Key: 1. The United States and its

monetary policy; 2. the USSR and its

defense plicy; 3. Japan and its eco-

nonic policy: 4. no opinion]

 

WPYRIGHT: Latitude SARL. Depot legal: 6° trinsstre 1981

10.042
080: 3100/205

1’.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ALLEGED PLO‘l'l'ING BEHIND 'MANIFBSTO orm 100' DESCRIBED
Madrid CAHBIO l6 in Spanish 21 Dec 81 pp 36-39

{Text} The civilians and military officers who secretly plotted the abortive

:3 February coup d'etat and attempted another uprising on 23 June, the day

before the king's birthday (See CAHDIO l6, No 503) are also behind the "Manifesto
of the 100," the manifesto signed by 100 commissioned and noncommiasioned

army officers and published early this month. Under the pretext of protesting
an alleged press campaign against the Armed Forces, the manifesto glorifies

the coup plotters who are awaiting court-martial.

One of the individuals most active in all this plotting. the elderly Jose
Antonio Giron de Velasco, a former Franco minister and president of the
National Confederation of Combatants, met for a 3-hour lunch with a group
of manifesto signers-2 days before it was published.

According to military secret service and police sources, at the luncheon
"they put the finishing touches on the manifesto and decided what strategy
to pursue so that it would be reported as widely as possible by the national
press."

In the event that no paper wanted to publish the document, according to
some sources, Giron de Velascn promised to publish it in BL ALCAZAR, the
pro-coup, anticonstitution and antimonarchy paperwhoseboard of Directors
Girun heads.

Their luncheon meeting over, Giron de Velasco returned to his house in Madrid,
ordered his bags packed and unexpectedly headed for his vacation home in
Fuengirola. He was supposed to leave 3 days later.

The lunch at which they decided on their strategy for the manifesto's publication
took place on Wednesday the second at a restaurant in the old section of

Madrid, decorated with bullfighting motifs and specializing in typical Spanish
stew.

Present at the lunch in addition to Ciron de Velasco were Commander Ricardo
Seen: de Inestrillas and Lt Col Jose Medina Gonzalez, both of whom have
been linked in police investigations to the organisation that planned

15

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
the unsuccessful coup d'etat on 23 June. Col Luis Sicre Canut, whom the
police have linked to the same network of coup plotters (see CAMBIO 16,
Nos 699, 502 and 503) had announced that he would be there but at the last
moment decided not to show up.

Four of the signers of the "Manifesto of the 100," including Infantry Capt
Ignacio Gasca Quintin, were present, however.

The anti-coup squad, which had been waiting for this luncheon get-together

for a week, was unable to record the conversations of the presumed coup

plotters or to photograph them. Capt Gasca Quintin, who specialized in
surveillance and counteraurveillance techniques while a member of the National
Police, spotted, as soon as he got to the restuarsnt, the camouflaged car

from which two police agents were trying to operate their cameras and record what
they were saying with directional microphones.

since the car's cover had been blown, some other policemen tried to dine at the
same restaurant, but the owner. whom BL ALCAZAR wants to pay homage to,
refused them a table. .

Considered a "nest of fascists" by the poliCe. which is why it was attacked
early last July, the restaurant did not serve a single drink until Ciron

de Velasco and his companions left. In spite of everything, the anti-coup
squad knew the substance of their conversation at lunch 24 hours later.

At the IMEC [Military Instruction of the Complement List]

It was learned, for example, that the document had been drafted a week before
by a high-ranking officer of Military Instruction of the Complement List,
at the offices of Military Headquarters in Madrid.

The man who inspired the manifesto, however, was not this officer but Col
Jose Ignacio San Martin, 56, an intelligence expert, former staff commander
of Brunete Armored Division I and one of the officers implicated in the
abortive 23 February coup d'etat; with whom the ranking IMBC officer met
frequently during the time the manifesto was being drawn up. San Martin
denies this.

By chance, one of the signers of the document is 30-year old Infantry Capt
Jose San Martin Nays, Colonel San Martin's son, who had been stationed at
the Madrid district [Mac until a short time ago.

The document was not, however, published as Colonel San Martin and the ranking
IMBC officer drafted it. Government and police sources feel that it was

redrafted by a group of attorneys defending the 23 February coup plotters
at an office on General Martinez Campos Street in Madrid.

16

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
alas Pinar Lopez, the leader of New Force and a notary, and his son, Blas Pinar
Gutierrez, an infantry captain of class 27 who is also stationed at the IHEC
and is a practicing attorney, have their offices in this building.

DIARIO 16 and BL PAIS Attacked

In the opinion of the police, the manifesto was not supposed to be a wild,
slanted attack on the press, which is what it seems to be on first reading.
Instead, it represents an underhanded defense of the arguments of the

23 February coup plotters, for whom the loo signatory commissioned and non-
commissioned officers show absolute veneration in certain paragraphs. As
far as the signers are concerned, the coup plotters are the Armed Forces.

The sponsors of the manifesto, including Capts Rogelio Gonzalez Anradas,
Blas Pinar Gutierrez, Enrique Gonzalez Hateos, Juan Canadas Lorenzo and
Jose Lorenzo Esperante, all of whom were suspended in their posts this past
ll December, hoped that at least 90 percent of the commissioned and non-
commissioned officers in the Armed Forces would sign the document.

Another aim of the document signers was to call for the closure of the papers
DIARIO I6 and EL PAls, which extremist factions of the Armed Forces accuse
of waging a campaign against the military.

This contrasts with the strong pressure that military groups have been putting
on the government to prevent the closure of the paper BL ALCAZAR, which

has been characterized over the past 2 years by its abject, ongoing adulation
of ultraconservative factions in the Armed Forces in the bid for a military
coup against our freedoms.

The Lower Rungs of the Ladder

when Defense Minister Alberto Oliart asked several counsnders whether it
would be a good idea to close down the mouthpiece of the Combatants and
the people who are nostalgic for Franco, they pointed out that it was not
necessary to close EL ALCAZAR, and some of them, as BL ALCAZAR maliciously
noted, wanted to know why the question referred only to the mouthpiece of
the National Brotherhood of Combatants.

The government had been aware that the manifesto was in the works l0 days
before it was published. In late November it had detected several meetings
between commissioned and noncommissioned officerc from the Recruit Instruction
Center (CIR) at Colmenar Viejo and [MEG Capts Blas Pinar Gutierrez and Ignacio
Gasca Quintin to discuss the manifesto.

At one of these meetings Captains Pinar and Cases made it known that the
manifesto had been drawn up with an eye towards having it signed by the

rank-and-file of the Armed Forces, in other words, the youngest commissioned
and noncommissioned officers who had not fought in the Civil War.

17

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
with this they were attempting to demonstrate that there was a single Armed
Forces philosophy and that both the cmissioned and norco-issioned officers
who had not taken part in the Civil War and the colonels and generals who

had shared the same concerns and were opposed to the democratic system.

The Military Speaks

According to the statements of its sponsors to the anti-coup squad, the
document had been drawn up with an eye towards having it signed by at least
30,000 soldiers. They expected at least 1,000 signatures in the Colmenar
Viejo CIR alone.

To achieve this they needed a catalyst that would force the great majority

of the commissioned and noncmmmissioned officers of the Armed Forces to

sign the document en masse. And according to the statements of its sponsors,
the catalyst was publication of the manifesto in the press, along with the
signatures of l00 commissioned and noncommissioned officers. plus as much
coverage as possible.

Around the time that these investigations were under way, the anti-coup
squad, which is headed up by Police Capt Emilio Sanchez, got wind of some
revealing remarks by Commander Saens de Ynestrillas to a comrade of his
who wanted to sign the manifesto. '

"You can't sign now, because only 100 or so are going to," Ynestrillas said.
"I think that we're talking about the people on the lower rungs of the ladder,
up to the sixth, and you're on the eighth, understand?"

At the time the manifesto was limited to the Colmenar Viejo CIR, where its
sponsors hoped to obtain the first l00 signatures. The Defense Ministry
sent a commander to tell the CIR colonel that the signature-gathering had
to stop.

The colonel who commands the Colmenar Viejo CIR immediately met with the
commissioned and noncommissioned officers in the orderly rooms and told

them in no uncertain terms about the instructions he had received. The

command had informed him that signatures were being gathered for a petition

that was also supposed to appear in the press. The commissioned and non-
commissioned officers under his command knew perfectly well that group petitions
within the Armed Forces filed outside of prescribed channels constituted

a serious violation of discipline that was banned by the Royal Ordinances

and severely punishable under the Military Justice Code.

The reaction of Colmenar CIR commissioned and noncommissioned officers at
the time was total support for their superior and compliance with regulations.

The CIR colonel reported the matter to the commander of Madrid, Guillermo
Quintana anacc , and the top brass felt that the issue was closed and that
no further importance had to be attached to the manifesto. Defense Minister

18

I03 OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Alberto Olisrt himself, who was kept posted on the matter, spent the first
weekend of the month away from Madrid, which indicated that things were
calm in the Armed Forces.

Nevertheless, the first week of December was rife with developments in the
military. Two days before, on 30 November, Infantry Capt Lorenzo Fernandez
Mavarro commanded a Military Police unit against a legal demonstration in
La Coruna; on 2 December, Capt Ignacio Urruticoechea declared himself pro-
BTAlBasqueFatherland and Liberty], and two officers from the Vicalvaro

ll Artillery Regiment were involved in an incident in a town outside Madrid

that same day.

All of these incidents, which were reported in the press, were misrepresented

by the sponsors of the manifesto as a campaign against the Armed Forces.

The situation, which had been regarded as under control 26 hours before,

got out of hand again on 2 December when the top commissioned and noncommissioned
officers in the Drunete 1 Armored Division placed their signatures at the

foot of the document.

CallforOrder

Vigorous action by the Joint Chiefs of Staff prevented the massive support
that the sponsors of the manifesto were hoping for. On 6 December, the ,
100 signers of the document were disciplined with 15 days preventive custody,

and So! the sponsors were removed from their posts and placed on call.

Subsequently, Cavalry Lt Col Tomas Almazan Lastieri, who had been stationed
in Salamanca, was also removed for having signed the manifesto.

The final episode in the "Manifesto of the 100" story was the 2-hour meeting
between the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the king on Friday ll December.

Juan Carlos, who had been on a trip to several Arab countries when the manifesto
was published, received the joint chiefs and after bringing himself up to

date on the situation in the Armed Forces, issued a "call for order" and
discipline in the military.

Two days later, the army chief of staff, Jose Csbeirss Montero, summoned
the commander of the Canary Islands, Jesus Gonzalez del Yerro, to Madrid.

General Gonzalez del Yerro'snamehad appeared often in the papers the previous
month in connection with rumors about a possible caretaker government headed
by him, after a series of meetings in early November in Madrid.

The meetings had been organized by individuals linked with pro-coup groups.
Attorney Antonio Garcia Lopez was also involved in these contacts with Oscar
Alzaga y Osorio. Their idea was to "create" a new leader in the Armed Forces
so that a coup would come easier. In all his public statements, however,
Gonzalez del Yerro has declared himself a constitutionalist and loyal to

the crown.
COPYRIGHT: I981, lnformscion y Revistns, s.A.

8743 19
680: 31l0/50

FOR 0F?ICIAL USE ONLY
MILITARY, REPORTERS MEET TO DISCUSS DIFFERENCES

Madrid CAHBIO 16 in Spanish 28 Dec 8| pp 36, 37

ITextl As some 50 journalists attentively looked on, Gen Juan Cano hevia
raised his glass and said: Should we propose a toast?

The military officers responded in the affirmative, an answer that as General
Cano himself would explain later, reflected the trust, friendship and approval
that the representatives of the Armed Forces felt towards the men of the

press with whom they had spoken openly for QB hours about the hottest political,
military and journalistic issues of the day.

with the waterfall behind the speakers platform gurgling, they all stood
up and drank to the good king, to the constitution, to Spain.

Applause, more toasts, applause. lt marked the close of a straight-from-

the shoulder dialogue during which the commanders of the three branches

clearly pledged to uphold the constitution. It was an attempt by the coalnenders
to give the newsmen an in-depth look at the internal problems and the workings
of the Armed Forces. It is a delicate world inside the "big silent one,"

as the French have come to call their Armed Forces and as the audience here

began to define them.

It was Gen Cano Nevis hiaself who unhurriedly explained what the silence
of the Armed Forces moans to society.

"Our society," he said. "is interested in our being somewhat silent."

He was not talking about a news-related silence nor about a deeper, more
wideranging silence when he reminded the audience that society has created
a body to defend it and has armed it. In this case, if the silence were
broken, it could have dangerous consequences for society itself, General
Csno explained.

Military Officers and Newsmen
Some 30 ranking commanders, chiefs and officers of the three branches of

the Armed Forces and the Civil Guard attended the meeting with about as
many newsmen, with General Bevia acting as moderator and discussion leader.

20

FOR OFFICIAL "88 ONLY
Hith refreshments for everyone, the military officers voiced their complaints
over how certain papers handled a number of news stories about the military,
although in spite of repeated requests by the newsmen the officers never

got down to naming names.

The purpose ofthia talk, which was organized by the Defense Ministry, was

to "downplay a situation that had been artificially played up," in the words
of Gen Cano Hevia. Underlying all of this, however, was what Rear Adm Jesus
Salgado Alba ultimately described as follows, with an eye towards the upcoming
23 February trials:

"ﬁle are asking for prudence," Rear Admiral Salgado explained, "in order
to resolve serious problems, big problems having to do with the security
of our country. There are two attitudes towards this, and one of them is

to add fuel to the fire."

That was the message, and it was repeated on television ("La clave") and
radio("Directo..Directo"). Prudence, accurate reporting, no touching the
military's sore spot. Upcoming events are significant enough to assume
that certain elements and groups are going to add fuel to the fire in an
attempt to divide the army.

The military spokesmen came out without reservations in favor of freedom
of the press, although at times questions arose that are by their very nature
the subject of debate within the media themselves in free nations.

"Have you ever placed limits on your freedom of expression for the sake
of a higher good, such as the defense of democracy, for example?" Gen Fernando
Rodriguez Ventosa, commander of the Operations Division, asked.

The word that came up at that point was responsibility, the responsibility
of the informant and the reaponsibility of the reporter or analyst.

It was a lively debate, marked by strong disagreement in many instances
and by discretion in others, but by the end fears had vanished. One got
the feeling that the officers and the newsmen really wanted to tell each

other what they thought.

Dissatisfaction with the press? It came out that there obviously was, at

least with certain papers, although no specific ones were mentioned, except
for minor cases. As Lt Col Manuel Henson, the Defense Ministry's media
director, commented, "Our dissatisfaction with the press has to do more

with form than substance, and we often see a lack of respect for the military."

A newsman then mentioned the reverence that the Armed Forces received in
the press during recent decades under the previous regime. Hhat should
it be: reverence or respect?

Air Force Maj Gen Jose Rebuelta Garcia replied: "Respect, of course!"

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
He then heard about the military's silent majority, which General Cano under-
scored because of what he considers its historic role during this transition
from one regime to another. "And the silent majority in the Armed Forces

has nothing against the press," Cano Hevia said.

The Armed Forces are disturbed that they have been identified with isolated
actions or the positions of fringe groups. Do the Armed Forces oppose the
constitution and want a coup?

"Do we want democracy?" Rear Admiral Salgado asked rhetorically; his reply
to the newsman was categorical: "Just as much, exactly as much as you do!"

It was then Gen Enrique Ugarte's turn: "Our compliance with the constitution
is total and absolute. The fear of a military coup that seems to be floating
around is just wishful thinking. Is there any option other than democracy

in Spain?" And he concluded: "Gentlemen. if there is no other option, what

are we going to create one for!"
Getting to Know Each Other

The newsmen looked surprised. They are not accustomed to hearing such blunt
talk at times like these. Perhaps it is because of the lack of contact,
their lack of familiarity with an institution that by its very nature is
practically impenetrable. All of Ugarte's comrades, whom we were watching
for a response, assented.

Rear Admiral Salgado spoke up again: "I subscribe to what the general (Ugarte)
has just said.“

As far as General Ventoss is concerned, an understanding between newsmen
and military officers is diffiCult, because “we are very different." The
military is a hierarchy..."and you are not," he said, adding: "We are all
in agreement on theory, on the way to apply general principles, which I
think is the hardest part. It's a road that we have to travel."

But how can these differences be settled? Rsar Adm Antonio Urcelay, from
the Joint Chiefs of Staff (JUJEH), explained it this way: "That's pretty
obvious. By putting yourself in the other person's shoes."

"Hith regard to the love of freedom that has come up here," Rear Admiral
Urcelay remarked further. "I would have to say that the older you are, the
more love of freedom you have."

COPYRIGHT: I98], Informacion y Revistas, S.A.

87k3
080: 3llO/58

22
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

GENERAL M“

ascm'r APPARKNT ILLNESS or lil'l'lBRRAND VIEWED
Paris PARIS ants in French 21 Nov 81 pp 4042

[Text] In its dealings with various administrations, presi-
dents and governments, PARIS HATCH has always been fair. PARIS
HATCH is recognised as a national magazine and througlmut the
historic upheavals experienced by the French nationo-Algeria,
the putsch, the OAS [Secret Arty Organisation], Hay l968--it
has always been intent on providing intonation to enlighten
its readers.

Today, by publishing the article which you are about to read,
PARIS MATCH has no other purpose than to help keep every French
citizen informed.

"The French have a right to expect that the man whom they have elected to occupy
the highest office in the nation will provide intonation about both his assets
and his health." This was the opening sentence of a conunique (issued on 20 My
1981) from Dr Claude Gubler. senior non-resident physician of Parisian hospitals,
who issued it at the request of the president of the republic. Referring to
Francois Hitterrand's health, it stated: "Height: 172 centimeters. Height:

80 kilos. Cardiovascular examination: arterial pressure on both arms: 13.5-8.
Normal and rhythmical pulse. Electrocardiograph, different auricular and ventri-
cular parameters and repolarization are all normal. The same applies to the
clinical and radiological lung examination, to tests on the hepato-digestive
system, to endocrinologic, neurological, ophthalmological and oto—rhino-
laryngological tests. Same results far he locomotive system and for the examina-
tion of superficial body growth (hair, nails, etc.). None of the various biolo-
gical tests conducted indicate anything unusual in the parameters usually con-
trolled at the chemical and hematological levels. In brie ," says the coll-unique,
"both clinical and paraclinical results are normal. Francois Hitterrand's general
condition is completely satisfactory and no acute or chronic abnormality can be
detected." During Georges Pompidou's long illness, Francois Hitterrand did not
make any official statement. Be merely remarked on the day of the funeral: "The
president of the republic dies while remaining true to himself and to his notion
of duty. It is important for a statesman to present his country with this fine
example...1'oday, we should collect our thoughts and meditate about what will be
good for France." But if Hitterrand remained silent during Georges Ponpidou's
illness, the then chairman of the socialist group at the National Assembly, Gaston

23
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE 0NLY

Dcfterro, wrote in his newspaper L3 PROVBNCAL on 5 June 1973: "The French people
have the right to know exactly what is happening. Their future depends on it. This
is not a private matter but something involving the destiny of the nation in the
person of the man who wanted to become its 1eader...The president of the republic
has the duty to inform us. He have the right to publicly raise the question no
matter how distressing it may be. The interest of the nation is at stake." On
behalf of the Communist Party, Reno Andrieu wrote in L'HUHANITB issue of 27 March
1974: "The communist Party, for its part, will not join in what at times seems
like a gathering to watch the kill. It wants the mandate of the president of the
republic to come to an end not through illness, but through the popular vote."

illnesses are so mysterious that I haven't even been told about them. I can sneeze
when in a draft but this is not necessarily fatal. Watching how I am being examined
for symptoms. I feel that there is a certain amount of nostalgia.” Subsequently,
Hitterrand also said: "The best denial is to be alive." Finally, during his most
recent press conference, in September of this year [1981], Francois Hitterrand,

by then president of the republic, said: "Finally, you have asked about my
health. When I was elected, I adopted a procedure which many of you had advised

me to follow. not just as an individual but as the holder of this office, and

which consists in disclosing the state of my health. It seems that many heads of
state are unwell, and I feel that many would like me to join their ranks...l must
admit that sometimes I happen to sneeze...and a few days ago, I made some careless
notions while engaged in a most commendable activity of a sporting nature and
slightly twisted a vertebra. Beyond this, I will issue an official communique on
the state of my health every 6 months. I issued one last May and will issue an-
other one next December to keep up with the 6-month interval but. if you want, I
could give it to you tonight: all is well."

cause at 0915 hours Professor Laverdan, a specialist in gastroenterology and senior
consultant at the Val-de-Grace Medical Clinic, a new ultramodern military hos-
pital which opened in January 1979, received a very confidential call telling him
that Francoid Mitterrand would be arriving very shortly. That hospital is the one
where all the prominent political and military personalities from France and

abroad are treated with the utmost discretion. since the hospital is not only

bound by professional secrecy but also by military secrecy. The doctors who work
there are the professional elite of the armed forces' medical service. These men,
most of then top "senior consultants," have at their disposal the best and most
advanced equipment, ranging from the laser in ophthalmology to computerized
monitoring of all major vital functions in the emergency services and in the inten-
sive care services. The technical facilities for radiology-~11 rooms-and for
radiotherapy are the most efficiently organized with absolute respect for the
patient. The equipment is among the most modern available. The surgical unit--
seven rooms, four of which are ventilated by laminar flew-~and the sterilization
unit were built and equipped in accordance with the strictest standards. It was

to this new "Val," which leaves nothing to be desired in comparison to the most
modern hospital in the world, is where Francois Hitterrand went.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A! 0920 hours, a brown unmarked car drove into the old Val—de-crace through the
entrance located on Saint-Jacques Street. That entrance does not have an automatic
barrier, and if the gates are opened in advance, an additional chance of prying
can be avoided. The car drove through the old military hospital, past a baroque-
style church, around the new building which had five levels above ground and two
under, and stopped at the lower ground-level entrance used for ambulances bringing
patients who want to avoid the upper ground-level, where too many people are
always milling around. Two men came with the president: one of his sons (or
somebody who looks very much like him) and a driver. At the entrance, he was met

by General Thomas, the top senior consultant of Val-de-Graee, who was suffering
from a very bad cold on that day, and by Professor Laverdan, a "big shot" in the
field of gastroenterology. Laverdan was given the appointment to Val-de-Grace
because it was known that his reputation would bring in very high-ranking patients.
This 55-year-old son of a policeman has surrounded himself with a team of hand-
picked doctora and, therefore, is assisted by the top specialists of the depart-
ment which he heads.

The automatic entrance door opened and Francois Mitterrand, flanked by his driver
and his son, walked through a corridor with off-white walls leading to the $081
(emergency service). There, for obvious reasons of security, the president of the
republic was registered under the name of Albert Blot or Biot. Those who saw and
recognized him would say later that his skin had a "lemon yellow" color and that
he was walking with difficulty, but did nos have to be carried on a stretcher or
wheelchair or perhaps he refused to do so. It was 0925 hours. What happened
afterwards? The president went into the radio-diagnosis room. In that large

roon there is a table covered with a sheet. 0n the ceiling, hanging for a rail,

is a huge articulated arm operated by remote control which can be beamed on the
exact spot selected by the operator. This operator was a 51-year-old chief
warrant officer who walks to the hospital every morning and happened to be on duty
on that day. He is the man who administered the intravenous injection to do a
scintiscan, a diagnostic procedure which consists in following the path of a radio-
active isotope emitting gama rays as it travels through the body. The sparkling
flashes produced by the isotope are recorded by a scintiscanner. which gives a
picture of the organ under observation indicating its contour, its unimpaired con-
dition, any tissue changes and so on. (The most typical example of this procedure
Is for the thyroid gland. The thyroid gland absorbs iodine. “hen the gland func-
tions normally, the injected iodine will be absorbed homogeneously. The path of
the iodine can be followed on a screen and the contour of the gland appears in a
photographic plate. When the gland is not functioning, nothing appears dn the
picture. If the gland is only functioning partially, some sections will show while
the rest will be black. If the gland contains cancerous nodules, black spots
called cold nodules will be visible).

On that Saturday morning, Francois Hitterrand, alias Albert Blot or Biot, remained
in an-de-Grace until 1030 hours, then went back to Bievre Street. That same day
at 1400 hours, Francois Hitterrand went back to Val-de-Grace driven in an unmarked
Critoen-X. The purpose of this new visit was to take a "delayed plate." This was
to see how the drug injected in the morning had concentrated. Only one person came
with the president and they followed the same route. Francois Hitterrand stayed in
Val-de-Grsce until 1700 hours. Dr Laverdan was accompanied by a radiologist,
Bouquet, an anesthesiologist, and a rheumatologist. In fact the entire emergency

25
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FINI<HHHC1AI.lﬂﬂE(M‘LY

Lcnm of anerdan'e service was on call. Since Laverdsn is a specialist in gastro-
cnterology, he was personally in charge of the case. As echography was also
perforned on the president of the republic. Between each series of tests, the
president rested in an austerely furnished room with orange walls.

The echography, a kind of sonar or radar which scans the body of the patient, took
65 sinutes. Each test, each result was verified twice.

The president was then told the results of the general checkup and whatever diag-
nosis was nade. which only Dr Laverdsn and General Tho-as know. It is reported
that following the visits and tests a decision was taken. in the utlost secrecy,
to alert 16 or so top specialists and to set up a permanent tean capable of treat-
ing the president in the Elysee should it become necessary.

If there is a copy of the case file on Albert Blot or Biot. it is locked in Doctor
Laverdan's safe at Val-de-Grace. It was not until the evening of Saturday. 7
November, after a long day of tests which should have been conducted under the ut-
nost secrecy, that the management of the Val Hospital was given for-a1 orders to
forget everything which had taken place on that day. But those who saw Franmis
Hitterrand were not aware that they should not have seen a certain Albert Blot or
Biot, and that nobody was supposed to have set that patient.

COPYRIGHT: 1981 par Cogediprcsse S.A.

8796
C30: 3100/157 END

26
FOR‘OFFKJA1.USE(M¥LY