FOR OFFICIAL USE ONI-Y

JPRS L/10351
25 February 1982

Near East/North Africa Report

(FOUO 8/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by e ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.5. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OUNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
NEAR EAST/NORTH AFRICA REPORT
(rouo 8/82)

Courems

P216 IAN GULF AFFAIIS

Various Iranian Acts on Arab Side of Gulf Described, Condemed
(Ahmad Hafiz; AL—HATAN AL-‘ARABI. 25-31 Dec 81)............

ALGERIA

Political System, Policies Defined
(HARGB TROPICAUX ET PEDITBRRANEENS, 1 Jan 82)............

Adoption of Information Code Noted
(HARGES TROPICAUX ET EDIERRANEJNS, 8 Jan 82)............

Brie fa
Algeria-Sovie t Cooperation

IRAQ

President Demands Military Sacrifice of Party Members
(AL-HAW AL~'ARABI, 8-14 Jan 82)

Information waister Criticizes Opponents, Imperialista
(Kamal Hasan Bakhit; AL-HA‘IAN Ala-'ARABI, 8-14 Jan '82).....

HAURITAN IA

Loans for Gorgol Nair Project Ratified
(NAMES TROPIGKUX ET IEDI'EERRANEENS, 1 Jan 82) . . . . . . . . . . .

MOROCCO

Article Examines Saharan War Status
(HARGiB TROPICAUX ET PEDITBRRANEENS. 8 Jan 82)...........

Phosphate Indus try Production, Development Reviewed
(WES TROPICAUX ET MBDI‘IERRANBENS. lo Dec 81) . . . . . . . . . . .
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

loan Granted for Boa-Gaffer Mining Development
(mains TROPICAUX E'r EDIERRANEENS, 1 Jan 82)................

Essaouira Gas Discovery lbubles Region's Production
(mam TROPICAUX ET EMERBANEBNS, 1 Jan 82)................

TUNISIA

Interview With Habib Aehour
(Habit) Achour Interview; AL-HATAN AL-‘ABABI, 11-17 me 81)....

Aftermath of Elections, New S-Yea: Plan Examined
(Francois P011; JEN! AFRIQUE, 30 me 81).....................

Article hflecte on $105: Democratization
(ﬂabib Boulares; JEUNE APRIQUB, 30 Dec 81)....................

Agreemnt Signed To Create Hating Company
(mamas TmPICAUX ET HBDI'ERRANEENS. 8 Jan 82)...............

B tie is
Mina-Kuwait Cooperation

-b-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

29

32

37

42

46

48
vmws IRANIAN m CH ms sun: or 601.? ntscnnrn, comm
Paris AL-HATAN AL-‘ARABI in Arabic No 254. 25-31 Dec 81 p 35

lirticle by Ahmad Hafiz: "The Dreams of Khomeyni's 'Bugire': Tehran Exported
Them, Dubai Discovered Then and Bahrain Squelched Themﬂ/

[135/ A plot has been eaqaosed which is being directed against the Arab Gulf and
has been aimed at the Gulf 's stability for a substantial period of time. The plan
that was thwarted in Bahrain a few hours before it was to be put into effect is a
chapter in a long story, an episode of sabotage in an ongoing serial that is being
prepared for the Gulf states through a theory which holds that an "Iranian security
belt" should be established which will realize the dreams of the "lhomeynist em-
pire." AL-HATAN AL-‘ARABI has gathered the following information on the latest de-
velopments.

Bulf security sources are in agreement on one scenario, which claims that the
rulers of Tehran, specifically Iranian intelligence, are financing the process of
"brainwashing" a number of deranged young people in the Gulf because they have been
won over by Khmyni's "philosophy" that the Arab Gulf regimes should be changed
and that a group of regimes should be established which are in harmony with the new
Iranian regime! What has happened in Bahrain seems like a coup-oriented act, and
it is not the first of its kind in the context of the Iranian plan, which in its
turn is a rush to the front lines to protect the Iranian regime from collapse.

The "coup-oriented” Iranian theory emerged after the first theory had failed; that
propounded "exporting the revolution" of nomeyni's after this "revolution“ had
lost its first ardor and the brilliance of the first weeks of excitement-~a bril-
liance that was connected not so much to the Ayatollsh's "revolution" as to the
result of the suffering that the fall of the Shah itself had caused.

Stagnant Merchandise

Therefore the "revolution" is merchandise that cannot be exported. From this point,
Iranian media set forth in quest of another method for dealing with all the Gulf
countries without exception, and that is the method of large and small explosions
in the terrorist manner--the assassination of officials, the destruction of of-
ficial and unofficial organizations, the terrorization of ordinary simple people
and deprivation of their stability.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Since Bahrain appears to be the first nut in the Gulf cluster, the closest to the
Iranians' reach, it was the first target. Encouraging the rulers of Iran to com-

it would subsequently be difficult to penetrate the Gulf security sphere. What was
required first and last was for Iran to continue to be the "policeman," just as it
was in the era of the former enpireuthe first and format policeman.

Bahrain," headquartered in Tehran. The people supervising this organization schemed
against the heart of the existing regime in Bahrain on the date of its celebration
of the national holiday, which fell on 15 December, and the declaration of the an-
nexation of Bahrain to Ir . Execution of the scheme was to be carried out start—
ing with the assassination of the suit of Bahrain, Shaykh 'Isa ibn Salmon Al
Khalifah, his prime minister. and a number of senior officials in it. Meanwhile
an emed group was to set off a number of dynamite charges and throw bombs at some
official installations and buildings. while another group would organize and lead
demonstrations of a popular character in support of the new "Islamic revolutionary"
regime, with posters calling for union with Iran! Radio Tehran would immediately
broadcast a statement supporting the new regime in Bahrain and declaring that any
aggression against Bahrain would be an aggression against Iran. According to the

Thus, as the conspirators planned it, the area would be plunged into chaos and the
Gulf Arabs would be indefinitely preoccupied with their security concerns.

Deliberation for the Moment

By the nature of the case, officials in Arab Gulf countries have not yet officially
made any declarations about these dimensions of the plot. There people's Opinions
tend to favor the need for careful deliberation in discovering all the secret
threads aimed at countries outside the area people prefer to wait until opportuni-
ties are appropriate before officially announcing the scheme in full. The Saudi
minister of the interior, Prince Nayif ibn 'Abdval-Mziz, referred to that when he
said, in exactly these words, ”Saudi Arabia is one of the countries that were the
targets" am "The security of Bahrai'l and the Gulf emirates is part of the security
of Saudi Arabia." The Saudi minister of the interior asserted, "Among those ar-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
It is worth pointing out that the first news on the "terrorist organization" was
distributed by the security agencies in Dubai, which arrested six persons after
they had become suspicious of their Bahraini passports. In the investigations.
they discovered that these were forged and handed the persons over to Bahrain,
which detained them on a preventive investigation basis. However, it soon discov-
ered that behind the six persons were 60 others from all the Arab Gulf countries
who had come to Bahrain via Tehran to dye the pure blue waters of the Gulf a deep
blood red, while other groups awaited them in the Gulf capitals to begin carrying
out the plot of an adventure of which the least that can be said is that it was

destructive.

COPYRIGHT: 1981 AL-h’A'l‘AN .\I.-'.-\RABI

1.1887
C80: 4&04/224

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POLITICAL SYSTEM, POLICIES DEFINED
Paris MARCHES TROPICAUX ET HEDITERRANEENS in French No 1886, 1 Jan 82 p 9
[Article: "A Clear Definition of the Political System")

[Text] Since he assumed his duties nearly 3 years ago, President Chadli Bendjedid
has been very sparing with doctrinal political declarations. The line that he in-
tended to follow has gradually been drawn, to be sure, both in the light of his de-
cisions and through the activities taken on by the Central Committee of the FLN and
by the National Popular Assembly. It thus emerged. for example, that contrary to
the expectations of certain commentators, the new chief of state did not intend to
restrict the party's role, and that quite to the contrary, he expected decisively
important collaboration from its Central Committee. But it is only in his "speech
to the nation" on 20 December 1981 that President Bendjedid has systematically de-
scribed the political functioning of the Algerian state of today. This part of the
presidential message merits particular attention.

The Guiding Role of the Party

After describing the most important activities carried out by the political leader-
ship in the past year, especially as regards satisfaction of the citizen's needs,
the president declared clearly: "Algeria is the country of the guiding party, not
the country of the management party." The party, he explained, had increased ac-
tivity in 1981, asserting its vanguard role in the conduct of the revolution, as
well as in expression of the needs and the hopes of the people; the major qualities
of the "guiding party" are "mutual confidence between it and the massesI its capac-
ity to identify with the objectives of the nation and assimilate the nation's ac-
tive forces." ‘

Among the party's recent achievements, the president listed: the increased numbers
of intellectuals and cadres joining, which has made it possible to improve the mix
of the different categories of citizens within its cells; the installation, at the
head of the Coordinating Council of each wilaya, of a mouhafadha secretary, chosen
from among the members of the Central Committee--a measure that strengthens the
party's guiding role on the spot and ensures a bond between the rank and file and
the political leadership; and examination by the Central Committee of the problems
of national interest, which are first debated at the rank-and-file level within
the organic frameworks of the party and of the state.

FOR‘OF1HC]AI.[H§E(MHLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The Elected Assemblies and Democracy

The president, next addressing the members of the National Popular Assembly direct-
ly. first stressed that the National Assembly is the first one to be elected by the
people in accordance with the provisions of the National Charter, and he expressed
his appreciation of their "sincere efforts." To be sure, the chief of state was
generally very sparing with resounding oratorical rhetoric; but nonetheless, the
modest level of the praise bestowed was noted.

Furthermore, this measured praise came after a rather severe evaluation of the
elected Assemblies of the wilayas and the communes, certain of which "have not al-
ways been up to the objectives of the revolution and the aspirations of the masses."

The Central Committee's Resolutions

A Central Committee decision--though an old one-«was stressed: involves medical
care without charge, which "shall forever remain an irreversible popular acquire-
ment," with every effort made to improve the quality of preventive medicine and
medical service.

The resolution on cultural policy was represented as further clarifying "all the
notions about the fundamental components of the nation," and as an achievement of
"responsible democracy: a nation with a centuries-old past, united by the language
of the Koran, that has forged itself in the crucible of Arab-Islamic civilization.
whose ranks have been solidly united in the course of the hard struggle for inde-
pendence and social justice, cannot help but be faithful to his history...and to
its principles."

The last session of the Central Cmmnittee--the sixth--studied the topic of the
private sector. The president remarked, in this regard, that "the strategic sec-
tors, which can influence political and economic decision-making." will remain in
the public sector, ensuring "the collective ownership of the means of production."
The "nonexploiting" private sector will have its place, aimed at "national develop-
ment and satisfaction of the citizens' needs." It should be complementary to the
public sector, "probably as a stimulant, and not as a substitute." it will be nec-
essary to define its field of action, and to "protect it from itself, so that it
will not veer toward the exploitation that our religion forbids, and not be a
threat to the advance of our socialist society."

It will be noted that the Central Committee's membership no longer includes Messrs
Bouteflika, Abdesselam and Ghozali, who were ministers under President Boumediene.

Production, Consumption and Morality

Speaking of the socioeconomic problems of production and consumption, President
Bendjedid introduced into the examination of them, for the benefit of the Algerian
people, a preponderant element of morality, and he gave some admonitions that were
of unaccustomed severity. Everyone, he said, "should ask himself what he has given
to his country, should question whether his output is in line with the pay and al-
lowances he receives.... There is no longer any room among us for anyone who lives
at the expense of society.... No excuses will be accepted any longer from people
who regress in their work." The rate of production has increased in many cases;
but, the president remarked, "it still has not reached the level that would merit
praise and admiration."

S

INJR 0F11C3Al.USEZ(NVLY
African and Arab Affairs

The president pointed out that Algeria belongs both "to the Arab Maghreb and to the
Saharan group of countries," and drew fr0m this fact the conclusion that "political
good-neighborliness" is necessitated: there is no ambiguity about the country's
borders, and the completion of their demarcation is ;n progress. The president's
extensive tour around Africa has made it possible, despite the diversity of the po-
litical systems, to strengthen friendship and ccoperszion.

while striving to maintain a "minimum of Arab solidarity,“ Algeria cannot accept
that "national rights should be ceded to the despoiler"--this being a discreet and
measured condemnation of the attitude of Egypt, which conflicts with the struggle
of the Arab people in occupied land. The entire nation will have to take up the
provocations suffered on the Golan Heights and in Jerusalem, and make "a new selec-
tion among friends, enemies and spectators."

On the other hand, "the unity of the Arab Maghreb constitutes a fundamental support
in the confrontation with racism and Zionism.... Thus should peace be reestab-
lished in this vital part of the Arab nation." Algeria is thus adhering to the so~
lution adopted by the OAU for the Sahrawi problem; while confirming its friendship
and consideration for its Moroccan brothers, it cannot ignore the struggle of a
people demanding its natural right: it will respect any choice expressed by the
people of the Hestern Sahara "in a free. general and global referendum, without
any foreign pressure or interference." Thus the president confirms that Algeria's
policy toward the Sahrawi problem has not changed. But he expressed this determin-
ation in very moderate terms and in as conciliatory a manner as possible, while
avoiding givingtheslightest pretext to horoccan sensibilities.

COPYRIGHT: Rene Moreux et cie, Paris 1982

11267
cso: 4519/90

FOR 0F1WC]A1.USE!DNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ALGERIA

ADOPTION OF INFORHAIION CODE NOTED
Paris MARCHES TROPICAUX ET HEDITBRRANEENS in French No 1887, 8 Jan 82 p 72
[Article: "Algeria: First Information Code"!

[Text] Algeria has provided itself with its first "Information Code," thus fil-
ling a juridical vacuum which has been noted since the independence of the
country, both in terms of the regulation of journalism as well as in terms of
information policy.

This "Information Code," approved on 28 December by the National Assenbly, which
amended some 60 of its articles and brought in new provisions to the government
draft, states in particular that "the right to i'Eormation is a fundamental right
of all citizens” and that the state must assure the vrovision of "complete and
objective information."

It also states that "information is an area where national sovereignty is exercised
under the aegis and direction of the National Liberation Front [FLN]." The
journalist is required to provide information "in the framework of the socialist
choices defined in the National Charter," while expressing "the revolutionary

will“ under the direction of the FLN.

The official text, which has not yet been published, defines in Article 9 the
conditions in which foreign institutions present in Algeria shall exercise their
information activities. It sets ou:the provisions of the monopoly by national
institutions in terns of information and regulates publicity-type information in
the country.

The code also defines the rights and duties of the journalist, in particular freedom
of access to sourcescf information, the legal protection of the profession and of

the journalist, the exercise by citizens of their right of response in the

media, the prohibition against publishers receiving funds from foreign organizations,

etc.

Penal provisions and punishments are also provided for in the text of the code to
prevent "abusive practices flowing from the privilege of writing and of providing
information," the daily newspaper EL MOUDJABID points out. The newspaper notes

in this respect that even though the National Assembly has been at some pains to
avoid making this law into a "Penal Code," it is nonetheless true that a "reading

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE GREY
of the document as a whole nevertheless serves to bring out a wide predominance
of penal provisions which could specifically block the possibility for the
journalist to inform himself."

It is therefore appropriate to "balance the judgment on each occasion when it is
a matter of discerning what was the good faith of the journalist and what were
the intentions which could be attributed to him," EL HOUDJAHID adds. The news-
paper considers that the "Information Code," "like every law, is valued by the
quality of its application and the use which is made of it."

COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux et Cie Paris 1982

5170
C30: 4519/97

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
INDR OFTNCJA1.USEZ(”ULY

ALGERIA

BRIEFS

ALGERIA-SOVIET COOPERATION--Some 100 projects are being carried out in Algeria with
the aid of the Soviet Union, declared Semion Skatchkov, chief of the Soviet delega-
tion, to the 12th meeting of the Soviet-Algerian Standing Committee for Coopera-
tion. In an interview in the journal INDUSTRIE SOCIALISTE reported in an AFP dis-
patch from Moscow, Skachkov stated that economic and technical cooperation between
the USSR and Algeria "is helping to solve the most important problems" of the de-
velopment of the Algerian economy. Skachkov referred to the construction of a
630-Mw thermal power plant at Jijel, a cement plant with annual output of 500,000
tons at Djelfa, a spare-parts shop in the metallurgical plant of El-Radjar, as well
as the enlargement of the drinking-glass factory built at Oran with Soviet assist-
ance. He added that the Alrar/Hassi-R'Mel gas pipeline is "an important project"
in Soviet-Algerian cooperation. "The contract for the equipping of a section of it
has already been signed by the competent organizations of the USSR and Algeria," he
indicated. In the agricultural sphere, Skachkov confirmed that Algeria and the
USSR had decided on joint construction of four irrigation dams in the northern re-
gions of Algeria. [Text] [Paris MARCHES TROPICAUX ET HEDITERRANEENS in French

No 1886, 1 Jan 82 p 18] 11267

COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux et Cie, Paris 1982

cso: 4519/90

hORlDFFﬂJAI.USE¢JNLY
PRESIDENT ems MILITARY SACRIFICE OF PART! mans

Paris AL-HATAN AL-'ARABI ‘in Arabic No 256, 8-14 Jan 82 p 23

Iﬁrucie: "Saddga llusayn: Self-Sacrifice in Combat Is the Prime Condition for.
Party Promotion'_'l

lzexgl The Iraqi People's Army’s participation in the war is a phenomenon that
acquires special inportance in the context of combat participation and party com-
sdtment to combat. President Saddam Husayn visited a special People's Army train-
ing cup and spoke with the fighting men.

Every day the commanders of the People's Army say goodbye to a detaclment headed
for the battlefronts and receive groups coming in from the front that have per-
formed their fighting role in combat.

Many are the groups of people who have participated more than three times in var-
ious sectors of the front, and many fighting man still are pouring forth, along
with many other persons whose turn has not yet come.

The last 2 weeks, many coaprehensive camp sessions were held involving a specific
type of fighting men distinguished by special characteristics that have attained
records which the Iraqi command has not announced.

These numerous large caps, which include tremendous groups of People's Army fight-
ing men, are broken down among a mmber of Iraq's governorates. It is said that
there are thousands of volunteers waiting for their turn to take regular training
in similar camps. These are the type of fighting man to whom the special charac-
teristics apply.

A few days ago the president of Iraq, Saddam llusayn, accoapanied by Hr Taha min
Ramadan, comander general of the People's Army, Samir al-Shaykhli, consander of
the People's Army for the Baghdad region, and a number of officials, visited these
camps and was received with great enthusiasm.

The Iraqi president became directly acquainted with the conditions of the fighting

men and witnessed a number of their training exercises. He entered into open dis-

cussions with than on training and proficiency in and the use of weapons. lie also

talked to them about the sp.'.rit of self-sacrifice and bravery by which the people's
fighting men mat be disting 'ished.

10

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In this regard, the Iraqi president asserted to the fighting men that bravery and
self-sacrifice were the most prominent conditions for party promotion, and the
other well known conditions came after then. He said, ”The spirit of sacrifice

will be a new criterion that will go into effect in the party apparatus, because
the Ba'th means self-sacrifice; it means abnegation, bravery and initiative."

The Iraqi president greeted the fighting non of the People's Army with appreciation
for their high morale and their enthusiastic rush to volunteer to sacrifice them-
selves for the country and the Arab nation. He stressed that this live presence of
the People's Army fighting men was the lid: between the two al-Qadisiyahs, the first
and the second, and stressed the people's inner strength and their vital persever-
ance throughout history.

COPYRIGHT: 1981 AL-NATAN AL-‘ARABI

11887
680: “solo/224

11

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
INFORMATION MINISTER CRITICIZBS OPPONENTS, IMPERIALISTS

Paris AL-HATAR AL- 'ABABI in Arabic No 256, 8-11. Jan 82 pp 20-22

IErticle by m1 Ilasan Bakhit: "Latif m1: Jasim to AL-HA'IMLAL-‘ARABI: The
Syrian Regime Supports Cooperstion Between Tel Aviv and Tehran'_'/

lgexgl when a whole people stand in the front-line trenches and the army realizes
a miracle, the media cannot remain in a state of passive absorption; from absorp-
tion they move to the initiative, and from the initiative to profound interaction
with the conscience of the army and the nation.

Letif Nasif Jesim, the Iraqi minister of culture and information, has realized this
combative pioneering achievement in the fighting media since the war began, as he,
in the uniform of the People's Army, has been in a state of permanent readiness and
extraordinary alertness. He is very strong and works without commotion in innete
solidarity with the struggle, keeping up with the unremitting daily acts of heroism
in all sectors of the front, on the battle line as in daily life.

The Iraqi medic today, with their agencies and orgenizations, are dynamic and do
not rest, are vital and do not let up, and are a true embodiment of the will of a
people who are fighting, building and singing, with blood and full vigor--building
domestic and national dignity and interacting with the world with the feeling of
people who are forging history.

AL-RATAN AL-‘ARABI met with the Iraqi minister of information and culture, and this
conversation took place on the media, the front, development, Golan, the conflict
with Israel and the Arab media in the struggle of destiny.

I asked the minister, "what goals are expected of the festival of Saddam's
Qadieiyah, which your ministry is organizing now? Has it achieved them?"

He replied, "The festival is e spontaneous tactical situation that all social
classes and popular organizations in the country heve pursued warmly to express
the victories that have been realized in the period of war that hes pessed, espec-
ially in 1981, inortalizing the menory of the martyrs of the new Qadisiyah who
gave without limit and whom the state of martyrdom has placed in a lofty, elevated
status which President Saddam Husayn expressed when he said "the martyrs are the
noblest of us all,’ being entitled to coworstion and glorification."

12

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

He went on, "The central observance is the 61st anniversary of the birth of our
giant army, which falls on 6 December. It is also an occasion for saluting this
prominent event, this immortal day which took part in the immortal battles of 1968,
1967, and 1973, and, before those, in 1941, and the battle of sl-Qsdisiyah. These
interconnected events have made people concerned with culture, arts, ideas and
other means of innovation move spontaneously in festivals, celebrations and carni-
vals that sing of these glorious deeds and stress in a warm, vivid manner their es-
sential solidarity with the heroic commander Saddam Busayn, from the far north of
Iraq to the south, from east to west--children, old men, women, military men,
civilians, students, peasants and workers, all at their places of work, expressing
this condition, which we consider to be an unusual one, by mobilizing, fortifying
and massing ranks. This interaction stresses that these great people possess un-
limited powers of dynamism and vitality. The joy is a state that the people ex-
pressed in the first days of the war; we find ourselves in the 16th month of the
war, and this dynamic state is increasing, becoming clear and deepening itself.

The picture today is riper than before. The songs are deeper, more involved, more
comprehensive. Such a state is rarely realized among any people."

He added, "Our people are fighting, singing and building a giant lofty edifice,
which you will witness and sense in all development institutions and all the in-
stallations of life.

"Therefore the festival of Saddam's Qadisiyah is a festival of victory. It is a
state of affirmation of the spirit of victory; it is a state of recalling the en-
tire sequence of events in the past that have elapsed in 16 months of war and are
still continuing. It comes as a culmination of the heroic struggles and giant vic-
tories that our heroic army realized in al-Khafajiyah and recently waged in West
Kilan and Sumar, by which it turned the mountains and plains of Iran into graves
where stubborn arrogant haughty heads have been buried. Things will remain like
this until they acknowledge all our rights to land and water and accept noninter-
vention in our domestic affairs in accordance with recognized international cri-
teria, rules and laws.

"I as an individual taking part in this festival feel unlimited happiness because
every day I discover that there are unusual powers in these people, powers for
poetry, powers for drawing and all other creative arts, powers that must be used
and directed in the proper, full manner in the various areas of the media."

l§uestiog7 what are the Iraqi media's most prominent approaches in the conflict?

[Answcgl The Iraqi media have not created a miracle. The miracle has been created
by our heroic army, by our extraordinary commander Saddam Hussyn, and by the loyal
masses of our people. The media have been and remain a reflection of this state
of affairs. They express this state, the state of victory, even if the expression
has so far been incomplete. The heroic army that is encamped on a front 1,200
kilometers long and 50 to 80 kilometers deep in Iranian territory is a matter that
was not easily realized. This state of mass upsurgence is a state that is not
often found in history.

13

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
All that the media have presented is to express themselves truthfully and in soli-
darity and convey the facts to the masses of the people and the world at a high
technical capability, through the living pictures of battle and by transporting
journalists to the battlefront and facilitating their arrival at the front.

By this description, I do not want to be humble or to belittle the role of the
media. The media are a basic central means for mobilizing, fortifying and rally-
ing public opinion around any great goal. However, this time the battle has been
greater than the volume of the media; no matter what mobilization and coverage we
have achieved, the battle is a greater and more imense truth than what we imagine
and what we have managed to convey.

l§uestion7 Nonetheless the media have managed to raise the morale of the fighting
men on the fronts and increase the cohesion of the dunestic front.

lénswegl That is true. However, the morale of our people has always been high.
and their adherence to their command has always been firm. Our people know every-
thing about their usurped rights to land and water and they know that they are a
people against whom aggression has been comitted and that they are not the ag-
gressors. It is the Iranians who started bombing and striking the towns of Handsli,
Zarbalmiyah and Khaniqin and tried to blow up more than one place in Baghdad, com-
mit aggression against women, old men, children and government officials, and form
a secret party linked to them inside Iraq. Our people know and fully realize all
these and other matters. They are a proud people who are not happy to have anyone
interfere in their affairs, and they adhere to their rights in full. Therefore
they have been totally fortified and mobilized, and the media have just been able
to convey the facts to the masses.

The Dangers of Khomeynism

l§uestion7 In the light of the new facts the war has brought forth in its 16th
month, how do you view the features of the coming stage politically and militarily
on the regional level?

/_A_nswe5/ We had hoped that no one would cosmzit aggression against us or interfere
in our affairs, but the war occurred, and we achieved brilliant victories in it.
Since 28 September l981, President Saddam Husayn has unilaterally suspended the
war in the hopes that the Persians would revert to their senses and their right
minds, but, in spite of all the appeals, all the stands and all the assertions of
peace, the Iranians' stubbornness has increased and they imagine that that is weak-
ness on Iraq's part. However, the appeals to suspend the war on Iraq's part have
begun to assume great scope within Iran itself and many bodies have begun to ask
Khaneyni's clique "Why do you insist on continuing the war at a time when Iraq is

declaring its readiness to stop it, in triumph, while it is strong and able to
continue?"

These appeals have therefore added a new problem to the series of the Khaneyni's
regime's problems, and the proof is the proliferation of atatunents that tell the

people not to listen to these appeals and other statmnts made by the
Iranian media.

14

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
l’UK UFLLLML U): Uﬂhl

Our position on the state of war is not a tactical one, it is one of principle,
and it is one of principle on the state of peace as well. It is a state we are
living through with a live conscience whose basis is our rights in full to land,
water, sovereignty, noninterference in our affairs, an absence of aggression
against us and the refusal to seek further rights by force.

However, Khomeyni the senile swindler, who has lost all the properties of civilized
man, does not understand this thinking. He is not just with his people, so how can
he be just with other peoples? Khomyni has turned Iran into a slaughterhouse and
a great bloodbath. They boast that they have tens of thousands of prisoners, and
that they have executed 90 percent of the opposition, and we know that the current
Iranian opposition is what launched the revolution, while Khomeyni was living in a
suburb of Paris.

When the ruler's position on his people takes this form, it is natural that he will
be more harsh and tyrannical with other peoples.

Exposed Cards

l§uestiog7 Do you believe that indoctrination and preparation have been made avail-
able for the rest of the masses in the various Arab countries?

IAnswegl We are carrying out indoctrination through an unusual nedia and cultural
effort. In the first place we are concerned with our own people because we are
waging the war in proxy for the whole Arab people and are striving to indoctrinate
this nation about the dangers looming over us.

The recent events that have occurred in Bahrain constitute serious additional proof
that the Iranian regime does not want to stay within its borders. Its aspirations
extend to all Arab territory, and what they are saying about "exporting the Islamic
revolution" and other claims a Persian Onan, a Persian Iraq, and a Persian Aden--
this all shows a deep-rooted resentment and backward mentality that is known for
its hostility to the Arab nation.

/§uestiog7 What role is requested if the Arab media is to break the noose of the
blackout on the level of the authorities and crystallize the popular Arab position
and nave it forward?

/Answe5/ Brother, we absolutely do not have any doubts on whether there are any
sincere Arabs opposed to this war of ours, because we have faced an attack, and
this attack is threatening the independence of our country and threatening the in-
dependence of the Arab nation.

Our faith is firm that no sincere noble Arab can stand against us in this struggle.
But for the cards to be shuffled, and for Islam to be mixed up with Arabhood,
Arabhood with Islam, and Islam with nationalism, then with the participation of
the Persians in the liberation of Palestine, and other appeals, these are all
camouflages whose real nature time will lay bars.

15

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The greatest proof that the cards have begun to be exposed is the armaments cooper-
ation between Iran and the Zionist entity. This is material proof, Rafsanjani has
admitted it, and the former president, Abol Hasan Bani-Sadr, has confirmed it in
his capacity as the former commander general of the Iranian armed forces. In addi-
tion there are the documents which Has'ud Rajavi, the leader of the opposition
Hojahedin-e Khalq organization, has highlighted and published, and the crash of

the Argentinian airplane. All this proof has categorically confirmed that the
Iranian regime is collaborating with the Zionist enemy in a secret manner to destroy
the Arab nation.

Nonetheless, in spite of the confirmation of the relationship, Hafiz al-Asad is
still offering the Iranian regime tanks, artillery, missiles and military advice
to help it keep on with the war and kill Iraqi soldiers who hastened to save
Damascus from falling in 1973.

There has been a change in the Arab media, and it is certainly an excellent trans-
formation. On the point that some Arab leaders are adopting a negative position,
I can say that there will be an accounting for everything.

l§uestio§7 What news is there on the killing of Iraqi prisoners and the blowing
up of the Iraqi embassy in Beirut, with the cooperation of Syrian intelligence?
Has the intention in blowing up the embassy to cover up the annexation of Golan?

lénswegl First, regarding the prisoners, this is a vile, immoral thing. History
will remember it for hundreds of generations, because prisoners have religious
rights and legal rights. The Persians' venturing to kill prisoners is expressive
of a state of terrible degeneration. It is a process which has removed the veil
they hide behind, which is Islam.

We are not surprised that the Iranian regime has perpetrated such a vile crime,
because it slaughters children and women, even pregnant women. Isn't that in its
own right a vile crime? We expect them to do more if they can; it is normal for
them to slaughter captured Iraqi soldiers who are fighting for the independence of
their nation and their usurped rights.

Second, regarding the blowing up of the embassy, the people who confessed to the
abominable crime are the ones who set it off, and we have enough evidence for that.
The people who committed that crime are accomplices of the Persian regime and the
Syrian regime's intelligence.

Third, we do not believe that the embassy operation was intended to secure the an-
nexation of Golan. For 14 years Golan has been under Israeli control--do you be-
lieve that a Syrian decree will bring back territory the enemy annexed 14 years
ago? Will it regain it by its own decree? We believe, indeed have faith, that
land that has been taken by force can be reclaimed only by force, whether or not
the Zionist entity acknowledges that it has annexed it. The territory will he re-
claimed by feree-otrue Arab force.

He stand severely against this tyrannical Zionist decision and condemn it with all
our power, because the territory of the Golan is the equivalent of any plot of

16

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

land in Palestine or Iraq; it is Arab land and does not belong to Hafiz al-Asad
or anyone else.

The Opposition and the War

I§uestiog7 Hould an Iranian regime headed by Abol Hasan bani-Sadr, Has'ud Rajavi.
Shapur Bakhtiar or the Iranian army be able to take a decision to end the war and
respond to Iraq's legitimate demands?

[Ensues-l- we, as President Saddam husayn said, are prepared to cooperate with any
party in the opposition in order to rid Iran of nomeyni's clique.

We will welcome any party that comes and is prepared to stq: the war and negotiate
on the basis of Iraq's legitimate rights.

l§uestiog7 Have any Iranian opposition parties responded to President Saddam
Buaayn's appeal?

linear] I have no knowledge of that and I do not follow that subject.

/§uestio_n7 Are there any new Arab or international efforts to resolve the conflict
between Iraq and the Iranian regime? Specifically, has Algeria declared its readi-
ness to make such efforts?

lznsweﬂ I have not heard about that.

[Question/ In the international and Arab media, there are two attitudes: one
stems from hostility toward Iraq, its experiment and its leaders, and the other
from the ally or friend's concern for Iraq, its experiment and its leadership.
However. people are united in wondering about the extent of Iraq's losses and mil-
itary and economic exhaustion through the war. How do you cope with these wonder-
ings, especially as regards the issue of econoadc development?

[Znswey we say that many people are pained by the victory and are pained by the
process of development and the continuous nature of this process, as well as the
excellent international position Iraq enjoys as a result of numerous factors,
principal among them the ability and genius of President Saddam Rusayn, aa a great,
magnificent figure in the nonaligned walnut. All these factors intermingle and
constitute a collection of grievances, a state that in some aspects resembles
jealousy. However, we are concerned about our people, who are zealous over their
experiment and are sacrificing themselves on its behalf. Day after day they in-
crease in pride and respect for themselves, their glories, their history and their
leaders. Day after day they see the land of Iraq continuously changing, the faces
of the Iraqis changing, and even the skies of Iraq changing, for the better and
for the preferable. 1111s is the true situation we are going through.

He also want Iraq's brothers to be informed of this situ.-’.'ion, to see it, and to
experience it, because it is basically their experiment, because it is the state

that we would like to become widespread, not in the form of a horizontal extension
but in the form of rays with a psychological, economic and social effect.

17

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The efforts of 2 million Arab brothers in our country and in our midst is s state
of affairs which we consider healthy and a mtual contact of principles. This has

all been created through a new experiment, the experiment of construction and the
experiment of development.

As to whether anyone wants to say that Iraq has lost lunch or little, I say that
everything is of little importance in the face of independence, the preservation

of dignity and the preservation of the soil. Development is of no benefit, billions
of diners accumulated are of no benefit, a strong army is of no benefit, if the
independence of the country is lacking and if the country is not beloved and is not
noble. What is the benefit of tremendous development if sovereignty is lacking?
"hat is the benefit of plans, principles and books if foreigners are trawling our
land underfoot, or a portion of it, as is now happening in Golan, Palestine and

elsewhere? Why this blood, this effort and this suffering? It is for the sake of
independence and sovereignty.

What is the difference between Gaza and Sayf Sa'd, between Jaffa and the Shatt al-
'Arab, between Zayn al-Qaws and Golan? That is all the Arab territory which we
went to be sovereign, and we are saddened when any square inch of it is foreign.

We thank the people who grieve over our losses but we know full well what we want,
and that is enough.

l§uestiog7 How do you evaluate the Arab and international Media?

lénswegl The Arab media in general, except in rare instances, are responding to
us to the utmost in the war. The media of Kuwait, the media of the Gulf, the
Lebanese media, the press abroad except for two publications in Lebanon that repre-
sent two political regimes, and some Lebanese papers that do not write because they
face deterrent pressure from the Syrian regime--however, we know that everyone's
intentions are on our side and their hearts are with us.

The media that are intensely hostile to us are primarily the Zionist media and the
American imperialist media. The international media which are not suspect are
taking a fair position and on some occasions are neutral.

The Nonaligned Sunlnit

Concerning the nonaligned sunnit, the Iraqi minister of information and culture
said, "Preparations are reaching an end in the form of halls, villas, buildings,
staffs responsible for administration and translation, secretaries and companions.
Everything that is needed is fully ready. The conference will meet at its scheduled
time, with God's pemission."

Finally, I asked, "How do you interpret the broad mass rallying, the great love
that the Iraqi people feel for President Saddam Husayn, although the war is enter-
ing its 16th month, and the fact that the domestic front is still strong and grow-
ing in strength with every day?"

He replied, "I wrote an article about that once in which I said that he is a
state, a symbol, a leader, a brother, a comrade and a friend.

18

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"Every Iraqi feels that Saddam Husayn is in his mind and in his conscience, be-
cause he is close to him; every male and female Iraqi is waiting for Saddam ﬂusayn
to visit him and take breakfast, lunch or dinner with him, or drink tea with him.

”This state which has been created is an unusual one. Every day Saddam Rusayn re-
ceives thousands of telephone calls from citizens and answers them calmly and
patiently. He receives the hundreds of thousands of letters the citizens send him,
and also answers them calmly. Saddam Busayn is in the village, the town, the
plains, the mountain, the factory, the field, the school, the university, and in
every installation in life.

"This state must be matched by a state of love, embracing and unlimited support
expressed by the Iraqis in numerous forms and various ways.

"This should also be mathd by the fact that Saddam liusayn is the son of the
Tigris and Euphrates, the son of Barada, the son of the Nile, the son of our land
and sky. That is the date that was created in the stage when we were in the great-
est need of a knight and brave comander to lead this nation from victory to vic-
tory, from triumph to triunph, from glory to glory.

"Finally, let me thank you in person and thank the magazine AL-HATAN AL~'ARABI

and our brother Valid Abu Zahr. I am happy that he has lost more than 15 kilograms.
This is further proof that AL-HATAN AL-‘MI is always experiencing a state of
vitality."

COPYRIGHT: 1981 AL—NATAN AL-'ARABI

11887
080: 4406/22!»

19

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
LOANS FOR GORCOL NOIR PROJECT RATIFIED
faris MARCHES TROPICAUX ET MEDITERRANEBNS in French No 1886, 1 Jan 82 p 22]
[Article: "Gorgol Noir: Ratification of Loan Agreements")

[Text] On 29 April 1981, the Moroccan JOURNAL OFFICIEL published three ordinances
of 23 April relative to the loan agreements and the tax regime for the Gorgol Noir
project. The following agreements were ratified:

--the loan agreement and its appendixes signed in Nouakchott on 1 March 1981 by the
representative of the Mauritanian government and the Saudi Development Fund rela~
tive to the financing of a part of the Gorgol Noir project and involving a loan of
SRls 33.5 million;

--the loan agreement signed in Abu Dhabi on 6 November 1980 by the representative
of the government of Mauritania and the Abu Dhabi Fund for Arab Economic Develop-
ment relative to the financing of a part of the Gorgol Noir project and involving a
loan of 24 million dirhams from the United Arab Emirates;

--the credit agreement signed in Hashington on 21 November 1980 by the Mauritanian
government and the International Development Association relative to the financing
of a part of the project and involving a loan of SDR [Special Drawing Rights]

11.4 million ($15 million);

--the loan agreement signed in Jeddah on 15 November 1980 by the government of the
Islamic Republic of Mauritania and and Islamic Development Bank relative to the
financing of a part of the Gorgol Noir project and involving a loan of 4.62 million
Islamic dinars;

--the loan contract and its appendixes No 46 [as published] signed in Rome on

24 October 1980 between the Mauritanian government and the International PUnd for
AgriCultural Development relative to the financing of a part of the project and in-
volving a loan of SDR 7.6 million;

--the loan agreement signed in Tripoli on 6 October 1980 with the Libyan Arab Jama-
hiriya relative to the financing of a part of the Gorgol Noir project and involving
a loan of $10 million.

Finally. Ordinance No 81-088 of 23 April 1981 establishes the tax regime applicable
to the Operation Gorgol Noir project. The companies to which contracts have been
awarded and their Mauritanian and foreign subcontractors approved by the adminis-
tration, responsible for carrying out the Operation Gorgol Noir project (Feumbleita
dam, the canal, the Gorgol Noir rice-growing area, and the administration and pro-
duction buildings), will enjoy, for the entire duration of the project, total ex—

20

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

emption from the current-action tax and from all customs duties and taxes as well
as from any levy having the character of an indirect tax on the materials, sup—
plies, spare parts and tires necessary for carrying out the work. The materiel
necessary for carrying out the work will be placed under the exceptional temporary
admission regime for the entire duration of the work and the time needed for reex-
portation of it. The foreign experts working within the framework of the project
will enjoy exceptional temporary admission of one personal vehicle per expert.

COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux ct Cie, Paris 1982

[1267
C80: 10519/90

21

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ARTICLE BXAHINES SAHARAN WAR STATUS
Paris HARCHES TROPICAUX ET HEDITBRRANBENS in French No 1887, 8 Jan 82 p 67
[Article: "Will the Saharan Har Change in Character?“]

{Text} Morocco has decided to put an end to the “outpost battle": the effort was
using up its troops. A regiment which had spent a long tour of duty in the iso-
lated position of Guelta Zemmour seems to have become demoralized. On 13 October
it was found no longer fit for combat. The army general staff in Rabat did not
think it needed to immobilize a new unit in this unsatisfactory mission. In the
course of November not only Guelta Zemnour, just barely reoccupied, but also Bir
anaran, another fortified position situated in the middle of the desert east of
Dakhla, which had just undergone two prolonged harrassing attacks by the forces of
the POLISARIO Front, were evacuated.

This double disengagement was carried out under excellent conditions without
hostile forces intervening to make it difficult. In fact the weakness of the
POLISARIO Front is that it has no air force. Lacking such a force, it often does
not have a rapid means for the collection of intelligence. In any event it did
not learn of the withdrawal of the Moroccans until well after it was completed.

At Guelta Zemmour the defensive and logistical positions, already seriously
damaged in the course of the November fighting, were totally destroyed. Bir
Enzaran, whose defensive perimeter was much less extensive, on the other hand
was abandoned almost intact, apparently with a certain amount of haste. However,
the Sahraoui state that the well was poisoned.

In leaving these outposts situated in the depths of the desert the Moroccan forces
have given up for the immediate future further raids in the eastern part of the
former Spanish Sahara. However, such operations no doubt did not figure in their
plans for the moment. In addition they are no longer in a favorable position for
an eventual exercise of the "right of pursuit" into Mauritanian territory. But that
is no longer a very current question. Following the Guelta Zemmour affair the
Moroccan forces had thought they had detected Sahraoui concentrations at Bir
Aydiynt. in Mauritanian territory. and the air force bombed them. However, it was
soon established that the Sahraoui were located a few hundred meters away from
that point, on the territory of the former Spanish Sahara, territory which they
state they never left in the course of the movements and fighting around Guelta
Zemmour.

22

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONIN

0n the other hand the Moroccan defensive deployment has not been really weakened
by these evacuations. It is not true, as has been written at times, that Cuelta
Zemmour "protected" Bou Craa and Bir Enzaran Dakhla. The light Sahrnoui

columns easily bypassed, at a good distance and most often without even being
detected, these positions, which were in no sense "unavoidable routes of movonentﬁ

in the event the Moroccan Government has simply given up a presence for prestige
purposes. Its flag has ceased waving in the middle of the Sahraoui desert. Out-
side the "useful triangle" of the phosphate mines of Ben Craa, the traditional
capital of Smara, and the port of Laayoun, the Moroccan Government only covers
the coastal enclaves of Boujdour, Dakhla, and Lagwira. However, it considers that
this small change on the war map, although it serves enemy propaganda, provides
the Moroccan general staff with the highly valued possibility of achieving a sav-
ings in the use of its forces and the prospect of regrouping them.

However, the Sahraoui. as might have been expected, see things from another point
of view. According to statements made to EL MOUDJAHID (Algiers, 2 November) by
Ibrahim Chali, Sahraoui defense minister, it was not so much Guelta Zemmour which
was the target in the middle of October but rather the Moroccan forces grouped
near Smara and Boo Craa. He said, "He made than bring out forces camped within
this 'useful triangle.‘ We forced them to regroup and we concentrated our fire-
power on them. Our objective was to wipe out a regiment of 2,000 men, earmarked
to come to the support of the units located outside the 'useful triangle.'"

Nlll heavier Armament Increase the Scale of the Fighting?

The Sahraoui therefore pride themselves on having forced the Moroccans onto the
defensive. However, according to the Moroccans, this kind of defensive deployment
is a victorious one and no doubt only temporary. Since the completion last spring
of "the defensive wall" the Moroccan forces have stated that their deployment

has never been penetrated or even seriously attacked by POLISARIO elements. The
latter, for their part, have reported many acts of harrassment of the "wall," whicr
no doubt have taken place at a good distance, and the shelling of places like lag
and Lemsseyed. However, it was alleged only once that they had made a breach for
a period of time at a point in the Moroccan deployment. One of the last great
undertakings which the POLISARIO Front claims, the taking of the post at Kheig
Afteita, 50 km southeast of Assa, is located on Moroccan territory near the
Algerian border, that is, in a region far from the center and not covered by the
defense line.

To do more it would have been necessary for the POLISARLO Front to have heavy.
very long—range weapons, capable of reaching not only the garrisons and strong
points of the "wall," but the concentration points of the Moroccan reaction units.
The thraoui are the first to admit that the best of their armament comes from
materiel seized in combat from the Royal Armed Forces and even say that they did
not have SAM-6 [Soviet-made, hand held surface to air missiles] missiles at

Guelta Zemmour. will they now ask the Libyans and Algerians to obtain Soviet arms
for them corresponding to these long-range missions?

In any case the Moroccan: have gone on ahead. Referring specifically to the use--
although this is denied by the Sahraoui--of SAM-6 missiles at Guelta Zammuur,

23

FOR 0 ’
they are asking that the United States both speed up the shipment of arms and
missiles already promised and the provision of further materiel. Concerning the
equipment already promised, this involves above all 108 M—60 heavy tanks. radio

and telecommunications equipment, and electronic equipment. Concerning the further
materiel desired, no details have been provided as yet. In any case it can be
assumed that this additional armament is not intended solely to strengthen a
defensive posture which is already rather strong, but rather that it pertains to
longer-term offensive plans.

In effect, given the present condition of the forces on both sides and the fortifi-
cations which have been completed, the Moroccan general staff considers that a
Sahraoui offensive coming from the other side of the "wall" is practically impos-
sible. Moroccan diplomacy, which is engaged discreetly but effectively in the
normalization of relations with Algeria, seems to consider it unlikely that the
Libyan commitment to the POLISARIO Pront will be increased. Libya is involved in
other tasks and is not very desirous of new complications at a time when Colonel
Qadhdhafi is about to assume the presidency of the OAU [Organization of African
Unity]. The defensive status quo assumed by Morocco could therefore go on for some
time.

However, the provision of additional offensive equipment, and in particular heavy
tanks and combat aircraft, would make it possible to move from this defensive stage
to active Operations. While neglecting the southern and central part of the

former Spanish Sahara, the Moroccan Army could concentrate its efforts on the
eastern part of the Seguiet a1 Hamra area, held for a long time by the POLISARIO
Front and which constitutes, for the latter, "the liberated Sahara."

The Moroccan deployment, resting in the north on Djebel Oursksiz, to the west on
the "wall" and on Smara and Bou Craa, squares off this Sahraoui quadrilateral
area, whose other sides are made up by the frontiers with Algeria and Mauritania.
Conditions are favorable to attack an enemey concentrated in a narrow space.
Certain indications make it possible to think that the Moroccan general staff is
studying this possibility. In this way a military solution would be prepared
against the possibility, in no way unlikely, that a diplomatic solution would
fail.

COPYRIGHT: Rene Moreux et Cie Paris 1982

5170
C50: ‘519/97

25

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MONCCO

PHOSPHATE INWSTR! PRODUCI'IQI, DEVELCPMEM' awn-wan
Paris MMCHES TROPICAUX El' MEDITERRANBBIS in French No 1882, 4 Dec 81 pp 3236-3237
[Text] Continuation of the Phosphate Plan

Included within the frameer of the 1981-1985 five-year plan adopted by the Chanber
of Deputies at the end of July is the continuation of the phosphate plan for the
industrial sector. and especially the canpletion of Marc: Phosphone III and IV mm,
12 June 1981, p 1586); the plan anticipates an werall gross investment sum or
around 111 billion dirhams (1 dirham - appratimately Pr 1.05) . France will con-
tribute to the implementation and financing of this plan. The principle of French
cooperation was confirmed in Rabat at the end of October at the meeting of the
fourth session of the joint intergovernmental committee: following this meeting.
Claude Gaeyssm. minister of external relations. indicated that an agreement was
being prepared for a contributim of 13 to 14 billion. and he anncunced upcoming
meetings between Mohaned Karim Lamrani, general manager of the OCP (Moroccan Phosphate
Office) , and the French minister d econany and finance. Jacques Delors (am, 6
November 1981. p 2813).

CEDIES (Socio-Econanic Research and Information Center) , an agency of com (Moroccan
General Bccncmic Federation). analyzing the OCP report for 1980. recently revealed
the current data and outlook for the phosphate industry fran the point of view of
production and developnent. The importmce of phosphates for Morocco was emphasized;
Morocco is the world's leading exporter. and its estimated reserves of some 58
billion tons account for three quarters of worldwide reserves.

In the first place, the development of world phosphate production is examined here.
The document brings to light the fact that as the QC? has tried to raise prices,
this nevertheless has had the effect. tn the one hand. of encouraging phosphate
production in several countries through the opening of new mines in diverse areas
(Brazil, People's Republic of China. l’inland. and sane Middle Eastern countries) .
and. on the other hand. of spirring the United States. Morocoo's principal rival, to
once again begin extracting its ores. in spite d their poor quality and of the fact
that they formerly had not proven very profitable.

In this way. worldwide producticn, continuing its rising curve, increased by 7 million
tons (or +5.6 percent) in 1980 to reach 135.86 million tons. The most important
increases. outside of the United States. the Soviet Union, and China. were. as in the
preceding year, those of Brazil. whose productim reached 2.9 million tons (+72 percent).
and of the Middle Eastern countries. especially Jordm (+50 percent).

25

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
In like manner, total deliveries of phosphate increased by 4.9 percent. Last year's
figure was 136.36 million tms, compared to 129.96 million tons in 1979. Deliveries
slightly exceeded world production, to the benefit of the United States, which lowered
its stocks by 2.3 million tons. Dmestic deliveries by producer countries to their
local industries increased by 9.9 percent to reach 84.08 millim tons, or 61.7 percent
of total deliveries, compared to 58.9 percent in 1979. This hurt exports, which
meanwhile dropped from 53.45 millim tms to 52.28 million tons; they had increased
by 4.1 percent from 1978 to 1979.

However, if secondary products from phosphates are included, it can indeed be seen
that, all together, world exports in 1980 represented the equivalent of 74.8 million
tons of phcsphate, compared to 73.2 million tens in 1979: secondary products
accounted for 30 and 26.9 percent, respectively. Furthermore, projections have

been made that phosphate and secondary product exports in 1985 will be around 95
million tons of ore, 38 percent of this in the form of phosphoric acid and fertilizer.

This development indicates a structural transformation which has characterized the
world phosphate market since the beginning of the 1970's and which might particularly
be explained by the following: the increase in the consumption of fertilizer and
other secondary products in all producer countries: and the establishment, near the
deposits, of a phosphoric acid and fertilizer industry basica1ly oriented toward the
exporting of these products.

Morocco, Tunisia, and Middle Eastern countries have already embarked upcn this route.
Senegal will soon follow suit. As for Morocco, the OCP, whidr accounts for 40 percent
of the country's total exports and creates 7 to 8 percent of the GNP, wishes to further
develop its industry. Its projects will focus, on the one hand, on strengthening its
phosphate production potential, and, m the cther hand. on developing an increasing
share of on-site ore production. For this it will rely upon Morocco's assets. among
them its high ore cmtent and a geographical situation which gives it access to major
markets under conditions that are more advantageous than those of most of its rivals.

Production. . .

Regarding production, the OCP's development projects anticipate a doubling of extraction
capacity between now and 1986. These projects, region by region, are as follows:

Khouribgau'rhe deposits developed in this region supplied 14.7 million tons, or 70.6
percent, of a total production of 20.8 million tons in 1980. Of this, 11.7 million
tons came from surface mines and 3 million tons from underground mines.

The three plants involved in the expansion project are:

"The "Recette IV Surface Mine,“ scheduled to open during the second quarter of 1983
(projected capacity will go from 2.6 million tons in 1984 to 3.9 million tons in 1986).

--'rhe "Meraa El Ahrech Couche 1! Sector,” with a projected capacity of 3.5 million tms

per year. Its production will go from 1.5 million tons in 1984 to 2.5 million tons
in 1986.

26

FOR OPTICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

--The "Sud Recette x Surface Mine,“ which should produce 6 million tons per year.
It is scheduled to begin operation in 1985 with an extraction of 2 million tons.

YousaoufiauThe prime concern here is black phosphate, for which the project antici—

pates tpeninq two units. This will bring productitn from 600,000 tons in 1981 to
4.5 million tons in 1986.

In 1980, Yousscufia was responsible for 26.4 percent of the OCP's total production,
with 5.5 million tons: of this, 3.0 million tons were extracted underground and 1.7
million tons at the surface.

sidi Hajjaj--The phosphate from this deposit will be intended for export after
washing and drying at the Jorf lasfar site. Extraction will take place at the surface

and will involve 3 million tons in a primary phase beginning in 1984, the scheduled
opening date.

Meskala—-Exploitaticn of this important deposit will allow 10 million tons of
phosphate to be produced in the final phase.

Development. . .

Regarding develoment, in addition to strengthening the phosphoric acid production
capacity of the Safi complex, two complexes are scheduled to be built at Jcrf Lasfar
and Nador.

At Safi, the additional units involve “Marco Phosphore 1, Fourth Line," with an annual
potential of 165,000 tons of P205, and "Marco Phosphore 11," designed to deV9109
phosphate from Benguerir, with an annual capacity of 495,000 tms of P205. These
will begin operation in the very near future. It bears mentioning that in 1980, the
Safi complex achieved overall acid production of 573,811 tons of P205 from 2.3 million
tons of phosphate.

At Jorf Lnsfar there is the "Marco Phosphore III-Iv" group, intended for production of
phosphoric acid and fertilizer. This includes eight production lines for acid, each

with a capacity of 500 tms per day, me unit for 70-percent P205 superphosphoric
acid, and one manufacturing unit for diamoniac fertilizer.

The Nador complex (Maroo-Phosphore Nord) . scheduled to open in 1905, will have a

capacity of 600,000 tons of P205 per year. This represents the development of 2.5
million tons of phosphate.

The operation of these diverse units will create some 7,500 new jobs. This will
strengthen the current OCP work force. which is made up of 21.704 blue- and white-
collar workers, 3,775 technicians, supervisors and administrative executives, and 489
engineers and associated workers, for a total of 25,960, of when 79 percent work
solely for the OCP.

Attempts at extraction of uranium and characterization of acids have also been under-
taken in Morocco and abroad; one meeting concerning this has been held with major

producers of uranium from phosphoric acid regarding the choice of a process and of
the company that will be respmsible for completion of the first industrial unit.

27

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
OCP development projects also include efforts in the areas of scientific and
technical research, training. and the strengthening of activities of subsidiary
companies.

In the training area, there are plans to q>en a supervisory school at Safi for the
purpose of training team leaders for the chemical industry, a training center at
Benguerir for vocational workers, and a training center at El Jadida for advanced
technicians.

At the subsidiary level. it should be noted that Marphooean, which at present has
available six phosphoric acid tankers and one gas tanker, for an annual transport
capacity of 1 million tons of acid and 55,000 tons of gas, will soon be equipped
with four new phosphoric acid tankers with a tctal capacity of 41,200 tons, and
three bulk carriers of 37,000 tons each, loaded weight.

COPYRIGHT: Rene Moreux et Cie Paris 1981

9927
C50: 4519/65

28
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MOROCCO

LOAN GRANTED FOR BOU-CAFFER MINING DEVELOPMENT

Paris MARCHES TROPICAUX ET HEDITERRANBENS in French No 1886, 1 Jan 82 p 19

[Article: "Loan of DH 15 Million from the BNDE (National Economic Development Bank)
to the BRPM (Mineral Prospecting and Investment Office) for Mining the Sou-Gaffer
Deposit"]

[Textl Moussn Saadi, minister of energy and mining research, presided, in Rabat on
22 December, over the ceremony of the signing of an important loan agreement be-
tween the BNDE and the BRPM. This loan agreement, signed by Abdelkader Benslimsne,
general manager of the BNDE, and Mohamed Shahid, general manager of the BRPM, is
intended for the financing of the project to work the mines of the Sou-Gaffer sec-
tor in Ouarzazate province.

In the speech he gave on this occasion, the minister stressed the importance of the
project in question. The Sou-Gaffer deposits are a part of the deposits of pre-
cious metals, silver and gold, in addition to copper, whose exploitation has been
included among the priorities of the 1981-1985 Five-Year Plan.

Through the intermediary of its subsidiary SODBCAT (Anti-Atlas Copper Development
Co), the BRPM has concentrated its action on the Bou-Gaffer district, which con-
tains the principal deposits of auroargentifetous cooper presently confirmed. The
results of the exploration and studies programs have led to the decision to open
four mining centers in 1982: Tiouit, Tizi Moudou, Akka N'Oulil and Asfalou.

The reserves already brought to light make it possible to set up mining units
equipped with two operational installations: one of 200 tons per day at Tiouit, and
the other of [00 tons per day at Asfalou.

At the outset, these centers will produce annually: 1,500 tons of lZ-percent copper
concentrate containing 185 kg of gold per ton [as published], 1,350 g or silver per
ton; 1,100 tons of 30-percent copper concentrate containing 3,600 g of silver per
ton. At current prices, this production represents a turnover on the order of

DH 35 million.

The total investments will be on the order of DH 55 million. The BNDE will con-
tribute to the financing of this investment with a medium-term credit of DH 15 mil-
lion. Finally, the opening of these new mines will make it possible to create 200
jobs and will contribute to the development of a regions whose nonmining resources
are very limited.

COPYRIGHT: Rene Moreux et Cie, Paris 1982

11267

CSO: 4519/90 29

FOR 0FTHCLAL.USE13NLY
ESSAOUIRA GAS DISCOVERY DOUBLES RECION'S PRODUCTION
Paris MARCNES TROPICAUX ET HEDITERRANEENS in French No 1886, 1 Jan 82 p 20]
(Article: "Discovery of Gas at Essaouira"]

[Text] A communique from the Ministry of Energy and Mining Research announced, on
22 December, that the ONAREP (National Office of Oil Exploration and Exploitation),
which has undertaken exploration of the Essaouira basin within the framework of a

loan granted to Morocco by the world Bank, has discovered a deposit in this basin.

This discovery is the first of its size discovered in Morocco, the communique
added, specifying that an initial drilling a Meskala. 35 km southeast of Essaouira,
to a depth of more than 3,374 m, gave a daily flow of 172,000 m3 of gas and 81 m3
of condensate.

A second well, being drilled 1.6 km north of the first one, has demonstrated the
continuity of the deposit. Other drillings will be necessary in order to define
the reserves better. In the specialist circles, it is stressed that it is still
difficult, for the time being, to have an exact idea of the deposit'a value.

Noting this discovery and commenting on it, the Moroccan daily L'OPINION stresses
that it doubles the region's production, with the present well's production
(172,000 In3 of gas per day) added to the 112,000 m per day already being extracted
from the two wells of Jeer and Keshoula, which are also in the Essaouira sector.

The two deposits, L‘OPINION further indicates, under the byline of Nadia Salah, are
being exploited by the Moroccan Petroleum Company (80?), and the production is
transported by pipeline to the phosphate drying lines of the OCP [Moroccan Phas-
phates Office) at Youssoufia. The SC? signed an agreement with the BRPM in 1980
for systematic mining of the concessions belonging to the national company, and
since then, the exploration activities in the sector have been multiplied by a fac-
tor of four, thanks to the World Bank financing.

The intensive prospecting has therefore borne its fruit, since the Essaouirs region
has just taken over the lead from the Gharb as regards gas production. The Gharb
is presently producing 34.5 million m3 per year from two principal deposits: Douar
Jaber and Ksiri, mined in association with BRPM/APEX. In that region too, explora-
tion work is in progress and drillings have been done at Ouled Merah and Ouled
N'sa. The gas of the Gharb too is exclusively for industrial use, and the bulk of
it is delivered to the Moroccan Cardboard and Paper Company of Kenitra.

30

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR‘OFTWC]AL.USE(MNLY

with the Essaouira discovery, total gas production rises from 75 million to 82 mil-
lion m3 per year. This production is still marginal, though, in relation to the
country's energy needs. and it is reserved for industries such as phosphate-drying.

COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux et Cie. Paris 1982

11267
C80: 4519/90

31

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
INTERVIEW WITH HABIB ACHOUR
Paris AL-HATAN AL—‘ARABI in Arabic No 252, 11-17 Dec 81 pp 40-41

[Interview with Habib Achour, president of the Tunisian General Federation of
Labor [UGIT], in Tunis by correspondentﬂabib al-Salimi: "Pardoning He Meant
Acceptance of the Independence of the Federation"; date of interview not given]

[Text] Pardoning Habib Achour, 3 years after he was forbidden to take part in
union activities following the incidents of January 1978, was a promising poli-
tical decision. Another "political" decision was his election as President of
the Tunisian General Federation of Labor [U611] after his release. AL—HATAN ‘
AL-‘ARABI met with him in Tunis after his release and discussed political and
union issues with him.

Our first question was about Habib Achour himself and his meeting with Habib
Bourguiba after the former's release...Achour answered sincerely:

[Answer] My meeting with the president was not out of the ordinary. He shook
hands and he started talking to me about my part in the struggle for indepen-
dence and the sacrifices I made. As you know. our close friendship goes back
to 1934. We fought and struggled for Tunisia's independence, and when the sub-
ject of lifting my house arrest came up which was the reason for our meeting,
we got into a heated discussion. The pardon which I had been waiting for was
to me the righting of a wrong, while to the president it was a humanitarian act.

As I said, the discussion was heated, and I would not accept less than the lift-
ing of my house arrest and the independence of the Tunisian General Federation
of Labor. I insisted upon this, and after a long discussion, we arrived at this
solution. I was backed by certain union officials who were demanding, in accor-
dance with the decisions of the Qafsah Emergency Conference, that I be released
and allowed to return to union activities. For the second time, the Federation
confirmed its independence from the government and that it will never give up
this independence.

[Question] The members of the Tunisian General Federation of Labor did not im-
pose the house arrest upon you. and you were singled out by high government
officials, not by the Federation. Isn't this true?

[Answer] True. However. the authorities could have lifted the house arrest
without granting me a pardon, and the pardon which the president announced
lifts the restrictions on me and enables me to return to union activities under
the law.

32

INDR OFTHCJAL.USEI(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Question] Your pardon was a special legislative pardon. Would you consider it
a step toward a general legislative pardon?

[Answer] My pardon concerns union officials primarily, and we got what we were
demanding. However, we are still working toward a general legislative pardon
at every opportunity. as you can see in numerous publications by the Federation.

[Question] You were elected president of the Tunisian General Federation of
Labor. which is a new position. Would you explain to us the advantages of this
position and how it differs from the position of secretary general, which you
held before January 1978?

[Answer] We were thinking about creating this position in l96h, when Ahmad a1-
Talili headed the Federation. It is not a new idea; it has been around for a
while, and now we have decided to go through with it. The presidency is not
honorary, but is real. and I have considerable power. The president is the
highest official of the Federation. and his responsibilities are the same as
those of the secretary general under the old structure. The presidency is the
foundation on which everything rests. I strongly refused the honorary presi-
dency which was offered to mefirst, and which would have kept me from union
activities. I would never accept such a suggestion because it would mean death
for the union. The suggestion of an honorary presidency caused a very heated
argument between President Bourguiba and me when he suggested it to me and
other union leaders.

[Question] Then the position of secretary general becomes the number-two position?

[Answer] of course. This was confirmed in the last National Council meeting.
This is the system in most union organizations all over the world. In Germany,
for example, there is a president and a secretary general, and the same is true
in Sweden, England....

Qafsah Revisited

[Question] After being pardoned and resuming union activities. how do you
evaluate the Qafsah Conference, which you were not allowed to attend by govern-
ment authorities?

[Answer] When the National Union Committee was elected, disputes arose among
union officials. Many did not want to serve on the Committee as they knew it,
while I agreed from the beginning to serve because the Federation was weak at
that time. I knew that we would be weakened by disagreements among us, so we
said, "Let us serve on the Committee to increase our chances for success."
However, when the unions reorganized, a legal violation occurred. Despite this,
the free union officials, those who believe that the Federation cannot be a true
Federation unless it is independent from political parties and the government,
decided to serve on the Conmuttee. They were followed by many other union offi-
cials, while a certain group insisted upon not serving.

Shortly before the Qafsah Emergency Conference, some of my union brothers and I
submitted my candidacy, but the National Union Committee rejected my candidacy,
and the party official told my brothers, "If you accept Achour's candidacy, you

33

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
declare war on the party and the government!" However, a good number of union
officials thought that I had a right to be a candidate and stuck by my candi-
dacy. Otherswere not dissuadedfrom participating in the Qafaah Conference by
the rejection of my candidacy, not because they did not back me, but because
they believed that union officials must participate in the conference and fight
to have the exception lifted.

There were arguments and much discussion at the Conference. ending in the with-
drawal of a large group of union leaders. Recommendations were made by the Con—
ference which were positive on the whole, and union leaders started trying to
carry them ont...then there was a delay by the executive office because. at

that time. they were still influenced by the party. The secretary general of
the Tunisian General Federation of Labor, Taieb Baccouche, played a large part
in fulfilling these recommendations through his numerous meetings and contacts
with government officials.

at first, restrictions on me were eased, and I was permitted to go to my birth-
place. The pardon came when the authorities contacted me to go to Tunis to
meet with the president.

At the National Conference. all the union leaders were satisfied by this victory,
which was not a victory for me, but the Federation's independence and freedom.
which were asserted for the second time.

[Question] If you had been secretary general during the recent legislative
elections. would you have agreed to join the ruling Destour Party in a united
front to go into these elections?

[Answer] It is for me to answer this question, and of course I have my

own opinion about this front and the recent legislative elections, but I do

not want to divulge it. Participating in these elections with the ruling party
was the decision of the Federation's executive office and management, and I can-
not dispute that decision now. While I was in Qarqanah (Achour's birth place),
a "delegation" contacted me and threatened that my provisional pardon would be
revoked and I would be imprisoned again if I did not interfere and cause prob-
lems within the Federation management. Some of the union officials closest to
me know my position on that participation well. Have they revealed this opin—
ion? I do not know...and now that I am in my present situation and after the
Federation's decision. I cannot criticizethat participation. The Qafsah Con-
ference decided that all parties would be equal before the Federation. He had
decided in 1978. when I submitted my resignation from the ruling Destour Party.
that we would not have political responsibilities. and we did not do so. not as
some believed to fight the Destour Party, but to be independent from all parties
and all political movements in the country. We do not favor one movement over
another because of our deep concern for the Federation's freedom and indepen-
dence. We want a strong, independent and neutral Federation.

An Independent Movement
[Question] You were jailed during Nouira's government. released, then went back

to union activities during Hzali's government. What is the difference between
the two governments?

34

FOR OFFKJA1.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Answer] I am still a prisoner and cannot express my opinion on this. The only
thing I have noticed is that unions are now working without interference from
the police or the army.

[Question] Do you think that Mzali's gOVernment really intends to carry out
the "democratic relaxation?"

[Answer] Union circles are serious about the application of these freedoms. In
Nouira's time, when we decided to strike for even 1 day, 26 January for example,
the police and the army tried to stop us. Today union officials strike 1 day or
3 days without this kind of "arrogance.“

[Question] Do you think that your return to leadership of the Federation will
stop the divisions which still exist in the ranks of union officials. and the
Federation will regain its power?

[Answer] This has already started happening. I noticed in the last National
Council a significant relaxation. the result of the lifting of the exemption and
restrictions on me and the assertion of the Federation's independence. I have
heard that union circles throughout the country are experiencing this relaxation.

[Question] There are those who say that reinstating you in the Federation was
meant to move the conflict in the government into the Federation itself, espe-
cially at this time when the c0untry is witnessing a wave of unrest.

[Answer] Is there someone who says this? I am surprised by that. i was not
forced upon the Federation. I went back at the request of the old union hier-
archy. which is still in place. Furthermore, in the National Council. all offi-
cials except one agreed that I should be president of the Federation. I did not
enter the Federation to cause discord. I have been in the Federation for 30
years. and I have never been a cause of dispute. Each official must protect

the unity of the Federation, without which he cannot be strong. What is being
said is in my opinion nothing but rumors to which we have to become accustomed.

Associated Federations

[Question] The relationship between the Tunisian General Federation of Labor
and the International Confederation of Arab Trade Unions is still weak. what
are the reasons [or this in your opinion?

[Answer] Host of the Arab Federations are not independent from political par-
ties. which is evident when these parties disagree. The Arab nation in most
cases is divided into two factions...and when the Steadfastness and Resistance
Front was formed. as a Federation we regretted this split because we have al-
ways defended Palestine as if we were on the firing line. When we joined CISL
(the international Confederation of Free Labor Unions). no one was even

saying the word "Palestine." The same thing was true in the International Office
of Labor. After lengthy efforts—~I was then a vice president of CISL--we

managed to make it neutral in the Arab-Israeli conflict as a first step folloah
ing a situation in which every member of this international organization supported
Israel. The Arabs at that time were divided, which is what hurt us because it

35

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
was reflected in the unions, which consequently could not speak with one voine
or adopt one position. When the Arabs agree to anything, we back and support
it, and when they disagree we feel sorry. However, it does not keep us from
defending Palestine.

The Tunisian General Federation of Labor attended a conference in Libya which
caused a great deal of talk and excitement in Tunis...soueone volunteered to
tell the International [Confederation of Free Labor] Unions what happened,
which costus all our earlier efforts to make this international organization
neutral in the Middle East conflict, and it began to back Israel. However, we
did not give up, and I went to Brussels to convince the International [Confede-
ration of Free Labor] Unions that there was no danger in the resolutions of the
Libya Conference. Then we voted with then, and did not work against them...how-

ever, this vote caused us great problems.

[Question] Does your separation from the Deetour Party shortly before the in-
cidents of January 1978 mean that you do not believe in its principles and goals?

[Answer] I still view that party in which I struggled for 30 years as I viewed
it when it started, when it faced French colonialism as the only party in the
country and fought along with the General Federation of Labor to liberate
Tunisia. I still ahdere to its original, unchanged values, which guide my
work. However, I do not approve the changed ideas of some of its leaders be-
cause I am not yet convinced of the worth of these ideas.

COPYRIGHT: 1981 AL-WATAN AL—‘ARABI

9882
C50: 6504/153

36

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

TUNISIA

AFTERMATH OF ELECTIONS, NEW 5-YEAR PLAN EXAMINED
Paris JEUNE AFRIQUE in French No 1095, 30 Dec 81 pp 59-61, 65
[Article by Francois Poli: "Tunisia '82: the Third Stage"]

[Text] "He have known socialism without democracy. Then liberalism
without democracy. We want to live under socialism and democracy at
the same time." There are many Tunisians who share this opinion.
However, since the legislative elections of 1 November, which have
left a real feeling of frustration, other and more immediate
concerns-~the high cost of living and unemployment-have again come
to the Surface. These are concerns to which the Sixth Plan will

try to respond.

struggle against rising prices and unemployment, the reduction of social and regional
inequalities. and the problems affecting agriculture, industry, and tourism.
The elections are over. where are we now?

The time is past when the foreigner who arrived in Tunis for the first time had the
feeling that he had gotten off in one of the least expensive cities in which to live
in the world. At the Tunis central market. the bsrametcr of daily life, a kilo of
daurade [a variety of Mediterranean fish] on the average costs 3 Tunisian dinars

(l dinar - 500 CFA francs); a kilo of mutton costs 2,400 dinars; chicken costs 800
millimes a kilo; rice costs 300 millimes a kilo; semolina [course ground wheat,
eaten with the North African dish cous-cous] costs 250 millimes a kilo; a liter of
olive oil costs 570 millimes. Wow the guaranteed minimum wage. which was increased
following the installation of the Hzali government, is still only 60 dinars per
month. A low—ranking employee only makes about 100 dinars per month. A teacher
with 12 years' seniority has a base salary of only 130 dinars. That is to say that
the large. pink shrimp, which is extremely fished for along the Tunisian coast and
which is sold for more than 6 dinars a kilo, for Tunisians as a whole is an item
which is beyong their reach.

Thus, people do not refrain from criticizing the government, even though it is not
alone--or even principally—-responsible for the high cost of living. The following
is the view of a high official of the Ministry of National Economy, charged
specifically with price control: "Those who criticize us systematically take the
price of butter as an example, which has, in fact, gone up from 1 dinar to 1,700

37

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
dinars a kilo between 1980 and 1981. However, they remark less often that the prices
of oil, sugar, coffee, bread, cereals, pasta, aemolina have not changed; that a can

of sardines has only gone up 35 millimes in the course of the last 2 years; that a

300 millimes container of butane gas remains the same (despite the increase in the oil
price); that a liter of fuel oil continues to cost 20 millimes; that a bottle of
kitchen bleach [made with potassium chloride] continues to cost 8 millimes (while

soda went up by 48 percent in 1980); and that a ride on the urban transportation
system has gone up by only 10 percent. Too often they also forget that in the last

2 years the prices of many products have gone down: school supplies, textiles,
transistors, TV sets...."

It is no doubt also true that in explaining the high cost of living the existence of
innumerable speculators between the wholesale and retail business levels has not

been taken sufficiently into account. For example, a retail merchant needs to obtain
fruit. The price paid to the wholesaler ranges between two limits: a floor price

for the lowest quality and a ceiling price for the "best choice." If he is dishonest,
the retailer buys a small quantity at the ceiling price and the rest at the floor

price, and manipulating the bill of sale he resells all of the fruit at the highest
price.

More than 10,000 vilations of this kind have been reported in the course of the past
year. During this same period of time the authorities have ordered 300 business
firms closed for periods of 3 to 6 months. Since April, l981, the fight against
speCulation has been intensified, thanks in particular to small teams of two or three
price controllers who, in addition to their salary, collect a premium proportionate
to the number and size of the violations which they report. it seems that this is
enough en:ouragement for the results to be substantial.

That is not all. Are the prices of industrial products manufactured in Tunisia always
what they ought to be? To find out, the government undertook what are called here
"fair price operations." Teams of three persons (an engineer, an economist, a

lawyer) go through companies with a fine tooth comb to determine if the cost of
manufacture of their products, their selling prices. their quality. and the ratio
between quality and price are correct. Or if, on the contrary. something should be
changed by better organization of the work, better defined schedules, or better
supervised health conditions. Since May, 1981, about 60 Tunisian companies,
manufacturing some 130 products in all, have been visited in this way.

Prices have gone down, but there have also been "upward readjustments," in the case
of businessmen who had incorrectly established their prices. This shows well that
the researchers are less preoccupied with doing police work than with helping the
company and improving its functioning.

Suspected at first, these operations today are so well accepted that they are to be
expanded and extended to wider sectors of the industrial activity of the country.
Evidently, they do not resolve everything. However, they are a part of the struggle
for the reduction of social inequalities and against too rapid enrichment of some,
which have been criticized for years and which still take place, as evidenced by
certain sumptuous residences which continue to be built in the residential areas of
Tania or in its northern suburbs, Carthage, La Marsa, or Gammarth. These are the
property of speculators of all kinds, unscrupulous businessmen who have built enormous
fortunes by exploiting the housing shortage or reselling cement on the black market.

38

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In the confines of his not alwavs comfortable, two-room apartment on the Rue des Haltais
or the Rue de Bah Snlkn. the very average Tunisian, who calls these nouveau rich

"the Arabs of the BM" (a reference to a BMW automobile), generally knows how they live
and entertain with champagne, smoked salmon, and foie gras from Fauchon's [expensive
delicatessen in Paris] and even how they amuse themselves at night without making a
spectacle of themselves in public places. The mos: stylish thing in this circle of

people is to have one's own "night club" inside one's own home. with blinking lights,
dance floor, and a professional model stereo set.

One of these "happy few," it is said, keeps in a stable behind his vacation home three
cows and a complete. sophisticated system for cooling milk for the sole purpose of
giving him his bowl of fresh milk on Sunday mornings. After. no doubt, a game of
cards on Saturday night. Because they play a great deal, of course. Poker for the
men, pinochle and rami [a kind of rummy] for the wives of these gentlemen.

And when the lady of the house marries off her daughter, you have to see it! To say
that the money spent on this Occasion would be enough to feed a residential section
of Tunis for several days is hardly an exaggeration. Wedding gowns which cost 2,000
diners and more are far from being the exception. Dressmakers who are capable of
copying any of the great style houses of Europe. come to the house and are charged
with making the gowns...and are paid in foreign exchange. The dinar is not for
circulation outside the country, but for the nouveau rich of Tunis there are always
arrangements with heaven. And well established ways of doing things. Those of the
Tunisian emigrant workers, for example.

Courted by real collectors of foreign exchange, those who agree to play the game do
not even have to go to the poet office to send a money order to their family in
Tunisia. The money is paid directly to the family, with a small bonus, by a
correspOndent of the collector, and the francs remain in France. This transaction,
multiplied by the number of emigres contacted, will make it possible for the rich
businessman from La Marsa to spend his winter vacation comfortably with his family
in n chalet in Megeve of Courchevel [two winter resorts in France].

A resident of Tunis who tries to judge his country objectively told me: "For those
people it's a question of where to find a way to impress those who are members of
the sane social class, with money they don't know what else to do with. But it is
the evolution of events which leads to that. And all social classes have tended in
parallel directions. Although for many Tunisians the first concern is still to eat
properly, things on the whole have considerably changed.

“Everyone now wants his motor bicycle, his TV set, his car. Even the poorest no
longer want to live in shanty towns [bidonvilles]. Moreover, most of the latter have
disappeared. They have been replaced by small houses which a rather wide selection
of loans at very reduced rates of interest makes it possible to buy in several years.
We don't have high salaries, but often we have several persons working in the same
family. They're able to pay the bills....

"About 5 years ago it was impossible to find locally made clothing of very good
quality in Tunis. Now y0u find nearly everything. No doubt you can criticize the
country for many things, but it works and doesn't get along so badly."

39

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
You will hear thise views often. I have not found a single Tunisian who did not admit
that real progress had been made in all areas, before as well as after the advent of
the Mzali government. They say this while still being aware that a great deal remains
to be done at all levels of society.

The Fifth 5-Year Plan was completed in 1981. The Sixth Plan (1982-86) now begins.
Redressing the balance of payments, that is, ending the importation of more than is
exported, is not the only concern. There are two other priorities, which, moreover,
are closely connected: the problem of jobs and the corrective action to be taken to
correct the imbalance between the various regions of the country.

The number of jobs which need to be created each year in Tunisia is on the order of
65.000—-or 325,000 over the next 5 years. That's a lot. About 49,000 jobs were
created in 1981, or 10,000 more than in 1980, but this is not enough. How to make

up the difference. As France is not taking in any more Tunisian workers, an effort

is being made to find more and more job openings in the countries of the Persian Gulf.

Elsewhere, each time that a former emigre finally returns to his country, with a
little money and an idea of a business to open--a "project," as they say here--the
authorities try (and they will try more and more) to loan him, at a low rate of
interest, as much money as possible to permit him to get started and to create jobs.
The 1976 law on industrial investments provided for the grant of various advantages

to business leaders to encourage them to decentralize. notably for the benefit of the
poorest regions of the country.

The Sixth 5-Year Plan filled out the measures already undertaken, and the disadvantaged
regions are better defined now. There are 120 "delegations" (subprefectures) in all
of Tunisia. They have been divided into five groups, from the most prosperous to the
poorest, in order to make it possible to divide the assistance to be given them,

on the principle that it is necessary to give more to the poor than to the rich.

The same 1976 law only provided facilities to companies creating more than 10 jobs.
Below that level, there were no facilities. Now it has been understood that there

is a need to look into the small "projects" with more interest and to provide them
with loans that are important to their proprietors. This is all the more the case
since, with unemployment and the difficulty of finding a job, more and more Tunisians
are trying to open their own business, and, in most cases, this is necessarily on a
small scale. People are also aware of the fact that the young people who come onto
the job market each year often have real qualifications.

Despite everything, the young have little experience, like all those beginning work,
but they demand relatively high salaries, and they are not always easily satisfied
with less. One of the ideas of those who developed the Sixth 5-Year Plan was to
encourage business leaders to hire the maximum possible number of young workers as
apprentices. The government will pay part of their salaries and for 3 years will
partially exempt the company from paying the social security taxes which it would
have to meet because of them.

The volume of investment provided for in the Sixth 5-Year Plan is in the order of
8 billion dinars (against 4.5 billion diners in the Fifth 5-Year Plan). National
savings, in the circumstances, should be able to finance 78 percent of the total,
with the remaining 22 percent assumed by "external" financing. The purely Tunisian
banks are not able to finance all these "projects." Therefore, various banks have

40

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

been established. like the Tunisian-Kuwaiti Bank and the Tunisian-Saudi Bank.
Other such banks will be e;:ablished in the near future: a bank bringing together
Tunisia, Qatar, and France; a Tunisian-Algerian bank; and a Tunisian-Abu Dhabi bank.

In accordance with the Sixth 5-Year Plan we should also note a series of basic reforms
concerning the whole structure of the c0untry: education, administration. tax system.
distribution system. In the agricultural sphere particular importance has been
attached to the development of animal husbandry and grain production. In the
industrial sphere it is intended in particular to give a breathing spell to the
textile industry and to develop the mechanical and electrical industries.

In the domain of tourism investments provided for will be more than twice what they
were during the Fifth 5-Year Plan. It is planned to increase the capacity of many
hotels, and throughout the country some 35,000 to 40,000 beds will be added.
particularly in Tabarka and Raf Raf (near Bizerte). A Kuwaiti consortium has begun
to invest in Tunisian tourism. Saudi Arabia is becoming more interested. This is
understandable: in 1982. 2 million tourists landed on Tunisian soil.

The new factor in the years 1980-81 is the development of Algerian tourism. The
800,000 Algerians who visited Tunisia in 1981 did not just come to the cOuntry.
They brought a considerable quantity of products which they could not. or only with
difficulty, could find in their own cauntry: particularly bedspreads. food, and
cosmetics. As the second source of foreign exchange after petroleum, can tourism
become the first source? Host Tunisian leaders seem to be convinced that it can.
It appears that they will do everything possible to make this happen.

What do the Tunisians think? A few weeks after the legislative elections of

1 November which as we know left a feeling of frustration, they recall the promises
made during the elction campaign. Not all of the political promises have been kept.
With a certain optimism Tunisians expect that the other promises will be kept and
that the view recently expressed by a Tunisian minister will beome a reality: "With
Ben Salah we experienced socialism without democracy. Hith Nouria we had liberalism
without democracy. we want to live under socialism and democracy at the same time."

COPYRIGHT: Jeune Afrique GRUPJIA 1981

5170
CSO: 4519/96

41

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ARTICLE RBFLECTS 0N SLOW DEMOCRATIZATION

Paris JEUNE AFRIQUE in French No 1095. 30 Dec 81 pp 65, 67, 69
[Article by Hnbib Boulares: "0n Homeopathic Democracy"]

[Text] when a system of government, based on the supremacy of a single party--de
facto or de jure, what difference does it make!-goes through the constraints of

a multiparty system. how far is it possible to go along the path of peaceful change
in the exercise of power?

The answer given to this question by Tunisia--a developing African. Arab. and Muslim
mnntry--merits reflection. Since the proclamatiOn of its independence on 20 March 1956,
Tunisia has been governed by Bourguiba, to whom the Constitution of 1 June 1959 gave
practically full powers within the framework of a republican presidential regime.

The nan is a convinced autocrat, for whom the idea of a stable and strong state wins
out over any other consideration of political circumstances. Now 79 years old, he
has not changed. He still thinks that the multiparty system is dangerous in a
cOuntry which he frankly admits is underdeveloped, above all when the country is
sensitive to the influences of an Arab-Muslim world, where democracy in the western
fashion is far from being a part of the cultural heritage and where, at times in the
name of Arabism and at times in the name of the Muslim Uhmn (community) the very
notion of the state is placed in question.

His party. the PSD (Destourian Socialist Party). which has become the single party
over the years, is not even a party. Rather. it is an organism charged with contact
with the people, an apparatus serving to control the cities and the countryside

instead of a reflective body capable of having any influence at all on the real choices
made by the government.

It is undoubtedly a single party, but it has nothing in common with the idea one has a
single party in the people's democracies, where the party governs the state. Here in
Tunisia, it is only a wheel operating within the government, among so many others.

It is also a party with several tendencies, where the members stay within it out of
force of habit or fidelity to the nationalist past. They come into it out of the

desire or need to play a role and leave it, at times, disappointed or eliminated by
the course of events.

42

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ON!)

Hence all of the ambiguity which the first steps toward a multiparty system involve.
The PSD. despite its name, is not an ideological body but rather a grouping of
bureaucrats, or men who belong to the party apparatus, of those who are nostalgic for
the national liberation movement, of young people in search of an outlet for their
desire for action, and of representatives of socio—professional organisms determined
to maintain the connection between their specialized activity and the administration
of the state. One might think that the PSD would cease to exist on the day when the
umbilical cord connecting it to the state is broken. However, one could also
transpose the question and say that, since the state is what it is, it is hard to see
what place it could leave to other parties.

And at that point we must speak of constraints. The move toward a multiparty system
is taking place under the pressure of an internal evolution within the country, and
first of all because there has been created, in the course of the last 10 years,

a real kind of multiparty system on the margin of the laws. Ideological groups--
Islamic, Arabist, Harxist--have seen the light of day. Democratic, socialist. and
trade union dissident movements have been developed. For some of them it is a matter
of struggling for a different model of society. For the others it is a matter of
rejecting despotism, even if it is "enlightened."

rne bloody clash between the security forces--on 26 January l978--and the workers.

as well as the attack on the city of Gafsa--on 28 January 1980--by commando group

of desperadoes who had come from Libya were spectacular and tragic revelations of the
fragility of the "domestic front." The witnesses to the decay of the situation were
not in short supply. During the 1970's a record number of political trials took
place before special courts. It was necessary that blood be shed, on two occasions,
to bring it out into the open-that is, the need to change the kind of government.

Before history it should still be recalleu that President Bourguiba hesitated between
two choices: to tighten the screws even further or to discharge some of the ballast.
Thoae who believe in the unavoidable character of developments should reflect on this
point of history. President Bourguiba could have chosen a "strong" solution. No doubt.
after other somersaults. the will to liberty would have ended by winning out.

But when? And at what price? With his temperament and at his age, he could have let
things run on. He chose to throw some ballast overboard. There was constraint, and
there was also a choice. By appointing hohamed Mzali as prime minister he wanted to
show this. Thus, a new political course began in April, 1981.

In any case, throwing ballast overboard means easing up on the brakes, not taking them
off completely. Bourguiba intends to remain in control of the game. Pluralism?

All right! But pluralism in expression first! Newspapers were permitted to appear.
Five weeklies and a monthly publication now express opinions opposed to those of the
government. A multiparty system? Yes, but in small doses.

The PCT (Tunisian Communist Party) has been reauthorized to function since July, 1981.

The single party system is officially out. The others? They will be treated case

by case. Islamic extremists were thrown into jail on the day when the Communists
received the green light to begin open activity. As the social d-ocrsts are divided,
they will be left. according to their various choices, to try their own luck.

43

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The soeialists of "popular unity" are also divided. Only one of the two tendencies
will be encouraged. And, since it is necessary for divergent opinions to find their
expression in the framework of governmental institutions, the government has been
trying for months to establish a "National Front" made up of the PSD and the trade
unions of the UGTT (Tunisian General Federation of Labor), whose leaders, released
from prison at the beginning of the year, were the beneficiaries of a kind of amnesty
to let them regain the controls of their central labor organization.

The message was clear to those who wanted to hear it. Bourguiba agrees to accept
opposition within the very center of official organizations, on a single condition:
mutual concessions. You accept me, I accept you! It will be said that that's not
real democracy. However. has Bourguiba himself ever claimed that he was establishing
a European style democracy?

From his point of view he has done the maximum. Authorizing the publication of
newspapers that he did not want to hear spoken of; again legalizing the Communist
Party; dismissing the men responsible for the 26 January 1978 affair; freeing
imprisoned trade union members; letting them resume control of their central
organization and meeting with them; allowing a free election campaign; "offering"

television and radio time to declared opponents of the government. That's already
a great deal.

In addition, will the entry of those opponents into parliament also be required?

Are they going to require the recognition of parties in the name of universal
Suffrage? To these two questions the president's response is a categoric "no."

lmnce the ridiculous figures "recognized" by the socialists (in particular) following
the early elections of 1 November 1981.

Why play this game, it is asked on all sides? Because there is no other way in the

eyes of all those who have chosen the legal path for the transformation of the

Tunisian political system. Bourguiba and the regime have not changed. The transformation
can only be gradual. For those who want to measure it in terms of the idea], it is
insignificant. However, compared to the situation which prevailed 2 years ago, the
change is profound and spectacular. The multiparty system today is a recognized

fact. The next stage should make the two levels fit each other.

It is clear that the established system has adopted the rule of not sharing power and
of not letting anything be forced on it. The opposition can demonstrate outside
government offices and parliament, and it is the president who chooses the time to
give it legal status.

In any case. this is a risky game, because it does not take into account the reactions
of public opinion. Profoundly shocked by the results of the elections of 1 November,
frustrated in its hopes because it believed in the normal operation of democracy,
public opinion threatens to turn into revolt or disenchantment. The government is
losing the confidence which it has been able to capitalize on for the past 2 years

or so. And to get back on top of things it would be necessary to do much more today
than what was demanded yesterday.

Few people seriously believed in the arith-etical possibility of an entry of the
opposition into parliament. That is the reason for which many voters, already part
of the system, gave their votes to opposition electoral lists on 1 November.

44
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

An honest result of the elections would have satisfied the majority of Tunisians.
Even better, the success of some opposition elements would have satisfied everyone.
although it would not have made any change in the balance of forces.

Instead of that. the frustration is such today that the new government course seems
to be threatened. It is threatened by social tensions which serve as compensation;
threatened by the radicalization of opposition movements, the more moderate elements
of which see the extremists mock their legalistic approach ("We told you that there
was nothing to expect from this regime!"); threatened also by the cracks which are
appearing in the governmental edifice, where agreement is far free complete on the
way in which the opposition has been treated.

No doubt, in a Third Horld country slow evolution is as indispensable as democratization.
The government cannot fail to loosen the vice of authoritarianism. under pain of

seeing the country plunged into dangerous disturbances. It can be done, step by

step, by stages. However. it is necessary to guard against provoking a backlash by
treating the people with contempt. The reactions then would be impossible to foresee.
The achievement, patiently added to and which is-once again--considerab1e, risks

being rejected in an atmosphere of loss and confusion.

For Africa, for the Arab world, the Tunisian example is not transferable. In order
for it to become so, it will be necessary to repair the harmful effects of the
mistaken maneuver of the elections of 1 November 1981. By recognizing the opposition

movements; by letting their representatives enter parliament in the first byelections
which present themselves. Then one could talk of a Tunisian model for slow
democratization. If the time is available.

COPYRIGHT: Jeune Afrique GRUPJIA 1981

5170
C80: 6519/96

45
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
AGREEMENT SIGNED TO CREATE FISHING COMPANY
Paris HARCHES TROPICAUX ET HBDITBRRANEBNS in French No 1887, 8 Jan 82 p 73
[Article: "Establishment of a Large Industrial Fishing Company"]

[Text] On 10 July 1981 an agreement was signed in Tunis for the study and estab-
lishment of an integrated fishing operation in Tunisia. by the Tunisian-Kuwaiti
Development Bank (BTKD) and the French company CECOTRAT (Center for Cooperation in
Transportation, Tourism, and Telecommunications). 0n 9 December an agreement was
also signed in Tunis on the financing of the operation between the same partners
and a Norwegian company for the construction of fishing boats, Rana Batfabrikk A/S.

This is a large Operation for the development of deep sea fishing in Tunisia, which
will be undertaken, since a new company, called the Industrial Fishing Company
[SIP], will acquire a fleet of 16 trawlers 25 meters long and construct a proces-
sing factory including: an ice-producing unit, equipment for freezing, filleting
of fish, canning, preservation, stocking, packing. etc.

The Industrial Fishing Company will also construct a ship repair yard for its own
needs but which will also be available for the repair of trawlers operating along
the Tunisian coast. The company's base of operations will reportedly be the port
ofBuene.

The overall investment will reportedly total Fr 230 million. CBCOTRAT will provide
the Industrial Fishing Company with all technical assistance needed up to the point

of the sale of its products.

The agreement was signed by Ali Boukhris, president and general director of the
Tmhhmhnﬂihnhmwtuﬁ(MULaMTunﬂu,”unmtmdyunl
director of CECOTRAT. The funds needed for the operation will be provided by
CBCOTRAT (33.4 percent) and the BTKD (30 percent). The latter will be the guaran-
tor for syndicating the remaining 36.6 percent among Tunisian institutional or
private partners. Further. the BTKD will guarantee Norwegian and Danish loans
provided under the form of export credits, one for the construction of the trawlers
in Norway and the other for the supply of the main engines by a Danish firm.

The feasibility of the integrated operation is based on fish catches in the order
of 600 tons per year for each trawler. Two trawlers have already been ordered
from the Norwegian shipbuilders, Rana Batfabrikk, and will be delivered as
follows: the first trawler on 30 November 1982 and the second trawler on 30 April

1983.

46

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Established on 25 February 1981, as we reported at the time (MARCHES TROPICAUX ET
MEDITERRANEENS of 6 March 1981, p 608), the BTKD is a Tunisian company with a

capital of 100 million Tunisian diners, of which 50 percent was provided by
Tunisia, 40 percent by Kuwait, and 10 percent by various Kuwaiti institutions.
The president and general director is Ali Boukhris.

CECOTRAT, whose president and general director is Tien Phuc, is a consortium of
French and foreign industrialI commercial, transportation, engineering, and
financial enterprises. Its purpose is the construction of "turnkey" or "production
in hand" projects, ranging from the search for financing up to technical assis-
tance in management, if it is needed. We recall that CECOTRAT was the promoter,

in particular, of Dakar Marine Company in Senegal.

COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux et Cie Paris 1982

5170
C50: 4519/97

67

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
BRIEFS

TUNISIA-KUWAIT COOPERATION--Tunisian-Kuwaiti cooperation, which is manifested in
many projects (see in particulsr MARCHBS TROPICAUX ET HEDITERRANEENS of 6 March
l981, p 608; 3 April 1981, p 935; 7 August 1981, p 2043; 6 November 1981, p 2812;
18 December 1981, p 3357), has just been ratified in a way by the official visit to
Tunisia made, from 21 to 24 December. on the invitation of Prime Minister Mohamed
Hzali, by the crown prince and president of the Council of Ministers of Kuwait,
Shikh Saad Al Abdallah Salon As-Sabah. In the course of his visit, the crown
prince, accompanied by a sizable delegation, was received by President Bourguiba
and visited several installations in the country. Apart from political questions,
problems of the Arab world and international questions of cannon interest, the
talks dealt with bilateral relations, with the two parties affirming their desire
to strengthen their cooperation. [Text] [Paris MARCHES TROPICAUX ET HEDITBRRANEENS
in French No 1886, 1 Jan 82 p 18] l1267

COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux et cie, Paris 1982

C80: 4519/90 END

48

FOR‘OFFKJALIEEZONLY