FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10171

9 December 1981

USSR Report

EARTH SCIENCES

(FOUO 8/81)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers. periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
I] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. "here no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.8. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
USSR REPORT

EARTH SCIENCES
(P000 8/81)

CONTENTS

HETEOROLOGY
Collection of Articles on 'Husson-77' Bxperiaent.................

Monograph on Use of Hydrometeorological Data in National

Econonyaooaoeauasaaoseaassess.saaaaaoaaoosoeooeaaooaooaosooaaas

OCEANOGRAPHY
Automating Processing of Shelf Survey Materials..................

Synoptic Experiment in the Indian Ocean..........................

Digital Processing of Echo Signals in Mapping of Bottom

Depositaaoasaooooan0.000000...300.0000tvooooolasoeseaooasooeeoo

Oceanographic Studies of Caribbean Sea...........................
Theory of Dependence of Low-Frequency Oceanic Noise on Depth.....

Experimental Investigation of Nonlinear Interactions in the
"1nd wave spectrmt...‘IOOCICOOOIOI0.0IUCUOOO0.00IIOIUIIOOIOOO.

Interrelationship of Fine Structure, Internal Uhves and
Sull'Scalc Turbulence..u...-u..."nu....o.................

Articles on Marine Electromagnetic Research......................

TBRRESTRIAL GEOPHYSICS

Magnetic Anomalies in Oceans and New Global Tectonics............

Methods for Autouating Geophysical Research......................

- a - [III - USSR - 21K SET

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ll

17
23
26

32

38

68

51
53

POUC
S'On OFT;"2..L A, 3:". .125. .'

\bsrracts 01 Articles on Seismic Instruments.....................

Satanicity and Focal Mechanisms of Far Eestern Batthquskes.......

Experimental Studies of Seismic Code.............................

Collection of Articles on Geophysical Instrumentation............

Propagation of Electromagnetic Heves.............................
PHYSICS 0F ATMOSPHERE

Articles on Space Exploration....................................

Monograph on Scattered Radiation in the Earth's Upper

AmosphereoososoonosioooooooosoooooslooDossselvssootlotesollooﬁ

-b.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

60
71
73
75
79

8k

86
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

HETEOROLOGY

UDC 551.553.21
COLLECTION OF ARTICLES ON 'MUSSON-77' EXPERIMENT

Moscow METEOROLOGICHESKIYE ISSLEDOVANIYA, NO 24: EKSPERIHENT 'HUSSON-77' in Russian
1981 (signed to press 17 Mar 81) pp 4. 108

[Annotation and table of contents from collection of articles "Meteorological Inves-
tigations, No 24: 'Husson-77' Experiment", responsible editors B. S. Chuchkalov and

Ye. P. Vesclov. candidates of geographical sciences, Izdatel'stvo "Nauka". 900 cop-

ics. 108 pages]

[Text] Annotation. The articles give the results of the international experiment
'Musson-77," carried out in the Indian Ocean in 1977. The authors examine the
circulatory mechanisms for the forming and development of the summer southwesterly
monsoon of South Asia, migration of the Icz. air transport across the equator and
conditions for the development of tropical cyclonic disturbances during the devel-
opment of a monsoon. Studies were made of the structure and energy characteristics
of the troposphere, the conditions for the development of cloud cover and precipit-
ation and the distribution of the temperature of the surface water layer in the
Arabian Sea and the Bay of Bengal. The collection is intended for geophysicists,
meteorologists, oceanologists, climatologists and geographers.

Contents
Preface 5
Chuchkalov, B. S. “First Results of the ‘Husson-77' (Monsoon-77) Experiment 6

Veselov. Ye. P. "On Relntionship of the Indian Southwesterly Monsoon and the
ICZ, Equatorial Divergence Zones and Tropical Cyclones" l9

Zhelnin. A. A., Kolchitskiy. N. N., Lisogurskiy, N. 1., Petrichev. A. Z. and
Petrova, L. I. "Transportation and Evolution of Air and Water Vapor Mass in

the Troposphere Over the Indian Ocean" 32
Lebedevu. N. V. "Conditions of Formation of Clouds and Precipitation Over the
Waters of the Indian Ocean" 39
Martinov, M. "Peculiar Features of Vertical Movements Over India, the Arabian
Sea and the Bay of Bengal During the 1977 Summer Monsoon" 45
1

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
EUR OFNL'IAL USP. ONLY

aniz- "4 1. A. "Space-Time Variations of Long-Have Radiation Flows and Heat
lnflow- Under Conditions of a Honsoonal Circulation" 52

Pctru‘m. L. I. and Donev, E. "Meteorological Elements Spectra in the Atmo-

3pherlc Near-Hate: Layer of the Tropical Zone in the Indian Ocean" 59
Pribis. 1. "Analysis of the Tropoapheric Structure Over the Indian Ocean in

LL: First Stage of the 'Husson-77' Expedition Prom Data of the Research

weather Ship 'Priliv'" ' 6S

Vesvlnv, Ye. P., Bclskaya. N. N., Petrova, I. I. and Papez, A. "Peculiar Fea-
tures of Development of a Tropical Cyclone Over the Arabian Sea in the
Period of the Monsoon 'Burst' in June 1977" 70

Chuchknlov, B. S., Belskaya, N. N. and Vlasova. I. G. "Singularities in the
Temperature Regine of the Surface Hater Layer in the Arabian Sea and Bay of
Bengal in the Summer of 1977" 79

Golovnatov, V. A. “The Somali Current and the Thermal Structure of Haters in
the Northern Part of the Indian Ocean During the Southwesterly Monsoon Sea—
son of l977" 86

Colovastov, V. A. "Heat Content of Waters and Its Space-Tine Variations in
the western Part of the Tropical Zone of the Indian Ocean" 91

Volkov, Yu. N., Kovshov. V. A. and Trumba, A. D. "The Role of Radiation and

Dynamic FaCtors in Short-Term Variations of Heat Content of Haters in the
Upper Layer of the Arabian Sea" 99

Zhelnin. A. A. "Changes in the Size of the Polygon With Altitude During
Radiosounding of the Atmosphere“ 104

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Nauka". 1981

5303
CSO: 1865/“.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
F0! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 551.509.59
HONOCRAPH 0“ USE OF HYDROHETEOROIDGICAL DATA IN NATIONAL ECONOMY

Leningrad GIDROHETEOROLOGICHESKAYA INFORMATSIYA V NARODNOH KHOZYAYSTVE in Russian
1980 (signed to press 9 Dec 80) PP 2, 166-167, l7b-l75

[Annotation, conclusion and table of contents from monograph "Hydrometeorological
Information in the National Economy". by Eduard Isaakovich Monokrovich, Gidrometeo-
izdat, 2600 copies, 176 pages]

[Text] Annotation. Timely allowance for hydrometeorological information makes it
possible to lessen the losses from dangerous weather phenomena and make better use
of favorable weather conditions in production: save fuel, increase the yield of
agricultural crops, reduce the time required for the delivery of freight, etc. How
is it possible to estimate the economic effect from the use of this information,
and therefore arrive at a reasonable measure of expenditures for collecting these
data? what reserves exist for increasing the effectiveness of production by taking
such information into account in planning and control? Such questions are examined
in this book which is intended for specialists of the Hydrometeorological Service
and a wide range of users of hydrcmeteorological information.

Conclusion. Thus, we have examined some economic results of hydrometeorological
support of the national economy, one of the several directions in activity of the
USSR State Committee on Hydrometeorology and Environmental Monitoring. Other high-
ly important directions (ensuring human safety during dangerous weather phenomena,
monitoring environmental contamination, further study of the atmosphere, ocean,
waters of the land and mechanism of climatic change) are not considered here. The
social importance of these problems is clear to everyone, although for the time
being it is still impossible to evaluate the results of their solution in monetary
terms.

However, in order to judge the profitability of operation of Hydrometeorological
Service agencies it is sufficient to compare the expenditures on maintaining
these agencies with the total economic effect which is attained in branches of
the economy highly dependent on the environment due to allowance for hydroneteor-
ological information.

According to the approximate computations made by the author, taking in (by no
means completely) only those branches of the national economy of Kazakhstan which
are examined in Chapter 2, this effect with the level of productive forces in
1976-1977 was 47-50 million rubles annually. This exceeds the annual expenses in

FOR OFFKJAI.USE(NVLY
INJRGJFF1C1AL USE2CNQLY

warn ninlﬁr ‘he Kazakh Administration of Hydrometeorology and Environmental Hon-
iturinn by a factor greater than 3.*

ﬂu to is reason for believing that the total effect of hydrometeorological ser-
vicing of the national economy of the country and the expenditures on maintain-
in; all the agencies of the State Committee on Bydrometeorology and Environmental
honitoriug are approximately in the same relationship.

By branches of the national economy of the republic the mentioned sun in millions
nf rubles per year is distributed in the following way:

Agriculture -- 22-25;

Civil aviation -- 7.0;

Highway traffic and highways -- 5.0;

Electric power -- 6.0;

Construction-erection work -- 1.5;

Railroad transportation -- 1.0;

water transportation and fishing -- 1.0;

Strip mining of minerals -- 0.5:

Saving in engineering field work and construction planning -- 5.0.

Thus, in Kazakhstan about half of all the economic effect of hydrometeorological
servicing is attained in agriculture. Accordingly, it is fitting to recall that
in a number of decrzes of the Party and the government, issued in different years,
the need has been emphasized for improving the hydrometeorological support of
precisely this branch.

As indicated by computations, the most valuable kinds of information for the agri-
culture of Kazakhstan is information relating to available soil moisture reserves
at the time of sowing of spring crops, predictions of the last spring and first
autumn frosts, weather forecasts during the period of harvesting of grain crops
and storm warnings for migratory grazing. In those regions of the country where
large areas are occupied by winter crops summaries on the state of winter crops

after wintering and recommendations on the areas of their resowing are extremely
effective.

A major national economic effect is also obtained by taking into account aviation
forecasts for the landing point and the use of regime materials (climatological,

hydrological. agroclimatic) in construction planning and in regionalization of
the territory of the country.

The determined advantages/expenditures relationship assumes particular importance
if still another important circumstance is taken into account. It is well known
that the productivity of labor and the profitability of production are dependent
to a high degree on the capital investment in the branch. that is, the amount

_.

i
In the economy of other regions of the country an important role is played by

forestry, tourism and other branches which are also highly dependent on the en-
vironmcnt.

 

 

 

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

invested per worker. Whereas in machine building. metallurgy and the chemical in-
dustry the capital investment is tens, and in the power industry even hundreds
of thousands of rubles per worker. for the Kazakh Administration of Hydrometeor-
ology and Environmental Monitoring it is only 2,500 rubles per worker (it is ap-
proximately the same for the other Administrations of Hydrometeorology and En-
vironmental Monitoring). For branches with such a low capital investment such a
ratio of the economic effect to operational expenditures is extremely high.

As indicated in the last chapter of this book, the reserves for increasing the ef-
fectiveness of use of hydrometeorological information are still very great.

With the realization of these reserves and increase in the volume of production
in the serviced branches of the national economy the socioeconomic importance of
hydrometeorology will also increase in the future.

Contents

Introduction.................................................................... 3

1. Hethodological Problems in Evaluating the Effectiveness of Use of Hydro-

meteorological information by Users....................................... 8
1.1. Profit and loss functions................................................ 10
1.2- "Payment" matrices ssssss GeeeoCoos.ooeoooesoeooeeooeeoseeeseeoeseoe'eeesto 17

1.3. Two initial concepts in computing the effectiveness of hydroeeteorolog-
icnl forecasts......................................................... 20

1.4. Algorithms for computing the economic effectiveness of hydro-eteorolog-
ical forecasts ...... ..... ........................................... 21
l 4 l. Forecasts containing quantitative data............................... 22
1.4.2. Alternative and phase forecasts ......... . ........ .................... 25

2. Use of Hydrometeorological Information in Branches of the National Economy
(Principal Directions, Methods, Results).................................. 32
2.1. Agriculture... ........ ........................... ..... ...........,....... 33
2.1.1. Forecasts of state of winter crops by the onset of renewal of the
growing season..................................................... 36

2.1.2. Information on soil moisture reserves by onset of sowing............. 37
2.1.3. Forecast of frosts.............................. ...... ............... 42
2.1.4. Servicing of migratory pasturing of animals.......................... 44
2.1.5. Servicing 0f silkmm 1ndustry..........................o..oo.o...... ‘8
2.1.6. Agroclimatic materials............................................... 49

2.2. Electric power ....... ............................. ......... ............. 50
2.2.1. Allowance for hydrological forecasts in the operation of hydro-

electric power stations............................................ 52
2.2.2. Use of temperature and wind forecasts in regulating the regime of

heat supply systems........... ...... .... ...... . ..... ............... 53
2.2.3. Use of forecasts of meteorological elements for refinement of elec-

tric load curves................................................... 58
2.2.4. Allowance for warnings of dangerous weather phenomena in the

operation of high-tension lines.................................... 61
2.2.5. Use of regime hydrometeorological data for computing and choosing the

technical parameters of structures and equipment................... 63

FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE(HVLY
2.

2.

2.

2.

2.

3.

3.
3.

3.

FOR 0F$1C1AL.US£GDNLY

Civil aviation. .......... .............................................. 72
3.1. Method for computing losses from interruptions in flight regularity. 75
3.2. Economic effectiveness of use of aviation weather forecasts......... 79
3.3. Economic effect from allowance for meteorological conditions along

flight route............................ ...... .................... 85
2.3.4. Tie—in of flight schedules to climatic characteristics of airports.. 87
6. Highway transportation.................................................. 89
2.6.1. Use of hydrometeorological information in operation of highway
transportation and highways.......................... ..... ........ 90
2.6.2. Evaluation of economic effect of hydrometeorological support of
highway transportation............................................ 95
2.6.3. Meteorological information and traffic safety....................... 99

5. Railroad transportation................................................ 103

2.5.1. Use of hydrometeorological materials in the operation and construc-

tion of railroads................................................ 106
2.5.2. Economic effectiveness of hydrometeorological servicing of

railroads ............. ........................................... 106
6. Hater transportation and fishing....................................... 111
2.6.1. Use of hydrometeorological information in the operation of water

transportation and the fishing f1eet............................. 113
2.6.2. Computation of the economic effect of recommended courses.......... 118
2.6.3. Computation of the effect of forecasts of water levels and

discharges ....... ................................................ 119
2.6.4. Effectiveness of forecasts of times of opening-up and freezing of

water bodies..................................................... 122
2.6.5. Methods for computing the effect of short-range weather forecasts

and storm warnings for fishing and navigation.................... 125
7. Construction. erection work and production of raw materials............ 127
2.7.1. Computation of effect from short-range meteorological forecasts

and storm warnings............................................... 130
2.7.2. Effect from use of hydrological forecasts.......................... 133
2.7.3. Use of climatological and hydrological materials................... 135

3.
2.
2.
2.

Problems in Increasing the Effectiveness of Use of Hydrometeorological
Data ....... .............. ..... .......................................... 140
1. Choice of an optimum strategy for using hydrometeorological information 141
3.1.1. Criteria of optimality of different strategies..................... 141
3.1.2. Principles for choice of optimum strategy.......................... 143
2. Optimum solution of problems of branch economics with allowance for
hydrometeorological information...................................... 150
3. Improvement of hydrometeorological support with allowance for techno-
logical characteristics of users..................................... 158
4. Measures for protecting economic structures and facilities against
dangerous weather phenomena......................... ....... .......... 163

Summary....... ............. ................................................... 166
Bibliography.. .......... ...... ....... ..................... ........... ......... 168

COPYRIGHT: Cidrometeoizdat. 1980

5303

C50:

1865/238

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ml omen. IS! ONLY

soc 528.932.:681.3
wromrruc nocessmc or swap sum mmms

lbscou GEODEZIYA I KARTOCWIYA in M80131! No 7, Jul 81 pp 39-41
[Article by V. H. Ramornyy]

modern electronic computers in a unified series and automated curve plotters. Such
a programmed complex is being developed at Enterprise No 2 in collaboration with
one of the institutes of the USSR Academy of Sciences. One of the well-known pro-
grams. the "Shel'f," developed at the enterprise, is used in obtaining the coordin-
ates and correcting the depths of neasurement points. Another, developed at the in-
stitute. is employed in computing and then drafting contours on an automated Yes-
7054 curve plotter. Both programs are employed using the RL-l and FORM-6 algo-
rithmic languages respectively and are used independently of one another.

The basis of the "Shel'f" program is five subprograms which ensure solution of the
following problems:

- input from punched cards and magnetic tape. checking. editing, regrouping and
supplementation of initial information;

- computation of plane coordinates of depth measurement points;

-- correction of depths with the necessary corrections;

- sorting of the depth measurement points by grid squares and forming of an ini—
tial bank of geodetic data for their processing under the second program of the
complex - a program for the plotting of contours;

-- printout of a catalogue of coordinates and depths. transfer of the bank of ini-
tial information for each grid square onto magnetic tape.

"Shel'f" program nukes it possible to process up to 80 000 exposures for 68 grid
squares in the course of 10-16 hours.
FIMICMHHCJAI.USEGDNLN

6-“ 3t. 5:- Z, 9).

where i is the number of the depth measurement point on the run; 81, 82 are measur-

ed navigation parameters characterizing the location of the depth measurement point;
2 is the measured or corrected depth; 99 is reference information for computing the

echo sounder corrections for the zero position, calibration and for deviation of

the rpm of the electric motor or instrument speed of sound in the water to which the
echo sounder is adjusted from the nominal value.

The upper plane of the A matrix, that is [91 k} , contains reference information
for each run. representing a set of values Hg, 1508' Tendo V} , where Hg is the
number of the run (the control runs are given with a minus sign); Tb , rend are
the times of beginning and end of the measurements on the run respect vely; V is

an index characterizing the method for determining the coordinates of the depth
measurement points.

The coordinates of the depth measurement points are determined by solution of lin-
ear, direct. reverse and polar intersections.

The plane coordinates are determined by the iterations method by solution of the
system of equations

{a.dr+b.Ay+l. -o;
am+My+h-0.
x‘-x‘"+Ax:

U‘-r‘-'+As.

where xi, y1 are the coordinates of the depth measurement point obtained in the
i-th iteration; a , bj (j - l. 2) are the coefficients and free terms, determined
by the position lines method for each type of intersection [3].

In determining the coordinates corrections are computed for centering and their re-
duction at shore posts. and for linear and polar intersections - meteorological
corrections and corrections for reduction of the measured distances to a plane in
a Gauss projection. The determined coordinates of the depth measurement points are
reduced to the center of the echo sounder vibrators and the accuracy of the plane
position of each point is evaluated.

In the office processing process the need frequently arises for plotting the depth
at an intermediate point situated on an echogram between the working readings on
the survey sheet. An oblique nomogram is used for this purpose. The program pro-
vides for computation of the coordinates of these points from a reading taken from
the nomogrnm.

After computing the coordinates an analysis is made of the determined values. This
makes it possible to check and reject erroneous data using all the initial inform-
ation intended for computing the plane coordinates. The constancy of the ship's
speed on a run in this case is checked using the condition

FOR‘OPFRJAL.USE(NVLY
l-‘Oll OFFICIAL USE ONLY

V”, V.-[0.75 I I .51»

where V” is the ship's speed between the measurement points i, 5; V0 is the ship's
mean speed on the run.

The Subprogram for the correction of depths provides for obtaining the total echo-
sounder correction. determined by both the calibration method and by computations
on the basis of hydrological data. and also computation of the level correction us-
ing data from observations at one, two or three level posts. The corrected depth
value 2 is computed using the formula [2]

z - to + A2” + Alf,

where 70 is the measured depth value; Ales is the total echo sounder correction;
Alf is the level correction.

The correction A Zf for the moment of depth measurement is determined using the ar-
gument of time T1 from ti .- function NT, n). obtained by the parabolic interpola-
tion method [1] on the basis of observational data for the level post: readings of
sea level n from the adopted zero height and the corresponding moments in time '1‘.
In the case of simultaneous observations at two or three level posts the correction
Alf is computed using the method adopted in hydrography [2] with the sole differ-
ence that the region of depth measurement is not broken down by zones. This is

dont using a coefficient representing the ratio of projection of the length of a
line from one of the posts to the depth-measuring point on the base connecting the
posts to the length of the base itself.

In the case of computations on the basis of hydrogeological data the corrections
for the deviation of the actual vertical speed of sound in water AZv from the com-
puted value to the total echosouuder correction Ales includes corrections for the
zero position AZMO’ deviation of the echosounder electric motor rpm from the nom-
inal value AZ" and settlingAZb; the latter takes into account the correction
for the settling of the ship or small boat during movement [2].

The correction AZV is computed separately for the horizon corresponding to the
value of the measured depth according to data from observations at two hydrolog-
ical stations situated in the region of the point of depth determination on the
run. Such operations are carried out for several stations, and especially for
those where the interval between the days of observations and the days when depth
measurements are made on .1 particular run is short. Then interpolation is carried
out for the point and the moment of measurement of depth. The law of linear inter-
polation is selected in connection with the fact that the nature of measurement

of the vertical speed of sound in the water remains unknown with respect to both
time and area.

When determining corrections to the echo sounder readings by the calibration meth-
odAZT. as in the first case the corrections AZ”, A20 are applied to Ales

[2]. 1hr correction A27 for the horizon 21, corresponding to the measured depth.
is determined from the argument 21 from the function 59(2L, 2), obtained by the
polynomial approximation method [1] on the basis of the results of calibration:
sounding lead readings 2L and echo sounder readings 2.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL LSE ONLY

The :uie' e Lnsounder error can be obtained both separately and jointly by calib-
ratior methods to the stipulated horizon and by computations using hydrological
do to .

A» a result of processing of the initial information for each run exposure it is
gmssihic- to obtain the set of values

02 - [N8' 1' X, yo 2’ AzeBIAZf}.

Then the depth-measurement points are sorted by survey sheets

xcx“.

where K is a final set. representing the coordinates of the depth measurement points

for all the runs in the work region; Kss is the final set, limited by the frames
of the survey sheets.

As a result of sorting, for each survey sheet a set Q2 is formed which represents a
summarized catalo us for all the runs falling within the grid square zone and the
set Q3 -{_x. y. 2 . used in implementing the program for drafting the isolines in
the programmed complex. Simultaneously with the set Q3 a determination is made of
the rectangular coordinates of corners of the grid square framesvith the points of
intersection of the kilometer grid with the frames of the survey sheet being deter-
mined in the same operation. In both cases the grid square designation (letter and
number) is determined and recorded.

0n the basis of the set Qz. obtained for the survey sheet, a statistical analysis is
made of the differences in depths at the points of intersection of the principal and
control runs. The depths at the points of intersection of the runs are determined
by the linear interpolation method. As a result. for the entire survey sheet the
mean square value of the difference in depths at the points of intersection m

is determined and the number of points of intersection at which the discrepancies

in depths (expressed in percent) fall is established (0 to 11, from 1 to 22. etc.
and more than 101). Al. Lln- some time, using the formula

ms-MAIV—z

it is possible to make an approximate estimate of the mean square error in the ver-
tical position of the isolines (contours) m for the particular survey sheet. since
the differences in depths A at the points of intersection of the runs can be repre-

sented in the form '
A ‘- AZ +Ao + Ace - (A’z +A‘o +A co),

where [X Z and [yz.are the random errors in determining the depth readings on the
main and control runs respectively; [50’ [3'0 are the random errors in the reading
at the point of intersection due to the generalization of relief obtained on the
considered runsermo. Z3'co are the random errors in vertical displacement of the
reading for a point of intersection caused by errors in determining the ship's co-
ordinates on runs.

Assuming the considered errors to be independent with mathematical expectations
equal to zero, it can be written [4] that

M [.\’I II '1 Ma’-

10

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLV
FOR OMCIAI. [SE ONLY

In order to check operation of the "Shel'f" program we carried out a great volume
of comparative computations and established that there was a good convergence of

the

results of manual and computer calculations. Both the coordinates and the

depth values converged in the limits established by the current instructions. The
"Shel'f" program was used in the processing of several work areas. The introduction
of the program for plotting contours for maps of the shelf was initiated.

According to preliminary computations the annual saving from the automated process-

ing

of survey materials for the continental shelf under this program is more than

50,000 rubles.

BI BL IOGRAPHY

Zhurkin, 1.6., Krasikova, H. V., et 31., VYCHISLITEL'NAYA HATEHATIKA (Computa-
tional Mathematics). Moscow, Nedra, 1976, 225 pages.

Kolomiychuk, N. 1).. CIDROGRAFIYA (llydrography), Leningrad, CUNiO, 1975.

Kougiya, V. A. and Sorokin, A. 1., GEODEZICHBSKIYE SE‘II NA MORE (Geodetic Net-
works at Sea), Moscow. Nedra, 1979, 270 pages.

Sorokin, A. 1., CIDROGRAFICHESKIYE ISSLEDOVANIYA HIROVOGO OKEANA (Hydrographic
Investigations of the World Ocean), Leningrad, Gidrometeoizdat, 1980, 285

pages.

Yakhman, V. V., "Complex of Programs for the Automated Processing of shelf
Survey Materials," REP. 88. No 69, SKIL: SOVERSHENSTVOVANIYE TEKHNIKI I TEKH-
NOLOGII TOPOGRAPO—GBODEZICHESKIKH RABOT (Collection of Abstracts No 69, Ser-
ies: Improvement in Technology and Methods for Topographic-Geodetic Work), Hos-
cow. TsNIIGAiK. pp 15-20, 1979.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Nedra", "Geodeziya i kartografiya", 1981

5303

(ISO:

1865/12

11

POI! omcm. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 551.665
SYNOPTIC EXPERIMENT IN THE INDIAN OCEAN

Moscow DOKLADY AKADEHII NAUK SSSR in Russian Vol 258, No 5, 1981 (manuscript re-
ceived 30 Oct 80) pp 1216-1219

[Article by B. A. Nelepo, academician, Ukrainian Academy of Sciences, V. Ye. Zaika,
V. K. Kosnyrev and V. A. Urdenko, Marine Hydrophysical Institute and Institute of
Biology of the Southern Seas imeni A. 0. Kovalevskiy, Ukrainian Academy of Sci-
ences, Sevastopol’]

[Text] Continuing the investigations of synoptic variability of the ocean carried
out by the Marine Hydrophysicai Institute, Ukrainian Academy of Sciences over a
number of years, during the period March-August 1980, in the northwestern part of
the Indian Ocean, specialists carried out a large-scale multifactor experiment
under the "Program for Multisided Investigation of the Fishing Resoures of the
Indian Ocean With Allowance for the Synoptic Eddy Structure" (KIPRIO -- Programma
Kompleksnogo Issledovaniya Promyslovykh Resursov Indiyskogo Okeana s Uchetom Sin“
opticheskoy Vikhrevoy Struktury). Six ships participated in the experiment: "Akad-
emik Vernadskiy," "Mikhail Lomonosov," "Professor Vodyanitskiy," "Chatyr-Dag,"
"Admiral Vladimirskiy" and "Faddey Bellinsgauzen." The need for investigations of
this type was dictated by the following circumstances.

Investigations made under the international POLIHODB program [1] made it possible
to establish that as a result of the disturbance of the upper layer of the ocean
by moving eddy formations there can be formation of zones of increased biological
productivity. Without question, the determination of the quantitative and quali-
tative relationships between the dynamic characteristics of eddy formations,
their energy and capacity to transport substances suspended in solution, on the
one hand, and the structure of biocoenosea, on the other hand, will afford a pos-
sibility for using information on the synoptic variability of the ocean in the
problem of the rational organization of sea fishing in the interests of the
national economy.

In order to solve the formulated problem, in March 1980 five ships were used in
making a large-scale survey of the region for the purpose of studying background
conditions and detecting eddy formations. The survey was made over a period of 17
days in a network of stations with a latitudinal interval of 60 miles and a lon-
gitudinal interval of 40 miles (Pig. 1).

During April—May the ships carried out investigations in polygons measuring 120 x
120 miles. studying the detected eddy formations, at the same time setting out
buoy stations. In June a repeated large-scale survey was carried out, completing

12

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the research program in the Arabian Sea. The "Mikhail Lomonosov" continued to work
in the equatorial part of the region until August.

Work was initiated in the period of ending of the winter monsoon with a wind velo-
city of 4-8 m/sec, primarily of northerly and northwesterly directions. Most of
the work was carried out in the transitional period during calm weather. The

final phase of the investigations coincided with the beginning of the summer mon-
soon with a wind of 10-18 m/sec, whose direction varied from S" to H3".

An important result of the experiment was a clarification of the characteristics
of synoptic variability of hydrological, chemical, optical and biological para-
meters of the medium. In the large—scale survey it was possible to register dome-
like rises and descents of the isotherms with a horizontal scale of 100—300 km
(Fig. 2). A tonal of seven cyclonic and five anticyclonic relatively weak eddy
formations were discovered, characterized by change in the height of the 16°C iso-
therm relative to the background level by 20-60 m. Two microsurveys of a cyclonic
eddy rarried out later (Fig. 3) indicated that it had moved to the US" with a
velocity of about 9 miles/day. The rise in the isotherms in the eddy zone was
observed most clearly in the layer 100-400 m, that is, in the thermocline. In the
deeper layers the temperature field disturbances were extremely weak and inade-
quate for reliable identification.

A distinguishing characteristic of the vertical structure of the eddy formation 18
a shift of the position of the center as a function of depth. The movement of the
eddy in the strongly stratified fluid, whose stratification was caused by inter-
action of the waters of the Arabian Sea and the waters of the Gulf of Persia and
Red Sea waters, acquires specific characteristics in the fields of temperature,
salinity, chemical and optical characteristics. For example, the center of the
eddy, which could be traced easily due to the anomalously high concentrations of
biogens, is displaced at the ZOO-m horizon by almost 60 miles relative to its
position at the loo-m horizon (Fig. 4).

The vclocities of orbital movement of the detected eddy formations, determined by
direct instrumental measurements and computations by the dynamic method, were
0.1-0.2 m/scc. It was established by T, S analysis that the cold cyclonic eddy
had characteristics corresponding to the zone of the Arabian upwelling and ac-
cordingly it is possible to postulate the capture of coastal waters by the eddy
in the process of its formation and their transport into the open ocean. At the
same time, the exceedingly rapid variability of the form of this eddy and its
grcni velocity of movement indicate either a wave nature of the formation. for
example, due to the superposing of fast baroclinic Rossby waves, or its instabil-

ity.

A distinguishing characteristic of the synoptic variability of the ocean in the
region or the investigations was the presence of a hydrological front, correspond—
ing with respect to the nature of its positioning to the southern and southeastern
periphery of a large-scale cyclonic circulation which during the period of the
winter monsoon occupies the northern part of the Arabian Sea. The meandering of
this front could he one of the sources of weak eddy formation in the polygon re-
gum.

13

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

I’ ..1. .5 5/; 1" A. U M
. - I

     
  

 
 
  
  
  
    
  
  
    
   

ootooosoo-oo

  
   
 
   
    
 
 

   
 
  
  
  
  

~0cooocooo_oo -”
A) :t-zdz-z'kmﬁeyi.
..tz. r¥991 r:?77 --n
100.000.000.09.
O'OOIOOUQOOOIO. -0
..v..JTT ..ITTT.....
--....oo .uoooo.ovce_ -‘
mm
lie-ooou.d.:.ltl,‘0";’dt..
"'$:G‘£Z:Fj-°-'—'.::.O'.. -5
...-I... ...IOIOI...
io-wwsw coo-ooooooo -'
-‘1~c;~':§'e':~ni".-9'9'€"*M . .
1....."12’2'... ”‘12.”..- .2
1354?. ..___.__. ,
”...—...
........ .2
0000...:
£37544. -'
Urn
........
eon-o... -‘
00......
-.. -a

r13. 1.

KEY:

A) "Akadcmik Vernadskiy"
118 stations

8) "Admiral Vladimirskiy"
48 stations .

C) "Professor Vodynnitskiy"
60 stations

D) "Admiral Vladimirskiy"
20 stations

E) "Fnddey Bellinsgauzen"
43 stations

P) Equator

C) "Chntyr-nng"
80 stations

During the period of development of the summer monsoon there was a cold eddy form-
ation present. having a diameter of about 150 miles with a maximum rise of the

the ocean surface the eddy could virtually not
be traced on the basis of temperature changes,.but was registered clearly on the
basis of increased salinity values of 36.55°/oo at its center relative to 36.2°/oo
in the surrounding waters. Among the biological characteristics it was noted that

16° isotherm by about 25-30 m. At

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

(7.": 37277] . u'
IN3R‘0FF1(]AI.IXSEZ(NVLY

there was a considerable spottiness in the distribution of more or less productive
zones in the investigated ocean area. which was associated with the characteris-
tics of its dynamic regime and the entry of biogens into the eutrophic layer of
the ocean. Primary production in the periods of the winter and summer monsoons was
comparable and averaged 2.0-2.5 mgC/m per day at the surface and 40-50 mgC/m3 per
day in the layer 0-100 m. The highest primary production values were observed in
the zone where cyclonic eddies were present. With respect to the level of primary
production the investigated waters can be classified as oligotrophic and meso-
trophic waters. The content of chlorophyll a in the photic layer was characterized
by low values, also characteristic of oligotrophic regions of the ocean. The mean
concentration of green pigment near the surface did not exceed 0.04 mg/m3, in the
layer 0-100 m -- 10 mg/m3. The maximum concentration of chlorophyll c was register-
ed during the period of the winter monsoon and was only 8.7 mg/m3. In summer the
content of chlorophyll c in the water was still further reduced.

The principal mass of photosynthetically active phytoplankton in waters undisturb-
ed by eddy movement was concentrated in the layer 0.25 m, whereas the maximum of
the vertical distribution of the concentration of chlorophyll a was found in the
layer 50-80 m. The depth coincidence of the maximum values of primary production
and the content of chlorophyll a was noted only in local circulations, which indi-
cates an increased photosynthetic activity of chlorophyll in the zone of intensif-
ied vertical movements and the rising of biogens associated with it. In the lower
layers of the eutrophic zone there was a concentration of settling "old" phyto-
plankton cells in a low physiological state. These cells constituted a consider-
able part of the detritus forming intensive layers of increased turbidity.

 

Pig. 6.

In the surface layer the total quantities of bacterioplankton and neuston biomass
were commensurahle with the quantities characteristic for oligotrophic (with re-

spect to neuston) and mcsotrophic (with respect to bacterioplankton) regions of
the ocean.

With respect to the level of development of zooplankton the investigated region
can be classified as a region of medium productivity. During the period of the
winter monsoon the mean biomass of zooplankton was 90 mg/m , in the summer 135 mg/

m3: 60-752 of the mentioned quantities are plant-eating zooplankton. A comparison
of data on the food requiremenns of zooplankton with data on primary production
reveals that the supply of plant food for zooplankton is only 25-60! of the daily

15

FOR 0FF“JAI.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

rutiwu. The unquestionable deficit of plant food is evidence that in the food
rhazn of th biococnosls an important role is played by detritus, and possibly
bacterial flora.

Summarizing the collected information and comparing it with data obtained under
the PULIMODE program. it can be established that:

--thc eddy field in the northwestern part of the Indian Ocean is subject to ex-
tremcly rapid variability; the characteristic time scale for the most intensive
formations was 50-60 days (100-400 days in the Sargasso Sea);

--the energy level of eddy movements is relatively low, the average density of
the available potential energy is 2-104 J/mz, which is an order of magnitude lowb
er than in POLIMODE;

--the rate of movement of eddies is very great, 9 miles/day (2-3 miles/day ac-
cording to POLlHODB data) and is close to the phase velocity of the first baro-
clinic mode of the Rossby waves. computed using a linear model;

--the orbital velocities of rotation of the eddies are small (0.6-2.0 m/sec in
the Sargasso Sea) and are close to the velocity of their general transport.

Proceeding on the basis of these facts, it can be concluded that during the period
of work in the northwestern part of the Indian Ocean there was a weak wave field.
against whose background slightly linear eddy formations [2) or nonlinear packets
of Rossby waves were propagated. The low eddy activity, together with the strong
vertical stratification of water masses, were evidently the principal reasons for
the low level of vertical movements, which exerted its influence on the biological
productivity indicesL However. this influence was manifested only at the lower
trophic levels of the ecosystem as a whole.

In conclusion the authors express deep appreciation to the chiefs of the expedi-
tions of the ships participating in the implementation of the Program: L. A.
Koveshnikov, 0. P. Pelevin. I. c. Chumakov and Yu. I. Shchetinin for furnishing
observational data.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

1. SINOPTICHESKIYE VIKHRI V OKEANE (Synoptic Eddies in the Ocean), Kiev, "Nauk—
ova Dumka," 1980.

(a)
e

Nelepn, B. A. and Korotayev. G. K., HGPI (Marine Hydrophysical Institute).
No 3, pp 5-20, 1979.

COPYRXCHT: Izdatel'stvo "Nauka", "Doklady Akademii nauk SSSR", 1981

5303
cso: 8146/1577

16

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOI!0FFHJAI.USE(NVLY

UDC [528.67:534.6):528.087.4
DIGITAL PROCESSING OF ECHO SIGNALS IN MAPPING 0P BOTTOM DEPOSITS
Moscow cmnezru I unmnrm in Russian No 7, Jul 81 pp 131-45
[Article by A. I. Svechnikov]

[Text] A solution of such a complex problem as the remote classification of bottom
deposits and their lithological breakdown is possible by the use of automated sys-
tems for the processing and interpretation of the results of measurements made us-
ing acoustic apparatus. Such systems must be based on digital computers of a uni-
fied series with a high speed of about 50 000-100 000 operations per second and
with external devices for the storage and display of the results of processing and
interpretation.

In the automated processing of the results of acoustic measurements the need arises
for the registry and storage of data on a magnetic carrier, which ensures the
simplest relationship between the source of information and units for digital pro-
cessing and interpretation. The use of analog magnetic recording in registry of the
results of acoustic measurements on the shelf makes it possible to obtain a quite
simple solution of the problem of accumulation and long-term storage of large vol-
umes of information collected when making studies for the mapping of bottom sedi-
ments. The digital processing of magnetic analog records makes it possible to widen
the set of procedures for the processing itself, make maximum use of the informa-
tion included in the echo signal and further develop the method for digital regis-
try of the echo signal.

The input of acoustic data registered on magnetic tape in analog form into a dig-
ital computer is accomplished using special or standard computer devices. It is
desirable that the information be prepared first, that is, that the analog magnetic
records be transformed into a form convenient for input into a digital computer.

A converter of analog magnetic records has been developed in the Geophysics Depart-
ment of the Leningrad Mining Institute imeni G. V. Plekhanov on the basis of the
small "Nairi-K" digital computer (Fig. 1). It includes an analog magnetic recorder,
analog-code converter and a control device. An additional control unit is provided
for the input and distribution of acoustic data in the memory device of the digital
computer.

The analog information received from the magnetic tape, after conversion into a
digital code, is fed into the second unit of the digital computer operational mem-
ory: in places 1 to 10 there is registry of the value of the echo signal digital

17

FOI‘OFFNJAI.USE(MNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

sample. and in places from 19 to 36 - a constant determining the time of the dig-
ital sample. The first digital computer memory unit holds the programs for comput-
ing the characteristic criteria in the echo signal and the mass of data for output
of information in a volume of 1000 36-digit words.

 

KEY

as

1. Magnetic recorder

2. Analog-code converter

3. Control device

a. "Nairi" digital computer
5. Input control unit

A modified program command END was used in organizing the regime for input and
automated processing of analog information. Since in programming work the first
address of a command is rarely used, the command END with a fixed value of the
first address (A1 - 32) serves as a signal for reception and distribution of acous-
tic information arriving from the analog-digital converter.

Upon the command INPUT PROM MAGNETIC RECORDER the digital computer goes into an in-
terrupted regime (the computer does not execute the command), the computer ele-
ments are prepared for the input of data and the input control device is activat-
ed. Upon receipt of the signal from the control device the magnetic recorder and
analog-digital converter are activated and the information is distributed in the
computer operational memory.

After filling of the second unit of the operational memory with information, the
magnetic recorder is switched off and the digital computer continues a discontin-
uous series of commands. In the course of processing of the received data an in-
dicative mass of data is formed for output.

Upon completion of processing of the mass of data fed into the computer another
input command is fed. The cycle of input and preliminary processing is repeated.
Hith refilling of the allocated storage space the computer goes into a regime of
output of the transformed data: the conversion cycle is completed.

Figure 2 is a functional diagram of the transformation unit with the main connec-
tions between the digital computer units in the regime of reception and distribu-
tion of the information received from the magnetic tape.

In the regime of input and transformation of analog acoustic information the oper-
ation of the digital computer is controlled by signals arriving from the unit for
control of the magnetic recorder and fed into the circuit for distribution of con-
trol pulses.

18

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FIIICHHHCJAl.lﬂﬂB(MVLV

The unit for control of the magnetic recorder includes: depth and registry timers,
scaling amplifier and circuit for the shaping of control signals. Upon receipt of
the signal BEGIN TIME SCANNING, which corresponds in time to the moment of sending
of the acoustic signal. the depth timer produces a time series of pulses with a
conversion frequency of 50 KHz. The signals from the depth timer are fed from the
digital computer summstor to the counting input of trigger 20. Thus, by means or

the depth timer the summator accomplishes a time scanning of the process of registry
of a series of echo signals with an interval of 20,».ec. The depth timer is activat-
ed using a synchronization pulse arriving from the first track of the magnetic re-
corder.

 

9)
10)
ll)
12)
13)
Pig. 2.
KEY:

1. Operational memory 11. Command address counter

2. Summstor 12. Distributor

3. Registry circuit 13. Magnetic recorder

a. Analog-code converter

5. Depth timer

6. Registry timer

7. Shaping of control signals

8. Scaling amplifier

‘0

Operational memory address register
10. Command register

The circuit for shaping the control signals, upon receipt of the signal BEGIN TIME
SCANNINC,preparcs the Summutor for reception of the next series of echo signals.
Trigger 19 of the summator determines the onset of receipt of digital information
relating to the next series of echo signals.

Upon the signal BOTTOM, arriving from the first track of the magnetic recorder and

determining the time of arrival of the echo signal from the bottom, the registry
timer is activated and this monitors the digital transformation time. The registry

l9

FIMI¢DFIHCIAI.IISE1(HVLY
lillioiiﬁtlhl.llSE2(NULN

timer produces a series of signals which determine the moment of digital sanpling
in the echo signal and the total number of samples in the transformed series. The
repetition rate of these signals is equal to the time quantization level during
which there is digital transformation of the analog signal. The signal is fed
from the registry timer to the analog-code converter triggering device and to the

circuit for the distribution of control pulses.

The echo signals from the second track of the magnetic recorder are fed to a seal-
ing amplifier and from there are sent to the analog-code converter input. In con-
formity to the internal operating regime of the F-4222 converter (tc cle - 10
lasec). lOrLsec from the moment of its triggering a digital sample 0 echo signals
is printed out. Accordingly, by this moment the digital computer control circuits
must be ready for its reception and distribution in the operational memory.

" M- silt- TT- sand-i”- 1
y . grave ,
if 4'? ﬁt: ' clay

      

4* ll 11-: i- u 32‘
mace

Fig. 3. Pig. 4.

The circuit for the distribution of control pulses is a pulse distributor which
on the basis of signals from the registry timer produces a series of five pulses;
the time shift between two successive outputs is blisec. It ensures synchroniza-
tion and control of individual computer elements in the regime of input of analog
information from the magnetic recorder: it prepares the summator for reception of
the next echo signal sample, forms the momentary address for the computer memory
unit, feeds the digital echo signal sample from the analog-code converter circuit
to the summator and shapes a signal for the registry of the summator contents in
the operational memory.

He will examine performance of the operation of registry of +1 in the memory unit
address register.

20

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
F0l105FﬂJAl.USE(MNLY

The first distributor pulse serves as a signal for the discharge of the command
register into the zero storage unit. the transmission of +1 into the command ad-
dress counter; the second distributor pulse is for preparing the storage unit ad-
dress register for the next reception and transmission of the contents of the com-
mand counter into the command register; the third distributor pulse is for trans-
mission of the contents of the command register to the memory unit address register.
The current address of the operational memory used in registry of the next echo sig-
nal sample is formed in this way. With the fourth pulse the digital echo signal
sample is transmitted to the summator and with the fifth pulse there is registry

in the computer memory.

Thus. each signal sample. together with the time. is entered into the computer mem-
ory. The indicator of ending of data input is the overfilling of the memory unit ad-
dress register. In this case the second distributor pulse blocks operation of the
circuit: the magnetic recorder is stopped. the 13th element of the command address
counter is discharged. code 10 is entered in its place. the depth and registry
timers are put into the initial position. and a delayed pulse is sent for the
triggering of the central control unit.

The digital computer proceeds to perform the subprogram for processing the introduc-
ed mass of data.

The developed unit ensures the conversion. entry into the operational memory of the
digital computer and preliminary processing of a series of echo signals in a volume
of 2048 digital samples; using the registry timer it is possible to select the
necessary fragments from the series arriving during one sounding cycle. The maximum
time for registry of the echo signals arriving from the layer of bottom deposits

is determined by the duty cycle of the sounding pulse and for a frequency of 10 KHz
is 40 msec and for a frequency of a K“: is 100 msec.

Figure 3 shows digital representations of the echo signals obtained using the con-
sidered unit for four varieties of bottom sediments (gravelly-pebbly, sandy, clayey
and silty). The carrier frequency of the duty cycle for the sounding pulse is 9.6
KHz. the quantization interval is ZO‘L.sec, the registry time is 1.4 msec. Visual
observations of the echo signals, registered on magnetic tape, create definite pre-
requisites for studying the process of interaction of acoustic radiation with
bottom sediments and make it possible to clarify the quantitative relationships
determining the process of interaction between the sounding pulse and a specific
lithologicai type of bottom material.

An analysis of the digital samples of echo signals. represented in Fig. 3. gives
evidence of appreciable differences in the echo signals obtained during the sound-
ing of different types of bottom material with respect to both amplitude level and
with respect to shape. It is evident that the represented echo signala can be de-
scribed using n set of criterial characteristics such as the amplitude value of

the envelope. shape factor. spectral characteristics and phase of echo signal first
arrival.

Figure A shows surves of change in the amplitude value of the echo signal and the
change in the envelope shape factors constructed on the basis of the results of
preliminary digital processing of the echo signals registered in the process

21

FOR 0FFNJAI.US£10NIN
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of ra;r "L" out of acoustic investigations along a profile passing through the re-
aiuus of recurrence of bottom sediments of different lithological composition.

Each pu:nr on the graph represents the result of averaging of the criterial char-
acteriStérs for 10 echo signals, which corresponds to a segment of the profile

31th an extent of about 20 m. Bottom sampling of material was carried out each 100
n and therefore the graphs of criterial characteristics have a great detail, deter-
mined by variability of the properties and characteristics of bottom materials
uirhin the limits of the profile.

On the basis of a conparison of the graphs of change of the echo signal criterial
characteristics shown in Fig. 4 and the results of bottom sampling it was possible
to escublish definite patterns of change in the characteristics of the echo signal
related to change in the type of bottom material.

It must he noted in conclusion that the described unit for the transformation of

andlnu magnetic records and the method for preliminary processing of the echo sig-
nu], pruvlding for computation of its criterial characteristics, ensures a consid-

erable compression of acoustic information (on the average by a factor of 30-40 in
the case of a 3-4 layer section and a number of criterial characteristics 20) re-
ceived for final processing.

COPYRIGHT: lzdatcl'stvo "Nedro", "Ceodeziya i hartografiya", 1981

5303
can: 1865/12

22

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 551.456.082
OCEANOCRAPHIC STUDIES OF CARIBBEAN SEA

Sevastopol' OKEAMGRAFICHBSKIYE ISSLEDOVANIYA KARIBSKOW MRYA I PRILEGAYUSHCHIKII
MYONOV in Russian 1980 (signed to press 31 Oct 80) pp 4-6, 119-120

[Annotatiom foreword and table of contents from collection of articles "Oceano-
graphic Investigations of Caribbean Sea and Adjacent Regions", responsible edi-
tor N. P. Bulgakov, doctor of geographical sciences, Izdatel'stvo Horskogo gidro-
fizicheskogo institute, number of copies unknown. 120 pages]

[Text] Annotation. This collection of articles gives the preliminary results of
scientific investigations carried out on the 38th voyage of the scientific re-
search ship "Mikhail Lomonosov" within the framework of the HOKARIB international
project in a polygon to the south of Jamaica and to the west of Grenada. Hater-
ials were obtained on the thermohaline, kinematic, hydrooptical, hydrochemical
and hydrobiological characteristics of waters in the least studied part of the
Caribbean Sea. Instrumental measurements were made of the temperature and velo-
city of currents for the purpose of experimental determination of the parameters
of internal waves. The results are compared with the values computed from disper-
sion relationships on the basis of hydrological data. Existing concepts on bottom
relief and the size of the strait between Rosalind and Pedro Banks, the direction
of deep circulation, water exchange between the Colombian and Yucatan Basins, the
nature of the vertical distribution of horizontal current velocity, the index of
attenuation of radiation, the distribution of chlorophyll "a" and organic matter
are made more precise. The collection of articles is intended for a wide range of
professional oceanographers.

Foreword. Expeditionary investigations on the 38th voyage of the scientific re-
search ship "Mikhail Lomonosov" were carried out under two international programs.
The first part of the work was carried out in the central and eastern (least stud-
ied) parts of the Caribbean Sea within the framework of the program for the inter-
national project MOKARIB on the basis of provision 0.76.01.06.06 in the Coordina-
tion Plan of the USSR State Committee on Science and Technology, decrees of the
Presidium Ukrainian Academy of Sciences and the plan of the Marine Hydrophysical
Inst itute. Acadany of Sciences Ukrainian SSR for 1979.

The second part of the expedition was carried out on the shelf on the continental
slope of the Guinea People's Revolutionary Republic in accordance with the Inter-
governmental Soviet—Cuinea Agreement of 3 August 1973 on the establishment of a
scientific research center at Conakry.

23

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The voyage lasted from 17 October 1979 through 28 February 1980.

The work program provided for carrying out research in accordance with the plans
of institutes of the Ukrainian Academy of Sciences: Karine Bydrophysicsl Insti-
tute. Institute of Biology of Southern Seas, Institute of Strength Problems, Hat-
erial Science Problems Institute. and also institutes of the USSR Acaduy of Sci-
ences: Moscow Physical Engineering Institute. Institute of Organic Chemistry.
The collection gives the results of preliminary scientific analysis of the first
part of the expedition carried out under the mmm program, to the south of
Jamaica and to the west of Grenada.

The articles examine probl-s related to the structure of waters, kinematics, bot-
tom relief structure. characteristics of parameters of internal waves and hydrobio-
logical indices. The data obtained on the voyage made it possible to refine and
supplement existing information on the investigated part of the Caribbean Sea. In
particular. it was possible to demonstrate the existence of an anticyclonic meander
of waters in the Colombian Basin on the basis of actual hydrobiological data for
the autumn-winter season, determine the direction of movement of deep North At-
lantic waters, and clarify the existence of inversion formations in aubantarctic
intermediate waters. Continuous measurements of subsurface depths along the

ship's track made it possible to detect 30 distinctive depths. The size of the
strait between the Pedro and Rosalind Banks, throngh whose channel the main ex-
change of waters between the Yucatan and Colombian Basins occurs, has been more
precisely determined. The results of measurements of currents in the neighborhood
of Grenada indicated that the vertical kinematic structure near the island has a
more complex character than was visualized earlier. In accordance with these in-
strumental measurements the need arises for a further improv-ent in the theory

of circulation in the neighborhood of the island. Oxygen data made it possible to
confirm the hypothesis expressed earlier concerning the existence in this part of
the sea of water interlayers whose thermohaline indiees coincide with the charac-
teristics of 18° water in the Sargasso Sea. Hydrobiological data are of important
independent interest from the point of view of investigation of the formation of
water productivity. At the same time, they also confirmed and supplemented the con-
clusions drawn concerning the structure and dynamics of waters. Insofar as we know,
the results of the investigation of internal waves presented in the collection of
articles constitute the first information based both on data from instrumental
measurements of temperature and current velocity fluctuations and the results of
computations based on hydrological parameters.

The scientific conclusions are based on observational data obtained on the voyage
using instrumentation and apparatus developed at the Marine Hydrophysical Insti-
tute: the ISTOK-3 and ISTOK-S sounding complexes, DISK-2 long—term current velo-
city meter. RITH instrument intended for the indirect determination of parameters
of internal waves from autonomous stations.

N. l’. Bulgakov. doctor of geographical sciences, expeditionary head of the 38th
voyage of the scientific research ship "Mikhail Lomonoaov," participated in the
preparation of most of the articles published in this collection. This applies
to formulation and solution of problems relating to the thermohaline, hydrochem-
ical and kinematic structures of waters, distribution of the speed of sound and
internal waves.

24

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Contents

Foreword

Nelepo, B. A. and Bulgakov. N. P. "NOKARIB Association: Cooperation, Some
Results. Tasks"

Bulgakov. N. P., Koveshnikov. L. A. and Nikhaylov, B. A. "Principal Tasks and
Preliminary Scientific Results of the 38th Voyage of the Scientific Research
Ship 'Hikhsil Lomonosov'"

Koveshnikov, L. A., Isayev, F. A. and Liverdi, V. P. "Temporal Variability of
the Meteorological Characteristics and Their Relationship to Variability of
Hydrophysical Fields"

Bulgakov, N. P., Paranichev, L. 6.. Khanaychenko, L. P. and Chekalin, I. A.
"Thermohaline Structure of Haters in the Central Part of the Caribbean Sea
and the Neighborhood of Grenada"

Zhidkov. V. c. and Screbryakov. A. A. "Vertical Kinematic Structure of Haters
in the Northern Part of the Colombian Basin in the Caribbean Sea"

Ganoon. P. P. and Khanaychenko. L. P. "Principal Features of the Field of
Speed of Sound in the Caribbean Sea"

Bulgakov, N. P. and Ivanov, V. A. "Hydrological Conditions of Formation and
Existence of Internal Haves in the Caribbean Sea"

Ivanov, V. A.. Kuznetsov. A. S. and Lisichenok, A. D. ”Characteristics of
Short-Period Internal Haves"

Romanov, A. 5., Ashikhmin, V. H. and ll'chenko, A. A. "Oxygen, Phosphates and
Silicates in Waters of the Central Caribbean and Near Grenada"

Il'ichev, O. V., Kolobashkin, V. ... Nekrasov, V. I. and Piven', N. S. "Ness-
urements of the Content of Neon. Helium and Hydrogen Dissolved in Ocean
Water"

Burlakova, Z. P. and Kholodov. V. I. "Suspended and Dissolved Organic Carbon
in the Surface Haters of the Central Caribbean Sea"

Burlakova, Z. P. and Yunev, 0. A. "Chlorophyll Distribution in the Central
Part of the Caribbean Sea"

Avdcyev. A. I. and Kobzar', V. N. "Characteristics in the Structure of Bottom
Relief of the Nicaragua Rise"

COPYRIGHT: Norskoy gidrofizicheskiy institut AN USSR (H61 AN USSR), 1980

5303
C80: 1865/265

25

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

16

24

30

AZ

51

63

70

77

87

91

102

110
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 551.463.21

THEORY OF DEPENDENCE OF LON-FREQUENCY OCEANIC NOISE 0N DEPTH

Hoscow DOKLADY AKADEHII NAUK SSSR in Russian Vol 259. No 6, 1981 (manuscript re-
ceived 8 Dec 80) pp 1683-1687

[Article by B. P. Kur'yanov and B. I. Klyachin, Institute of Oceanology imeni P. P.
Shirshov. USSR Academy of Sciences. Moscow]

[Text] Acoustic noise in the ocean is dependent on a whole series of oceanological
conditions determining the processes of generation. propagation, absorption. re-
flection and scattering of sound by the ocean surface and bottom. Allowance for
each of these factors is in itself an extremely complex problem and in its total-
ity the problem seems soluble only by the use of purely computer nodeling. Never-
theless. there is an extremely broad range of conditions in the real ocean in

which simple solutions can be obtained having a clear physical sense and which

can be used in explaining the recently collected experinental data on oceanic noise
and in particular. its dependence on depth [1-6].

For solution of the problem we will make the following simplifying assumptions
which are satisfied for the deep ocean.

I. The principal noise sources are situated near the free surface of the ocean;
they are distributed uniformly over the ocean surface, are incoherent and their
radiation has a dipole character.

2. The medium is layered-inhomogeneous and the bottom depth is constant.

3. The speed of sound near the bottom exceeds the speed of sound at the surface;
the thickness of the abyssal channel occupies a considerable part of the ocean
layer.

A. The computations can be made on the basis of ray representations and the inco-
herent summation of the contributions of individual rays.

5. For relatively low frequencies (less than 1 xxx) and typical conditions in the
open ocean (length of half-cycle about 30 km) it is possible to neglect attenua-
tion in the length of the cycle.

6. Energy losses in the case of reflection from the bottom are considerably great-
er than the losses in absorption during passage of the ray through the cycle.

26

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In order to make these computations we will use the so—called ray intensity of

the diffuse field, which is used extensively in optics and in radiation transfer
theory [5]. The diffuse field in the neighborhood of some point r is represented by
the totality of plane uncorrelated waves and is described by the function of an-
gular density of intensity I(r,s) (ray intensity), which by definition is the

flux of intensity d" in a unit solid angle d-Q through a unit area in the direction
3. The use of postulates 1—3 leads to a dependence of ray intensity only on depth

2 and the angle with the vertical 0, I(z, 0). The I(z,0) value gives an exhaus-
tive description of all the energy characteristics of noise. In particular, the
energy volume density 5(2), proportional to noise intensity received by a nondi-
rectional sound detector, is expressed as follows

5(2) = i— I «2. 0W <1)

(c is the speed of sound), and the spatial correlation function of the field for
two points spaced at the distance/0 is the Fourier transform of I(z,9)

3(2. p) a no. a)¢""dn;

k is the wave vector.
c, ml

    

Fig. 1.

In a general case the function 1(2, 9) is described by the radiation transfer
equation. which leads to a constancy of ray intensity for a honngeneous medium
without scattering and losses. If refraction ocwrs in the medium it can be demon-
strated that the value c2(z)I(z,9) is conserved along the ray; this is a corollary
of the law of flux conservation. For a media: with refraction and absorption the

transfer equation will be (, a
I ' ' C l 2 I I .135
(z 0) (6(2) [(1 , 0 )e . (2)

where s is the length of the ray between two points at the horizons z and z', 0‘
is the absorption coefficient.

He will find the intensity I(z,9) of the noise field for a typical oceanic wave-
guide represented in Fig. 1. He will denote the rays emanating downward and up-
ward by the subscripts l and 2 respectively. Then the total intensity of the
field emanating from the surface 11(0. 91) will be the sum of the intensity of
the sources J(91) and the intensity of the mirror-reflected wave 12(0, 91), re-
duced to the surface: 11(0, 61) - J(01)+Iz(0. 61). But in accordance with (2)
12(0. 91) - I1(0. 01)cxp(-2u S), where S is the length of the half-cycle of the
ray and hence it follows that 11(0,01) - J(91)/(l-exp(-2«s). Now it is easy to
determine intensities for noise at any depth:

27

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

‘-‘| ’ 1(0|)¢"P('as|)
I' (x. a) . (7(1) l—exp(-—2as) '

_ €- ‘ J(°.)¢Xp(—a(28 - 5.)) (3)
' (To) l-exp(—2e8)

I, (x, 0) I

81 is the ray length from the surface to the z horizon. In exactly the same way
formulas are derived for rays experiencing bottomreflections: .

M2. 0) . (ﬂ)a MMPHS')

cm n-V(o,)exp(—2a3) ' (4)
' c. a J(0.)V(o,)exp(-¢(2s-s.»
W 0’ (a?) "‘T-Tw;)'ex'p(' -2'.s) ‘;

V(92) is the energy coefficient of reflection from the bottom.

We note that here we have presented a simple derivation of the results in [6, 7].
in which the authors calculated the anisotropy of noise by the emanation of an in-
finite series of sources of surface noise experiencing a different number of re-
flections from the surface and bottom. In more complex cases, for example, in de-
termining scattering. such an approach leads to insuperable difficulties, at the
same time that use of the transfer method for computing the ray intensity makes

it possible to solve the problem.

Now we will proceed to a determination of the dependence of noise 3(2) on depth,
integrating expressions (3). (4) in accordance with (1). Using postulate 5 con-

cerning the smallness of attenuation in the length of the cycle, we will neglect
the difference exp(-2¢X S) from unity, whereas the denominator of expression (3)

will he represented approximately as 20‘ S. Then

2 c a I+I’(0,) 1a.)...»
mpg—MT» [Immomonoi—W— . (s)

The denominator of the first term is the energy coefficient of sound propagation
to the bottom and this value is of the order of l, at the same time that 0! S can
be very small for low frequencies due to the smallness of absorption. According-
ly, for the low frequencies the water rays (rays not experiencing bottom reflec-
tions) must give the main contribution to the noise field. Using postulate 3. it
is possible to obtain a further simplification, seaming that the beam of water
rays is quite narrow and the lengths of the half-cycles 5(9) have li_t_t1e depend-
ence on the 9 angle; this makes it possible to remve the lean value 8 from be-
neath the integration sign. Next, we proceed in formula (5) from the angular var-
iables 6 at the depth 2 to the 91 angles at the surface and we will also use poa-
tulate l on the dipole character of the sources: J( 91) . Jo cos 61. Then

2. 1. .n cos’d'. memo.
E( ) : -——- —— ' —_ '
‘ co) «8 .’- F—’—’. 4491:.) an 9;

Here 9' is the angle of deflection from the surface for the ray touching the
bottom (sin 0' - cllcz, c2 is the speed of sound at the bottom). Formula (6) is
suitable for depths 2 less than the critical depth 20; for depths z>zo the
upper limit is equal to 9". where sin 9" - c1/c(z). The integration of expres-
sion (6) is reduced to elementary functions:

(6)

28

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

£(z)' :8 hay-[l -:( ;)]F,.,'(x),
nor) «Ii—+3" - .21.. ﬂ (7)

x I

[(.f-.'))- ]/l1( (°-' 3’] “8--

F,(x) I «I -x! + x’ In L:— M ,

"Vic-(0)1” “:"(Dl

Curves of the universal functions F10!) and P2(x) at a logarithmic scale (in db)
are shown in Fig. 2. Using these curves, it is easy to obtain the dependence of
noise intensity on depth for an arbitrary speed-of-sound profile c(z). As can be
seen from (7). the dependence on depth enters into 3(2) only through c(z); hence
follows the "law of conjugate depths" [4]: at depths with equal speeds of sound
the noise intensities are equal. Figure 3 gives the dependence of noise levels on
depth computed using formula (7) according to hydrological data from an experi-
ment carried out by Morris [2] and normalized to the level value at the surface.
It should be noted that the results of the numerical experiment, according to for-
mula (5), taking into account the dependence of the length of the half-cycle 8(6),
differ from the computations using fornula (7) by not more than 0.2 db. As indi-
cated by Fig. 3. the minimum noise corresponds to the depth of the sound channel
axis and the maximum noise corresponds to a depth of the sound channel axis some-
what below the critical depth. Such a behavior is easily explainable by simple
physical considerations: due to the smallness of absorption in the length of the
cycle the intensity flux H is constant and there is an inflow of the constant en-
ergy WA t during a unit time At through the horizontal surface for any depth 2;
this energy penetrates to the depth A z - cAt cos 6 (9 is_ the mean direction

of the beam of water rays). 0n the axis of the channel case is maximal and there-
fore the energy is distributed through a greater volume, that is, the volume den-
sity 8(2) is minimum.

0 1m in: -: a a -z -1 0 mm; db

   

29

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

When the depth becomes greater than the critical depth, cose decreases and the
energy density increases, but with a further increase in depth there is a great-
er influence from the opposite factor: a decrease in the total intensity flux
through the horizon due to bonding of the rays arriving from the surface. It also
follows from the considerations expressed here, in accordance with formula (7),
that the closer the critical depth is to the bottom depth, the narrower will be
the beam of water waves and the greater will be the difference in the noise levels
at the surface and on the axis of the channel. It should be noted that source [6]
gives curves similar to those in Fig. 3 and evidently obtained by the modeling

of propagation of the sound of distant sources.

At the present time there is definite experimental data supporting the described
model. The small crosses in Fig. 3 represent the results of measurements made by
Morris [2] at a frequency of 500 Hz. Although the number of points is obviously
inadequate. the general behavior of the dependence is qualitatively described by
the theory. There is less attenuation of noise on the channel axis than is predict-
ed hy theory, but this can be attributed to the contribution of bottom rays, which,
as indicated by numerical integration using formula (5), can make a contribution

to the noise at frequencies above 200 lie. but have no dependence on depth. Hess-
urements of the direction of noise at different depths [2. 3, 8] show that in the
upper layer of the ocean noise arrives at angles 13‘ to the horizon, whereas near
the bottom these angles decrease to lo“, which corresponds completely to geometric
computations of the angles of arrival of water rays. The systemtic excess of the
noise levels on the axis of the channel, observed with simultaneous measurements

of noise at two remote points with different hydrology [1] and attributed by the
authors to different attenuation of noise along the navigated track, can be explain-
ed simply within the framework of a model of hoaogeneous surface noise, attributing
it to purely geometric distributions of the speed of sound at these points.

However, the model considered here is inadequate for explaining some observed char-
acteristics of noise. The experiments described in [1-3] show that at frequencies
below 200 Hz the decrease in the noise level also continues at depths below the
axis of the channel; in addition, on the axis of the channel there is noise in
horizontal directions [3], which contradicts the described model and can be at-
tributed to sound scattering. Scattering can also be taken into account by trans-
fer theory methods.

BIKIJOGRAPHY

l. Kibblewhite, A. 5., Shooter. J. A. and Watkins. S. I", J. ACOUS'I'. SOC. ML,
Vol 60, 1040, 1976.

2. Norris, c. 3., 1310., Vol 64(2), 581, 1978.
3. Anderrson. V. (2.. IBID., Vol 66, 1666. 1979.
lo. Heston. IBID., Vol 67(2), 530, 1980.

5. Chandrasekar, 5., PEREIDS LUCIIISTOY ENERGII (Transfer of Radiant Energy). Hos-
cnw, IL. 1953.

30

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

6. Talham. R. J., J. ACOUST. SOC. ML, V01 36(8), 1541, 1964.

7. Furduyev, A. F. , "Ocean Noise." AKUSTIKA 0mm (Ocean Acoustics). Hoscov.
"Nauka," 1976.

8. Morris. (2. 13., J. ACOUST. SOC. ML. Vol 64(1), 166. 1978.
COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Nauka". "Doklady Akadanii nauk SSSR", 1981

5303
C50: 1865/5

31

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 551.646
EXPERIMENTAL INVESTIGATION OF NONLINEAR INTERACTIONS IN THE HIND HAVE SPECTRUM

Moscow DOKLADY AKADDiII NAUK $881! in Russian Vol 258. No 5, 1981 (manuscript re-
ceived 27 Jan 81) pp 1212-1215

[Article by A. B. Leybo and I. A. Leykin. Institute of Oceanology, USSR Academy
of Sciences]

[Text] At the present time extensive use is made of a representation of wind waves
as being a stationary Gaussian random process: a surface rise is regarded as the
sum of uncorrelated harmonic components with random amplitudes and phases [1].
however. experimental data obtained during recent years [2, 3] give basis for as-
suming that nonlinear processes play an appreciable role in forming the wave
spectrum. In sources [6, 5] the authors proposed nonspectral models in which waves
are regarded as a narrow-band nonlinear random process in which all the spectral
components are statistically related to the main component.

In this article we describe a quite general method for investigating the interre-
lationship of the spectral components of waves based on a model of a nonstation-
ary harmonizable random process. As an example we analyzed records of wind waves
obtained in a laboratory aerohydrodynamic apparatus.

It is assumed that wind waves can be described as a harmonizable random process
= ‘ Iul '
X0). :f- e Z(du), (1)

where L is time, OJ is the cyclic frequency, 2 is a tendon complex function of
frequency. Assuming that the mathematical expectation HX(t) - 0 and examining.
with (1) taken into account, moments of higher orders, we introduce a multispec-
trum of the n-th order

3(w. on. - - - .wn-INwaI---4Un-I " MIZ(4“I)~-z(d“’3)z.(d”)' (2)
where the asterisk denotes complex conjugation.
If nonlinear interactions occur in the process, this is manifested in some sort
of dependence between its harmonic components. By insignificantly restricting the

universality of the reasonings. we will represent this dependence in the form of
a series

32

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

2, - ”ﬁx, wrazm o ...+;..
(3)

Here 21 - 2(d01). Hi and Hi" are constant complex coefficients, {1 is random

noise and summation s can ed out for j, 1, and n. In order to clarify what terms
dominate in expansion (3), we will exanine the normalized multispectra or multi-

coherences, for example
1
-9(u».aw)5(uy.ay)
”(‘01. 011- him”:

so». wow», w...)'

 

C02 (’a)‘. (0,) '

 

 

(5)

CO, (”I- ”I! “1!) =

where S(cJ1_, elm) - Hthanz.

 

U l I J 0 1 I
0/11, I’- Hz

Fig. 1. Frequency spectrum of wind waves.

Similarly it is possible to introduce multicoherency of any order. The multico-

herency values indicate the relative role of tile corresponding terms in (3). For
example. if Condo 0’2. can) - 1, then z 1"z 12... with high multicoherency
values it is possiglc to evaluate the coefficients 1in the expansion (3). In addi-

tion. arg 8(01, M1) - 501 - 931, at; 8(01. «)1. (an) - fm+ ﬁ- (’1, etc.
(9’1 = arg 7.1).1'he physical sense of the multispectrum argument is dependent on

the coherent form of the investigated process.

The second-order multicoherence (6) with equal values of the arguments is equal
to unity and is symetric relative to the permutation of its argments. The third-
order multicoherence (5) does not have the property of symetry and its values on

33

FOR OFHCIAI. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the diagona- characterize the asymetry of the probable distribution of the ran-
dom process.
‘I/tf‘ III

all? Hz

   
   

"' 30. w/Zali II: "I. 3'. #34“ Hz

113. 2. (at left) Second-order nulticoherence function. 1) 0.25.602-SOJ; 2) 0.3~<.
Co {0.4; 3) 0o2>o.t..

Fig. 3. (at right). Third-order nulticoherence function. 1) OJSCOZSOJ; 2) 0.5S
(o $0.7; 3) Co2>o.7.

In this article we will limit ourselves to an investigation of the correlation
between all possible pairs of spectral components, that is, we will examine a nul-

ticoherence in the form
c 1 ) Imzfrzfl’
0 (“h ”I m2”, ”ll/Ia ' (6)

where K and N are natural numbers, (K + N) is the multicoherence order.

Some of the characteristics cited above were examined earlier. For example, in [6]
a study was made of the second-order nultispectrun (bilinear spectral density). In
[7] use was made of second- and third-order nulticoherence functions for analysis
of a seismogram. However, the bispectrun [8, 9] has cone into the widest use; it
is obtained from a third-order multispectrun with a stationarity of the process.
The bispectrum makes it possible to study only three-wave interactions of the com-
ponents whose frequencies are related by the condition 60- cal + 002. Accordingly.
probably. attempts to apply the bispectrun to an investigation of wind waves did
not give appreciable results [10. 11]. although the bispectrua is used successfully
in the study of turbulence [12]. We note the following: if the small effect of use
of the bispectrum is related to an absence of intensive nonlinear interactions in
the process [13], the proposed method will evidently also be ineffective.

If the investigated process is stationary in all sufficiently narrow frequency
bands (that is, the components adjacent in frequency are not correlated with one
another and energy is transmitted discretely through the spectrum). an evaluation
of the multispectral characteristics can be rude by analogy with the evaluation of

3!.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the characteristics of stationary processes. In this case it is possible to use
ordinary statistical evaluation methods: construction of confidence intervals, de—
termination of the significance level. etc.

As an illustration of the possibility of the proposed method we processed several
records of wind waves obtained using an aerohydrodynamic apparatus with a wind
velocity V - 5.5-8 m/sec (wave fetch 13 m, water depth 0.7 m). A record with a
duration of 1 minute (3000 readings with a discretsness interval of 0.02 sec) was
broken down into successive segments each with 250 readings, fron which we comput-
ed periodograms. An evaluation of the frequency energy spectrum S(cJ). as well

as the multispectra and multicoherence values, was accomplished by averaging by
segments. The number of degrees of freedom was v=324 (with a frequency resolution
0.6 Hz). which gives a 952 significance level 0.16 and 0.25 for second- and third-
order multicoherence values respectively.

Figures 1-3 show the 5(a)) frequency spectrum (in arbitrary units) and the second-
and third-order multicoherence functions for one of the records. In the 8(8))
spectrum, in addition to the main peak at the frequency of the spectral maximum
Um. there is a peak in the region of the doubled frequency 2.4m. Such a form of
the spectrum is typical for laboratory measurements when the ratio of the phase
velocity of the waves to wind velocity is small.

The second-order multicohcrence function (Pig. 2) is synnetric relative to the di-
agonal ¢J1 - 0’2. where 002 - 1. With increasing distance from the diagonal the
Co2 values decrease rapidly. In the region (“)1 .- 261... 02 '0”) there is a stat-
isticaliy significant maximum with Cob-30.35. Significant 002 values are also noted
on the ridge along the line 6’23 le.

The third-order multicoherence function (Pig. 3) is asymmetric relative to the di-
agonal ‘41 = 0’2. The represented Co2 values were computed in accordance with (6)
with K - l, N - 2 and corres nd to a quadratic interrelationship of the spectral
components in the form zlvzz. 0n the diagonal the 002 values are different from
zero for the regions near an, and 20’m- In the region («)1 . 2a)“, «J2 - u) is
a peak with Co2 a 0.75. Large (up to 0.8) 602 values are also observed up to the
line «)2 ddm/Z.

An examination of the computed second— and third-order multicoherence functions
shows that the energy is transmitted discretely through the wave spectrum: only
the spectral components of the fundamental and doubled frequencies were statistic-
:nlly significantly related. This correlation is satisfactorily described by the
dependence 7.(2a)m) ~- 22(0) m), which agrees with the representation of nonlinear
surface waves (for example. see [14]). However, the second-order multicoherence
is not concentrated on the diagonal “’1 - <02, and accordingly, the investigated
records are not stationary. The 8(a)) frequency spectrum is not dependent on time
t (which was checked by a comparison of the 8(a)) spectra, computed for successive
segments of the record with invariable wave-generation conditions) and therefore
it can be assumed that the investigated records have "internal" or "small-scale"
nonscationnrity. evidently associated with the periodic (with the period of the
fundamental frequency) transmission of energy from the region of the fundamental
frequency into the region of doubled frequency.

35

ms OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

Thus, cne :uplcscntwtiun of wind waves as a narrow—band nonlinear random process.
in which all the spectral components are statistically related to the fundamental
cnwponent. is not confirmed in our measurements. The investigated wave spectra
consist of Statistically independent spectral components with a stochastic struc-
Euro, close to Gaussian. and a clear correlation with the fundamental component
(and difference from a Gaussian structure) is observed for the most part in the
noighbnrhwod of the doubled frequency (and also, evidently. in the neighbor-

hood of higher—order harmonics, although in this study such an investigation was
not carried out). The reason for the appearance of significant second- and third-
order multicoherence values on the ridge “232d. remains unclear and this ef-
fect requires further investigations.

It can he hoped that the proposed method will be useful in an investigation of
surface and internal waves in the ocean and also in the solution of other prob-
lems related to the study of nonlinear random processes.

The authors express appreciation to Professor A. H. Yaglom for valuable cements

and also K. V. Poknzcyev and A. D. Rozenberg. who participated in making the
measurements o

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Krylov, Yu. H.. SPEKTRAL'HYYE HETODY ISSIEDOVANIYA I RASCHBTA VETROVYKH VOLN
(Spectral Methods for Investigating and Computing Hind Haves), Gidrometeoiz-
dat. Leningrad. 1966.

2. Ranamonjiarisoa. A. and Coantic, H.. C.R.. Ser. 3., Vol 282, 111, 1976.

3. Yefimov, V. V. and Solov'yev, Yu. P., IZV. AN SSSR: PIZ. ATM. I OKEANA (News
of the USSR Academy of Sciences: Physics of the Atmosphere and Ocean), Vol 15.
No 11, 1175, 1979.

4. Lake, V. H. and Yucn, II. C.. J. FLUID HECH., Vol 88, Part 1, 33, 1978.

u-
a

Molo-Christensm. B. an" Ramamonjiarisoa. A., J. GEOPHYS. RES., Vol 83. 6117,
1978.

6. Rytov, '4. H., WEDENIYF. V STATISTICHESKUY'U RADIOPIZIKU (Introduction to Sta:-
istical Radiophysics). CH. 1. SLUCHAYNYYE PROTSESSY (Part 1, Random Process-
es), Moscow. "Nauka," 1976.

7. Ilaubrlch. R. A., J. CEOPHYS. RES., Vol 70, No 6, 1415. 1965.

8. 'l‘ukey. J. 14., OCEAN HAVE SPECTRA. N. Y.. p 367. 1963.

‘1. Hassolmnnn. K.. Hunk. H. H. and McDonald, 6.. TIME SERIES ANALYSIS, p 125,
1963.

10. lmasato. N.. J. OCEANOGR. SOC. JAPAN, Vol 32, Ho 6, 253, 1976.

11. Imasato. N. and Kunlshi, H., J. OCEAHOGR. SOC. JAPAN, V01 33, 267, 1977.

36

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

12. Kim, Y. C.. et a1., PRYS. FLUIDS.. Vol 23, No 2, 1980.
13. HcOonas, C. H. and Briacoe, H. G., J. FLUID. MEG!" Vol 97, Part 7, 205, 1980.
14. Ablowitz, H. J. and Segur, H., J. FLUID HECH.. Vol. 92. Part 6, 691, 1979.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Ranks", "Doklady Andean nauk SSSR". 1981

5303
C80: 1865/236

37

FOROFFICIALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 551.665.152:351.466.8

INT ERRELATIONSHIP OF FINE STRUCTURE. INTERNAL WAVES AND SHALL-SCALE TURBULENCE

Moscow OKEANOLOCIYA in Russian Vol 21, No lo, Jul-Aug Bl (manuscript received
3 Apr 80) pp 605-612

[Article by V. Z. Dykman and 0. A. Kiseleva, Marine Hydrophysical Institute, Acad-
may of Sciences Ukrainian SSR, Sevastopol']

[Text] Abstract: The article gives the results of
experimental studies of the interrelation-
ship between the energy characteristics of
internal waves and small-scale turbulence
under conditions of a finely stratified

ocean and the peculiarities of these char-
acteristics in the zone of action of eddy

formations of a synoptic scale.

According to modern concepts. internal waves constitute one of the principal energy
sources of small-scale turbulence in the absence of shear currents. The mechanisms

for the g~neration of turbulence can be different [7, 10. 18]. and in particular the
turbulence can be caused by hydrodynamic instability and the destruction of internal
waves [M]. Turbulent and wave movements in the ocean are closely interrelated to

local stratification conditions and therefore an effective method for their investi-
gation is determination of different characteristics of the fine vertical structure

of hydrophysical f ieids.

In this article we give the results of experimental investigations of the energy
supply of small-scale turbulence and its interrelationship to the field of internal
waves. These investigations were carried out within the framework of the POLIHODE
program in 1976-1978 on voyages of the scientific research ship "Akademik Vernad-
skiy." The apparatus used was slid along a supporting-electrical cable [3] being
employed for measuring the temperature of sea water with a response of 10’ °C and
a spatial resolution of 3.6 cm. The averaged profiles of temperature, salinity and
density were obtained from synchronous soundings with the ISTOK hydrological probe

[9].

Different opinions now prevail concerning the nature of the fine structure (PS) and
microstructure (HS) [6. 7, ll, 15]. The IKnown methods for separating the spectrum
of vertical structure scales into the 'two ranges PS and MS take into account not
only the difference in scales, but also the processes participating in their forma-
tion. An analysis of the numerous experimental data on the fine vertical structure

38

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0FF1C1AI.USEGDNLY

of the ocean [6, 11, 15-17] evidently gives basis for assuming that under the con-
ditions prevailing in the open ocean outside the zones of mixing of waters of dif-
ferent origin it is internal waves (IN) which play the principal role in forming
of the F5. Microstructure is the smallest-scale variability with scales from 1 m
to 1 mm, where molecular processes of viscosity and diffusion already exert an ef-
fect and in whose formation small-scale turbulence participates [7, 11, 15].

The minimum FS scales and the maximum HS scales, that is, the position of the boun-
dary between these two structures, must be determined by local conditions. Source
[12] gives an empirical expression determining the position of this boundary on the
wave number axis kzo I ’30“. where n - N'N '1 is the dimensionless Viisala-Brent
frequency. N0 - 3 cycles/hour, :3- 1 cycle m. The vertical scale

L. = 15:, (1)
thus characterizes the maximum vertical scales of the HS or turbulent formations.

The position of the boundary between the FS and the MS can also be determined from
the experimental temperature spectra [1. 2. 5]. In order to determine the type of
movement (waves or turbulence) use was made of the following tests and criteria:

the form of the spectrum on both sides of this boundary and the test
M

_ itiﬂ)’
v""(01I dz '
characterizing the degree of nonlinearity of the process [12] or the weak interac—
tions condition v2<1 and the strong interactions condition V2) 1.

Evaluations of the v’2 parameter indicated that only for scales greater than 2-5 m
is there satisfaction of the weak interactions condition (1’2 . 0.1-0.2), which
corresponds to linear internal waves. In the smaller-scale range 1/2 becomes great-
er than unity. attaining several tens. as is characteristic of turbulence. An ad-
ditional characteristic for determining the type of movement can be the probability
of local negative density gradients. being a consequence of positive temperature
gradients under conditions of stratification which on the average is stable. Small
values of the probability ELM or "AT: are evidence of wave movement; high values
of these characteristics indicate intensive mixing of a stably stratified fluid and
are an indicator of turbulence. The evaluations were made using histograms of the

distribution of local temperature gradients.

investigations of the small—scale vertical structure of the temperature field were
made in the Sargasso Sea. where during different time periods anticyclonic and cy-
clonic eddies were observed. The most detailed survey with an interval of 15 miles

to depths of 1.000 m was carried out during the 17th voyage of the scientific re-
search ship "Akademik Vernadskiy" in the zone of a cyclonic eddy [A]. The mean hy-
drological conditions,against whose background disturbances associated with the pas-
sage of eddies were observed. were called "background" conditions. In order to eval—
uate the influence of eddy formations on small-scale fluctuation processes an anal-
ysis was made of quasihomogeneous (constancy of N) layers 280-450 and 550-800 m.

Data for these same layers were analyzed under background conditions as a comparison.

39

ETHICNHﬂCJAl.USE(MﬂLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Figure 1 shows :he characteristic Spectrum of temperature PT'(R) and temperature
dissipation PT-(k)-k2, obtained using the results of soundings on the 14th voyage
of the scientific research ship "Akademik Vernadskiy." The figure illustrates the
method for determining the boundaries between the PS and MS and the dependence of
its pusitieu on the wave numbers axis on local hydrological conditions (on the N
frequency). It can he noted on the basis of the totality of numerous data that the
lonc-waue part of the spectrum (PS sector) on the average is approximated well by
the power law dependence PT'(k)~'k‘“, where n - 3, as is characteristic for inter-
nal waves {6, 15]. In the short-wave region the steepness of the spectra varies
sharply and the exponent assumes values in the range 1-2, as is characteristic for
small-scale turbulence (for fluctuations of the scalar value) in all three spectral
subintervals: buoyancy, inertial-convective and viscous. In the region of this
"break" is the boundary between the PS and the MS, which corresponds to a minimum
or the spectrum PT(k)-k2 (Fig. 1) and the maximum vertical turbulence scale Let-
The level of spectral density of instrumental noise (according to experimental
evaluations) is also shown in Pig. 1. Spectral distortions due to "eliasing" were
eliminated by averaging of temperature along the vertical base of the sensor (5 cm)
and with a discreteness interval (3.6 cm).

It can be noted that the tendency in change of Lcr with an increase in E is the
same as for L0: the values of these scales, computed using formula (1), decrease
with an increase in N. However, in each specific case these evaluations can differ
substantially. which evidently is attributable to the fact that expression (1)
does not take into account a number of dynamic factors (for example, shear velo-

cities. etc.) and is dependent only on N.

Regarding the scale Lcr (or L0) as the maximum vertical turbulence scale. on the
basis of the dependences cited in [8] it is possible to obtain evaluations of the
rate of influx of kinetic energy a and the coefficient of vertical turbulent ex-
change K max;

2 e - 5.3.10-9-1. ,4? gmz'eeC‘3. (2)
Kamax . 1,74.1o-2.L§rvn cmz-sec'l, (3)

where her is in cm and § is in cycles/hour.

In making evaluations of 8 and Kz'3x it must be remembered that expressions (2)
and (3). strictly speaking, are applicable to locally isotropic turbulence, whose
existence in our measurements could not be reliably established in each specific
case. Whereas the temperature spectrum in the HS range in actuality corresponds

to the buoyancy interval. the LC; and KZIBX evaluations are known to be too low
since the expenditures of kinetic energy on maintaining turbulent movement in this
interval shOuid be greater than in the inertial-convective interval [13]. However.
this should not be reflected in the basic conclusions from our study.

Since henceforth the analysis of the distributions of the rates of influx of kin-
etic energy to small-scale turbulence is carried out on the assumption of a pre-
dominance of the role of internal waves in this process, it would be useful to de-
termine the interrelationship of the energy characteristics of internal waves and
turbulence. as well as their dependence on density stratification conditions. which
in the absence of significant shifts of the current velocity field determines the
conditions for the existence of internal waves.

40

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Ft”!(ﬂﬂﬂ(]Al.USEiDNLY

According to existing concepts [14], the process of development of local hydrody-
namic instability of internal waves is random, and therefore, for determining

the statistical interrelationships of the energy and hydrological characteristics
it is necessary to average them in time or space greater than the spatial-temporal
scales of internal waves. For this purpose use was made of the energy characteris-
tics of internal waves and small-scale turbulence, averaged for a quasihomogeneous
layer (constancy of N) on the assumption of a statistical uniformity of the inter-
mittent turbulence. Without question, in each localized center of turbulence the
energy of small-scale uwvement is determined not only by the density field, but
also by the current velocity field, which in turn can be determined by the field of
internal waves. An analysis of the experimental results indicated that the spatial-
temporal averaging procedure is necessary for obtaining stable evaluations.

2
CC 'I'II
Prlu'CQ-d 4(4)“.

10 '

  

m" In"
to" m"

LC!
1:" S} '0"

I, m I,” O, 10 ll, 7

Fig. 1. Spectrum of deviations of temperature from mean profile PT(k) (l) and cor-
responding temperature dissipation spectrum Rr(k)k2 (2) for layer 165-210 m and N
- 2.7 cycles/hour. (I) -- spectrum of instrument noise Pnoise(k)3 Lcr -- maximum
vertical turbulence scale. equal to 0.86 m.

Small—scale turbulence in the presence of FS evidently exists only in relatively
uniform mixed layers with small vertical gradients of temperature and density.
alternating with intercalations with considerable gradients of these parameters
and therefore for correct evaluations of e and K2“x in (2) and (3) it is neces-
sary to use not the menu, but the local vaisalx-Brent frequencies in mixed turbu-
lent layers "lay‘ The Viisﬁla-Brent frequencies in layers “lay and intercalations
"inter were determined from histograms of the distribution of local temperature
gradients, making it possible to obtain the mathematical expectation of the gradi-
ents Pia-”g; z- the mean square values of positive 031702 and negative o’_aT/a z
deviations of the local gradients from the mean. 0n the assumption of a linear cor-
relation between temperature and density, which is entirely justified due to the

41

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

negligible changes in salinity with depth in the investigated layers of the ocean,
we obtained:

 

“lay . ”(1- Von»: ° Mir/a.) :
Ninter ' 7H1 + Vii-ma: ' M353.) - (4)

These dcpendences are represented in Fig. 2, where the correlation of “lay’ “inter
and N for the particular region and the existing neasureaent conditions can be rep-

resented in the form of empirical linear dependences:

uh, - ﬁ/u; an“, - 1.7 i; “inter/"lay - 4.4. (5)

k. .:. ,u'l cycles/hour .1
I:

       

} i J '
. IV. «Ml/v
cycles/hour ‘

Fig. 2. Dcpomlencc Inf locnl frequencies in layers N1” (a) and intercalations N1 ter
(b) on mean V5 isla'lﬁ-Brent frequency N. The figures correspond to the conventional

numcr lcnl designations of the stations; the subscripts correspond to the upper (l)
and lower (2) layers.

The use of the i value instead of N18), for evaluations of 8 and szax does then not
change the qualitative picture of distribution of these parameters.

Figure 3 illustrates the dependence of the relative values i/"lay’ “inter/i and
”inter/"lay on the value of the dispersion of vertical displacements US in the

field of Internal waves, evaluated for the "wave" parts of the fine structure

42

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0FFNJAI.US£1DNLY

Pg(k) = PT(k)-(J T/a z)'2. With an increase in the amplitude of the vertical dis-
placements of the water layers by internal waves the ratio of_the local frequenc-
ies "inter and “lay and their difference from the mean value N increases apprec-

iably, as is also evidence of the considerable role of I" in the formation of the
fine structure of the density field.

Table 1

Distribution of Normalized Dispersion of gettical Displacements, Characteristics of
Small-Scale Turbulence and Vaisﬁlg Frequencies With Depth

 

 

Invest lg” Nn WM
- of

atedl :para llaxe 1000 1011 1002 1000 1102
’ . 1'.0 15.0 v.0 15.1 11.1
N' "‘1‘” 2 3.51 1.10 0.10 1.51 1.15
hr 0 2.05 2.03 2.10 2.02 2.05
3'. .11 1 0.011 0.011 0.025 0 015 0.051
‘ 2 0.000 0.022 0.050 0.002 0.131
0 0.210 0.105 0.110 0.570 0.511
1. n, ' 1 0.10 0.10, 0.10 0.21 0.23
C" 2 0.31 0.00 0.35 0.35 0.50
3 0 00 0.11 0.50 0.53 0.50
1 0 10 0.10 0.21 0.10 0.20
L" “ 2 0 10 0.11 0.10 0.10 0.01
3 1.01 1.02 1.20 1.03 1.13
. 2. 0.“ 1.20 5.11 0.50 1.11
t 10’. ‘ " -3 i 1.50 2.35 2.01 2.10 1.50
sec _ 3 0.51 0.10 0.20 0.01 0.00
" 2. ' 1 0.01 0.00 0.00 0.19 1.05
K: ' 225-1 2 1.20 1.11 1.25 1.01 2.01
‘ 3 2.01 3.00 1.10 1.10 1.50

 

12 mm?

c I layer
1'") - intercalation

 

Fig. 1. Dopcndcm-c "/Nlny (l). "inter/i (2). "inter/“lay (3). Notations in the text.

113

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In order to explain the influence of synoptic eddies on the process of energy sup-
ply of small-scale turbulence in its interrelationship to the field of internal
waves: it is f irst necessary to exaaine the results obtained under background con-
ditions (Table 1, stations 1788, 1789. 1674).

It was noted in [10' that under background conditions in the layers 280-405 II, 550-
800 m the potential energy level is virtually identical (6 2£0.17 1:2). The rates
of influx of kinetic energy to snail-scale turbulence a an the frequency N in these
layers also differ insignificantly. In a broad range of change of N from 2.5 to 15-
16 cycles/hour in the upper layer of the ocean 25-2“) m (Fig. be) the influx of kin-
etic energy to turbulence varies considerably (from 0.28-10"3 to 8.6010“3 cm -sec"3).
increasing with an increase in N. At the sane time, there is a considerable change
in the density of potential energy of internal waves, decreasing by more than an
order of magnitude with an increase in N. With respect to the change in the coef-
ficient of vertical turbulent exchange Kan“ under background conditions. on the
basis of the table and Fig. be it can be concluded that large N correspond to less-
er sz" and vice versa although the range of change is less (from 1 to 3 cmz'sec'l).

a: a: m m 0.53;
1.0 2.0 u m an?"

    

Fig. la. Change in potential energy 5:2 (1), rate of influx of kinetic energy 5 (2)
and coefficient of vertical turbulent exchange Kznl‘ (3) with depth in layer 25-200
In for .1) background stations 1659 and 1676, b) in eddy zone at stations 1662 and

[668.

The distribution of 3 and K3" with depth in the zone of eddy formtion can be

judged from Fig. db and the table. In layers up to 200 In both the mentioned para-
meters are of the some order of magnitude as under background conditions. The sale
can also be noted for the layer 550-800 In. The greatest differences in the values
of the parameters 8 . sz" and the density of potential energy of I" are observed

410

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FORiOFFKJAl.USB(MNLY

in the layer 280-605 in. where E , szax and 3‘2 can considerably exceed the back-
ground values.

Data on the distribution of 8 and szax over the area of a cyclonic eddy are given
in [a]. In the upper layer 280-405 m the maximum rate of influx of kinetic energy
to turbulence is observed in the central part of the eddy, where the level of poten-
tial energy of the wave field has a minimum. On the periphery of the eddy 8 and
szax decrease, approaching the background values. It was impossible to obtain the
full picture of distribution of 6 and xzmax over the area of the eddy for the layer
550-800 a. but available estimates make it possible to conclude that 5 and Kz“‘*
in this layer as well are close in their values to the background values. Thus, the
experimental data indicate that in the layer 280-405 m at the center of a synoptic
eddy there is some nucleus for which relatively high values of the coefficient of
vertical exchange and an intensive influx of kinetic energy to turbulent formations
are characteristic. An indirect hut convincing confirmation of the existence of in-
tensive turbulent exchange at the center of the eddy can be the fact of the discov-
ery of a zone of increased biological productivity of the waters here.

2

-sec'3

r.cM{£” CD
to '1

  

III‘ 10' 1,18 m'

m' m mum/o m’ ”ﬂu/“Out

Pig. 5. Dependence of the rate of influx of kinetic energy E on Viisali-Brent fre-
quency. 1) background; 2) eddy. layer 280-405 a; 3) data in table. Interrelationship
of rate of influx of kinetic energy and potential energy value a; ; 6) background;
5) eddy, layer 280-605 m: 6) data in table.

An analysis of the results indicated that there is a close correlation between the
rate of influx of kinetic energy to turbulence. the density of potential energy of
internal waves and local hydrological conditions (gig. 5). High 8 values correspond
to lesser 0:2 and vice versa. with an increase in N there is an increase in the
energy influx to turbulence and a decrease in the potential energy of internal
waves. The range of change in 5 and 31,2 is about two orders of magnitude.

In addition to data on 8 obtained by the method described above, Fig. 5 gives data
from [1]. Estimates of Cu. obtained by the authors on the basis of measurements
for relatively thin layers, have a considerable scatter around the empirical

45

FOR‘OFFNJAI.USI(HNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

dependence. After averaging for the range of depths 100-200 and 200-300 m and
for four series of snundings the 5 u values correspond well to this dependence.
Here we have also shown an estimate, made using the data in [14], for the mean

conditions in the ocean.

Such a result can indicate that with an increase in the mean Vaisglg-Brent fre-
quency N (or the mean density gradients 40/3 2) in the presence of a fine ver-
tical structure there is an increase in the probability of the occurrence of local
shear instability in the intercalations since the local Richardson numbers R1' are
("inter/")2 times less than the mean 81 number [16]. This should lead to an in-
criase in the cases of destruction of unstable internal waves accompanying the for-
mation of "spots" of small-scale turbulence and in general, to an increase in the
expenditure of energy from internal waves to turbulence. This, in turn, can be one
of the mechanisms of limitation of the amplitude of internal waves, and according-
ly. the potential Energy of the nave field. It must be noted that the dependence
of 5 ED“ 55 2 on N is manifested most clearly in layers with great density gradi-
ents (N > 3 cycles/hour). as is characteristic for the seasonal thermocline and
zones of deformation of the density field in eddy formations. The principal differ-

ence between the experimental data used by Garrett and Hunk for validating a Iodel
of the spectrum of IN (CH-75) is that they correspond to the main ocean thermo-

clino, where i <§3 cycles/haur. Evidently, only in layers with large density gra-
dlents can the mechanism of local hydrodynamic instability of internal waves be

operative. In the deeper-lying layers, in zones of small vertical density gradi-
ents other mechanisms of wave destruction can be operative (for example, see

[181).

The authors express appreciation to N. A. Panteleyev for disCussion of this work.
BIBLIOGRAPHY

1. Belyayev, V. S.. Lozovatskiy. I. D. and Ozmidov, R. V., "Features of Small-

Scnle Turbulence in the Ocean Thermocline." PIZIKA ATHOSFERY I OKEANA (Phys-
ics of the AtmOSphere and Ocean), Vol 15, No 10, pp 1060-1065, 1979.

re
0

Dykman, V. Z.,nnd Panteleyev, N. A., "Correlation Between Fine Structure in
the Ocean and Internal Waves and Turbulence," MDRSKIYE GIDROFIZICHESKIYE IS-

SLEDOVANIYA (Marine Hydrophysical Research), No b, Sevastopol', Izd. HGI, pp
132-147, 1977.

3. Dykman, V. 2., Yefremov, 0. I. and Panteleyev, N. A., ”Sounding Complex for In-
vestigating the Fine Vertical Structure of the Ocean," EKSPBRIMENTAL'NYYE
METODY ISSLEDOVANIYA OKEANA (Experimental Methods for Investigating the
Ocean). Suvustolml', Izd. Hicl, pp 125-136, 1978.

4. Dykmun, V. 2., Kiseleva, 0. A. and Yefremov, 0. I., "Investigations of the Pine
Vertical Structure of the Temperature Field in Eddy Formations of a Synoptic
Scale." OKEANOLOGIYA (Oceanology), Vol 21, No 3, pp 451-446, 1981.

S. anovatskiy, I. 0., "Spectrum of Vertical Inhomogeneities of the Temperature
Field in the Ocean Thermocline," 12V. AN SSSR: FIZIKA ATMOSFERY I OKEANA, Vol

15, No 11, pp l188-ll98, 1979.

46

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
10.

ll.

12.

13.

14.

15.

16.

[7.

18.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Miropol'skiy, Yu. 2. and Filyushkin, B. N., "Investigations of Temperature
Fluctuations in the Upper Layer of the Ocean at the Scales of Internal Crav—
itational Haves," IZV. AN SSSR: FIZIKA ATMOSFERY I OKEANA, Vol 7, No 7, pp
779-797, 1971.

Monin, A. S., "Turbulence and Microstructure in the Ocean," USPEKHI FIZICHESK-
IKH NAUK (Advances in the Physical Sciences), Vol 109, No 2, pp 333-354, 1973.

Ozm1dov, R. V., CORIZONTAL'NAYA TURBULENTNDST' I TURBULENTNYY OBMEN V OKEANE

(horizontal Turbulence and Turbulent Exchange in the Ocean), Moscow, Nauka,
1968.

RUKOVODSTVO P0 GIDROLOGICHESKIM RABOTAH V OKEANAKH I MORYAKH (Manual on Hydro-

logical Studies in the Oceans and Seas), Leningrad, Gidrometeoizdat, pp 562-
589. 1977.

Phillips, 0. M., DINAHIKA VERKHNEGO SLOYA OKEANA (Dynamics of the Upper Layer
of the Ocean). Moscow, Mir, 1969.

Fedorov, K. N., TONKAYA TBRMOKHALINNAYA STRUKTURA VOD OKEANA (Pine Thermohaline
Structure of Ocean Haters), Leningrad, 1976.

8e11, T. 8., "Internal Nave-Turbulence Interpretation of Ocean Fine Structure,"
GEOPHYS. RES. LETTERS, Vol 1, No 6, pp 253-255. 1974.

Bolgiano, R.. "Turbulent Spectra in Stably Stratified Atmosphere," J. CEDPHYS.
ass.. Vol 64. No 12, pp 2226—2229, 1959.

Garrett, C. and Hunk, w., "Oceanic Mixing by Breaking Internal Waves," DEEP
SEA RES., 19, No 12, pp 823-832, 1972.

Gregg. M. C. and Briscoe, M. C., "Internal Haves, Fine Structure, Microstruc-
ture and Mixing in the Ocean," REV. GEOPH. AND SPACE FHYS., Vol 17, No 7, pp
1524-1548, 1979.

Gregg, M. C., Cox, C. S. and Hacker, R. H., "Vertical Microstructure Measure-
ments in the Central North Pacific," J. PHYS. OCEANOGRAPHY, Vol 3, No 4, pp
458-469. 1973.

Hayes, 5. P.. Joicv. T. M. and Millard, R. C., "Measurement of Vertical Fine
Structure in the Sargasso Sea." J. GEOPHYS. RES., Vol 80, No 3. pp 314-319,
1975.

Orlansky, J. and Bryan, K., “Formation of the Thermohaline Structure by Large-
Amplitude Internal Gravity Haves," J. GEOPHYS. REV., Vol 74, No 28, pp 6975-
6983. 1969.

COPYRIGHT: Izdarel'stvo "Nauka". "Okeanologiya", 1981'

5303
C80:

1865/2b2

47

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0F!1(]Al.USE¢DNLY

UDC 550.38;SSO.37

ARTICLES ON MARINE ELECTROMAGNETIC RESEARCH

Moscow PROBLEMY MORSKIKH ELEKIROMAGNITNYKH ISSLEDOVANIY in Russian 1980 (signed to
press 25 Jul 80) PP 2-5

[Annotation and table of contents from collection of articles "Problems in Marine
Electromagnetic Investigations", responsible editor M. S. Zhdanov, doctor of phys-
ical and mathematical sciences, Institut zemnogo magnetizma. ionosfery i rasprost-
raneniya radiovoln (IZMIRAN), 300 copies, 190+ pages]

[Text] Annotation. This collection of articles consists of papers presented at the
Third All—Union Seminar "Fundamental Problems in Marine Electromagnetic Investiga-
tions," held at the Institute of Terrestrial Magnetism, Ionosphere and Radio Rave
Propagation (IZMIRAN), USSR Academy of Sciences. in 1980. These are papers contain-
ing the results of original investigations of the natural electromagnetic field

of the planet, descriptions of methods for its measurement and methods for pro-
cessing and interpreting the collected data.

The articles discuss the problems involved in the mathematical modeling of two-
and three-dimensional electromagnetic fields and also the problems involved in

creating specialized data systems for processing geophysical information on an
electronic computer.

The authors give an analysis of the possibilities of solution of geological prob-
lems by a complex of deep marine geophysical methods: magnetotelluric sounding and
measurement of heat flow. A number of studies devoted to analysis of fields of hy-
drodynamic sources are included.

The collection of articles is of interest for specialists working in the field of
geomagnetism and geoelectricity, and also for a wide range of marine geophysicists.

Contents
I. Methods and Results of Marine Electromagnetic Investigations

1. Zhdanov. M. S. "Problems in Investigating the Anomalous Electromagnetic
Field in Ocean Areas" 6

2. Sochel'nikov. V. V. and Kalashnikov, N. I. "Status of Development of a
Complex of Methods for Deep Marine Geophysics: Magnetotelluric Sounding
and Heat Flow" 11

£8

INDR OFTNCJALIﬂSE(MHLY
3.

10.

II.

11.

12.

13.

1h.

15.

16.

Shneyer, V. S., Varentsov, I. M.. Golubev, N. 6., Dubrovskiy, V. G.,
Zhdanov, M. 5., Nepesov, K. N. and Finger, D. L. "Results of Geoelectro-
magnetic Investigations in Ocean Areas and Along the Shores of the
Southern Part of the Caspian Sea" 15

Molochnov, G. V., Kozulin, Yu. N. and Sekriyeru, V. 6. "Partial Interpret-
ation of Equivalent Geoelectric Structures" 28

Molochnov, G. V., Kozulin. Yu. N., Sekriyeru. V. G. and Sysoyev, B. A. "In-
terpretation of Magnetotelluric Sounding Data" 40

Nazarenko, 0. V., Kryukov, A. V., Degtyar', B. F., lenders, Ya. K. and
Zakharov. S. V. "Marine Measurements of a Constant Electric Field Hith
a Difference Apparatus" 33

Karnaushenko, N. N.. Kukushkin, A. S. and Zhilina, A. I. "Statistical
Characteristics of the Natural Electromagnetic Field in the Seas and
Oceans" 38

Gorodnitskiy, A. M., Luk'yanov, S. V. and Suzyuaov, A. Ye. "Anomalous
Magnetic Field of the Northwestern Part of the Pacific Ocean and Its
Correlation With Tectonic Development of the Region" 56

Kolezhuk. I. V. "Possible Tracing of Transformed Faults of the Central At-
lantic Using Geomagnetic Data" 67

Kas'yanenko, L. 6. "Normalized Coefficient of Anonalouaness of the Observ-
ed Geomagnetic Field" 74

Application of Electronic Computers in the Processing and Interpretation of
the Results of Electronagnetic Investigations

Varentsov, I. M. and Golubev, N. G. "Application of Asymptotic Boundary Con-
ditions in Problems of Modeling of the Electromagnetic Field in Inhomogen-
eous Media" 77

Yudin, M. N. "Computation of the Magnetotelluric Field by the Grids Method
in Three-Dimensional Inhomogeneous Media" 96

Zhdanov, M. S. and Spichak, V. V. "Finite-Difference Modeling of the Elec-
tronagnetic Field Over Three-Dimensional Geoelectric Inhomogeneitiea" 102

Guhenko. N. D. and Tsipis. Ya. L. "Some Problems in Organizing Data in
the 'KOMRAS' System" 115

Alekseyev, S. M.. Varentsov, I. M. and Golubev, N. G. "System of Data
Bases for the Processing of Geophysical Information on a Yes-1010 Elec-

tronic Omnputer" 121
Alekseyev, S. M. and Golubev. N. G. "Specialized 'KAIALOG' Data Base for
Processing the Results of Marine Magnetic Surveys" 125
69

FOI'OFFKJAL.USI(HNLY
FOR OFBCIAL USE 0ND.

III. Apparatus for Marine Electromagnetic Investigations

17. Krotevich, N. F.. Panurovskiy. V. N. and Klekovkin, V. A. "Small Bottom
Magnetic Variomcter"

18. Polonskiy, Yu. M. "Self-Contained Digital Apparatus for Hagaetotelluric
Sounding on the Shelf"

19. Fastovskiy. U. V. "Reciprocal Influence of Simultaneously Towed Magneto-
meters"

20. Bobrov. V. N. and Kudrevskiy, A. I. "Mechanical Tests of Quartz Vario-
meters"

21. Nikitinskiy, V. V., Luk' yanov. A. N., ﬂorets, V. V. and Kudrevskiy, A. I.
"Electric Method for Compensating Drift of Nagnetostatic Variometers"

22. Bogorodskiy, H. H. "Investigation of Contact Primary Measurement Con-
verters for the Sea Electric Field"

IV. Fields of Hydrodynamic Sources

23. Corskaya, Ye. M. "Magnetic Field Variations Induced by the Motion of Sea
Haves on a Steep Slope and on a Hedge"

26. Savchenko, V. N. "Correlation Between Geoelectromagnetic Variations of
Waves and Bottom Relief of an Electrically Stratified Sea“

25. Savchenko. V. N. and Smagin, V. P. "Role of Crest Length in the Electro-
magnetic Induction of Three-Dimensional Sea Haves"

26. Aleksandrov, V. V. "Eddy Hydrodynamic Fluctuations of the Electric Field
in Lake Ladoga"

Abstracts

COPYRIGHT: Institut zcmnogo magnetizm, ionosfery i rasprostraneniya radiovoln
(IZHIRAN). 1980

5303
C80: 1865/24

50

FOR OF11C1AL1USEiﬂNLY

129

136

139

163

149

155

162

171

177

183
190
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY '

TBRRBSTRIAL GEOPHYSICS

UDC 551.468.551.24+550.838:550.389
MAGNETIC ANOHALIES IN OCEANS AND NEW GLOBAL TECTONICS

Moscow MACﬂlTNYYE ANOMALII OKEANOV I NOVAYA GLOBAL'NAYA TEK‘I‘ONIKA in Russian (signed
to press 3 Mar 81) pp 2. 212

[Annotation and tables of contents from collection of articles "Magnetic Anomalies
in Cht‘ Oceans and the New Global Tectonics". responsible editor Ye. 6. Hirlin, can-

didate of geological and mineralogical sciences. Izdatel'stvo "Neuka". 700 copies.
215 pages]

[Text] Annotation. The authors of these articles examine the principal patterns
of the structure of magnetic field anomalies in the oceans and in transition zones
and have ascertained the relationship between the parameters of anomalies and the
magnetic properties of rocks on the ocean floor. An analysis is given for modern
models of formation of the oceanic magnetically active layer and the processes
leading to changes in it. Also examined are the problems involved in the method
for the interpretation of data from marine magnetic surveys. Paleotectonic recon-
structions of the relative position of t‘ continents in the. Mesozoic—Cenozoic are
presented. The collection is intended for geophysicists and geologists involved

in investigations of the structure of the oceanic earth's crust and its evolution.

Contents

Foreword 3
Belyayev. I. 1. "Marine Magnetoaetric Apparatus" 5
Strakhov. V. N. "Some Problems in the Theory of Interpretation of the Results

of Geomagnetic Measurements in the Ocean" 20
Valyashko, G. ‘1. "Method for Interpreting Results of Magnetic Surveys in the

Ocean" 60
Valynsiuko. G. M. "Methods for Studying the Pine Structure of the Anomalous Hag-

nctic Field" 86
Shreyder, A. A., Trukhin. V. I. and Razzhivin. Yu. P. "Method for Paleomagnetic

Analysis of Magnetic Anomalies (In the Example of the Indian Ocean)" 118
Nazarova, Ye. A. "Magnetic Properties of Basalts in the Oceanic Floor" 131

51

FOROFFICIALUSEONLY
FINICMWNC1A1.US£(N§LY

lelin. Te. 6. "Processes on the Constructive Boundaries of Lithospheric
Plates and the Nature of Linear Magnetic Anomalies"

Karaslk. A. M. "Some Characteristics of Geohistorical Analysis of the Anon-
alous Magnetic Field Under Conditions of Slow Spreading of the Ocean Floor
(In the Example of the Eurasian Basin of the Northern Arctic Ocean)"

Mirlin. Ye. c. "Cenozoic Tectonics of Plates in the Icelandic Region of the
North Atlantic"

Suzyumov. A. Ye. "Ceodynanics of the Pacific Ocean"

COPYRIGHT: Izdatei'stvo "Nauks", 1981

5303
C30: 1865/19

52

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

162

162

175

197
FINICHWNCIAI.USE(N‘LY

METHODS FOR AUTOMATING GEOPHYSICAL RESEARCH

Apatity AVTOMATIZATSIYA GEOPIZICHESKIKH ISSLEDOVANIY in Russian 1980 (signed to
press 26 Dec 80) pp 2. 151-157

[Annotation and abstracts from collection of articles "Automation of Geophysical Re-
search", responsible editor I. A. Kuz'min, candidate of physical and mathematical
sciences, Kol'skiy filial AN SSSR, 300 copies, 157 pages]

[Text] Annotation. The collection of articles "Automation of Geophysical Research"
is devoted to the timely problem of automation of the collection and processing of
geophysical information and also the description of the apparatus and methods em-
ployed in geophysical experiments. The collection includes descriptions of specific
technical developments in systems for the automation of scientific research, a sys-
tem for the input of different types of geophysical information into an electronic
computer and autonomous recorders of data on a magnetic tape. Several articles are
devoted to the problems involved in computations and specific technical designs of
individual recording apparatus components. In general, the collection will be of un-
questionable interest for researchers working in the field of automation of sci-
entific research and the description of specific technical innovations may be of
substantial assistance to scientific workers in many related fields of science and
engineering.

Abstracts

UDC 6S.011.56+SSO.3

AUTOMATION OF SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH IN GEOPHYSICS

[Abstract of article by Kuz'min. I. A.]

[Text] The article examines the requirements imposed on systems for the automation
of geophysical research in the field of study of solar-terrestrial relationships.
There is a brief review of existing systems for automating the collection and pro-
cessing of experimental data. The structure and technical aspects of a system for
automating geophysical research at the Polar Geophysical Institute. Kola Affiliate,
USSR Academy of Sciences, are presented. Figures 6, references 23.

53

POI OFFKJAI.USE(NNLY
IIIICNNHCJAI.USEGNNLY

UDC 550.385.37

RESISTRY AND PROC' -ING 0F GEOHAGNETIC PULSATIONS AT REAL TIME SCALE
[Abstract of article by Yelistratov. V. P. and Negrebetskiy, A. A.]

[Text] An automated system for the collection and processing of geomagnetic data at
a real time scale is described. A block diagram and description of operation of a
reuorked control program and time program are given. A magnetic variation station
and the active RC filters which it contains are described, the filter parameters
are defined and the practical results of processing of geomagnetic pulsations are
presented. Figures 3, references 11.

BBC 681.335+621.39+550.3

INSTRUMENT COMPLEX FOR THE PROCESSING OF ANALOG AND TELEHETRIC INTORHATION OBTAINED
IN A GEOPHYSICAL EXPERIMENT

[Abstract of article by Radkevich, V. A. and Perlikov. A. H.]

[Text] An instrument complex for the processing of analog and telemetric information
is examined. It was developed at the Polar Geophysical Institute. Kola Affiliate,
USSR Academy of Sciences. and is intended for the processing of information trans-
mitted by the radiotelemetric system aboard a balloon in experiment SAHBO, from
aboard an artificial earth satellite and received at geophysical observatories. A
block diagram is presented and a description of the processing procedures with the
ASVT M-6030 and VK "Iskra-lZSZ“ computers with use of a device for the decoding of
telemetric information is given. The authors describe operation of the decoding
unit, which makes it possible to transform an analog signal, PM signal with partial
separation of channels using the IRIG standard or a separated PH signal into a dig-
ital form and introduce it into an electronic computer. Methods are given for re-
duction of the analog signal into digital form using an AIsP system and PM signal
as well as a discrete frequency meter and the channels of an x-radiation spectro-
meter. The number of simultaneously operating channels is up to 8; the instrument
error is 0.11. The accuracy in tie-in to the time mark is d: 0.01 sec. The maximum
discretization frequency is 20 KHz. The problems involved in long-range development
of the instrument complex are considered. Figures 5, references 13.

“DC 550.83.065+68l

AUTONOMOUS RECORDERS 0F GEOPHYSICAL INFORMATION ON A MAGNETIC CARRIER

[Abstract of article by Deryahin, V. N., Ivanov. A. P.. Kazak, B. N., Kuz'min, I. A.,
Lemnev. V. I. and Hakarov, V. 1.]

[Text] Different methods for the registry of geophysical information are examined
and their comparative characteristics are given. as well as examples of the prac—
tical realization of the considered methods. Carriers of geophysical information

and registry methods meeting the needs are described. A slow analog magnetic recorder

Sb

FINIiNFFTCJAl.lMSEICMVLY
FOR OFINCJAI.USE(NNLY

and a stepped accumulator employing magnetic tape which have been developed are
briefly described. as are the principal fields of their application. Figures 2,
references 9.

UDC 551.594.5+550.388.8
AUTOMATED COMPLEX FOR THE REGISTRY OF NIGHT AIRGLOV AND PROCESSING OF COLLECTED DATA
[Abstract of article by Solov'yev, V. N.. Starkov. G. V. and Yusbchenko, V. F.]

[Text] The need for and possibility of creating an automated complex for the regis—
try of night airglow are examined. This complex also processes the collected data.
Existing methods and apparatus for the registry and processing of information on
auroras are briefly analyzed. Block diagrams of instruments and apparatus for the
registry of auroras and processing of the collected data, which have already been
developed, are provided. Figures 3, references 8.

UDC 535.241.6
USE OF COHERENT LIGHT SOURCES IN PROCESSING OPTICAL INFORMATION
[Abstract of article by Anokhin. V. V.]

[Text] This is a review of methods for laser beam control applicable to the problems
involved in the processing of images, in particular, auroras, on an electronic com-
puter. The problems related to reduction of images taken on photographic film to
digital form are analyzed. Figures 3, references 11.

UDC 550.388.2:551.501.8
MODELING OF ELECTROMAGNETIC PROCESSES IN THE AURORAL IONOSPHBRE BY NUMERICAL
SOLUTION OF THE HAVE EQUATION
[Abstract of article. author not indicated]
[Text] The computation of low-frequency (f<310 KHz) electromagnetic fields in inho-
mogeneous plasma of the auroral ionosphere is considered. A method for determining
fields by means of numerical solution of the boundary-value problem for the wave
equation is given. This method is used for investigating ionospheric sources of

low—frequency radiation and study of the resonance properties of the earth-iono-
sphere waveguide. Figures 7, references 6.

55

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
INTI OFIICIAL USIICN‘LY

UDC 550.388.2z551.594.6

ANALYf-lﬁ JP '11.? SIGNALS BY DIGITAL “MODS
[Abstract of article by Perlikov. A. H. and Ostapenko, A. A.]

[Text] Methodological problems arising in the analysis of signals in the frequency
range ié 3 KHz are analyzed. An experimental apparatus for the input of analog
signals into an electronic computer and an algorithm for the spectral-temporal
analysis of VLF signals are described. This apparatus has a high resolution. An
example of analysis of a model signal, describing a short electronic whistler, is
given. as well as the results of processing of an experimental VLF signal of a
dis'retc typo. Figures 5. references 9.

HBO 51+550.3

MATHlﬁATICAL SUPPORT OF A COMPLEX FOR PROCESSING GEOPHYSICAL INFORMATION
[Abstract of article by Radkcvich. V. A.]

[Text] The article gives a description of the mathematical support of a complex for
the processing of analog and telemetric information obtained in a geophysical ex-
periment. Included is a block diagram of a complex of programs containing primary
and scientific processing programs. servicing programs and standard programs. The
storage of data is organized on magnetic tapes. A description of the organization
of input of information into an electronic computer and the purpose of the programs
are given. The complex of programs is introduced into “-4030 and KV "Iskra-1252"
computers at the Polar Geophysical Institute, Kola Affiliate, USSR Academy of Sci-
ences. Figures 1. references 6.

UDC 681.17
SURFACE RECEIVING-RECORDING COMPLEX FOR THE SAHBO-79 EXPIRIHEHT
[Abstract of article by Zhavkov, V. A. and Sushchenko. H. 8.]

[Text] The purpose of receiving stations is examined and a block diagram of the
equipment is given. The authors describe the apparatus at the receiving points
and give a brief description of the operating principle for a receiving point and
individual instruments. The technical specifications of the principal units are
presented. Figures 2. references 3.

UDC 621.371+621.396.6+550.3
MOBILE (DMPLEX OF APPARATUS FOR STUDYING PROPAGATION 0F DECAHETER RADIO WAVES

[Abstract of article by Patenchinkov, A. A., Pertsovskiy. R. A., Sazonov, V. A. and
Tkacbenko. B. V.]

[Text] A mobile receiving-transmitting complex has been developed which makes it
possible to organize temporary radio links in the SW range for solution of various

56

F0R10FFKJA1.USE(NVLY
FIN!€MWHCIAI.USE¢MVLY

scientific research problems. This complex makes possible the simultaneous radi-
ation and reception of radio waves at several fixed frequencies in both continu-
ous and pulsed regimes. The radioelectronic apparatus installed at the reception
point makes it possible to register the following parameters of test radio signals:
1) envelope of a radio signal radiated in a carrier regime; 2) averaged envelope
of multimode pulsed signals with resolution along the rays; 3) Doppler frequency
shift in one of the receiving channels; 6) absolute signal level at the receiver
input; 5) visually monitored data for some signal parameters in any of the receiv-
ing channels with the possibility of photoregistry; 6) number of rays of multimode
signals, with measurement of their duration and lag time between them; 7) high-
quality magnetic record of transformed high-frequency signals at several fre-
quencies simultaneously for their subsequent spectral analysis. The complex also
includes a magnetotelluric station making it possible to register the median and
short-period variations of the magnetic field in three components. this making it
possible to monitor overall geophysical conditions at the reception point. This
complex was tested within the framework of the international experiment SAHBO-79,
during which it was used in obtaining unique results in the field of slant sound-
ing of the auroral ionosphere. Figures 8, references 2.

000 621.396.62
NARROW-BAND SUPERHIGH-FREQUENCY RECEIVER WITH DOUBLE FREQUENCY CONVERSION
[Abstract of article by Beloglazov. H. I.and Shishayev, V. A.]

{Text} The article describes a SH? receiver with compensation of phase changes of
heterodyne voltage. The receiver transmission band is oils Hz. the amplification
factor is 100 db and the level of instrument noise in the passband is less than
0.01;LV. In the temperature range lO—éo’c the change in signal delay time is 0.10-
0.15;isec/1'C and the mean change in the amplification factor in this same temper-
ature range is less than 0.52/1'C. A block diagram of the receiver and circuit di-
agrams of individual stages are given. Figures 2, references 2.

HBO 621.38+629.l321
SPECIALIZED SIGNAL RECEIVER IN A PRECISE TIME STATION
[Article by Kornilov. I. A.]
[Text] This is a review of the principal methods used in synchronizing precise
time services. It emphasizes the prospects for using precise time stations in a
geophysical experiment for transmitting time information in a digital code. The
author briefly describes a specific receiver used in the territory of Hurmanskaya

Oblast for the reception of signals of precise time stations situated in the ter-
ritory of West Germany (77.5 KHz) and Great Britain (60 KHz). Figures 3, refer-

ences 3.

57

F1)! (MHWCJAI.II§E:(MRLY
FINI<NNH€JAI.1§HE(HILY

UDC 621.38+629.l321
RECEIVER 0P VLF RADIATIONS FOR BALLOON INVESTIGATIONS
[Abstract of article by Kornllov, N. A.]

[Test] The article concisely sets forth the fundamental principles for construct-
ing a receiver of VLF radiations for balloon investigations. A block diagram of
the instrument is provided and its technical specifications are stipulated. In
addition to balloon studies. the instrument use also employed in surface VLF in-
vestigations. It can operate with both electric and magnetic antennas. Figures

1, references 2.

BBC 535+550.388

WIDE-BAND SPECTRAL CAMERA WITH INTERMEDIATE DISPERSION FOR OBSERVING AURORAS
HIT" LIGHT BRIGHTNESS AMPLIFIER

[Abstract of article by Sukhoivanenko, P. Ys.]

[Text] A highly sensitive spectral camera has been created with a brightness ampli-
fier for the observation of auroras. The instrument field of view is 100°. The in-
verse linear dispersion is 150 Alma. Exposures from 30 to 150 see are used in sur-
veying the auroral spectra. Figures 3, references 7.

UDC 621.39+591.510

DISCRETE CIRCUIT OF A RECEIVING-RECORDING APPARATUS.FOR ATMOSPHERIC
OPTICAL SOUNDING

[Abstract of article by Baydalov. S. I and Drozdov, M. Yu.]

[Text] A simple circuit for optical sounding of the atmosphere by the photon count-
ing method with discrete sampling of range and the strobe is described. A threshold
response of about 5.10‘19 w was attained. The dynamic range of the measured light
fluxes is M107. The shaped counting pulses were normalized with respect to dura-
tion and amplitude. The circuit simultaneously provides for direct and inverse out-
puts. Figures 1, references 5.

UDC 621.316.S

LOHLPOHER D-C VOLTAGE CONVERTERS
[Abstract of article by Zhavkov, V. A.]

[Text] The author gives concise recommendations on the choice of circuitry for a
low-power converter. The article examines in adequate detail the operation of a
converter with a saturating core constructed in a circuit with a grounded collec-
tor. A formula is cited which relates the conversion frequency, power voltage and
core parameters. A method is given for simplified computation of the specific cir-
cuit. Figures 2, references 4.

58

FIII(Mﬂﬂ(JAl.lﬂﬂE(NULY
FOR 0511C1A1.USE¢3NLY

UDC 621.371

PHASE METER HITH PULSED PHASE DETECTOR WITH RECTANGULAR CHARACTERISTIC FOR RADIO
SIGNALS IN THE SUPERLONG-UAVE RANGE

[Abstract of article by Beloglazov, M. I. and Shishayev]

[Text] The article describes a device for measurement of signal phase in the range
10—30 KHz. The authors validate the use of a phase detector with a rectangular char-
acteristic and a signal limiter in the phase meter instead of an AVG system. The re-
quirements imposed on individual parts of the developed device. which ensures the
measurement of the phase of superlong-wave signals with an error less than 11 sec

with a signal-to-noise ratio > 0.5 in the band 20-30 Hz, are analyzed. A block dia-
gram of the phase meter is given. Figures 2. references'7.

UDC 621.37
AMPLITUDE LIMITER WITH FLOATING THRESHOLD
[Abstract of article by Galakhov, A. A.]

[Text] A scheme of an amplitude limiter with a floating threshold for reducing the
influence of atmospheric noise on the error in registry of VLF radiations is de-
scribed. Pigures 2, references 3.

UDC 621.396.62

ACTIVE FILTER FOR PROCESSING VLF SIGNALS

[Abstract of article by Pershakov. L. A.]

[Text] A scheme is proposed for an active RC filter for very low frequencies. The
proposed scheme makes it possible to construct filters with independent regula-
tion of the mean frequency of analysis, the width of the band of analyzed fre-
quencies and the transfer coefficient. Figures 1, references 2.

COPYRIGHT: Kol'skiy filial AN SSSR. 1980

5303
C50: 1865/23

59

FOR‘OFFKJA1.USE(NVLY
ma OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 550.34
ABSTRACTS 0? ARTICLES ON SEISMIC INSTRUMENTS

Moscow PROBLEHY I NETODY SEYSHOHETRII: SEYSHICHESKIYE PRIBORY in Russian No 14,
1981 (signed to press 29 May 81) pp 151-156

[Abstracts from collection of articles "Problems and Methods in Seismometry: Seis-
mic Instruments". responsible editors Ye. S. Borisevieh. doctor of technical sci-

ences. and D. P. Kirnos, doctor of physical and mathematical sciences, Izdatel'stvo
"Nauka", 950 copies. 156 pages]

[Text] Abstracts

UDC 550.34

ASTATICIZED SEISHOMETER WITH A NEGATIVE FEEDBACK

[Abstract of article by Rykov, A. V.]

[Text] In seismometry the mechanical method of astatisation of a seismometer with
a rotational type of motion of the inertial mass is widely known and used. A dif-
ferent method is proposed for the astatization of a seismometer which is based on
the automatic tracking method which is also applicable to a seismometer with trans-
lational linear motion of the inertial mass. Mathematical and experimental models

of an astaticized seismometer with use of this method are considered. Figures 1,
references 2.

UDC 550.36

DEVELOPMENT OF METHODS AND INSTRUMENTATION FOR SEISHOHETRY IN THE NEAR ZONE IN
THE USSR

[Abstract of article by Premd. V. ".1

[Text] In the USSR work is actively developing on the principal instrumental-method-
ological directions in the problem of seismometry in the near zone. Routine expedi-
tiouary investigations of aftershock activity in the epicentral zones of strong
earthquakes are being carried out. The network of instruments for strong movements
at seismic stations in active regions has been expanded. The main volume of material
is obtained using stand-by galvanometric channels. Methods have been developed for
the processing of seismograms of stand-by instruments, including for spectral

60

FOR 0511C1A1.USEIJNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

analysis and restoration of the true motion of the ground. The new instrumental
developments involve the use of magnetic recording and digital registry, the cre-
ation of long-period seismographs for strong movements. improvement in piezoelec-
tric seismometers and expansion of the possibilities of the galvanometric chan-
nels. Figures 5. tables 1, references 14.

UDC 550.34
INSTRUMENTAL-HBTHODOLOGICAL COMPLEX FOR STUDYING STRONG EARTHQUAKES

[Abstract of article by Aref'yev. S. S., Grayzer. V. H.. Pletnev. K. 6., Freud.
V. M. and Shebalin. N. V.]

[Text] The article discusses the problems involved in creating, using and develop-
ing the complex. including the seisometric problems, methods for organizing and
carrying out observations and computer programs for the processing and interpret-
ation of date to be used in the investigation of strong earthquakes, primarily in
their nearest zones. Figures 5, tables 1, references 10.

UDC 550.34

POSSIBILITY OF COMPRESSION (USING THE FREQUENCY CRITERION) OF THE DYNAMIC RANGE OF
SIGNALS EXCITED BY EARTHQUAKES

[Abstract of article by Aranovich. Z. I. and Melamud, A. Ya.]

[Text] On the basis of an analysis of the amplitude and frequency characteristics of
9-. S- and L-waves excited by close and remote earthquakes it was possible to eval-
uate the possibility of compression of the dynamic range of these waves (using the
frequency criterion) for the purpose of ensuring undistorted registry. It was es-
tablished that P-, S- and L-waves excited by close and distant earthquakes. de-
pending on epicentral distance, are characterized by different dependencea (vary-
ing from linear to cubic) of their amplitudes on period. Accordingly, the simultan-
eous compression of the dynamic range of these waves (using the frequency criter-
ion) is impossible. The desirability of using velocimeters for these purposes is
demonstrated. Figures 8, references 9.

UDC 550.36
ANALYSIS OF LONG-PERIOD CHANNELS WITH DIFFERENT TYPES OF CORRECTION
[Abstract of article by thloznynk, T. K.]

[Text] A study was made of the influence of different types of correction on the
principal characteristics of long-period seismometric channels. Their merits and
shortcomings were determined. Figures 2, references 9.

61

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 550.34

DERIVATION 0? A CONSTANT OF PHYSICAL SYSTEMS RITE THO DEGREES OP FREEDOM AND ITS
APPLICATION TO A SEISNOGRAPH

[Abstract of article by Hysh, A. G.]

[TeXt] The author derives a constant for physical systems with two degrees of free-
dum. An unambiguous relationship is established between the branches of the fre-
quency curves situated on different sides of the mean geometrical frequency. In the
example of a seismograph it is shown that it is possible to use the relationships
with the constant in obtaining the frequency characteristics, determining the char-
acteristic parameters, direct restructuring or sealing of the frequency curve into
a phase curve and in algorithms for pulse calibration of instruments. Figures 5,

references 5.

UDC 550.34

PHASE ERRORS IN SEISMOMETRIC ENGINEERING INSTRUMENTATION

[Abstract of article by Tseytlin. S. I.)

[Text] The article examines the phase errors in seismometric engineering instrumen-
tation arising as a result of instability of the characteristic parameters of these
instruments, including attenuation and characteristic frequency. The concept of the
coefficients of influence of changes in the parameters on the phase error is intro-
duced. A study was made of the frequency characteristics of the coefficients. Recom-
mendations are given on taking into account and decreasing the phase errors of
seismometric engineering instrumentation. Figures 5, references 16.

UDC 550.34

CORRECTION OF DISTORTIONS CAUSED BY FLUCTUATIONS IN THE RATE OF TAPE MOVEMENT
IN THE MAGNETIC REGISTRY 0P SEISMIC SIGNALS

[Abstract of article by Fridman, A. A.)

[Text] It is shown that fluctuations in the rate of tape movement during the regis-
try and reproduction of signals generate additive and multiplicative noise with the
frequency of the fluctuations in the rate of tape movement and also lead to para-
sitlc PM of the reproduced signal. The author examines different methods for cor—
rertion of the errors caused by fluctuations in the rate of tape movement. The ar-
ticle describes the block diagram of an experimental apparatus for investigating
the effectiveness of suppression of the influence of fluctuations in the rate of
tape movement by means of servocontrol of the rate of tape movement during repro-
duction using a control signal registered in an individual track. A tape-moving
system has been developed; it ensures the registry of considerable disturbances

in the frequency range up to 30 Hz with an insignificant lag. The amplitude-fre-
quency characteristic of the system is given. Satisfactory results are ensured with
the joint use of difference compensation and servocontrol. Figures 6, references 2.

62

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 550.34

SOME PROBLEMS IN CWPUTING HULTICHANNEL HEASURﬂiENT srsrms WITH FREQUENCY
MODULATION FOR GEOPHYSICAL INVESTIGATIONS

[Abstract of article by Razorenov, A. A.]

[Text] The article deals with the problems involved in computing the extent of the
frequency transmission bands of channels and their rational distribution in the
frequency range. Graphic dependences are given which facilitate these computa-

tions. Figures 5, references 7.

UDC 550.34

INFLUENCE 01“ Tim MUTUAL INDUCTANCE 0P COILS IN A HAGNETOELECTRIC CONVERTER ON
THE CHARACTERISTICS OF A SEISHCHETER HIT“ A FEEDBACK

[Abstract of article by Trapeznikov. N. L.]

[Text] The transfer function of a seisnometer with a feedback was obtained. It
takes into account the mutual inductance of coils in a magnetoelectric converter.
An analysis of distortions of the characteristics of an idealized seismometer with

a feedback, caused by mutual inductance, is presented. Figures 4, references 7.

I we 550.34

ORGANIZATION OF A 14E SERVICE IN REGIONAL SEISMIC INVESTIGATIONS

[Abstract of article by Vol'f. A. 1., Krylov, G. 6.. Rays-an, V. 1.. Chibiaov.
S. c. and Brenburg. M. 5.]

[Text] A time service is proposed and introduced. It ensures a time tie-in of
seismic information in regional seismic investigations carried out using auton-
omous registry stations. The time service is represented by . quartz clock with
a rate with a high degree of accuracy. The start-up of the clocks for the autono-
mous stations and checking of their rate is accomplished using a secondary fre-
quency standard -- portable reference quartz clock. Such an organization of the
time service made it possible to form a unified scale tied in to precise tine

for the clocks of a large group of autonomously operating instruments. to in-
crease the accuracy in determining corrections for clock rate, and to improve
the operational characteristics of instrumentation. Figure 1. references 7.

63

INN!(NﬂﬂC1Al.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONL'n'

UDC 550.34
TIME SERVICE IN APPARATUS FOR REGIONAL SEISMIC INVESTIGATIONS

[Abstract of article by Vol'f. A. 1., Krylov, G. 6., Rays-an, V. 1., Starodubtsev,
I. A. and Chibisov, S. 6.]

[Text] The article describes the makeup and operation of the time service in in-
strument complexes for regional seismic investigations. the "Cherepakha-H" and
the RTSS. This service includes the quartz clock of the recording apparatus, a

portable reference quartz clock and the time unit at the processing center. The
highly precise quartz clock of the recording apparatus for-s a binary-decimal

time code registered on a magnetic tape synchronously with seismic information and
in a minute interval containing information on the year, month, day, hour, minute
and second of registry time and also on the number of the apparatus and amplitude
level of registry. The reference quartz clock makes it possible to form a unified
scale tied in to precise time for a large group of recording apparatus. The time
unit at the processing center ensures a visualization of the reproducible time
information and automation of operation of processing center systems. Figures

5. references 8.

UDC 550.34

SYSTEM FOR THE COLLECTION, PROCESSING AND STORAGE OF SEISMIC DATA IN A Yes-1030
ELECTRONIC COMPUTER

[Abstract of article by Starovoyt, 0. Ye., Zakharova, A. 1., Barmin, M. P. and
Babkina, V. F.]

[Text] The article gives the first results of work at the "Obninsk" Central Seismic
Observatory on the creation. on the basis of s Yes-1030 electronic computer, of a
complex ensuring: routine collection, processing and publication of data fro-

YeSSN seismic stations for determining the principal parameters of earthquakes;
forming of a catalogue and bulletin of earthquakes on the magnetic tape of an el-
ectronic computer with organization of a search for seismological information on
interrogation; automated spectral processing of records of body and surface waves
in digital form on a magnetic recorder with creation of a system for the accamula-
tion and storage of this information. Figures 3, tables 2.

UDC 550.34
METROLOCICAL SUPPORT OF SEISMIC ENGINEERING MEASUREMENTS

[Abstract of article by Kirnos. D. P.. Manokhin, A. Ye., Tokmakov, V. A., Kharin,
D. A. and Tscylin, S. 1.]

[Text] The article gives a formulation of the problem of metrological support of
seismic engineering measurements and points out the timeliness and feasibility of
its solution. The priority work required for this purpose is defined. The prin-
cipal parameters of the necessary means for checking the measurement apparatus

64

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

are indicated; a list of the norm-setting and technical documents (All-Union and
All-Union State Standards) is given. References 10.

UDC 550.34

CONDITIONS FOR AND EXPERIENCE IN USING SEISHOHETRIC EMINEERING APPARATUS
[Abstract of article by Kuz'mina, N. V., Tokmakov, V. A. and Kharin, D. A.]

[Text] The article describes the conditions and some results of use of various
types of seismmetric engineering apparatus for measuring oscillations caused by
different sources. The accuracies of different methods for determining instrument
parameters are compared with one another. Figures 2, tables 6. references 8.

UDC 550.34
85? EPICEN'I‘RAL SEISMOCRAPI-I POI! NEAR ZONE 0? STRONG EARTHQUAKBS

[Abstract of article by Fremd. V. IL]

[Text] The choice of the principal technical specifications of a simplified mechan-
ical seismoneter for evaluation of the principal parameters of oscillations in the
near zones of strong earthquakes is validated. In the instrument the inertial mass
is a recording device. The registry is on paper using a helical pen or "flomaster."
The characteristic period of the pendulum is about 1 see; the damping constant is
0.7. The time of continuous registry is 12 hours. Figures 1, references 2.

UDC 550.34

THREE-COMPONENT PIEZOELECT‘RIC SEISHIC SWITCH
[Abstract of article by Arakelyan. G. K., Uapenskiy. B. 6. and Fremd. V. IL]

[Text] The article describes an instrument consisting of a three-component piezo-
sensor. charge amplifier, comparator, relay logic system and internal power
source. The instrument is intended for the combining of industrial antiseismic
protection systems. Figures 1., references 11.

UDC 550.34

PZO-IJ ELECTROCRAPIIIC LIGHT-RAY OSCILLOGRAPH WITH VISIBLE REGISTRY ON A SIMPLE
PAPER TAPE

[Abstract of article by Begushin, G. K., Borisevich, Ye. 8., Zabelin, H. V., Mos-
yaginu, M. S. and Rozenberg, I. 14.]

[Text] This is a detailed description of the unit and the operating principle of

the principal functional units and working circuits of the on-m electrographic
oscillograph. Figures la. references 11.

65

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 550.36

DIGITAL ELECTROGRAHIIC DEVICE

[Abstract of article by Borisevich, Ye. 8.. Begushin, G. K., Hosyagina. M. S. and
Hkhitaryan. S. A.]

[Text] The authors describe the operating principle for a digital electrographic
oscillograph. The principal expressions are given for determining its basic
technical specifications. The article examines the desirability of creating such
an instrument and indicates the possible areas of applicability of a digital elec-
trographic oscillograph. Figures 1, references 7.

UDC 535.3
INTERFERENCE INSTRUMENT WITH REFLECTING HEDGE FOR MEASURING HOVDIENTS

[Abstract of article by Kologrivov. V. N.)

[Text] In the automation of geophysical measurements and computer processing of
data ever-increasing use is being made of interference-type novenent sensors.
The article examines the possibilities of a sensor having a substantially higher

response and more convenient for automatic measurements than traditional instru-
mentation. Figures 3. references 3.

UDC 550.36
PULSE CHECKING 0F SEISHOHETRIC CHANNELS USING A PRIMARY STANDARD

[Abstract of article by Fremd, V. PL]

[Text] After determining the seismgraph constants and forming a channel with stip-
ulated characteristics its response to a calibrated pulse effect is registered.
This response is the primary standard with which the responses to a similar effect
are compared in the successive channel monitoring operations. It is possible to
make a qualitative evaluation of the reasons for change in the form of response in
the case of maladjustment of the channel parameters. Figures 1, references 5.

UDC 550. 310

TWO-C(HI'ONENT VIBRATIONAL PLATFORM FOR CALIBRATING PENWLIH SEISMOHETERS
[Abstract or article by Pedoseyenko, N. Ye. Deniskov, A. S. and Kastorskiy. s. A.]

[Text] The article describes a two-component vibrational platform for angular
and vertical reciprocating oscillations for calibrating. testing and selecting
seismic sensors intended for sea and land observations. The use in this apparatus
of a compensator of nonlinear distortions made possible a sharp reduction of non-
linear distortions of a vibrational table and a broadening of the range into the
region of infralow frequencies with a simultaneous increase in the amplitude of
angular oscillatory motions. The vibrational platform has snail nonlinear distor-
tions (up to 11). Figures 3, references 1..

66

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE(MVLY

UDC 550.34
ONE METHOD FOR PRODUCING lNFRALOH-FREQUENCY MECHANICAL OSCILLATIONS

[Abstract of article by Surkisyan, R. Ye.. Avetisyan, G. R. and Akhsakhalyan.
c. A.l

[Text] The article describes a method for obtaining infralow-frequency oscilla-
tions when using pendulum vibrational stands. The method is based on the prin-

ciple of compensation of the rigidity of elastic bonds, that is. the introduc-

tion of negative rigidity. Figures 2, references 2.

UDC 550.34

EFFECT OF SIX-COMPONENT OSCILLATIONS 0F GROUND (STRUCTURE) ON READINGS OF A
SINGLE-COMPONENT PENDULUM-TYPE SEISNOHETER

[Abstract of article by Sheyn. B. N. and Fedorov, S. A.]

[Text] The authors give the derivation of a full formula for a mathematical pen-
dulum which takes into account the contribution of all six components of motion.
0n the basis of this formula it was possible to evaluate the errors involved in
solving the inverse problem of seismometry for earthquakes of 6-9 scale units as~
sociated with the influence of the accompanying components of translational and

rotational oscillations on single-component seismometers of the pendulum type.
Figures 4. tables 3, references 5.

UDC 550.36

FEATURES OF A METHOD FOR MEASURING OSCILLATIONS OF CONSTRUCTION PARTS AND GROUND

IN RELATION TO TASKS 0F VIBRATIONAL PROTECTION FOR PRECISE TECHNOLOGICAL
EQUIPMENT

[Abstract of article by Maksimov. L. 8.]

[Text] Practical recommendations are given on some problems related to measure-
ments of oscillations of construction parts and the ground in the designing of
kinematic vibrational protection systems: required response and working range of

frequencies of vibrographs. choice of type of vibration measurement apparatus and
some design solutions, feasible duration of registry of oscillations, use of map-

netogrnphs and digital correlators for the analysis of random vibrations. Figures
4. references 3.

67

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY ~
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 550.34

FIELD TESTS AND RELIABILITY OF PIEZOELECTRIC SYSTBi FOR ACTIVATION OF INDUSTRIAL
ANTISHISHIC PROTECTION

[Abstract of article by Arakelyan, 6. K. and Premd. V. ".1

[Text] The article gives the results of field tests of a piezoseismometer with a
new electronic unit and three-component piezoelectric seismic switch forming part
of an industrial antiseismic protection system. An evaluation of reliability of
the seismic switch and the entire system is given. Figures 4, tables 1, refer-
ences 9.

UDC 550.34

HM'CllING DEVICE FOR REGISTRY 0F SEISMIC OSCILLATIONS BY PIEZOELBCTRIC
ACCELEROMETERS

[Abstract of article by Parshakov, (u. P.. Gurov. s. P., Hironov, Yu. H. and
Halyarov. I. I...)

[Text] The authors describe a model of matching amplifiers for piezoaccelerometers
basvd on modern integrated circuits. The amplifiers revealed a great stability in
Operation, reliability and ease of adjustment in tuning during the registry of

seismic oscillations in the near zone of shots in models and under industrial con-
ditions. Figures 8, references 3.

UDC 550.34
TIIYRISTOR VOLTAGE CONVERTER FOR ROTATION OF A SYNCHRONOUS WARREN MOTOR

[Abstract of article by Knyazev, V. V. and Fursov, A. N.]

[Text] The circuitry of a voltage converter for supplying Current from storage bat-
ter‘es to a Warren motor is described. Figures 1. references 1.

UDC 550.34
DEVICE FOR CRADUATINC EXTENSOHBTER
[Abstract of article by Kologrivov, V. N.. Yakovlev, A. P. and Latynina, L. A.]
[Text] A small portable device has been developed for the contactless measurement
of the graduated displacement of an extensometer, constituting a Michelson inter—

ferometet (with unequal arms) with an Lc-56 laser as the light source. The device
has been tested at seismic stations. Figures 1, references 6.

68

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OiTNCJAI.lEﬂE(NVLY

UDC 550.34

UNIVERSAL GEOPﬂYSICAL AMPLIFIER
[Abstract of article by Ignatov. B. 6.. Volodin, A. A. and Zelikman, B. I.)

[Text] A study was made of the problem of developing a universal economical geo-
physical amplifier fabricated using microcircuits of series 286. In the amplifier
special measures are used for contending with cophasal interference and there is
a fixed voltage regulator. Smooth filters of the upper and lower frequencies are

also built in. The range of frequencies which can be registered is 0.03-5 sec.
Figures 2.

UDC 550.36

INVESTIGATIONS OF MEMBRANE PERHEABILITY IN A DEVICE FOR REGISTERING VARIATIONS
IN MECHANICAL TERRESTRIAL STRESSES

[Abstract of article by Shporkin. H. I. and Yurovskaya, I. 8.]

[Text] An experimental study was made of the change in permeability of rubber fab-
ric membranes for gas and fluid with different membrane tensions. There was a

stepped change in permeability with an increase in membrane thickness and insig-

nificant changes in permeability in the temperature range from 3 to 20°C, and al-
so an increase in permeability for fluid with an increase in excess pressure from
the direction of the deformation converter cavity. Rays to compensate leakage of

the working substance are proposed. Figures 6, references 8.

UDC 550.34
DEVICE FOR MEASURING TOTAL ENERGY 0F SEISMIC OSCILLATIONS
[Abstract of article by Aleksandrov, A. L.. Zelikmsn. E. I. and Freud, V. M.]

[Text] The article describes the schematic diagram of a seismic energy meter in
which there is a squaring of oscillations of seismometer signals proportional to
velocity, summation of the squares for the three components and integration of
the sum. The output signals of the device._proportional to seismic energy, are
converted into the pulse repetition rate and the pulses are counted by an elec-
tronic counter. Depending on the level of the seismic signals and the setting of
the adjustable parameters in this device its continuous autonomous operation from
several days to months is possible. Figures 1, references 6.

69

FOI.OFFKJA1.USE(NVLY
FOIlOFFKJAL.US£(NNLY

UDC 550.34

FREQUENCY DIVISION HULTIPLEXING IN THE CIRCUIT OF AN ISHR SEISHOGRAPH
[Abstract of article by Aleksandrov, A. L.. Zelikman. E. I. and Freud, V. N.]

[Text] The article describes the operating principle and circuitry of a device for
the multiplexing of the FM channels of a seismograph with magnetic registry. The
multiplexing is accomplished by the frequency division of the modulated signals of
one of the two channels with subsequent filtering during registry and reproduction.
The device makes possible a reduction in the number of channels of the registering
magnetuxraph by half. Figures 3. references 2.

UDC 550.34

ECONOMICAL SYSTEM FOR PRECISE FREQUENCY MODULATION AND DEHODULATION IN SEISMIC
APPARATUS

[Abstract of article by Aleksandrov. A. L.. Zelikman. E. I. and Premd, V. H.]

[Text] The operating principle and circuit diagram of a frequency modulator devel-
oped for seismographs with magnetic recording are described. The output frequency
of the modulator is not dependent on the time constant of the integrator and slow
drifts of the comparator zero and reference voltage, which ensures a high conver-
sion accuracy. Figures 4, references 3.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Nauka", 1981

5303
C80: 1865/16

70

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 550.343.4/6:550.348:550.341:551.1
SEISMICITY AND FOCAL MECHANISMS OF FAR EASTERN EARTHQUAKES

Yuzhno—Sakhalinsk SBYSMICHNOST' I HEKHANIZHY OCHAGOV ZEHLETRYASENIY DAL'NEGO VOSTDKA
in Russian 1980 (signed to press 29 Dec 80) pp 2-3

[Annotation and table of contents from collection of articles "Seismicity and Focal
Mechanisms of Far Eastern Earthquakes". responsible editor R. Z. Tarakanov, Izdat-
el'stvo SathNII, Novoaleksandrovsk, 400 copies, 103+ pages]

[Text] Annetation. An improved variant of a seismic regionalizatiun map for the
Priamur'ye and Primor'ye regions is proposed. The articles give the results of the
South Kurile seismological experiment of 1975 with bottom stations. The spatial-
temporal distributions of earthquakes and the problem of discriminating transverse
faults are also examined. Some results of study of differences in earthquakes pro-
ducing tsunamis and those not producing tsunamis are presented on the basis of the
dynamics of development of their foci in the radiation stage. Data are given on the
peculiarities of the focal mechanism in the process of preparation of a strong
earthquake. Also considered are seismological investigations by the following
methods: three-dimensional modeling, earthquake exchange waves and spatial sound-
ings. The collection is of interest for seismologists, geophysicists and geologists
concerned with study of the structure and dynamics of the transition zone from the
continent to the ocean.

Contents

Solov'yev. S. L. "Seismic Regionalization of the Priamur'ye and Primor'ye
Regions: 1979 Variant" 6

Tarakanov, R. Z. and Kim Chun Un "Features of Seismicity in the Kurile-Kam-
chatka Zone and the Problem of Discriminating Transverse Faults" 31

Boldyrev. S. A. and Spirin. A. I. "Seismological Observations on the Vityaz'I
Underwater Range (South Kurile Islands) Using Bottom Seismic Stations" 40

Ivnshenko, A. I. and Burymskaya, R. N. "Dynamic Parameters of Foci of Kurile-
Knmchatknn Earthquakes" 55

Burymskaya. R. N. "March Earthquakes of 1978 in the Neighborhood of Iturup
Island" 64

Chugunova. G. L. "Seismic Regime and Focal Mechanisms in the Process of
Preparation of a Strong Earthquake (in the Example of the South Kurile Zone)" 72

71

FOR OFF1C1A1.US£13NLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

mph-gin. S. 3-. and KLantaycv, A. H. "Possible Physical Model of a Precursor
of 11 Earthquake )bscrvcd Using Borehole Data for Kunashir Island (Kurile
Islam‘s)" 80

.mikoncv, Yu. Ye. and Shvandyuk, I. S. "Results of Construction of the Velo-
city Field of P Waves Within Some Parts of the Kurile-Japanese Focal Zone" 816

Papnv, A. A., Zlobin, T. K. and Nenchenko. G. S. "Some Results of Detailed
seismic Investigations by Use of Exehange Haves Fran Earthquakes in the
Southern Part of the Kurile Island Arc" 95

Hinayev. Yu. N. and Suvorov, A. A. "Spatial Seimic Sounding in the Region 103
of the South Kurile Islands"

COPYRIGHT: DVNTB AN SSSR

“303
CFO: 1865/15

72

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 550.346.3
EXPERIMENTAL STUDIES OF SEISMIC CODA

Moscow EKSPERIHENTAL'NYYE ISSLEDOVANIYA SEYSMICHESKOY KODY in Russian 1981 (signed
to press 7 Apr 81) pp 2, 142

[Annotation and table of contents from collection of articles "Experimental Invest-
igations of the Seismic Coda". by T. G. Rautian. V. I. Khalturin, H. s. Zakirov,

A. C. Zemtsova. A. P. Proskurin. B. c. Pustovitenko. A. N. Pustovitenko, L. G. Sin-
el'nikova. A. G. Filina and l. s. Shengeliya, Izdatel'stvo "Nauka", 1550 copies,
143 pages]

[Text] Annotation. The articles describe the results of investigation of the seis-
mic coda on the basis of earthquake records obtained with long-period (SK. SKD),
short-period (SKH, VEGIK, SKh) and frequency-selection (ChISS) instruments for a
number of seismically active regions: Crimea. Caucasus. Central Asia. Altay, Bay-
kal, Kamchatka. Kurlles and Cuba. The authors have obtained evaluations of the
quality and turbidity for the upper layers of the crust (sedimentary layer). lower
crust and lithosphere, and mantle. The dependence of these parameters on frequency
was obtained. Stable regional characteristics of coda envelopes were defined. Cor-
relations were obtained between the coda level and the magnitudes KL“, mpv and the
energy class K for different regions and the fundamental principles of the method
for classification of earthquakes on the basis of the seismic coda are examined.

A method has been developed for determining the focal spectra of earthquakes on the
basis of the spectral composition of the coda obtained using ChIss records. The
spectra were determined for earthquakes in different regions of Central Asia. There
are three types of focal spectra and these are associated with definite zones. The
problem of interpretation of focal spectra is discussed from the point of View of
different focal models. Also examined are the methods employed and the results of
study of the attenuation of direct Haves by means of their normalization to the
coda level. The book is intended for seismologists concerned with the problems in-
volved in wave propagation in real media, the method for magnitude classification
of earthquakes. seismic regionalization. determination of the focal spectra of
earthquakes and the problem of physics of focal processes. Figures 171. tables 20.
references 135.

Contents
Preface ........................... ............ ...... ............................ 3
Chapter I. Structure of Coda Envelopes of Different Frequencies Determined

Prom ChlSS Records and Evaluation of Medium Quality and Turbidity. 7

1. Observation methods and materials used.................................... 7
2. Parameterizat ion of oscillations and measurement methods. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10

73

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ChJ pt er II .

1.
2.
3

(I.

\‘1
0

09V?
....

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Coda onvuiapcs of different frequencies.................. ..... .............

Models of lodn tormntion............... ...... ..............................

ﬁxsuches oi coda envelopes and evaluation of quality as a function of
frequency ......... .....

season's-ocoeeooossese oooooo eooemsosoosooeoteeeeee

Evaluation of seismic turbidity ..... .......................................
Regional and local features of coda envelopes of different frequencies.....

Coda Envelopes Based on Records of SKM and SKD Instruments and
Earthquake Calibration...................... .......... ............

Earthquake magnitude and coda level........................................
Instrumentation and processed earthquakes ...... ...
Periods of oscillations in coda............................................

Station peculiarities......................................................

Methods for constructing composite coda envelopes using records of wide-
hand instruments and investigation of their stability....................
Structure of SKH coda envelopes for different regions......................
Structure of SKD coda envelopes for different regions......................
Correlation of coda level vith magnitude or energy c1ass...................
Construction of system for classification of earthquakes on the basis of

coda 1eve1.. ........... ..................................................

Chapter [11.

Focal Spectra of Earthquakes and Their Determination From ChISS

Cudn Spectra........ ...... sovens-oonooe-oo-I...00......IOOOOOOIOOeooOoleooemDee
I. ChiSS coda spectra and their properties. ..... ............................u
2. Computation of spectra of focal radiation from ChISS coda spectra..........
3. Focal Spectra of Central Asian Earthquakes........................ ...... ...
4. Correlation of K and magnitudes with seismic energy.......................

5. Correlation of seismic moment “0 and magnitude............................

6. Spectral characteristics of earthquakes of different seismically active

Chapter [V.

ZOOES...... ....... ....... ........... ........o...o.c...o-..

scenes-oaeells

Use of registry of coda by SK(SKD) and SKh(SKH) Instruments for approxi-
mate evaluation of spectral characteristics of earthquakes..............

Study of Attenuation of Direct Waves by Method of Normalization

to Coda........................ ..... .............................
i. Attenuation according to observations of ChISS stations...................
2. Attenuation according to records of wide-band SKH, SKh. SKD instruments...
Summary ..... .... ............... .................................................
Bibliography........ ....... . ....... ... ........... ...............................
COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Nauka". 1981
S303
CSO: [865/253

76

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

14
23

30
33
37

54
66
48
51
SS

58
70
74
78

83

88
88
91
96
104
108

111
117
121
122
125

129
136
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

COLLECTION 0? ARTICLES 0“ GEOPHYSICAL INSTRUMENTATION

Leningrad GmFIZICHESKAYA APPARATURA in Russian No 72, 1981 (signed to press
13 Mar 81) PP 188-190

[Table of contents from collection of articles "Geophysical Instrumentation", tech-

nical editor A. B. Yashchurzhinskaya, Izdatel'stvo "Nedra". Leningradskoye otdelen-
iye, 2150 copies, 199 pages]

[Text ] Contents

Hagnetonetry

Andrianov, B. A.. Petukhov, Yu. H. and Studentsov, N. V. "Instrtmental Errors

in the Single-Component Henley Hagnetoueter" 3
Veynberg, A. K. and Kvachevskiy, 0. A. "Demagnetization Coefficients for Bodies

of 3 Cubic Configuration" 12
Electrometry

Holochnov. G. V., Radionov, N. V. and Sorokin, V. V. “Apparatus and Results of

Frequency Sounding by the Method of Hatched Loops of a Conducting Layer With a
Spherical Inclusion in a Model" 19

Kuznetsov, A. N. and Moroz. I. P. "Apparatus for Physical Modeling of Problems
in Magnetotelluric Sounding and Profiling" 22

Komrov. V. N. "Comparative Characteristics of Soundings by Rectangular and
Triangular Pulses in the Transition Processes Method" 33

Nuclear Geophysics

Borisenko. Yu. N., Portnov. V. S. and Polkovnikov. Yu. V. 'Tuo-Ray Ion-Probe
With Stepped Excitation" 36

Nazarov, I. A. and Burdygin. A. P. "Investigation of the Influence of the
Geometrical Mensuranent Conditions on the Intensity of Secondary Cams
Radiation" 39

75

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

annt|i£;‘i}. V. A. and Leman, Ye. P. "Evaluation of Threshold of Response
:u xur.y Radiometric Logging and Testing Under the Conditions of Natural
".eddim of ﬁres" ('3

Bukhalo. 0. P. "One Component in the Statistical Error of Gamma-Spectromet-
ric Measurements" 47

50k010\, A. N., thntovskiy, S. M., Sinel'nikov, H. 3., Rusinov, H. B. and
VozncSenskiy, L. l. "Experience in Use of s Differential Automatic Volume
Control System in Nuclear Geophysical Apparatus for the Continuous Testing
of Ores and Their Enrichment Products in a Technological Scheme" 52

an'fshtevn. P. N., Kircyev. V. A. and Peskov, V. N. "Instrument for X-ray
RJdlomwtrlc Logging with the PRK-1—36 Controllable Extensible Device" 57

Kosrin. Yu. I.. Zaychenkov. B. 0., Ibatullin. R. A., Gulin, Yu. A. and Tugar-
lnov, L. N. “Transportable Activation Apparatus for Preparation of Radio-
active Sodium Under Production Conditions for the Purpose of Investigating

Boroholes by the Isotopes Method" 63
Sldcnko, V. V.. Crabuvskiy. A. V., Gerling, V. E., Vasil'yev, A. V. and

Zgnrduvskiy. V. I. "Vacuum Semiconductor Spectrometer Hitlxat-Excitation" 68
Lemon. Ye. P., Zolotnitskiy, V. A. and Hats, N. A. "Interpretation of X-ray

Radiometric Profiling with Probes of Different Designs" 71
Seismometry

Kozlov, L. G.. Lukashin, Yu. P. and Hitrofanov, V. N. “Apparatus for Checking
and Adjusting the Computation Block of the VSK-l Vibroseismic Apparatus Com-

plex" 81
Lukashin, Yu. P. and Pushkin, A. 6. "Analysis of Noise Immunity of Analog

Vibroseismic Apparatus" 8S
Kozlov. L. 6. "Dynamic Ranges of Seismic Waves and Apparatus Used" 95

Bayknv. . . V. and Hukhamedzhanov, A. 3. "Device for Tie-in of UPR Apparatus
to the Small M6000. M7000, 8N1 and 5H2 Electronic Computers" 100

Anislmov. A. A. and Karnyev, N. A. "Apparatus for Ultrasonic Seismic Model-
ing" 105

Geophysical Investigations in Boreholes

Pyatctskiy. Ye. M. and Shcherbakov. Yu. D. "Influence of the Curvature of a

Borehole on the Readings of a Rotating Perrosonde" 109
Tarasnv. V. A. and Creyner, A. L. “Borehole Instrument for Determining the
Thermal Conductivity of Rocks Under Natural Conditions" 112
76

FOR OFFICIAL HSE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Bragin. A. A., Col'dshteyn, L. H., Pedoriv, R. F. and Shikhmsn, A. 8. "Stan-
dardized Electronic Unit for a Small X-ray Logging Apparatus" 121

Krapivskiy, Ye. I., Sergeyev, L. Ya., Kovalev, A. A. and Artamonov, s. V. "Appar-
atus for Neutron-Neutron Logging With Automatic Processing of Hessurement
Results" 124

Gutorov, Yu. A. "Choice of working Parameters for Complex Apparatus for
Acoustic Monitoring of Cementing and Technical Condition of Cased
Boreholes" 129

Lomachev, Ye. P. "Determination of the Actual Scale of Registry of Amplitude
Curves of Acoustic Cement Meters" 141

Sarkisov, I. K., Pugachev, V. P. and Hikhaylov, V. V. "Development of Autono-
mous Digital Instruments for Borehole Logging in the Drilling Process" 146

Artsybashev, V. A., Volkov. A. A. and Dugin, V. V. "Instrument for Nuclear
Geophysical Testing of Open-Pit Boreholed' 151

Innovations in Geophysical Instrument Making

Critsenko, C. V., Culyayev. c. N.. Kornilin, S. A., Krasyukov, V. A., Stavrov,
B. V. and Stepanov. B. S. "Semiautomstic Apparatus for the Read-out of
Graphic Information -- the 'Shifrator-3'" 155

Veselovskaya, N. P., Gulyayev, G. N.. Gritsenko, G. V., Kovalenko, P. 1..

Krasyukov. V. A., Novikov, M. Ya. and Stepanov, B. S. "'Grafik-l' Field
Digital-Analog Recorder" 158

Sarkisov. I. K., Pugachev. V. P., Hel'nikov, A. G. and Granovskiy, M. P.
"Apparatus for Electric Logging for Investigating Deep Boreholes Using
a Hultistrand Cable" 163

Exchange of Experience

Ivanyukovich. C. A. and Nazarov. A. R. "Choice of a Design for a Gamma-X-ray
Source" 167

Artsybashev. V. A. and Volkov, A. A. "Investigation of the Influence of the
Intermediate Zone in Calms-Gamma and X-Ray Spectral Analysis Logging of
Open-Pit Boreholes Hith Inversion Probes" 173

Aholeshln. V. H. "Use of a Secondary Source in X-Ray - Radiometric Logging
for Tin and Antimony" 177

Reutov, Yu. Ya. "Magnetic Properties of Radio Parts of Hagnetonetric Appar-
atus" 179

Sarkisyan. R. Ye., Hkhitaryan. s. A. and Gevorkyan. L. A. "Field Electric
Prospecting Instrument for Studying the Primary Fields of Stray Currents" 182

77

FOR ONO“. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Tsalyuk, M. V., Chelok'yan. R. 8.. Mel'taer. A. K. and Reznik, P. D.
"Method for Reducing the Electric Noise Level 1n the Logging of Deep

Boreholes"

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'scvo "Nedra", 1981

5303
C80: 1865/2 50

78

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 621 . 371+535 . 2(571 .54)
PROPAGA I‘ ION OF ELECTROMAGNETIC WAVES

Ulnn-Ude RASPROSTRANENIYE ELEKTROHAGNITNYIGI VOLN in Russian 1980 (signed to press
U: Apr 80) PP 2, 112, 1110-119

[Annutution, table of contents and abstracts from collection "Electromagnetic Have
Propagation", edited by N. Ts. Gonboyev, Ch. 'l's. Tsydypov and N. B. chimitdorzhih
yev. Uchastok operativnuy poligrafii BF SO AN SSSR, 500 copies. 119 pages]

[Tcxtl Annotation. This collection of articles is devoted to investigations of the
propagation of waves in the radio and optical ranges near the earth's surface. A

number of studies give the results of experimental determination of the coefficient
of refraction in the atmosphere and the electric parameters of the underlying medi-
um in steppe and semidesert regions of the Mongolian People's Republic.

Contents

Khomyak. Ye. M. and Batornyev, A. S. "Possibility of Obtaining Regions of a
Quasihomogeneous Field Near the Earth's Surface" 3

(:hlmitdorzhiyev. N. 3., Darizhapov, D. D. and Dagurov, P. R. "Diffractor
Field Change in the Presence of Waves Reflected From the Earth" 18

Dagurov, P. N., Tsybikov, A. Ye.- and Chimitdorzhiyev, N. 8. "Rapid Fadings on
Diffraction Paths" 38

Tsydypov, Ch. Ts., Bashkuyev. Yu. B. and Khaptanov, V. B. "Some Results of
Investigations of Natural Electromagnetic Fields in the Range 20-100 Hz in
'l‘ranshaykal in" 47

norzhiyev. V. S. and Ivoylov. Yu. A. "Electric Properties of Alluvial Deposits
in Mongolia in the Frequency Range 10-1000 KHz" 6O

Advukumv. V. R. and Dorzhiyev. V. 8. "Effect of Precipitation on the Electric
Properties of the Underlying Medium" 65

Damdlnsuron. E. and Tsydypov. Ch. Ts. "Vertical Structure of the Index of Atmo-
spheric Refraction in the Steppe and Semidesert Regions of the Mongolian
[Monk-'4 Repuhfiv" 72

79

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Dandineuren, 5.. .\r.-;cut'yev, I. V. and Danun. D. "Investigation of the Bf-

i".- -tiv«~ Atmospheric Gradients Under Gobi Conditions" 84
dcr:»:..;;.-t--.-, v. V., (.‘om'noyev. N. Ts., Poplaukhin, V. N. and Trubacheyev, E. A.

"Measurement of Dispersion of Intensity Fluctuations in a Partially Co-

herent Laser Beam" . 92

Bardanov, Zh. P. and Comboyev, N. 1's. "Determination of the Structural Charac-
teristic of the Index of Atmospheric Refraction From the Blurring of the
[usage of Parallel Hires" . 98

Boronoycv, V. V.. Zubritskiy. E. V. and Poplaukhin, V. N. "Apparatus for ﬂeas-
uring the One-Dimensional Spectrum of the Coherence Function for an Optical

Ham: and the Turbulence Parameter 612-e f" 106

ABSTRACTS

UDC 621.37l:621.396.103

POSSIBILITY OF OBTAINING REGIONS OF A QUASIHOWGENEOUS FIELD NEAR THE EARTII'S
SURFACE

[Abstract of article by Khomyak, Ye. M. and Batoroyev, A. 5.]

{Toxtl A study was made of the possibility of obtaining regions of a homogeneous
(with a stipulated error) field from dipole sources of ultrashort waves raised to
a low height and with arbitrary values of. the reflection coefficients. The spa-
tial position of a cubic region of a quasihomogeneous field and the magnitude of
the amplitude error for the field are determined within its limits. The study can
be used in antenna measurements based on the use of standard fields. Figures 3,
references 3.

UDC 621.39l.Bl:621.396.63
DII-‘PRAC'I‘OR FIELD CHANGE IN THE PRESENCE OF HAVES REFLECTBD FROM THE EARTH

[Abstract of article by Chimitdorzhiyev, N. 3., Dariahapov, D. D. and Dagurov,
P. 31.]

[Text] The authors give an analysis of the influence of a reflecting discontinuity
on diffractor field change. It is shown that the reflection of radio waves from
the earth's surface exerts a subscantial influence on diffractor field change and
signal stability in the passive relaying of radio waves. The results of computa-
tions are in good agreement with the experimental data obtained on model lines.
The computed statistical distributions of the attenuation factors for diffraction
and diffractor radio lines. obtained taking into account waves reflected from the
earth. are in satisfactory agreement with the experimental curves of radio signal
stability on natural paths. Figures 10, references 15.

80

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 627.371.222.3
RAPID FADINCS ON DIFFRACTION PATHS

[Abstract of article by Dagurov, P. N.. Tsybikov, A. Ye. and Chinitdorzhiyev,
N. 3.]

[Text] The article gives the results of an experimental investigation of rapid
fad ings on two two—peak diffraction paths "ith a length more than 100 km. Infor-
mation is given on the statistical distributions of the intensity of the fadings.
their duration and other statistical characteristics. It is noted that the dis-
tributions of the intensity of instantaneous fluctuations in two-minute intervals
were distributed approximately in conformity to the generalized Rayleigh law with
mean K values falling in the range -10 to -12 db. Figures 8, references 8.

UDC 621 . 371 .+550. 371

SOME RESULTS OF INVESTIGATIONS OF NATURAL ELECTROMAGNETIC FIELDS IN THE RANGE
20-100 Hz IN TRANSMYKAIJA

lAbstract of article by Tsydypov, Ch. Ts.)

[Textl This paper gives the results of experimental investigations of natural elec-
tromagnetic fields in the superlou frequency range. The authors describe the radio
measurement apparatus employed and the method for measuring and processing the re-
sults. The results are compared with data in the literature for other regions.
Figures lo, references 23.

UDC 550 . 372+621 . 391 .81 (519 . 3)

ELECTRIC PROPERTIES OF ALLUV IAL DEPOSITS IN MOMS-0L“ IN THE FREQUENCY RANGE
10-1000 K":

[Abstract of article by Dorzhiyev, V. S. and Ivoylov, Yu. A.]

[Text] The authors give the results of an experimental investigation of the geo-
electric sections of alluvial deposits in Mongolia and give resistivity values as
a function of the granulometric composition of the deposits and the effective e1-

ectrlc properties of the sections in the frequency range 10-1000 KHz. Figures 1,
tables 2. references 3.

UDC 550.372+621.391.81(571.54)
EFFECT OF PRECIPITATION ON THE ELECTRIC PROPERTIES OF THE UNDERLYING MEDIUM
[Abstract of article by Advokatov, V. R. and Dorzhiyev. V. 8.]

[Text] The results of an experimental evaluation of the influence of precipitation
on the parameters of geoelectric sections and the effective electric properties of

81

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFWCJAI.USE(NNLY

rhr underlying medium in the frequency range 10-1000 KHz under the climatic con-
ditions prevailing in Transbaykalia are cited. Figures 2, tables 3, references 5.

DEC 621.391.81

VERTICAL STRUCTURE OF THE INDEX OF ATMOSPHERIC REFRACTION IN THE STEPPE AND
SEMIDESERT REGIONS OF THE MONGOLIAN PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC

{Abstract of article by Damdinsuren, E. and Tsydypov, Ch. Ts.]

[Text] The authors examine the spatial-temporal distributions of the vertical gra-
dient of the dielectric constant of air in the surface layers on the basis of data
at nvtwork stations for aerological sounding. Some features caused by the specific
natural-climatic conditions of the Gobi were discovered: a relatively great varia-
bility of the gradient of the atmospheric refraction index, as well as a predomin-
ance of reduced refraction. The results of the investigations are compared with

data for similar climatic regions of the USSR. Figures 3, tables 2. references 19.

UDC 621.391.81
INVESTIGATION OF THE EFFECTIVE ATHDSPHERIC GRADIENTS UNDER COB! CONDITIONS
[Abstract of article by Damdinsuren, 3., Arsent'yev. I. V. and Banzan, D.]

cher The paper gives the results of determination of the effective gradients of
the dielectric constant of air under the climatic conditions prevailing in the
Gobi (Mongolian People's Republic). An integral distribution curve approximated
bv a normal law is constructed and its parameters were determined. The authors
give a comparison of the statistical distributions of the effective and aerolog-
icnl gradients of the atmospheric dielectric constant. Some characteristics which
are caused by the specific climatic features of this region are defined. Figures
4. references 15.

UDC 621.371.26

MEASUREMENT OF DISPERSION 0F INTENSITY FLUCTUATIONS IN A PARTIALLY COHERENT
IASER BEAM

!Ahs|rnct of article by Boronoyev, V. V., Comboyev, N. Ts., Poplaukhin, V. N. and
Truhachnyev. E. A.l

[Text] The results of measurements of the dispersion of intensity fluctuations in
a broad partially coherent laser beam on a path with a length of 1,800 m with a
fixed value of the initial degree of source coherence are given. It is shown

82

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0F11C1AI.USE(NVLY

that the level of saturation of the dispersion of intensity fluctuations in a
multimode broad beam is dependent on the initial degree of source coherence and
is considerably lower than the corresponding level in a single-mode wide laser
beam. Figures 1. references 11.

UDC 551.501.72&:551.591.1

DETERMINATION OF THE STRUCTURAL CHARACTERISTIC OF THE INDEX OF ATMOSPHERIC
REFRACTION FROM THE BLURRING OF THE IMAGE 0? PARALLEL “IRES

[Abstract of article by Batdanov, 2h. P. and Comboyev, N. 13.]

[Text] The article describes an apparatus for use in visual determination of the
structural characteristic of the atmospheric refraction index cref from the image
blurring of parallel mires. Experimental data are given on the temporal variation
of the Cref parameter, as well as histograms and integral distribution curves of
the cre values. A comparison of the results of determination of Cref by the vis-
ual metgod with data on measurement of cref on the basis of distortion of the spa-
tial coherence of optical radiation indicates their satisfactory agreement. Pig-
ures 6, references 11.

UDC 681.41:535.853.68

APPARATUS FOR MEASURING THE ONE-DIMENSIONAL SPECTRUM OF THE COHERENCE FUNCTION FOR
AN OPTICAL HAVE AND THE TURBULENCE PARAMETER C2 f
re

[Abstract of article by Boronoyev. V. V., lubritskiy, E. V. and Poplaukhin. V. N.)

[Text] The authors propose an improved apparatus for measuring the one-dimensional
spectrum of the second-order spatial coherence function for the field of an optical
wave and the structural characteristic of fluctuations of the atmospheric refrac-
tion index C2 in which a second receiving channel, identical to the first, has
been introduESd for the purpose of increasing measurement response and accuracy.
The photodetectors of these channels are cut into a bridge circuit. This apparatus
is intended for investigations of the distribution of the mean intensity of optical
radiation in the focal plane of the receiving lens and makes it possible to measure
light fluxes of the order of 10"3 of the intensity of this flux through a slit at
the center of the diffraction pattern. In the case of a one—channel measurement
scheme this value is limited to light fluxes not less than 10‘2. Figures 2. refer-
ences 8.

COPYRIGHT: Buryatskiv £11m so AN $553, 1980

5103
CSO: 1865/23?

83

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ETHIGDFFMJAI.USEIJNlY

PHYSICS 0P ATMOSPHERE

UDC 550.388
ARTICLES 0“ SPACE EXPLORATION

Novosibirsk ISSLEDOVANIYE OKOLOZEHNOGO PROSTRANSTVA in Russian 1981 (signed to
press 8 May 81) pp 2-3, 66

[Annotation. foreword and table of contents from collection of articles "Investi-
gation of Circumterrestrial Space", responsible editor I. H. Vilenskiy, doctor

of physical and mathematical sciences, Inatitut geologii i geofiziki 80 AN SSSR,
500 copies. 67 pages]

[Text] Annotation. The authors of these articles discuss problems related to in-
vestigation of some phenomena transpiring in circumterrestrial space. The articles
give the results of a theoretical investigation of quasiperiodic disturbances cre-
ated in the ionosphere by powerful radio waves. The effects caused by the influ-
ence of these disturbances on radio wave propagation are discussed. Some aspects
of ionospheric propagation of radio waves are examined: a) a rigorous solution is
given for the problem of radio wave propagation in a homogeneous anisotropic ion-
osphere and examples of computations using the developed method for characteriz-
ing the propagation of radio waves in the SH? range are given; b) the method for
experimental determination of the vertical angles of incidence of short radio
waves reflected by the ionosphere is discussed. The problem of modeling of iono-
spheric winds is examined. Some problems involved in determining the earth's con-
ductivity from electromagnetic variations for depths corresponding to the bottom
of the earth's crust and mantle are investigated. Some results of investigation
of cosmic ray variations are given.

Foreword. This collection of articles briefly sets forth the results of studies
made during recent years (1976-1980) at the Complex Geophysical Observatory of

the Institute of Geology and Geophysics, Siberian Department, USSR Academy of Sci-
ences.

The articles give the results of a theoretical examination of problems related to
the effect of powerful radio waves on the ionosphere: a) there is a discussion of
the effects associated with the development of artificial quasiperiodic inhomogen-
eities in the ionosphere: b) a theoretical examination is made of the problem of
distortion of powerful signals during their interaction with the ionosphere; c)
the conditions for nonlinear reradiation of radio waves at combined frequencies by
the atmosphere were investigated.

The problem of reconstructing the angular characteristics of radio waves in the

short-wave range which are reflected from the ionosphere is examined on the basis
of experimental data.

84

FIHII)FFIC1AI.Il3210hﬂJV
FI”!(Nﬂﬂ(JAl.lEﬂECNVLY

Radio wave absorption in the lower ionosphere was investigated. In contrast to
other studies in this field. the problem is discussed using a numerical solution
of the full wave equation for an anisotropic inhomogeneous medium.

An algorithm is also given for solving the problem of a model of a wind system in

the thermosphere and some examples of the realization of this algorithm for the
polar region are cited.

Section II is devoted to geoelectromagnetic investigations. Individual models of an
anisotropic conducting medium are examined applicable to magnetotelluric sounding.

Section III gives the results of an analysis of data on cosmic ray variations carr-
ied out using the local generation of neutrons effect.

At the end of the collection of articles there is a list of investigations publish-
ed hy observatory specialists during the period 1976-1980 in the field of study of
circumterrestrial space and geomagnetism. The authors regret that due to the brevity

of exposition the collection of articles gives no bibliographic citations to the
studies of other authors.

Contents
Foreword 3
I. Radio Have Propagation and the Ionosphere

Vilenskiy. I. H., Izrayleva. N. I., Kapel'zon. A. A., Plotkin, V. V. and
Frcyman. M. Ye. "Some Nonlinear Effects in the Lower Ionosphere" 4

Lipay. O. I. "Determination of the Angular Spectrum of Incident Radio Waves in
Spatially Separated Reception“ 16

Nesterova. I. I. "Radio wave Absorption in the Lower Ionosphere" 22

Zhalkovskaya, L. V. and Ginsburg. E. I. "Algorithm for a Numerical Semienpir-
ical Model of a Global System of Thermospheric Hinds" 38

II. Geomagnetic InVestigntions
Levadnyy. V. T and Pavlova. I. V. "Electromagnetic Investigations Applicable to
Study of the Conductivity of the Bottom of the Earth's Crust and Upper
Mantle" 47
Ill. Cosmic Ray Variations

Yanchukovskly. V. L. "Investigation of Cosmic Ray Variations Using the Local
Neutron Generation Effect" 57

Bibliography 63
COPYRIGHT: Institut geologii i geofiziki 50 AN SSSR, 1981

5301

(:50: 186 »/22 85

FIN!(NHWCIA1.USIIO$HJ!
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

000 551.521.3

MONOGRAPH ON SCATTERED RADIATION IN THE EARTH'S UPPER ATMOSPHERE

Leningrad ISSLEWVANIYE RASSEYANNOGO IZLUCHENIYA VERKNEY ATHOSFBRY 23“.!
in Russian 1981 (signed to press 13 Jan 81) pp 2, 207-208

{Annotation and table of contents from monograph "Investigation of Scattered Radi-
ation of the Earth's Upper Atmosphere". by Arkadiy Yeznikovich Hikirov and Vasiliy
Andreyevich Smerkalov, Gidrometeoizdat, 750 copies. 208 pages]

[Text] Annotation. The monograph describes twilight, searchlight, lidar, rocket

and satellite methods for optical sounding of the upper atmosphere. Rocket meth-
ods are described in more detail because they have been discussed to a lesser de-
gree than the other methods in the Soviet and foreign literature. The book gives
the principal results of investigations of scattered radiation of the upper atmo-
Sphcre by different methods. Also discussed are possible mechanisms of the observ—
ed rad iation. including the role of molecular and aerosol scattering, the influence
of the underlying surface and multiple scattered radiation. The authors examine the
problems involved in the use of the collected information on the field of scattered
atmospheric radiation for determining its optical characteristics (scattering func-
tions and coefficients. optical thickness, etc.). The monograph is intended for
specialists in the field of atmospheric optics and related branches of knovledge

in which information on the optical properties of the upper atmosphere and methods

for their investigation are used.

Contents

1. Concise Information on Surface Methods for Investigating the Optical
Characteristics of the Upper Atmosphere.................................. 6

2. Rocket and Satellite Methods for Investigating Optical Characteristics of

the Upper Atmosphere......... .................... ........................ 39
2.l. Rocket meteorological complexes......................................... 41

2.2. Apparatus for rocket measurements of brightness and polarization of upper
atmosphere radiation.............................. ........ ....... ..... 67
2.2.1. Rocket photometers of the Central Aerological 0bservatory........... 48
2.2.2. IPS rocket polarimeters............................................. 50
2.2.3. SR-lah and SR-185 rocket spectral radiometcrs.......... ...... ....... 52

86

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAI USE ONLY

2.3. Methods for rocket measurements of brightness and polarization of
radiation of the upper stmosphere.................................... 60
2.3.1. Methods for rocket measurements of brightness of upper atmosphere
under twilight conditions........................................ 60
2.3.2. Methods for rocket measurements of brightness of upper atmosphere
under daylight conditions........................................ 61
2.3.3. Methods for rocket measurements of polarization of scattered radia-
tion of the upper atmosphere..................................... 65
2.4. Methods for processing of data from rocket measurements of brightness
of the upper atmosphere.............................................. 66
2.4.1. Methods for primary processing of results of rocket measurements... 68
2.6.2. Methods for statistical processing of results of rocket measure-
ments of brightness of the upper atmosphere...................... 73
2.4.3. Methods for determining the optical characteristics of the upper
atmosphere using data from rocket measurements of brightness..... 79
2.5. Satellite methods for investigating the optical characteristics of the
atmosphere........................................................... 88
2.5.1. Twilight observations from space................................... 89
2.5.2. Observation of daytime horizon from space.......................... 92

3. Principal Results of Investigations of Scattered Radiation of the Upper
Atmspherel0.00CO0.0...0.0..O000.00....COD...0..OIOOOCOOIOCOIIIIOOODOIOO 95
3.1. Data from theoretical computations of the angular. vertical and spectral
distributions of brightness of the upper atmosphere.................. 95
3.2. Results of experimental investigations of optical characteristics of
the upper atmosphere................................................. 118
1. Data from searchlight sounding..................................... 119
2. “:8 from lidar measurements-unnun...u.u.................... 122
3. Data from twilight measurements.................................... 126
4. Data from rocket measurements...................................... 146
5. Data from satellite measurements................................... 155
lysis of results of experimental investigations of optical character-
istics of upper atmosphere........................................... 170

é

smry-unease-oasesoneseoeoooeosooesossoososeooseoessseoevessssoeeeoeeoesaoss 187

Bibliography.OOOOCIOOOOOOOOOOOI...OC.CU.OIOIOOOOOCO.QC.ICOOOCCOCOOOOOO'OOOOCII 191
Principal Notations........................................................... 204

Index......................................................................... 206

COPYRIGHT: Gidrometeoizdat, 1981

5303
080: 1865/24? - END -

87

FOR OFFKHAL.USE(NNLY