FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10342
19 Februaty 1982

USSR Report

POLITICAL AND SOCIOLOGICAL AFFAIRS

(FOUO 6/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRs publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers. periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
nation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.5. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODCCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
USSR REPORT

POLITICAL AND SOCIOLOGICAL AFFAIRS
(POUO 6/82)

CONTENTS

INTERNATIONAL

Book Critiques Bourgeois Theories on International Conflict
(N. I. Doronina; HEZIHIJNAROMYY KONFIJKT, 1981) ............. l

NATIGML

Interrepublican Differences in Treatment of Economic Crimes Scored
(A. A. Barbinyagra; IZVESTIYA AKADDIII NAUK HOLDAVSKOI $31:
SE11“ OBSHCHESTVMYIGI NAUK, No 3, 1981) WW... 3

New Tasks, Procedures for Social Scientists Outlined
(P. N. Fedoseyev; VESTNIK AKADEHI NAUK SSSR, Nov 81) ....... 9

Labor Productivity Tied to Social Conditions
(vomm anII, NOV 81) O...-0.0..OOOOOCCCOCIOOOOOCCOOODI 15

Conference on Propagandizing Soviet Way of Life Held in
Belorussia
(Ye. M. Babasov; VOPROSY FILOSOFII, NOV 81) o no... 0 o o o o a o o 0.. 17

- a - [III - ussn - 35 P000]

PAD 0mm: I '5‘? “K" V
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

INTERNATIONAL

BOOK CRITIQUBS BOURBEOIS THEORIES ON INTERNATIONAL CONFLICT

Moscow HEZHDUNARODRYY «ourerr in Russian 1981(signed to press 16 Jun 31)pp 1-2.
181-183

[Table of contents and brief description of book by “.1. Doronins]
[Excerpts] Title Page:

Title: HBZHDUNARODNYY KONPLIKT (International Conflict)

Publisher: Hezhdunarodnyye otnosheniys

Place and year of publication: Moscow. 1981
Signed to Press Date: 16 June 1981
Number of Copies Published: 10,000
Number of Pages: 183
Brief Description:
The author critically analyzes bourgeois theories on international conflict and examines
Western scientists' ideas on nanaging conflict-crisis situations. Sane of these
questions are examined in Soviet literature for the first tine. The author intro-
duces a number of materials that had not been used previously. The book is intended
for specialists in the field of international relations and other branches of social
sciences.
Table of Contents Page
Introduction 3

Part 1. Methodological Bases of Bourgeois Research on International Conflict 18

Chapter 1. The Concept of International Conflict. Contradiction

and Conflict 19
Chapter 2. working Out a Systemic'Approach. 'The General Theory of
Conflict" 35
1

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Chapter 3. Typology and Classification of International Conflicts

Part 2. The Problem of Managing International Conflicts and Crises

Chapter 1. Theoretical Ideas on Managing Conflict and the Practice of
"Crisis Management" in the Near East

Chapter 2. The Study of Concrete Ways and Means To Resolve Conflict-
Crisis Situations

Conclusion
Bibliography

COPYRIGHT: "Hezhdunarodnyye otnosheniya". 1981

cso: 1807/65
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

NAT IONA].

INTERREPUBLICAN DIFFERENCES IN IREAIHENT OF ECONOMIC CRIMES SCORED

Kishinev lZVESTIYA AKADEHII “AUX HOLDAVSKOI SSR: SERIYA OBSHCHBSTVENSYKH NAUK in
Russian No 3, 1981. pp 46-50

[Article by A. A. Barbinyagra: "An Improvement of the Legislation on Responsibi-
lity for Petty Theft"]

[Text] The Soviet state carries out the comprehensive safeguarding of socialist
property and wages a consistent struggle for strengthening it. The USSR Constitu-
tion which was adopted on 7 October 1977 established that the basis of the USSR
economic system is made up of socialist ownership of the means of production in
the form of state (public) and kolkhoz-cooperative property (Article 10). "For
it is in the field of economics." the General Secretary of the Central Committee
of the Communist Party comrade L. I. Brezhnev noted in the Summary Report of the
CC CPSU to the 26th Party Congress, "that the foundation for the solution of
social problems is laid . . . the foundation for an active foreign policy."1

The effectiveness of the legal protection of socialist property depends upon
improving the legal regulation of the social relations which develop in the field
of the production and distribution of material goods and the state of the practice
of the application of the legal norms which are aimed at struggling against
encroachments of socialist property.

One of the most widespread and dangerous encroachments is represented by petty
thefts of state and public property which cause socialist society considerable
economic and moral damage. This is why it is necessary to constantly improve the
criminal. administrative. and public means of influence for their perpetration.

In order to struggle against petty theft in recent years the Presidiums of the
Supreme Soviets of the union republics have changed the content of the laws
dealing with responsibility for this type of encroachment on public property.
Thus. by virtue of the 17 March 1978 Ukase of the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet
Moldavian 858, Article 124 of the Criminal Code of the Moldavian SSR is set forth
in the following redaction: "The petty theft of state or public property by
means of larceny, misappropriation, embezzlement. abuse of one's official posi-
tion, or swindling. committed by a person against whom, because of the circum-
stances of the case and of personality, measures of public or administrative
influence cannot be applied is punished by deprivation of freedom for a period of
up to six months or by corrective labor for a period of up to one year. or by a

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

fine of 100 rubles. The same act committed by a person who had been previously
convicted of petty theft, or had previously committed a theft of state or public
property or of the personal property of citizens as stipulated by Articles 119-123
(1), 145-147, 149, 225 (2), and 227 (l) of the Criminal Code of the Moldavian SSR
is punished by deprivation of freedom for a period of two years or by corrective
labor for one year, or by a fine of 200 rubles."

The laws on criminal responsibility for petty theft have also been changed in the
Criminal Codes of the RSFSR, Belorussian SSR, Kirghiz SSR, and Uzbek SSR. For
example, according to Article 85 of the Criminal Code of the Ukranian SSR, a person
who has committed a petty theft of state or public property can be brought to
criminal account if during the course of a year he has been subjected twice to
administrative punishment or measures of administrative and public influence for
the same actions. For the perpetration of petty theft with aggravating circum-
stances the guilty party, in accordance with Sanction Part 11, Article 85 of the
Criminal Code of the Ukranian SSR, may be subjected to deprivation of freedom for

a period of one year, corrective labor for the same period, or a fine of 100 rubles.

in order for a perpetrator to be brought to criminal account‘in accordance with
Article 96 of the Criminal Code of the Turkmen SSR‘it is also required that the
guilty party has been subjected during the course of a year to measures of admin-
istrative or public influence for petty theft. The sanction of the above articles
stipulates the punishment in Part I--deprivation of freedom for a period of one
year, corrective labor for the same period. or a fine of 100 rubles, and in Part
II-—deprivation of freedom for a period of two years.

Punishment by corrective labor is not provided for in the sanctions in Part 11,
Article 87 of the Criminal Code of the Azerbaijan SSR, Article 95 of the Criminal
Code of the Kazakh SSR. Article 77 of the Criminal Code of the Cossack SSR.
Article 94 of the Criminal Code of the Estonian SSE established the maximum and
minimum limits of the fine which may be exacted: Part l--from 30 to 50 rubles.
Part ll--from 50 to 100 rubles.

Article 98 of the Criminal Code of the Lithuanian SSR consists of one part which
states that the petty theft of state or public property committed for a second
time in a year either by a person who has previously been convicted for such a
theft or for the theft of the personal property of citizens as stipulated by
Articles 90-95, 232 (2), 146-148 or 151 of the Criminal Code of this republic is
punished by deprivation of freedom for a period of two years, corrective labor
for one year, or a fine of 100 rubles.

There are also other differences in the disposition and sanctions of the articles
of the Criminal Codes of the union republics which stipulate responsibility for the
petty theft of socialist property. The most successful is the disposition of
Article 96 of the Criminal Code of the RSFSR, Article 126 of the Criminal Code of
the Moldavian SSR, and of other union republics in which in order to bring a

guilty party to criminal responsibility it is not possible to apply to him (in
keeping with the circumstances of the case and of person) measures of public or
administrative influence.

14
FOR OFTTCLALI£HE(MNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

with this kind of construction of the law the agencies of preliminary investigation
and inquiry have more possibilities for giving comprehensive, full, and objective
consideration to the circumstances of the deed which has been committed, to collect
and evaluate data about the personality of the guilty party, and after this to
decide to which form of responsibility to bring the person who has committed the
theft.

To tie the question of the initiation of a criminal case to the fact that the
guilty party must have been subjected twice during the course of a year to admin-
istrative punishment or measures of administrative and public influence does not
correspond to the goals of the effective defense of socialist property. The dis-
tinctive characteristics of the construction of the norms of the law which have
been noted lead in court practice to different judicial evaluations of the very
same criminal encroachments on socialist property and to the setting of different
meaSures of punishment.

The above-noted differences in the Criminal Codes of the union republics are hardly
to be explained by reasons of a local, national, or territorial character, and,

of course, do not help to strengthen socialist legality at the current stage of the
construction of developed socialism in the USSR. The laws on petty theft have to
be uniform, for, as V. I. Lenin wrote, " . . . law cannot be Kaluga and Kazan'

law, but has to be uniform . . . for the entire federation of Soviet republics."2
in our view, not all of the circumstances which aggrevate guilt in connection

with the perpetration of petty theft are provided for by the legislation in effect.
Thus, the commission of a petty theft by an especially dangerous recidivist (if

he was not previously convicted for a theft) will not be considered as a circum-
stance aggrevating his guilt and his actions are subject to qualification in
accordance with Article 124 Part I of the Criminal Code of the Moldavian SSR. In
such a case the guilty party will bear a punishment in the form of deprivation of
freedom for a period of six months, corrective labor for a period of one year, or

a fine of 100 rubles.

The role of aggravating circumstances manifests itself in a different manner when
what is involved is theft of personal property. including thefts of insignificant
dimensions. A larceny committed in preliminary agreement with a group of people or
with the use of technical means is punished by deprivation of freedom for a period
of five years, while a larceny committed by a dangerous recidivist is punished by
deprivation of freedom for a period of ten years. Here, in accordance with the
sanccion in the article, there is no place either for corrective labor, or for a
fine, or. especially, for the use of measures of public influence. But the re-
peatcd petty theft of state or public property, regardless of the means used for
committing the crime or of the fact that the person who has committed this act is
recognized as an especially dangerous recidivist, is of no legal significance at
all. Thus, when repeated thefts are committed by an especially dangerous recidi-
vist in one case (the theft of personal property) the legislator recognizes this
as an aggravating circumstance, while in another case (petty theft) this circum-
stance plays no role.

5
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFIﬂAL USE ONLY

The legislation on responsibility for petty theft sh0uld stipulate additional
responsibility for the existence of aggravating circumstances (the com-ﬁssion of
the theft in preliminary agreement with a group of persons or with the use of
technical means).

The necessary conditions for an improvement of the legal regulation of the relations
which take shape in the process of ensuring the safekeeping of socialist property
are: a reflection in the legal norms of socialist property's true significance in
the life of society; complete coverage by legal regulation of the social rela-
tions which take shape in the sphere of dealings with socialist property; the
punctual improvement of legal norms in accordance with the economic and social
processes occurring in the life of society; and the accessibility of the legis-
lation to officials and citizens.

Thus, the following formulation of Article-‘-2h of the Criminal Code of the Holdavian
SSR, in our view, would be the most correct and in accord with the goals of
socialist legislation:

The petty theft of state or public property by means of larceny, misappropriation,
embezzlement, the abuse of an official position, or swindling which has been
perpetrated by a person to whom, in view of the circumstances of the case and of
personality, measures of public or administrative influence cannot be applied is
punished by deprivation of freedom for a period of one year, corrective labor for
a period of one year. or a fine of 200 rubles.

The same act committed in preliminary agreement with a group of persons or with the
use of technical means, and also by a person who has previously committed a theft of
state or public property or of the personal property of citizens as stipulated by
Articles 119—123 (1), 145-147, 169, 225 (2), and 227 (l) of the present Code is
punished by deprivation of freedom for a period of three years.

The same act committed by an especially dangerous recidivist is punished by
deprivation of freedom for a period of five years.

The relationships of socialist property are also regulated by the norms of adminis-
trative law. Administrative responsibility for the petty theft of state and public
property was established for the first time by the 29 April 1969 UkaSe of the
Presidium of the Supreme Soviet Lithuanian SSR "on strengthening responsibility for
the petty theft of state and public property."3

With the introduction of administrative responsibility for the petty theft of
socialist property the struggle against such violations of law grew stronger and
its forms and methods were improved.

Thus, Article 1 of the 17 March 1978 Ukase of the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet
Moldavian SSR "0n Administrative Responsibility for the Petty Theft of State or
Public Property" states: "Be it established that a person who has committed a petty
theft of state or public property, if his actions do not entail criminal responsi-
bility, is subjected to administrative responsibility in the form of a fine of

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

from 10 to 50 rubles. or measures of public influence including compensation for
material damage."4

An analysis of the administrative law of the union republics on responsibility for
petty theft shows that there are important differences in the legislation which has
been adopted. Thus, one of the measures of administrative responsibility being
employed at the present time for petty theft is an administrative fine: from 10
to 50 rubles in the RSPSR, Moldavian SSR, and the Ukranian 883, and from 10 to 30
rubles in certain other union republics. In addition. corrective labor for one or
two months is provided for in the Lithuanian 58R, the Georgian SSR, and other union
republics.

The existence of so many seriOus differences in the legislation of the union
republics regarding this type of violation of law is hardly justifiable. The
success of the struggle against encroachments on public property demands a further
improvement of this legislation.

The legal basis for the application of measures of administrative punishment
against people who have committed petty thefts is their release from criminal
responsibility on the basis of Article 68 (l) of the Criminal Code of the Holda-
vian SSR. In accordance with the latter. a person who has committed a crime which
does not represent any great public danger and for which the law provides a
punishment in the form of deprivation of freedom for not more than one year or
some other milder punishment may be released from criminal responsibility if it is
acknowledged that administrative influence is sufficient for his reformation.

The following measures of administrative punishment may be applied to people who
have been released from criminal responsibility in accordance with Part I of the
above article: A fine of 50 rubles, corrective labor at the guilty party's work
site for a period of from one to two months with 201 of earnings withheld, or
arrest for a period of 15 days. This law has the task of ensuring a more differ-
entiated approach to the responsibility and punishment of persons who have commit-
ted crimes which do not represent great public danger. Thus, the legislation on
petty theft is a complex of different types of responsibility which are frequently
not identical in their content in the union republics.

Present-day conditions objectively demand a greater role for law and the well-
organized juridical regulation of social relations. A strengthening of legality
and law and order and an improvement of tne legislation represent one of the lawful
processes of a mature socialist society and are a necessary precondition for
accomplishing the tasks of communist construction.

FOOTNOTES
1. "Materials of tne 26th CPSU Congress." Moscow, 1981, p 31.

2. V. i. Lenin, "Complete Works," Vol 45, p 198.

7
INJRiOFTWCIAI.l£SEZ(HNLV
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

3. "Bulletin of the Supreme Soviet and Government of the Lithuanian SSR." No 12 ,
1969, p 11a.

4. "Bulletin of the Supreme Soviet and Governnent of the Moldavian SSR." No 3,
1978. p 30.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Shtiintsa", 1981

2959
cso: 1800/199

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

NATIONAL

NEH TASKS, PROCEDURES FOR SOCIAL SCIENTISTS OUTLINED
Moscow VBSTNIK AXADEMII NAUK SSSR No ll, Nov 81, pp 26-61

[Article by Academician P. N. Pedoseyev: "The XXVI CPSU Congress and the
Important Tasks of the Development of the Social Sciences"]

[Excerpts] The XXVI Congress of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union

opened up a new period of active social and political life in our country. The
Summary Report of the Central Committee of the CPSU which was delivered by the
General Secretary of the CC CPSU, comrade L. I. Brezhnev, and the decisions of
the Congress give a theoretical substantiation of the prospects for Communist
construction and world development which makes it possible to carefully collate
the plans and methods for our work with the aims of the Party forum which
concern all of the areas of the domestic and foreign policies of the CPSU and
the Soviet state.

The importance of the documents of the XXVI Congress for intensifying and in-
creasing the effectiveness of the research work of Soviet social scientists is
exceptionally great.

The results of the work of humanitarian institutions were discussed in suffi-

cient detail at the General Meeting of the Academy of Sciences, at meetings of
its branches and at a session of the Social Sciences Section which took place

immediately after the XXVI Congress.

For this reason. consideration should be given chiefly to the tasks of social
scientists which have to be accomplished by them in the next few years.

The greater integral and overall nature of social development under mature
socialism gives rise to the necessity for a deeper study of the spiritual life
of society, of the basic tendencies and factors in the strengthening of the
material and spiritual foundations of the socialist way of life, and of the
problems of the formation of the new man.

In recent years there have appeared quite a few works in which the essence of the
socialist way of life, its structure, and certain laws of its formation and
development are revealed. However, the practical value of these works is sub-
stantially lessened by the fact that they do not have in them a clear system of
indicators which reflect all of the aspects of the development of Seviet society

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL L'SE ONLY

and which are essential for the needs of social planning and management. The
questions of the interconnection between the material well-being and spiritual and
moral wealth of people and of a growth in their culture and political conscious-
ness are also in need of theoretical interpretation. Especial importance is also
being acquired by the question connected with the cultivation of reasonable needs
and interests in the individual, for, as was noted at the XXVI Congress, "our
party sees one of the important tasks of its social policy in their active and
directed formation.“

In the present situation a more sober and scientific approach to the formation of
social expectations is needed; for life convinces us of the fact that the
propagandizing of unrealistic promises engenders exaggerated social claims and
social delusions.

Social scientists have to make a deep analysis of the state of public opinion
and of the mass consciousness and behavior of people, following Lenin's
instruction regarding the necessity for "soberly keeping track of the real state
of the consciousness and preparedness of precisely the entire class (and not only
its Communist vanguard), of precisely the entire toiling mass (and not only its
advanced people)."

in the field of the social sciences, as in other areas of knowledge. scientists
possess a large potential which has to be used efficiently and fruitfully.

Substantial work is being performed in the Academies of Sciences of the Union
Republics on studying the important problems of the economic. socio-political,
and spiritual development of socialist society and of international relations.
The decisions of the XXVI Congress have become a powerful stimulus for increasing
the effectiveness and quality of the work of the Republic academies. With
regard to the tasks posed by the Congress, the Republic academies have decided
to deepen their study of the basic tendencies which are changing the social
structure of Soviet society and perfecting the political system and spiritual
life of developed socialism.

Steps are being taken in the Academies of Sciences of the Union Republics for a
scientifically substantiated development of a long-term program of overall
development and scientific and technological progress for their republics for the
period until 2005—2010. A study of the problems of the socialist way of life, of
the education of youth, and the formation of the family occupies an important
place in the republic scientific research plans. Attention is merited by the
initiative in organizing a study of the principles, ways, and forms of realizing
the constitutional rights of citizens and labor collectives, of the legal prob-
lems of the organization of production and labor, and of the realization of the
rights and duties of workers and employees in the sphere of labor activities.

1n the light of the theses which were worked out at the XXVI Party Congress, the
problems of the scientific and technological revolution and of its social
consequences will be studied on a deeper level. During the Eleventh Five-Year
Plan, it is planned to intensify the opposition to various bourgeois ideological

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

conceptions, and to develop on a broad front the criticism of nationalism and

of religiOus and other survivals in the consciousness of people. Attention to
the international education of the workers and to a development of the principles
of socialist internationalism will increase.

It has to be noted, however, that there are still considerable reserves for
increasing the effectiveness and quality of scientific work. It still does not
happen often enough that the research of republic scientists rises to a high
all-union level of generalization and to the level of results which are of

general importance for all of Soviet science. For example, in the academies of
certain republics, quite meticulous studies are going forward of tne processes

of the social and spiritual life of the village, but this question, unfortunately.
is not posed Sufficiently broadly—-the coming together of town and country--and

it does not bring the scholars out to the problems connected with it.

Nor sh0uld it be forgotten that much of the work on important scientific
problems is being conducted in the country's leading vuzes, both in the center
and in the localities. This work must, without question, flow into the comon
stream of the research by the social scientists of the entire country.

The realization of the program of scientific research in the light of the
decisions of the XXVI CPSU Congress depends, to a large extent, on the level
of the scientific organization of the labor of social scientists and upon the
state of the coordination of scientific research work.

Today Soviet social science possesses a large detachment of qualified organizers
of science: around 40 scientific councils and commissions on the most important
problems have been created in the system of social sciences. However, it is not
yet possible to say that everything is in good order with the coordination of
research, ensuring its overall nature, and in the concentration of the efforts
of social scientists on the creative solution of the most urgent problems.

There are still quite a few cases of duplication. petty topics, and completely
unjustified tendencies to direct efforts toward the solution of local problems
which have no significance for theory or practice. This was discussed, in
particular, at the 1981 General Annual Meeting of the USSR Academy of Sciences

and at the sessions of the Coordination Council (including at a recently held
travelling session in Tashkent).

The work to clarify and improve the system of scientific councils is far from
completed. The Social Sciences Section and its divisions have to take all of
the necessary measures to complete this work as rapidly as possible. The
necessity for a further improvement of the coordination of research and for
creative cooperation is dictated by the overall character of the problems being
studied which require unification of the efforts of not only the different
detachments of social sciences, but also of representatives of the creative
unions. natural scientists, and technicians. Let us recall that last year, when
there was a discussion of the ideological educational role of historical sciences
at a meeting of the Social Sciences Section, the Division of History of the

USSR Academy of Sciences was urgently recommended to establish strong contacts

‘1
L
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

with the USSR Union of Writers, the Union of Cinematographers, and with other
creative unions and organizations.

The insufficiently wide introduction of the results of research into practice
remain: a weak point in our work; moreover, relations with, so to speak, clients
are still insufficiently permanent, and frequently the orders themselves are
poorly grounded.

In planning any kind of work in the field of sciences, it is necessary to know
by whom and for what it is needed. In a word, the kind of system of organizing
scientific work has to be conceived which will make it possible to approach an
overall problem being studied concretely and by subjects.

He already have a certain amount of experience in this kind of organization and
planning of scientific work within our institutes (for example, in the Institute
of Economics, in the Institute of World Economics and International Relations,
and in the Institute of the History of the USSR of the USSR Academy of Sciences).
Attention should be given, for example, to the experience in realizing jointly
with the sections of the Moscow City Committee CPSU of a long-term plan for the
participation by the humanitarian scientific institutions of the USSR Academy

of Sciences in solving the problems of the socio-economic and cultural develop-
ment of Moscow. He have to try to achieve the same kind of situation in other
spheres of scientific activity also. The practice of creating authors'
collectives for the writing of major scientific works became established long
ago. However, it is clear that it would be useful in necessary cases to create
creative collectives for the development of important topics with the partici-
pation of representatives of the appropriate party and state agencies. The
system of contracts with ministries and other practical organizations which is
practiced by natural scientists produces palpable positive results both in
revealing the level of the effectiveness of the research being performed and in
the efficient introduction of its results. He have to actively struggle for the
realization of the results of scientific research and for the recommendations
worked out on their basis (if, of course, they are deserving of this).

The development of science is a fruit of collective common labor. For this
reason, a regular creative exchange of opinions among scientists is an urgent
need for science today. In April of this year an All-Union Conference on the
Philosophical Problems of Contemporary Natural Science took place with great
success. Suggestions on holding a new All—Union Conference of Historians (the
last conference took place more than twenty years ago) merit attention. In
considering the important tasks of social science we are fully aware of the role
of historical research and generalizations for science and social practice, for

the ideological arming of our cadres, and for the spiritual life of society and
the education of the masses.

The work of methodological seminars is an important form of Marxist-Leninist

education, and of scientific intercourse and of the creative exchange of opinions.
At these seminars scientific workers and vuz teachers discussed the philosophical
problems of scientific knowledge, of the contemporary scientific and technological

12
FOR OFIWCLkLIJSEGDNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

revolution, and of economic and social progress, the important problems of the
social, natural, and technical sciences, and the dialectics of their inter-
connections and interaction. The representatives of the artistic intelligentsia
should be enlisted in the work of the seminars which have been created in
institutes and which are engaged in studying the problems of literature and art;
a broad discussion could be organized here of the problems of the development of
socialist culture and literature and art and of the creative improvement and
application of the method of socialist realism. A critique of bourgeois ideology
has to be an important direction in the work of the seminars.

Without greater activeness by the scientific public, science cannot become a
genuine "disturber of the peace," to which the XXVI Party Congress called
scientists. The academic journals in the social sciences have to fully become
"disturbers of the peace." In addition to treating the achievements of science
and providing a scientific information service and a coordinating role, they
have to be a kind of "instigator" for the holding of creative discussions,
discussions of important problems, and for the organization of "round table"
meetings.

Unfortunately. in recent years, such materials have become much rarer. Quite a

few reviews on the pages of our journals, unfortunately, are more reminiscent of
simple notations: it is extremely rare that one can find a detailed analysis of
the content of the books being published, not to speak of the fact that reviews

of weak works have altogether vanished (and such works, unfortunately, are also

published).

In order to overcome the complacency which exists in certain scientific
collectives, resolute measures have to be taken so that every academic aub-
division is dominated by an atmosphere of creativity, mutual comradely exacting-
ness, and ardent searches.

During the pas: five-year period, the USSR Academy of Sciences and the academies
of sciences of the union republics continue to deepen and perfect their multi-
lateral and bilateral scientific relations with the academies of science and
other scientific organizations of the socialist countries, which made it possible
to achieve important scientific results.

However, the process of socialist integration which is being dictated by law is
setting the task of seeking qualitatively new forms of cooperation and of
singling out top-priority topics. in this connection. the work plans of the
bilateral commissions on the social sciences have to be clarified. The fulfill-
ment of the long-term cooperation program of the scientific institutions of the
socialist countries in the social sciences is of great importance.

The rather complex situation in international politics and international
scientific cooperation has in recent years somewhat reduced the intensity of
scientific relations with the capitalist countries.

13
FORiOFFHJAl.USEiONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

For this reason, an increase in the effectiveness of scientific assignments
abroad is becoming even more important. As a result of the difficulties which
have arisen in the development of scientific cooperation with American scientists.
it would be useful to take steps aimed at a certain reorientation of our
scientific relations toward the scientists of those countries which have a
favorable attitude towards scientific cooperation with the USSR.

It must not be forgotten that scientific research in the field of Marxist
social knowledge has to always contain a powerful aggressive ideological and
propagandistic charge.

FOOTNOTES

1. V. I. Lenin. "Complete Works." Vol 61, p 42.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Nauka", "Vestnik Akadenii nauk SSSR", 1981

2959
C80: 1800/168

1h
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

NATIORAL

LABOR PRODUCTIVITY TIED T0 SOCIAL CONDITIONS

Moscow VOPROSY FIwSOFII in Russian No 11. Nov 81 pp 51-63

[Article by I. T. Levykin. T. M. Dridze. 2. A. Orlova. and Ya. V. Reyzema: "Theo.-
retical-Methodological Foundations for the Comprehensive Study of the Socialist

way of Life“: In a 10.000-word article. the four authors define Way of life"
(obraz zhizni) as a "definite system of stable and repeating modes of life activi-
ty which possesses an internal unity." Drawing on the writings of Marx. Engels.
Lenin. and Soviet social scientists. they analyze this concept into its various
constituent parts and discuss its application: at such different levels of analysis
as the individual. class, and society as a whole. In conclusion. they emphasise
that all parts of this system are interrelated and that investigations in this area
should proceed "from the individual to the social-typical.']

 

[Excerpt] In organizing the "environment of his own habitation" and constantly de-
ciding questions of vital importance for him. a person over the extent of his en'.-' -
tire life expend: on this his own mental. emotional. and physical energy. More-
over. the "environaent of habitation" can scarcely be reduced to this or that ._
sphere of activity; like the way of life this is not Just a simple set of uncoor-
dinated spheres (types) of activity. eadsting. as it were. outside of the social
subjects. /Hay of life is an integrated system of activity. a person's communion
and inter-action with his social and natural environment/ [in boldface]. and hence
extraordinary expenditures of his energy in one unit of this system will imediate-
ly (or after a certain amount of time) inevitably affect its other units. knock the
system out of kilter. and bring about stoppages somewhere. It may be assumed that
potentials for a growth in labor productivity and quality. as is also the case for
an increase in labor resources. are concealed not only in the sphere of labor (al-
though also there) but likewise in freeing up and retaining those energy expendi-
tures which go into forms of activity which. at first glance. are not directly con-
nected with labor. In other words. only a complex of measures with regard to im-
proving the entire system of activity. communion and inter-action between people.
taking into consideration all the vitally important problems demanding everyday at-
tention. answers the demands of the times.

A more profound study of the nature of the vital problems confronting various peo-
ple and the ways chosen to solve them will facilitate in the future a more precise
formulation of the tasks to be done in working out the most adequate methods of
controlling and regulating social relations. both on the level of social groups as
well as on the level of society as a whole.

15
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Hithin this schema the informational capacity of the concepts "concrete-historical
situation." "social situation." "life situation." and "problematical life situation"
is very great. 0n the basis of these concepts we can formulate an entire series of
contents-type and methodological hypotheses, allowing us to empirically study the
way of life in its real dynamic connections. These concepts are essential for the
classification and typology of the way of life, for revealing the principal tenden-
cies of its development.

I I‘ §

The theoretical-methodological principles set forth above allow the authors to make
the transition from a general analysis of the concept "way of life" to an analysis
of its components and the inter-connections between these components within the
framework of certain situations and, consequently. to a further differentiation of
the categorial apparatus of study. In the course of the empirical study of the so-
cialist way of life they will facilitate the solution of a whole range of general
and specific problems. In particular, they will allow u» to discover the general.
type-forming factors of the socialist way of life, the chief traits and tendencies
of its development. as well as the factors determining the differences in the

types of the way of life of classes, other social groups and communities within a
socialist society. They will help us to work out the typology (fixation. manifes-
tation of structure, and description) of the social situations which are the most
characteristic for various groups of the population. as well as the life situations
of individuals who are members of these groups; to determine the nature of the con-
nection between the type-forming factors of the socialist way of life. the social
situations of diverse groups of the population, and the life situations of indivi-
duals who are members of these groups; to carry out a composite analysis of such
situations for the purpose of finding the general and the specific in their struc-
ture and contents. All this will help us to discover the most urgent socio-econo-
mic, socio-cultural, and ideological-educational problems connected with further
perfecting the socialist way of life.

As follows from what has been set forth above. the basic principle of the given ap-
proach to studying the socialist way of life has proved to be the rinciple of /as-
ccndlng from the individual to the social-typicalz/ [in boldface from studying
the life and problem life situations at the level of the individual personality to
an analysis of social situations at the level of classes, other social groups and
communities. and to the discovery of the type-forming factors of the socialist way
of life at the level of the concrete-histtrical situation of society as a whole.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel’stvo TsK KPSS "Pravda". 'Woprosy filosofii" No 11. 1961

238h
cs0: 1800/ 178

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FDR OFI’ICIAI I'Sli UNIX

NATIONAL

CONFERENCE ON PROPAGANDIZING SOVIET WAY OF LIFE HELD IN BBLORUSSIA
Hoscow VOPROSY FIIDSOFII in Russian No 11. Nov 81 pp 165-166

[Article by Ye. M. Babasov. corresponding neither of the 838?. Academy of Sciences.
and L. A. Cutsalenko: "Methods of Studying and Prepagandiaing the Advantages of
the Joviet Hay of Life']

[Text] The theoretical conference entitled "Methods of Studying and Pmpagandiz-
ing the Advantages of the Soviet Hay of Life in the Lmt of the Decisions of the
26th CPSU Congress" was held in Hay 1981 in Hinsk. Like its two predecessors, it
was organized by the Minsk Obkon of the C? of Belorussia', the Belorussian State '
University iseni V. I. Lenin, the Institute of Philosophy and Law of the BSSR Aca-
demy of Sciences, the Belorussian Divisions of the USSR Philosophical Society,

and the Soviet Sociological Association.

The conference was opened by the secretary of the Minsk Obkon of the C? of Belo-
russia. A. I. Zhil'skiy. He noted the great theoretical and practical importance

tasks set forth by the 26th CPSU Congress with regard to further developing the na-
terial and spiritual foundations of the socialist way of life. as well as the for-
mation of the new man.

The materials and decisions of the 26th CPSU Congress. noted R. P. Platonov
(Minsk). constitute the theoretical-nethodological basis for studying contemporary
social development. its contents and principal directions; they provide the key
for examining the problems of perfecting the Soviet way of life.

Extremely important for the activity of the party. the state. and public organiza-
tions with regard to strengthening the material and spiritual foundations of the
socialist way of life is the conclusion that the establishlent of a classless so-
cietal structure will take place within the historical framework of nature social—
ism. 01‘ great methodological importance for a scientific understanding of the
grounds for the development of the Soviet way of life are the conclusions of the
26th 0130 Congress concerning the inter-relationship between education and the par-
ty's social policy. an increase in the role of labor in the life of Soviet society.
perfecting distributive relations and the unceasing observance of socialist princi-
ples therein, the place of interests and needs within the nulti-faceted develop-ent

of the individual personality, and the necessity for overcoming negative phenoaena

17
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

which are alien to the socialist way of life. The ideological-theoretical rich-
ness contained in the materials of the 26th Congress is today a powerful weapon in
the struggle of the party and the people to ensure a well—planned and harmonious
development of all aspects of social life on the path to building socialism.

The report by corresponding member of the BSSR Academy of Sciences Ye. h. babosov
examined the socialist way of life as a specific means of vital human activity.
This way of life has developed under concrete socio-economic. political. and spiri-
tual conditions of socialism and is directed at carrying out those forms of vital
activity which. within their own dialectical inter-action. lead to the formation of
a universally developed personality. 0f importance for this approach is the use of
the method of ascent from the abstract to the concrete--from the most general laws
of societal formative movement. as embodied in the specific characteristics of de—
veloped socialism. through the study of the special grounds for the development of
this system's separate spheres--the means of production. the basis. spiritual life
of society. everyday life. etc.--to the concrete manifestations of socialism's uni-
versal activity in various modes of vital activity. as expressed not only in their
common traits but also in the specific. individual forms of the manifestation of
these traits in specific personalities. in their value orientations. interests. in-
clinations. and acts.

By utilizing the methodological principles of this approach. the author considers.
we can more concretely and precisely picture to ourselves the contents. structure.
and dynamics of this way of life. as well as differentiate the most important the-
oretical and practical cross-sections of its structural-functional analysis--with
respect to its modes and forms of vital activity. its conditions and spheres. sub-
jects of vital activity, specifics of the socio-spatial organization of vital ac-
tivity. etc. Structural-functional analysis as a component part of a systemic stu-
dy of a way of life should be organically combined with a contents analysis of this
complex and multi—faceted social phenomenon.

Academician of the 333R Academy of Sciences K. P. Buslov noted that social rela-
tions. class relations. and the establishment of a homogeneous way of life consti-
tute dialectically inter-connected social phenomena. A change in the socio-class
structure determines the dynamics of the Soviet way of life. This is conditioned
by the following objective characteristics of Soviet society at the contemporary
stage of its development: 1) the complexity. 1ntggjhl-nggurg, and multi-faceted
development of socialism; 2) the increased inter-relationship of economic. socio-
political. and spiritual progress; 3) further development of the class and natio-
nal structure and. accordingly. their increasing reciprocal influence; b) perfect-
socialist statehood. democracy, and forming the culture of an integrated Soviet
people. The Soviet people's way of life. based on an integrated socialist econo-
my. ideology. and culture. in turn. facilitates the drawing together of classes

and of all social groups.

c. F. Davidyuk noted that among the criteria characterizing a way of life. along
with economic. moral. and world-view elements. political criteria must be present;
it must be indicated that the way of life pertains to a specific class.

The report by L. A. Cutsalenko (Minsk). entitled "The New Man as a Subject of the
Soviet Way of Life." noted that in the way of life. which represents primarily the
activity aspect of historical development. what is central is the subject of the

18
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL “SI-I ONLY

L. F‘. Yevmenov (Minsk) thoroughly analyzed the various types of contemporary bour-
geois ideology. which distort the Soviet way of life and falsify the spiritual
trai ts of Soviet man.

of development, correlations, and inter-penetrating influences at the stage of de-
veloped socialism of objective conditions and the subjective factor of the Soviet

COHRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo TsK KPSS "Pravda". "Vopmsy filosofii" No 11. 1981

23m;
340: 1800/ 177 END

19
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY