FOR OFFICIAL “SI-Z ONLY

JPRS L/10326
16 February 1982

Translation

?ROCEED|NGS OF THE FOURTH ALL-UNION SYMPOSIUM
ON CONTROL PROBLEMS

IN COMMUNICATIONS NETWORKS AND CENTERS

Ed. by

V.G. Lazarev

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the U.S. Government.

COPYRIGVT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODCCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10326

16 February 1982

PROCEEDINGS OF THE FOURTH ALL-UNION SYMPOSIUM
ON CONTROL PROBLEMS IN COMMUNICATIONS NETWORKS AND CENTERS

Moscow TRUDY IV VSESOYUZNOGO SIMPOZIUMA PO PROBLEMAM UPRAVLBNIYA NA

:STEAEESI UZLAKH SVYAZI in Russian 1981 (signed to press 26 Feb 81)

[Book puhlished under the auspices of the USSR Academy of Sciences,
Information Transmission Problems Institute, edited by Doctor of Tech-
nical Sciences, Professor v.6. Lazarev, Nauka. 350 copies]

CONTENTS

Annotation 1

Problem of Determining the Load on Centralized Control Units at

Switching came”. R. A. Avakov. V. D. Safronov 2

Estimating the Operating Efficiency of the Control Complex of a

Switching Center. E. 101. Allayev. H. Sh. Zakhitsov, A. S. Saibov 5

Influence of the Traffic Control Algorithm on the Transmission

Characteristics of Hultipacket Communications. A. V. Andrianov 9

Estimating the Efficiency of a Model of the Game Method of DynamicControl of a

Communications Network. P. V. Bershteyn. P. I. Kozhemyakin 12

Estimating the Reliability of Communication Networks with Nonideal

Control. V. A. Bogatyrev. Yu. H. Hartynov 15

Analysis and Short-Tern Forecasting of Telephone Traffic.

R. P. Borisova. T. D. chentsova. A. P. Pshenichnikov 19

Real Time Dispatcher for a Programmed Subscriber's Station.

Yu. F. Gal', V. I. Colovach. V. M. Sobol'. Ye. G. Stalin 22

Analytical and Statistical Simulation of the Telephone Operation Svstem

of an Electronic Switching Center. 3. S. Gol'dshteyn 25

Methods of Dynamic Dispatching of Problem in Conputer Networks.

K. R. Guaryan, V. H. Konovalov 29
- a - [I - USSR - F POUO]

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR ()i-‘I-‘IG‘IAI. USE ONLY

Methods of insuring operating Stability or a Massage Switching Network.
I. H. Curevlch, V. K. Demin. V. H. Chentsov, S. Ya. Shorgin 33

kthod of Improving the Service Quality on a Channel Switching Network
with Dynamic Control. A. Ya. Dolgoselets, N. A. Knyazeva. 1.. A. Nikityuk 38

Overload Protection in Channel-Switched Networks, V- N. WWW-“8k” "2
Problem of Channel Distribution in the Digital Data Transmission Network

for Railroad Transportation. 2h. Dusenbayeva 1.6
Switching Control in Railroad Transportation Long Distance Telephone

Service. S. L. Dyufur, Yu. V. Yurkin 48
Control Algorithm and Carrying Capacity of Switching System.

V. A. Yershov 51
Problem of Designing Developed Networks of Collective-Use Couputer

Centers in the Dialog Mode. Yu. P. Zaychenko 55
An Approach to Optimizing the Structure of a Large-Scale Data Trans-

mission Network. 6. P. Zakharov, V. V. bokhmotko 60
Time Decomposition of an Automaton. L. N. Zoreva. V. C. Lazarev 65

Distributed Control in Switching Centers Using Microprocessors.
0. N. Ivanova 67

Software for Supplementa’y Services of the 'Kvant' Quasielectronic
Automatic Telephone Office. A.A. lvanov 71

Choice of Dynamic Control Method for Information Flows on a Commieations
Network. Yu. H. Kazachenko 76

Selecting Types of Processors for a Multiprocessor System.
A. N. Kol'tsov, F. I. l’epinov so

Homostatic Principle of Regulating the Outgoing Sibscriher Traffic.
A. V. Kotov 83

Research of the International Telephone and Telegraph Consultative
Committee in the Field of Network Control. A. V. Kotov 88

Some Characteristics of Packet-Switched Data Transmission System.
V. N. Koshelev 91

Simulation of Progranned Control Processes in Switching Centers.
Ye. V. Konovalov 97

Consideration of the Length of Transmitted Messages for Routings in
Channel-Switched Networks. N. I.” Kuznetsov. 0. N. Romanov 101

b
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FUR ()l'Hi'IAI. IISl-Z "NIX

Influence of Control Function Distribution on Output Capacity of a
Multiprocessor Control Computer. S. Sh. Kutbitdinov

Routin; Algorithm and Communications Quality in a Multipolar Data
Transmission Network. N. P. Krutyakova

Structural Principles of an Automated Design System for Intonation
Distribution Systems and Devices. V. C. Lazarev. N. Ya. Parshenkov.
Ye. I. Pin'

Introduction of a Method of Setting Up Calls With Alternative Routings on
Rural Telephone Networks. Yu. V. Lazarev, S. A. Krasnov

influence of the Carrying Capacity of Switching Centers on Dynamic Control
Efficiency. Yu. V. Lazarev. l. V. Nikiforuva

Application of the Methods of Dynamics of Means for Estimating the
Efficiency of Dynamic Traffic Control in Networks with Queues. Yu. A. Lev

Call Distribution Algorithm on Prospective Rural Telephone Networks.
1. 0. Litsit

Some Results of Comparing Two Methods of Calculating Losses in
Communications Networks. A. I. anshovich

Set of Programs for Calculating bosses in Comunications Networks by
the Combined Method. A. i. Movshovich. M. Yu. Khokhlova

Application of Specialized Processors in the Control Units of Switching
Centers. A. G. Popova

Systems Approach to Control Systems at the Junctions with Different
Methods of Delivering Messages to the Networks. V. N. Roginskiy

Dynamic Control of Branch Capacities in a Channel Switching Network.
0. F. Sergeyevn

Mathematical Model and Estimating the Efficiency of a Message Delivery
Control Technique Based on Joint l\pplication of External and Internal
Priorities. V. N. Silayev, Yu. F. Zolotykh. L. M. Bondar'

Study of Methods of Organizing Call Servicing in the Control Computer of
.1 Computerized Switchiny. Center. A. V. Soiov'yev

Some Methods of Improving the Carrying Capacity of a Channel Switching
Network. (z. 1.. Slepuvn

Redistribution of Problems in a Microprocessor Control Network with
Failures. Ye. N. Turuta

Man—Machine Method of Obtaining an Algorithm for the Operation of a
Control Unit. l.. K. Yun'shina

C

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

105

108

112

115

118

121

1210

128

132

138

1101

1103

1106

150

153

157

162
Hill (WI-RT“ I'SF (INIJ

ANXUI‘ATIOS

[Text] The given collection includes expanded sumeries of the reports presented
at the Fourth All-Union Sywosium on the control problems of comunications
networks. the construction of dynamic information flow control system, the prob-
lem of introducing control system in the commications networks and centers of
the USSR and the construction of programmed control devices. In addition. a
study is made of the analytical methods of analyzing networks with dynamic
traffic control and the problem of their application in practice.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
'\" ‘1'. I‘ IMO. I“... "I..l.

PROBLEM OF DETERMINING THE LOAD ON CENTRALIZBD CORTROL UNITS AI SHITCHING CENTERS
[Article by R. A. Avakov, V. D. Safronov, Leningrad. pp 3-5]

When deveIOping centralized control units (CCU) based on control computers (BUM).
a number of peculiarities arise in determining the incoming and serviced load.
These peculiarities are caused by the multiple staging, the presence of priorities
and teworary restrictions in servicing the cells [1-3].

The incoming telephone call traffic creates a load on the switching center (SC).
The load serviced by the switching center with given subscriber servicing quality
norms determines the carrying capacity of the switching center as a whole. The
carrying capacity of a switching center with programmed control depends on the
carrying capacity of the switching system (SS) and the centralized control units
(CCU). Let us stipulate that the carrying capacity of the CCU be expressed in
terms of its output capacity, which will be determined by the maximum number of
serviced calls per unit time under the condition of the presence of a sufficient
number of SS units. Thus. the output capacity of the CCU can be expressed in
terms of the load for which it has the meaning of efficient application of the
CCU.

The servicing of calls in the switching center with program control is divided
into a number of stages which are determined by the type of communications. the
type of c0mmunication area, the actions of the calling and called subscribers.
Each stage of servicing the calls corresponds to setting UP 3 C311
(disconnectingl in the switching system between the incoming and outgoing eqUiP-
nent (lines).The flow of calls coming to the switching system "multiplies" on the
basis of multistaging and limitation of the functions of the SS sets. and it

determines the flow of requests to the CCU. The requests to the CCU come from
sources which are the various types of SS sets. The process of servicing the
requests consists in successive processing of calls in the CCU-SS section [b].
There is a dependence of the load (YCCU) coming to the CCU on the load (Y 8’
coming to the SS: Yc ‘f(Y s). As YSS increases. YCCU also increases: C is
considered to have e austeg its output capacity when it cannot service an addi-
tional load without having a negative effect on the subscriber service quality.
Here the difference between the incoming load and the load serviced by the CCU
will determine the service losses of the flow of requests AY [1]. In reference
[5], let us present the possible methods of estimating the carrying capacity of
the $5 with programmed control.

FOI‘OFEKJAI.USE(H§LY
FUR (”FR I“ I St" UNI}

From the point of view of program processing. each stage of servicing is a separate
problem which is realized in the CCU by means of three processes: information
reception, processing and output. Representing the operation of the CCU in the
form of a single-routing queueing system for each of the stages. it is possible to
obtain all the necessary characteristics (waiting time, busy period, and so on)

of each of the processes which are required to estimate the load on the CCU.

A formalized description of the process of servicing the CCU calls can be
represented in the form of a graph:

i. - {l.8} ,

where A-(al. .... an} is the set of apexes of the graph which correspond to the
call servicing stages; B-lbi } is the set of sides of the graph which reflect the
information interrelations of the call servicing stages and are given by the matrix:

i for i-j.
B -I5QI 5%- 5g in the presence of a side,
0 in the absence of a side.

From the matrix B. which is a mapping of the graph G, the set of routes traveled
by the call servicing stages between apexes a1 and a 1 1.1 .. n is determined.
The call servicing route (sequence) is also given by Ehe'transmiésion matrix:

P-lp.,i.

where 91' is the probability that after servicing at the apex a1 the call will go
to apex £1 for servicing.

Each apex of the graph G forms its own flow of requests to the CCU in accordance
with the load intensity of the i-th flow (‘1). The flow of requests coming to

the CCU for servicing is characterized by the times of their arrival t1 and the
servicing time of the requests in different stages 311. The times t1 are deter-
mined by the actions of the subscribers (picking up the receiver, beginning to
dial the number, and so on). For determining ari through a given SS it is
necessary to know the number of operations executed in the i-th stage k1 (it is
determined by the logical diagram of the algorithm) and the duration of each
operation Ari (it corresponds to the time spent on performing an eleuentary opera-
tion):

33.". at.

the flow of requests reaching the CCU creates the load:

ﬂ
YCCL‘ - ?.15‘a6‘o‘

"I
In addition to the basic tine tproc'g Ari spent on processing the requests to

the CCU, it is possible to isolate conitant time expenditures on the performance
of systems operations ‘50' the operations of scanning the 58 sets tsc n and the
variable time expenditures connected with the maintenance servicing o the system.
tmain' All of these components can be related by the coefficients q defining the

proportion of them out of the total operating time T:

3

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
MM Uri-n IM. oar. HI‘IJ

‘so'q1r‘ tsccnuqzlr; tpro::'.'cma.in"'3T'

Considering the coefficient 3, operation of the CCU without overloads is guaran-
teed:

Q|.QB.:‘) -‘T-

The time expenditures tso and tscm create a constant load on the CCU independent
of the matter of incoming requests. When determining the load connected with
processing the requests. it is necessary to consider the constant component which
takes \p a significant pr0portion of the total load on the CCU.

A study is made of the estimation of the effectiveness of functional organization
of request servicing processes in the CCU by the load criterion. The optimization
of the call servicing processes is carried out by minimizing the nonproductive
mchine time expenditures. Determination of the load permits estimation of the

duration of the CCU and generation of recommendations for effective use of the RUN
in the switching centers.

For proper calculation of the switching center control equipment it is necessary
to have systematic statistical data. The formation of the statistical information
on the call service quality in the CG] can be carried out on the basis of the load
calculation program.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

1. Lazarev. V. 6.: Piyl'. Ye. 1.; Turnta. Ye. N. PROGRAHHMYE UPRAVIENIYE NA
UZLAKN ICOMHU'I‘ATSII [Programed Control at the Switching Centers]. Moscow.
Svyaz', 1978.

2. Ivanova, 0. N.; Popova. A. 6.; Solovoy. Yu. V. L'PRAVLYAYUSHCNIYE
L'STROYSTVA KVAZIELEKTRONNYK}! KOWUTATSIONNYKH SISTEM [Control Units of Quasi-
electronic Switching System]. Moscow, Svyaz', 1975.

3. BRAND, J. 8.; HERNER, J. 5. "Estimating the Output Capacity of a Processor
when Processing Calls in a Switching System with Control by a Given Program.’
TIIER (translated from the English), Vol 65, No 9, 1977.

a. Safronov, V. 0.; Chagayev. N. 5.: Yurikov, N. K. "Estimating Load Intensity
at the CCU in the Switching Centers." VSESOYUZNAYA NAUGiNAYA SESSIYA.
POSVYASHCHEN'NAYA DNYU RADIO: TEZISY DOKL. [All—Union Scientific Meeting in
Honor of Radio Day: Sumneries of Reports], Moscow. 1979.

5. Villar. J. E. "Traffic Calculations in SPS Systems." PROC. 8th INT.
TELETRAFPIC CONGR., Melbourne, Vol 2. 1976.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ESTIMATING THE OPERATING EFFICIENCY OF THE CONTIDL COMPLEX OF A SWITCHING CENTER
[Article by E. Kh. Allayev, H. Sh. Zakhitsov and A. S. Saibov, Tashkent. pp 5-9]

The control system of the switching center mat operate continuously over a pro-
longed period. for failure of the control system can lead to interruption of the
operation of the entire system. In order to insure high reliability of the con-
trol system. the two-cowuter principle of switching center control is used [1].

The two-couputer control system (DUK) is made up of two identical control computers
(tun). Depending on the selected operating conditions, either one BUN or both of
the Elm simultaneously can be med to service the incoming call traffic.

The operation of the DUI! can be organized in the following modes:
Asynchronous (s-l),

Synchronous (3-2),

load separation (s-3).

Source separation (3-4).

In the asynchronom mode of operation of the WK, the fmctions connected with
servicing the incoming calls are performed by the active EUH (BUN—A), the other
(BUN-B) is in "hot" reserve [2]. In the case of failure of an active EL'H. the
reserve EUM takes on the functions of controlling the switching center. The
operating fitness of EUH-A and EUH—B is monitored autonomously using hardware
and software (logical program or test) mnitoring means. In contrast to the hard-
ware. the software monitoring is accomlished periodically with a period of TPGY'
and it requires expenditures of EUH time equal to Tper' After detection of a
failure in the active ELM. the reserve is put into operation after a time interval
tt‘es'

In the synchronous mode of operation of the DUK, each incoming call is processed
in parallel by two EU" [3]. The results of operation of the Elm-A and Elm-E are
cowared in order to monitor the fitness of the cur. in defined phases of call

processing or periodically (with a period of Tco ). In the case of noncouparison
of the results of the BUM-A and the Elm-B. each 3'? them includes the monitoring

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ram "rt“ 0-" e .‘r u VLI

program pruvidiug lul‘ linding the tailed HUM. Before repair of the failed EUH.
the fitness of the BUM that is in working order is checked by the hardware and
software.

In the load division mode the incoming call traffic is also serviced in parallel
by the BUM-A and the Elm-B [4]. However. in contrast to the synchronous mode,
the BUM-A and the BUM-B process different calls. 0n failure of one of the sun.
the entire load is picked up by the other. After elimination of the cause of
failure. the initial structure of the DCK is restored. In the made with load sepa-
ration, the fitness of the EL'H-A and BUM-B is also checked autonomously using
hardware and software monitoring means.

The mode with division of sources is characterized by the fact that all of the
load sources of the switching center are divided into two grOups. The calls
coming from the first group of sources are serviced using the Elm-A, and the calls
from the second group of sources. by the Elm-B. On failure of one Elm, the other
(the one in good repair) services calls coming from all the load sources. The
fitness of the EUM-A and the E'JM-B is checked autonomously using hardware and soft-
ware.

The above-investigated operating conditions of the OCR are not equivalent. for they
provide for different output capacity and require different expenditures. for
organization of the interaction of the BUN. therefore the problem of determining
the operating node of the MK in which maximum output capacity will be insured
with low expenditures on hardware and software for organization of the interaction
of the SW is of great interest. For selection of this operating mode of the DUK,
the quantitative characteristic is required which permits comparison of different
versions of the but among each other. The output capacity, that is, the nunber
of calls serviced by the DUK with observation of quality indices per unit time,
can be used as this characteristic. Since the calls are serviced by the DU! with
waiting, and the call waiting time characterizes the operating quality of the
system. the output capacity of the DUI can be defined as

n-[t-Pihtdl-A. (1)

where A is the intensity of the incoming call traffic; P{t>ta} is the probability
that the call waiting time will exceed the value of ta; ta is the admissible call
waiting time.

For selection of the optimal operating mode of the DUK using the index (1), it is
first necessary to define the call waiting time distribution functions H(t). The
function "(0 depends on many factors: the arrival intensity A and the servicing
intensity u of the calls, the failure intensity A0 and repair intensity “rep of

the BUM. the period T e, and the time for performance of the check tests 1p . the
period Tea and the comparison time icon, of the requ ts of the Elm-A and EEH-B,

and the opgating mode of the DUK, 9.

An efficient operating mode for the nut can be selected sinply without considering
the nature of the incoming traffic or the time required to service the incoming
calls. In this case. it is expedient to use the use coefficient of the conputing
capability of the but n 5 as the optimalness index of the operating node of the

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

DUK. This index is defined as the ratio of the total useful operating time of
the Elm-A and the SUM-B T“) to the total operating time of the two computers 21‘
in the operating time interval of the WK ‘1‘. that is

(5) TO)

The operating time of the DL'K ‘1‘ consists of three term:

Tlll.tl,t§o (3)

where t1 is the time during which both EUM are in proper working order; :2 is the
time during which only one EUH is in proper working order; t3 is the time during
which both EL'M have failed.

Let us propose that the probabilities of the state of the DUK P11 (1-0.1 and
3-0.1) are known, where i characterizes the state of the EUI‘I-A. and :1 character-
izes the state of the EL'M-B, where 0 is the working state Of the corresponding
EL'M. and l is the failed state; then

tI-T'POOo tg'T(POI.P|o)3t3-T‘Pa- (a)

Let us consider the time during which the EL'H can be busy with servicing incoming
calls as the useful operating time of the DUK T 9). For determination of the
value of ‘1‘“) it is necessary to calculate the nonproductive expenditures of DUK

time in eadw mode.

The nonproductive expenditures of DL'K time in the time intervals t1 and t under
asynchronous conditions are related to the performance of check tests an switch-
ing from one Elm to another. The expenditures of out time on performing the
check tests are (tllrper):pe and (CZ/Tper“ er’ and the expenditures connected
with switching amount to :0 Et1+t2)tres, whe e t /‘r and t2/T r are the nutter
of performances of check tests in the correspondingpﬁme intervals, and :"-o(t1+t2)
is the average number of switchings with the simplest flow of BUM failures.
Therefore the value of Ta) can be defined as:

(5)

Key: 1. per; 2. res

In the synchronous mode the nonproductive expenditures of DUK time are connected
with comparison of the results of the Elm-A and the Elm-B (in the time interval

t1) and the performance or“ check tests (in the time interval t2). These expendi-

tures are defined as (ti/Tco )Tcomp and (tZ/T er)‘ er, respectively. The non-
productive expenditures of DL time on perform ng cgeck tests at the times of

noncomparlson of the results of the SUM-A and the Elm-B are “Ocltper' Conse-
quently. we have

W l i
T “lg“?“Tc'tt'T—‘Tn‘on‘iTnv (6)

m (2")

Key: 1. comp; 2. per

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
r|'l\ \utueu nu. ..... .

The nonproductive expenditures in the load and source division mdl‘.“ an» rulatml
only to perform-thee n!" the check tests. Here. considering that in the time inter-
val :1 both sun can be btsy with servicing calls, we obtain

T”’.z(t:-%‘I-)’tr EH“:- (7)
Key: 1. per (1)

Considering (2),. (S) and (7), we obtain the expression for determining the use
coefficient of the computing capability of the DUK in various modes:

'2‘“ -‘-(P..~ “mow-h -.A t»)
(1)

2m'1‘[P¢(1‘-:-‘ZA. I p‘) (9’1" '°)(1_T 72)]-

“Q0 in'PNI' p“. 9M1- —
Key: 1. per

The discussed comparison method and proposed indices permit selection of the best
operating mode of the DUK and at the same time inprove the efficiency of using
EUN in switching centers.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

1. Lazarev, V. 6.; Piyl', Ye. 1.; Turuta, Ye. N. PROGRAMME UPRAVLENIYE NA
UZLAJGI KOWUTAISII [Program Control in Switching Centers]. Moscow, Svyez' ,
1978.

2. Sidlo, C. H. "A Method for Computer Control Transfer in a Coununicetion
Switching System," REMIX 70, Rec. Boston. Mass; New York. Vol 12. 1970.

3. Hart, 1. A.; Taylor, F. F.; Ulrich, N. "Organization of the N l 855 Central
Processor," THE BELL SYSTEM TECHNICAL JOURNAL, Vol XLIII, No 5. 1964.

lo. Lingelbach. W. "Metaconta I. large local exchanges supervision and maintenance
_ techniques." ELECTRICAL COiMJNICATION, Vol 51, No 1, 1976.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ma OFFICIAI USP ()Nl.\

INFLUENCE OF THE TRAFFIC CONTROL ALGORITHM ON THE TRANSMISSION CHARACTERISTIG
0P MULTIPACKET COMMUNICATIONS

[Article by A. v. Andrianov, Leningrad, pp 9-12]

A study is made of the data transmission network (01') with packet switching (P5).
in which the traffic is controlled individually for each pair of interacting
subscribers in accordance with the "window" algorithm [1]. The essence of this
traffic control method consists in the fact that the sender subscriber is for-
bidden to input more than the allowed nuaber W (the size of the "window") of uncon-
firmed packets into the network. Each packet taken out of the network is con-
firmed by the receiver subscriber. Therefore the actual maadmum packet input

rate to the network is determined by the rate of removal of packets by the receiver.

Then the analytical method is used to investigate the following characteristics
of the traffic control algorithm: the distribution of the length of the packet
queue at the network output (in the queue before the output stbscriber line) and
the effective rate R of data transmission between the two subscribers. The inves-
tigation is perfoer for the case where all of the packet transmission times ~-
over the subscriber lines and over the network - are random variables.

Let a multipacket commication be transmitted between two subscribers connected
to the PS network. The law of arrival of packets from the AP“... and also the
process of servicing the packets in the line to the APO“; are assumed to be
Poisson with intensities of x and 1:2. respectively. The packet delay or confirma-
tion time in the network is assumed to be distributed with respect to an arbitrary
law with man values of tcl and tcz, respectively.

The packet transmission process over a logical connection, considering control is
simulated by a three-phase queueing system.

The first phase -- a H-line queueing system without a queue -- simulates the trans—
mission process of data packets of the investigated logical connection over the
network. The equipment busy time corresponds to the random packet delay time in
the network.

The second phase simulates waiting of the packets in the queue and transmission
over the output subscriber line. The second phase is a single-line queueing sys-
tem with limited queue. The third phase simulates the process of transmitting
return confirmations over the network. Its structure is analogous to the struc-
ture of the first phase.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I'UK I’fl'lk IAI. h-‘I‘. \DI‘LI

The restriction imposed by the traffic control algorithm consists in the fact that
the total number i+j+k of packets and confirmations in all three service phases
cannot be greater than H. For equality of i+j+k-H, the input traffic halts.

If we denote the steady probabilities of states Pi k where there are i, j and k
packets in phases I. II and III, then the systen of equations relating Pijk under
the conditions i+j+k<w. ul-l/tcl, u3-l/tc2, is written as follows:

(mm *h' tropeu ' (‘0 ‘lrsPu'M ”PM-M ’ (1)
’(i")rlpt"."-‘.£ ‘r‘pquJ-L

For limiting states in which i+j+k-w or any of the indices equal to 0, obvious
simplifications are introduced into equation (1).

The solution of the system of equations (1) has the form

9:9: 9,‘ (2)

where ol-Xtcl, 03-1:

2. oz-l/uz. and the probability P000 is determined from the
normalization condition

 

. ti.
IZLPgt (3)
From (2) and (3) it is easy to find that
HQ 9? {QWM1
- c' a . ' l . (4)
Pm 1/51, n. 7,

Then the characteristics of interest to us can be defined. The distribution P3 of
the queue length before the output subscriber line

H" (914%)“ (5)
«no '3'. .

 

J

‘%"Poog'9.'
Expression (5) permits determination of the volume of the storage element in the
output node of the network required for organization of one or several logical
connections.
Then some results are presented from calculations by the obtained formulas.
Figure 1 shows the distributions of the number of packets at the network output
as a function of the carrying capacity of the output line for 1-1, "-8,
tcl'tcz'tc-S.

From the graphs it is obvious that significant queues of packets can accumulate
at the network output not only for 32>1, but also in the case of close input and
output rates (cg-1).

10

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Nohha

 

Figure 1 Figure 2

Figure 2 shows the mathematical expectation m of the amber of packets j at the
network output and the quantile x0 95 of the distribution Pj as a function of

u2(x-l, w-s, tc-S).

For illustration of the influence of the parameter W on the efficiency of the
control algorithm Figure 3 shows the coefficient R-u2(1-Pc)/min(l, uz) as a func-
tion of the window size N for l-l, tc-S and different uz. The relative effective
rate R as a function of u2 is shown in Figure lo.

It is obvious that the function R(u2) has an extremal nature. The least value of
R and, consequently, the greatest losses in speed, as the graphs show. are obtained
for uz-Hoz-l). The minimum value of “min decreases with an increase in the net-

work delay.

 

[1:41 ’5"

I I‘m]
40 t
40
4' '
4‘

a 1 a II II w
Figure 3 Figure la
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Puzen, L.; Zimmerman, 1:. "Proceedings Handbook," TIIER (translated from the

English). Vol 66, No 11. 1979.

ll

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I‘D.“ \II'I I\ II‘I- in... \II‘IoI

ESTIMATING THE EFFICIENLY OF A MODEL OF THE GAME METHOD OF DYNAMIC CONTROL OF A
COMMUNICATIONS NETWORK

[Article by P. V. Bershteyn and P. I. Koshemyakin. Kiev, pp 12-15]

A study is made of a network with channel switching in which the intensity of the
individual items is insignificant by comparison with the total load serviced by
each branch, and therefore the distributed load of the k-th item in practice has

no influence on the losses in the branches and. consequently, on the paths by
which it is serviced.

A comparative estimate of the application of dynamic control in the above-investi-
gated network using a game automaton of the D type [1] and a version of it [2] is
presented in this paper.

Let the flow of the k-th item from some node j be able to be directed over VP; of
the n allowed paths. each of which is characterized by a value of qi (i-l, 2,...,n)
called the probability of arriving. that is, qi-l-p , where p is the probability
of failure along the path "1' In this case the pro ability of establishing connec-
tion of the calls of the k-th item will be determined by the value of qk of the
selected path. If the calls are distributed with respect to all possible paths
using the automaton D. the probability of directing the incordng call to the i-th
path will be proportional to qi' Consequently. the probability of getting through
for the calls of the k-th flow using distribution by the algorithm of the automa-
ton D will be:

I
A L. _»- ’64)
w" 522 éqﬂ‘ 1‘13 q”, (1)

Key: 1. mean

where: gep' 1' 3:“: ‘

h ;o(

(1)
Key: 1. mean

The gain by comparison with using one path will be:

6 aq -q -q _q 6; ‘A 6; (2)
D o ‘ c? I 4:98” ‘3»

Key: 1. mean
12

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I’HR "WIN“ 1 SF ONLY

If dq is distributed with respect to a law with probability density p-f(:q),
the mathematical expectation of gain

'9 no: ‘

- 6 I
30-] (A4~$)f(aq)d(oq)a%! , (3)
“in.“ ”(1) G9

Key: 1. mean

The percentage of failures (losses) is a normalized parameter. It is known that
such parameters are distributed most frequently with respect to a normal law [3].
Since do is a linear function of p, also do is distributed by a normal law with

dispersion ozq and mathematical expectation Aq-O. In this case the probability
that B>0 can be defined by the formula:

P(Bo>0)=0.5[1*‘P(?1)l~ (a)

For estimation of the values obtained, it is possible to assume with acceptable
accuracy for practice that:

QM 'Qnt 4‘,
65" as; n I: z (5)
2

 

On a well-operating network h-(2 to 3)°10‘

13.. No.32 z . W,

and quash-I'IO'Z; then

0
6~-I
“80> 0) . 0.552,

It is interesting that even for qmax'qmin'l and qmean'o's
BD-S.6Z for P(BD>O)-0.566.

It must be noted that when using automata D, almost uniform load distribution with

respect to the allowed paths (qi are almost identical for them) is achieved by
the above-described algorithm, although the gain is small.

In order to increase the gain, it is possible to propose an algorithm analogous
to the one investigated above except that the call is directed to one of the
possible paths with probability proportional to Yi'qi'°‘ Here asqmln is a
constant. In this case

 

n It 6‘ (6)

Key: 1. mean

As is obvious from (6), qDﬁ increases with an increase in a.

13

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ﬂ“! ()FFK'IAI l SF UNI \

For .-q n the path with a value of qi'qmin does not participate in servicing the
calls 0 the k-th item. Successively increasing a, we arrive at the type H
automaton in which the incoming call is directed to the path with the value

qi'qmax' Then

BH‘QM‘S'qt- (7)
The mathematical expectation of gain will be
- 9-0:
a" .14 (q Ills-Qt) ’(q)dq .qNG- er . (8)

In order to obtain a normal probability distribution law for failures with respect
to different paths with qmax' min'h’ for the above-investigated conditions:

I1, - E“ a (noun.
h
once A

£.36
-—--600.
go 2-£‘
Thus, in channel switching networks with quasisteady probability of losses on
the branches, (that is. not depending in practice on the distributed itemo the
game method of dynamic control using the algorithm of the automaton H turns out
to be more effective than automaton D.

The gain from using the automaton H is proportional to the dispersion range of

the probabilities of getting through (qi) along the paths, and for the automaton D,
the dispersion of this value. However, with sufficiently high probability (no

less than 0.&3) the use of automaton D in the above-investigated form also has

a negative effect on the service quality.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Lazarev, V. 6.; Parshenkov. N. Ya. "Came Method of Dynamic Control of a Commun‘-
cations Network," POSTROYENIYE L'PRAVLYAYUSHCHIKH USTROYSTV I
SISTEH [Construction of Control Units and Systems], Moscow, Nauka, 1974.

2. Bershteyn, P. V.; Kozhemyakin. P. I. "Comparison of the Efficiency of
Dynamic Telephone Network Traffic Control Methods," III VSESOYUZNYY
SIHPOZIUH P0 PROBLEMAM UPRAVLENIYA NA SETYAKH I UZLAKH SVYAZI: TEZISY DOKL.
[Third All-Union Symposium on Control Problems in Comunication Networks and
Centers: Summaries of Reports], Moscow. Nauka. 1978.

3. Gnedenko. B. V.; Belyayev, Yu. K.; Solov'yev, A. D. MATEHATICHESKIYE

METODY V TEORII NADEZHNOSTI [Mathematical Methods in Reliability Theory],
Moscow, Nauka, 1965.

16

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ESTIMATIM THE RELIABILITY OF COMINICATIQSNETHORKS WITH NONIDEAL CONTROL
[Article by V. A. Bogatyrev, Yu. M. Hartynov, Moscow. pp 15-18]

By communications network reliability we mean the probability of the presence of
at least one properly Operating allowable path between a given pair of junctions.

we shall consider that in a comunicationa network with ideal control all possible
paths between each pair of junctions are perussible.

In networks with nonideal control situations exist where there is a path through
the operating network elements. but it cannot be used for information transmission
as a result of absence of information at each communications center on the state
of all of the network elements, inaccessibility of individual areas or comunica-
tion channels for the given data transmission routing, and so on.

Let us propose that as a result of analyzing a specific control method. all of the
allowable paths 1: , “2' ..., "n between each of the given pairs of centers can be
enmerated. Each path is given by listing the network elements entering into it:

p.40”)... IL

The path elements can be comunication lines and centers. The probability of the
existence of each k-th path element is known and equal to pk. Failures of the
comication network elements will be considered independent events. The relia-
bility of the i-th path will be

R.'9uP§--‘PI- (1)

If the given set of permissible information transmission paths consists of inde-
pendent paths “’9' ”t’ ..., Hz}, the reliability R of the corresponding informa-
tion routing can be defined by the known parallel connection formula

H-i-(d-RMi-Rg)...(1-9.). (2)
In the general case. however. different paths can contain cannon elements. and
therefore the failures of these paths will be correlated. In reference [1] it

is demonstrated that the formula (2) can also be used in the general case. but
when the parentheses are removed it is necessary to use the rule

15

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
IV” V. mam IaIl- yuan too-~-

EPA" Pa~ (3)

The necessity for following rule (3) forces the calculations to be performed
by formula (2) in general (literal) form; here multiplication by each next
binomial doubles the number of terns in the general expression for B so that in
the presence of N paths the number of terms in the general formula can reach 2“.

A method is proposed for significant reduction of the volume of calculations by
formula (2) by using a number of simplifying procedures and relations following
from (3). Let us denote the multiplication operation subject to rule (3) by the
symbol (*). Let us introduce the unreliability index of the i-th element
piil-pi. It is easy to see that

R-P.'P;'(*Ps)‘9.‘9.'Pt-Pg‘Ps'O. (a)
Analogously, it is easy to check the correctness of the following expressions:
5". ' 5:45;. (S)

1-9.95-pdz-éa.

For illustration of the sequence of the calculations by the proposed method let
us consider a simple communication network consisting of eight elements:

a, b, c, d. e, f. g. h. Let the control algorithm permit use of only the follow-
ing paths, the number of elements in which will not exceed three

Ma- SJ 4-.- Isdl era-{anam- [a.q.dlsrs- {mind}-

He shall perform the calculation with respect to the probability Q of unconnected-
ness of the network Q-l-H by the recurrent formula following from (2):

Ot'OM“(1‘9§)-0£-;‘Pu0{-n0.,=i. (5)

Inasmuch as the first three paths in the investigated exanple are independent
(and in the general case the independent paths must first be isolated and put in
the first places in the list of paths), for 03 according to (2), we have (in
order_to abbreviate the notation we shall arbitrarily stipulate that pa-a.
l-paea. l-papb8ab, and so on)

ova; ed c7.
Now let us define Q“ using expression (6):
on-Os-aqd - (53c:a 0?) -o,-aqd. 55;].

According to rule (3) the repeated elements are dropped when the parentheses
are removed.

16

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0}"(1Al I'SF ()Nl \

Analogously, for Q5 we obtain
0,— o.-oid- 0. - a aq-qaia .7 - .un‘tai «19‘6“.

In the example of the expression for Q5 it is possible to formulate the following
general algorithm for calculating the probability of disconnectedness of the net-
work by the proposed method. First, the probability of the absence of all indepen-
dent paths is described by the parallel connection formula, then the probability
of the existence of the next path in the list is written with a minus sign multi-
plied by the preceding notation in which only the probability of the existence

of all elements entering into the last path are omitted; then the probability of
the existence of the next path is written with the minus sign multiplied by the
entire previously obtained expression in which the eleuents entering into the

last path are omitted. and so on.

Let a sixth path of four elements u6-{a. g, h. f} also be permissible in addition
to the listed ones.

Using the presented algorithm and the expression for Q . we obtain the following
formula for calculating the network reliability with six allowed paths

! o.-o,-aqi;(icﬁa dies).

When calculating the expression for Q we used the fact that t£?;o. The cofactor
in parentheses, according to (S) pe ts further simplification

Ecaa- dies -Eé (c-d-de). isJ.
Thus, for Q6 we finally have:
ob-Elaae}-quic;?~8thi(;i-agQ-iidaghf
Let us note that when calculating by the generally accepted procedure the
expression for Q6 would contain 26-64 terns.

For demonstration of the possibilities of the preposed procedure let us calculate
the increment eh of the reliability which takes place if we permit the use of

another path :7uie. h. 8. b}.

Comparing R-=ehgb term by term with_ the expression for Q we obtain the addition
from the_ first term equal to ehgbacdf. and the addition grom the third term equal
to ehgbdcfa; the remaining addition terms are not given according to rule (4).
Thus. the desired increment will be

n1,- etqsaa f-dafayeigmj A.

Thus. if the 3reliabitity of each element is 0. 9, then the increment will be
0 94(1- 09) 3.-6 510

17

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
a Ul‘ V. a as one. run. I010...

Estimates of this type can be useful when determining the expediency of compli-
cating the communication network control algorithm accompanied by expansion of
the sweet of allowable information transmission paths. For estimation of the
reliability of rea‘. communications networks, the discussed mthod was programmed
on a computer; the entire logical part of the calculations are perfomd using
the built-in boolean Emotions on the rows of bits position-wise representing
elements of the coununications network. The calculation of the reliability of a
two-pole network with three allowable information transmission paths on the
Yes-1020 computer takes several minutes of machine time.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Davydov, C. 8.; Roginskiy. V. N.; ‘l‘olchan. A. Ya. SETI ELEKTROSVYAZI
[Electrocommications Networks], Noscow, Svyaz'. 1977.

18

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ANALYSIS AND SHORT-TERM FORECASTING 0F TELEPHONE TRAFFIC

[Article by R. P. Borisova, T. D. Zelentsova and A. P. Pshenichnikov, Moscow.
pp 18-21]

For the dynamic design of city telephone exchanges (GT8) one of the labor-
intensive problem is predicting the telephone traffic for newly built automatic
telephone offices (ATS) and predicting the traffic variation on all the existing
commication lines as a result of a change in capacity and structure of the
network. Forecasting is realized on the basis of observing the traffic on the
existing network and it consists in developing quality characteristics (descrip-
tion of the observed and expected development trends) and quantitative (point or
interval) estimates.

The traffic intensity is a random variable, but in addition to the random fluc-
tuations there are stable trends in the variation of the average values of the
load intensity with development of the network. The average load intensity from
one group of sources to another does not remain constant with developmnt of the
network even if the capacities of these groups do not change. Traffic redistribu-
tion occurs. but, as observations show. this process has high inertia. The inertia
can be explained obviously by the effect of a large nunber of factors having
opposite influence on the investigated process. Under these conditions, from

the large nunber of existing forecasting methods [1,, 2]. it appears natural to
use statistical methods for predicting telephone traffic load.

The statistical forecasting process consists of two steps [3]. The first step is
analysis of the data for the observation period and the period of construction of
the statistical model. The construction of the model includes the selection and
substantiation of the form of the equation describing the dynamics of the process
(its determined base) and estimation of the parameters of the equation. In the
second step, on the basis of the statistical laws found. the expected value of
the predicted attribute is defined.

The traffic was analyzed for a five-year period beginning in 1970 to 1974 at more
than 100 AIS and 2000 interjmction communication lines of the Moscow GTS.

During the investigated time period, a unique seven-digit subscriber nunbering
system was used on the network. One, two, three and four-million numbering zones
were organized. A study was made of the traffic intensities occurring at the
ATS, the intraoffice. intrajunction. on the routings from the ATS to the outgoing
message junctions (1115), from the [115 to the incoming message junctions (W5).
and from the W5 to the ATS.

19
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I V“ V. I I‘ll... mu... mice”.

The stability of the increase in capacity of the Moscow GT8 on the level of
130.000 to 140.000 nunbers per year, invariability of the macrostructure of the
network during the observation period made it possible to use a very simple
linear relation to describe the deterministic basis for the process and load var-
iation in tire. The equation parameters were found by the least squares method.

For studyirc the effect of the capacity of individual groups of subscribers on the
traffic flows. the reduced capacities of the ATS were calculated

Nred ' I“nu + i Ni(yi/ynu)'
where “nu is the hunter of residence telephones for private me; N1 is the
nunber of sources of the i-th category included in the ATS; yi is the average
intensity of the individual load of the sources of the i-th category; ym is
average intensity of the specific load of the private residence subscribers.

Let is briefly enumerate the basic results of analyzing the load on different
coununication lines for the investigated observation period.

The intensity of the load occurring on the ATS is Y1. The ail-office peak

load hour (PLH) depends on the structural composition :3: the ATS sub-
scribers. For ATS with a proportzon of private residence telephones in the reduced
capacity of :he ATS, for more than 507. the PLH falls in the evening hours and
and less than 4-03. in the morn-.ng. For the majority of the
investigated ATS the ratio of the intensity of the load occurring on the ATS in
the PL“ to the reduced capacity of the ATS Y IN ed 1 had a trend toward insignif-
icant growth. The increase in the specific load averaged over all of the ATS of
the first million numbering zone was 0.5: per year. and the second million zone.
1.22 per year. .

The intensity of the intrajunCtion load -- the total load from the ATS with re—
spect to all ATS of the junction region 1. including the ATSi - is YiI' Analysis
of the variation in time of the proportion of the intrajmction load in the load
occurring at the ATS YiI/Yi demonstrated that this ratio had a tendency toward
reduction, and for the ATS of the first million nunbering zone the reduction on
the average was 1.77.. and for the ATS of the second million zone, 0.42 per year.

a relation was discovered between the proportions of the intrajunction load in
the load occurring at the ATS and the specific Height of the capacity of the region
in the total capacity of the network.

The intensity of the intraoffice load of the ATSi is '1'1 . Analysis of the varia-
tion in time of the proportion of the intraoffice load in the intrajunction load
Yﬂ/Y demonstrated that the magnitude of this ratio increased on the average
by 1.0} per year.

The intensities of the interoffice traffic flows (from ATS! to ATS of one junc-
tion region) is Y”. A deterministic basis was discovered for the' statistical
dependence of the ratio of the traffic intensitv in the PLH from the ATSi to the
ATS to the intrajunction load of the ATSi on the specific weight of the capacity
of he ATS in the capacity of the Junction region I, YijlYiI'fmred 1/311,“ I)'

20

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFNIM. I'Sl-f ONLY

The intensities of the load on the ATSi-UIS lines are Y R (k-1.2,3,6). Analysis
of the dynamics of this load made it possible to trace the process of traffic
redistribution with development of the network. In 5 years the capacities of the
million numbering zones increased as follows: the first million by 1.11 times,
the second million by 1.18 times, the third million by 3.53 times and the fourth.
by 3.42 times. Here the specific weight of the capacity of the first and second
numering zones in the total capacity of the network decreased, and the third and
fourth zones, increased. The specific weight of the traffic intensity from the
ATSi to the 025-1 and HIS-2 in the occurring load of the ATSi with development of
the network decreased, and to the HIS-3 and 1315-6, increased. The traffic redis-
tribution process at the Moscow GT8 was also observed earlier, for example, during
the 1953-1963 period [4]. Considering that the development rates of individual
million numbering zones do not remain constant in time, for prediction of the load
in the AIS-UIS directions, it is proposed that the dependence of the ratio Yip/Y1

on the specific weight of the capacity of the zone k in the network capacity be
used.

Intensities of Interjunction Traffic Flows (from UIS to UVS). The study of the

dynamics of these loads for 2000 interjunction routesdemonstrated that their mag-
nitude is influenced not only by the capacities of the junction regions and net-
work capacity, but also the uniform gravitation factor. Thus. under other equal

conditions, the lead intensities to adjacent juncrion regions are greater than
to remote ones.

Load Intensities on the UVS—ATS Routings. The specific loads incoming from
the UVS to the ATS had a tendency toward growth for the majority of routings.

and for the AIS of the first million numbering zone the increase was 1.052 per
year, and for the second zone. 0.252 per year.

For short-term traffic forecasting in the majority of cases it is justifiable to
assume invariability of the model both in the observation section and in the fore—
casting section. Under this assumption the determination of the expected loads
was realized by extrapolation of the deterministic basis for the observed process.
In order to obtain the interval forecast. the forecasting confidencem‘er"818 were
calCulated. It is necessary to solve the problem of short-term traffic forecast-

ing annually; therefore all of the forecasting calculations are performed by
computer.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Yanch, E. PROGNOZIROVANIYE NAUCHm-TEKHNICHESKOCO PROGRESSA [Forecasting

Scientific and Technical Progress], translated from the English, Moscow.
Progress, 1974.

2. Lisichkin, V. A. TEORIYA I PRAKTIKA PROCNOSTIKI [Theory and Practice of
Forecasting]. Moscow, Nauka, 1972.

3. Gletyrkin, Ye. M. STATISTICHESKIYE METODY PROCNOZIROVANIYA [Statistical
Forecasting Methods]. )bscow, Statistika, 1977.

‘\

.‘lakslmov, C. 2.: Pshenichnikov, A. P. TELEl-DNNAYA NAGRUZKA MES'INYKH SETEY

SVYAZI [Telephone Traffic On Local Communicationsﬁetworksl, Moscow, Svyaz'.
1969.

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I‘Uﬂ Ufl'lblﬂl. 00¢ 00‘...

REAL TIME DISPATGIER NR A PROGRAMHED SUBSCRIBER'S STATION

[Article by Yu. 1’. Gal', V. I. Golovach, V. M. Sobol'. Ye. G. Stalin, Moscow,
pp 21-24]

The creation of prospective programmed subscriber's stations (AP) with a wide
spectrum of functional capabilities is connected with the development of software
to control the AP resources. The most iaportant operating. reliability and
cost characteristics of AP depend on the choice of methods of designing the AP
software. Let us note that these characteristics have a significant influence on
the efficiency of the corresponding data transmission system as a whole.

A method of developing AP software using the UZOR (real-time operations system
assignments control) dispatcher is discussed. Brief consideration is given to
the problem connected with implementation of this dispatcher on mini and micro-
computers and the specific nature of its application in AP.

The AP that we are talking about is part of connunications system providing two-
wey "terminal-terminal' communications in the interests of remote subscribers.

The activity of remote subscribers is manifested at the input of the AP as an
integral load. In order not to reduce the operating efficiency of the network,
the AP reaction must lead the message arrival rate over the communication channels.
Consequently. the software-hardware system of the AP must satisfy defined tin
restrictions; in other words. the operation of the comunications AP takes place
in real time. On the basis of this specific nature, for programming the AP assign-
ments means are required with the use of which the exchange procedures with the
message processing problems or operator activity of the investigated AP are
synchronized. The UZOR dispatcher also permits programing of multifunctional

AP probleus. The 0203 dispatcher is the "fram" of the AP program system, and

the functional components of the software of the investigated AP are based on

this dispatcher.

The dispatcher controls the following AP resources: the operating time of the
central computer processor; the ready-access memory of the computer; interrupts
from peripheral devices (for exanple, communication lines. information storage

and display devices).
The program making up the dispatcher correspond to nacroinstructions. From the

point of view of the AP software developer, these mcroinstructions expand the
usual set of instructions of the mini or microconputer making up the AP, permitting

22

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

algorithms to be written, individual parts of which are executed in parallel in
real time and asynchronously. These parallel parts of the algorithm are called
processes. The presence of processes is a characteristic feature of the operation

of AP in which several information reception and dispatching problems can be
solved simultaneously.

The number of such parallel-solved problems can vary during operation of the

AP; therefore the dispatcher has means of assigning dynamic processes which appear
for execution of a defined problem and disappear after this problem has been
solved. The possibility of assigning dynamic processes makes it possible to use
the computer memory which is part of the AP especially efficiently. for on comr
pletion of the dynamic process the memory allocated for solution of the problem
becomes free and can be used to solve other problems.

Not all of the problems solved by the AP have identical importance. For consid-
eration of the relative importance of simultaneously solved problems at the time

of appearance (generation) of each process its characteristic. called its priority.
is assigned.

In the computer the processes must have the possibility of becoming synchronized
with one another at certain points in time. In other words, the programmer must
know how to give events occurring in certain processes simultaneously. Usually
at such "meeting points" one of the synchronizing processes ("the sender") trans-
mits the conditional information to the other ("the receiver"). Each of these
meeting points corresponds to a signal. The nomenclature and number of signals
are selected by the developer of the AP software himself.

Very frequently the expected event consists in the execution of a defined problem.
Synchronization with the event consisting in completing the dynamic process can
be realized by using the cooperation operator provided for this purpose. The
cooperation operator is also convenient for "early" curtailment of certain pro-
cesses required. for example, in the case of AP operation.

The processing of interrupts from the peripheral devices of the AP is carried out
using the interrupt waiting macroinstruction. The characteristic features of the

interrupt waiting instruction permit a group of like peripheral devices to be
programmed (for example, several alphanumeric displays can be serviced by several
processes executing the same Program segment).

The UZOR dispatcher also includes special devices that simplify checkout of the

A? software in real time. The programmer can set conditions under which emergency
situations arise -- disturbances in the operation of the system of implemented
processes fixed by the dispatcher himself and capable of leading to failures in
the operation of the AP. There is also a possibility of defining reactions to
emergency situations which permits the consequences of the failures to be recti-
Fied.

The following characteristics of the UZOR dispatcher are noted:

The dispatcher instructions are machine-independent; thus. the dispatcher can be
executed on a wide range of computers;

23

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
run UI'I‘ILIAI. var. (mm

It is especially efficient to implement a dispatcher based on single-processor
mini and microcomputers with limited ready-access memory size:

The dispatcher is independent of the peripheral devices; the required drivers
(input-output processes) must be programmed by the AP developer hiuelf.

At the present time the UZOR dispatcher is implemented on the SH—3 minicomputer
and the "Elektronika—60" microcomputer. The total volume of the dispatcher is
less than 2 K of 16-bit words. The software for the specific AP was written
using the “Am-II microasseubler and the macrolibrary corresponding to the dis-
patcher instructions and operators.

The experimental operation of the [3201! dispatcher demonstrated the following:

The expenditures of labor on the development and checkout of the software were
reduced sharply;

The AP software developed ming the dispatcher satisfies the requirements of the
given speed of the reaction to events in the external environment (requests to
receive and transmit data) and restrictions on the size of the ready-access
memory used;

The A? software developed using the dispatcher has a clear. flexible. simple
structure which permits easy adaptation, accompaniment and modification.

'9
‘5

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAI. NSF. ONLY

ANALYTICAL AND STATISTICAL SIMULATION OF THE TELEPHONE OPERATION SYSTEM OF AN
ELECTRONIC SWITCHING CENTER

[Article by B. S. Col'dshteyn, Leningrad, pp 24-28]

The telephone operation system (TOS) is one of the mat important software com-
ponents of the switching center. and it is an ordered set of software organizing
the couputing process in real tine. that is. at the natural rate of operation of
the switching center and the telephone periphery and providing control of all of
the resources of the control couputer (EUH).

‘Ihe telephone operation system is divided into the nucleus and periphery. The
nucleus of the T05 is the priority queueing system which is the dispatching
mechanism of each specific version of the operation system and is based on a
two-dimnsional strategy with absolute-relative priorities. Thus. let N flows of
requests to include N programs exist to which N priorities are placed in correspon-
dence. Let these priorities be distributed in some way with respect to K levels.
On each level k (k-1,2,...,K) there are "k priorities, the requests of which do

not interrupt one another. Thus, it is possible to write a priority inthe form

of a pair of numbers (k, In). On the I: level there will be (It, 1). (k. 2)....(k, m).

..., (k, uk) such pairs. Obviously. ‘

7 o
m"! N.

In this system the request z(k,m) for a call for calculation of the priority
program (k.m) can be either in the waiting phase llbl. or in the servicing phase
/</:

zlk’.’ . J

Then the rule for calling the priority program (km) iuplemnting the investigated
strategy with absolutely relative priorities can be described ming the following
logical expression:

‘ ’1‘ _- IQ(O.m-0

[ﬁLuQ'Vﬂ-"Q‘In 1?.('Mj)]a[n n tit-2:131}? (1)

53‘ j. b" i"

where
H; . for “a,

q(a..b)- { 6 -for “a.

25

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR Ol-I-lt IAI. i-hl’. URL!

Expression (1) is understood as follows. The event n(k.m) consisting in calling
the functional priority program (k,m) takes place when and only when there is a
request to start this program. requests to start higher priority program are
absent, and a higher priority program or lower relative priority program. but of
the same absolute priority, is not working.

For construction of an analytical model of the 10$ [1]. the following basic assump-
tions are introduced:

The input flow of priority requests (k.m) is Poisson with the paraneterk(k.m);

The flows of requests of different priorities are independent, and. consequently,
the total flow is Poisson with the parameter

I n;
22‘. 10.1),
III In!

The operating timesof the functional programs servicing the requests of different
priorities are independent random variables with distribution functions 8k.m(t)’
first moments b(k.m) and finuc second moments b(2)(k.u0;

A study is made of the steady-state operating conditions of the system. that is.

K H; I n; (2)
2‘. Z. L(~.‘) %(;.‘)=2 2. 909d;
m pg 3-4 vi

The interrupts and exchange operations connected with them do not increase the
cue spent by the requests in the HUM, interruption of the service program
does not lead to loss of time already expended on servicing;

The sizes of the request queues are selected in such a way as to exclude the
possibility of loss of a request as a result of absence of places for waiting.

For the investigated strategy of priority organization of the telephone operation
system based on the so-called direct uethods [2], analytical expressions are ob-
tained [3] for the average waiting time for the beginning of servicing of a
priority request (k.m):

n-I
Mao-90.») @364)
i gnu-.4) (3)

HI "|

and the average total servicing time. that is, the time from the beginning of the
work of the service personnel to completion of the servicing of the priority

request (k. In)

Y(‘.m) =

‘ "9"» (I) ‘4 H; H}
552' 27 u...) % (mob-‘2‘ 290.92 90.1pr
t- p e l" '0'! I
”(km)" i «(0....4) i w.» l ( )

[1—22 90.))[1-2 2. 90.49

in j.‘ 3-! J's;

 

26

FOR OFHCIA'. USE ONLY
8(£IM)I [0" li‘.

!. :- °' Mn;
6( .o T—-: a: Hi-mi-tZZMi-plkbg,,.(t),np.m <5)
ZZqu)’ """
“13..
and
(n .
T; (2;!) m 1.1,
o(i.4)- ﬂarem) for “L (6)

50.") ' W 10.1)

Expressions (3)-(6) permit a priori information to be obtained about the quality
indicea of the functioning of the TOS and realization of the search for the

optimal strategy of the priority servicing system. Considering the labor intensive-
ness of the calculations by the proposed procedure of complex multipriority sys-

tem, special programs were written to calculate the TOS parameters in the PL/I
language [4].

However, the parameters defined by the presented expressions, just as any average
values, are not in the general case sufficiently complete characteristics of the
computation process in the RUN of the switching center, the behavior of which is
of a probability nature. Therefore the problem of finding more representative
characteristics of the T08, such as the distribution function of the time spent by the
feQiﬁtSin U2 BUM and the queue length distribution functions for the entire set

of request flows is very urgent. Unfortunately, the definition of these functions
by analytical methods is very difficult, and results usable in practice have not
been obtained in this area. For solution of the stated problem the method of
statistical simulation of the telephone operation svstem was selected.

In exactly the same way. the analytical methods do not permit estimation of the
operation of the TOS in the overload mode, that is, on violation of the condition
of being steady state (2). This situation is reached in the switching center
during the periods of high activity of the telephone periphery when the total
demand for EUM resources of the set of requests forming the current load of the
control computer can exceed the capability of the system. Under these conditions
the telephone operation system reveals its true indices. The 108 is studied in
the overload mode by the statistical model.

It must also be noted that this model is free of the majority of restrictions
characteristic of the analytical uethod of describing T06. and it compensates
for the difficulties in experimental determination of the probability character-

istics of the computation process during operation of the switching center in
real time.

What has been stated permits consideration of the problem of constructing a
statistical model of the telephone operation system a necessary step in the opera-
tions when designing the software for electronic switching centers The given

27

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Hm unu MI. use. mu.-

uudei is J means in the hands of the [US developers which permits rapid and
quite accurate deep analysis of the operation system and makes it possible to
obtain a justified estimate of the strategy of organizing the computation process.

The basic thing in the statistical model of the TOS is simulation of the
interrupts and functions connected with completion of the operation of the service
program and calling another program. This permits variation of the current simu-
lation time in hOPS- the duration of which corresponds to the free times

of the central processor.

Evolution of the computer process consists in interchange of the phases of time spent by
requests by the EUM accoupanied by modifications of their dynamic parameters. For
description of the current state of the s-th request of the l-th priority. the

BUM uses the TAB vector (s. l). The components of this vector are the current
characteristics of the state of the request: the time of initiation of the re-
quest (HOH); the operating time of the functional program servicing the given
request (TSA): the real time of servicing the request accumulated in "lots" in the
intervals between interrupts of the service program (188); the time of waiting for
the beginning of operation of the service program (TUB); the time of waiting for
continuation of operation of the service program accumulated in "lots" during
interrupts (THI).

The operating process of a telephone operation system in the model is considered

during the time period (0._r), that is, the requescifor which the initiation time
HDM>I do not reach the system and are not serviced. The value of the simulation

interval T is selected from the conditions of obtaining sufficiently representa-

tive statistical data.

For the selected strategy of priority organization of the TOS using the model it
is possible to isolate the limits within which the parameters of the operation
graph are located so as to insure predominance of this strategy over the others.
In addition, the developed model permits assembly of additional statistical
characteristics of the telephone operation system: the average number of requests
serviced without waiting; the average number of interrupts of the functional pro-
gram servicing the requests of l-th priority; and a number of others required to
estimate the operating quality of the TOS.

The model is written in PL/I language and is formed as a set of procedures: the
procedure for generating the operation graph GEN. the main simulating procedure
HDTOS, the procedure for processing the simulation results HINAN and FINAL. This
made it possible to create and check out a complex simulating system having quite
broad functional possibilities in very short time.

The investigated methods of studying the telephone operation system of the elec-
tronic switching center were used when developing a specific version of the T05
of the time—pulse tandem communications junction.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

1. Gol'dshteyn. B. S. "Priority Servicing in the EATS Automatic Telephone
Office Software." III \SESOYUZNYY SIHPOZICM PO PROBLEMAM CPRAVLENIYA NA SETYAKH
I UZLAKH SVYAZI: TEZISY DOKL. [Third Ali-Union Symposium on Control Problems

in Communicationsﬁetworks and Centers: Summaries of Reports], Moscow, Nauka.
1978.

28

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
METHODS OF DYNAMIC DISPATCHING OP PROBLEMS IN COMPUTER NETHORKS

[Article by K. R. Cuaryan, V. M. Konovalov, Moscow, pp 28-32]

Large material expenditures on the creation, operation and maintenance of computer
networks are giving rise to the necessity for improving the operating efficiency
of the computer systens within the frameworks of a united network. the creation

of methods and algorithms for operative control of the hardware, software and
information reserves of the networks.

The problem dispatching systems known at the present time, as a rule, provide for
centralized decision making in the network with respect to the processing center.
The low functional reliability of centralized dispatching systems and the
necessity for realizing traffic distribution in real time on arrival of a request
for processing are promoting the creation of decentralized dynamic dispatch sys-
tems (SDD), the development of which must be realized in the set of problems
connected with creating network operation systems.

In this article a study is made of the principles of decentralized dispatching
in which the dispatcher functions are distributed with respect to all the junc-
tions of the network. The junction SDD makes a selection of the computer when
the request arrives for processing. The flows of problems and the time for pro-
cessing them are random variables.

The methods of decentralized dynamic dispatching are distinguished by the strategy
used in the network for gathering information on the state of the computing and
communication reserves. when implementing an information strategy I 0 in the
network, the service information (SI) is gathered in the training megs; the SI
accompanies the problems sent through the network and the calculation results.
For the strategy ISO. the trained SDD -- SDD(0) -- are proposed which operate
under conditions of a priori indeterminacy of the situation in the network, the
shortage of ST is made up by the 500(0) in the operating process. The realiza-
tion of a developed network metering system in the network corresponds to the
information strategy [51' In the corresponding SDD -- SDD(I) -- a "fast" model
of the computer network and its components is used. The efficiency index of the
functioning of the junction SDD is assumed to be the average waiting time of the
calculation results characterizing both by output capacity of the network and
the quality of servicing the users.

29

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Itlﬂ \II I on a... - .-.. can...

The construction of mathematical models of decentralized dispatching for informa-
tion strategies 150 and 151 is realized using the game-theory methods. Decen-
tralized dynamic dispatching can be represented in the form of collective behavior
of N junction SDD, each of which strives to minimize the intrinsic quality index
J1(y1.y2....,yN) related to the average time the user problems are in the network.
where yi‘Yi’ 1-1, N is the $00 strategy. Inasmuch as the junction SDD have coupon
interests -- the effort to reduce the time expenditures on processing the problems
as a whole throughout the network —- the situation that arises is analogous to
gates of N people with nonzero sum. the optimalness principle in which is the Nash
equilibrium. Bach junction SDD distributes the problems coming to its own junc-
tion between the junctions N1 in its range. The SDD strategies satisfying the
Nash condition are optimal inasmuch as they lead to a stable situation in which
the 800 are in no position to decrease the time the problem spend in the net-
work by varying their own strategies.

For information strategy ISO, multi-input stochastic automate are used as the
basis for the training SDD. These automata function in random media by which we
mean the computational and comunication processes occurring in the computer net-
work. The decentralized dispatching reduces to collective behavior of N automate
A1, 1-1, N in this case:

b b . (. '. (a
A‘-ix().s().Y( ).O"'p( 11.1. )1 .

Here X are the input signals (nonbinary alphabet) representing the time the
individual problem is in the network w(t ); S is the nunber of states of the
automaton, each of which corresponds to a defined computer. The output signals Y
are the nuuber of the cormuter selected by the incoming problem. The output func-
tion ops»? is deterministic. The elements of the vector of state of the automa—
ton P(t) define- the probability of selecting the next state of the automaton at
the next point in tin. Adaptation of the SDD is achieved by varying the elements
of the vector P(t) in accordance with the Fu—MacLauren training. During the
interaction of the junction SDD. the average processing time of the problems in
the network for the SD!) under the mOSt unfavorable conditions from the point of
view of having computer resources is minimized.

For the information strategy [51, a model of decentralized dynamic dispatching is
presented which is formalized within the frnnework of the differential gene theory.
Proposing simulation of the conputer reserves by one-line Markov queueing system
(5N0), the dynamics of the average problem processing time in the comuter net-
work are described by a differential equation of the type

 

- «N m1“ 1. w-pc-
W“ A;W,' Z. —- ' '

3‘2}. 1 “'1~(’C3 Virc.’|)'
“3:11;.

under the initial conditions w(t0)-No. Each SDD(I) is characrerized by _a__s_et of

control elements arranged byelecting theﬁralue of Y1j(t)-3i It“); i,j-1.N on

satisfaction of the conditions 311(020. ... 1811(t)'1. The e ficiency criterion
1-
of the junCtion SDD assumes the form

30

POI? OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1’
13-4! Y;5(W‘W1'a")dt. an?

at am?
where T1 is the average time for sending the problem and the results of the
calculations between the i-th and the j-th junctions; w is the average problem
processing time on an individual ooaputer. The solution of the differential game
of N sun is realized both analytically and algorithmically.

The investigated models of decentralized dispatching are med as the basis for

the dynamic load distribution algorithm operating in real time [1]. For
estimation and forecasting of the dynamic characteristics of the computers in the
dispatching algorithms, procedures for determining the average waiting tion in the
queue "q and average time the problems spend in the SH0 (conputer) "s operating
mder nonsteady conditions are inplemented. In particular. the procedure for calcula-
tion and prediction of N8 is based on the expression

' 1'“ _Ws(‘)!‘ .
"5(0-8 [90) WgUM'NI-l . w; (0) sto.

Prediction of Us for any point in time consists in multiple solution of the above-
presented nonlinear differential equation under various initial conditions for
the junctions in the range of the SDI).

0n transition from the Markov models of computers to system of the H/G/l type
the basic characteristic of the state of the computer by which the control strat-
egy is formed in the SDD is- uncompleted operation of U(t) during the calculation
of which the reliability of the user information about the processing time of the
problem in the computer and the actual time for fulfillment of the problem are
considered. For priority queueing (comuter)system U(t) is deterulined by cal-
culating the busy interval.

Inasmuch as the network couputers funccion, as a rule. under conditions of varia-
tion of intensity of the problem flows, the efficiency of the SDD(I) depends on
the time of gathering information about the state of the network reserves. For
Markov nature of variation of the load at the computer input, a procedure is pre-
sented for calculating the WW period for $1 on the state of the computer. The
asynchronous principle of SI exchange. the period of which is selected directlv
in the network junction. is economically most justified.

A comparison of the proposed dispatching methods is made on a specialized
simulation model of the computer network. During the course of the experiments
it was established that the SDD(O) and SDD(I) insure reduction of the average
time the problems are in the network by 1.6 to S tines by cowarison with net-
works where there is no dispatching. The $000) decrease the value of N by com-
parison with the SDD(0) by 9-137. on the average. but they require transmissions
approximately 3 times greater than the volume of SI.

31

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
um urns Ha - at H." I

In order to improve the effect .)1 dispatching, the range of the SDD must be
limited. For SDD(0) the number of available couputers must not exceed Nl-S-6.

A comparative analysis of 500(0) and SDD(I) with respect to efficiency and coupler
ity of realization demonstrated that the range of application of SDD(0) can be
networks with limited gathering of SI. random load surges and the necessity for
rapid selection of the computer, above all. the network based on mini and micro-
comuters. The SDD(I) insure higher quality of dispatching in the presence in

the network of a network mtering service which is characteristic for networks of
medium and large couputers.

1.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Vasil'yev. v. V.; Guaryan, K. 11.; Konovalov. V. M. "Problem Dispatching
Algorithm in Computer Network," IV VSESOYUZNAYA SHKOLASEHINAR P0
WCHISLITEL'NYM SETYAM: REF. LEKTSII [Fourth All-Union Seminar on Computer
Networks: Lecture Abstracts], Part 2, Moscow, Tashkent. 1979.

Bronshteyn, 0. l. "Controlled Multistep Service System," IZV. AN SSSR. 1969.
TElGlNICHESKAYA KlBERNETIKA [News of the USSR Academy of Sciences. Technical
Cyberneticslﬁlo 2, 1969].

Col'dshteyn, B. 5. "Optimal Priority Servicing in EATS Automatic Telephone
Office Software." SISTEMY IJPRAVLENIYA SE‘IYAHI SWAZI [Commication Network
Control System]. Moscow. Nauka. 1980.

Boytsova, L. V.; Gol'dshteyn. 8. 5. "Algorithm for Calculating the Basic
Parameters of a Combined Priority Queueing System," ALCORITHY I PROGRAM
[Algorithms and Programs], No S. 1979.

32

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

METHODS OF INSURING OPERATING STABILITY OF A MESSAGE SWITCHING NEWORK

[Article by I. M. Gurevich, V. K. Denin, V. H. Chentsov and 3. Ya. Shorgin.
Moscow, pp 32-38]

Let c(V,U) be a message switching network; let V be a set of switching centers
of the network (for identification of the network subscribers with the network
centers); let U be the set of network comunication lines, [VI-n, IUI-m;
.\-||11 II he the matrix of the load presented for servicing where 1(11) is the
intensity of the flow of messages requiring transmission from junction 1 to
junction 1; i,jev and cij is the cost of one massge of the flow “11).

9.
Let V2 be the set of corresponding pairs (i.j), 1,56V and lift) V1; Vicvz;

oviv -¢; iﬁj; 14-1—9. is the breakdown of V2 into priority ciéSAes with respect
to cast of the messages.

We shall characterize the qualiﬁy of servicing the network subscribers by norms
for mandmum admissible delays 1‘ in transmission of messages of given classes
of priorﬂes and the corresponding loss norms 7:1 k of the transmitted mssages
where k-l,l. Let us isolate the two causes of lolses of messages: losses of
messages at the network entrance as a result of limiting the load sdtdtted to
the network and loss of a message (11) inside the network from limiting the
buffered memory of the network junctions.

Let t3 propose that the channel capacities of the initial network G and the
messg e flow distribution rule with respect to G are such that for V(i,j).K
TEjﬂij and message losses are absent.

We shall consider that the message switching network is subject to the effects
of information and structural disturbances, assumingsthat the information dis-

- A .- * x o
turbance t(..) is estimated by the value of ((Ijﬁvk E-lu'koij / 11)) 1001. where

"1 /\1 is the relative increase in the flow intensity X13 and Ink is aweight
coe ficient. The structural disturbance C(s) is the vector (n1,m1)'1001, where
n .1111 are the relative proportions of failed communication centers and lines of
the network. respectively.

Let'

1% (24.2)). i'{ (:(m be the magnitude of the delay, the delay norm for the
information d sturbance c(.\) for the k-th class of mssages;

33

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
PC!“ ("'I'ﬂ (AI. Ik‘l’. \ll‘l.l

Tk (6(a)), ‘l‘k (£(s)) be the magnitude of the delay. the delay norm for the
sti'uctural disturbance 1(a) for the k-th class of messages:

I: (£00)." (:00) be the magnitude of the losses. the loss norm for the
in omtion gisturbance :00 for the k-th class of messages;

:1 (6(3)). (6(8)) be the magnitude of the losses, the loss nor: for the
ctural i:l‘igturbance t(s) for the k-th message class;

(30:00). Tkj(€(s)).*kj(€(ﬁ)).*1(C(53)) be some piecewise-constant functions;
{a} be a class'1 of network control prbcedures.

we shall consider that the comications system <G,{9}> is stable with respect to
information disturbancas if for Vt*(:\)zt(!.) 20. where c*(A) is the given
maximum information disturbance, E(61}C(9‘r such that

1; (aw): i} (can) .
«gems 1? .:(¢ on).

and the system is stable with respect to structural disturbances if for
Vc*(s):c(s):0 EPJ )CES}. where c*(s) is the given maximum structural disturbance
such that

also» s f.“ (em)
I“ ‘(c (5)) s z; ‘-(c (6})

In the general case stability can be insured by two means.

A priori Method. Here the problem of insuring stability is formulated as the
problem of selecting the structure of the initial network. its channel capacities
and information distribution rules such that any admissible information and
structural disturbances do not take the quality of servicing beyond the limits of
the given norms.

For consideration of possible information disturbances the channel capacities
(cu. uEL') of the network communication lines are calculated by the matrix
A*-|:\* '. As for consideration of the structural disturbances, under the
assumption of failures of only the communications lines it is expedient to use
the following method of constructing a stable network. Let 5*(3) determine the
maximum number mm of possible allocatable communication lines. {‘1} be the set
of side sections of the graph G of the network. {.‘Ul. {302 . .... {M} m-l be the
ordering of the set of sections such that 6((M)C{M}11)-i where 5(.‘i) is the
power of the section M. let us consider the series 1091. ”02. --~. {mml and
a heuristic rule Z':<{M}.. {r02 . ..., l> of definition of the set

utU, where IU*I-n1. Here the problem no? a priori support of stability with
structural variation of c*(s) is solved by selecting the channel capacities and
the distribution rules of the communications with respect to the network

C(V. (N*)UU'), where U' is the minimum with respect to cost [two pages of the
original Russian text missing].

36

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USF. ONLY

ilere the plublcm u: optimal distrigut ion .\ in the comutlcaiiuns network is
sta red as the problem of defining POM) such that

"2“ 90.7)): 9(A.§.(A)) .

In reference [2], a decentralized algorithm is presented for insuring minimum
average cost of the messages in the communications network granting the right of
predominant servicing to the priority messages of greater cost. It must be noted
that although the algorithm [2] is constructed for a communication network without
loss of messages, it appears entirely substantiated that in the case of equality
of sizes of the buffer memory of all network junctions the algorithm of [2] in-

sures optimalness with respect to the cost criterion considering the limited
nature of the buffer memory and message losses.

Inasmuch as the algorithm of [2] does not take into account the requirement on the
magnitude of the communications delay, the following generalization of it as a
solution of the system is natural

LC“ A.“ (1)-e min .

"g Jlsl'U)’

vz‘.‘ 1', s11“:- ; (1)
. ' ’ a '

TV'W'1'-‘Zj 1%. M: <0. Mama-<0-

where i is the message transmission route: TV is the message delay in the line V;
"V is the average flow in the line V of the route; A130.) is the intensity of
the flow of mssages arriving at the junction 1 which must be transmitted to
junction :1 along the path 9.; 1* (2.) is the actual passed load; uv is the average
length of message in the line 6‘! cv is the carrying capacity of the line V;

Z is the set of paths.

Under the assumptions of reference [3], the solution of system (1) as a problem
with linear purpose function in the piecewise linear restrictions can be found
for restriction of the mode 31 (2.) to the value of H (9.) for fixed routes 2,
simultaneous determination of the routing 9. and the restrictions 1:10).

As for the algorithm [2], it is easy to see that it is easily adapted both to
the in formation and structural disturbances (not exceeding some defined value)
by successive rccalculations of the routing tables for each pair (1.1)EV2.

From the general nature of the algorithm [2] and the algorithm described by the
system (1), it follows that the given algorithm pertain to the class of
algorithms for preventing overloads. It is possible to demonstrate that if the
magnitude of the load entering the network does not exceed some critical value,
then by the traced degrees of loading of the communication lines the algorithm
[2] optimally selects the commications flow distribution plan. In the case of
the occurrence of structural and/or information overloads, the servicing
characteristics are calculated (the average delay and losses) for the routing
rules in accordance with the algorithm [2], and a comparison is made between
these characteristics and their given values. From optimalness of the algorithm

35

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
run \Is a a\ or". \‘s'k our...

[2] it follows that 11' the values of the calculated characteristics do not
correspond to the given service quality, then under the conditions of the given
overloads it is imossible to insure the required service quality. In this case
insurance of the required service quality for the most important messages with

respect to priorities (cos t) is insured by limiting the load transmitted to the
network.

Let us assume that the set V2 of corresponding pairs (1.3) is broken down into
two subsets: Vz-Vou‘v ; the messages reaching the network at the junction 1 and
addressed to the junction 1 for (1,5)evo have priority in the sense of mandatori-
ness of the given quality of servicing of the given messages. here the problem
arises of limiting the inflow of nonpriority messages to the network such that
Lnder the condition of insuring the required quality of servicing of the priority
messages the total losses in the network (both from limiting the load and from
limiting the buffer empty) will be minimal.

In reference [2]. an algorithm is proposed for limiting the load coming into the
nework with message switching which agrees with the described optimal routing
algorithm (let us note that it is possible to limit ourselves to investigation of
the pairs (1,1)6V1 only; here the load remains fixed for the pairs (1.1)6V0).

The algorithm operates as follows. First the insurance of the given quality of
servicing the messages of class V0 in the case of absence of messages of the
class V1 by using the algorithm of [2] for 1(i,j)-0 for V(i,j)6°V1 is checked.
In the case of guaranteeing the given service quality (otherwise introduction of
the reserve resources of the network is required). the admissible magnitude of
the additional load from messages of class V1 is defined which can be serviced
while maintaining the given servicing quality of class V0. This maitude is
determined by the following algorithm. In each step an initial a0 >0 is
selected (the minimum average cost of the total load transmitted to the network
per unit time), it is assumed that b(1)-0. and it is proposed that c“) is the
total load from messages of all priorities. Let n-l. In the n-th step of the
algorithm, the optical routing and load limiting algorithm is used for minimum
level so“). If the class V0 message servicing characteristics obtained here do
not satisfy the given values. then we set

(«-0 (to. (mi){ N in (M0 0‘)

t -a, .a. '3“ H2 )-.8 -$

and we proceed to the next iteration step. If the service characteristics are
satisfactory, that is, Flt-£1. "3-52, where :1. :2 are given constants, we set

on a) (MD to (u
5‘“ .af .a, .‘Ekmoa. )-,c‘ Lam

and we proceed to the next iteration step. If T-sls‘l's'l‘, ﬁ-azf'nd'. then we stop
with this step. selecting 8001) for the true value of the minimum cost of
messages transmitted to the network.

36

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

BIBLIOGRAPHY

1. Chentsov, V. . . SISTEMY RASPREDELENIYA INFORMATSII. SINTEZ STRU‘KTL'RY I
UPRAVLENIYA [Information Distribution System. Synthesis of Structure and

Control]. Moscow, Svyaz', 1980.

2. Agslarov, Ya. IL; Shorgin, S. Ya. "Optimal Comicatims Network Control
for Cost Criterion and Load Restriction," ITEIGINIKA SREDSTV SWAZI [Commits-
tions Hardware]. No 3. 1979. Set. ASU [automted control systems series].

3. Kleinrock, L. WCHISLITEL'NYYE SISTEMY S OCHEREDYAMI [Couputer System with
Queues], translated from the English, Moscow, Mir, 1979.

37

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFMLIAL use umm

METHOD OF IMPROVING THE SERVICE QUALITY ON A OIANNEL SWITCHING NE'NORK WITH
DYNAMIC CONTROL

[Article by A. Ya. Dolgoselets, N. A. Knyszeva and L. A. Nikityuk. Odessa.
pp 38-102]

Constant variation of message flows in the network with time leads to the fact

that noncorrespondence arises between the system of directing the flows and the
network structure and, consequently, the subscriber servicing quality is negatively
affected. The problem of restoring this correspondence can be solved by introdur
ing dynamic traffic control in the network. In the general case with dynamic
control in the comunications network for estimation of the state of the network
or its individual parts the information is accinulated over some period of time
and averaged- In accordance with the average values, the traffic distribution

plan in the network is varied. The variation of the distribution plan itself can
be realized by selecting the corresponding connection paths (basic and bypass).

As the criterion for estimating the traffic distribution plan from the point of
View of efficiency of the functioning of the network it is expedient to select the
quality of servicing the subscribers. In this case the plan will be considered
optimal where the minimum value of the maximum magnitude of the losses among all
pairs of corresponding subscribers is reached [1].

In the given paper a method of constructing the traffic distribution plan in the
channel switching network with explicit losses and dynamic control by the criterion
of gmranteed subscriber servicing quality is proposed. A distinguishing feature
of the proposed method is the fact that the process of forming the traffic dis-
tribution plan consists in constructing a set of plans and selecting the best of
them in the sense of the adopted criterion. Here. the statistical network
parameters are calculated in parallel. The selected plan is used on the network
during a time interval required for obtaining the next best plan in accordance
with the information about the state of the network averaged with respect to the
time interval for obtaining the plan adopted for use. Here the guaranteed level
of quality of servicing the network subscribers in different time intervals can
assume different values depending on the magnitudes of the flows averaged with
respect to the preceding time interval.

‘lhe initial data when solving the problem of determining the traffic distribution
plan are as follows:

38

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
1) The structure of the network represented by the connection matrix

B-IIB1 II where each branch 8i is characterized by the capacity c - the number
of st dard channels forming 11 -- and also the magnitude of the thieshold ‘ij
expressed in the nmber of channels inaccessible for servicing the excess

(dropped from the path of first choice) load;

2) The traffic intensity between each pair of junctions averaged with respect to
some time interval t-XIJ;

3) Restrictions on the choice of paths in the form of requirements on the maximum
number of cardsn corrections and given order of succession on the path of the junctions
of different category.

The problem of constructing the optimal traffic distribution plan by the servicing
quality criterion is formulated as follows.

Let us find

plm me: P".
(n) a.) II

where i.j-1,n, n is the number of network junctions; PR is the service quality
between the junctions i and j, which depends on the pro abilities of losses of
the basic and excess loads on the branches of the network and defined as the
ratio of the magnitudes of the load lost in the direction 1, j and the incoming
load; {M} is the set of constructed plans.

Let us introduce the following notation: P31, P21, pf§(0), Pcv(u), the losses of

i
the basic, excess load and the losses of the basic and excess loads averaged with
respect to k-plans on the 311 branch, respectively.

The proposed method of improving the subscriber servicing quality consists in
generating a converging series of traffic distribution plans with selection and
storage in each step of the plan characterized by improved quality, that is.
smaller values of max ng by comparison with the corresponding characteristic
of the stored plan.

For solution of the indicated problem an algorithm is proposed which is the
iteration procedure of the following type.

Step 0. The initial values of the loss probabilities in the branches for the
basic and excess loads, for example, zero. are given. The iteration number k is
taken equal to zero.

Step 1. The matrices of the losses in the branches for the basic and excess loads
averaged for the number of iterations are calculated

‘D‘l

P..- «again/(“n.pg"‘z.)-[§p;ui/u~n.

where Pg!(l), P" (i) are the losses in the branches for the basic and excess

loads 0 ained 14 the z—th iteration.

39

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
a was v- s on 9.... was.— 0. nu-

Step 2. For each source-junction of the network, a "tree“ of the first q optimal
paths with resrect to the adopted weight parameter to all remaining junctions of

the network satisfxing the requirements on the path organization is constructed.

The values of P1 (k) and P1 9(")(k) of the averaged loss probabilities in

the branches of he basic and xcess loads are taken as the weight parameters.

The superposition of all of the "trees" forms the next traffic distribution plan
H(k).

Step 3. The probabilities of load losses are calculated: basic P? (k) and
excess ng(k) on the branches of the network by the method described in [2].

Step 4. The probabilities of load losses with respect to lines for each pair of
network junctions P?J(k) are calculated.

Step 5. If k-O, the obtained plan and its statistical characteristics are stored.
If kfo, the following condition is checked

where P is the corresponding quality characteristic of the servicing of the sub-
scribers for the stored plan. If the condition is satisfied, the distribution
plan M(k) obtained in the k-th iteration together with the corresponding
statistical characteristics is stored. If the obtained and stored plans have
identical values of the servicing quality characteristic. it is necessary to
compare the probabilities of losses by lines of successive magnitude.

Step 6. The following condition is checked

nunlp“ (.)'-P“(:34)1<e.
t.‘ I ”l

where s is a small number given in advance. If the condition is satisfied. the
transition to step 7 is made. Otherwise the iteration number k is increased by

one, and transition is made to step 1.

Step 7. End of operation of the algorithm.

Let us demonstrate that the presented iteration process is converging. Actually,
since

ﬁw’m - [; p""’(..n]/(m) . [‘3 1‘9““) '
.p"“’(..n.[ b'<o-:'>"“'u~ 91/04).

we obtain
- spiﬂ ‘ ‘

IP m-P "do-1)!s[l§°(:)~f3‘m(c 0|] A...”

40

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFF“ 1 \l. I'Slvf ONIA

The latter expression can be made as small as one might like for sufficiently
large k. As a result of the fact that for the same structure of the network the
procedure for constructing optimal paths gives similar or coinciding plans Mk)
and M(k-l) for sufficient lxnclose values of the average losses in the branches.
36(find that_ the matrices P (k) and P“(k) are close to the corresponding matrices

k-l) and ”(k-l). In the latter case with sufficiently large k the following
condition will be satisfied:

|§"(o~§"(x-4)|< e,

where HAII denotes any matrix norm. From the last inequality, satisfaction of
the following inequality comes directly:

M’r- I9?J (I0— Pan-1)] < e,
“-1

Analogously. i tis possible_ to demonstrate the correctness of the corresponding
estimates for the matrices P“(k) and PCP“) (k).

The rate of convergence of the itera_t_ion process depends on the closeness of the
elements of the matrices PCP(k) and P(k), that is, the choice of the initial

values of the loss probabilities of the basic and excess loads on the network
branches.

The use of the loss probabilities of the basic and excess loads on the network
branches averaged for the nunber of iterations has a smoothing effect on the

oscillatory phenomenon of the process and, consequently. increases the conver-
gence rate.

It is obvious that the presented algorithm pertains to the class of directional
sorting algorithm for finding the local optimum.

Program were written for the Yes-1033 computer in PL/I language for the given
algorithm. The approximate time spent on obtaining the best plan for the network
containing an the order of 30 junctions is about 120 minutes.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

,_.
o

Yukhno. V. T. "Problem of Optimal Qaannel Distribution in Communication
Networks with Distributing Frame Switching." author's review of candidate's
dissertation, Odessa. 1976.

[9
o

Parshenkov. 3!. Ya.; Sergeyeva. 0. F. "Iteration Methods of Calculating the
Statistical Quality Parameters of the Servicing of a Channel Switching
Network." POSTROYENIYE USTROYSTV UPRAVLENIYA SEWAMI SWAZI [Construcing
Commications Network Control Units]. Moscow, Nauka. 1977.

(.1

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
run urns nu. mu. emu.-

OVBRLOAD PROTECTION IN CHANNEL-SWITCHED NETNORKS
[Article by V. H. Dubrovinskiy. Kiev, pp 42-é5]

During operation of a network, the intensity of the incoming load to the network
can increase. If the increase in intensity exceeds the calculated version of

the incoming traffic, the network equipment overloads. Since an equipment over-
load has a negative effect on the quality of servicing the traffic. when design-
ing the network it is necessary to consider operation of the network with overloads.

Let us consider the diagram depicted in Figure l.

 

. Figure 1

In the given diagram three flows emanate from the junction 1: Y1, Y2 and Y3.
Here, the flow Y1 is under the most favorable conditions. for three group:
participate in servicing it: 1, 2 and 3. Flow Y3 is under the most (sic) favor—
able conditions. Only group 3 participates in servicing flow Y3. The number of
channels in this grOup is determined reckoning that the resultant losses for flow
Y3 will be equal to the given loss norm, that is. 3(3)-B (3)-P. (Here 33(3) are
the individual losses for the flow Y in the group3.) e resultant losses for
flows Y1 and Y2 defined by the formu as

B“). b. 8“.) 5’“),
5"‘- 5‘.” 5‘3.

are found to be less than P here.

(1)

 

*[Translator's note: probably should be least favorablr.]

42

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFK‘IAI. USU-Z ONLY

Accordingly, with an increase in intensity of any flow the flow Y3 will experience

the greatest losses. The flows Y1 and Y2 have significant advantages in this case
(these advantages are sustained even by comparison with the network withoutalcornarive
routing: where losses for all flows are taken equal to P). Thus. the problem of
increasing the stability of networks with bypasses with respect to overloads

reduces to protection of the traffic of the last choice group with an increase
in intensities of other flows.

At the present time three methods of protecting the traffic of the last choice
group are known.

1.5egregarion of a separate first choice group for the given traffic (that is.
creation of the advantages characteristic of flows Y1 and Y2 also for flow Y3).

2. An increase in the number of channels (within the limits of economy obtained
from introducing bypasses) in the last choice group.

3. Use of dynamic control means with restriction of the load thrown in the last
choice group. ‘

when using the first method on reutings formiﬂs last choice paths. two groups
are organized: the first choice group (NC) designed to service the route load
itself; the last choice group.

The order of throwing the load to the last choice group for the investigated
system depicted in Figure 1 is illusrrated in Figure 2 for this case.

 

Figure 2

In the given case the resultant losses for the flow itself will be determined
by the formula 8(3)-Bc 33(3). Here the flow will be protected no worse than

flow Y2.
The number of channels in the third raute groups in this case will be calculated
as follows. For satisfaction of the required quality of servicing the flows Y1.

Y2. and Y3 it is necessary that the losses in the last choice group 3 be selected
beginning with the following conditions following from (1):

43

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
fl). \II‘I I‘ CI‘I. tail. ‘ll‘lcl

The third relation is always satisfied on satisfaction of the first two.

Since the numger of Ehannels in the first and second groups and. consequently,
the ratio V Iv2 2)m2 are found by definition of NC, in this case

8,3-(PV3/H (m2(3)V2/v2(2)m2, and the number of channels “c must be selected
considering the condition

U)

I; "\2 Va
ﬁ:> ibf""

"la

By the known N1. N2, N and 833 it is also possible to define the number of
channels in group S.

The investigated procedure permits insurance of almost identical servicing of

each of.the flows coming into the network without introducing structural redundancy.
However. the application of this method encounters difficulties in a number of
cases which are connected with complexity of organizing a supplementary routing
between the switching offices.

The second method provides for introducing structural redundancy. For calculation
of the addition to the last choice groups the necessary initial data are as
follows:

The admissible magnitude (k) of the increase in total intensity of flows coming
into the system with a common last choice group;

The magnitude of the admissible losses (83) for the flow itself and the last
choice group with an increase in intensity of any other flow.

For the given values. the addition is calculated in two steps:

The losses are determined for the flow itself under conditions of increasing the
intensities of each of the other flows by an amount for which the total intensity
of the flows coming into the system will increase by k times. and the E-th flow

is discovered. an increase in the intensity of which causes the greatest losses
for the flow itself;

The addition to the last choice group is determined for which the losses for the
flow itself will not exceed the value of 38 under conditions of increasing the

intensity of the E-th flow to the value obtained in step I. In contrast to
procedure I for increasing the resistance of the network to overloads which only

#4

FOR OFTWCIAI.USEIDNLN
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

creates identical servicing conditions for all the flows. the second procedure
permits effective protection of each flow. Thus, whereas with a simultaneous
increase in intensity of several (or all) flows the total intensity of the flows
coming into the system increases by no more than- k times. the losses of each of
the flows in the general case will not exceed 88.

The third method of protecting the flaw of the last choice group itself provides
for using dynamic flow control means. At the present tine many different
mthods of dynamic control have been created. One of the methods giving rise to
the greatest practical interest is the modified Granzhan method in which the
threshold x58 is established in the last choice group consisting of N channels.
For calls of the excess flows, the given group is considered blocked if the
mmber of busy channels in it qzx. The application of this method permits
efficient protection of the flow itself. However, when using it, difficulties
arise connected with selecting the effective value of the threshold taking into
account both the sizes of the groups and the situation develOped in the network.

It must be noted that the effectiveness of each of the investigated uethods of
increasing the resistance of the network to overloads has still not been finally
established at the present time. This arises primarily from the absence of limits
for the admissible worsening of quality of servicing of the flows with overload.
the specific statistics of the increase in flow intensity in the networks with
bypasses and also the absence of a technical-economic analysis of methods.

45

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
IND“ urn-u ans. can. "nah!

PROBLEM OF CHANNEL DISTRIBUTION IN THE DIGITAL DATA TRANSMISSION NETWORK
FOR RAILROAD TRANSPORTATION

[Article by 2h. Dusenbayeva. Alma-Ate. pp 65-67]

The introduction of automated control systems in railroad transportation has given
rise to the development of the existing digital data transmission network (PDT).
The nunber of channels of the switched network has been increased, the channel

switching means have been improved, and the volume of automatically transmitted
data has been increased.

A change has also taken place in the network structure. for the flow routings
have changed. New channel switching centers and stations having large informa-
tion exchange with the conputer center for which nonswitchable channels are
required have arisen. As a result, the carrying capacity of the switchable net-
work has been enlarged, and the matter of stations serviced by this network has
been increased. The information subject to transmission over the network is also
differentiated with respect to urgency.

Further development of the commications network for the automated railroad
transportation control system will take place by joint use of switchable networks
operating by the method of channel switching (KR). message switching (KS) and
packet switching (KP). Under these conditions the most important operating index

is its reliability which can be placed in correspondence to the probability of
connectedness of the graph depicting the investigated network. In the given case

the problem of constructing the optimal network with respect to reliability is
solved by constructing a graph with a given nuaber of apexas and sides in which
the probability of connectedness reaches the maumum value.

When designing a communications network for an automated railroad transportation
control system, another approach is selected: namely. the network structure is
known in general, and it is only necessary to distribute the comication channels
optimally under the condition of satisfying a previously given reliability.

For this purpose let us represent the structure of the connunications network as a
fully connected nuclem. the nodes of which are the switching centers. and the
remaining nodes. which are the subscribers. connected in some way to the nodes of
this nucleus. Here it is possible to state the problem of determining the optimal
umber of nodes of the nucleus.

46

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The probability of a random n-apex graph Gn (t) is defined in reference [I]. and
the probability that the random graph 6(n, m) is connected is defined in [2].

In reference [3]. the network is depicted by the graph G“ with probability of
existence of any side equal to p.

However, in a real network another characteristic is more iuportant: the proba-
bility of the existence of paths between arbitrarily selected junctions A and B
which corresponds to the value of P“ (G‘.l ). Analogous characteristics (the prob-
ability that the message will get from junction A to junction 8) were obtained
for the KS network -- Pawn ).

In the given case a study is made of an information network operating in the KS

and the KP mode, for which the probability that the message will get through P
(n,‘I) is defined. Then for determination of the initial assigning graph, the
existing network is analyzed. the gralitation matrix and quality characteristics

of the function of this network are found. For optimal channel distribution in the
investigated network. the assigning graph corresponding to this network has a

curve which will be called redundant.

On this redundant curve it is possible to select one side each, obtaining the
graph of the corresponding network insuring the same information flows. Consider-
ing the cost index, the longest side of the redundant graph is excluded.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Stepanov. V. Ye. "Codainatorv Algebra and Random Graphs," TEORIYA
VEROYATNOSTEY I YEYE PRIMENENIYE [Probability Theory and Its Application],
Moscow. Nauka, Vol 14, ho 3.1969.

2. Erdesh, P.; Spencer, J. VEROYAI'NOSTNYYE .‘IETODY KONBINATORIKI [Probability
Pbthods of Combinatorial Analysis]. Moscow. Mir. 1976.

3. Bogomaz. V. P. "Some Problem of Optimizing Information Networks,"
OPTIMIZATSIYA NA CRAFAKH I SETYAKH [Optimization on Graphs and Networks].

Novos ibi rsk,19 78.

107

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
MIR UFI‘“ IAI. “at. URL!

SUITO‘ING NUTROL IN RAILROAD TRANSPORTATION LONG DISTANCE TELEPHONE SERVICE
[Article by S. L. Dyufur. Yu. V. Yurkin, Leningrad, pp 47-59]

The railroad transportation long distance service network is separated
from the national network. It encompasses almost the entire territory of the
Soviet Union and corresponds to the railroad network in its configuration. The
necessity for this special network is dictated by the responsible role of rail-
roads as the primary transport system on which high requirements are imposed with
respect to insuring large volumes of freight and passenger hauling and train
traffic safety.

At the present time the development of the network is taking place in the direc-
tion of complete automation of settirg up calls. Accordingly, the problem of selecting
the network structure, the method of controlling the network and optimal value

of the quality indices of the servicing of calls have important significance.

The railroad transportation commications network has the following characteris-
tic features as compared to the national long distance commications network:

lhe line loads are small and are within the limits of l to 15 crimes;

The network Operates with calls on the long distance channels with explicit losses
and repeated calling where the probability of tall losses has an aVerage value of
0.2 to 0.3. At the same time the probability of load losses is close to zero.

The study of subscriber opinions demonstrates that losses in the peak load hour
of 202 of the calls are considered to correspond to good quality of service as

a result of which no significant reduction in the probability of call losses is
planned in the long range forecasting of network development;

The network ha predominantly a single-route structure, but the necessity for
increasing its viability has raised the question of broad application of alternative
rautlngs:

The lO-step switching equipment is primarily used on the network; the crossbar
system has been partially introduced. The introduction of quasielectronic and
electronic system is planned in the future.

In the given phase of development of the network it is expedient to me the static
control method. As the calculated loss probabilities with respect to calls are

68

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

reduced and mdern switching equipment is introduced in the nemork, conditions
will be created for transition to the dynamic method of network control. An
expedient number of bypass routes and the number of branches in each route are
being substantiated. ‘

0n different network levels there are conditions of application of hierarchical
and symmetric methods of constructing the network. The limits of expediency of
each of the methods must be defined considering the costs of the channels, the
incoming loads and the probabilities of losses with respect to cells. Figure 1
shows graphical relations permitting qualitative estimation of the lindts of
applicability of the symmetric and hierarchical methods of network construction.
The coefficient F is the ratio of the total cost of the channels of hierarchical
structure to the total cost of channels of a symmetric network. The argument h
is the cost of one channel of the network branches with respect to the channel
cost in a high-use group for hierarchical structure of the network. Curve 1
characterizes the case where the load coming to each branch of the network is

3 times less than the load coming to the high-use group; curve 3 is the case
where the given loads are as many times greater than the load on the high-use
channel group; curve 2 shows all of the incoming loads identical. For F>1. the
symmetric structure has the economic advantage.

For a real railroad transportation network, families of configurations were
discovered during the analysis process. and the costs of each version were deter-
mined with respect to consolidated indices Q-K£?T. where K are the capital expend-
itures.3 are the operating expenses, T is the return time on investments. In
Figure 2 as an example we have the relative cost of each version of the network
structure (symmetric and hierarchical methods) as a function of the ratio of the
branch lengths d. The study confirms the conclusion previously drawn [1] of
expediency of application of the symmetric structure in the majority of cases on
the railroad transportation network.

The intensities of the incoming flows are determined, and by measurements over a
long period of time it was discovered that a significant increase in them with
respect to the established level has law probability. 0n the other hand. loads
caused by damage to part of the branch channels or complete failure of the network
branches are possible. Simulation has demonstrated that the symmetric networks
tolerate overloads connected with damage to part of the branch channels better

than the hierarchical network; in the case of total damage to a branch. the network
is in practice blocked as a result of an avalanche increase in the repeated calls.
In this case the bypasses muSt be forbidden.

The published research results provide a basis for assuming that in the case of
small loads and high use of the network channels, control methods with limited

waiting at the call generating point and with threshold for tandem loading will
have an advantage with respect to the strategy of servicing over direct groups.

b9

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
utlﬂ Qt. nus no... \--.. u.-.-.

   

Figure 1 Figure 2
Key:

1' QaX‘nm/therarchy
2. er ans:
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Dyufur, S. L. "Application of Variable Routing of Calls on a

Long Distance Automatic Railroad Communications Network," AVTOMATIKA,
TELEMEIGMNIKA I SVYAZ' (Automation. Telemechanics and Communications].

No 3, 1970.

50

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

(IJNTROL ALCORITHB‘S AND CARRYING CAPACITY OF MTGINC SYSTEIG
[Article by V. A. Yershov, Moscow, pp 69-53]

Effective estimation of the operating quality of automatic switching system
including two functionally complex subsystem -- the control swaystem and switch-
ing subsystem itself -- is impossible without joint analysis of them and a system
approach to the given problem. This is manifested especially clearly in prospec-
tive automatic switching systems with control based on a computer where the method
of processing the control information is determined by the call set-up

algorith onwhich.in turn, depends on the method of finding the connecting paths in
the system.

Let us consider the class of path selection algorithms in an arbitrary multilink
switching system (KS). which we shall define as follows. Let Cc“) be a random
(equilitigium) selection algorithm for a free segment of the path in the link i

and G be the ordered selection algorithm for a segment of the path in the
link . Then ' -'
(s) Q) .
G-[Gc ,C, Iggy, ten, nun-1}, (1)

where the z-set of links of K5 is a path selection algorithm in KS, for which a

random choice is used in the zz-link, and ordered selection of the path segments.
in the zl-links.

The mat detailed study was made of the influence of the algorithl {CCU-”162}
representing the random path selection algorithm in the KS, on the carrying
capacity. The algorithm {6},” H61}. which is the ordered selection algorithm.
has been studied appreciably less in theoretical respects. The algorithm of the
more general form defined by (l), were studied only by statistical simulation of
the operation of the KS on a computer.

Let us consider the calculation of the capacity of a multilink KS when using
algorithm of the type of (l). The basis for the approximate mathematical model
is the relations used in the separate loss method (m) [1]. According to the NRP.
the general loss probability with respect to calls p and its components in the KS
operating in the grow finding mode (GI) are determined from the conditions:

p-Pgoph (2)

51

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USI-I ONLY

95' (Hm-p) Sam-3%) '
“FF-41's It?” emu-‘53) (3)

Pf'f'l £104 3%). (4)
Kr!
K'TT I

where p is the probability of losses with respect to calls as a result of
internal blocking in the KS; Pv is the probability of losses with respect to calls
as a result of all of the outputs of the hunting route being busy; v is the
number of outputs on the hunting route; Y is the intensity of the serviced
load on the huntig routing; K1 is the number of switchboards of the first KS

link; ”b' uv are the load screening coefficients assumed to be equal to the
following, respectively:

rt'l'Pd 3 (5)

]w- mom. (6)
The magnitude of the effective availability d is determined from the expression:
d-(i-rnugY, ”(mayo/x“ (7)

where 1 is the probability of blocking of the routing output; Y1 is the load
intensity serviced by one switchboard of the first link KS; n is the proportion of

the serviced load of the first link switchboard routed on the investigated
routing.

For solution of the system of equations (2)-(7). it is necessary to know the load Y
serviced bv a group of v lines, the structural parameters of the KS, the interlinh
cnmsamnmxtion law given by the graph of the paths between the entrance and exit
andthe probability w. The value of 3 depends on the above-indicated parameters

and also the algorithm for selecting the path segment in each link.

Let us find the probability 1. For this purpose let us consider how the load on
the KS links is distributed during random and ordered hunting. Let us introduce the
following notation. Let Yr be the load caused by one switchboard of the link r;
y(r,l)(r+l,t) be the load serviced by one line connecting the switchboard 2 of

link r to the switchboard t of link r+l, where r-l.z-l. t-l,kr, t-1,mr. During
randow arming in the link r we shall consider that

‘1(=.¢)(xo4.e)‘Y‘/'”" (8)

For ordered hunting in link r, beginning with line 3, the distribution y(r,l)
(r+1,t) will be given as follows. If

Az'Yi/(I'Em, Hz». (9)

then

52

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

10.0mm)”Jet-“‘0‘ 5:“ "1» (10)

where
{5.5.1,...,m;.4,.... o-i , if ' 5 ‘1
L-"mep 1‘ ,.1 '

Let W(r,l)(r+l,t) be the probability that the side R(r,l)(r+l.t) of the graph
of the paths between the entrance and exit of the system is busy. Then, if we
assune that

Vanna.» ' Vacuum . (11)

then the probability graph obtained in this case determines the probability n
for the adapted path selection algorithm.

The problem changes insignificantly if KS operates in the GI mode with several
attempts to set up a call. In this case, only the expression for the

probability Pb changes. It is possible to show that for v attempts to set
up a call the probability of blocking will be:

P -6"). I [’1 [(mt'd3)'J°Il
b _‘ I

n 90
d:) 1-21' [21. m A 5;—
:Mnrnoi ‘ (12)

 

 

 

where Y: is the load caused by a group of nz lines; nz. m are the number of inputs
and outputs of the switchboard of the link 2: dV is the effective availability of
the K5 for u efforts to set up a call; [at]z is the probability that "on:
lines will be busy simultaneously in v switchboards of the link 2.

Let us illustrate the proposed method of calculating losses in the KS in the
example of a three-link KS operating in the GI mode with ordered path finding
algorithm. The investigated KS has the following structural parameters:

nl-ml-n -m3-k -h-l8. nz-mE-kl-k3 -20, n-l/18. For the ordered algorithm the
probability of blocking t e output of the KS will be defined by the graph, the
probabilities of a busv on the sides of which are found from (9) to (11).
Considering the configuration of the graph (see the figure) for the probability a

we have:

"t
"D. ("‘1' w (1.!)(2.w)X ' “(twat)“ - (13)

53

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
to“ U)?“ IAI. use. URL!

The results of theoretical calculations of the 103s probability with respect to
HR? (equations (2)-(7). (12))and the results of statistical simulation for the
ordered hunting algorithm and all links of the K5 are presented in the table.
The results of the statistical simulation are taken from [2].

YIv I38! P... -

0.603 0,0ns 0.0120 3 0.0024
0.702 0.0420 0.0350 3 0.0038 (4;)
0.735 0.0541 70.0542; 0.0004
0.762 0.0022 0,0024 3 0,0066
0.705 0.1289 0.1134 3 0.0079

——————-——_—__

 
  

(-1 I}

Key:
a. HR?
b. MOD

Comparing theoretical data with the statistical simulation data, it is possible

to note good agreement of them. Some overestimation of the data obtained by the
method of separate losses can be explained by the fact that during the calculation
the fact that the calculated loads are of a smoothed nature faikul nabetaken into
account [1]. Good agreement of the theoretical data and the statistical simula-
tion data is also obtained in cases where the number of efforts to establish a

connection is limited to the value of v.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Yershov, V. A. KOFNL'TATSIYA NA INTECML'NOY TSIFRDVOY SETI SWAZI
[Switching in an Integrated Digital Communications Network], Moscow, Svyaz',
1978.

2. Rahman Khan, H. M. "Call Packing in a 3-Stage Clos Network," Thesis for the
degree of doctor of philosophy, Univ. of Strathclyde. Glasgow, 1975.

510

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PROBLEPS 0P DESIGNING DEVELOPED NETWORKS 0P courcrrvs-usz COMPUTER CENTERS
IN THE DIALOG mus

[Article by Yu. P. Zaychenko, Kiev. pp 53-57]

Among the problems of designing networks of V‘l'sKP [Collective-Use Couputer
Centers] and data transmission systems. an important role is played by the prob-
lem of topologic design, as a result of which the locations of the V'l‘leP, con-
centrators and multiplexers must be determined. the general communications network
structure synthesized, and its characteristics defined. The long duration of the
period of creation of the VtsKP network and also the variation of a nutter of
initial design parameters in the time interval from development to introduction
determine the necessity for transition from traditional static network design
problems to dynamic ones.

In the dynamic problem it is necessary to find the plan for development of the
V'l‘sKP network and determine the sequence of structures of the developed network
for which maximum effect from its use will be insured.

Dynamic Problems of Designing Centralized Networks

Let us consider the statement and mathematical model I of the dynamic problem of
designing centralized networks.

Given: the set x={ F. j-l,n is the subscribers of the network -- the sources of
probleus; the geographic coordinates of each subscriber are {5 .w 1; the predic-
tion of the variation in demand for information-computation opera ions (IV) is

h (t), t€[to,‘r], where to.‘l‘ are the times of beginning and ending operations

0 creating the network; Cpmcﬂi. 3). Ctrms(t,h) are the forecasts of variation
in cost of information processing and transmission, respectively, with the course
of time; the number of steps in creating the network is K; capital investments
are 'dk allocated for creating the network in the k-th step k-1.K. It is necessary
to determine the plan for network development and find the series of structures
91’ D2, .... Dk for which the following is insured:

um: éHQ(D£/Di-‘) (1)

55

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0F"! lkl l'hi‘ NINA

mder the conditions

“emu/DH)‘ W i L1 . {-1.

Key' 1 alloc (1 . (2)
. . l

£:(DE)‘ h;'((t i),- j'ﬁv (3)
Key: 1. req -

"0(Di/Di;l)'Ha(Dg-g)‘ AHa (Di/DIM) . U.)

Mm): f}, k“; (on.

where Hawk/Dbl) is the total volume of IVR performed by the network in the k-th

step; "swig/Dbl) are the required capital investments on converting from the

Dk-l structure to the Dk structure; ha?“ ), hawk: are the required and actual
t

auﬂmated volume of IVR of the j-th s scr er n e k-th atep, respectively,
j-l.n.

In order to solve the dynamic problem (l)-(6) a basic recurrent relation was found.
and a calculation algorithm was developed that uses dynamic programing [l].

A more general statement of the dynamic problem (model 2) is also possible, in
which the general means of creating the network H: are given. and it is required
that thsy b8 distributed in the best way between the steps and the series of struc-

tures D , D . ..., D2 be Eomd for which (1) goes to the minimum under the condi-
tions 1 1

{E‘wm mm Wt.

A two-level dynamic programing algorithm has been devel ed for the dynamic model
2: the optimal distribution of means among the steps (11?; is found on its upper
level, and on the lower level is the optimal distribution within the step between
the correspoading VtleP and centralized communications networks. Thus, an embedded
dynamic programming process is used to solve dynamic problem 2.

Dynamic Problems of Centralized Network Desigt

In contrast to centralized VTsICP networks. distributed networks are characterized
by complexity. multiconnectedness of structure, uniqueness of paths of flow dis-

tribution. The problems of analysis and synthesis of networks of this class are
described in term of the "multiproduct flows."

Let us consider the dynamic model of the desim of the structure of a distributed
network.

Given: the matrix of request H(k)-Hh1 (10”. hi (k) is the required magnitude of
information exchange among the network iunctions { and j in the k-th step; v1

is the relative cost benefit from information exchange between junctions i and j;
H(k-l) is the network structure in the (k-1)-st step which is characterized by
the presence of effective communication channels (i.j)¢M(k-1). their carrying
capacities d1 (k-l) and achieved output capacity of the V'I'sKP -- "1(k-l).
Required: to find the matched plan for development of all W510 and the structure
of the intercenter SPD Mk). for which the maximun effect E from using the network

56

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in the k-th step is insured with a restriction on the allocated capital investments
wk alloc' The mathematical model of this problem has the form

M, E(Ha(l))-mnan z". z; a]. t‘; (nm/ Mil-1)) (5)

under the conditions
510): £2? (4; (6)
7:31.3‘. :(ﬂsn (g) (7)

“(Home 4» Zc “ﬁr? who 4)»

(3)
'wmﬂhét'! (“W/HU- 0): V i “of,

Key: 1. trans; 2. alloc . 3. process

where Cipr°°°55(1¥(k)/1h(k-l)) are the required expenditures for increasing the

output capacity 0 the “SK? to the magnitude of E1(k); Ctr3“3(M(k)/H(k-l)) are
the expenditures on increasing the carrying capacity of the channel (r, 1);
115 is the specific labor intensiveness of handling the traffic “11'

As a result of analysis of the model (S)-(8) it was established that in contrast
to the model (l)-(4), for model (5)-(8) the condition of sdditiveness is not sat-
isfied. This excludes the possibility of using the method of dynamic progranuung.
Inasmuch as in full. the problem (5)-(8) cannot be solved strictly. the
following simplifying assusptions are introduced for its solution:

1) The principle of priority in development of the network is introduced which
ueans that during synthesis of the developed network. the appearance of only
those communication lines which must he used also in the final topology of the net-

work is permitted;

2) In each k-th srep not all of the centers are developed, but only some subset
of them Y(k).

The method of solving the dynamic problem (5)-(8) includes two procedures.

Procedure 1 consists in determining the subset of VTs [computer centers] which
must he developed in the k—th step Y(k) and finding the traffic haj(k), transition
of which wit 1 inSure the greatest effect. For this purpose, the exponent vlj/C"
is used where Vi the effect from transmission of the traffic h , c1 is the
sum of the expenditures on transmission and processing of the trafﬁc1 ht? . Then
the perimeter expenditures N1(k) on development of the i-th VTsKP and the value

of "(k)'2 “N1(k) are determined.

Procedure 2. The remains of the means for development of the SPD are determined
-- "5'3“5 - after which. using the values faund for (hi. (k)}. we solve the prob-
lem of optimal selection of the carrying capacity (VPS) jby the criterion of the

trans
minimum C: or T man

57

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
run Ufa-n Ina. u-u. nu...

The presence of undefined initial data and also several criteria in the network
design problems determine the expediency of using the dialog mode. The applica-
tion of the dialog mode insures the possibility of combining powerful mathematical
uethods and unformalized knowledge of the designer in a single process. For
realization of the dialog mode, a dialog system was developed for topologic optiud-
zation of networks DIATOS [2] based on the DESK-6 computer and the UOOGI graphical
display.

The system software consists of functional and support subsystems and a control

program. The functional subsystems include the optimization subsystems, sub-
systems for analysis, correction and input-output. The optimization subsystem

includes operating programs for optimal location of the VTsKP and KB, optimization
of the network topology, and so on; the analysis subsystem permits calculation of
the basic operating indices of the network, the correction subsystem offers the
possibility of introducing changes into the outgoing and intermediate data and
also the dynamic structure using a light pencil.

The interaction between the designer and the system is realized using the system
input language.

The DIATOS system permits realization of the interactive mode when solving dynamic
VTsK? network design problems, significantly expanding the possibilities of the
operating optimization programs. In particular, the following problem is investi-
gated.

Let it be required to determine the optimal plan for the development of a central-
ized network in model 2 wheregthe capital investments wt are variable, and let it
ze.;::essary to find max(l/K)ﬁ_1da(Dk/Dk_1)-max Emean under the condition

Both criteria 8 an and W, are opposite with respect to effect, and it is
necessary to figs a compromise solution satisfying both criteria simultaneously.
The procedure for finding the compromise solution in the interactive mode consists

in the following.

i. Let us determine the range of possible values of ”E: [wu1n, "max]'

2. Let us give the initial value of w -w x’ let us solve problem 2 with respect
to one criterion wax Enean(w)t and fin cﬁé values of (Emean(°)‘ Ho).

3. Being given the admissible discount an and setting w -Uo--H, we again solve
the problem with respect to one criterion 3:: Ewes“, and let us determine the
pair of values {Emean(1)' w:(1)}. 1

6. Analyzing these values, the designer makes the decision either to continue
the optimization process or curtail it. As a result of repetition of steps 3, 4.

a compromise curve is constructed in the plane of the criteria Emean and "5.
On this curve, using some additional information (for example. the condition

=Emean/)N:-min). the designer finds the most appropriate point.

58

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

0n the basis of the proposed algorithms for solving dynamic problems, programs

for designing the developed networks of VTs (models 1 and 2) on the BESM—6 have
been developed which were used to solve some of the practical problems. In

particular, the application of a dynamic model when designing the Latvian SSR

network made it possible to increase the average network output capacity by 111
as compared to the static model.

On the whole, realization of the proposed dynamic models permits solution of a
theoretically new class of network design problems in which the initial data and

parameters are variable. and the use of the interactive mode insures the possibil-
ity of considering the multicriterial nature of these problems.

BI BLIOGRAPHY

1. Zaychenko, Yu. P. "Dynamic Problem of Controlling VTs Network Development."
UPRAVLYAYUSHCHIYE SISTEMY l HASHINY [Control Systems and Machines],
No 6, 1978.

2. Zaychenko, Yu. P.; Kondratova, L. P.; Pechurin, N. K. "Dialog System for
Designing the Structure of Collective-Use Computer Center Networks."
UPRAVLYAYUSHCHIYE SISTEMY I MASHINY. No 3, 1979.

59

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
PC)“ Ufl‘lLlAl. hat. \DIVLI

AN APPROACH to OPTIMIZING THE STRUCTUR£ OF A lARGE-SCALE DATA TRANSMISSION NETWORK
[Article by G. P. Zakharov and V. V. Lokhmotko. Leningrad, pp 57-61]

The traditional approach to the solution of the problem of structural optimization
of a large-scale PD [data transmission] network on arbitrary weighted graphs turns
out to be in practice unrealizable because of the absence of sufficient decomposi-
tion experience and limited possibilities of the computer equipment used. A method
of automatic calculation of the structure of a large-scale PD network in the class
of uniform and regular graphs is proposed which permits significant reduction of
the size of the model and realistic optimization of a large network without losses
to the basic qualitative properties.

A characteristic feature of the proposed approach which considers a PD network in
the form of a set of two subsystems (delivery of messages and technical mainten-
ance) consists in the possibility of coordinating the economic indices of the net—
work. its structural parameters and also the probability-time characteristics of
the processes of delivering messages and technical maintenance within the framework
of a single mathematical model, which permits recommendation of it not only for
selecting the hardware for equipment of the network and topological optimization

in the initial design phases, but also when solving the problems of structural
network control.

The initial data for the calculation are as follows:

N -— the number of terminal stations of the network (0?) with a breakdown by
type;

A; - the specific intensity of the outgoing traffic from the OP of the C-th type;
v - information aging intensity;
V -- volume of message:

a. w -- junction and network load closure coefficients reflecting the nature of
uniform gravitation between 0?;

kk, ky - the coefficients of the efficiency of use of the communications channel
(is) and switching center (UK) (concentrator);

60

FOR 0F11C1A1.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

21. z -- dimensions of the rectangle approximating the territory;

2
p -- types of concentrators and UK distinguished by output capacity {61}.
cost (c1) and reliable indices (availability factor {kn} and recovery
intensity {aini

q -- types of KS distinguished by PD speed {C }, the coefficients. {a I and {b1}
of the cost function of the line equipment and also the reliability ndices
n‘rj} and {dj};

g -- types of technical maintenance centers (rs'm) distinguished by fmctional
accessories and annual expenditures on maintenance {eY}.

The dependence of the KS reliability on length kn“) is proposed.

It is required that the reduced expenditures function f. taking into account both
capital expenditures of introduction of the network K and operating expenditures 3
be minimized:

n-C'K 93 '. III-tn
(1)

on satisfaction of the restrictions on the average time ‘1' and probability of
timely delivery of messages Q. In particular, it is necessary to determine:

The number of steps in the network hierarchy (R):
‘l'ne type of structure, types of UK and K5 in each step;
Number of UK (n), KS -(n) and rare - (h) in each step.

It is proposed that the integral model of the network structure be represented
in the form of a set of three functionally distinguished models.

1. Models of the estimate of the probability-time characteristics of the PD
network for different switching techniques [1,2,3 and so on], giving the
analytical function T(".u. “r. d. kJO) and Q(X,u,v, kr' d. 150) where X and u
are the intensity of the incoming flow and intensity of servicing the UK (KS).
respectively.

2. Models of estimating the efficiency of technical maintenance permitting
determination of the probability of servicing the next hardware set without wait-
ing ‘30 [A] as a function of n, kr» d and h.

3. The topologic model developed by the authors based on the concept of a contour
R-separating graph with simple subordination [5] integrating the hierarchical
structure by a composition of subnetworks of different levels. Here the spectrum
of possible topologies is quantized by a set of base graphs, including the null
graph, the shortest connecting network. radial. lattice and uniformly S-connected
erm-l describing a broad range of structures. from loop to fully connected.

61

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
rtll an o\ use. a .ta. nus-.a

it is proposed that for individual steps in the hierarchy. any of the above-
enumerated organizational principles is possible. and for the between-level
subnetworks. only radial. For the base topology. analytical relations were ob-
tained between the basic structural parameters such as the nunbsr of nodes n,

the sides It, the average length of routing I, the average connectedness S, the
average geographic length of KS 2. under the assmotion of uniform placement of

the OP. and under the assumtion of uniform gravitation between the 0? of
individual subnetworks and realization of routing over the shortest paths. analyti-
cal forns of the traffic distribution plan with respect to nodes A and sides X

of the network as functions of N, \ , O. i. n,1 and S, which in thg initial design
phases permits avoidance of the application of labor-intensive algorithmic pro-
cedures. In the given model optimiz_ation problem in the class of fixed structures
can be carried out for Sr-const, r-l,R (the hierarchical trees, multiloop and

radial-nodal structures) and the problem of finding the optimal topology when Sr
is unknown.

For the adopted models the purpose function (1) assures the form

a 9. 9. ~ 1
[1-545 2. 15,15 ,n “‘22: ”p011“: (.)m‘;].lz‘;e‘hl, (2)

3-: 3" gun-1
{1, if i, j6!’ steps.
"ir’ ”r - 0 - otherwise,

Z—V’u ' 2'3 W52. - l.
" I

The first and second terms in (2) are the capital expenditures on junction
and line equipment, respectively, and the third term is the operating expenditures.

l'ne average delivery time on the network is defined as the weighted mean with
respect to different routes considering their length n and proportion of the
flowing traffic

a 2-1 . ' M
2: I”! 19.3%“; ”1.30 2;}sz%T;.r.).d,v,1‘(1u.1‘1 (3)

14 all

Here it is assumed that in the R—step network there are no mre than two R routes.
t'n_at_is, through the UK of the r-th step and the sibnetwork of the r-th step,
r-l.R, and the delay on the route is represented by the sum of time segments spent
by the message in each UK and KS which it visited [6]. Formula (3) is a special
case of the expression for the all—network delay [7] for a hierarchical network
under the assumtion of uniformity of structure within the limits of individual
steps of the hierarchy.

The limitation function Q is formed analogously. The difference of this function
from (3) lies only in the multiplicativeness of Q for a route taken separately.

a 1-4 1 , 1 1.4 (4)
°'Ez[£‘,“‘P~°TD.°....-.(moraine;of )1.

62

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In formulas (3) and (4) the following notation is used:

T1-1 1, Q _ are the average time and probability of timely delivery of a
message to Eat KS of an interstep subnetwork, respectively;

Tr-r’ Qr,r are the average time and probability of timely delivery to the KS
of a subnetwork of the r-th step of the hierarchy;

Tr' Q are the average tire and probability of timely delivery to the UK of the

subneEwork of the r-th step of the hierarchy;
a-l—o, B-l-w.

The procedure for solving the given problem of search for the optimal topology

of the network and selection of the optimal type of hardware reduces to substitu-
tion of the expressions for i, m, I, I1, 01 in (2)-(4) and subsequent solution

of the problem of mathematical programming of a combinatory and nonlinear nature.
Analysis of the functions (2)-(4) indicates that for fixed R, i, 1 it can be
reduced to a series of simpler functions. the dimensionality of which does not
exceed 3(R-1), for in each step. in addition to the subscriber, n, h and S are
inknown.

In order to minimize (2) with restrictions (3), (4), a combined algorithm is pro-
posed which is constructed from the ideas of the methods of boundary search and
branches and boundaries. Reduction of the sort with respect to the variables R,
"ir' w r is achieved by preliminary Cutting out of nonprospective versions based
on var ous asymptotic estimates, quasi and locally optimal solutions.

Program realization of the proposed algorithm was used to calculate the network
structures with N>105, the choice of communications hardware to equip them and
discovery of the most effective regions of application of various switching
methods.

The results of the studies demonstrated that the proposed approach to optimizing
the structure of a 1arge~sca1e PD network is an effective means of decision making
on the part of structural organization of prospective networks.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

1. Zakharov. G. P. SETI PEREDACHI DANNYKH [Data Transmission Networks], Part 1.
Leningrad, LEIS, 1976.

2. Zakharov, C. P. ”Data Transmission Networks with Packet Switching." VOPROSY
KIBERNEIIKI [Problems of Cybernetics], Moscow, 1979.

3. Zakharov. G. P.; Lokhmotko. V. V. "PD Network with Packet Switching
Operating Over a Virtual Channel," TEKHNIKA SREDSTV SVYAZI [Communications
Hardware], TPS Series, No 4, 1979.

63

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Kct'man, .-\.: Kryuon, R. .‘IASSOVOYE OBSLUDIIVANIYE. TEORIYA I l‘RlLOI'Jll‘ZNlYA
[Queueing. Theory and Application], Moscow, Mir, 1965.

Bunker, R.; Saati, ‘1'. KONECHN'YYE GRAFY I SETI [Finite Graphs and Networks].
Hoscow, ﬂauka, 1974.

Kleinrock, L. KOWIKATSIONNYYE SETI [Communications Networks], translated
from the English, Moscow, Nauka, 1970.

Pashkeyev, S. D.; Minyazov, R. 1.; Mogilevskiy, V. D. MASHINNYYE HETODY
OPTIPEZATSII V THU-[NIKE SWAZI [Machine Methods of Optimization in Comunica-
tions Engineering], Moscow, Svyaz', 1976.

64

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR ()I-‘FIUAI. USE ONLY

THE DECG‘IPOSITION OF AN AUTOMATON
[Article by L. N. Zoreva. V. C. Lazarev, hoscow, pp 61-62]

As a result of complication of the operating algorithm of digital automation
devices and computer engineering, the necessity for varying the algorithm during
the functioning of the digital device. the problem of constructing logical control
uniu (LPU) with adjustable structure combining the advantages of ULU with hard—
ware and software exewtion of the operating algorithm, is acquiring more and
more urgency. This article discusses one of the automatic models of ULU with

adjustable structure in the form of time decomposition of the automaton A, and its
implementation principle is considered.

Let the automaton A be represented in the form of a composite of subautomata
A1,...,Aa. Then the decomposition of the automaton into subautomata A1,... .A‘
will be called a time decomposition if any internal state -< te{xi.....<1 } of one
and only one subautomatonA £(A1,....A,.}such that the transiti n function 61

and output functions A of he subautomaton A when it is in the internal state <1
assume the same values as the transition function 6 and output function 3 of
the automaton A when it is in the internalstate <1, is compared with any internal
state rld<1,...,<s; of the automaton A.

Thus. in contrast to the known types of spatial decompositimof the automaton in
which each internal state of the automaton A is representable, generally speaking.
by internal states of several subautomata. during the time decomposition each
internal state of the automaton A is representable by an internal state of one
and only one subautomaton Aj.

Obviously. the time decomposition of the automaton, just as the spatial decouposi-
tion, can be interpreted as a special encoding of the internal states of the
automaton A. Some examples of the coding of the internal states of the automaton
A corresponding to the time decomposition of the automaton are considered.

On the basis of determination of the time deconposition of the automaton A. if
the automaton A at the time t must be in the internal state K(t). only one of the
subautomata A 6.A1, ”A4: will be in the' 'excited" state. in the internal state
<j(t) which i; compared with the internal state <(t) of the automaton A.

It is easy to understand that the rim decomposition of the automaton is a break-
down of the set of its internal states into n nonintersecting subsets. with each
of which the subautomaton AjéfAl....,A4} is compared.

65

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I'UK UI'I‘ILIAL UBL UI‘IJ

one of the criteria of brcaLdowu of the set on imemai states on the automaton .-\
into subsets can be the “connectedness" of the internal states by transitions,
outputs, and so on.

A discussion is presented of the method of formation of the groups of connected
internal states based on the method of obtaining maximum groups of joint internal
states of the automaton. and a procedure is presented for constructing the time
decomposition of both the general type automaton given in the language of the

transition tables and the mitroprogram automaton given in the language of logical
flow charts of the algorithm.

Considering noncomarison of the operation in time of individual subautomata of
decomposition structure of the automaton A, each of the subautomata can be realized
at different points in tire in the same segment of uniform medium of the program-

ble logical matrix or in another basic module permitting rearrangement (reprograming)
of its structure.

This realization of the time decomposition of the automaton with respect to parts
using the same reserves is essentially the hardware-software implementation of the
automaton and is a generalization of the known principle of cycle-by—cycle imple-
mentation of the automaton.

The structure of the device for hardware-software implementation of an automaton
is presented.

66

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL “SI-Z ONLY

DISTRIBUTED CONTROL IN SWITCHING CENTERS USING MICROPRDCESSORS
[Article by 0. N. Ivanova, Moscow. pp 63—67]

The problems of optimal synthesis of the control units of switching offices and
centers of comunications networks are an important problem, the solution of which
determines the technical-economic indices and expenditures on technical maintenance.
In their development the structures of the control units have gone through a num-
ber of stages which were characterized by He element base for implementation of

the control units (UU), degree of centralization of the UV and switching equipment
systems.

In the ten-step ATS? individual relay type control units are used for each switch-
ing device. The complexity of the DU was determined by the functions of the switch-
ing device in the corresponding finding steps. In the crossbar ATS, relay con-
trol units are used for a group of switching devices which form a switching mod~
ule. The complexity of the CU was determined by the parameters of the switching
module and its functions (conditions) in the corresponding finding steps. The
transition from individual W to general UU using the same element base, that is,
relays, limited the volume of switching devices which can be serviced by the UU

on the basis of low operating speed of the relays (12-30 milliseconds). Therefore
each finding stage was constructed from individual switching modules, each of
which was assigned 3 UU-ln addition, the volume of switching devices which were
serviced by one UU also depended on the operating speed of the switching devices
theuselves during the process of setting up a call inasmuch as the "U
could simultaneously setting up only one call within the limits of the given
module. The time of inclusion of the switching elements on the connecting path
from the module input to its output was on the order of 50 milliseconds

(tmean VH+tmean UH)‘ The effort to increase the degree of centralization of the
UU in order to decrease their number could be realized only on a new electronic
basis. With the appearance of seunconductor transistors and diodes it became pos-
sible to use this element base to construct the DB of automatic telephone offices
and centers. This element base came to be called circuit—board electronics. in-
asmuch as when installing the UU each element was a separate component of the net-
work. The appearance of electronic UU opened up a new area in switching engineer-
ing with the building of mechanoelectronic ATS (MYe, Hungarian offices. PS-KE-IOO.
and so on). However, in these ATS systems it was not possible to make full

use of the speed of the UU to significantlv increase the number of switching
devices serviced by one UU inasmuch as the switching devices themselves did not
have the necessary speed.

 

* :automatic telephone office]

67

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
H)“ ill-I‘ll lAI. Lb}. URL!

the broad possibilities opened up by high-speed electronic UU making use of pro-
gram control led to finding a new element base for constructing the switching
system of the ATS, the basic requirements were good contact quality in the
information transmission channel and high speed during the process of setting up
and terminating calls. This element base was provided by hercon relays
(cresponse=2 milliseconds, t elease'o‘s millisecond). the ESK relay. ferrides and
hesacons. The combination of the switching system constructed from hercon relays
or the above-enumerated relays with electron control units led to the development
of quasielectronic switching offices and centers. These systems include the
£551, 100, TOR. "Kvarts." "Kvant," "Istok" and other systems.

In these systeus the CU were constructed on a new electronic base -- integrated
microcircuits - which insured an increase in operating reliability of the UU.
simplification of the installation of the UV, and a decrease in size. In

the quasielectronic ATS. the degree of centralization of the UU is appreciably
higher than for the mechanoelectronic ATS. Especially for the first models of
quasielectronic ATS in which all the functions of setting up calls. recep-

tion and processing of the address and control information were invested in a con-
trol computer (BUM), the outpgt capacity of which would be sufficiently high with
high ATS capacity (250-500-10 op/sec for an ATS with a capacity of 10,000 to
20,000 numbers). Thus. at that time the structure of the DU went from the
individual UU to the centralized, all-office device which providedcontrol of the
switching devices within the limits of the entire switching system (KS) of the ATS.
The high degree of centralization of the SU significantly increased the requiremenm
on the operating reliability of the DU of the ATS. for failure of the UU led to
shutdown of the entire ATS. Therefore special measures were taken to improve the
operating reliability of the CU such as redundancy, deep monitoring and diagmosis
of the equipment. which required both increased capital expendituresand increased
output capacity of the W inasmuch as the monitoring and diagnostic programs
account for 40 to 601 of all of the instructions executed by the BUM during its
operation. After appearance of the quasielectronic ATS with high degree of central
ization, deficiencies were discovered in this method in which it is necessary to
include the following. With an increase in capacity of the ATS. it is necessary
simultaneously to increase the output capacity of the EUR, which leads to the
necessity for implementation of it to use the element base with high speed, and
consequently. it leads to an increase in cost of the sun; the requirements on the
reliability of the operation of the BUM increase.

For elimination 0f the first deficiency, :he call set-up algorithms were executed i
parallel so that part of the processes would take place in parallel. but this.

in turn. complicated the general algorithm because it required dispatching when
executing individual programs. establishing situations of conflict with simul—

taneous reference to counon modules (for example. the ready-access memory) and

introduction of a large number of interrupt levels.

In addition. in order to decrease the influence of the low speed of the KS and
terminal sets. part of the BUM functions were transmitted to peripheral UU(PUU)

which could interact with the systems and KS without direct participation of the
EUH and transmit information to it or receive it on instruction from the BUM.

68

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIM. USE ONLY

Thus, the strutture of UV with distribution of functions with respect to

individual modules of the control wiits appeared. This method of construction

made it possible to lower the requirements on increasing the output capacity of
the BUN, because part of its functions began to be performed by individual PUU

which can be both passive and active.

In this method of construction, research is required with respect to optimal dis—
tribution of the functions among the individual modules of the PUU and the BUM
itself and also synthesis of the modules realizing the given function. Then it is
necessary to develop the software for the entire UU for the given type of office

considering auxiliary types of servicing, automation of technical maintenance
and a number of other functions.

Modern progress in the field of electronics and the creation of a new electronic
base on the basis of large integrated circuits (BIS) and microprocessors (HP) is
opening up new ways to synthesize the UU of switching offices and centers.

Large integrated circuits can carry out quite complicated functional problems
during the process of controlling the setting up of a call and can be a
device for hardware implementation of the control functions.

In the A15 switching system or the switching system of a center it is possible to
isolate operations with respect to setting IJp calls which arerepeated
for each cal l. and they are performed independently. receiving only the
instruction to execute and the instruction to output the results of execution
from the computer if needed for subsequent operation of the UU. If such opera-
tions are encountered in different parts of the system. they can be executed by
different BIS, the operating priority of which is given by the operating program
of the BUM with respect to setting up the call.

If it is necessary to perform different operations, it is possible to use micro~
processors, each of which operates by the corresponding program. Here we have a
set of MP, each of which carries out its mission. their operating priority is
provided by the EUM which can be executed in the form of a minicomputer with
integrated processor which, in turn. can also be executed in the form ofan MP.

with this method of construction. the UK will be a set of BIS and MP providing

for the execution of all functions of controlling cal ls at the ATS or

center. but each BIS or HP will be connected only to part of the KS equipment or
sets, that is. the control will be distrituted somehow over individual modules of
the switching equipment and the AIS systems. Here the primary principle is the
principle of control distribution by which failure of one BIS or HP or another will
not disturb the operation of the AIS.

Obviously it is possible to find distributed control structures which will reflect
the same structural redundancy as the KS where the connection from the input to
the output of the KS or an individual module of it can beprovidml by several
connecting paths from which one is selected. Failure of One path does not lead

to disturbance of the possibilitv of sett ing up ca! ls but onlY IOVEIS the
quality of servicing the calls somewhat with respect to time required :0 eliminate
{at lure if it coincides with the PLH [peak load hours]. With this structure.

69

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0}?“ IAI. hat. ONLY

the necessity arises for investigating the capabilities of the manufactured BIS
and MP to solve individual control problems at the ATS. to optimize the structure
of the W based on BIS and microprocessor sets and to develop software correspond-
ing to the operating requirements at the ATS or center. The use of distributed
control is possible both in the quasielectronic ATS and in the BATS implemented
on the basis of digital data transmission. In the digital system of the ATS,

the switching system will be executed by means of electronic contacts which. in
turn. can form electronic connectors for the required number of inputs and the
number of outputs in realized in the form of one BIS. Such connectors, forming
individual modules of the ATS switching system, can control the functional modules
of the UL' which can be realized by means of the HP operating with the given
algorithm for the given switching module. Individual sets (or groups of sets) of

one type or another (AK. ShK, SK. RSL. and so on) can also be implemnted on the
basis of the MP and the BIS.

Inasmuch as at the present time the BIS and the MP are primarily created for the
cirCuitry of computer engineering, it is possible that they do not fully
correspond to the requirements which are imposed by the ATS control units; there-
fore the question can be stated of creating specialized BIS and MP for the U11 of
the switching centers and offices. For this purpose it is necessary to develop
circuitry for the BIS and M? which will to a maximum degree satisfy the require-
ments on the W structure.

In the switching equipment the nurber of 3IS and HP required to construct the U!)
is quite large; therefore the production of specialized BIS and HP in industry
can be instified economically. The problem of the developers is to create
universal BIS and MP for commications engineering which can be inplemented in
industry.

The layout of an ATS with a capacity from 2048 to 8192 nuubers of the quasielecH
tronic type is considered in which the subscriber finding stage inplmted by three-
link BAL modules with parameters 2068*1025X512X512, the group finding stages using
BSL modules with paramters 312¥512*512‘<512 and the register finding stages using
SRI [sic] modules with paramters 512612612612, are used.

For construction of switching system modules. hercon connectors with 818 capaci tv
with electric delay are used. Service wires or 02!! [ready-access memory] is used
to depict the state of the intermediate lines in the [(5.

Control is realized by means of peripheral UL', a central L'U imlemented in the
form of a £1.11 with program control. The control is constructed so that it is dis-
tributed with respect to hierarchical structure. The switching equipment is
divided into sections. the equipment in each of which permits setting up

1-3115 from the input to the output of the module over independent paths.

In accordance with the breakdown of the switching system into sections, a settional
control system is constructed.

Each section has its own control unit in the form of an identifier of intermediate
lines (OPL) and a module for disconnecting the switching elements. The choica of
RF. is realized by the OPL. The main part of the distributed control syscem can

be imlemnted on one or two types of microprocessors operating by program re-
t'iec:ing the operating algorithm of the corresponding module or switching equipment

section.
70

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

50mm Fog SUPPLEMENTARY SERVICES or rat 'Kvm' QUASIELECTRONIC AL-Tomnc
TELEPHONE OFFICE

[Article by A. A. Ivanov, Riga, pp 67-71]

The method of controlling the ATS KE [quasielectronic automatic telephone office]
by a recorded program gives the subscribers a nutter of additional services.
capabilities or simply additional types of servicing (DVD):

The external communications category;

Constant number within the office;

Determination of the number of the calling subscriber by request of the called
subscriber;

Poor audio message;

Extraneous signal message:

Absence of KPV voice-frequency signal message;

Absence of ringing signal message;

Failure of telephone set (TA) message;

Three-way calling or call forwarding;

Speed dialing (up to I) ll-digit nmbers);

Direct line (lifting the receiver. without dialing the number);
Temporary inhibition of incoming service;

Temporary selective restriction of incoming service;
Reminder or wake-up calls:

Recording of incoming calls:

71

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I'UK Uri-IL me. use. um...

Information calls;

Call transfer (from an information call);

Return calling or putting on hold;

Urgent service for privileged subscribers;

Notification outgoing call;

Temporary postponement of completion of DVD;

Conference calling (up to 5 subscribers in one office);

Radio communications;

Search signalling (via a light display);

Dictation machine for recording voice communications;

Automatic telephone answering device;

Group forwarding or night service mode;

Permanent forwarding when the main subscriber is busy;

Recording of outgoing long distance conversations;

Notification incoming call;

Trunk hunting.

The greater part of the listed services are provided by purely software means.
Individual use of the DVD by office subscribers is determined by the class of
service of each specific subscriber. The class of service is the set of data

which completely describes each subscriber line included in the office. from the
point of view of basic and auxiliary forms of equipment and which is stored in
memory (ZU), it is compiled when designing the ATS K: by information provided by
the requestor, and it can be altered during operation by technical personnel.
Organization of the class of service permits any ATS KB subscriber to have any
number of DVD in an arbitrary combination.

From the presented DVO list, the first seven are provided to all of the ATS K3
subscribers without exception; the last five are realized automatically as a
result of the corresponding class of service of the subscriber, and the last DVD
are controlled directly by the service user himself by special subscriber
procedures performed on the telephone set. Dialog subscriber procedures have been
developed on the basis of the Recommendations of the MKKTT [International Telegraph
and Telephone Consultative Committee].

72

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Subscriber signalling consists of a set of digital data modules separated by inter-
mdule separators. The first mdule always contains two digits called the service
code.

A unique control signal used in the DVO procedures as the intermodule information
separator is dialed by the subscriber by 13113551118 8 button
("square on a touch telephone. It is also equivalent to a four-second delay in
number dialing. and both signals can be used interchangeably. As a result. iden—
tity of subscriber procedures for touch and dial telephones is guaranteed without
using any additional nonstandard buttons.

Brief pressing of the microtelephone receiver arm for 0.2 to 1.2 seconds or briefly
hanging up (KRO) is used as the signal to get a second line to dial a DVD sub-
scriber procedure while putting a first call on hold. After obtaining the second
dial tone, the basic procedure format is followed. The KRO signal for a three-
way connection is received as a request to switch the talk channel.

The parameters of additional information signals are presented in Table l.

The basic volume of DVD system data is for subscriber characteristics (AKh) or the
translator for decoding the line nunber of the subscriber (LNA) to a set of
finite parameters such as the listed number of the subscriber, the type of sub-
scriber line (AL) and its relation to the different forms of equipment. The basic
structural principle of the translatoris organization of multistep indexed tables.
as a rule, of no more than three steps.

The first translator stage is acne-dimensional matrix of so-called first words of
the AKh. The size of the matrix is uniquely determined by the finite subscriber
capacity of the office and fully corresponds to it. The initial parameter for
indexing the given table is the complete LNA in binary code. The unincluded AL
are denoted by "all 1's." The entries corresponding to included AL contain the
type P descriptor (the high-order bit of the word) which indicates the nature of
the information in the rest of the word. For P-O the remainder contains data;
for P=l the remainder contains a reference to the next step of the A101. The
second and following steps of the AKh can have altered format.

For realization of some services, for example, "reminder" and "return call."
connected single-pass lists of variable length are used which are formed of four-
word blocks in the ready-access memory. In addition. from the second step of the
AKh of the service user there is a reference to this blocl: or several blocks and
one of the lists. In all. there are four types of such lists: the free block
list, the list scanned once every second, the list scanned once every minute, the
list for organizing the printing out of the information from the DVO system.

The DVO system programs participate in the following calling phases: reception
of the nunber from the subscriber, arrival of a call at the subscriber, arrival
of the disconnect signal from the subscriber and organization of sending special
signals to the subscriber. In addition, there are a nutter of programs, the so-
called operation planners triggered by a timer once a second, minute
and hour on the basic program level. The MO software, just as the rest of the

73

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
6 Notification of a new in- 4254-25 0110.1 5+1
coming call during converse-
tion

7 ﬂaking a call with "return 2532 1.+0.25 110.25
call" service

8 Making a call with 2512 2+O.5 2+0.5
"reminder" service

9 Signal of an incoming s‘o __ 0.151005 0.15:0.05

urgent" call three sendings

N
'9
LII

ATS KE software. is constructed on the modular principle in the form of a coupon
program. This means that the programs are written without being tied to the
physical addresses of memory and can be moved. The references between the programs
and between the programs and the office data are by means of reference tables.
Thus. when generating the ATS KB software only the office data, for example. the
AL repeaters. SL repeaters, the routings, and so on describing the specific office
and coupling it to the communications network are subject to generation.

The memory used to inplement the DVD is presented in Table 2.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Table 2
Volume
Name of set of operations gk-wordaz

Desip operations 1

Register information processing 3

Implementation of two in the incoming call phase to a subscriber 1
and organization of special signal sending

e

000 UFO

v

PIOCessing of disconnect signals from the subscriber and KRO 3.
AKh for wing the DVO for 2048 AL capacity 16.
Total: 210.

Introduction of the developed DVO system has the following advantages: it expands
the subscriber capabilities; it insures economy of personal and work time;
the possibility of transition if desired from a system with rejects to a system
with waiting; increases the carrying capacity of the ATS as a result of partial
elimination of repeated calls. and it increases the carrying capacity of the
recording equipment.

75

FOR OFFIGAL USE ONLY
bolt Uri-lust. var. mun

CHOICE OF DYNAMIC CONTROL METHOD NR INFORMATION FLCMS ON A COMICATIONS
NETWORK

[Article by Yu. M. Kazachenko. Leningrad, pp 71-75]

One of the ways to increase the operating efficiency of a commications network

is to optimize the control of the interaction of individual network subsystem

and the control subsystem itself. Therefore recently significant attention has
been given to investigation of adaptive control of information flow distribution

in the communications networks. The realization of this control faces the designers
with at least the two following problems:

The placement of the control subsystem (centralized, decentralized);

Organization of service information exchange, the rate of renewal of service
information or the adaptation rate of the control algorithm if the service infome-
tion exchange is not carried out.

Theoretical analysis [1] and also the results of experiments on existing networks'
[2. 3] permit isolation of three basic situtions which arise during the operation
of a communications network: small loading, loading close to critical and over-
loading. In each situation the efficiency of the information traffic control
will be different. As is noted in [1, 2. 3]. the greatest effect is obtained
from the applicatim of adaptive information traffic control (dynamic routing)

in the presence of significant loads. 'Jith a small load. static routing is
effective; for overloads restricting the load coming from the network subscribers
appears to be the only possible solution (without altering the structure of the
network). Thm. quasistatic control will be optimal [to].

In this case the service information exchange rate will be relatively low [3].
which will lower the nonproductive load on the channels. Let us note that in the
ARPA network with fully decentralized, dynamic control up to 502 of the carrying
capacity of the communications channels is med to transmit service data [5].

The centralized and decentralized methods of constructing the control subsystem
are characterized by advantages and disadvantages [6]. Let us only note that
during overloads (that is, restriction of the incoming flows) the control is the
most effective for the centralized method [6]. Thus, an intermediate method of
placement of the information traffic control subsystem is expedient [7, 8]. One
version of the structure of a control subsystem can be as follows.

76

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Let us consider a network of N junctions with arbitrary connections. Let Qi
be the quantity of information at the time t which must be transmitted fi-om’J
junction i to junction j. The values of Q1 (t) form an NXN matrix Q(t) describ-
ing the "operation" which must be carried 0&1 in the network at the time t. The
variation rate of the matrix Q(t) is determined by the variation rate of the total
quantity of information in the network. Also let c1 (t) be the carrying capaci-
ties of the channel directly connecting junctions 1 53d 1; C(t) is the matrix
describing the reserves which are available in the network for performance of the
operation Q(t). Let us propose that C(t) is a two-dimensional file of elements

c (t). Now the routing problem consists in optimal distribution of reserves
CIEI for execution of the operation Q(t). In this case the current delay will be

(t)

d2. (t)-0..,(t) /°'~-i (I). (1,
The average delay is caICulated in the switching center
d.,‘(I)uk-dg,j(l"t¢) ~(1-k)d:,‘(t). (2,
where Oskil and T) characterizes the history.

The value of di,j(t) is transmitted to the network control center (TsUS) only if

|d..,(n~d..,(z-L mpdii? (3)
Key: 1. threshold

where L=l,2,3,... which corresponds to quasistatic control.

The general state of the network is estimated at the TsUS on the basis of the
matrix D(t) with the elements di ;(t). The shortest path is found using a method.
for example, the dynamic programming method. Here not one. but n shortest paths
are defined. Let :i denote the k-th path of the investigated paths joining the
junctions i and 1. hi: this path the delay will be

I
.Z. d. t. 4
Two) mm; 440 < )

The value of (4) is calculated for all n routing versions and the values of T: (t)
are compared to each Other. If one value is distinguished from another by ’3
less than some amount 5, control is realized by the switching center control suh-
system. For example. the method of dynamic priorities can be used [9]. where the
information distribution plan on the network does not change. In the opposite
case the TsFS selects the shortest path and corrects the information distributicn
plan. The nature of the solutions adopted when using the given method can be
demonstrated in an example where the number of paths between the i and j junctions
from which it is possible to choose is n-Z. t the Tsts, the delays are compared
with respect to these paths and

if th,‘(u<Tt.°(t)-6 . then Low-A. (5)

77

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
run unn on. was. uuua

if T::,-°(‘)‘T'.,}‘("’d than “140.5; (6)

1‘ IT..,~‘(0—T‘.ff(o|w.zhen Lqmaht}. (7)

Thus, in the cases (5) and (6) the routing is selected on the TsUS, and in the
case (7), the path is chosen at the switching center on the basis of the routing
matrix developed in the network desim stage. The parameter 6 determines the
degree of independence of the switching junction. If 6 is small (that is, even
insignificant changes are considered in the delays with respect to different
paths), we arrive at a fully centralized control. If 6 is large. we arrive at
decentralized path selection. Exceeding some threshold by the average delay with
respect to the entire network indicates overloading of the network with messages.
In this case the T305 goes to the load limiting algorithm. for example, curtailing

access of low-priority messages to the network or wing other load limiting
algorithm [4].

Thus, implementation of the discussed method permits the use of the advantages of
decentralized and centralized methods of constructing the control subsystem. In

addition, the given method permits efficient use of the control subsystem in the
entire range of load variation.

One of the primary difficulties in implementing any nontrivial method of dynamic
traffic control on a commications network is the fact that the "operation" Q(t)
is distributed in space and time. In other words, the special operation Q1 j(t)
is known exactly only at the time t and only at the junction 1. Information about
Q, -(t) can be transmitted to another junction, but this information can become
obsolete during transmission time. Thus, any global characterization of '.he
general operation of the network Q(t) is based on data pertaining to the past

and not current information about the state of the junctions. In the network
there are .40 types of information about its state:

Precise and timely local information (that is, information about the state of the

switching center at the same center). This information is available for every
center;

Ayerxge values describing the past local characteristics of the network.

The preposed dynamic control method permits full use of both types of information
about the state of the network, which insures effectiveness of it.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Starobinets, S. )1. "Study of the Efficiency of Using Bypass Paths in the
Presence of Dynamic Control on Channel Switching Networks." author's review
of candidate's dissertation, Moscow, 1977.

DJ

Kleinrock, L. ‘JYOHSLITEL'NYYE SISTEHY S OCHEREDYAMI {Couputer System with
Queues], translated from the English, Moscow, Kit, 1979.

73

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
3.

1..

5.

FOR OFHCMI. USE ONLY

Naylor, W. P.; Kleinrock, L. "0n the Effect of Periodio Routing Updates
in Packet-Switched Networks," NTC76-NA'1'. TELEOOM. coma. New York, Vol 1,
1976.

Kazachenko, Yu. M. SOVREMENNOYE SOSTOYANIYE I PERSPEKTIVY RAZVITIYA

SISTEM U‘PRAVLENIYA POTOKAMI: INNRMAI‘SII NA SETYAKH SWAZI [Modern State of
the Art and Prospects for the Development of Information Flow Control System
on Commication Networks], Leningrad Electrotechnical Comwications
Institute. Leningrad, 1979, 56 pages, 94 references, manuscript deposited

at the TsNTI "Informsvyaz'," 18 July 1979. No 26.

Beloborodskaya. 1‘. V.; Solodyannikov, Yu. V. "Organization of Measurements
on Packet-Switched and Message-Switched Conputer Networks," ZARUBEZHNAYA
RADIOELEKTRWIKA [Foreign Radio Electronics], No 3, 1978.

Butrimenko, A. V.; Lazarev, V. 6.; Sergeyeva. 0. 1’. "Problem and Architecture
of an Automated Comaunications Network Control System." POSTROYENIYE
UPRAVLYAYUSHCHIKH USTROYSTV I SISTEM [Structure of Control Units and Systems].
Moscow. Nauka, 1976.

Bershteyn, P. V., et a1. "Structure and Construction of Telegraph Network
Control Systems." TRUDY TSNIIS [Works of the Central Scientific Research
Institute of Communications], No 6, 1977.

Rudin, H. "On Routing and Delta Routing: a Taxonomy and Performance Compari—
son of Techniques for Packet-Switched Networks," IEEE TRANS. COMMUN.I

No 1, 1976, Com-210.

Pickholtz. R. L.: XcCuy, C. Jr. "Effects of a Priority Discipline in Routing
for Packet-Switched Networks." IEEE TRANS. 00W., No 5. 1976, Com-24.

79

""R OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OI'I'IL IAL one. UNL!

SELECTING TYPES OF PROCESSORS FOR A MULTIPROCESSOR SYSTE!
[Article by A. N. Kol‘tsov and F. I. Pepinov, Moscow, pp 75-77]

A study is made of a multilevel hierarchical system wi th given structure. The
apexes of different level joined to each other form a precursor ~follower pair.
In the k-level system the i-th apex of the 2-th level forms the set F1 of its
followers of the 1+1 level and the set F? of its followers from 1+1 to I: level.
This system can be a model for execution of a parallel computation problem.
administrative relations and the relations of any agency, a multiprocessor data
processing system, control unit, and so on [1]. Beginning with the selected
structure of the system and its purpose. a special algorithm 01 is matched to
each apex of the system i in some way or another. This special algorithm is
executed by sons type of processor from among the given ones located at the i-th
apex of the system. The composition of the special algorithms o-(ol.....on}

is the operating algorithm of the system.

In the investigated systea in the processor memory of the i-th apex. in addition
to the special algorithm 01 executed on this processor, all special algorithms
0*1 matched to the follower apexes from the set F2 are stored (but not executed).
The special algorithm stored in the memory of the i-th apex processor can be

transmitted to the follower apexes from the set F1.

The investigated system is implemented in a set of processors of different types
R-iRl“... Rn}. The types of processors 3 . j-l....,n can differ significantly
with respect to their capabilities; therefgre each special algorithm °iv i-l,...,m
can be executed on one type of processor or another with different speed, re11a~
bility and cost. The execution of '31 on R is characterized by the following
parameters of the special algorithms and p ocessors.

C; is the cost of the j-th type of processor; .\ is the intensity of failures

0 the j-th type of processor; t is the given xecution time of 01; L1 is the
magnitude of the penalty for failure to execute the algorithm oi; Vi is the
magnitude of the penalty for exceeding the execution time of the algorithm 01

per unit time; p1 is the probability of failure to execute the algorithm .11 when
executing it: on the j-th type processor; c1 is the cost of developing a method
of implementing the special algorithm 61 on the j-th type pro-essor; t1. is the
time of execution of a" on the j-th type of processor. '

80

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The enumerated parameters will permit determination of the magnitude of the
average losses #1 when executing the algorithm 01 on the j-th type processor
which is made up of the following components:

c'ij is the cost of executing the algorithm °i on the j-th selected type processor.
cl ijacjﬂij;

L pi is the average magnitude of the penalty for failure to execute 01, where
the probability of this event is calculated by the formula:

p517 99-1”“ ;

Vit'i is the penalty for exceeding the execution time of the special algorithm
01 by the time t'ij which is calculated as follows:

i, 0. 1f tn ‘1;
.‘ t“1"“ - '1‘ ‘u”;'

The magnitude of the average losses W1 when executing the special algorithm at
on the j-th type processor is calculat d by the formula:

' a
:Pq'l-‘st 'v'v‘lu’cu' (1)
The magnitude of the average losses in implementing the entire system:
R
91-ij (2)

It is obvious that the magnitude of losses w depends on which type of processor
is used to execute each of the special algorithms site.

A method of selecting the types of processors executing the set of special
algorithms is proposed such that the magnitude of the average losses w for the
given hierarchical multilevel system will be minimal. here it is remember that
the number of processors in the system is no less than the number of special
algorithms

m‘ 2.171, (3)

where r . j-l.....n is an arbitrary given number of processors of the j-th type.
Otherwise, it is also possible to combine some special algorithms so that condi-

tion ((3) is met.

For each special algorithm 1 64. values of the average losses #1 . #12..... it“
are calculated by formula (1 for execution of the special algorithm on all
given types of processors R . Ra, .... Rn. that is. each algorithm Ci has a

row of losses 211, T12""'$in in correspondence to it. The set of such rows
forms a loss matrix 3, each column of which is assigned an rj - the number of

type R. processors.

81

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
F0" UI'HL IAL Dbl: UNLI

0n the basis of the loss matrix 7, a matrix breaking down the special algorithms
with respect to types of processors B is constructed, the rows and columns of
which precisely correspond to the loss matrix, and the elements are bij' where

b I

{ 0. if 01 is not executed on the R1 processor
11

1. if °i is executed on the 83 processor.

Inasmuch as each special algorithm is executed on only one processor,

II

2 tn,- -4. (A)
I“

On the other hand, the number of processors of each type R3 is given. and this
means that

2.5:“.
.‘ J J (5)

The expected magnitude of the losses V for the entire system with respect to all
special algorithns is defined as follows:

w- -’§-'ZE("~i-*~n- <6)

The obtained expression (6) is the solution functional of the system, the minimum
value of which determines the choica of types of processors for the entire system
with the existing restrictions (4) and (S).

82

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

HOMEOSTATIC PRINCIPLE OF RECULATINC THE OUTGOING SUBSCRIBER TRAFFIC
(Article by A. V. Kotov. Leningrad, pp 77-82]

within the framework of dynamic traffic control on telephone networks, the volume
of the outgoing traffic from the subscribers can be automatically regulated. This
is extremely desirable from the point of view of increasing the cost effectiveness
of the connunications networks [1. 2]. However, implantation of the indicated
regulation is possible only under the condition of improving the algorithm for
interaction between calling subscribers and the telephone system in which negative
feedback is introduced into the "subscriber-telephone network" control circuit.
The conversion of the interaction algorithm with introduction of negative feedback
into the telephone system is realized, for example. by certain additional types

of services such as the automatic answering device, "putting the call on hold"

and so on. These services decrease the number of repeated calls (PV) and thus have
an automatic regulating effect on the outgoing traffic from the subscribers. In-
asmuch as the largest number of PV on a network are formed as a result of low
accessibility of such GT8 services as ticket ordering, the information office. and
so on, it must be expected that the greatest regulating effect with respect to the
occurring load is provided by services which are designed to eliminate rejects on
the part of the indicated services. An example of a hardware solution in this
area is described in [3]. Here the subscriber calling for service gets a recorded
message about the time by which he will receive a return call for servicing his
request. The indicated time depends on the number of requests accumulated
previously for servicing.

As is known. in ordinary request and information service systeus the load is
characterized not only by the fact that it has a sharply fluctuating intensity.
but also by the fact that even during short-time intervals, for example, in the
plh [peak load hour] it does not have the properties of a sitplest flow in view
of the presence in it of a large nutter of PV (a flow with consequence). In con-
trast to this. in the system according to [3], the total load is somehow split by
the regulating mechanism into two flows: 1) a simplest flow (flow without PV)
with low intensity Vocc r y consisting of the actual serv1ce requests

coming into the syscem n regfxtime and having a constant service time (trans-
mission of a voice message) tat“e (where ta is the average busy time in case
of ordinary requests for information services)? 2) an ordered (deterministic)
flow of request servicing with a time shift having an intensity y-const.

83

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
mu UH'ILIM. use ONLY

     
 

..

’0
0 I, I, '. ‘
Figure 1

In order to explain the essence of the given regulation principle let us consider
Figure l which depicts the load intensity distribution curve y-y(t) of the request
or information service load for some tine interval. The level yo denotes the
total carrying capacity of the entire operator staff (depending on the time of day
this level can vary in accordance with some schedule). If the service is equipped
with a system according to [3], after a time t1 all of the calls begin to be
serviced with waiting. Up to the time :2 (that is, while y>yo) the queue is en-
larged and after t . it diminishes. The end of servicing with waiting takes place
at some time t3 defined from the expression

I t
Lino-malt ajhh,-g(o1dt .

In Figure 1 this corresponds to equality of the crosshatched sections of the area
above and below the curve y-y(t). A call coming into the system at the time t2
will be serviced with maximum waiting tine Tm equal to

‘- (1)
«r...- ‘i yum-Mac .

Expression (1) is a mathematical model of a telephone system with self-regulation
with respect to subscriber traffic directed to information or request services.
The regulation effect in the given case consists in the fact that for given carry-
ing capacity of the system y , whatever the intensity of the arrival of requests
(of course, within known li ts). the set-rice waiting time me will always be
automatically selected, in which the intensity of the traffic service by the
operators remains constant and equal to yo. Here the total traffic intensity

yo cur+3'0 will be appreciably less than Ymax‘ all of the calls will be serviced,
and no rejects or Pv will occur.

Another possibility for controlling the outgoing traffic from subscribers consists
in icing the mechanism of adaptive rates on the networks [2]. The essence of this
nethod consists in the fact that a system of variable rates is introduced on the
telephone network. the size of which is determined by the load intensity of the
ATS, and negative feedback is realized in the form of operative transmission of
information about current rates to the subscribers. In this case a regulating
effect on the occurring load as a whole is realized. The given method of regula-
tion is based on sifting out part of the load (transferring it from peak periods
to other tines) by the criterion of quantitative consideration of the human factor
-- the requirement for communications under various specific conditions. This

84

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

factor can be quantitatively expressed in terms of the value content of the
information in the calls.

The random variable 9 -— the value content of information in a call -— is defined
as a subjective estimate by the calling subscriber of the value (expressed in
money) of this information which the subscriber hopes to transmit. receive or
exchange as a result of making a given specific call. Figure 2 shows the hypothet-
ical probability density distribution curve for the indicated variable.

y (0)

 

Figure 2

The mechanism of adaptive rates presupposes that if the measured intensity of the
occurring load does not exceed a threshold value y,, the preferential rate c1 is

in effect. for example, equal to zero, and the subscribers are informed of this

by the corresponding signal. when an increase in traffic intensity exceeds y",

an increased rate c2 is automatically put into effect on the network, and the
signal transmitted to the subscribers changes simultaneOusly. With afurther
increase in traffic, rate C3 can be put into effect and the signal corresponding

to it. and so on. If, for example. rate c2 has been put into effect, the calls

for which the value content of the information 6<c2, that is. the calls correspond-
ing to the crosshatched part of the area under the curve 0(5) (see Figure 2) will

not be made by the subscribers, and they will be postponed to a later time when
the rate c1 will again be in effect as a result of a drop in the load on the net-

work. This part of the calls will be:
c. . .
O‘iI Me) as.
B

The rest of the calls are made. Inasmuch as the entire area under the curve :03
is equal to one. the proportion of calls made by the subscribers during the period
that the rate c2 is in effect will be:

Ca
5‘. {-S ”(0) do ‘

the load intensity proportional to the entire area under the curve >(6)
characterizes the total demand for the entire set of subscribers for communica-
tions at the investigated point in time. Let us denote this value by Ydemand-
Then the load intensity occurring at the same point in time in the presence of
the adaptive rate mechanism will be expressed as follows:

(1" 2 ‘
Why)" “(0029(I' I“(9)d9) ' (2)
Key: 1. occur; 2. demand .

where c is the Current vain: of the rate.
85

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
a use VI l as. use. vol. v. \ua

Expression (2) is the regulation function -- a model of the telephone network
equipped with an adaptive rate mechanism. The regulation effect consists only
in the fact that whatever the peak value of the demand of the entire set of
subscribers for communications it is always possible to select a rate c1 for

which the occurring load will be less than some previously given value yoccur ,.

u) (2 ‘
‘1‘»- ##6- Gift—Tie d0 .

Key: 1. occur; 2. demand

into the man-machine "subscriber-telephone network" system. As is known [4] the neg-
ative feedback is a recessary condition for giving a complex probability system the
properties of homeostasis, that is, the capacity to withstand dynamic (fluctuating
within some sufficiently narrow limits) constancy of its significant variable under
the conditions of sharp inconstancy of eXternal disturbances affecting the system.
By significant variable we mean the variable closely connected with the operating
quality of the system. In our case it is the occurring telephone traffic which,

as is known, in the absence of regulating mechanisms is distinguished by extra-
ordinary fluctuation with respect to hours of the day. days of the week, and so on.
Complex probability systems having the homeostasis mechanism belong to the class

of cyberneticsystems [4]. Therefore the application of the above-iescribed tech-
nical solutions on telephone networks and also the DVD which introduce some degree
of negative feedback into the "subscriber-telephone network" system gives the
latter the preperties of a cybernetic system operating in the optimal version.

All of the mentioned technical solutions can be used both separately and simul-
taneously. In the latter case it is necessary to expect that a maximum overall
self-regulating effect will be obtained.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Lazarev, V. R.; Lazarev, Yu. V.; Parshenko, N. Ya. "Teletraffic Control on
Communications Setworks," PRINTSIPY POSTROYENIYA USTROYSTV RASPREDELENIYA
{SPORMATSII [Structural Principles of Information Distribution Devices],
Mosc0w. Nauka. 1978.

I»)
-

Kotov, A. V.; Kotov. N. A. "Psychological Engineering and Ergonomic
Approaches to the Analysis and Synthesis of Telephone Systems." POSTROYENIYE
USTROYSTV UPRAVLENIYA SETYAMI SVYAZI [Structure of Control Units for Communica-

86

IN)! OFTWCIAL USEICNVLY
3.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Kotov. A. V. "Prospects for Using Computers to Control the Operation of
Telephone Information Services," OPYT ISPOL'ZOVANIYA SREDSTV

WCHISLIIEL'NOY TEKHNIKI PR1 PROYEK'I'IROVANII I EKSPLUATAISII KUWATSIONNYKH
L'ZLOV SWAZI [Experience in Using Computer Engineering Means When Designing,
Operating and Maintaining Commications Switching Centers], Leningrad,
LDNTP, 1978.

311'. St. KIBERNE‘I'IKA I UPRAVLEWIYE PROIZVODSTVOM [Cybernetics and Production
Control], Moscow, Fizmtgiz, 1963.

87

FOR OFF-1G“. USE ONLY
I \In “I O I‘lﬂlv VI)“ VI ‘hl

RESEARCH OF THE INTERNATIONAL TELEPHONE AND TELEGRAPH CONSULTATIVE COMMITTEE
IN THE FIELD OF NETWORK CONTROL

[Article by A. V. Kotov, Leningrad. pp 82-85]

Automation of international telephone communications, growth of information exchange
are raising the urgent problem of introducing methods of controlling the traffic
flows on international networks which previously, in the absence of automation.
were realized by international telephone operators. However, the problem of
organizing work control on an international scale not only has technical and
economic aspects, but it also requires the organization of cooperation of the
commications administrations of the participating countries. It is natural that
the solution of this type of problem is only possible for an international co-un-
ications administration organization -- the International Electrocommmications
Union ()65). One of the permanent agencies of the )6}: is the International Tele-
phone and Telegraph Consultative Committee (HGT!) which at the present time (the
investigated period is 1977 to 1980) inclu-‘es l7 investigative commissions and more
than 10 mixed, regional and other specialized working groups.

Research in the field of traffic flow control in international networks has been
performed by the MUCH for a number of years. In the preceding research period
(1973 to 1976) 13 research committees were engaged in this research. The result
of earlier research was the Recommendations Q.55/£.41o approved by the Fourth
Plenary Meeting of the International Telephone and Telegraph Consultative Comittee
in 1972 [1]. This recomndation sxbstantiates the necessity for controlling
traffic flows on international networks, the concept of work control is defined.
and the actions required for inplementation of it (performed manually or automat-
ically) are enumerated.

The purposes of network control are indicated as insuring continuity of comica-
tions and maadmizing the nuaber of paid cal ls as a result of the most complete
possible use of equipment boch during normal operating periods of the network and
during periods when there is some disturbance in its operation.

The Reconunendation includes a description also of the parameters (indices. obser-
vation of which will permit determination of the time when it is necessary to

take measures to control the network and establish what actions it is expedient
to take. These parameters are as follows:

88

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

An overload coefficient (expressed in percentages) defined as the ratio of the
number of unsatisf ted requests for a free channel in any group of channels

(circuits) to the total number of requests coming to this group during a defined
time interval;

The 801 index defined as the ratio of the averag: nunber of requests for free

channels coming to a given group of channels during 1 hour to the number of
mannels in the group;

The 501 index indicating the average number of busies during the hour per operating
channel of the given group.

An important item of the Recommendation Q.55/1-:.a1o is indication of the necessity

for developing a system of signals which must be transmitted from certain switch-
ing centers to others during the network control process.

In the same Recommendation it is stated that the time for organizing any inter-
national center in which the control of the international network would be concen-
trated still has not come and that onthe modern level. the organization of load
control in international service must be realized on the basis of two-way or

multisided mutual agreements between the commications administrations of various
countries.

During the next research period (1973 to 1976) the problem of load traffic control
on the international networks became the content of Question 4/XIII. A very
important new measure of this research period was the organization of an inter-
national experiment in introducing load flow control under actual conditions --
in eadsting international service. Among the purpose of the experiment were the
following: 1) obtaining experience in using network control on the international
level; 2) determination of the threshold values of the indices used in network
control; 3) development of proposals regarding new indices which would be useful
in the sense of increasing the control efficiency; 4) the development of proposals
with respect to further improvement of the system of signals transmitted between
the switching centers during the load control process. and so on.

For countries agreeing to participate in the experirent. the form of periodic
reports on the course of the experiment was developed. The report data were
generalized and published in the documents of the W00"! by the person reporting on
Question 6/.\'III. The results of the experiment which was participated in by sev-
eral countries were generalized and presented for investigation by the Sixth
Plenary Meeting of the MKKT‘I‘ which was held in 1976. They were published in the
first official docmzent of the MIT in the current research period 2. Ehcommenda-
tion Q.SS/E.-’410 was approved and put in Volume 3.2 of the MICKTT Orange Book.

The decision was made to continue the international experiment in a new research
period (1977 to 1980).

The Sixth Plenary Meeting made changes in the composition of the research
comittees. The 13th Comittee was for-med, and the greater part of its problem,
including the problem of network controlnere transferred to the II Cosmittee.

89

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
0 VI. ‘0. DIV-u... he-.. Una...

During the current research period network control is the content of Problem 18/11
[2]. the primary work is concentrated srcund further continuation and expansion
of the international experiment. By Deceuber 1977, the number of countries par-
ticipating in the experiment reached 12.

At the present time the Recomendation 0.55/8410 is being reexamined. A new
altered, supplemented version of it containing an appendix with definition of

terms has been published in [3]. It was presented for approval by the Seventh
Plenary Meeting of the MCKTT in 1980.

The MCKTT is making an effort to involve new countries in the participation in

the experiment with respect to network control on an international level and is
paying special attention to the necessity for more precise definition of the
threshold values of the indices which were obtained during the course of previously
performed work and also the necessity for developing an optimal signal system
considering both the requirements on the part of network control and other require-
ments on the signalling system. the development of which enters into the competence
of the Eleventh Comittee of the MIT. The following signals have been proposed.

Information signals: 1) the switching center is overloaded as a result of over-
loading common devices; 2) the SN index exceeded the threshold value in a given
group of networks; 3) blocking of the lines or switching centers of the national
network occurs on the routings (the codes are indicated); 6) the location of the
blocking of the lines or switching centers of the international network occurs on
the routings (codes are indicated).

The signals transmitting the information and requiring that special measures be
taken with respect to network control are as follows: 1) blocking has occurred
in the switching center. It is proposed that the load be reduced by 25, 50, 75
or 1002 (one of these figures is indicated): 2) blockings in the line groups or
in the switching centers of the national network have arisen in the stated
routing (the codes are indicated). It is oroposed that the load be reduced by
25. SO. 75 or 1002 (one of these figures is indicated); 3) the same as 2). but
for the international network; 6) the signal (indicated by the signal identifier
code) is cancelled; S) the proposed action is taken.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
l. CCITT. GREEN BOOK, Vol V'I—I.I‘1'L', 1973.
2. CCIT‘I‘. Period 1977-1980. COM 11-No.1.

3. CCI‘I‘T. Period 1977-1980, COM l.1-No.16ln

90

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SOME CHARACTERISTICS OF PACKET-SWITGED DATA TRANSMSSION SYSTEMS

[Article by V. N. Koshelev, yoscov, pp 85-90]

The purpose of this paper is to investigate the dependence of the mathematical
expectation of the time spent by a message broken down into packets in a queue,
for the packet switching method (KP) with priority parameter assimed to it by

p -- from the length of the packets. the number of packets and the nunber of out-
going channels from the UK. At the same time, a study will be made of the

uessage parameters which determine the choice of the length of the service-address
information (SAI). and the load was analyzed. The results of the analysis can be
used to select the number of packets into which it is necessary to break down the
message for a given nunber of outgoing channels from the UK.

Let us consider the dependence of the increase in message length for KP on the
increase in SAI volume. Let us assume that the length of the title of the packets
is approximately equal to the length of the titles of the messages when switching
messages (KS); then:

ewe-(wont . (1)
where 1/uc is the average message length with a title;

1/:_ is the average packet length with a title;

H3 is the title length;

m is the nunber of packets in the mssage.

Let us denote the z-coefficient of the length of the packet title indicating how
much the title length is less than the packet length:

I
"— I (2
6' Peua )
then ‘
“* Pn'd (3)

From (1) and (3). it is possible to obtain the expression relating the average
length of the complete message and the message broken down into packets:

91

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
a VB vs a .Slﬂk val. vats-a

i _ Mad) ti

 

 

"‘ “I“ (a)
or
4 4
n 'P r. ' (5,
where Jaw-0'1 '
°‘ (6)

5 is the packeting coefficient indicating how long the message broken down into
packets is with KP greater than the length of the same message with the KS method.

Analysis of the coefficients a and 3 for different values of 1/11", H3, m indicates
that the message informativeness coefficient for KP:

-.£ MOI-(hi
I. ﬂ“n————ma’ (7)

depends on a so that 1*]. for a”. The graph of this function is presented in
Figure. l.

The results of the analysis of a and i can be used when selecting H3 of the packet.

as! ,"m
(I
“ '
(I
41 c
-I

Figure l

The KP method permits transmission of the packets of one message simultaneously
over different channels. This leads to the presence of two cases influencing the
message servicing time for KP:

The service time is equal to the packet service time (sz):

I'he message servicing time is longer than the packet servicing time. but smaller
than the message servicing time for KS (N<m). It is obvious that in the general
case the packets of one message will be serviced on the UK in several cycles equal
to the following:

m
z “I N" (a)
where 'u‘ is the integer from dividing ml?! with the remainder,

N is the number of outgoing channels from UK.

92

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The intensity of the arrival of messages broken down into packets for servicing

for K? will be: xcg-rxn. and the load on the system when processing message is
broken down into packets:

gen-19" (10)

where c is the load on the system when transmitting packets in one operating
cycle 0? the system.

9:
9.“; ' (11)

The ratio of the loads on the system when using the K? on KS methods will be:

2-9:
9e- 9
Analysis of the interrelation of ac" and pa for different m and N is illustrated
in Figure 2, and it leads to the conclusion that increasing the number of packets
(m) in a message leads to reduction of the Qt: with constant N. Increasing the
number of packets in the message which increases the number of service cycles
(r) leads to a reduction in the upper bound of “ot‘ Increasing the number of out-
going channels (N) from UK offerSthe possibility of lowering the lower bound ccﬁ.

The results of analyzing cc, can be used to select the number of packets in a
message for the given number of outgoing channels from the UK.

(12)

 

Figure 2

Let us consider the variation of the average waiting times in the different

priority systems when using the KP method (wgnn), and let us compare them with

the mean waiting times for KS (We). Here s is the priority system index. The

mean waiting time graphs were Bonstructcd for the KS by the control systeus
for them taken from [1].

The average messagelength broken down into packets will be:

 

4.. m . - (13>
Pu PF:
93

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
For a system with fixed priority without interrupt it is possible to write:

    
     

uw- (1~.‘;M9ua)(1-W9...) (14)
0‘ £0” 9“ a
where j is a minimum positive integer such that
p
31.9“. < I . (15)
O . 9... (I (16)
g I: 1- £990.
0 41— . 9a.“.
900-0 .

p is the number of different classes of priorities.

The family of characteristics rm: and unite-p is depicted in Figure 3.

For a system with fixed priority with interrupt for auto. we obtain:

32. ' ‘ l '
h F:- ’ §.'%3 (Pm, .Pcos)'i-thleuawm - (17)
w n .P.‘
‘* 1- 9“. .
u up on '9‘. .
The family of characteristics a"? and true P is depicted in Figure lo.
“ 1?

For systems of priorities with dependent delay. the mathematical waiting time
which is required for completion of servicing of the message broken down into
packets which is in processing, on entry of the new message into the system of
packets considering (10) and (13) will be:

In P 9P (18)
W“. 11%;“ r?

P
where "0'{.1°p/”p is the mathematical expectation of the time which is required

for completion of servicing of a complete message in processing, on entry of a
new message into the system [1]. The growth rate of the priorities b for the
system of priorities with dependent delay [1] for K? remains the same as for KS.

For the system of priorities with dependent delay without interrupt for

Osncn<rle ’4

w 5 a W“. /("gca) ' Z,‘ 90‘; we» (1'5‘./59) '

elf 1".P.‘gq.(t‘sP/6~) (19)

The family of characteristics a": and ”#2". is depicted in Figure 5.

For a system of priorities with dependent delay with interrupt for Osccq<rlé

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

, 9 .. 5
"Te: I E. 9:4“ 'EP/s) m 2'. ‘ 1'54: - (20)

“pure;
2'9 .
... 'Z;(1-:——:-) mums-.0 335)]

The family of characteristics ""31! and u H33 is depicted in Figure 6.

Cup Cr.‘ cwp
Analysis of the graphs in Figures 3-6 indicates that the mathematical expectation
of the time spent by the messages broken down into packets in the queue for KP is
appreciably less than the mathematical expectation of the time spent by the
messages in the queue for KS. It must be noted that for all the priority system
the messages broken down into packets have a finite value of H for all cate-
gories of priorities for saturation of the servicing device (ca-B. The applica-
tion of KP for the system of priorities with dependent delay turns out to be
especially useful, for with KS for all groups of priorities they have u -

for oc-l, and for KP, for all the priority groups the, have finite, insggnificant
times spent by the messages in the queue.

 

e "a '-
#w'4.w W I‘M 'l‘tnwcn’
I2 ’=/

95 Figure 6

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Analyzing the graphs in Figures 3-6 jointly with Figure 2 it is possible to draw
the conclusion that increasing N. m, 8 leads to a decrease in "cup'

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Kleinrock, L. KOML‘NKATSIONNYYE SETI [Communications Networks], translated
from the English, Moscow, Nsuke, 1970.

96

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SIMULATION OF PROGRAMMED CONTROL PWCESSES IN SWITCHING CENTERS
[Article by Ye. V. Konovalov, Minsk, up 90-93]

The purpose of the studies of the control processes in the switching centers

(KU) is development of recommendations, methods and inntments for the KI! devel-
opers. However. active use of the results of these studies in design practice is
being held up for a number of reasons, among which inadequateness of the investi-
gated models for the design projects and noncorrespondence of the purposes of the
studies to the actual requirements of the developers are significant. In particu-
lar, the basic "product" of the researchers is means of calculating quantitative
parameters (numbers of devices, sizes of storage elements. and so on). that is,
parametric optimdzation means, at the same time as the basic problems of the
developers consist in selecting effective structures and algorithms for the
operation (SA!) of the hardware and software, that is, structural optimization of
the project. The SAP as the most conservative design elements must be selected
in the early design phases and not be changed insofar as possible.

One of the most complex components of the KU with program control is the internal

software (VPO). Analysis of a number of Ru designs and publications [1] demon-
strated that defining characteristics of the SAP of the VP0 include the following:

“1 — composition of the actuating processes (1?);

"2 - configuration of the communications with respect to transmission of requests
between the service objects and 1?;

M3 - configuration of the communications between the IP and the KU hardware;
”g- - 1? resource distribution algorithms;

Y1 - composition of the control processes (UP);

Y, - configuration of communications for transfer of control between processes;
Y3 - configuration of communications between the UP and the hardware;

Y; - UP algorithms.

97

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I Uh vs I as use. you Vl'l—I

By the process (I? and D?) we mean the part of the VP0 which is initiated when
transferring control with respect to some input.

The service objects("2) for the IP are subscribers, the KU equipment and operating
personnel or signals (requests) detecting them, equipment elements (ferrodes,
monitoring circuits, directive registers, and so on). For the UP, the "objects of
service" are the IP and U? of lower level (Y2).

The hardware mentioned in the ﬁand Y includes the control computer assemblies
which provide for operation in the mult9program mode (processors, interrupt system,
timers, and request storage elements).

Each of the enumerated VPO characteristics is defined in terms of the values of
simpler quality characteristics (types of interrupt systems, timers, disciplines,
and so on) and quantitative parameters (the dimensions of the storage elements, the
priorities, and so on), which are elementary design solutions (EPR) for the
developer. The directional sort of the EPR considering their combinability,
researcher recommendations and. possibly, simulation results is the basic method

of synthesizing the SAP VPO for the developer.

The schematic for the formation of the design solutions for constructing the VP0
constructed on the basis of the morphological approach [2] confirms the extra-
ordinarily high diuensionality of the problem of SAP synthesis and the necessity
for decouposition of it -- isolation of partial problems of SAP analysis and
synthesis and partial models of the object (ChMO) corresponding to them. However,
the systens approach requires that in this case all the ChMO be representable in
the form of reductions of some generd-model of the object (0M0), where reduction
of the latter must be realized as a result of cutting out certain elements and
detailing others and the DMD communications.

Since the control in the K0 is realized as a set of request detection processes
and dynamic distribution of the KC resources among them, only a queueing system
(5N0) containing all types of sources of requests. resources and interactions
between them which are characteristic of the KU as the object of simulation, can
be used as the 0M0. Analysis of the known classes of SNO [3] demonstrated that
all of them are inadequate to the KU as the object of investigation, and the basic
cause for this consists in the fact that between individual types of K0 resources
there are dominance ratios which do n0t exist in the known SMO classes. There-
fore it is proposed that the 5M0 of the type presented in the figure. hereafter
called 5N0 with nonuniform resource and dominance (5H0 NRD), be used as the OMB.

The SEC consists of some number of sources (I) of requests and the service junction
(U0), which. in turn. contains storage elements (N) and service devices of the
following types: processors (P), sets (K), markers (M) and regiscers (R). The
dcmi ndnt devices are P which participate in servicing all the requests and for
some of them realize search for a free and available device of the K, M or R type,
using it (7) and release of it (8). The requests occurring in I are detected via
the interrupt systems P or by scanning and they go to the 80 directly (1) or
through the N (4. 3). The N are also used to store (2) the requests, during the
servicing of which planned or random interrupts occur. Certain types of K are

96

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

converted to I (6) when busy. Assignment of arbitrary numbers of the types of
I, N, P, K, M, R and the quantities of eletents of each type is possible.

 

Key:
a. I f. R
b. N 3. TS
c. P h. 80
d. K i. 00
e. M

The sequence of executing the I? with respect to single requests of each type,

the procedure for use and release of the required [10 resources. the rules for ming
the N and departure of the requests from the system (S) are given by the flow
charts (TS) [4]. The control strategies (SU) give the resource distribution
algorithua of the U0 under load conditions and in accordance with the TS. The
characteristics Sﬁ-ha form the TS. and n‘. YrJ‘, the SU.

In addition to the enumerated "large" components, the description of the cnn also
contains groups of parameters characterizing the behavior of its individual ele-
ments. For example. for description of each group of uniform I. assignment of

the following parameters is required: the number of I in the group, the number of
requirements in one I. the sign of the fact that the I of the given group is
formed from K elements when they are busy. the sign of activity (the request
causes an interrupt or is detected during scanning of the I), the type of genera-
tion rise distribution. type of impatience function, the characteristics of the
indicated functions.

Thus, all types of service objects and KU resources (the switching bank is repre-
sented in terms of the availability parameters of the K). and also all of the
above-enumerated charact.ristics of the SA? of the VP0 have found their reflection
in the given model. Consequently. the described SNO of the NRD is adequate to

the KU as the object of investigation and the goals of the VP0 developers.

99

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
I'UI Ufl”o\.lﬂb UJL Vi‘hl

The problem of the applicability of the proposed model is solved as follows.

i. Realization of the 0H0 in complete volume is meaningful only as a system of
automating the design of high-level KC permitting the developer to compare ele-
mental and complex design solutions matched with some system of forming them.
the low recurrence rate of the solution of the synthesis problem of the SAP VPO
makes this application of it highly problematic.

2. Realization of the ChMO containing all of the DMD elements is possible, but
a limited number of versions of TS and SH, namely, the versions which describe the
possibilities of the specific KU design system.

This realization, which is a simulation system with the dialog mode can be used

for complex parametric adjustment of the installed RH for specific operating condi-
tions.

3. Using the 0H0 jointly with the system for formation of the design solutions.

by reduction of it it is possible to obtain the ChMD permitting realization in the
form of analytical calculation schemes or simple simulation nodels describing the
"elementary" processes in the KU. Considering through the OMB the influence of
other processes on the investigated process, it is possible to obtain highly relia-
ble recommendations with respect to efficient rc-lization of it

BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Lazarev, V. 6.; Piyl'. Ye. 1.; turuta. Ye. N. PROGRAMMNOYE UPRAVLENIYE NA
UZLAKH KONNUTATSII [Programmed Control at the Switching Centers]. Moscow.
Svyaz', 1978.

2. Saati, T. L. ELEMENTY TEORII )USSOVOGO OBSLCZHIVANIYA I YEYE PRILOZHENIYA
[Elements of Queue Theory and Its Application]. Moscow. Sovetskoye radio, 1971.

3. Yanch. E. PROGNOZIROVANIYE NAUCHNO-TEKHNICHESKOGO PROGRESSA [Forecasting
Scientific-Technical Progress]. translated from the English. Moscow, Progress,
197a.

6. Pospelcv, D. A. VVEDENIYE V TEORIYU VYCHISLITEL'NYKH SISTEN [Introduction to
the Theory of Computer Systems]. ﬁcscow, Sovetskoye radio, 1972.

100

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FUN (DH-1i l\l INF "NI \

CONSIDERATION OF THE LENGTH OF TRANSMITTED MESSAGES FOR ROUTINCS IN CHANNEL-
SWITCHED NETWORKS

[Article by N. l. Kuznetsov and 0. N. Romanov, Moscow, pp 96-97]

Traditional routing algorithms in channel-switched networks (KR) do not consider
the busy time of the channels when processing the next call inasmuch as this

time, as a rule. is unknown when the call comes for processing. Another situation
is observed when using the KK mode in computer communications networks where
exchange is by messages of previously defined length and, consequently. the service
time of the messages by the communications channels is known. It appears natural
that consideration of the length of the transmitted messages (calls) and. conse—
quently, the busy time of the channels processing them when solving the routing
problems and the problems of load limitation can give an increase in operating
efficiency of the network. For example, if the length of the sent message is
small with respect to the average length of the messages in the network. it is
obviously possible to send it over a bypass path; if the length of the message is

long, this solution leads to inefficient use 0. resources and a reduction in out-
put capacity of the network.

In reference [1] a very reasonable routing method is proposed which consists in the
fact that for message transmission through the network the path with minimum cost
is selected. The path cost is defined as the sum of the cost of the sides (the
routings) on this path. The cost of a side is calculated as the mathematical

expectation of the number of failures in this side as a result of the fact that
the given message is received for servicing:

dislxlmohi/‘ni)~p~(n.t/i)]dl, (1)
0
where \0 is the intensity of the traffic flow to the side:

n is the number of channels in the side:

pn(k,g/i) is the probability that k channels on the routing will be busy at the
time t under the condition that at the initial point in time 1 channels were busy.

Let us consider the routing as a multiple-queue queueing system. We shall consider
that the lengths of the messages reaching the routing and, consequently. their

servicing times in the channels are distributed by an exponential law. Under
the assumption of the simplest traffic flow to the side. the probabilities

101

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
l'tlll ‘Iftu slu- \nis' "nus

pn(k,t,i) are solutions of the corresponding system of Kolmogorov~Chapmaa
ordinary differential equations.

Below, the authors have proposed a generalization of formula (1) to two cases of

considering the length of the transmitted messages when solving the routing prob-
lem.

Let us determine the cost of transmitting a message of length I over a routing of
n channels under the condition that at the time t,i channels are busy for a random
time distributed by an exponential law as

d2(b-fﬁﬁdmt/tv1.l)-p.(n.t/s)}dt. (2)

where §n(n.t/i+l,i) is the probability that all n channels will be busy at the
time t under the condition that at the initial time 1 channels were busy. and the
(1+1) channel is busy for the time i.

It is easy to reduce formula (2) to the form

a ' ‘
4433 -1‘ [pm (n-Ltl'») ‘P~(n.t/L)] dt .
‘ 11, [M an (1.1/ '0‘ 9.. (mt-14) - 9,. (a. l/L)]dt. (za)

where all the probabilities are solutions of the corresponding Kolmogorov-

Chapman systems. It is possible to obtain the value of d1"(i) in explicit form
for a specific value by solving the corresponding Kolmogorov-Chapman systems and

further integration. Figure l. a, b. c shows the form of these functions for the
cases n-l,2.3.

l”

     
     

I

‘ a

(a
a n b
59

0-1

 

FOR OITWCJAI.USEi)NLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

For i-vo the function d"1(i) approaches an asymptote, the slope and the displace-
ment of which depend on the flow intensity. The slope is identical for all i.

In the case where at the time of appearance of a message of length l the times
b1, b2, .... b1 of completion of servicing of the calls using bray channels are
known, formula (1) assumes the form:

d:'(t,b.,6.,....%;){alga/301.5“...6;.l)-p.(§/i.6.,-,8jd.t_ (3,

where the variable of the type pun/j. b1.....b ) is the probability that all

n channels in the side will be busy under the cgndition that at the initial point
in time j channels out of n were busy for the times b1.....bj.

The values of di'". just as d1". can be obtained in explicit form for the specific
values of the paramters entering into formula (3). Figure 2 shows the form of
the function d'" for n-2.

 

Figure 2

It is possible to introduce the average cost of messages serviced by the network
into formulas (l). (2), (3). In this case it is possible to consider d'i' d"1,
d"'1 as the total cost of the messages which will be rejected as a result of
servicing the given call. This permits use of not only the nuuber of lost calls.
but also their total length as the purpose function, which hm great significance
when optimizing the volume of information transmitted by the network. In the
general case the message costs and the purpose fmction can be arbitrary.

it is necessary especially to note that the discussed approach permits solution
of both the routing and the load limitation problem. Actually. when determining
the message transmission routing. a path is selected with minimum cost. that is.
with minimum losses. If the expected losses are greater than the cost of the
transmitted message itself. then it is rejected and. thus, the load limitation
problem is solved. The authors performed a statistical simulation of a network
with K for the three enumerated methods of determining the cost of sending a
message over the channels. For simplification of the statistical model it was
proposed that the intensities of the level of messages in all channels are equal
and conmensurate with the intensity of the calls in the network as a whole.

The operating efficiency of the network was estimated by the reject coefficient

(Kreject) which is the ratio of the number of messages which will be rejected to

103

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I ”H \lfll\ .I‘t. tu‘l’. \II‘I.’

the totallummer of messages reaching the network, and the loss coefficient

(Kloss) which is the ratio of the Sum of the lengths of the messages which were
rejected to the total length of all messages.

The simulation demonstrated that in the case where the cost of sending a message
was determined in accordance with formula (2), Kreject and K1 as decreased by
15-20% and 5-101, respectively. by comparison with the case w ere the cost of
sending was calculated in accordance with formula (1), that is, when the message

length was not taken into account at all when determining the cost of sending it
through the commications channels.

Consideration of the time required to complete servicing of the messages which are
already being serviced on the routing at the time of arrival of a new call (cal-
culation of cost in accordance with formula (3)), further reduces Kreject and
K1035 by 15-20% and 5-102, respectively.

The representation of the mathematical expectation of a routing as a multiqueue
queueing system determines the formulas for calculating the cost of sending
messages in the network and the load limitation criteria. The performed statisti-
cal simulation confirms the correctness of the approach consisting in considering

the lengths of the sent messages to the solution of the routing and load limita-
tion problems.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Glushkov. V. M.; Kalinichenko. L. A.; Lazarev. V. 6.; Sifonov. V. I.
SETI EVH [Computer Networks], Moscow. Svyaz'. 1977.

104

. FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL (:58 ONLY

INFLUENCE OF CONTROL FUNCTION DISTRIBUTION ON OUTPUT CAPACITY OF A HULTIPROCESSOR
CONTROL COMPUTER

[Article by S. Sh. Kutbitdinov, Leningrad, pp 97-100]

One of trends noted in the construction of the control systems of switching cen-
ters with programmed control is use of multiprocessor control computers (BUN)
consisting of two or more processors having a common memory.

In reference [1] a study is made of the basic versions of the structural organiza-
tion of two-processor SUN. A synthesis is made of the structural organization of
the two-processor EUH by the criterion of maximum output capacity, by whid: we
mean the maximum number of calls which can be serviced by the control system per
unit time with given service quality.

The quality of servicing a call is determined by the probability of its loss and
will be within the admissible limits if the probability Ploss does not exceed a

given value, that is, if the condition Plossspad' Therefore in accordance with

the definition of output capacity. it was demonstrated that

“(pwl).(1-P~1)Ar
(1)

Key: 1. loss
where \ is the intensity of the arrival of calls at the switching center.

For each of the investigated versions of structural organization of a two—processor
EUH. expressions were obtained for the probability Floss under the assumption that
the scanning functions of the line. patch cord and order circuit svstems are not
realized by processors making up the two-processor BUM.

As a result of the performed analysis the best versions with resoect to output
capacity turned out to be the versions of structural organization of a two—
processor BUN Operating in the time-sharing mode for the load and in the function-

sharing mode.
The choice of the two-processor EUH :an be based on the fact that this type of
control system is quite widely used in practice. The two-processor configurations

are elementary structural parts from which significantly more complex multi-
processor structures can be assembled.

105

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
IQ.“ \ll '.‘.."|v ‘10... \ll‘ltl

In the given paper a study is made of the influence of the distribution m zlw
control functions on the output capacity of the two-processor Elm ope-ruling In
the function-sharing mode, for which the functions realized in this phase of
servicing the tall are divided into two groups. Each group of functions is
realized by one of the EU}! processors; therefore the servicing of a call consists
of two phases. The influence of the call processing function distribution between
the two BUM processors on the output capacity of the entire control system is
investigated considering performance of the functions of scanning the line, patch
cord and order circuit system by the processor of the first call service phase.

The mathematical model of the investigated version of the structural organization
of a two-processor EU}! can be represented in the form of a single-queue two-phase
queueing systen (5m) with simplest input flow of requests of intensity A-NA

(N is the nusber of call servicing steps), with unlimited queue ahead of the
second phase and exponential service time distribution in each phase with intens-
ity in.

When servicing the call, part of the speed (v) of the EUM will be spent on per-
forming the scanning operations; therefore the intensity of servicing the calls
during processing can be represented in the form

2
r '- Ea)
f‘(D Ku
Key: 1. processing; 2. scanning
where K is the average nunber of operations per unit tine spent by the EL’M on

scanningcgﬂe line. patch cord and order circuit system; Kprocessin is the
average number of operations spent by the BUM on processing one cal .

For the investigated two-phase 5m. Kscan'K'scan'Hc 5c , but since it was noted
that the scanning functions are performed only by the irst phase processor,
Knscan'o.

For processing a call -K' +K" . where K' is the average
number of operations stgngcgﬁsprogggs :2 on3r85$isby the firgfoﬁﬁe processor;
K"process is the nunber of operations spent on processing the same call by the
second phase processor. The values of Knorocess and K"pr°°ess are related to the
value of Kprocess by the expressions: ‘

KQLde . X?“ 41'4“» .
Key: 1. process

where 1 is a coefficient giving the distribution of the call processing functions
between the two servicing phases (processors) (0<-u<1).

For the described two-phase SMO. the expression was obtained for the call loss
probability Ploss in the form:

106

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFK'IAI. USE ONLY

1)
‘0 'A)1(gu - 45")?" ‘ (" 6) 1‘00
(222 A A [e _ q '

P.- " r-ae—

Key: 1. ad; 2. loss

where P P K (12

Key: 1. scan;2; process

Tad is the admissible tine the request spends in an individual call servicing
step.

From the obtained expression it is obvious that for a fixed value of Kscan' by
varying the value of a it is possible to obtain different values of P1055. Using
the initial data close to the actual data, a numerical calculation was performed.
and the functions P1033(a) were constructed for fixed values of Kscan'

Investigating the influence of the value of u on P~° for a fixed value of K
an optimal value of (at) was found for which P1033 aiﬁ-min P1033(a), that is.
the value of 3*(Kscan) determining the optimal distribution of the call processing
functions between the EUH processors.

scan’

Thus. from what has been stated it is possible to draw the following conclusion.

1. Great achievements in the field of microprocessor engineering have led to

the appearance of distributed and mixed methods of program control in the switch-
ing centers for which the performance of individual call processing functions is
invested in individual microprocessors or specialized processors. Therefore it
is necessary to develop a procedure for optimal distribution of the call process-

ing functions among several processors to increase theoutput capacity of such
control systems.

2. The performed study of the operation of a two-processor BUN operating in the
function-sharing mode demonstrated that the distribution of the call processing

functions among processors greatly influences the output capacity of the entire

SUN.

3. The developed method of optimal distribution of the call processing functions
among processors can be extended to multiprocessor EUH which contain more than
two processors with identical speed having a common memory.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
l. Ignat'yev, V. 0.; Kutbitdinov, 5. Sb. "A Problem of Svnthesizing Structural

Organization of the Control System of a Switching Center,“ TEKHNIKA SREDSTV
SVYAZI [Communications Hardware], 1980. TPS Series.

107

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
PU“ UI'I‘IQ IAI. \Ibf. UNIJ

NUTISC ALGORITHMS AND COWUNICATIONS QUALITY IN A HULTIPOIAR DATA TRANSMISSION
NETWORK

[Article by N. P. Krutyakova, Leningrad, pp 100-103]

For breakdown of the overall problem of designing an optimal multipolar commun—
ications network it is possible to isolate the problem of synthesizing the net-
work control in an independent class [1]. The algorithm for the solution of
these problem can make up the software for the network control centers during
operation of the network and also be used in the automated commications network
design system and the network control system.

The problem of synthesizing the communications network control in general and
data transmission network (PD) in particular, belong to the class of mathematical
programing problems. Very frequently the probability of timely delivery or qual-
ity of connunications Q is used as the purpose function in them. The form of the
purpose Emotion Q of the network essentially depends on the traffic flow routing
algorithm. Thus, for strict solution of the problem of control synthesis it is
first necessary to solve the analysis problem: to determine the analytical
expression Q as a fmction of the load characteristics of the network, its struc-
tural parameters and routing algorithm. For this purpose, a study was made of a
tripolar network as the elementary cell of a multipolar PD [data transmssion]
network, the more so in that it is possible to propose structural stability of the
results of investigating such a network and extension of these results to networks
with a large nunber of jmctions [2].

Three routing algorithm were considered: message distribution by fixed routes
(1), a set of fixed routes with probabilities {p1 q} where p1 q is the probability
of transmission of messages over the q-th path frgm the eadsting £1 paths
between i and j junctions of the network (2). the distribution of megsages using
bypass routings when one basic and several bypass routings are defined for each
message flow M in the network. but the bypass routings are used if it is
impossible to e the basic routing (3). The basic assunptions are as follows:
the message flows in the network are Poisson; the switching centers (UK) and
commication branches (VS) are absolutely reliable; the information aging time
and the message service time are distributed by an exponential law with intensi-
ties "i! u . respectively, for the i-th VS; the service type in the V5 is with
rejects (0 . limited waiting (OOZh), and unlimited waiting (0211); the messages
serviced through a tandem junction in the network with rejects occupy two counun-
ications channels simultaneously (for a tripolar network); here

108

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL IESI’ ()NI \

Celki’celi s’ 8-1.2, [3]. and. consequently, uu-minuij , 3-1.2, where Celi' is
the operating carrying capacity of the VS between 5the i-th and j-th junctigns

of the network. 1.16 (1.... N}. N is the number of network junctions. As has
already been noted. the problem consists in determining the analytical expressions
for the comunications quality Q for a network with the sane topology. but differ-
ent network algorithms for servicing the messages or routing algorithms.

The assumptions made with respect to the nature of the processes occurring in the
network permit consideration of it as a Markov type queueing system. The method
of solving the problem consists in constructing phase spaces of the Markov model
of the network for different routing algorithms and finding the probability vector
of different states of the network under steady-state conditions. P-(Pi). i-l.k
determined from the equation 9-?” [4]. where P1 is the steady-state probability

of the i-th state of the Markov model of the network; k is the number of states

of the Markov model of the network; v is the matrix of transition probabilities of
states of the network. The transition matrix elements W are calculated by known
procedures for a queueing system {6. 5]. Q is defined €££SY finding the vector P.
Thus. for the PD netwurk with rejects when N-3. v1-0. 1-1.3, the communications
quality Q for the following methods of message servicing was determined:

a) The message distribution over the direct (shortest) routings between network
junctions (algorithm 1):

\1 is the message flow intensity in the i-th VS.

For a uniform network when \1-‘. ui-L, i=l.3,
- P
Qw'r~l

b) The message distribution when using a tandem routing for one of the flows
=1, i€{1.2.3} (alaorithm 1):

~ 1 [v M A
u.=—— ._ —o.~—:n o.
banotll:ﬂ A: At‘“: ].
ran-r. “‘ kw.
V“
where .‘,""~“ {r :I r P.- A ' 1.2. is the message service intensity in the

corresponding branch entering into the tandem routing.

For a uniform network
spi-sr‘

l) ————-

has)» ' 5r"

 

109

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
IN!“ Url‘l‘ IAL U.’l’. \II‘L'

c) The message distribution when using probability distribution of one of the
flows l1, ieil,2,3}over possible routing; (algorithm 2):

o ~-'-[2 _‘—*0w£:—*o- monk)“ 11 0k]

1". I-I'
k' 1 . h'e's
where (I ~131;r1 0t
I'i i"' ’
'5 ‘

x is the part of the messages of the flow l1 serviced over the direct routing.

For a uniform network

\ .1 wound-r)!“ e:
“20 ((roA)‘v(l-1)le I. rel

d) The message distribution when using bypasses for one of the flows X1, 16! 1,2. 3]
(algori than 3)’

‘2 ﬁ—lot ‘—;.o- -'A+‘——‘21 M

‘ﬁ37Laz 1; ku'
[‘03 I":
where , . .
A .1, M . A: n 0!.
I“ or” A. 1“ pt’

lib

For a uniform network when 31-- --1 \1-1, 1-1.3

_1‘0L102
”awaken-2'

For the network with N>> and vtjlo, i,je{1....N}, Q was determined when using
a Markov model of the network with absorbing states. In this case Q of the net-
work is represented as a function Q of the V5 and the routing algorithm.

Studies of the network Q as a function of X /u made it possible to discover the
advantages of one routing algorithm or another for different network loads and
also the behavior of the functional Q. Thus. for example. the studies demon-
strated that Q3 :Q' in the entire investigated range of low variation. This is
also confirmed 3analvtically. In [2] it was determined that for A>l in a uniform
network the communications quality when using bypass paths for all flows is less
than 0' 0' that is, there are limiting loads in a tripolar uniform network for
which algorithm has has no advantage. Considering what has been discussed. it
is obviously possible to talk about the maximum number of flows in a nonuniform
network, designation of bypass routings for which retains the advantages of
algorithm 3 in the entire range of load variation.

110

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL NSF. ONLY

The solutions of the enumerated analysis problems permit transition to the solution
of the problems of synthesizing the control algorithm by the criterion of max Q.

In particular, exact analytical expressions are obtained for the parameters of
algorithm 2 in a trigolar network where a defined ratio of network parameters was

obtained Q1Q2(Ql-(12/u1)Qz)ZQ3, only on the satisfaction of which is it expedient
to use algorithm 2 as compared to algorithm 1.

The obtained expressions for Q and their analysis permit exact solution of the

problem of message flow control synthesis or determination of the class of optimal
control algorithms for the network structure and message flows for various load
characteristics of the network in order to insure max Q.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

1. Krutyakova, N. P. “Transformation of the Multipolar Communications Network
Synthesis Problem." TEKHNIKA SEEDSTV SVYAZI [Communications Hardware],
No 6, 1977, IPS Series.

2. Gorbenko, N. 1.; Krutyakova, N. P. "Comparative Characteristics of the
Information Flow Distribution Algorithms of Communications Network Control
Systems." TEKHNIKA SREDSTV SVYAZI. No 6. 1978, T95 Series.

3. Zakharov. G. P. SETI PEREDACHI DANNYKH [Data Transmission Networks],
Part 1, Leningrad. L315. 1976.

a. Raskin. L. G. ARALIZ SLOZHNYKH SISTEM I ELEMENTY TEORII OPTIMAL'ht a
UPRAVLENIYA [Analysis of Complex Systems and Elements of Optimal Control
Theory]. hoscow, Sovetskoye radio. 1976.

S. Tarakanov, K. V.; Ovcharov. L. .31.; Tytyshkin, A. N. ANALITICHESKIYE

METODY ISSLEDOVANIYA SISTEM [Analytical Methods of Systems Research],
Moscow, Sovetskoye radio, 1974.

111

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
STRUCTURAL 9RINCIPLES OF AN AUTOMATED DESIGN SYSTEM FOR INFORMATION DISTRIBUTION
SYSTBiS AND DEVICES

[Article by V. G. Lazarev. N. Ya. Parshenkov and Ye. l. Piyl'. Moscow . PP 105-
106

[Text] Progress in the field of communications. computer engineering and micro-
electronics has led to significant development of information distribution sys-
tems. The information distribution systems (communication systems) represent an
example of complex systems. and they include the channels and channel-forming
equipment. information transmission interception means. switching equipment and
other devices providing for the transmission and distribution of various infor-
mation among the sources and receivers (users).

At the present time computer engineering means are finding broad application in
communication systems. This is leading to a qualitative change in the strucs
tural principles of both the communication networks and the control systems in
the communication centers and networks. A new system with programmed control
has come to replace the crossbar switching centers (UK) with register-marker
control. In the new system the processes of servicing the requests to set up
calls are controlled by programmed devices. the nucleus of which at the medium-
and large-capacity UK is made up of control computers (EUH) analogous with re-
spect to structural principle. operation and capabilities to the most modern
computers. At the low-capacity UK, microcomputers and special control units
(00) in the form of microprogrsmmtd UU are finding broad application.

The UK with programmed control create good prerequisites for accelerating the
introduction of dynamic control of information flows on the communicationinet-
works ensuring a significant increase in the efficiency of the use of the chan-
nel and switching equipment by comparison with the presently used static infor-
mation distribution as a result of redistribution of the flows with a change in
situation on the communication network. Thus. at the present time the control
system is an independent. quite highly organized element of the communication
system based on broad application of complex control devices and modules.
Therefore the design of the control system as a whole and its individual devices
is becoming such a labor-intensive. complex process that it does not appear pos-
sible to construct a sufficiently efficient control system for a modern communi-
cation network manually. using only design experience and intuition.

112
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFK'IAL USE ONLY

The design of other elements of a modern communication system (the structure of

the communication network with selection of the channel group capacities and/or

their carrying capacities. the structure of the switching system of the UK) also
requires the application of computers.

Consequently, at the present time it has become necessary to build an automated
design system for information distribution systems and devices (ASPRI).

when building the ASPRI. undoubtedly it is necessary to consider the existing
experience of a number of organizations with respect to developing automated de-
sign systems (ASP) for individual elements of the communication system (the au-
tomated design system for network structure. the automated system for calculat-
ing call losses in the switching system. and so on).

However. in our opinion it is necessary to create not individual automated sys-
tems for designing and calculating the parameters of the network elements or UK.
but an integrated ASP constructed on a uniteJ procedural base. The creation of
the integrated ASPRI even with staged design of the communication system will
permit consideration of the interrelation of its individual elements. The
structural principles of the integrated ASPRI during the development of which
research experience at the IPPI of the USSR Academy of Sciences with respect to
automation of the design of individual elements of a communication system are
discussed.

Considering the properties of the communication system and the capabilities of
modern computers. it is expedient to construct the ASPRI in the form of a multi-
modular hierarchical structure. Here the ASPRI is an open system and permits
inclusion and/or replacement of its individual functional modules (subsystems).
The structural.principles of the ASPRI and its individual subsystems have been
developed as applied to the channel switching network. However. the ASPRI per-
mits inclusion of the required subsystems and modules for consideration of the
specific nature of the design of the message and packet switching networks.

The ASPRI includes four subsystems: the design of the communication network.
the selection of the optimal flow control algorithms. the selection of the ar-
chitecture of the control system and design of the SUM.

The ASPRI operation system is a four-level hierarchical structure. The first
(highest) level includes the chief monitor of the system. the control and ser-
vice programs providing for the choice of one of the subsvstems in the dialogue
mode. 0n the second level (the subsystem level) there are suhsystem monitors
and control programs for the subsystem providing for the selection of functional
modules in the dialogue mode permitting the design of quite powerful devices of
the communication system (for example. the design of the comunication network
topology. the microprogram UU. and so on). The monitor and the control programs
of the functional module providing for selection of the functional modules are
located on the third level (the functional module level).

Each of the functional modules designed for solving a specific problem (encoding
the internal states of the automaton, selection of the channel distribution
method, and so on), has a monitor and fourth-level control programs which pro-
vide for inclusion and operation of defined functional design programs.

113
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
H)“ (lH'ﬂ IAI. Use; UNL‘I

The given ASPRI does not impose special requirements on the requester with rv-

spect to knowing formalized languages or design methods.

cates with the ASPRI in Russian, using terms and concepts
der these conditions. for simplification of the operation
lators, the "active designer-passive requester" principle

The developed structural principles of ASPRI permit broad
age elements and archives.

The resident port of the operation system of the ASPRI is
which takes a mall mt of :he ready-access memory of the

116

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The requester comuni-
familiar to him. Un-
system and the trans-
is used in the ASPRI.

use of external stor-

only the chief monitor
computer.
IN)R OFTWCJAL USIZCNNLY

INTRODUCTION OF A METHOD OF SETTING UP CALLS 91TH ALTERNATIVE ROUTINGS 0N
RURAL TELEPHONE NETWORKS

[Article by Yu. V. Eazarev and S. A. Krasnov. Moscow. Rostov . pp 106-108]

[Text] As is demonstrated in a number of papers [1. 2]. one of the possible
ways to improve communications quality and reliability is the introduction of a
method of setting up calls with bypass roulings combined with dynamic distribu-
tion of the call flows. However. up to now the structure of the rural telephone
networks (STS) provided for by the process design norms did not permit the pos-
sibility of introducing the bypass method of establishing connections, for the
STS was constructed by the radial-nodal principle. In addition. ATS [automatic
telephone offices]. the control units of which did not have the possibility of
implementing the method of setting up calls with bypasses. were used in
the STS.

At the present time. in the presence of significant graVitatiOfl between ATC
in the STS the Process Design Norms provide for the organization of transverse
couplings between the ATS of the same level. which, in turn. permits organiza-
tion of bypass routings from the point of view of the construction of the STS.
However. the equipment of the ATS widely used at the present time on the STS
(ATSK 100/2000. ATSK 50/200). with the exception of the ATSK 50/200 M. does not
permit organization of the method of setting up calls with prass routings on the
STS.

During studies of the efficiency of introducing the method of setting up

calls with bypasses and dynamic control. more attention was given to the
long-distance (HTS) and municipal telephone networks (CTS) than the rural tele-
phone networks which can be explained by the restrictions imposed by the struc-
ture of the STS and the ATS used in the STS on the possibility of introducing a
bypass method of Sntting up calls.

In the example of one of the STS, a study is made of the problem of the expedi-
ency of introducing the merhnd of setting up calls with bypasses and dy-
namic call traffic distribution on the rural telephone networks.

Results are presented from observations of the load variation between individual
automatic telephone offices. The main conclusions which can be reached on the
basis of the measurement data consist in the following:

115
FOR OFFKJAI.USE(NNLY
I‘U'. \II’I’ILIAI. 03‘ U"...

a. during the day the load is subject to significant fluctuations;

b. the peak load hours (plh) on individual service routings do not coin-
cide with respect to time of day;

c. the time of occurrence of the plh on individual service rOutings re-
mains invariant for different days of the week;

d. the increase in load on the STS begins at 0800 hours. and the decrease in
the traffic is observed beginning at 1700 hours;

e. the nature of the load variations on individual service routings basi-
cally depends on the nature of the production activity of the subscribers in—
cluded in the automatic telephone offices between which the given routing is or-
ganized.

In order to discover the possibility of introducing the method of setting

up calls with bypasses and dynamic call traffic distribution in the investi-
gated STS. on the basis of the obtained loads. a check calculation was made of
the quality of servicing the calls. The calculation was performed on the basis
of a method, the description of which is presented in [3]. Here the calculation
was performed for three cases: for the method of sellins uP C3115

out bypasses. for the method of setting up calls with bypasses and for
dynamic distribution of the call traffic based on the method of limiting the
tandem load during overloads when a threshold is established for the tandem
traffic in the form of the number of busy channels. on exceeding of which it is
forbidden to send tandem calls over the given routing. that is. it is forbidden
to use the given routing as a bypass routing.

The given check calculation demonstrated that with the introduction of the
method of setting up calls with bypasses. noticeable improvement in the
quality of servicing the calls is observed. In addition. analysis of the ob-
tained results demonstrated that a still more noticeable effect in improving the
quality of servicing the calls will be observed on introducing dynamic distribu-
tion of the call traffic.

During the process of performing the check calculation. a section of the STS was
discovered in which the losses with the method of setting up calls with-
out bypasses at certain points in time significantly exceeded the normative val-
ues of the losses.

With the introduction of the method of setting up calls with bypasses.
the losses between the automatic telephone offices in the given section. al-
though they decreased. still remained above the losses provided for by the
norms. 0n introduction of dynamic call traffic distribution on the basis of the
methods of restricting the tandem load during overloads. the losses obtained
during the calculation process turned out to be lower than the normative losses.

In order to organize the method of sor:ing up calls with bypasses. a
correction was made to the automatic telephone office equipment used in the in-
vestigated STS.

116

FOR‘0FFKJAL.US£(NVLY
FOR "FFICIAL USE ONLY

In particular. a module for organizing bypasses was introduced into the outgoing
stage markers. by means of which the cells not traveling over the direct path
(the first choice path) because of all the channels being busy in this group
were not lost. but were directed to the bypass routing (the second choice path).

Considering certain difficulties in introducing a completely automatic system of
dynamic call traffic distribution on the STS in view of the presence of a cross-
bar-type automatic telephone office on the network. the dynamic distribution of
the call traffic was organized by a schedule considering the plh on individual
service routings.

By calculating the quality of servicing the calls. the optimal schedule was se-
lected for limiting the tandem flow of calls for which the losses obtained at
any point in time are below the normative values of the losses.

When selecting the schedule. the method of selecting the optimal call flow dis-
tribution plan was used [6].

Then an experiment was run on the investigated section of the SIS which demon-
strated that an introduction of the method of setting up calls with by-
passes in combination with the dynamic call flow distribution elements. the call
losses between the automatic telephone offices decreased.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

1. Lazarev. V. 6., and Sawin, G. 6.. SETI SWAZI. UPRAVLENIYE I KOHMU‘IA'ISIYA
[Communication Networks. Control and Switching]. Moscow, Svyaz'. 1973.

2. Lazarev. V. C., Lazarev. Yu. V., and Parshenkov. N. Ya.. "Telegraph ConLrol
on CommunicationsNetworks." PRINTSIPY POSTROYENIYA USTROYSTV RASPREDELENIYA
IXFORMATSII [Structural Principles of Information Distribution Devices].
Moscow. Nauka. 1978.

3. Lazarev. Yu. V.. and Parshenkov, N. Ya.. "Iteration Methods of Calculating
Channel Switching Networks With Dynamic Control." UPRAVLENIYE NA SETYAKH I
UZLAKH SVYAZI [Control in Communication Networks and Centers]. Moscow.

Nauka. 1979.

4. Lazarev. Yu. V.. "Procedure for Calculating the Efficiency of the Methods of
Dynamic Call Traffic Control." III VSESOYUZNYY SYMPOZIUM P0 PROBLEMAM UPRAV-
LENIYA NA SETYAKH I UZLAKH SVYAZI: TBZISY DOKL. [Third All-Union Symposium
on Control Problems in Communication Networks and Centers: Summaries of Re-
ports]. Moscow. ﬁauka. 1978.

117
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
run Ute-sues. van sins.-

INFLUENCE OF THE CARRYING CAPACITY OF SWITCHING CENTERS ON DYNAMIC CONTROL EFFI-
CIENCY

[Article by Yu. V. Lazarev and I. V. Nikiforova, Moscow . pp 109-111]

[Text] One of the means of improving the use of communication channels and
lines and at the same time more efficient use of the communication network
structures is the introduction of dynamic call traffic distribution. However,
as was demonstrated in a number of papers. for example. in [1. 2], depending on
the structural principles of the communication network. its operating condi-
tions. various methods of dynamic control can give different effects. Thus. in
[2] it was demonstrated that the game method of dynamic control as applied to
the structural principle and operating conditions of the city telephone networks
(615) is preferable over. for example. the relief method. This is explained by
the fact that considering the peculiarity of the structure of the 618 (signifi-
cant connectedness of the switching centers and restrictions with respect to
losses), it is expedient to use only the paths which pass through one tandem
switching center (UK) as the bypass paths. Under these conditions, for the re-
lief method the criterion for selecting the path of setting up calls

for which the path length expressed in the number of tandem sections is used.
all of the bypass routings will be equivalent. By the game method, the crite-

rion for selecting the path of setting up calls, is the probability of
setting up the call. Accordingly. in the game method the bypass rout-
ings for setting up calls will not be equivalent, and they are clas-

sified as a function of the probability of setting Up the call.

It must be noted that up to now the efficiency of introducing one method or an-
other of dynamic control has been investigated without considering the carrying
capacity of the UK. at the same time as it is possible to expect that the carry-
ing capacity of the UK will have significant influence on the efficiency of in-
troducing various dynamic control methods. In order to determine the influence
of the UK carrying capacity on the effectiveness of introducing one dynamic con-
trol method or another. a number of GT5 networks have been simulated in which
the structural principles and operating features of the GT5 were taken into ac-
count. For comparison a study was made of the static distribution of the call
flows and two dynamic control methods: the relief method and the game method.

The results of simulating the CTS networks are presented which confirm the as-
sumption made previously that the carrying capacity of the UK has significant
influence on the effectiveness of introducing various dynamic control methods.

118

F1)R‘0FT1CJAI.IJSII(MHLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Analyzing the results obtained, it is possible to draw the following conclu—
sions:

a. introduction of the relief method improves the quality of call servicing in-
significantly by comparison with the static call traffic distribution. Intro-
duction of the game method leads to more noticeable improvement of the call ser-
vicing quality by comparison with static distribution than the relief method;

b. with a decrease in carrying capacity of the UK. the effect from introducing
the dynamic control methods decreases;

c. an introduction of different carrying capacity for different UK. a signifi-
cant difference is observed in the results obtained for the game method and the
relief method. Here the average network losses obtained for the game method are
less than the average network ;osses obtained for the relief method.

The fact of a decrease in the effect from introducing dynamic control methods
with a decreasing carrying capacity is obvious in general. Decreasing the car-
rying capacity of the UK for tandem call traffic. at the same time we exclude
the possibility of using bypass routings which. in the final analysis. also has
a negative effect on the call servicing quality.

The fact that for a different carrying capacity of different UK with the game
method of dynamic control significantly smaller average network losses are ob-
tained than for the relief method is explained as follows. As has already been
pointed out above. the path selection criterion for establishing the connection
in the relief method is the path length expressed in the magnitude of the tandem
sections. From the point of View of the given criterion all of the bypass rout-
ings for setting UP calls are equivalent. although these routings differ
significantly with respect to carrying capacity. The difference in carrying ca-
pacity is explained by the fact that each bypass routing consists of three sec-
tions (channel group. tandem CK, channel group) characterized by their carrying
capacity, and the carrying capacity of the entire route will be characterized by
the leaSt of the carrying capacities making up the given bypass route for
setting up the call. Thus, if the carrying capacity of the channel routes is
greater than the carrying capacity of the UK. with the relief method a nonopti—
mal plan for distribution of the call traffic can be formed.

By the game method. the criterion for which is the probability of SPtring

up thc call. differences will be discovered in the carrying capacity of dif—
ferent bypass routings and calls will be directed last to the bypass routings
having the least carrying capacity. The obtained results permit the conclusion
to be drawn that when estimating the efficiency of introducing one method of dy-
namic control or another. it is also necessary to consider the carrying capacity
of the UK. Failure to consider this factor can lead to a significant error when
estimating the effectiveness of introducing one method of dynamic control or an-
other.

119

FOR OFFKJAI.USEioNLN
run Urrn one. new. UN...

M “LIHJRAI'NV

Lazarev. V. C. , and Parshenkov. N. You "Came Method of Controlling 3 Com-
munications Network," AVTOMATY I UPRAVLENIYE. POSTROYBJIYE UPRAVLYAYUSHCHIKH
USTROYSTV I 818131 [Automate and Control. Construction of Control Units and
Systems]. Moscow. Nauka. 1974.

Lazarev. Yu. V.. "Effectiveness of Using Dynamic Call Traffic Control on the
City Telephone Networks," AVTOMATY I UPRAVLENIYE. POSTROYENIYE UJTROYSTV

UPRAVLENIYA SETYAMI SWAZI [Automata and Control. Construction of Communi-
catiomsNetwork Control Units], Moscow. Nauka. 1977.

120

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPLICATION OF THE METHODS OF DYNAMICS OF MEANS FOR ESTIMATING TBE EFFICIEWCY 0F
DYNAMIC TRAFFIC CONTROL IN NETWORKS WITH QUEUES

[Article by Yu. A. Lev. Kiev , pp 111-113]

[Text] In (1]. a study was made of the possibility of using the method of dy-
namics of means [2] for analyzing networks with queues. The discussion is con-
ducted using the example of a message-switched (KS) network. The problem
reduces to solving a system of differential equations with respect to the number
of messages in different parts of the network. that is, the lengths of the mes-
sage queues. Here the primary problem is determination of the system coeffi-
cients in each step of solving the system of differential equations for the in-
vestigated control algorithm. The coefficients are the message traffic intensi-
ties directed to each branch of the network, the flows of branch releases. and
the outgoing message flows from the network. A procedure is proposed for deter—
mining the indicated values.

2 1

Figure l .

 

Let us consider the example of 3 KS network depicted in Figure 1. Figure 2
shows the graph of the states of the message Circulating in the network. The
numbers 1 to 4 denote the incoming states of the message to the corresponding
network junction. the number 5 denotes the outgoing state of the message from
the network. The numbers 6-15 denote the states of the message in the queue and
being serviced in the corresponding branches of the network.

121

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I "'\ "I'. ll INC. ‘1‘.” ‘ll‘hl

Let us make the following assumptions. The external traffic flows of the net-
work are Poisson. The message lengths are distributed by an exponential law and
are determined independently in each junction (the hypothesis of Kleinrock inde-
pendence). The flows of releases of the branches are Poisson with intensities
equal to the corresponding intensities of the input flows of the branches if the
branch load is less than one (the Bern theorem). Otherwise the flow of branch
releases is Poisson with intensity equal to the carrying capacity of the branch.
All of the partial flows running through the given branch are limited to an
equal degree. Thus. all the processes occurring in the system described by the
graph (see Figure 2) are Markov. The system of equations for the average num-
bers of states of the message (average lengths of queues) look like the follow-
ing:

dm
If! “M’AQng'l-u imu 'Lxumu."

"Mb'ﬂ-g'lnml'l”mt'lumu‘.

:EI— -1‘5nﬂ *A as'“;" ,5ﬂt3'J-hsnmu. (1)
(1

:£%:_ Albﬂmg'A.5;"‘bt

dmls

T'J’H’ m“-ll$5m15v

where A is the intensities of the external loads of the flows of message r0ut-
ings for servicing to the corresponding branch. the flows of releases of the
branches and exit of the messages from the network; m are the mean numbers of
states of the message.

All the coefficients of the system (i) are defined for a fixed plan of traffic
distribution when calculating the right-hand sides of system (1). The location
of the input flow intensities ‘inp and output flow intensities *out for each
branch which are related by an expression of the following type is basic:

\out I crimp; (I S l.

The remaining coefficients are defined in terms of kinp and ‘out for each branch
in terms of the traffic distribution plan. The values of *inp for each branch
are defined as the sum of the intensities of partial flows coming into each
branch considering the flow distribution plan. The values of a are found by
solving the following system of linear algebraic equations:

11 I Cillinpi; 1 ' l, .... M. (2)

where C1 is the carrying capacity of the branch 1; M is the number of network
branches; if ci/‘inpi > 1. then :1 - l.

122

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The solution of system (I) in one step takes place for a llxed trulllr Jlaltlhu-
tion plan. On transition to the next step of the solution of the system (1) a
correction is made to the flow distribution plan if necessary using the investi-
gated flow control algorithm. Here it is mandatory to use an algorithm to elim-
inate possible loops in the routings or the algorithm to get out of the loops.
for when solving system (2). each flow is taken from the source center to the ad-
dressee center; on occurrence of a loop in the routing the program for solving
system (2) will loop. Any method can be used to solve systems (I), (2). Here.
in addition to the values of the mean lengths of queues in the branches. the
mean values of the total lengths of queues throughout the entire routing can be
obtained and, consequently. the values of the mean message delays for each con-

nection.

The application of the method of dynamics of means for analysis of the networks
was checked in an example (see Figure l). The program was written in Fortran
for the BESM—é computer. For system (2). the iteration method turned out to be
convenient from the algorithmic point of view. For solving system (I). a stand-
ard BESM—6 program was used. The preliminary results indicate high speed of the

method.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Lev. Yu. A.. "Estimating the Efficiency of Dynamic Traffic Distribution by
the Method of Dynamics of Means." III VSESOYUZNYY SIMPOZIUM P0 PROBLEMAM

UPRAVLENIYA NA SETYAKH I UZLAKH SVYAZI: TEZISY DOKL. [Third All-Union Sym-
posium on Control Problems in Communication Networks and Centers: Summaries

of Reports]. Moscow. Nauka, 1978.

2. Venttsel', Ye. S.. ISSLEDOVANIYB OPERATSIY [Operations Research]. Moscow.
Sovetskoye radio. 1972.

123
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I'UK Ul'l'l‘ IAI. OBI. UNI-I

CALL DISTRIBUTION ALGORITHM 0N PROSPECTIVE RURAL TELEPHONE NETWORKS
[Article by I. O. Litsit. Riga , pp 113-1171

[Text] In recent years equipment systems have appeared for quasi-electronic
rural automatic telephone offices (ATS KE) for operation with the existing auto-
matic telephone offices in existing communicationsnetvorks. Digital transmis-
sion systems with pulse-code modulation (PC!) and also medium-speed data trans-
mission equipment for standard telephone channels were developed and assimilated
by industry in parallel. It is natural that in the future rural telephone net-
works (STS) built on the basis of the ATS K3 and also electronic switching cen-
ters. the latter will interact over common signal channels (OKs). the advantage
of which is speed of connection. the possibility of almost unlimited expansion
of the composition of the telephone signals. and so on. The use of OKS and pro-
gram-controlled ATS will permit optimal control of the STS as a whole.

One of the important elements of Operative network control is dynamic control of
the call traffic [I]. In [2] a study was made of the method of servicing calls
in the network based on estimating the efficiency of bypass routings. In the
case of decentralized call control in the network providing for higher reliabil-
ity and viability of the STS, at the outgoing automatic telephone offices (ATS)
in practice it does not appear possible to estimate the efficiency of each by-
pass routing individually; therefore in [l], a combined method of dynamic tref-
fic control is proposed in which the game method of flow distribution is com-
bined with the method of limiting the number of bypass routings in the presence
of overloads (exceeding a defined threshold) of the segments making them up.
which can be used also in the STS not having 0K5. that is. in the near future.

The appearance of OKS will permit intense exchange of messages between the auto-
matic telephone offices for operative control of call traffic in the STS. Let
us consider the call control algorithm in future STS precisely implementing the
method proposed in [2]. The essence of the algorithm consists in the fact that
for a call from an outgoing ATS over an oxs network hunting messages (POS) will
be prepagated in the direction of the incoming ATS. Eachofthe hunting mess,xcs
will accumulate a total estimate of the traveled path, and a response message
(OTS) will be sent in the opposite direction from the incoming ATS after analy-
sis of the incoming messages and selection of the best of them. This response
message will initiate sorting up the call over the most optimal
routing for the criterion used.

124
FOR<0FFHJAI.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

it is convenient to begin thc discussion for the STS with .1 connected 0K5 not-
work. The configuration of the STS at each ATS is reflected by the relief ma-
trix (MR) [3]. Any ATS outside the STS has information corresponding to it
which pertains to the central office (TsS). for the STS is connected through it
to the other networks of the country.

Let a request that a call be set up with a Subscriber connected to ATS-B
arise at ATS-A. If ATS-Bis opposing and available for ATS-A over the channel
group connecting them. then after exchange of the corresponding messages between
them (with availability of the called subscriber). the call is set up.

If the ATS-B is not opposing or. being opposing. it is inaccessible along a di-
rect routing. then from ATS-A the P05 is transferred to all accessible opposing
ATS. In addition to the number information. each POS contains the following: a
pointer of the maximum number of tandem sections (MChT) between the ATS-A and
the ATS-B (for the T38. if the ATS-B is located outside the STS). the value of
which is taken from the HR; the index of the number of traversed tandem sections
(PChT); the total estimate of the traveled routing (SOP) equal to the sum of the
estimates of individual tandem sections [2]. The POS transmission sequence to
the opposing ATS is determined by the values of the MR numbers located in the
row corresponding to the ATS-B number: namely. initially the POS which corre-
spond to the smallest numbers are transmitted.

The routing for reception of the P08 is stored in each opposing ATS. and the
ATS-B number is checked against it. When they do not compare. the tandem POS
transmission program is run: by the ATS-B number from the MR. the corresponding
row is calculated. each of the numbers of which is then added to the PChT
pointer. and the results are compared with the MChT pointer; thus. the P05 are
discovered which follow along direct routings (in the general case there can be
several of them which are identical with respect to the number of tandem con-
nections). On the accessible routings corresponding to the direct paths. uncon-
ditional transmission of the P05 is realized (with corresponding corrections of
the TChT pointer and "312:: :f the SOP). The tran-M1ssion of the P08 over all
remaining accessible routings (the reception routing is not considered) is real-
ized under the condition that the POS transmitted previously over them (each
routing has a transmitted POS memory) had larger values of the SOP and also un-
der the condition that the values of the SOP prepared for transmission of the
POS are less than one (otherwise. according to [2]. the bypass routings corre-
sponding to them are not efficient). The POS transmission sequence from the
tandem ATS is defined just as for the outgoing ATS.

0n comparison of the ATS-B number in the received POS with the number of the ATS
receiving it. the POS analysis program for the incoming ATS is run (on avail-
ability GfthEibﬁled subscriber). For this purpose. at the ATS-B the received
POS having the same number information are recorded for a defined time. Then
the POS are selected from among them (if they exist). for which the PChT and
MChT pointers are identical (that is, received over direct routings). and the
one is selected from them which has the least value of the SOP. although it can
exceed one. These POS must arrive at the ATS-B first. which is ensured by the
transmission sequence at the outgoing and tandem ATS. In the absence of P05 re-
ceived over direct routings (as a result of blockings on these routings). a
choice is made among the POS arriving over the bypass routings having the least

125
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
I116 \II'I on use. Q-o'e- sumo-o

value of the SOP (if there are several. then the one having the smallest value
of the PChT pointer).

0n the reception routing selected as a result of analysis of the POS. the free
channel is taken at the incoming ATS-B. and the OTS containing number informa-
tion and the PChT pointer (with value decreased by one) and also the busy chan-
nel number as identifiers is transmitted. 0n reception of the OTS in the tandem
ATS. the channel is busiedon the routing receiving the corresponding Pos. the
value of the PChT pointer of which coincides with the PChT pointer in the OTS
(and if there are several of them. the one having the least value of the SOP).
and the 0T8 is again transmitted (with a decrease in the value of the PChT
pointer by one and a new channel number), and setting up the call

between the selected channels is initiated. On reception of the OTS in the
ATS-A, a loop check of the channel is made from it. after which the calling and
called subscriber are connected to the channels in the outgoing and incoming
ATS. If the OTS does not reach the outgoing ATS-A during the check time. the
call is considered lost. Information about the P05 is erased in all of the ATS
on expiration of some time interval after the beginning of recording of it.

If the incoming ATS-B is located outside the STS containing the ATS-A. then the
P05 is received at the T38. which in the given case is tandem. where the avail-
ability of the routing to the ATS-B is checked. If it is available. then the
OTS is sent in the direction of the outgoing ATS-A. and the call is

set up between them; the exchange of control information between the T58 and the
opposing ATS of the other network is organized in parallel. Finally. the suc-
cess of the connection will depend on the availability of the incoming ATS-B and
the called subscriber from the T38. If the outgoing ATS-A is located outside
the STS zone. then the call is initially set up ' from it to the T55.
and then the Tss organizes the hunt for the optimal routing to the incoming
ATS-B.

If the STS has a quasi-connected OKS network. then for transmission to opposing
ATS with which there is no direct signal channel or information about the HR.
P08 and OTS vectors. the latter are equipped with a special title and number of
the corresponding opposing ATS; this title and number permit the vectors to be
distinguished from ordinary messages and to be sent to the indicated addressee
via other ATS. For the rest. the transmitted information content and the algo-
rithms for processing it remain the same as in the connected OKS network.

On the level of the terminal offices (05) in the STS using the OKS for signal-
ing. any of the existing AIS can be connected through the ATS KE. The call con-
trol in the network from these ATS is organized from the ATS KB after reception
of the number information in them.

Comparatively small size of the STS and high speed of control information pro-
cessing in the ATS and transmission of it over the signal channels ensure rapid
convergence of the search process. Thus. the given algorithm based on almost
"instantaneous" state of the network at the time of hunting implements the
optimal method [2] of servicing calls in the STS sufficiently precisely.

126

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
l.

3.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

BIBLICXSRAPHY

Lazarev, V. c.. Lazarev, Yu. V., and Parshenkov, N. Ya.. "Telephone Traffic
Control on CommunicationSNetworks." PRINTSIPY POSTRDYENIYA USTROYSTV RAS-

PREDELENIYA INPORMATSII [Structural Principles of Information Distribution
Devices]. Hoscov, Nauka. 1978.

Lazarev. V. 6.. and Starobinets. s. M.. "Application of Dynamic Programming
for Optimizing Control on the Channel Switching Networks," IZV. AN SSSR, TK
[News of the USSR Academy of Sciences, Technical Cybernetics]. No 3. [977.

Litsit, I. 0.. and Yermolova, L. P.. "Algorithm for Processing Control In-

formation When Forming Communication Network 'Reliefs.'" VOPROSY RADIOELEK—
TRONIKI. SER. TPS [Problems of Radio Electronics. TPS Series]. No 10, 1974.

127

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I'UK |NIIL IAL Ual‘. URL!

SOME RESULTS OF COMPARING THO METHODS OF CALCULATING LOSSES 1N COMMUNICATIONb
NETWORKS

[Article by A. I. Hovshovich. Leningrad . pp 117-121]

[Text] The accuracy of two methods of calculating losses «11 with respect to
communication routings in a channel-switched network in which one-para-
metric and two-parametric models of traffic description are used. is compared.
In method I. all of the flows in the network are considered Poisson. that is.
they are characterized by their own first moments -- average values. For calcu-
lation of 111 in this case it is sufficient to have a call traffic distribution
plan. and the values 81 of the blocking probabilities of the network branches
(1 - l. H). In the two-parametric model for each flow two moments are calcu-
lated: the average a' and dispersion v'. Here. in addition to the values of
81, additional operating parameters of the network branches are used. the com-
position of which is determined by the adopted calculation algorithm a'. v'.
The Kat: algorithm [3] for calculating losses for a model of flows with two pa-
rameters is used in method 2.

The accuracy of the analytical methods of calculating losses is determined by
comparing the calculated values of u1j with the estimates by calls 311 of these
values obtained using simulation. The length of the random process during the
simulation is selected so that the confidence intervals for the estimated val-
ues will be appreciably less than the error in the calculation method. The val-
ues of 31 in the analytical methods are found as a result of performing the it-
eration process. in each step of which the incoming load is distributed with re-
spect to the routing trees of all of the communication routings. The error in
calculating the probabilities 3; depends on the model of description of the
flows and influences the accuracy of the final result.

The magnitude of the systematic error in the loss calculation methods which is
determined when calculating n11 by exact values of 81 and other operating pa-
rameters of the network branches is of interest. The systematic error is the
lower bound of the error in the analytical method and characterizes the accuracy
of the selected model of the flows and the methods of calculating the parameters
of this model. For calculation of the systematic error in the analytical meth-
ods it is possible to use combined methods (KM) of calculating losses in the
communicationpnetworks [l].

128

FOR‘OFFKJAL.USE(NNLY
FOR 01-1-14 'IAL USE ONLY

 

 

 

Table I Table 2

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 6
1 0 24 30 41 47 52 24 4! 1 0 14.17 18.9 28.37 33.09 37.8 14.17 28.37
2 30 0 26 35 40 44 21 35 2 19.2 0 15.37 23.1 26.9 30.75 11.55 23.1
3 31 21 0 35 40 44 21 35 3 19.37 11.62 0 23.26 27.08 30.91 11.62 23.26
4 41 27 34 0 54 60 27 47 4 27.9 16.68 22.33 0 38.99 14.66 16.68 33.5
5 46 31 39 53 0 68 31 53 5 32.5 19.54 25.9 38.6 0 51.81 19.54 38.53
5 53 35 44 62 70 0 35 62 6 38.22 22.88 30.58 45.76 53.3 0 22.?: 45.76
7 30 21 26 35 40 44 0 35 7 19.2 11.55 15.38 28.1 29.3 30.75 0 23.1
8 41 27 34 47 54 60 27 O 8 27.94 16.68 22.33 33.5 38.99 44.66 16.68 0
Table 3
G 5" 1" 6" r: 1‘. M. at. '2. 2:.
1.1 0.0 0.W47 30.0“)2 0.0024 0.“! 0.“)26 0.0011 50.6 21.4
1.15 0.W04 0.0154 30.0W3 0.” 0.01% 0.0358 0.0032 34.3 20.4
1.3 0.2306 0.0964 30.0009 0.0805 0.1105 0.0160 0.0176 16.0 18.6

Results are presented from calculation of the losses with respect to the KH in
two communicationsnetworks. All of the calculations are performed using a set
of programs for the "Minsk-32" computer described in [2]. In each version the
estimates of ﬁ1j were determined by a run with a length of 1.5 million events
of the "call" and "release" type. after which the losses n11 were calculated by
each of the two methods. The call traffic distribution plan in the two networks
was formed by the "relief" method. where among the routes of equal length, pref-
erence was given to the route passing through the adjacent junction with smaller
number. The relay-race algorithm for setting up calls was used every-

where.

The first network is an example of the district network of a 015 [city telephone
network]. The matrices of the capacities of the branches and extensions (in
Erl) are presented in Tables 1 and 2. The average busy time is 85 seconds. The
channel bunches are unidirectional. Bypass routings two units long are permis-
sible. The network was designed in the region of small. medium and large
losses. The extension matrices were calculated for all versions by multiplying
the elements of Table 2 by the coefficient 0. The results of the calculations
for three values of Q are presented in Table 3. The values calculated for the
model with one parameter have a lower index l. and for the model with two param-
eters, the index 2. For each version the following are presented: BM —- the
average probability of blocking of the branches with respect to the network;

a" -- the estimate of the average losses over the network with respect to calls;
5“ -- the deviation of the confidence limits with respect to 3“ for a confidence
level of 0.95; xx -- the average losses over the network calculated by the KN;
s: -- the average systematic error in the analytical method; n -- the relative
average error in calculating the lost load with respect to service rout-
ings. The values of s: and 1 are determined by the formulas:

129

FOR OFTNCIALVUSEiDNLN
I'UK "If“ IAI. I03: UNIJ

‘ . ‘
u-;_--?;I:..-u..l.

‘ . “-‘u

Sunnntion is carried out with respect to all pairs (1. j). for which yij # 0.
Here ’11 is the load going to the service routing (i. j); Y is the total
load imposed on the network; L is the number of service routings.

As a second example. a network was selected. the capacity matrices of the
branches and extensions of which are presented in Tables 6 and 5. The channel
groups are bidirectional. Calls no more than five branches long are
permitted. The average busy time is 5 minutes. In contrast to the preceding
example. the network branches primarily service a tandem load. In addition. the
network is characterized by small connectedness and branched "trees" of the
routes on all service routings. The network was calculated for four val-
ues of the coefficient Q. For each version. in addition to the average losses
with respect to the network. the average losses with respect to three grOups of
,,,V.¢e routings were calculated. One group included the service
routings with identical minimum distance R among the branches between the out-
going and incoming junctions. The results of the calculations are presented in
Table 6. For each Q. the average losses with respect to the network are pre-
sented in the first row, and the average losses for the first, second and third
groups are presented in the three subsequent rows, respectively.

 

 

Tablelo Tables

12345670 12345670
102000003213 -102220262
220043000013 220622222
304302503600 326022622
400250230016 422202222
5'0002306130 502220222
60036060200 622622022
732000132000 762222200
013130160000 022222200

The results obtained permit formulation of the following conclusions.

I. The single-parametric model of flows leads to low results everywhere. The
relative mean error in calculating :13 decreases with an increase in the losses

in the network and is satisfactory only in the large-loss region.

2. In the region of small and medium losses the accuracy of method 2 is appre-
ciably higher than the accuracy of method 1.

3. In the region of large losses. the systematic error in the investigated
methods is approximately the same.

130
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

 

 

 

Table 6
0 0" i" 6" 1‘. I: u. u. 2. 2
0.0091 30.0002 0.0001 0.0054 0.0022 0.0004 55.2 31.1
0 9 0 0550 R - 1 0.0047 :0.0002 0.0009 0.0027 0.0051 0.0022 01.0 42.1
- - a . 2 0.0127 :0.0004 0.0049 0.0095 0.0070 0.0005 52.1 20.;
11. 3 0.0205 00.0015 0.0124 0.0197 0.0141 0.0025 55.1 27.
0.0354 :0.0005 0.0153 0.0015 0.0222 0.0055 54.2 13..
1 0 0 1150 12. 1 0.0221 30.0005 0.0071 0.0179 0.0191 0.0050 55.2 19.:
- - R- 2 0.0475 31.0000 0.0244 0.0451 0.0232 0.0049 49.1 10.;
9- 3 0.0024 31.0025 0.0504 0.0247 0.0020 0.0077 30.0 9.1
0.0034 20.0005 0.0512 0.0911 0.0300 0.0090 30.0 11.1
, 1 . 19m 2- 1 0.0571 :0.0007 0.0200 0.0005 0.0353 0.0049 50.0 9.1
.. 1.. a. 2 0.1001 30.0012 0.0720 0.1290 0.0354 0.0150 33.0 14.1
11. 3 0.1712 £0,003? 0.1275 0.1709 0.0437 0.0029 24.0 1.'
0.1954 $530012 0.1517 0.2174 0.0372 0.0255 17.5 12;
1 _ 0 315? 12. 1 0.1451 21.0014 0.1090 0.1015 0.0415 0.0193 24.4 13.-
--‘ 1 - 11. 2 3.2401 4.0022 0.2:50 0.2019 0.0333 0.0352 13.4 14.:
2- 3 0.3440 :0.0053 0.3090 0.3329 0.0351 0.0100 10.2 5.:

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Movshovich, A. I., "Combined Method of Calculating Losses in Switched Com-
municatiou1Netvorks." ELEKTROSVYAZ' [Electrocommunications]. No 10. 1978.

2. Movshovich, A. 1.. and Khokhlova. M. Yu.. "Set of Programs for Calculating
Losses in Communicatiom.Netuorks by the Combined Method." see the present

collection.

3. Katz. S. S.. STATISTICAL PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS OF A SWITCHED COMMICATION-«
NETWORK. preprint book of Fifth International Teletraffic Congress. New

York. 1967.

l 31
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I‘ll VI'I'I\ the. var. unu-

SET OF PROGRAMS FOR CALCULATING LOSSES IN COHMUNICATION5NETHORKS BY THE COMBINED
METHOD

[Article by A. I. Movshovich and H. Yu. Khokhlova. Leningrad . pp 122-127]

[Text] Basic information is presented on the set of programs (KP) for the
"Minsk-32" computer realizing the combined method (KM) of calculating losses in
switched communicationnnetworks [I]. The KP is a library of program modules.
from which operating programs can be assembled for investigating networks with
dynamic call traffic distribution control and with different network algorithms
for setting up calls.

The programs of the first phase of the KM which perform the simulation are a
significantly revised and expanded version of the KP described in [2]. The pro-
grams are divided into the following basic groups: initial data input, the for-
mation of a representation of the network structure and the incoming load to the
network, calculation of thresholds for tandem calls. setting up and

terminating calls dynamic call traffic distribution control. processing and
documentation of simulation results. Different simulation models of communica-
tionsnetworks are formed by assembling the corresponding control programs in
which the composition and order of execution of the modules are defined and the
lengths of the common regions of ready-access memory are also given. The common
regions contain standard representation of the network structure and other in-
formation files depicting the state and results of operation of the communica-
tionsnetwork for all programs. As a rule. each data file. the length of which
depends on the initial data. corresponds to one named common region. When as-
sembling the working program. the length of this region is taken equal to the
maximum of the lengths indicated for it in all of the joined programs. There—
fore, when reserving in the KP modules only one word of memory in each common
region. the possibility of controlling the memory distribution in the model us-

ing the control programs is enSured.

The programs in the set executing the second and third phases of the KM consist
of programs for calculating the operating characteristics of the network
branches. the programs for calculating the losses #1 with respect to serv-

ice routings and the programs for documenting the results of calculation and
simulation. In addition. for this group of modules there are control programs
which give the operating sequence of the modules and reserve the ready-access
memory regions for additional data files used in the second and third phases of

the KM.

132

FOR‘OFFK]AL.USE(M‘LY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The configuration of the communicationgnetwork is described by the adjacency au-
trix of the network junctions [b1 ] and is depicted in the computer memory by
the KN? file. The length of the &NF file is equal to the number of units in the
matrix [bij] and is denoted by H. The KN? elements are ordered in rows [bijl in
increasing order of the numbers j of the incoming junctions. Here each bij - 1
corresponds to one element of the KN? file. Each oriented branch is represented
in the KN? by one element. and unoriented branch by two elements with the in-
dices i and l. for b1j - b1) - l for it. The KS? element (1) takes one word of
memory and contains the pointer y for blocking the channel group. the number i_
of the outgoing junction. the number 1 of the incoming junction and the index 2
of the paired element corresponding to b 1. For oriented branch we set i . 0.
Then the index 1 - 1(i. j) will be calle the network number of the branch

(1. j). and the junction number of the branch will be defined as 615 - i(i. j) -
l(i. j;) + i where i(i. j1) is the index of the first branch in the KN? file go-
ing out from the junction 1.

The junction numbers of the branches are stored in the matrix [613], i. j - TT—ﬁ.
the elements of which take up one byte of memory each. For the pairs (1. j)
such that bij - 0. the element 513 - 0.

In the simulation step. for each branch of the network the following parameters
are stored: c -- the capacity of the branch. Cn -- the magnitude of the thresh-
old for tandem calls. c -- the indicator of damage to all channels, 9 --
the branch length, m -- the number of busy channels. 5 -- the serviced load.

tc -- the total time the group is in the state m - c. tn -- the total time the
group is in the consolidated state m 2 Cn- These parameters occupy 8 M words of
memory.

In the second and third phases of the KM. four additional information files M

words long each are used: the variation coefficients 5. the load imposed on the
branch; the variation coefficients an of excess load; the empirical coefficients
k; the loads 30 corresponding to the calls connected through the branch but re-

jected.

The load imposed on the communicationsnetwork is given by the extension matrix
[yij]. where yij is the average value of the outgoing load from the junction 1
to the junction 1. When constructing the network model. the following assump-

tions were made: the flow of calls on any survive routing is Poisson. the
talk time is distributed exponentially. the time for setting up (Alli and
disconnecting the setuo tails is equal to zero, there are no repeated

calls. the busy time and failure of the subscribers to answer are not taken into
account. losses as a result of busy switching and control equipment at the of-
fices are nonexistent. These assumptions permit replacement of the true proceSS
of servicing calls by a modified Markov process [3]. After this substitution
the KP simulates an embedded Markov chain over a set of calls and releases.

in order to accelerate the operation of the call distribution algorithm with re-
spec: to \ervicc routings. the set of aruvitﬂions 71‘ i 0 is converted to
the vector MT so that (MT(k + l) - HT(k))Y - yij. k - Tj'il Here Y is the total
load imposed on the network. L is the number of grrnratnms yij i 0. Let us note
that MT(|) - 0. and HT(L + i) a 1. Each MT(k) is placed in correspondence to a

133
FOR OFFKJA1.lﬂﬂE(ﬂQLY
IN)“ ‘Ifl'l‘ IAI- oar. Vl‘lal

pair (i. j) which is stored in the gruuatlmn referencing list (SPT). The pairs
(1, j) are placed in the 891' in the order of the nonzero elements according to
rows of the matrix [yu]. Thus, for determination of the service routing
(i. j). in which it is necessary to send the incoming call. it is sufficient to
find the k such that M'l‘(k) < E s llT(k + l), where E is the value of the random
variable uniformly distributed in the interval (0, 1).

The calls that are set up are represented in the format (1. 61. ..., 62).
where 61. .... 62 is the sequence of junction numbers of the branches beginning
with junction 1. For r s 6 the call rakes one word of memory. and for

5 s r s 9. two words of memory. Short calls are recorded as they arrive
from the beginning of the SUS file, and long ones. from the end of the sus file
containing both lists of set up calls. 0n occurrence of the "re-
lease" event. the call which must be removed from the 505 file is selected
equiprobably among all of the setup calls and the last element of
the corresponding list is recorded at the location of the removed element.

The process Of setting 'JP “115 in the communicationsnetworks is simu-
lated by the PROKD program. This program permits investigation of various algo-
rithms for selecting the outgoing routings (VIN) at the network junctions for
two methods of setting up calls: relay-race and rescanning (with return
to the outgoing office). The outgoing routings are selected at each junction s
of the network using the routing matrix Rs - [big]. The matrix Rs has a number
of rows equal to the number of network junctions. and a number of columns equal
to the number of brancnes emanating from the junction 5. The matrix columns are
attached to the outgoing routings in increasing order of the numbers of the ad-
jacent junctions. that Ls, k - 6. The matrix element hip is a floating-point
number, which is an estimate of the set of routings from junction 3 to the des-
:ination j through a branch with junction number 6 I k. The initial filling and
variation of the matrices Rs during operation of the network are realized by the
flow transmission routing control programs. All of the matrices Rs are in a
common region for which N x H words of ready-access memory are reserved.

Le: us consider the operation of the VIN algorithm at the junction 5 when
setting up a call over a service routing (i. j). The problem of the
VIN algorithm consists in calculating the junction number 6 of the next branch
which is included at the junction 3 in the established connection. If 6 - 0.
this means that there are no available routings to the junction j from the junc-
tion 5. For calculation of 5. the following series of operations are executed.

Step I. If 55:] 1‘ 0, the possibility of setting up the call with respect
to the branch to the destination j is checked. 'dith positive outcome, we set
S . '35]. and the operation of the algorithm ends; otherwise we proceed to step 2.

Step 2. If rs - m - l. i I 0. and the operation of the algorithm ends; other-
wise we proceed to step 3 (here n1 is the maximum admissible number of branches
in the connection. r5 is the dynamic length of the connection).

Step 3. The list D of junction numbers of available routings is compiled. for

the outgoing calls (5 I i) the routing with network number i. is considered
available if 0(1) - 0, 3(2) < Cn(7«)- and a :andem connection is permitted

1310

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

through the adjacent Junction. For tandem calls. the routing to llw Int-vending-
junction is also excluded from investigation. In the D list formation cycle the
value of 6* is calculated corresponding to the minimum element h* in the row j
of the matrix R; among the columns 11: 6 0. When hunting for the minimum and
filling the list D the row 3 of the matrix Rs is examined from left to right.

Step I" If the 115‘ D 13 e“‘Pt)’. then 6 - 0 and operation of the algorithm ends;
otherwise we proceed to step 5.

Step 5. If eh - 0, then 6 I 6*. and operation of the algorithm ends; otherwise
we proceed to step 6.

Step 6. The list De of junction numbers of equivalent outgoing routings is com-
piled. It includes 5* and all 6 e D. for which Ihig - h*! < en. The desired
value of 5 is selected from the list De equiprobab y, and the operation of the
algorithm ends.

The set of above-investigated network algorithms for setting up calls

can be described as a function of three parameters A(w, m, ch). Here w is the
maximum number of attempts to reestablish connection. The value of w - 0 corre-
sponds to the relay-race algorithm of sezcing up calls. The value of 3h
determines the equivalence level of estimates of outgoing rautings in the rout-
ing matrices. Varying an. it is possible to change the degree of influence of
the control algorithms U on the call traffic distribution in the communication
network.

In the KP, two control systems are realized for the flow transmission routings:
a combined system based on the relief method and the relief method with inertia
Up(n. 1‘) [’4] and a combined system based on the relief method and the game
method Uu(a. 5) [5). Here n is the inertia parameter. T is the minimum vector
exchange period. a is the magnitude of the penalty. 8 is the magnitude of the
reward. In order to standardize the VIN algorithms. in contrast to {5] . it was

assumed that a > 1. 3 < 1.

Both of the combined control systems presuppose the presence of a relief matrix
Z-ls - (Hi-l at each junction 5 of the network. This matrix has the same struc-
ture as the matrix R5, but the elements H5 occupy one byte of memory each [a].
The structural control is realized by network orientation programs which calcu-
late the finally reformed network relief {Hs}. s - l. .'. 0n the basis of the
obtained relief. the matrices Rs are corrected. after which the load control is
included: the relief method with inertia or the game method.

 

When realizing the method Up(n, T), modification of the relief method proposed

in [6, 7] is generalized. The refinement pertains to the blocking rule for the
columns of the matrix as when calculating the minimum vectors (NV). Now the al-
gorithm for calculating the minimum in row 1 of matrix H5 coincides with the al-
gorithm for calculating he in row 1 of matrix R; (step 3 of the VIN algorithm)
for a tandem call coming from the junction to which the W will be sent. After
calculating the AV. its components corresponding to adjacent junctions with for-
bidden tum-.1: connection are set equal to one if m(.‘.) < cn(2). During opera-
tion of the programs in the structural control mode. the MV calculation alggithm
coincides with the investigated one if we consider that m0.) - 0 for t - 1. .‘i.

135
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
P‘IK Ul’l’lLlAl- USE. URL!

The programs of the second phase of KM calculate the operating parameters of the
network branches. By the magnitudes of the service load a; and probability 3!

of blocking the branch, the parameters 0;. 82 and K; are calculated for l - l. H.
The calculation algorithm is discussed in [1]. When giving a single-parametric
traffic model we set 61 - l. 02 - 1. K1 - 0, where i - l, M.

The programs of the third phase of the Km calculate the losses n11 with respect
to the communicationsnetwork routings (i. j). The algorithm for calculating n13
was developed for the network algorithms for setting up calls of the

Agw, r3. 0) type. Another restriction is the assumption that cn(l) - c(1). t .
l. “a

The load distribution yij with respect to the routing "tree" from junction 1 to
junction j is realized by the RTYaG program. The routing tree in this case is
not formed in advance. but each new routing to junction j is constructed as
needed by the HARSh program. This program uses the vector NPV which is a func-
tion of the number j of the incoming junction. The SPV vector contains a se-
quence of network numbers of the branches 2;, lg. ..., lg for each junction 5 of
the network. These branch numbers are arranged in increasing order of the num-
bers of the paths of selecting the outgoing routings at junction 5 when

setting up a call to junction j. Here 12 is the network number of the branch
which is the last—choice path. The application of the NPV vector ensures inde-

pendence of the HARSh program with respect to the VIN algorithm selected in the
model.

The general calculation scheme using the RTYaG program consists in the following.

Step 1. The route is constructed from junction 1 to junction j. The number of
the path of choice q for the junctions newly included in the route is equal to

one. The load is distributed along the route. here the excess loads from all

branches of the constructed route are stored.

Step 2. The transition is made to the next to the last junction k of the route.
and the last junction is excluded from the route. At the junction k, we set q -
q + I.

Step 3. The element 22 is extracted from the NPV vector. If 1% - 0. transfer
to step 6. otherwise transfer to step 5.

Step 6. For the relay—race algorithm of setting up calls, the excess
load from the network 1: ' is considered lost. and for algorithms with rescan-
ning it is added to the excess load from the branch L}. If k - 1. transfer to
step 7; otherwise transfer to step 2.

Step 5. The route is constructed from junction k along the path of choice with
number q in the direction of the junction j.

Step 6. The excess load from the branch lg-l is distributed by the constructed
route. transfer to step 2.

Step 7. The value of 111 is calculated.

136

FOR 0FFKJA1.USE(NNLY
2.

3.

5.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

8 1 31.] VIEW"?

Movshovich. A. 1.. "Combined Method of Calculating Losses in Switched Com-
munication Networks." EBCTROSVYAZ' [Electrocommunications]. No 10. 1978.

Is’yanov. V. M.. Movshovich. A. I.. and Epshteyn. Ye. 3.. "Application of
Computers for Solving the Problems of Designing Communication; Networks and
Selecting the Optimal Network Control Systems," I VSESOYUZNYY SIMPOZIUM PO
PROBLEMAM UPRAVLENIYA NA SE‘I‘YAKB I UZLAKH SWAZI: TEZISY 0010.. [First All-
Union Symposium on Control Problems in Comunicstion Networks and Centers:

Sumries of Reports]. Moscow. VEEIS. 19714.

Shneps. M. A.. CHISLENNYYE METODY TEORII TELE‘I'RAFIKA [Numerical Methods of
Teletraffic Theory}- Moscow. Svyaz'. 1974.

Movshovich. A. I.. and Epshteyn. Ye. 3.. "Using the 'Relief' Method for In-
formation Flow Distribution in Communication; Networks." VOPROSY RADIOEEK-
TRONIKI, SER. TPS [Problems of Radio Electronics. TPS Series]. No 7. 1973.

Parshenkov. N. Ya.. and Tikhonova. 0. V.. "Combined Method of Dynamic Traf-
Eic Control on a Switched Comunicatiom‘ Network." AVTOMATY I UPRAV'LDJIYE.
SE‘II SVYAZI I DISKREINYYE USTROYSTVA UPRAVLmIYA [Automate and Control.
Communication Networks and Digital Control Devices]. Moscow. Nauka. 1976.

Litsit. I. 0.. "Formation of Optimal Relief Matrices in ComunicstiorﬁNet-
works," I VSESOYUZN'YY SIMPOZIUM PO PROBLBiAM UPRAVLENIYA NA SETYAKH I UZLAKN
SWAZI: TEZISY DO“... Moscow. VEEIS. 1974.

Bakayev. N. 3.. and Bakhmendo. M. A.. "Some Inaccuracies of the 'Relief'
Method." VOPROSY RADIOELEKTRONIKI. SER. TPS. No 7, I976.

137
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
a VA an s as sum. mum. on use

APPLICATION OF SPECIALIZED PROCESSORS IN THE CONTROL UNITS OP SWITCHING CENTERS
[Article by A. G. Popova. Moscow . pp 127-130]

[Text] At this time the opinion exists that flexibility characteristic of the
programmed approach and connected with using finished standard components (mi-
croprocessor sets) permits the advantages of programmed control in the switch-
ing centers to be increased even more. The central control unit of the switch-
ing center (KU) can be constructed as a central processor (TsP). Here two meth-
ods of executing the operating algorithm of the control unit are distinguished:
hardware and microprogram.

In the hardware implementation of the algorithm the central control unit is a
programmable device which consists of logical elements and memory elements
joined together in a defined way. The disadvantage of such programmable devices
is irregular structure. but the speed of these devices is high. In the control
hardware. the sequence of execution of the program instructions is determined by
the rigid connections between logical elements built into the system. that is.
rigid interelement couplings.

For the microprogram realization, the central control module consists of an in-
formation processing module (301) and microprogram device (HPU). The 301 per-
forms functions analogous to the functions of the arithmetic~logica1 circuitry
of a computer except that in the KU the majority of functions are logical. The
MPU realizes the microprogram execution of the instructions of the operating al-
gorithm of the KU control unit.

One of the possibilities for increasing the operating efficiency of the control
units (00) is the application of sufficiently autonomous devices having their
own control. These devices are called specialized processors (SP). The appli-
cation of specialized processors is expedient in cases where the operating algo-
rithm of the processor is frequently used in the common operating program of the
UU. and the operating program of the processor is distinguished by sufficient
simplicity and has little connection to the remaining operating programs of the

UU.

The peripheral control units ( identifiers. modules for including the switching
elements, and so on) [I] can be constructed as SP. The construction of the KU
control units in the form of central and specialized processors permits use of
the advantages of both the centralized and distributed methods of control in the
KU.

138

INJR‘OFTWC1AL.USHE(M§LY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

One or the basic missions of the KU control unit is the search for a connecting
path in the switching system. The initial information for beginning the search
for a connecting path is the input and output numbers between which it is neces-
sary to set up the call and the final result is the values of the con-

necting path coordinates selected for connection or the signal of impossibility
of setting up the call.

when carrying out the mission by a specialized processor. the latter can contain
MPO, which ensures execution of the hnting program instructions. 301 and OZU in
which the data are stored regarding the state of the connecting paths and the
set up cal ls. the SP operating program and auxiliary values required
to execute the program. The SP operating program will contain the following
stages: processing of requests from the TsP. the search for a connecting route.
recording of information about the set up call. release of the con—
necting path after ring-off, organization of central processor requests. Find-
ing the connecting path includes successive search for a free switchboard
output in each of the elements. The process of finding the free switchboard
output on a link of an i .z-link KS consists in the following. After
determining the address. the ready-access memory cell and reading the required
bits of the word in this cell, a number will be entered in the m1 last bits of
the operating cell R1 each bit of which characterizes the state of one output of
the required switchboard of link i. In order to decrease the nonproduc-
tive busy time of the specialized processor in the case of absence of free out-
puts in the given switchboard it is necessary to introduce the operation of
checking for the presence of at least one unit in the number obtained. If there
is at least one unit. then the search for this unit in the number is made. that
is, the number of the bit is determined in which the unit is entered. If there
is no free output. then a return is made to the search for another free switch-
board output of the preceding iink (i - I).

When checking the state of the switchboard output, logical bit-by-bit multipli-
cation of the register contents Ri and the contents of the auxiliary register
RI' is carried out. in one bit of which a one is entered and in the rest. a
zero. In the initial position before the beginning of the search for the con-
necting path a one is entered in the low-order bit of the register 82'. If a
number having a zero in all bits is obtained as a result of multiplication. this
means that the checked output is busy. Therefore it is necessary to increase
the number of the checked output by one. Simultaneously. a shift of the regis-
ter contents RI' by one bit to the left is made. and the state of the next

switchboard output is again checked.

The formation of the ready-access memory cell address for selecting information
about the state of the outputs of the accessible switchboard on link (i + 1)
consists in the following. On link i the intermediate line is determined by the
set of coordinates a, 3. 7. .... 5. the values of which are entered in the cell
3%”. Here the coordinate 5 corresponds to the number of the switchboard output
selected as a result of performing the preceding operations. In the next link
(i + l) the intermediate line is defined by the set of coordinates 3, y. .... 5.
a. and the value of the last coordinate a will be defined when finding the con-
necting path on link (i + l).

139

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
3"!“ .ll'l'lt URI. U-‘I‘. UNI-l

Thus. for determination of the address of the cell corresponding to the interme-
diate lines of the next link. it is necessary to enter the register contents R;
(the code of the selected switchboard output of link i) in the low-order bits f
the selected output code of link i; then, shifting the register contents Riv
by logza bits to the left. the obtained number is used to determine the address

of the ready-access memory cell.

This method of forming the memory cell address is suitable for the KS with any
values of the structural parameters under the condition of entering the code of
the KS target in the binary-decimal number system. If the structural parameters
of the KS are defined as

m - 2“. n1 - 2",

then the word length of the code of the object is made best use of. and the shortest word-
length of the “PU registers of the specialized connecting path fitdlng processor
is required.

The proposed SP operating algorithm for finding the connecting path can be used
for the KS of any structures and with arbitrary number of links.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. lvanova, 0. N.. Popova, A. 6.. and Solovoy. Yu. V., UPRAVLYAYUSHCHIYE
USTROYS‘I'VA KVAZIELEKTRONNYKH KOtNUTATSIONNYKH SISTBi [Control Units of the
Quasi-Electronic Switching Systems], Moscow. Svyaz'. 1975.

140
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SYSTEMS APPROACH TO CONTROL SYSTEMS AT THE JUNCTIONS WITH DIFFERENT METIIODS 0F
DELIVERING MESSAGES TO THE NE‘I'I-‘ORKS

[Article by V. N. Roginskiy, Moscow , pp 130-132]

[Text] The application of different methods of delivering messages in channel-

switched (KK). message-switches (KS). packet-switched (KP) and other networks was
until recently connected with different forms of service and different technical
implementation. For comparison, different approaches and methods of estimation

were used. All of this leads to the fact that it is impossible to make an objec-
tive comparison or estimate the advantages or deficiencies of each procedure. An
effort is made to evaluate various methods of delivery and the requirement on con-
trol of the switching centers from united points of view.

All of the methods of delivering messages in the network can be divided into two
groups: without switching centers (with direct or cannon channels) and with
switching centers (UK).

The second group of networks is of the greatest interest. In the general case
it is possible to have a combination of different methods in individual sections
or for different types of information in the network.

In networks with UK it is possible to isolate two methods of distributing mes-
sages in the centers: without accumulation of messages at the centers and with
accumulation of messages (or parts of them ~- packets).

In junctions without accumulation for each message the routing is selected by
address, and either a through transmission channel from the coupled-out channels
is set up for each message (channel-switched system) or "armoring" of the chan-
nels takes place along the entire path so that'on arrival of the next segment of
the message it will be transmitted without delay (address-code switch ed. sta-
tistical multiplexing, some of the KP sysrems -- creation of "virtual." "log-
ical" channels, and so on). If there is no free channel at the given time for
the given message. it either waits at the junction or a rejection occurs (the
call is lost). which corresponds to waiting at the terminal point (0P). In both
cases there is a delay in assigning a channel for transmission of the message.

At centers with accumulation, each message (or packet) is received and stored
together with the address. and only then 19 it transmitted farther as a free

110].

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ova van-e me. e.“- use...

channel is assigned (KS and certain KP systems). When the channels are busy.
the message waits. Under other equal conditions. the waiting time will be the

same as for KK for the same load. On transmission by packets. the waiting time
for individual packets will be less. but it can increase for the entire message.

If we consider that there are no losses of messages (information) (the subscrib-
ers are "absolutely persistent"). for identical transmission and processing
rates and message sizes the busy condition of the channels in any case creates a
delay. The messageisdelayed eitheratthe 0? (in the special case. at the man)
or at the UK which requires corresponding memory at the switching center. The
greatest delays are created when the called 0? is busy.

In all cases the control unit (UU) of the center receives and analyzes the ad-
dress and determines the outgoing routing. finds and assigns a free. unblocked
channel and gives the instructions to transmit the address and messages farther.
and if necessary it assigns a channel for putting the message in a queue or re-
jecting it.

In addition. the UU performs a number of other functions: effecting priorities. fi
in; alternative rourings, circular transmission. and so on. The realization of
these functions is different for different switching methods.

The basic quality index -- the message transmission time in the network for dif-
ferent methods of delivery and identical transmission and processing speeds —-
contains a common component including the following times for passage thrOugh k
junctions: the address transmission and waiting (k times) and single message
transmission. For different delivery methods the following are added:

for ER. the waiting time connected with an increase in load on the first chan-
nels on the path;

for KS. the time of (k - l)-fold transmission of the message;

for KP. the time of (k - l)-fold transmission of one packet and (h - l)-fold
transmission of the address (h is the number of packets in the message).

The optimalness of delivery is determined by the relations of the message and
network parameters. admissible delays, the required memory size and other in-
dices when considering additional requirements such as response speed or the re-
quirement of dialogue. In the latter cases. it is necessary to use duplex chan-
nels or "armoring" of the channels in both directions.

The greatest effect from statistical multiplexing is contained in cases where
the message contains interrupts in information transmission. All of this must
be considered when comparing different methods of transmission of messages in
the network.

The united approach to estimates of different methods of delivering messages in
the network and methods of implementing them will permit standardization and in-
tegration of the channel-forming. switching and control equipment. optimal con-
struction of the networks on a united technological base with united control
programs and algorithms. selection of the solution for individual parts so as to
ensure optimalness on the whole.

142
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

DYNAMIC CONTROL OF BRANCH CAPACITIES IN A CHANNEL SWITCHING NETWORK
[Article by O. F. Sergeyeva. Moscow . pp 132-1351

[Text] At the present time a great deal of attention is being given to improve-
ment of the efficiency of the use of communications media. which will permit im-
provement of the quality of servicing in the network with minimum expenditures
of financial resources. One of the means of solving this problem is operative
correction of the network structure for different operating periods when

the dynamic traffic control in the network does not ensure the required servic-
ing quality for certain pairs of offices.

A study is made of one of the problems of operative variation of structure with
variation of the situation on the network consisting in correcting the capaci-
ties ensuring optimal (from the point of view of efficiency of use of the net-
work channels and service quality) loading between each pair of uniformly gravi-
tating offices in the network structure. The necessity for such correction will
occur. for example. in the following cases:

when servicing the load flows with noncoinciding peak loading hours (plh). when
at different times of day it is necessary to increase the channel groups on cer-
tain routings and decrease them on others;

with an increase in incoming load on individual routes as a result of including
new groups of subscribers;

with sharp changes in loading of individual network groups, for example. in case
Of failure.

In these cases it is necessary to correct the network branch capacities without
changing the topology of the network so as to ensure sufficient carrying capac-
ity to service the load flows between each uniformly gravitating pair of offices
with given service quality. In contrast to the analogous statement of the prob-
lems in [1. 2], in the given paper a study is made of the channel switching net-
work with arbitrary loading of the branches. when solving the investigated
problem it is proposed that the following are known:

I. The network structure: number of offices N. number of branches M. their in-
terrelation and capacities of the branches -- B - “BLJJ.

143

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I'Ull V's swans. Doe. v"...

2. Uniform gravitatious (load in Briangs) between pairs of offices -- F -
1513"-

3. The admissible magnitude of the losses for each uniformly gravitating office
is P(i. 3)ad-

4. The admissible magnitude of losses in the branches and the corresponding av-
erage use of the lines in the channel groups forming the branches "min - "max’

where n ’ (Yconst - Yobsl)/“channel'

5. The load traffic distribution algorithm with respect to network branches.

In the given paper when solving the problem of correcting the branch capacities.
optimizing the carrying capacity of the network. the concept of saturated cross
section is used [3]. This approach is being widely used abroad at the present
time to optimize the network topology under the name of the cross section satu-
ration method. The basic idea of this method consists in the fact that an in-
crease in carrying capacity of the network is achieved as a result of increasing
the carrying capacity of the saturated cross section. In the general case the
cross section is the minimum set of branches. on removal of which the network
becomes unconnected. In the given paper by the network cross section we mean
the maximum set of branches on removal of which all of the paths are broken for
servicing the load and for some pairs of offices it is impossible to set up

a call. Here the cross section is considered saturated if it consists of
branches. the use of the lines of which is higher than the maximum allowable
amount for the investigated network.

Thus. the presented problem of correcting the network branch capacities to en-
sure the required carrying capacity of the network reduces to minimizing a func-

tion of the type:

3-1. ....N.
l . l..... u'
1". ”00"..

El
"la.“ Z. 6‘ (aa‘. ),

m-

where > 0. if chsu
J < 0. if ﬁsts“ but 2‘< 2min.
.0, if P; 1:5... and 21>z min;
EH is the set of saturated cross section branches;
a} is the subset of junctions separated by the saturated cross section 5“;
W* is the subset of network branches making up the saturated cross section
and also the branches entering into the paths for servicing the load
between pairs of offices separated by this cross section SH;
cagz is the increment of the serviced load on the 3 -th branch when servic-
ing the load between the pair of offices (k. a}. The following condi-

tion must be satisfied here:

911‘ P(1s j)ad' 1 .1. one, N.
j- I. can] “I

144
FOR OWTWCJAI.USEGDNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

After the values of the total load increments -- As5 on the corrected branches
are defined, the variations of the loss probabiliti s on these branches corre—
sponding to them are defined as follows:

aa‘
Mir—1' -

*5

where A3 is the total load arriving for servicing on the 8 -th branch in accor-
dance w th the given distribution algorithm before correct on.

the obtained magnitudes of the losses on the branches are used to determine the
capacities of the branches ensuring the required quality of servicing for the
investigated pairs of offices.

It is obvious that the proposed method is heuristic and is realized by successive
approximations to the local optimal solution. In this paper an algorithm is pro-
posed which realizes the given method, permitting enaurance of operative control
of the network branch capacities under conditions where the dynamic flow control
does not permit the required quality of servicing to be ensured for certain

pairs of offices on the network. The proposed algorithm includes three basic
procedures: determination of the magnitude of the saturated cross section. de-
termination of the required volume of corrections of the branch capacities en-
suring the required quality of servicing; calculation of the network parameters
characterizing the servicing quality.

The advantage of the given method by comparison with others [1. 2] lies in the
fact that it permits a united approach to the solution of the problem of cor-
recting the branch capacities and topological optimization of the network using
the cross section saturation method.

When comparing the proposed branch capacity correction algorithm. for example.
with the algorithm of [I] it turned out that:

when using the proposed algorithm the same branches are corrected as when using
the algorithm of [l];

determination of the requirednumberafcornxriaw ensuring the required carrying
capacity requires a smaller number of calculations by comparison with the algo-

rithm [l].

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Katz. 8.. "Calculation of Nonhierarchical Networks." translated from the
English. express information. PEREDACHA INFORMATSII [Information Transmis-
sion]. Moscow. VlNITI. No 5. 1971.

2. Maksimova. 0. P., Svetlitskiy. A. H.. and Svetlitskiy, Ye. M.. "Method of
Solving Certain Extremal Problems in Comunicatiors Networks." AVTOHATY I
UPRAVLENIYE. SET! SWAZI I DISKRE‘I‘NYYE US‘IROYSTVA UPRAVLE‘JIYA [Automate and
Control. Communication Networks and Digital Control Devices]. Mosc0w.
Nauka. 1976.

145
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
IV“ we a essue. Us». one...

MATHEMATICAL MODEL AND ESTIMATING THE EFFICIENCY OF A MESSAGE DELIVERY CONTROL
TECHNIQUE BASED ON JOINT APPLICATION OF EXTERNAL AND INTERNAL PRIORITIES

[Article by V. N. Silayev, Yu. P. Zolotykh and L. M. Bondar'. Moscow . 99 135-1381

[Text] The use of external priorities (fixed priorities) and internal priorities
(dynamic priorities) is widely known [1-2].

The novelty of the method proposed in [0] consists in the application of external
and internal priorities to control the delivery of messages in a finite control
time ui > w1(t), i - 1, p. where w1(t) is interpreted as the actual time spent

by the i—th priority request in the system. The value of the priority function
81(t) is calculated by the Jackson formula [2]:

31(t) I “i - w1(t).

The operation of the network is described by the following procedure. The direc-
tive time of delivery u1. i - l. p is assigned to the messages entering a net-
work of i-th priority class. The messages are placed in a source-junction queue
in accordance with the priority function 81(t). The highest priority corresponds
to the least values of 81(t). After transmission of the i-th class message to
the network it is stored for a time T1 (the waiting time for obtaining verifica-
tion of proper reception by the destination junction of the i-th class message).
If on expiration of the time T1 verification has not been received. the message
is again transmitted. Otherwise the next message is transmitted with least
value of the priority function 81(t). The repeated messages reach the repeated-
message queue and have a relative advantage in servicing over newly arriving
messages.

 

Under the conditions of simplest flows of incoming messages with intensity X1,
i I l, p. constant transmission time equal to a. independence of the repeated
transmissions. the basic expressions are obtained for the Laplace-Stiltjes
transformation of the transmission time distribution function in the network,
the average waiting time wi in the source-junction. the average transmission
time E[V1] through the network of the i-th class messages for steady state of
the network.

 

Let Bi(t) be the distribution function of the random variable -- the time inter-
val from completion of message transmission to acknowledgment of receipt in the
transmitting junction under the condition that verification is delivered on time.

.,,
AND

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The probability of the last event will be denoted by :1; then the probability of
repeated transmission is defined as v1 - l - n181(T1). For E[V1] the following
expression is valid:

. 1.,
EM- {av );[a..T-. . sum .1] . lilt¢15~(0}/(1‘9&) . (1)

0

where S'(l) - [Soqo(l - z)/(Q[z] - 2)];1 is the average number of messages in
P
the repeated message queue; Q(z) - 2 qkzk is the generating function of the
k-o
number of arrivals in the repeated message queue; qk is the probability of si-
multaneous arrival of k messages in the repeated message queue; 1 is the average
repeated transmission waiting time of a message from the repeated messages en-
tering the queue.

n is found -- the minimum average transmission repetition

From (I). T: - T 1
is to the nearest multiple of a).

time (it is roun

For average waiting time W1 the following expression is valid:

W‘a w,00'(l)[——“‘.:’]a.a _._____3.q.0 U) 1-2113); 0-

“W'W 1-! (2)
‘1 - :4
9 ‘Z-E'llloi‘ -Il.‘-+ w.) 9 ‘2".1‘ (u? a») .

where w; is the average time of completion of servicing equal to a/Z.

The Laplace-Stiltjes transformation of the distribution function of the actual
transmission time of an i-th class message is as follows:

' t: -l was 40.4“ e .- -nk 0" m - H
L(*)=..>_o“ e e '6 1- 29 s 5- M ’ ‘ 3
a" ‘ .(5’ ’t-O range .9... ( )

I re.
where %_(:)-I e ’2gg‘(‘). qé is the probability of arrival of m messages in the
a
repeated message queue. one of which is i-th class.

The value of q: is found from the expression:

q; " 2- g.°;91.°a.'--~'g.

" ulQn-I...) -

to‘.-IU-g"'0 ‘5)- “. 95-1054) ’

where A(m - l. i) is the set of combinations. the powers IA(m - l. i)I - c32i.

numbers 1. 2. .... n. .... p; n f i; kj e K.

147
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLV
I’Ul‘ vrrana. amt. "sun

The efficiency of the given control technique was estimated by simulating net-
works of two structures -- distributed. consisting of 27 junctions. and a linear
S-junction network. The networks with and withOut control with direct servicing
procedure were compared by the following indices: the number of messages deliv-
ered on time. the average delivery time and dispersion of the delivery time.
Under the conditions of uniform loading of the network with the control consist-
ing of 27 junctions. efficiency was demonstrated with respect to the criterion
of the average number of messages delivered on time. For a linear network. the
range of loads in which control turned out to be efficient was obtained with re-
spect to each junction. In the indicated load range the effect is 5 percent.

The following features are characteristic of the proposed technique:
a) on satisfaction of the condition 51(t) 5 0 the message is lost;

b) the param-‘ar ui is not the only parameter for all requests (messages). but
it is in one-to-one correspondence with the initial priority. the urgency cate-
gory of the given request;

c) the priority function 61(t) of the request achieved in the given processing
stage (in the given communication center) appears as the final priority in the
next stage;

d) for 81(t) - r the request is assigned the highest priority with which the
i-th class request comes to all subsequent network reserves over its repetition
route. The interval T is interpreted as the network parameter and characterizes
the time required for the i—th request to pass through the network in the ab-
sence of control and loading of the network on a given level in the quasi-exclu-
sive mode of using the processing reserves of the network;

e) the initial and dynamic priorities are selected from the series: 1. or. ...,
wT. where a. .... u are integral coefficients. Thus. all of them are multiples
of r, and each lower one is a multiple of the preceding higher one.

Physically the efficiency of the control imposed on the network is based on in-
creasing the use coefficient of the network reserves most loaded at the given
point in time by expanding the period of their greatest loading in time as a re-
sult of the time reserve u; - w1(t) and use of the time reserve At - u1 - r.

A study was also made of the laws of variation of priority in accordance with
arithmetic or geometric progressions or combination of them and also various
versions of organizing the time service. Analysis of the results of using dif-
ferent laws of priority variation demonstrated that in the majority of practical
solutions the use of arithmetic or geometric progressions gives satisfactory re-
sults.

with programmed realization of the enumerated versions it was considered that
the network junction has a separate program performing the functions of priority
control and monitoring of the time of existence of the message in the network.
and the operations system has the apparatus for starting these programs after
time quanta equal to or proportional to t. The volume of the program execution

148
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

for different versions turned out to be in practice identical: 25-50 instruc-
tions of the “-7000 computer. SH-l, SM-Z computers. The difference in versions
was discovered in the frequency of starting the programs and the required size
of the field for entering the achieved priority in the message title and the time
left before expiration of the control period.

The performed analysis of various versions of program implementation permitted
substantiation of the choice of program implementation of the method of control-
ling message delivery on the switching level of a distributed operations system.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

1. Kleinrock, L., KOMHUNIKATSIONNYYE SETI[Camunkmriomﬁetworks], translated from
the English. Hoscow. Nauka, 1970.

2. Jackson, J. R.. "Queues With Dynamic Priority Discipline." HANAG. SCI..
No 8. 1961.

3. Kleinrock. L., and Finkelstein, R., "Time-Dependent Priority Queues." OPER.
RES., Vol 15. No l. 1967.

4. Silayev. V. N., "A Way To Control Queues in Distributed Data ?rocessing,"

Finnish-Soviet Symposium "Small Computers and Distributed Data Processing."
Helsinki, Finland. 1976.

149

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
"UK \Ifl’“ mu. var. QII‘IJ

STUDY OF METHODS OF ORGANIZING CALL SERVICING IN THE CONTROL COMPUTER OF A COH-
PUTERIZED SNITCHING CENTER

[Article by A. V. Solov'yev, Moscow , pp 138-141]

[Text] Efficient organization of call servicing in a control computer (BUM) can
be achieved when the operating program dispatching algorithms have the possi-
bility of flexible redistribution of its time reserves. This becomes possible
with the introduction of interrupts. the use of static dispatching disciplines.
formed by composition of transfer rules from one queue of requests to another
and selection of queues (programs) and also with restriction of the BUM loading
in case of overloads.

The entire set of operating programs of the EUM S I {31. ..., 9N5} is divided

into groups 8;, ..., SL so that 51 n 51' I 0. i, 1' I l. ..., L, i i i'. The
program 53 6 52,3 I l. ..., NS is characterized by the order number in the

group and the group number. that is. sj E a(i. i), i I l. ..., 1;, i I l. ..., L.
The interaction between different groups of programs is defined using the matrix
3(t) . IIhgg'(t)I|. the elements of which hgz'(t) I 1 if any level program I can
interrupt the performance of any level program i'. In cases where interruption
of the 2 level program by 2' level programs is not permitted. the element h;g'(t)
of the matrix H(t) is equal to zero.

On completion of execution of the program s(i'. z), the transition to another
program s(i". t) is made in accordance with the following rules:

A; -- on completion of servicing of each request from the queue;

A; -- on detection of the control request in the queue (the control request is
placed at the "tail" of the queue before the beginning of servicing of the re-

quests in it);

A; -- on elimination of requests in the queue.

The program s(i". i) is selected in accordance with the rules:
81 ' i" I min i. i I l. ..., It
32 - i" ' 33. if i ' ij-l(1' ' Ek» then 1" ' £1): 61- 5k. 53.1.

150
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

".41 are the terms in the sequence z - Ex. .... 51-1. 65. .... 51‘. such that '21 6
' . .... Ii}-

As a result of the composition of the rules Av1. Bv2(v1 I l. 2. 3. v2 - l. 2)
dispatching algorithms are formed which are most frequently used when organizing
the call servicing in the EUM.

The average interrupt time of a request for the program s(i, l) in the EUH for
the investigated model of organizing the call servicing is

Mr 59a
{(6.0- u (1.!) v 60.!) , t 3.1.
”La. 1“ 1-9¢)'

where wAv‘sz(i. 1) is the average waiting time for servicing of the requests

(1, i) when using rules Av1, sz in the call servicing model without interrupts.
8(1, 1) is the average time for execution of the program [(1. i), R; is the to-
tal load factor of the EEK by the programs s(i. l) for which hgz' - 1.

Since in a number of cases the BUM cannot provide for processing all of the in-
cominginformation inteal time.overloads occur. The efficient organization of
the servicing of calls in the EUM in the presence of overloads is achieved when
using adaptive load limitation algorithms [1]. The algorithm for limiting the
load of the BUM which can operate jointly with any algorithm in the multilevel
model of organization of call servicing is based on using alternative operating
programs and the collective of finite automata functioning in random media.

The program 31. 1 . 1. .... NA 18 designated as aliernate if a request to the
BUM can be processed by any of the subroutines 51 (v1 - l. .... N18). The
preference in processing the request by subroutine sivi decreases with an in-
crease in v1. With an increase in vi. the values of the average execution
times of subroutines 31" decrease. The subroutine sivi is selected by the fi-
nite automaton 51 on completion of the operations fvi(v1 - i. .... N13). The
automaton operates in the random medium C(t) - {Civ1(t)}. The probabilities of
v
penalties 61 1(t) are ordered as follows:

C.'(t)>6.‘0)> >C.°'(t)-c.°"'(n-...-c-.N' (e).

The automaton 51 must select the operation £91 with greatest probability during
the operating process.

The interaction of the automaton ii. i - 1. .... NA is realized in accordance
with the procedure analogous to the "common money drawer" in games of disposi-
tion [2]. The automaton :1 fixes the values of the overload indices xwait and
XEIOV obtained at the end of the interval Tk. The average penalty for the
player played by the automaton in one interval Tk is calculated by the formula

a . (ﬁnaicxwatt + Sflowvf1°")/m(on)

151
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
s on. no 0 .. u... w --m- ...-.--

where “wait. ﬁfluw are the coefficients selected as a function of the composi-
tion of the alternate programs. m(on) is the power of the set of automate n1
selecting the subroutines s1vi. The automata ﬂiton are penalized in cases where
a > u1 1, where “1V1 is the weight of the program sivi.

For investigation of the efficiency of the call servicing organization algo-
rithms in the EUH, a simulation model and program corresponding to this model
were developed. Two groups of experiments were run. The call servicing organi-
zation model for the first group of experiments did not contain the algorithms
limiting the load of the EUR under overload conditions. The operating programs
were dispatched on two levels: priority (reception and output of information)
and basic (information processing) with SUM loading coefficient that varies in
the range of 0.94 to 0.98. The second group of experiments was run for the same
values of the characteristics of the external environment of the EUH as the
first. but with organization of call servicing, an adaptive algorithm was used
for limiting the load which was based on the operation of the dispatch automata.

The simulation of the EU" program dispatch algorithms demonstrated that in the
operating range of variations of the values of the EUM load coefficient not ex-
ceeding 5 percent, situations of local overloads arise. The basic level pro-
grams directly connected with the priority level of servicing the calls in the
EUM turn cut to be especially unstable with respect to the local overload situ-
ations.

The adaptive BUM load limitation algorithms permit elimination of local overload
situations. The gain achieved here with respect to the values of the admissible
times the requests remain in the SUM is within the range of 18-36 percent. The
use of the dispatching automata made it possible to redistribute the time re-
serves of the EUH as a function of the overload.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
l. Lazarev, V. 6.. and Solov'yev, A. V.. "Software Elements of the BUM." PRO-
GRAMHNOYE UPRAVLENIYE NA UZLAKH KOHMUTATSII [Program Control in the Switch-
ing Centers]. Moscow. Nauka. 1978.

2. Varshavskiy. V. I., KOLLEKTIVNOYE POVEDENIYE AVTOMATOV [Collective Behavior
of Automata], Moscow. Nauka. 1973.

152

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SOME METHODS OF IMPROVING THE CARRYING CAPACITY OF A CHANNEL SWITCHING NETWORK
[Article by G. L. Slepova. Moscow . pp 141-144]

[Text] Calls in the channel switching networks (KR) can be serviced not only by
the system with rejects. but also by a combined system with rejects and waiting.
In order to estimate the Operating quality of the system with waiting. the most
important indices from the point of view of the network user were investigated:
the probability of reject -- p —- and the average waiting time -- r -- and also
the most important index from the point of view of operating efficiency of the
network -- its carrying capacity.

One of the reasons for using the combined servicing system (K50) in the XX net-
works is the effort to increase the carrying capacity of the network inasmuch as
by comparison with systems with rejects. the carrying capacity and use of the
service units in the K50 are higher because the serviced load is higher.

The combined servicing system in comunicatiors networks is implemented by using
limited waiting of the calls for the release of channels. Here restrictions are
imposedonthetimespentbythecallinthesystem. OntheexistingnetworksKSOwitha
limited number of waiting places -- m -- and with a limited number of waiting
places and limited waiting time Tmax' have found application.

It is necessary to determine whether there is an increase in carrying capacity
of the RR network with bypasses on introduction of the K50 and the degree of
this increase. For this purpose a study was made of the nature of variation of
losses and average waiting time in the network on variation of the number of
waiting places for fixed values of the incoming flow and number of channels in
the groups. These relations were obtained by analytical calculation (1) and
they were confirmed by the statistical simulation method (2) for a fully con-
nected five-junction symmetric network with a number of channels in the group
n1 - n - 30 with static information distribution plan. Here it was determined
that for small incoming loads (to a specific incoming load of K - 0.8 Erlang).
the introduction of waiting places on the serVice rantings (channel
groups) and increasing the number of them lead to a significant decrease in the
losses for insignificant values of the average waiting time comparable to the
hardware component of the call SetuPtime in the network. With an increase in
incoming load above the indicated magnitude. introduction of the K50 is nor ef-
ficient. for with an increase in number of waiting places both the losses and
the average waiting time increase. This increase in losses is possible as a

153
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
l-Ult UI'I‘ILIAL var. mu.)

result of nonproductive busy time of the channels in the waiting time. lor with
an increase in load. the number of waiting calls and their waiting time increase
sharply. Thus. the introduction of K80 on the KR networks without using special
control methods is efficient only for low loads and a small number of waiting
places.

In order to increase the operating efficiency of networks with K50 in the high-
load range. in the existing networks the method of limiting the nonproductive
loading as a result of waiting calls is used. This is achieved by limiting the
time spent by the call in the queue -- tmax. In [2] some results from simulat-
ing such algorithms are presented for different values of Tmax. From the point
of view of the problem stated in this paper it must be noted that the applica-
tion of this method has not led to improvement of the quality indices of the
network.

Inasmuch as the invescigated type of overload occurs not only as a result of
"long-waiting" calls. but also as a result of the entire mass of calls waiting
in the tandem junctions. it is expedient to use a method that is simpler to im-
plement to restrict the nonproductive load which consists in preventing waiting
for tandem calls. In the presence of categorizing of calls it is possible to
forbid calls of only the lowest categories from waiting. The expediency of us-
ing the given method is illustrated by the method of statistical simulation in

[2].

However. the application of the indicated method permits only partial solution
of the overload problem in a network with K50 and an increase in its carrying
capacity. As is clear from what has been investigated. when using combined ser-
vicing systems in the KK networks. the following contradictions arise. Under
conditions of low intensities of incoming flows. the use of bypasses is very ef-
ficient. and increasing the number of waiting places reduces the network losses
for small values of the average waiting time; for high intensities of the incom-
ing flows overloads and general network losses acour. and the average waiting
time increases sharply. In addition to the above-noted cause of overloads. ef-
ficient use of bypasses has significance also in a network with rejects.

In (3). the problem of finding the dynamic control algorithm which is efficient
in the entire loading range. that is. realizes expedient distribution of the
call traffic with low load intensities and limits the load for high load inten-
sities. is solved. The "efficient" algorithm was obtained on the basis of gen-
eralizing the "efficient control" principles to the case of networks with KSO.
The cost of the k-th path of the j-th flow D(t}) for a system with KSO can be
selected as follows:

i -
"-3 t Z
”(‘1’ d‘“*...; ‘ii' (I)
1"
where d1(i) -- the cost of the system M/M/nzlml in the state i -- is estimated
as the forecasted increase in number of lost calls as a result of busy time in

the branch 7; of the channel or the waitin place; d; is the mathematical expec-
tation of the cost of the branch 7;. 5 G 1;. € # l.

154

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

It must be noted that the cost of the path includes the instantaneous cost of
the first branch of the path and mathematical expectation of the costs of the
subsequent ones, for the expression was obtained under the assumption that the
states of the successive branches of the path. in addition to the first. is un-
known at the time of arrival of a call for which prediction takes place. This
is significant for a branch with waiting. for the call can wait in the process
of being set up for a random time in each tandem UK. In the case
of routing the call, a bypass path of minimum cost is selected under the condi-
tion that all the channels and all the waiting places are busy on the direct
path. If 0(1 ) 2 l. the call is rejected. As statistical simulation has demon-
strated. as a result of the application of an efficient algorithm on a symmetric
network for m - 2 it was possible to cut the losses in the entire load range ap-
proximately in half by comparison with the static distribution. This reduction
in losses is felt most significantly in the high-load range. This made it pos-
sible to increase the carrying capacity of the network with a specific load of
0.8 Erlang by 1 percent; with a load of 0.9 Erlang by 6 percent and with a load
of [.0 Erlang. by 10 percent.

It is possible to simplify the efficient algorithm. From the equality

‘ ‘ -
D“; "Enhm‘CfJ/e-‘(YJ' E)?!“ d‘ I L

. (2)
E’i

where Y; n l/u is the load intensity coming to the branch 11 of the path 13' un-
der the condition that the calls are distributed only with respect to the di-
rect routings, En1,m_(Y1) is the probability that the system MIN/n1/m1 will be

busy; £1(Y1) is the probability that the group of 1 channels will be busy for
i S n1. for i > n; the probability that the system NIH/ngli - n1 will be busy.

of a call on the bypass path 2 on the branch 11 the number of servicing devices
is less than i, the call is serviced. Otherwise a reject is received. The re-
sults of simulating such a simplified algorithm demonstrated that the servicing
quality will be very close to the results obtained when using the theoretical
algorithm.

It is possible to find the i wEich satisfies condition (2). Then if on arrival
J

A study was made of the dependence of the quality indices for the above-indi-
cated network on the incoming load with an increase in number of waiting places
to [0 when using the efficient algorithm. Inasmuch as its application offers
the possibility of obtaining losses always less than when using only the forward
connections, with an increase in number of waiting places and simultaneous use
of the efficient control it is possible to obtain an increase in network carry-
ing capacity both for low and high loads. The possibility of using an efficient
algorithm combined with using the K50 to increase the carrying capacity of the
KK network were limited only by the requirements on the maximum admissible aver-
age waiting time by a call for beginning of servicing.

155

FOR OFl-TCIAL USE ONLY
l.

awn "0..-”... - _... -.-...o

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Slepova. G. L.. "Approximate Method of Estimating the Servicing Quality in
Channel Switching Networks With Combined Servicing System." TEDDY UCHEBNYKH
INSTITUTOV SVYAZI [Works of the Communications Training Institutes). Lenin-

grad. L215. 1977.

Slepova. G. L., "Some Dynamic Teletrsffic Control Algorithms in Channel
Switching Networks With Limited Waiting." AVTOHATY I UPRAVLBIIYE. PRINTSIPY

POSTROYENIYA USTROYSTV RASPREDELENIYA INFORMATSII [Automate and Control.
Structural Principles of Information Distribution Devices], Moscow. Nauka.

1978.

Slepova. G. L.. et 31.. "Control Technique on Channel Switching Networks
With Bypasses and Limited Waiting," AV'I'OMATY I UPRAVLENIYE. UPRAVLDHYE

SETYAMI SVYAZI [Automate and Control. Communications Network Control],
Moscow. Nauka, 1979.

156

FOR OFF-1C1“. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

REDISTRIBUTION 0F PROBLEMS IN A MICROPROCESSOR CONTROL NETUORK WITH FAILURES

[Article by Ye. N. Turuta. Moscow , pp 165-1491

[Text] One of the prospective approaches to solving the problems of increasing
the reliability of distributed multimicroprocessor control systems is the ap-
proach based on ensuring the property of gradual degradation of the system in
the case of failures of its processor modules. By this property we mean the ca-
pacity of the system to reconfigure and redistribute the problems of the failed

modules among the working modules.

This redistribution offers the possibility of keeping the system operating as a
whole in the case of failures of positive modules with worse. but admissible
values of some of the Operating indices of the system such as output capacity.

functioning efficiency. and so on.

A study is made of a distributed multimicroprocessor technological process con-
trol system implemented in the form of a microprocessor control network (Fig-
ure 1). The functional processor modules (PM) solving the technological process
control problems realize control information and data exchange among each other
and with the objects of control (00) by means of the communication network. the
junctions of which are the processor switching modules (KPH).

 

157
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
l I". Iu'l as one. r. -a. nun.-

Let us assume that PM failures are possible during operation of the system. The
failures of the communication network channels. Kiliand.objects of control are
no: considered.

The state of the system at an arbitrary point in time is determined by the set
of states of its PM: KP I 01, ..., on. where 01 6 {0. l} and 01 I 0 if the PM;
is in the fit state; 01 I I if PM1 is in the failed state.

[Two lines missing from the ori inal text] ... processes solved in the system in
the state xv; Rf - {51”. .... ouv. .... aﬁyv}, i I l. .... gv is the subset of
problems solved by the working PM1 in the state rv. where oﬁv s Q“, gv - n I kv
is the number of working PM in the state <V, kn is the number of failed PM in

this state, °v I {b¥. .... 0E9} is the set of all technological processes (T?)

taking place in the objects of control in the state KV. v I l. .... 2n - l inas-
much as fit PM are absent in the state <1 I ll ... 1.

Organization of the redistribution of the problems of the failed PM requires ex-
ecution of the following basic steps.

1. Finding the sets 3° I {01. .... on}. Q; I (of. .... at. ..., 0&1]. yo I

{01. .... 3L} corresponding to the state < I 00 ... 0.

2. Determination of the correspondence between the set of all control problems

and the set of all T? for the state <°. This correspondence can be given by the
n

matrix i|a(u1)k] having R I I m1 rows and L columns where 3(u1)k I 1 if for per-
1-1

formance of the T? 9k it is necessary to solve the problem 0% and 3(u1)k I 0 oth-

erwise.

3. The choice of indices on which defined requirements are imposed with organi-
zation of redistribution of the problems.

Let us consider the case where such indices are the system efficiency. the out-
put capacity of the PM and the expenditures required for realizing the possibil-
ity of redistribution of the problems.

As the efficiency index of the system in the state xv let us take the value
Ev I E 9k: where 9k is the weight of the T? ¢k given by the requester.
5ke‘52)

We shall estimate the duration of the PM1 by the mean request servicing time for
the performance of any mission 3% e RX in the 9M1 in the state ‘v-

Let us assume that the average time I: for servicing a request in the P31 in the
state r° and the matrix HAT31EI. j I l. .... N and i I l. .... n is given, where
5111 is the increment of the average request servicing time in the 9M1 on trans-
fer of the problem 03 to it. The required expenditures can be given by the ma-
trix IICj1!!. j I 1. .... N and i I l. .... n. where C11 are the expenditures
which are required to ensure the possibility of transfer of the problem 01 to

158
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

.c . .
the module 9M1 (where a] e ;) on :ailuro 0! PM;. Let us assume that the value

of C31 does not depend on in which Pﬁz the problem 03 is realized in the state
<°. 0n transfer of the problem a} 6 Q: of the failed P81 to the working Phi two
cases are possible: [four lines missing from the original text] ... that the
Phi will now carry out the problem beginning not only with its own requirements,
but also the requirements of Pug.

In case (2). transfer of problem as to modulus PM1 involves defined expenditures
connected with the necessity for introduction of additional reserves into t is
modulus. Therefore we assume that C11 - 0 if a 6 92 and 631 i 0 if a G Q1.

In the special case the magnitude of the expenditures C11 cannot depend on the
PM1 to which the problem is transferr (for example, if all PM in the system
are the same). Then 611 - 0 if Oj e 91 and C31 - Cj if 01 6 Q; for any i - l.

.... qv.

4. Finding the set S - {Cy} of distributions of the problems each of which cor-
responds to the state 4, from the given subset r . {<v} of states of the system
and satisfies the requirements imposed on the selected indices.

Two approaches to organizing the redistribution of the problems in the system in
the case of PM failures are possible. The first approach assumes that the opti-
mal distributions CV for all states <v G I (where r is the given subset of
states) are found when designing the system and each PM is provided with the
necessary reserves to carry out the problems required both in the state x° and
in each of the states xv 6 F in accordance with the distributions on found when
building the system.

The second approach is based on the fact that the problem of finding the optimal
distribution 6“ is solved each time (using a special decision module) for transi-
tion of the system to the state <v. and the result of its solution can depend on
the preceding states of the system.

In the general case obtaining optimal distribution can require redistribution of
the problems of both the failed and operating PM.

Let us consider the first approach to organizing the redistribution of problems,
assuming that on transition of the system to the state rv, the problems of only
the failed PM are redistributed.

For each state <v 6 P we find the distribution Gv satisfying the conditions:

EV .mx;

C-JSC-J ad.

Ti 5 T1 ad. 1 '1. .... g“.

where C9 are the expenditures required to ensure the possibility of transferring
the problems of the failed PM to the operating PM in the state <v; T} is the av-
erage request servicing time in the P51 in the state <1; CV ads TX ad are the
admissible values of the indicated indices for the state <v.

159

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The problem 03 carried out for the initial distribution in the PH1 will be de-
noted by 031. Let the initial distribution Go be given by the matrix “BjilL

j - l, .... N and i . l. .... n. where 831 is the weight of the problem 03 car-
ried out for the initial distribution in the PH1 defined as

Pl». 2 9“"

leg-.017.

where 611 - {¢31} is the set of T? for performance of which it is necessary to
satisfy the problem 031. 031 is the weight of the T? 031.

Let D3 - (any), Dv - (HH¥} be the set of failed and operating PM respectively
for the state <v$ A: be the set of all problems which in the state x are car-
ried out in the modules :8! 6 D3.

The component of the system efficiency in the state xv determined by the perfor-
mance by the operating PM in this state of the problems 031 6 A3 can be ex-
pressed as

9) -
I L
r'.‘ -ZZ d': z.
a L-laﬂd: ‘P‘
where d}: 6 {0. l} and dji - 1 if the problem 0J2 is transferred to the 9M1,
dﬁz . 0 otherwise.

It is possible to assume that finding the optimal distribution CV for fixed
state <v reduces to solving a problem of integral linear programming consisting
in finding the set of values of the variables dii maximizing the value of the
function E: under the restrictions:

$3 -
Co'ZZ- .d'¢C<‘z).‘Coad.

V" 0“€A; ‘

a o
T’.T°.Z d AT ‘.$T;. 'k-{,..., a.
s L a.“‘; 1‘ (‘0 Cd q

where C(j¢)1 are the expenditures required for realizing the transfer of the
problem 012 to the modulus PM1 (given by the matrix “C11H);AT(J;)1 is the in-
crement of the average servicing time of a request in the operating PM on trans-
fer of the problem 011 to it (given by the matrix IIATjiﬂ).
This problem can be solved by any of the known TsLP methods [2].

5. Finding the problems which each PH must solve in the state <° and in all
states nu 6 r and calculation of the total expenditures required to realize the
obtained set S - {CV} of distributions, the average request servicing time in
each PM and the values of the efficiency index of the system for each of the
states of the given set r - (<u}.

160

IN)R‘0FT1(]Al.l£SE (NHL?
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The optimal distribution of the problems found for each state x“ 6 r(u - I.
..., r) is described by the matrix geyiﬂ. where j - 1. .... N and i - l.

..., n. A31 is a subset of problems defined below.

For the columns corresponding to the operating Phi in the state Kv A31 -
011 L1 {aj1)“1. where 011 is the problem executed in the Phi in the state x
{011}V1 is the set of problems 012 transferred to the Phi in the condition <v

from failed PHI. where they are carried out in the state to.

For columns corresponding to the failed Put A 1 - 6. Let us construct the re-
sultant matrix "A31”, where A31 - JgIAxi. e matrix "A11“ defines the set of

problems for each PML. i - l, ..., n. which must be carried out in it in the
case of failures of the given subsets of PH in order that in each of the corre-
sponding states of the systemathemmximum value of its efficiency will be
reached for given restrictions on the output capacity of the PM and additional
expenditures. The above-indicated system indices can be calculated by this ma-
trix.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
l. Ushakcv. I. A., "Operating Efficiency of Complex Systems." 0 NADEZHNOSII
SLOZﬁNYKH TEKHNICHESKIKH SISTEN [Reliability of Complex Technical Systems].

Moscow, Sovetskoye radio. 1966.

2. Kofman. A.. and Anri-Laborder. A.. METODY l MODELI ISSLEDOVANIYA OPERATSIY
[Methods and Models of Operations Research]. Moscow, Mir. 1977.

161

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
um Utrlt cm. was. \nuJ

MAN-MACRINE METHOD OF OBTAINING AN ALGORITHM FOR THE OPERATE}! OF A CONTROL UNIT
[Article by L. K. Yan'shina. Hoscow . pp 1109-1521

(Text! The initial step in the synthesis of microprogram control units is the
step of obtaining the operating algorithm (AP) in the formal synthesis language.
The difficulties of this step consist in the fact that the requester. as a rule.
is not familiar with the formal synthesis languages and cannot competently write
the algorithm for the behavior of his device in them. In a number of existing
automated design systems (A8?) of digital control units these difficulties are
overcome by creating specialized input languages oriented toward a specific
class of users and similar with respect to their dictionary composition and
grammatical rules to the terminology adopted in the given field of engineering.
However. even in this case it remains necessary for the user to study these
highly complex and formalized languages. In the automated design system for mi-
croptogram automata (ASPUHA). another procedure is proposed for obtaining an al-
gorithm for the functioning of the control unit not requiring any formalized
languages of the user. It is only assumed that he has a meaningful description
of the AF of his device.

Obtaining the A? of the control unit in the ASPUMA system is an interactive pro-
cess. the active side in which is the ASP (computer). However. it is highly
complicated to realize adequate translation of the meaningful description of the
AP to the language of logical flowcharts for algorithms used as the design lan-
guage in ASPUHA directly. Therefore first the AP is written in an intermediate
language (the conversion formula language [1] or sequence language). and then
this notation is translated to the language of the logical flowcharts of algo-
rithms (LSA).

The AS? initiates problems of two types: the problem requiring a descriptive
answer. the problem requiring an alternative answer ("yes-no" type). The sn-
swers to problems of the first type are given in natural Russian language with-
out any requirements on syntax; the answers to problems of the second type are
regulated. The dialogue is realized by a computer videoterminal. and it con-
tains the following steps.

I. Obtaining the set of control inputs.

2. Explanation of the control input feed sequence.

162

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFlﬂAL USE ONLY

3. Description of the set of logical conditions.
lo. Discovery of the values of the logical conditions.

After some familiarization with the technique of performing the dialogue and the
capabilities of the ASP, the requester sets to work on the first step of the
dialogue procedure.

1. Obtaining the set of control inputs:

In this step it is assumed that the requester will describe all of the control
inputs required for proper operation of his device. He must describe the first
control input (operator). second. and so on. Each control input can be de-
scribed by means of several Russian sentences and contain a brief characteristic
of it. All of the described ASP operators are assigned notation with which the
requester is familiar in the dialogue protocol. In the last steps of the dia-
logue procedure all of tie described operators are identified only by introduced
notation.

2. Explanation of the cuntrol input feed sequence:

It is proposed that the client consider all of the operators described by him
successively. If the conversion formula language is used as the interaediate
language. the requester must answer the question as to which operators can be
performed after the given operator with observation of certain conditions. If
the sequence language is used as the intermediate language. the requester must
call out the operators which are performed before the given operator. Thus, for
each operator either a set of follower operators will be obtained or a set of
precursor operators. The choice of the intermediate language is left to the
requester.

3. Description of the set of logical conditions:

In this step all conditions are discovered for each pair of operators between
which transfer is possible. the checking of which is necessary when realizing
the given :ransfer. The computer outputs the pair of operators A1. A) and ex-
plains to the requester what conditions must be checked so that the control in-
put Aj can be sent after the control input A1. Each logical condition (LU) must
be described by several Russian sentences. The described LU obtains a descrip-
tion which is recorded in the dialogue protocol. After all possible transfers
A1. A1 are investigated and a set of Ll: :5 described for each transfer. the per-
formance of the third step is completed.

la. Discovery of the values of the logical conditions:

In the intermediate languages used, only the two-valued logical conditions are
considered which assume two values: true and false. In the given step of the
dialogue the requester is given the LG for investigation with indication of the
t.‘.m.\:'-_I.' A1 * A) for which it is checked. He must answer the question as to
whether the given transfer 1.1kesplav.c on satisfaction of the specific LU (that
15» 501' 1‘5 true value) cr n:n<:uis:‘.lcti-:s of the Z.” (fora false value)? When

163
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
all of the transfers from one operator to another are investigated and the
values of all of the described LU are discovered. the writing of the operating
algorithm in the intermediate language will be completed.

After the AF is obtained in the intermediate language. translation of it to the
language of logical flow diagrams of algorithms is realized. Since different
languages can be used as the intermediate languages. it is expedient to do the
translation by syntactic methods. For the conversion formula and sequence lan-
guages, generative grammars have been constructed. Inasmuch as the number of
rules of these gramars is small. the pouer of the terminal and nonterminal dic-
tionaries is also small, and they are reduced by standard methods to precedence
gramars. and the methods based on precedence ratios were used to construct the
translator. The recognition element of this translator is very simple and uni-
versal for a class of input languages [22.

Each input language is represented by a table of generative rules and precedence
matrix. and the output language is represented by a set of semantic programs.

In conclusion. it is necessary to note that the given procedure can be used to
automate programing, that is. to obtain the block diagram or logical flow dia-
gram of the algorithm of the complex program.

3 IBLIOGRAPHY

l. Lazarev. V. 0.. and Piyl'. Ye. I.. SINIEZ UPRAVLYAYUSHCHIKH AVTOHATOV [Syn-
thesis of Control Automata]. Moscow. Energiya. 1978.

2. Lebedev, V. N.. WEDENIYE V SISTER PROGRAMROVANIYA [Introduction to Pro-
gramming Systems]. Moscow. Statistika, 1975.

COPYRIGRT: lnstitut problem peredachl informatsii AN SSSR. 1981

10865
(ISO: [860/100

-END-

16!.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY