APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/00: ClA-RDP02-00050R000200030016-0
Near East/North Africa Report

No. 2055

FBIS FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE
NOTE

JPRS publications contain infatuation pri-rily frol foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
translissions and broadcasts. Materials fro. foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and saterial enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original inforntion was
processed. more no processing indicator is given, the infor-
nation was sun-arized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or nanss preceded by a ques-
tion earl: and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. 'riaea within item are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no w represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.8. Govern-ent.

PROCURDIEM' 0? PUBLICATIONS

JPRS publications my be ordered from the National Technical
Information Service, Springfield, Virginia 22161. In order-
ing, it is recommended that the JPRS masher, title, date and
author, if applicable, of publication be cited.

Current JPRS publications are amounted in Gaverment Reggrts
Announceeents issued semi-monthly by the National Technical
Infornation Service, and are listed in the Monthly Catalog of
0.3. Gwernnent Publications issued by the Superintendent of
Docmnents, 0.5. Government Printing Office, Washington, n.c.
20602.

Indexes to this report (by keyword, audxor, personal oases,
title and series). are available fron Bell a Howell, old
Mansfield Road, Rooster, (bio “691.

Correspondence pertaining to setters other than procure-cot
may be addressed to Joint Publications Research Service,
1000 North Glebe Road, Arlington, Virginia 22201.
I). mm a W
I P-vl ir icnl Science X _lnter-Arab Affaiux

Sociology :North African
Econonico _Aifairo
Culture (Social ___Af3haniotan
Sciencua) 3g_ﬁisoria
Ethnology 4L_pahrain
Geography _Bgypt
Techologicnl 3£_lrnn
Military Sciences ___Iraq
3L_loracl
___Jordan
___!uvait
Lebanon

_Libya
_Hauritanin
—Horocco

:::?cople's Deno-

X

cratic Republic
of Yolnn
Persian Gulf
—Arna

3L_gatar

X

Sandi Arabia

:::}paniah North

Africn

___§udan
NEAR EAST/NORTH AFRICA REPORT

No. 2055

Conrsms
INTER-ARAB AFFAIRS

Gulf States Attenpt To Mute Internal Dissidence
(An-mm REPORT & m, 29 Oct 79) nose-00.0.0000.

ALGERIA

Briefs
Soviets Pilot Algerian HiGs

BAHRAIN

Offshore Banking Activities Continue in Popularity
(mmuom “En-Y, 3mv 79) OCOOOOOIOOIOOIOOIOOOOO

Briefs
French Arms Sales

IRAN

Role of Revolutionary Council Comes in Clearer Focus
“BM. 13 MV 79) OOOOOIOIOOOCCOOI.OOOOOIOQOIOOOIOOOO.

Oil Minister Instructs workers To Be vigilant
“mm, 11 OCt 79) .00.....000.0....OIOOOOOOOOODOOOOOOU

Japanese Discuss Resumption of Petrochemical Plant Operation
(W, 15 Oct 79) OOOOOOOOIIOOOOOOOOOOOO0.00.0.0000...

PAGE

10
14

17
ISRAEL

Solution to Settlement Problem Delayed
(MDI'A’ 29 “‘1 “V 79) I.COOOIOCOIOOCCOOCOOOOOOCIQC

Division on Court Ruling, Editorial
Settlement Seen As Political, Editorial

Party Dissension Follows Deyan's Resignation
(N1t0r181;le'A, 28 Oct 79) oosoosasous-soosssoeooo

Editorial Looks at Reasons Behind Dayan's Resignation
(Bd1t0r1.l;mom, 22 Oct 79) ooossossou-aoasaoaooosss

Coalition Agreement Tested, Agudat Israel's Support Questioned
(Ed1:°dll; ”01", 2’. 0C: 79) nose-ooosooossosaosaaoa

Law Permitting Abortions for ‘Social' Reasons Condemed
(Editorial; MDI'A, 31 Oct 79) .......................

Threat of Bl-Al Strike
(m1t0r1.1; HAZOFEH, 22 Oct 79) OOOOIOOOOoIIOIOOIIOOOOOO

LIBYA

New Oil Refinery Inaugurated
(m WIRIYA “IL, 6 wt 79) OCOIOIOIOIIICOOOODOOOIO.

Briefs
Sewage Plant Contract

PERSIAN GULF AREA

Foreign Workers Pose Grave Problem for Area Governments
(Nicolas Belay; moms-lacuna, Jul-Aug-Sep 79) ......

QATAR

shaykh Al Thani Interviewed on Finance Policy
(‘Abd al-‘Aziz ibn Khalifa Al Thani Interview;
LE NOUVBL BCONOHISTR, 22 Oct 79) .......................

Briefs
Fertilizer Comany Production

19

23

25

27

30

33

35

36

52
SAUDI ARABIA

Conflict Reported Between Information Oil Minute"
(AN-MIMI! ARAB REPORT & "Em, 29 Oct 79) ............... 53

Br! efs
Japanese Methanol Plant 54
GULF S'LATBS A‘l'I'BHPI TO HITS INTERNAL DISSIDBNCE
Paris AN-NAHAR ARAB REPORT 8 mm in English 29 Oct 79 p 2

[Text] Recent sabre-rattling statements by Iranian ayatollahs have per-
suaded some of the autocratic Arab rulers in the Gulf that they could melee
their regime a little more secure by introducing a measure of democracy.
Informed sources told this newsletter last week that the rulers of Bahrain
and Kuwait were contemplating early moves to give the younger generation
and influential families a greater say in the running of state affairs so
as to dampen opposition to the royal family.

Kuwait's 50-member National Assembly was dissolved in August 1976 and
Bahrain's National Assembly in 1975.

Both Bahrain and Kuwait were recently visited by Iran's Deputy Premier
Sadegh 'l‘abatabai, who sought to reassure the Arab governments that state-
ments by Ayatollah Sadegh Rouhani did not reflect government policy. Mr
Tabatabai, who is also government spokesman, was accompanied by Syria's
Foreign Minister Abdel-hali- Khaddam; Syria, which enjoys close relations
with Iran's Islamic authorities, was reported to have offered to mediate
between Iran and Arab Gulf states after Ayatollah Rouhani declared that
Bahrain was part of Iran and that Arab Gulf rulers would meet the seam
fate as the Slah unless they learned the lesson of the Islamic revolution.

Despite reassurnnCes that Iran has no territorial designs on them. the Arab
Gulf states intend to continue consulting each other until they have worked
out detailed plans for closer coordination on security, informed sources
said. Soothing words from tehran nevertheless persuaded the Arab leaders
that a emit was unnecessary the sources said, a rupture in diplomatic
relations with Tehran was likely.

The sources also said they expected the Baghdad and Tehran governments to
continue with efforts to improve relations between them, which have been
tense since the Shah's overthrow in February. lbwever, the sources added,
Baghdad is insisting on two conditions for e modus vivendi: first, that
Iran's religious leaders refrain from provocative statements designed to
stir up religious dissidents in Iraq. and second that Iran abide by the

1975 Algiers agreement signed by the Shah and the man who is now Iraq's
President, Saddam Hussein.

Details on the agreement were published in this newsletter's October 8 is-
sue, but as we then stated, the new authorities in Iran do not feel them-
selves bound by it. Observers nevertheless expect Ira to agree to Iraq's

terms, if only to put an end to the bitter tensions along their comon
border, where Kurdish rebels based in Iraq are striking at towns in Iran.

Baghdad is said to be demding a halt to Iran's interference in its

internal affairs as the price for putting a stop to cross-border activities
by the Kurds.

C50: 10820
BRIBPS

SOVIE‘rS ler mum: KISS—According to the French secret services [not
further identified. probebly the some], the 1416-25 eircreft eeen flying
over Algiers on 1 “amber on the occuion of the Liberntion Dey festiv-
vitiee were not piloted by Algeriene but by Soviets. The Soviet instruc-

tors on acid to be having great difficulty treining the Algerian crew
for these eircrnft, delivered elnoet a year ago. [Tut] [Perie LB POINT
in French 12 Nov 79 p 63]

080: 6600
OFFSHORE BANKING ACTIVITIES CONTINUE IN POPUIARITY
Beirut THE ARAB HORLD WEEKLY in English 3 Nov 79 pp 3-6

[Text] Signs of an economic turndown? Rumors of political instability?
It vulnerable does not seem to make much difference as far as Bahrain's
offshore banking sector is concerned, as in April this year. fiftieth unit
was added to the OBU family. Bank Brmiputra of Halaysia. Certainly, by
any szandards, Bahrain offshore banking sector has been a success, and

most experts seem to feel that while the huge profits of the past nay not
be repeated, it is poised for still further gains.

One of the reason why the offshore banking sector has boomed, no doubt is
because of the strict rules and regulations governing its operation. lbst
important of all, it has been decided that only banks of established inter-
national reputation may participate. So far, this rule has been rigidly
adhered to, and there are not likely to be any unpleasant surprises con-
cerning either resources or management, as has happened in several instances
in other parts of the Gulf. As a result, when any of Bahrains offshore
banking units goes into a project you may be sure it is sound; they could
not afford to back a loser for fear of damaging their credibility. As
some experts expressed it recently one will only need to worry over
Bahrain's OBU's if the Bahrai! Monetary Agency (she) starts issuing licen-
sea to new banks set up with local or regional capital, fund put together
merely for the purpose of entering the market.

One other factor that has ensured the OBU's continuing success is the
simple fact that Bahrain is a small place, and what goes on in one part
of the island is soon known in every other. ‘lhere are few major deals tht

take place in Bahrain about which the Bit is ignorant.

Yet, even the warmest proponents of Bahrain's OBU's would concede that
there have been problems. And these are likely to remain, for a number of
reasons which are unlikely to change. For one thing Bahrain is vulnerable
to all kinds of political pressures, and the recent crop of runours have
not done the local economy much good. Banking can only thrive where there
is confidence and news about internal sectarian unrest is hardly conducive
to good banking. Bahrain is also vulnerable to the activities of the other
central banks of the region, and of course to the movement of the dollar,
and especially to the fact that at least a quarter of the number of cur-
rencies the sector deals in are local currencies, the Saudi riyal, the
Kuwaiti dinar, the Qatari riyal and the Bahraino diner, none of which
co-nand real respect as international currencies.

Of course all these local currencies are basically sound, but they none-

theless provide considerable headaches to the bankers who deal in them in
large quantities.

The supply of these regional currencies is directly linked to the spending
of the governments of Saudi Arabia, Kuwait, the United Arab Emirates,
Qatar .and Bahrain. If these governments fail to spend the dollars that
they receive in return for their oil experts at the same rate that the
private sectors in these countries is needing local currencies to pay for
imports, then there can be a shortage of the currency in question.

To make the point clearer, one might say that the Eurodollar market would
never expect to run out of dollars. At the same tim it is not at all un-
likely, or at least far from being inconceivable, that the Bahrain off-
shore market might run out of dinars or dirhams or whatever other local
currency might be in demand.

According to most reliable reports it was a shortage of currence the was
behind "the small storm" that blew up in offshore Bahrain at the end of
1978, and continued into the first months of this year. The trouble evi-
dently started when President Carter put together his package for support-
ing the dollar on November 1, 1978. This had the effect of strengthening
the dollar, and this in turn caused the (half oil producers to leave rela~
tive ly more of their money in dollars, a trend which was reinforced by
nervousness in the Gulf states because of the situation in Iran, as well
as by the downturn in government spending in the region. This led to son
Arab governments not releasing their regional currencies into the local
market at a rate matching the demand. Short-term rates therefore rose
sharply; and a large supply of Kuwaiti dinars was drawn to Bahrain, much
to the annoyance of the Central Bank of Kuwait.

This led to the Kuwaities retaliating by adjusting their definition of the
liquid assets of the comercial banks. To put it another way. the Central
Bank ruled that all deposits of up to one month were to be regarded in
future as liquid, and were to be kept in Kuwait. This, in turn, caused a
certain amount of anger in Bahrain, bankers are complaining that the
Kuwaities were trying to put them out of business, and Kuwaiti bankers re-
taliating by saying that the Bahrain's OBU's were making excessive profits
at their expence.

Host of the 0811's turn a profit after only twelve months of operation. 0n
the other hand, the more banks that join the offshore sector the lower
those profits are likely to be. True, business was better in 1978 than in

'3
l977. but at the time of writting it does appear that the rate of increase
is now stabilising. The M maintains that the 030 has a balance sheet of
some $650 um, and that its annual expences are unlikely to be in excess of
[.0 mn dollars. and that it makes a higher of abput another 1.0 an dollars.
Some bankers say that these figures are misleading, and that their expenses
are in reality much higher, while their profits are less. 0n the other

hand, there is little evidence that any of the OBU managers are especially
worried.

The OBU's expenses are direct foreign exchange earnings for Bahrain and in

this context, during 1978 the 030's brought in approximately $50 an to the
Bahrain treasury.

OBUs Produced By Boom Conditions

One thing that should be remembered. however. is that most of the OBUs
came into being at a time when there was a boom in the region. The oil
producing states of the region were making huge financial surpluses and
many of them were engaged in disbursing a large volume of government ex-
penditure, pushing regional currencies into international circulation.

Now however, although one could hardly say that a recession has arrived
it is true that most of the countries of the Gulf are moving out of their
hefty surpluses and with most of the big infrastructural projects now com-
pleted it is likely that we will see a taperring of government spending.

This means that in the near future profits are likely to remain relatively

low but at the same time there is no reason to fear that the offshore bank-
ing sector is likely to run into difficulties thanks largely to the fact

that most of the banks operating in the region are well established with
sound international reputation.

According to international banking experts, most bankers operating in
Bahrain fear that the OBU system has now reached maturity. They accept
that there is now a plateau but see no cause for alarm.

As one businessman recently observed: "banks are saying that for five
years we have been racing and now we need to take one or two years easy
and spend the time reorganising".

BM: a firm hand on the tiller

Watching over Bahrain's economy is the Bahrain Monetary Agency (are) which
has only recently assumed the powers of the central bank. Previously are
had confined itself to the issue and the redemption of currency in suc-
cession to the now defunct currency board. Its activities are essential to
the planned growth of the island's economy.
At the present time BM is responsible for the control of the banking sys-
tem. lt conducts an effective monetary policy, managing the foreign re-
serves of the country and maintaining a stable value for the Bahraini Dinar.
It also has a task of developing Bahrain as an international aoney and fi-
nancial market. The am has encouraged coaaaerciel banks to build up its
activities by creating stable working conditions through maintaining ef-
fective exchange reserves and assisting in liquidity when needed and pro-
viding guidelines.

Because the BM has pursued a relatively cautious policy and has leaned ro-
vards a conservative approach in financial methods the agency has managed
to provide a stabilising influence in an economy which might otherwise had
gone out of hand. As it is Bahrain's banks have been able to play a pos-
itive role providing useful services to the cos-unity.

During the past five years coamrercial banks have expended total assets

that rose from BD 188.1nillion at the end of 1973 to BD [96 million at

the end of 1978. During the same period total lending to private resi-
dents rose from BD 76.1. aillion to B!) 320.5 million. Of course such ex-
pansion would be meaningless unless inflation had been kept vithin managable
limits and this is what the BM has succeeded in doing. Operating in co-

operation with other government ministries and through various monetary
measures to relieve the economy of expansionary pressures felt most force-

fully during the period 1976-1977. This was a time which sav rising costs,
high profit expectations shortage of labour and goods and services. and
consequently a high rate of inflation. The BM worked together with the
government and the banking comunity to reduce the rate of growth in the
money supply and bank lending which reached 65 per cent in 1976. This was
done by stabilising government expenditures and diverting banking lending
to the more productive economic sectors.

As a result the island experienced balanced growth, the investment oppor-
tunities are now evaluated at realistic economic return rather than on
quick profits. Consequently the inflation rate which reached 30 per cent
a year during the boom has been gradually reduced and monetary experts
are hopeful that it will be brought to as low as 5 per cent by the end
of this year.

This should help restore the competitiveness of Bahrain as a service center
and should encourage investment and the choice of Bahrain as an operating
base for a broad spectnaa of enterprises.

Monitoring Market Conditions

The BM is constantly aware of the market conditions and monitors them
closely in an effort to ensure the stability of the Bahrain Dinar which
is the agency's top priority. During the five years of its operation the
total assets of the BF! rose from BD l7.0 million in [073 to B!) 201.6
million in 1978.
But the agency has been able to balance its desire to maintain a strong
relationship with all major currencies with the need to have a realistic
exchange rate, against the background of relative inflation rates and

the dollar based oil income. In January this year the B!“ announced that
the Dinar will be linked to the International Monetary Fund's SDR instead
of the US dollar.

As a result the value of the Dinar against the dollar was adjusted up-
wards three times during the past year by a total of three percent. Per-
haps the most important action of the Eli since its inseption was to
promote the idea of offshore banking. This idea was well received by lead-
ing international banks. Many of them established 0308 in Bahrain. The
offshore banking sector is regarded as an important step in helping to
develop Bahrain as a regional and international financial center which
also contributes to the Bahrain economy and renders services to both sur-
plus and deficit Arab countries.

At the present time Arab countries have deposited around $2 billion in

Bharain and in return received the sam amount in the form of lending
from the 0811 market. This benefits Bahrain both directly and indirectly.

In fact OBUs bring in an estimated $45 million in foreign currencies to
cover expenditures on salaries and rents which contributes significantly
to the country's balance of payments.

CSO: (0820
FRENQ! ARMS SALES-d‘rance is currently intensifying its efforts
to sell military equipment to the countriea of the Persian Gulf,
and Bahrain seems in a fair way to beconing one of France's na-
Jor clients in that region. During a recent official visit to
Paris, Bahrain's minister of defense attended a nt-ber of deion-
strationa of military hardware, in particular anored cars and
anti-tank helicopters and declared that his country vas looking
for Just such cooperation, in order to be able to take advantage
of the modern technological advances of French industry. Let ue
recall that the French situation with respect to land equip-eat
sales is particularly delicate; for exalple, not a single armored
car has been sold by France since the end of 1977. [Text] [Paris
DEFENSE IM‘ERARHEES in French Oct 79 p 5] 8117

C50: 6800
ROLE OF REVOLUTIONARY CWNCIL 00185 Ill cm Focus

Tehran KBYHAN in Persian 1:! Nov 79 p 3

Izrticle: :‘New Responsibilities for Revolutionary Council Members in the
Ministries:/

/1ex_t_/ Formation of the Council of the Revolution and determination of the
basic outlines of this council's programs in administering the country have
to a large extent become clear and thus it is lost probable that the final
conposition of the members of the council, the members' responsibilities

and the outlines of the council's program in the ministries will be known
in the next 26 hours.

Yesterday at the end of the Revolutionary Council session, during a discus-
sion among a number of council members, new responsibilities were announced
for Ayatollah Dr Beheshti, Ayatollah Husavi Ardabili, Ayatollah Mahdavi
Kani, and Hojjatoleslam Hashemi Rafsenjani.

Ayatollah Dr Beheshti has assumed supervision of the holy "er of Construc-
tion, llojjatoleslam Hasheni lafsenjani has been charged with supervising
the Ministry of the Interior, Ayatollah unsavi Ardabili is the guardian of
the foundation, end Ayatollah Hehdevi Rani has been elected to supervise
the revolutionary comittees and to represent the Revolutionary Council in
the revolutionary courts and the Army of Guards.

Some members of the council were present during the conversation and the

membership of Ho'infar, minister of oil, in the Revolutionary Council was
approved in final form.

According to a report by mm'a correspondents, the new guardians of the
abovementioned organizations have to some extent proclaimed the varying
shedes of their program; this includes Ayatollah Huaavi Ardebili, guardian
of the Foundation of the Downtrodden, who declared "Town lands and farmed
lands belonging to the foundation will be handed over to the people follow
ing the necessary investigations. Similarly, the satanic palaces will be
turned into museums or places of healthy recreation for young people."

10
According to KlYﬂAN's newsmen, the report by the special Kordestan delega-
tion and other national affairs were subject to discussion and exchanges
of views at the session of the Revolutionary Council which was held yester-

day evening and lasted until 2200 hours.

According to this report, some members of the Revolutionary Council placed
information at the disposal of the newsmen at the conclusion of this ses-
sion, in which all members of the Revolutionary Council and members of the
special Kordestan delegation took part.

At the conclusion of yesterday evening's session, referring to the fact
that he had been chosen as the Revolutionary Council's representative to
the Holy War of Construction, Ayatollah Dr Beheshti stated:

"The people in charge of most sections have been determined. A final de-
cision has not been taken on three other sections, since our effort has
been to make a selection so that God willing the succeeding established
government will remain."

Dr Behesti then referred to the point that Mr Banisadr's plan regarding
the American embassy had been presented to the council and ratified and
would be officially approved tomorrow by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
Regarding the special Kordestan delegation's report, he said:

"This report was extremely good and the special Kordestan delegation's re-
port took aost of the council‘s time. This report gives room for hope,
and we hope that we will be able to solve the problem of our beloved
Kordestan and our Kurdish brothers in a good manner."

Referring to the fact that Mr. Hashemi Rafsenjani had been appointed the
Revolutionary Council's representative to the Ministry of the Interior and
the guardian of that ministry, Ayatollah Beheshti discussed the conposition
of the Revolutionary Council:

"The council has no head and I an functioning as the council secretary."

He added, "The new responsible officials have begun their jobs and I sy-
self. as the person in charge of the holy war of construction, had a unet-
ing today with members of the holy war and began my work. The other friends
have also started their job."

Mo'infar, Member of the Council and Oil Minister

Dr Beheshti added, "I have had considerable interest in the revolutionary
foundation from the very start and therefore wanted to be in contact with
this young, searching, dynamic creative generation. Since I was in touch
with their activities, and the young people wire in contact with me, be-
forehand throughout this period, 1 also agreed to take the responsibility
for them so that we could travel along this road together."

ll
Referring to the fact that Mr Mo'infar would function as member of the
council and as oil minister, Dr Beheshti distussed the question whether
there was a broad difference of opinion within the council:

"Give the word to our pegple and outside Iran that fortunately no such sit-
uation exists and that lgpen discussiog/ is only out of the desire to have
an adequate discussion regarding every selection. If responsibility for
the current activities were not our responsibility as well, the selection
of responsible persons would have taken place in 2 days. Therefore we did
not have enough time.

"We have nearly completed our job; the essential responsibilities have been
determined, and everyone has begun his job. The jobs are being performed.

Decisionmaking is taking place. According to the arrangement we have made,
the nation's general affairs are being brought up in the council every day,
decisions are being made on them, and these are quickly being conveyed for

implementation."

Hojjatoleslam Mahdavi Kani
At the conclusion of this session, he said:

"Today the issues of Kordestan and appointment of new ministers were made
the subjects of discussion and exchanges of views. The special delegation's
report was interesting."

At the conclusion of yesterday's session, referring to the fact that Iran's
complaint to the Security Council was ratified by the council today,

Sadeq Qotbzadeh discussed the matter that revolt has resumed in Kordestan
following the return of the special Kordestan delegation and the nature of
its relationship to these talks:

"The counterrevolutionary forces, which are basically not Kurdish, are not
letting up, and this is something we know. They want to sabotage every
type of negotiation and we are therefore waiting for this type of incident.
The important aspect of the case is that the overall problems with our
Kurdish brothers should be solved. Our Kurdish brothers will themselves
settle accounts with them.“

Ayatollah Husavi Ardabili also described the progress of the council‘s
agenda as good, referred to the fact that he had been selected as the
council's representative to the Foundation for the Downtrodden, and stated,
with respect to his won programs in the Foundation for the Downtrodden:

"I have been going to the council for 2 days now. I have invited friends

to go there so that we can have a new organizational structure. I would
prefer that this foundation be administered in council form." He added,

12
"Hhat occurred to me in this foundation are firstly the issues of the
municipal lands here. I have said that people should identify these lands
and apportion those which have no legal problems among the people as soon
as possible.

"Others are the agricultural lands. I have said that people should identify
these at once and break them up for apportionment among farmers. Of course
a group is to be appointed in a manner which in our view is very useful and
fundamental and is also in conformity with legal criteria.

"Newspapers, magazines and on occasion artistic activities will be admin-

istered under this group's supervision and of course I have stated the basic
plan for this."

With regard to whether the Foundation for the Downtrodden had a program for
reducing the staffs of the newspapers attached to this foundation,
Ayatollah Husavi Ardabili said,

"of course after this group is famed it will be within this group's powers
to investigate and it seems to me that as long as they can, and there is
work, use must be made of these people since it is not proper for people to
dismiss an effective member who is used in one place, on grounds of purifi-
cation, unleas he be an element, or elements, which are of no use in that
job or are not working in a useful manner."

Ayatollah Husavi Ardabili added, "Regarding the palaces, I have said that
an investigation should be made and we will try to turn them into places
where the masses of the people can benefit from them and which can be at
the disposal of the masses of the people, be they libraries, museums or
places for healthy recreation for young people."

11367
080: 6906

13
OIL MINISTER INSTRUCTS HORKBRS TO BE VIGILANT
Tehran KEYHMI in Persian 11 Oct 79 p 13

[Text] Ahvsz--K£YHAN correspondent--At an assewly of oil workers in
Ahvaz, Oil Minister Engineer Hoinfar urged the oil enployees, especially
the oil workers. to help promote the goals of the glorious revolution
under the guidance of concept and teaching of Islam in the sane nanner
they had helped in bringing to its knees the devil of dictatorship through
their continuous strikes. lie said the nost ilportant thing to do now was

to choose the direction needed by the revolution and the future of the na-
tion.

In his speech in the assewly hall of the oil industry employees, enpha-
sizing the importance attached to the oil industry by the govern-ant of
the Islamic revolution of Iran and saying that there was no lore root for
the old systen which he said reselialed nore like a branch of the royal
court. Hoinfar continued: "We all observed how that system was reversed
and upturned in accordance to the wishes of our nation as was the case
of our other industries in the country.

The oil minister went on to point out sone of the existing problens of the
oil industry emphasizing the fact that certain problens could not be solved
overnight. He further said: "Sons of our problem are inherited fro- the
past and under the present circunstances. and in view of the inediate ur-
gencies. all could not be solved at once. It will take years to overcone
our problems and to satisfy all the society's needs and demands. A major
profound transformation and a cultural revolution is needed to change the
fabric of the society and to achieve a cultural revolution all and every-
thing aust undergo a change-changes in the node of life. in dealing with
friends, and in the habits and patterns of consumption-which. no doubt,
are not easily achieved. 0n the surface, it sonetines looks as if their
indifference and lack of attention in acne areas gives the inpresaion

that there were no differences between the post and prerevolutionary tines.
Here. by choosing the proper direction and in view of the fact that we have
an alert public, guided by the principles and teachings of Isla, we rea-
lize that should there be any negligence and mistakes, they could be over-
come by using these nechanisns and teachings. Therefore, a nation that
was able to destroy and overthrow the corrupt nonarchical systen by its

14
glorious revolution need not despair and fear facing problems. The govern-
ment is the government of Islamic justice, and Islam is the protector of
the nation."

In another part of his speech. referring to the imperialistic plots aimed
at damaging the Islamic revolution, the oil minister said: "It is a fact
that imperialism and its agents will not stand still. It will try to
create problems and inose various plots and disruptions on our people.
Yet, it must be remeﬁered that these will only make us more determined
in achieving our goals. The enemy is in the waiting and the achieving
of our revolutionary goals are not an easy task."

Emphasizing that it was necessary to cowine realism and farsightedness.
the oil minister went on to say: "He must pay for whatever we buy. Noth-
ing is free. The Iranian people nod must pay for the blood shed by its
martyrs. Some of our existing problem are the products of our revolu-
tion and there are many who welcome them. A masher of our people are toil-
ing in villages and some are serving the people freely and have sacrificed
everything they had. Our revolutionary guards are giving their lives for
the revolution. These are the fruits of our revolution and yet there are
people who try to identify our people's desires and goals as those of eco-
nomics and materialistic. They try to smear our revolution by claiming
that what our people are demanding are material things. The strike by

you. the oil workers. is being interpreted as a materialistic demand. So
are strikes by others. But we have come to know that you. the people of
Iran, have shown that what you were demanding was, freedom. independence,
dignity and respect. You all learned after the revolution that theie were
plots in various corners of the country and some people were ab‘a to take
advantage of the dissatisfactions that were the products of the past some
of which still exist. We found out that in different parts of the country
there were elements who were trying to capitalize on welfare and economic
demands being made by some naive but well meaning individuals. Plotters
have sometimes been able to persuade these people into following their way
of thinking and ideology. Our Islamic revolution possesses such a quality
enabling these people to realize their mistakes and. in the light of our
revolution, become aware of their cultural heritage which had been so
grossly misrepresented for so many years. Our sacred Islamic teachings
had lost their real meaning. It was revived and bloomed once again through
our revolution enabling the nation to reconcile with their past--a recon-
ciliation that is still continuing. I am confident that with changes taken
place there are many people in our nation that are not troubled by our
problems and will not be dispaired. They know their path is that of God
and are dealing with Him and are not worried about the future of the na-
tion." with respect to problem, high prices, the obstacles created for
the revolution by the agent of imperialism—obstacles for our trade and
industries and the securing of spare parts, the lack of which had resulted
in shortages—the oil minister said: "These will not result in the aliens-
tion of our people from our revolution. We are realistic enough to know
that receiving a valued prize requires bearing of hardship (paying the

15
price). Let us review revolutions in other countries. Where have the
conditions returned to normal in a short period of time? Returning to
normal following a great revolution is sinply a miracle. Hardships lust
be born. Don't refrain from speaking up and say what is on your mind

but at the sane time bear the revolution in your mind. The fact that our
worker friends have asserted that they stand ready to defend our revolu-
tion with their hands and teeth is very gratifying."

"You are the guardians of the revolution's life blood, protecting a major
part of our oil industry in the south. Continue protecting this vital
artery and don't ever lose your revolutionary spirit. Your present think-
ing and mentality is in contrast with that of the past. “hat you have now
is a right-seeking mentality." At the conclusion. Hoinfar made references
to the writing of Constitution, the democratic administration of the Is-
lamic republic and the importance of the councils (of the revolution)
which he said play the role of the arms (of the government). He once
again called on the oil workers to do their utmost in making the great
wheels of the oil industry turning.

At the meeting the oil workers aired their demands and discussed their
various problems. They asked the oil minister to act swiftly in purging

the oil industry and putting an end to the slowdown and inefficiency in
the industry. '

8516
650: #906

16
JAPANESE DISCUSS RBSUMPTIG‘ 0P PBTROCHEMICAL PLANT OPERATION
Tehran BAMDAD in Persian 15 Oct 79 p 16

[Text] Japanese Minister of International Trade and Industries, Masumi
Esaki, who is in Iran at the head of an ll-Inan mission, held a press con-
ference yesterday attended by both local and foreign newsman during which
he described the purpose of his visit and the talks he had had with Iran-
ian officials.

The Japanese trade minister noted that his mission was in Iran to convey

to the government of Iran his goverment's decision regarding the resump-
tion of work on the giant petrochemical project at Bandar Khomeyni (formerly
Bandar Shahpur). This followed decision by the Japanese Government on

12 October to support the resumed operation. Discussions were held in
Tehran and Prine Minister Bazargan expressed satisfaction that the opera-
tion was going to be resumed. .

Becki further recalled that the petrochemical project at Bandar [Glomeyni
had stopped operating during the Iranian revolution and that, with the
Iranian government's consent, operation will resume 11 Moved)“, and some
300 engineers and technicians will soon arrive from Japan to help.

he pointed out that at the start 1,000 and later 3,000 Iranians, including
workers, engineers and office workers, will be put to work at the plant.
He said that in order to enable Iranians to rm the plant in the future
they will be trained by experts.

Regarding his oil talks with Iranian authorities, the Japanese minister
revealed that he had discussed the question of increased exports with

Mr Bazargan and Oil Minister Moinfar and that the prime sinister had re-
acted favorably. He noted that prior to revolution in Iran his country
purchased 800,000 barrels of oil daily from Iran which had been reduced
to [090,000 barrels a day after the revolution with the latter figure de-
clining 8 percent later on bringing the present rate of export of Iranian
oil to Japan to 660,000 barrels a day. lie said that with promises made
this will now be increased by 30 percent.

The Japanese trade minister added that Japan had already expressed its
willingness and was ready for the transfer of the technological know-how

17
required for the economic development of Iran. He further said that in
view of the long traditional ties between Japan and Iran cooperation be-
tween the two countries in cultural and technical fields was needed to be
expanded for which Japan had already expressed its willingness.

It should be noted that in separate meetings held between Esaki and Minis-
ter of Commerce Reza Sadr the question of securing the raw naterial needed
by the various industries in Iran and of providing goods for Japan were
discussed. The Japanese trade minister gave assurances that efforts would
be made to take care of the Iranian needs and that it will be given priority.

In addition, discussions were also held about providing facilities for
Iranian importers and it was agreed that they will extend the needed facil-
ities they enjoyed in Japan prior to the Iranian revolution. Agreements
were also reached on the expansion of the Bank Melli [Central Bank] branches
in Tokyo and Osaka and about the participation of the Arya National Shipping
Co in the transportation of Japanese-made goods to Iran and cooperation in
the expanding of purchases made in Iran by Japan.

During his visit, in addition to his meetings with Prime Minister Bazargan,
the Japanese trade minister also met with 011 Minister Moinfar, Minister
of State and Planning and Budget Organization Chief Sahsbi, Connerce Minis-

ter Reza Sadr and with minister of Housing and City Planning Engineer
Katirai.

He is scheduled to leave Tehran for his country today.

8514
C80: 6906

18
SOLUTION 1‘0 SETTLEMENT PROBLEM DELAYED
Division on Court Ruling
Jerusalem MDI'A in Hebrew 29 Oct 79 p 2

[Editorial: "Government Seen Divided Over Court Ruling on Evacuation of
Blon-Horehﬂ

lfexg The government was saved from an imediate crisis when Prime Minister
iegin announced that following the ruling of the Supreme Court in the case
of Blon-Horeh efforts were under way to relocate the settlers elsewhere in
Samaria. The meaning of this announcement is that there is no longer any
doubt that the government will carry out the verdict to the letter. But on
the other hand it will also try to compromise with the settlers so as to
find a substitute site beyond the green line.

This does not mean that the danger of a crisis is no longer there. Before
the meeting of 28 October the government was on the verge of handing its
resignation to the president. The anger, it seems, is still there, since
the real discussion was to be held on 1 November in a special coalition
meeting which was expected to reveal extreme, totally opposed points of view.
Agriculture Minister Ari'el Sharon announced even before the government meet-
ing of 28 October that if a resolution favoring mass settlement is not adopt-
ed in reaction to the Supreme Court's ruling, he would find himself outside
the government, since he would not be able to continue as minister. It is
most likely that in this case NRP ministers will also not be able to stand

still since their credibility on their comitment to the cause is on the
line.

At the same time it is difficult to believe that the majority in the govern-
ment will give in to the demands of Minister Sharon and the m ministers, or
even to some of them. The defense minister opposes any attempt to bypass
the Court's ruling such as a proposal to establish a military outpost on the
site that the Court ordered evacuated. Hr Heisman stuck to his position
which he voiced while the hearings were still going on, that with all the
strategic importance of the site, there is no need to point it out by the
existence of a settlement or even a military outpost there.

19
The defense minister is supported by the Liberal ministers, as well as the
Democratic ministers and some of Herut's ministers. Prime Minister Begin,
in spite of his ideological position in favor of settlements in Judea and
Samaria. is aware of all the political constraints and limitation. He
stands face to face with the growing political isolation and knows where
things may be headed if the government adopts the basic premise of Gush
Emunim. That may embroil it in indescribable political difficulties.

Mr Begin is afraid, justifiably so, that all the political work of this
government up to this point, which climaxed in the signing of the treaty
with Egypt, may be in vain. The government which started us on the road to
peace may end its term in quite the opposite direction. Therefore he is
struggling with the issue. and that is why he has hinted via his close ad-
visers, that in case of bitter confrontation, he is considering tending his
resignation to the president, which will almost certainly lead to new elec-
tions.

In this context it was also reported that Mr Begin tried to hint to Gush
Bmunim that their attempt to achieve a fait accompli will end up quite dif-
ferently. Early elections will bring back the Alinement, and under the s-
lineaent Gush Emunim will accomplish nothing. That will bring an end to all
their plans and wishes.

This is not an idle threat, but a practical, realistic analysis. A resolu-
tion of the sort that Gush Bmunim and its supporters would like to see pass-
ed is out of the question, because it will endanger, as mentioned above,

the peace treaty. If Mr Begin is to foil this attempt he has no choice but
to submit his resignation to the president, which will bring about the return
of the Alinement to power. A government of the Alinement will, of course,
vehemently oppose the adventurism of Gush Emunim, to which it will have no
commitment.

Settlement Seen As Political
Jerusalem WDI'A in Hebrew 1 Nov 79 p 2
[Editorial: "Issue of Settlement Is a Political, Not Legal 0ne'_'7

[I‘ext7 The government was to convene on 1 November to discuss the implications
of the Court ruling on Elon-Moreh. Various "sides" have demonstrated in favor
of their position prior to this meeting, in which, according to one minister,
"the great battle" will be fought. It seems that the ministers will form two
groups, one, headed by Agriculture Minister Ari'el Sharon, and the other head-

ed by Defense Minister Bzer Heisman.

Minister Sharon, who expresses the opinion of the ministers with the extreme
positions, said that the situation that was caused by the Court's ruling
should prompt the government to devise a mass settlement plan with a budget

of IL2.5 billion for the near future. Minister Heisman has an opposite ap-
proach and he Opposes any attempt to circumvent the Court's ruling so as not

20
to evacuate the settlement, even with the formula of converting it to a
military outpost.

Many. including the president of the Lawyers' Association, have warned the
government to not dilute the ruling. Others, like him, have not ceased to
talk about "the danger to law in this country," while totally rejecting the
idea of retroactive legislation, claiming that it will shatter law and order.

Stressing law and order ignores, or shifts attention my from, the real crux
of the matter, which is political, not legal. The question on the agenda is
what the government should do and how it ought to maneuver between heavy pres-
sures exerted on it to start mass settlement, pressures whose covert threat is
the very existence of the coalition, pressures that sole ministers are part to,
and political pressures from the outside, when it is obvious to all that under
present conditions, if the government decides on more settlements in Judea

and Samaria it could cause the collapse of the peace treaty and many result

in total isolation in the international arena.

All those who stress the point of respect to the Court are raniss when it
comes to this important issue, especially when it is rather deubtful that they
are sincere in their demand to respect the law. Those circles are not only
coming out with this demand now, following a long string of tramping law and
order, but are actually preaching it now, when it so suits them. "by should
they expect now that their outcry will be accepted with any amount of cred-
ibility?

The government faces a serious political dilema on the issue of Blon-Horeh
and the plans of Minister Sharon, who is supported mostly by the HR? minis-
ters. The issue of respect for the Supreme Court and its resolutions is se-
condary. There are sufficient causes and areas where respect for the law can
be exhibited. Those who did not care when numerous physicians broke the law
forbidding abortions, before the present law went into effect, those who do
not care about the intolerable breaking of the law regarding the holiness of
the Sabbath, cannot now convince anyone of their seriousness when they protest
the "danger" now facing the very law.

The issue, as was mentioned, is purely political. The government, a good part
of which considers itself in sympathy with the yearnings of Gush bunim, has
understood, from the very beginning, that these plans, vital as they may be
to the cause, cannot be realized without serious international complications.
Therefore it always preferred finding indirect ways and means to camouflage
the establishment of new settlements. It now turns out that the way Elon-
Moreh was established did not stand the legal challenge, and the government

cannot now, mostly because of political considerations, ignore the verdict and
not obey the Court ruling.

lhe government therefore has no choice but to adopt one resolution, namely,
to evacuate Blon-Horeh. Not because of fear of collapse of law and order,

21
which are rather shaky as is, but because of a purely political reason. Min-
ister Sharon and his supporters should understand that the alternative now

is not mass settlement but the fall of the government and the failing of any
plan. even a minimal one, for settlement in Judea and Samaria.

8666
CSO: 6805

22
PARTY DISSENSION POLWS MYAN'S RBSIGNATIOH
Jerusalem HAHODI'A in Hebrew 28 Oct 79 p 2
ﬁditorial: "Squabbling Over Foreign Minister's Position?

[Tag The sign of relief heard in coalitionary circles following the foreign
minister's resignation has turned to fears of an iminent crisis. It turns
out that those who thought that some minor changes would solve the appoint-
ment problems were very wrong. The stalling of a few days gave the various
parties a chance to reexamine their positions and come up with new denmnds.
Thus the job of appointing a new foreign minister and then filling a few more
positinns now seems more complex than before.

The feeling of relief when Minister Dayan resigned ates-ed from the fact that
up to then things seemed very complicated because of fights within the Liberal
Party and its demand to replace the finance minister and appoint him to some
other position, while appointing a new finance minister. The resignation of
the foreign minister sensed to pave the way for just that, because of the
possibility to appoint Ehrlich deputy prime minister, and Professor Yadin
foreign minister. It then became obvious that the coslitionary partners are
not willing to give up the opportunity to correct distortions of the dispro-
portionate representation of the Democratic Party in the government. It is
well known that this party enjoys the position of tipping the scale and that
without it the coalition lacks majority. when it joined the government there
was a majority without it. but it had 15 members of Knesset and therefore it
was accorded four portfolios. Since then the Democratic Party has split and
the faction that remained in the government only has seven members of Knesset,
of whom one is not happy with being a coaltion member. Other things have also
happened, and the coalition has shrunk because of some resignations from Liked.
The Democrats have a small Knesset delegation, but its weight, from the point
of view of how much the coalition needs it, is high.

The Democrats are now offered one of the most important positions in the gov-
ernment, that of foreign minister. But Professor Yadin is hesitant, either
because he is afraid he may not be able to always represent the government's
policy, especially on issues related to settlements, or because he does not
want to show too much eagerness, so as not to weaken his party's bargaining
position and to be able to hold on to three portfolios.

23
It is obvious that the disproportionate number of ministers that the Democrats
have tips the scale of the government. The customary gauge is four members of
Knesset per one minister, whereas the Democrats have a minister almost for
every member of Knesset, so much so that even two Democratic ministers carry
more weight than the whole party's Knesset representation. Prime minister
Begin has up to now rejected any demand, especially from the "RP, to force the
Democrats to vacate one seat. His refusal resulted from the realization that
the Democrats may decide to leave the government altogether. thus leaving it
without a majority and forcing it to resign.

It seems, though, that now, following the resignation of the foreign minister
and the crises within some of the coalition parties, that the prime minister
ought to reopen the whole issue and consider reshuffling the whole government.
The complaints of the Liberals can well be understood, because if the Finance
Ministry is taken fros it, it will be in an inferior position compared with
the other members. One can also accept the NRP's claim that it cannot recon-
cile itself to the fact that with 12 members of Knesset it has the same nunber
of ministers as the Democrats, with less than half as many Knesset members.

At the same time this may be the last chance to form a government not by party
or factional considerations, but also according to some functional ones. All
these cannot be accomplished with just more patchwork.

Therefore it would be best if the prime minister were to announce that every-
thing is open and that there are no "vested rights." Then he may be able to
form the government all over again. He will then be in a position to take
into account the proportional weight, i.e., each coalition party should be re-
presented in the government according to its proportional representation in the
Knesset. He will also be able to consider function, in other words. match
people to jobs where their chances of success are best.

8666
080: 10805

2!.
.ITORIAL LOCKS AT “A8016 IEIIND DAYAN'S MIM‘HG
Tel Aviv mom in Hebrew 22 Oct 79 p 2
[Bditoriah "Real Reasons Behind Dayan's Resignation”

[Text] The reasons that Foreign Kinister lioshe Dayan cited in his letter
of resignation to the prime minister do not sound sincere. There were some
other considerations behind his resignation and they should be understood.

Moshe Dayan was appointed foreign minister with no party behind him. His
appointment caused some difficulties for the prime minister since the
public, and especially the parents of fallen soldiers of the Yom Kippur
Her, has not stopped to protest that Dayan was the main culprit in the
scandal of the war, regardless of the fact that the Agranst committee did
not accuse him, claiming that it did not deal with political figures
responsible to the Knesset.

Hr Dayan was appointed not in order to carry out a foreign policy of his
own, but that of the government. It can be assumed that he knew what the
makeup of the goverment was, and what its policies might be at a later
date when the future of Judea and Sasaria was on the ageMa. Dayan's
claim that when issues of autonomy were taken away from him he was left
with only minor responsibilities, is also unacceptable because the prime
minister offered him the position of chairman of the autonomy co-ittee,

which he turned down. Moreover, he cooperated with this co-sittee and
even participated in some of its meetings.

Dayan's resignation, with the reasons he cited, has caused international
repercussions. The first one has already been heard from Cairo. ‘l'hey show
that Dayan'a reasons are not justified. It seems that the reason he gave
regarding the autonomy issues that had been taken away from him was but a
smoke screen. It can be asmmed that relationships between him and the
prime minister deteriorated and that sale disagreements surfaced following
Dayan's meetings with FLO supporters in the territories, meetings which e
had held without the knowledge of the prime minister, and his dramatic
declarations of changes of policy toward the United States which he had
made without coordination with the prime minister and without the latter's
prior knowledge. Even his farewell greetings and his declaration

25
regarding the need to turn the military administration over to civilians
is not according to the govemment's line.

Dayan declared about 1 months ago that the government is like a corpse.

it could be sensed then that he was about to leave and in order to justify
his leaving the corpse that he had helped form he brought forth irrelevant
reasons. The real reason for his resignation is the loss of confidence of
the prime minister which followed political maneuvers opposing Begin's line.

It was a mistake, to begin with, to appoint Dayan foreign minister, since
his instability on political matters and the frequent changes of policy
that he is prone to are well known.

Blaming autonomy issues for his resignation could damage Israel's political
posit ion and the negotiations that are now in a very delicate stage.

Maybe Dayan hoped that the negotiations would come to a stalemate and then
he could come in and save them. But since this did not happen he aims his
arrows in this direction.

8646
650: 6805

26
COALl'l'lw mm mm, 4601M! ISRAEL'S 8mm QUSTIOIED
Jerusalem man's in Hebrew 24 Oct 79 p 2

[Bditorialz "Agudat Israel’s Conditions for Supporting Goverunent
Reorganization" 1

[Text] 'lhe winter session of the Knesset opens under a shadow of tension
and crises within the coalition, when, in addition to the regular problems
that have been plaguing the goverr-ent for months, there no- ere problems
related to the resignation of Foreign Hinister Moshe Dayan and the ruling
of the supreme court demanding the evacuation of Blon lioreh within 30 days.

Mr Dayan's resignation increases the pressure on the government to quickly
solve the coalitionary complications and find a solution to the reorganization
of positions within it. It is only natural that the possibility of such
changes has prompted some coalition members, or faction within Likud, to
present new demands or take the opportunity and correct sale situations

which they deem as inequities and which have been there since the establish-
ment of the coalition.

Thus Herut thinks that the time has come for it to be "coqsensated" for the
portfolio that was taken away from it and given to Moshe Dayan. The Liberal
faction acts as per the resolution of its central connittee and demands the
reorganization of the whole goverment. As part of this, the Liberals would
like to reshuffle positions and make sure other changes, especially in the
area of responsibility for economic areas. At the same time the goverment
is also threatened by a crisis from the LA'AH faction if, in case of
reorganization, Member of Knesset Yig'al llurvitz, who would very such like
to become finance minister, is not awarded this position, if indeed Minister
Ehrlich vacates it.

The NR? is also trying to attain some advantages as a result of all these
complications. It knows that this is a chance to push for more positions,
in return for its agreement to changes in the govement. It would like
the Foreign Ministry or a deputy minister in one or another ministry.

27
Agudat Israel, who does not want power or positions, should now press for
implementation of all the promises made in the coalitionary agreement.
True, even without recent problems it planned on a campaign to carry out
those items that have not yet been implemented, especially the one related
to abortions, but it seems that now is a more appropriate time to achieve
all of these, or at least the major items.

It should be regretted that the N, as a religious party, has concentrated
all its demands on representation and more advantageous positions, although
the coalitionary agreement mandates it, too. 'lhere is no doubt that if it
joined Agudat Israel and pushed together with it, it would make it easier
to achieve the justified agreed upon demands.

'lhis should in no way diminish the activity of Agudat Israel. ‘lhe problem,
as is well known, is not the reluctance of the government or the coalition.
The prime minister promised Agudat Israel a number of times that he would
do all that is within his power to implement the promises. Ihe problem is
with some coalition members, especially in the Liberal faction, who claim
that their conscience does not permit them to vote for the amendment in
the abortion act. It has already been said that the breach of an agreement
and not implementing a written and signed connitment, is even more an issue
for the conscience than the vote for the amendment of an act that for some
reason is in conflict with their outlook. It is difficult to understand
what kind of an outlook mandates them to keep on the books an unjust law
that permits the murder of unborn children, with no discretion but only
following a demand stemming from so called "social reasons."

Today's coalition is already not too big and it needs the votes of Agudat
Israel's members. ‘lhia is particularly true for when the government decides
on reorganization and the Knesset's approval thereof. The coalition party
and all of Likud's factions have to understand that the support of Agudat
Israel is not given under any condition and for whatever price. If they
want to strengthen the government and make it functional again, they have
to take Agudat Israel's demands into account. These demands are far from
material demands, or claims to power and positions. 'lhey are all based on
a traditional Jewish outlook.

In a Knesset vote on 23 October, when the coalition won a vote of confidence,
Agudat Israel supported it. It did so because it believes the promises of
the prime minister that he will find a proper way to carry out promises that
are part of the coalitionary agreement and also because it appreciates the
positive attitude of the government to religious needs and to the legitimate
existence of the religious comnunity.

This is sometimes shown from the negative side also, when this attitude of
the government gets unrestrained criticism from the opposition which is upset
with corrections of injustices that were comitted against the religious
conmaunity over the years. It is typical that a debate on a proposal of a
secular party is now expected. ‘l‘hat proposal is to debate the recent

28
allotments to religious schools and other institutions, while blantantly
ignoring the fact that billions of pounds are budgeted for all kinds of
secular educational and cultural projects. They are only willing no vent
their anger on the religious conlnunity. Thus they not only justify what
they did in the past, when they were in power, but are attacking the present
government which has done something to right injustices and wrongs.

It is clear, though, that the important achievements to date, and the
righting of some wrongs that have been emitted against the religious
cauuunity, are not enough to ensure the continued participation of Agudat
Israel in the coalition. The unequivocal demand is that all promises made
when the coalition was formed be kept.

8646
$80: 4805

29
MU PBRHITTING ABORTIONS FOR 'SOCIAL' REASONS COMBINED
Jerusalem HAHODI'A in ﬂebrew 31 Oct 79 p 2

Editorial: "The Section Permitting Abortions for Social Reasons Should Be
Repealedﬂ

ﬁexﬂ Health Minister Bli'eser Shostaq is to propose to the Knesset an amend-
ment to the abortion law and the removal of section 5 thereof. That section.
which allows the termination of a pregancy when the reason is "the difficult
family or social environment of the mother."

The amendment is a result of the coalitionary agreement between Likud and
Adudat Israel when the present government was formed. and it is a condition

of Agudat Israel to continue its participation in the government. Regrettably,
there have been a number of delays in presenting the amendment for debate and
a vote, and it is intolerable that 2 years after signing the agreement this
should not be done forthwith.

The unequivocal announcement of Agudat Israel in the Knesset that the issue
has to be brought for the Knesset's approval at the beginning of the winter
session has brought about this action by the health minister, and thus the
first debate on the amendment will be initiated. Surprisingly the Knesset
chairman listened to some extreme leftist members who are now in the United
States who protested that the amendment is brought to a vote "without prior
announcement" and he therefore decided to not call the vote right away.

It can be assured that in the course of the debate the antirellgious letters
will jmp at the opportunity to attack the government because of presenting
the amendment and will object to returning to the former situation. while de-
fending that horrifying disregard to life that stems from this cruel section
of this law. There are many unjust laws in Israel, not to mention the mere
fact that a Jewish state has a secular legal system, and not that legal sy-
stem which applies to the whole Jewish people. But there has never been a
more shocking, disconcerting law, because it allows the murder of unborn
children, threatens the future of the people and reduces its numbers.

30
The section, as quoted, allows performing abortions "because of a difficult
family or social environment of the mother." There has never been such far-
reaching license, because this actually permits abortions in any case. Any
woman who falls for the permissive atmosphere can decide, just like that. to
murder her fetus. and according to the law this is not only permissible, but
she should be aided in performing this crime.

It should be pointed out that this law. including that infamous section, was
enacted rather hastily, when the secular majority rushed like "thieves at
night" to vote for it, while taking advantage of the temporary absence of most
of those opposed to the law. This act, especially section 5, is in total op-
position to the principle of maintaining the status quo on religious issues,
also part of the coalitionary agreement.

Since the establishment of the state and up to the enactment of this law in
the waning days of the last Knesset, there was a law that forbade abortion
except in cases where the mother's life was in danger. In all other cases
abortion was a criminal offense. Regrettably the authorities ignored what
was happening, and since the establisInent of the state hundreds of thousands
of such murders were performed and not one physician was prosecuted. But
rather than implementing the law the secular majority turned the other way.
It repealed the law and created a situation of horrible license when even the
theoretical threat of the law is no longer there.

Strangely, a group that calls itself "social," issued a call to members of
Knesset on 27 October to "not support this antisocial step." Is the preven-
tion of murder of babies an anti-social act, or is it precisely an act that
may improve social conditons in this country, a country with a distorted
society that deteriorated so badly to corruption and loss of any hunan dignity.
Who appointed this group to say whatever it said? Is that its concern with
the social aspect of this country? would it not be better if they concentrat-
ed their efforts on helping large families, rather than proposing a criminal
act to cut back on family size by murdering some of the future family members?
The association upon hearing this is so horrible, it cannot be put down on
paper.

The proposal of the health minister to the Knesset does not mean that the
resolution will indeed be passed. In order to repeal section 5 there is a
need for a majority in the Knesset. Although the coalitionary agreement man-
dates it, and although efforts have been made to ensure a majority, there are
still some fears that some coalition members will try to avoid the responsibi-
lity of abiding by an agreement and keeping a promise. To wit, Meier of
Knesset Sara Doron. of the Liberal Party, who maintains that agreements have
to be followed but when it comes to an agreement vs. "conscience," conscience
wins. This is difficult to comprehend. ls conscience only on the side of
maintaining a law that permits murder of babies before they are born? Is
there no conscience on the other side, to keep the life of an innocent fetus

who is about to be murdered? And is there no point to abiding by signed agree-
ments and promises?

31
The members of Knesset who are to debate the amendment, even those who up to
now appose it. had better rise above themselves on this issue, which is not
related to "forcing religion" or to the desire for power on the part of the
religious parties. but stems from the very meaning and essence of a responsible
approach which is seriously worried about our existence as a nation. The
legalization of murder of babies is so horrible because of the murder itself
and because of the horrible implication of creating an atmosphere where every-
thing is allowed, including murder. This may bring about unforseeable results
in the near future, inasmuch as the younger generation may not be able to dis-
cern innotal atrocities.

The repeal of the law will not only avoid one more coalitionary crisis, but it

is an amendnent for the good of the whole nation. This, and only this, is why
Agudat Israel is so concerned and puts so nuch emphasis on this vote.

8646
C50: 10805

32
THREAT 0P E-AL STRIKE
Tel Aviv IIAZOFEH in Hebrew 22 Oct 79 p 2
[Bditoriah "The Threat Posed by an Bl-Al Strike"!

[Text] When the strike at national Bank, a strike that paralyzed the
economy, was over Bl -Al's workers started to threaten with a strike of

their own. This strike will disrupt all ties of this country with the
outside world.

Bl -Al's employees caused the colpany to become the "chronic patient" of
this country. Strikes there served as a pattern to other industries.
‘mere are always new strikes threatened.

Ihe sovcrment dealt with the issue on Zl October and appointed a

ministerial comittee to join the negotiations. 'me governaent has
threatened, a number of tines, that if the strikes continue it would close
up the company. But all the threats reusined just that.

Regrettably it is the highest paid workers who strike. The goverment has

to do something about public companies of the kind of El-Al to serve as
an example. Affairs at El-Al have reached an unheated of level of strikes.

8646
(SO: 10805

33
NEH OIL REFINBRY INAUGURATBD
Valerta THE JAIIMIIRIYA MAIL in English 6 Oct 79 p 12

[Text] . TH! lode: of the First of September mole.

rion, Colonel Moons-or Guano“. has laid
down the handotion m be, the oil re“.
net-y and petrochemical plant in In Lon-

our.

apopulcr celebration was I”! o! moon bench delly

held on thls occeslon attend-
ed by the Secretaries at 00
end Heavy Industry. Secrete-

ﬁnally.
.1)» second ﬂu In suII
under otter end chm It pro

He: or the General People's ductng seven) grade- or met.

Oommttleee for IonIpraII-
tIee. Sports and soon: see-
urIty and uveul secretuter
ol the peopIe's coherence and
committee; In the em.

As he enlm to the elte.
Octonel Guam" wee. recer-
ca by huge meme shouunc
[or the ImIIIe ol the m
or Septarber revolution end
In leader and expreuIne
theI: carmttment to achIevo
the targets of the revolu-
tIon and Its humemtcnan
«Iota.

'Mter colonel Oethaﬂ leId
the IonndetIon atone for mu
(rent project, he made an
inspection tour In the Indus-
trIeI none In Rue uncut.

Ru Lemur ample: .vul
be completed In three stages.
The ﬁrst I: ﬁle oil reﬁnery
much um start productlonln

 

The productton 'Is comm
o! the roam:
.mune end IIquItI us
unlt .
Q DIstIlIatIon by low pres-
sure unlt.
cerbonlnuon unIt.
Oman; down unIt by
Wen cm The Indul-
mel complex Includes the
IoIIowIn; Includes:
0 Power Button 0! I70 men
"In.
0 Deuunetion plant 0! 20.000
ton; duly concaty.
Qateam mm 0! mo tone
Wm loading
9 r [or end
unbedIn‘ the products.
Modem houung estate lot
«to We.

.Vocettonal tnInInu centre.

The Ieeder o! the erect lst

at 1udsuneuﬂm- revohmon. also

the n" Mmm

whlcn Includes mono hous-
In. “21:.bthc «mauve?
emu can cm- o

080: 10820
BR IEPS

SNACK PlANT CONTRACl‘uThe treatment of sewage in the Libyan city of Derna
is to be improved under a contract worth more than £1 million awarded by
the National Company for the Construction and lbintenance of Municipal
works in Libya. The state body signed the contract with a British fire,
Hilliam B. Parrer Ltd, which will supply treatmnt plant under a scheme

to modernise existing system and equip a new works in the rapidly-ex-

panding city. Equipment for the second stage of developnsnt at the Derna
works includes mechanical services, screens, pups, incinerator, grit re-

moval, oil and grease separatoin plant, aeration equipmnt and ancillary
pipevork and parts. Delivery scheduled to co-scce by the middle of 1980
and will be completed by the end of the year. A further contract is cur-
rently being negotiated by the British company for the erection of the

plant, and an additional, two-year contract for running it is also under
consideration. Farrer, a menber of the Moss Engineering Group, was suc-
cessful earlier this year in obtaining a contract for the Municipality of

Shahit in Libya. [Text] [Vsletta THE JAMHIRIYA “It. in English 20 Oct 79
p 12

C80: 6820

3S
3083104 BORIGRS R383 GRAVE 30313! FOR AREA commie
Paris “(HIRED-HAW“ in French Jul-M801) 79 pp 5960

[Article by Nicoles Holey: "In-15mm on the Arebien Penineule"]

Tut] The sthion of petroleus revenue in the countries of the Porsien

if. end the desire of theee stets'e to schim minus economic develop-eat
so quickly so possible. heve in recent years led to substantisl chenges in
their econoeic. politicel end eociel structuresnchenges which ere further
eepheeiced by the preeence or en i-ié‘ent popnletion whose input continues
steedily to grow. ihie “cation-which sill henceforth he essentiel to
the developeent of these countries-ﬁe still poorly controlled. 1t cerries
Iithin itself. however. the potentiality for disequililrim end is More
e source of enxisty to the top leedership of the concerned countries.

The preeent study proposes first to point out the origins end cherscter of

this iuigretiom second. to eveluete its i'spect on the Arch socisl structure
in the countries of the Peninsuls: end lastly, to enelyse the gensrel ettitud
of the concerned governments with respect to this perticulerly ecute problem

A. origin end dsture of the Inimtion

nip-story eovesents heve origineted on the ershien Peninsule for elsost 1b
centuries. Ever since the birth of Isles. in feet. ereb populations hevs
slept. in succeeeivs Isvee tonerd territories opened up by conquest. settling
originelly on the rich lends of the Fertile Q‘eecent end subsequently in

sore distent countries. These sovesente together constitute the long history
of the spreed of the mn- rsith. en expeneion thet continued despite severel
interruptions during which the vorldsse Isles evolve-with the developeent
of the Unyysd end Qbhesid espirssufrol s purely Areh disension to e suiti-
netionel dieemion. lass isportent. to hi sure. but vorthy o: note nonethe-
less is the fsct thet the populstion signtions heteeen the 11th end 19th
centuries heve elso left treces thet ere still visible todsy.

11» beginning at the 20th century lurked first the h.-lt. end then the rover.

eel. of this simtory current. According to Phil Eonnentent sev'ered fsctors
help to explein thie phenoeenond

36
1. The forcod sodontotion of tho Bodouins. Until the ascension to pouor of
the king 'Abd sl-‘Azis. Bodouin lifo sorely followed the rogulu- cycle of
ooncontntion ond dispersion of tho uriouo tribes in scoordsnoo with tho
nood to sook s supply of rotor snd posture for their herds. Beginning in
1910 tho policy of sodontstion mnctiood by the Saudi lonu'di. togother uith
tho onsuing ostoblishoont of pesos. mod tho first tins tho troditionsl
populotion sows-onto hod boon (nu-bod.

2. The ourgonco of politiool boundsrios. Indiotoly following tho first
world our nou political boundaries opposrod thst had been drum in on erbi-
tru-y sonnet. ofton to tho dotrisont of tho populstions which thoy hod tho
effect or «pasting. in pu-ticnlsr. thooo houndsrioo severed tho mute
uood by tho tribos to trsvol botuoon tho hex-thorn port of tho Poninsuls snd
tho Fortilo meant.“

3. Crostion of tho otnto of Iornol. This ovontulhidt took plooo in 19%"
ond tho conflicts um dorivod m. it in 1956. 196? and 1973 csuood C
assivo populstion dioplscolont involving slsost 1 Iillion persons. ”shy
of thoso rotugooo sisretod tousrd tho Arobisn Poninsuls, thus roversing for
tho firststiso tho liarstory amount in tho diroction of tho oountrioo of
the Cult.

16. Potroloun. The diocovocry of potrolou. ond its intonoivo oxploitotion
ottom- 19'55, rooultod in s growth of tho scone-y of tho oil-producing Arsb
ststos so ropid thst thoso rooms-coo on! tho rolstod possibilitios tor
invostsont hsvo constituted-40: thoso undorpopulstod countrioouo fgcuo of
sttrection thst has brought in tons of thousuds of foreign workers.

‘l‘skon togothor. thoso factors hovo hsd tho offset of asking intornotionsl
oimtions one of tho dosinont dnroctoristioo of tho canto-pom Riddle
hot snd oopocielly of tho counties thst hordes: tho hobo-Fusion Gulf.

Golculstion of tho onct nusbeu-s of inigrsnt lsbor ctn‘rontly rooiding on
tho Arobinn Poninsuls posos rosl difficultios. bocsuso in sons of thoso
countries tho statistical dots booting on this specific pmblos sro nonu-
istont. kept somt. or intontionolly distorted. Tho figuroo opposring in
the mount study should thoroforo bo vioued as ostintoo. in solo cases
even so vory rouyt ostiostos. or greets: isportsnoo no tho ovortil
poroontsgoe thet are obtsinod. for roam-(nose of tho disputss non; «ports
thoso {ism-so oro on o scolo sufficiontly lugs to olucidsto tho soot Iinuto
prohlsuo

lndood. thooo difficultios bogin to sppoor so soon so one ottospts to uko
on onolysis of tho oosposition of tho populotion of tho countries of tho
Cult. A distinction not in foot be Iodo botvoon thoso olosonts of tho
populstion who hsvo soroly osisrstod within tho group of otstoo of tho
Poninsulo. itself. on tho one hood. snd thooo ole-onto who hove case I‘m.
sore distant oountrioo. horoovor, cortsin notionsl loodorouinvoking tho
concept of on "Arsb hotion'urojoct tho oppliation of tho ton "slim" to
design-no workers who have oooo ml othor Arob countries to rooido none

37
thee. Lastly. these workers ere celled “guest workers." which ilpliee thet
their presence in the host countriee Le only teeporsryueoeething thet
reuine to be proven.

It therefore would eeee eore preciee to epeek here of ”non-netionels,” thet
is to eey. of pereone who do not hold citisenehip in the country wherein
they currently reside. One cen eccordingly eseuee thet of e totel populetion
in exceee of ii eillion in these hoet countriee. epproxieetely 3.5 sillion
ere "non-netionele." The letter thus npreeent 30 percent of the populetion
of the Arehi'en Peninsule.

The distribution of the "non-netionele" tlmoquat thie territory in very
uneven. In eons of the countries bordering the Gulf the proportion of non-
netionels is very high 75 percent or the populetion in the United Areh
hiretee [043] mi eleo matter. eui lore then 50 percent in Kuueit. 1n
Behrein. on the other hend. iniaente represent only 20 percent of the
populetion. Seuii Arghie elone be lore then 1 Iillion Yelenite workers
resident on its soil.

Kore then 30 different netionelitiee ere thu represented in the countriee
of the Gulf: the ieeiaente cone tron been. Pelestine, Syrie, rapt.
Lehenon. Soeelie. Irsn. Suden. Ethiopie. Mieten. Indie. Indoneeie. ‘l‘eiwen.
Bengledew. South Koree. Jepen. Greece. leetern Europe end North Aeerice.
eeong others.

It in not. we repeet. e question of deheting the correctme of the figures
presented, or the ecdelitiee of residence of e given cetegory of illiaent

workers. but rether of piecing the eezhuie on e eituetion thet is extreeely
delicete for those etetee which ere obliged to undergo this kind of foreign

pressure.

‘i‘wo of the countriee of the Arehisn Peninsule elone “supply” e lerge lshor
force: north Yeeen end (to e leeeer extent) Oeen. By theeeelves these two
countries heve sent e totel of epproxilstely 1.5 eillion workers to the
neighboring countriee. end this figure repreeente ‘05 percent of the totel
of "non-netionele" eentioned ebove.

me other ieeigrent workers, therefore. coee tron countriee thet ere
eitmted outside the Arebien Peninsula in four different geogremic eonee.
es follows:

i. A sone situeted i-edietely to the north of the Penineule. coeprieins
the Areh etetes of the ﬂeet bet (Syrie. utenon. Jorden end Ireq) end
Peleetinel end terther to the eeet. inn.

2. A concentric none enclosing the Arehien Peninsula to the west. Egypt.
the Suden, Ithiopie end Soeelie; end to the eeet. Mieten end Indie.

3. An excentric zone to the eeet. coeprieing Indonesie. Theilend end
heleyeie. end still further to the eeet. South Koree end Jepen.

38
‘6. A zone conprining the industrielised countries of the Heetern world:
the United sum of Auction end nmopeﬁ

‘1"0 principel emu-cos of empower cen eccondingly be distinguished: en
Arnb noun‘ce end e non-Areb source. the letter being {tn-the: divisible into
e non-Arnb Muslin source end e non-hunlin source. Thin type of cleesifice-
tion tekee on npeciel inportence when one exeninee the nkiiln offered by
the inigrentn of eech of the eforenentioned scnenn

e. The countries of the Areb heer Est supply pereonml uinly for the
veriom sectors of the liberel professions. educetion. public heelth, upper-
lsrvsl public edeinistretion. end e nunba: of confidentiel positions.
Pelentiniene. Jondenienn. Syrienn end Egptiene hold none of the east
input-tent poets in the cebinet ninintries. The launene. on the other hend.
ere nore inclined towerd the field of privnte busineen nnngenent.

b. The countries of the African horn. for their pert. conntitute e reservoir
of workm for the tertiery sector: public enployeen. enell tredesnen. end
donentice.

Although n ninority of Indiene end Mietenis otter hide-level nkilln (none
even nerve in tho vex-ions nntionel erned forces). the greet Injority of the
i-ig-ent workers fron the Indien subcontinent heve no speciel skills. end
in feet they nnke up the bulk or the clendentine lebor force.

c. The countries of Southeest Anie supply neeinkilled end unskilled lebor
whidl is used prinu-ily in public works end construction. There in one
exception. however. end it is noteworthy beceuee or its incrensing inpor-
tence: the South Koreen workers. who ere univernelly epprecieted becnme
of their conpetence end efficiency.

d. Lently. the United Stetee of Anerice end Europe send for the noet pert
highly skilled cedren end technicienn who occupy e conpletely distinct
ntetun within the omen npectrun or the tonign-nntionel populetionn.

Hhet eleraee. therefore. in e tether cleer-cut distribution or proteneionnl
end vocntionnl ectivitien thnt in structured on the hein of the ceogephic,
ethnic or religious origins of the workers who ere grand» into the lehor
nerket of these countries of the Arebien Peninnule. Such e distribution--
which in ultinntely hiererchined in the cheer-serves to underscore the
extrnondinnrily hroed renge of points of View end nativetionn thet inspire
thin elien populetion.

The Effects of the Inigretion

The nont striking effect-asst striking becnune it in the east innedieten
is the eﬂe produced on these nntioml econonien. This point in well
understood. wevetr. end we shell therefore onit econonic {isms end
ntetintice end inntend enphnnise the indirect consequences thnt derive {non
the presence of e lerge elien lebor force.

39
(me sust first of ell esphssise the cleavegcu that exist nong the various
cstegories of esploylent. This sultinstionsl employment scene is higtly
hierdrchissd. sad the division of lsbor often corresponds to differences in
geogrsphic or socisl origin. tne finds. for example. that the top posts
are held by sesbers or the ruling fenilies: the highest-level technical
positions ere allocated to children of upper clue families esny of who-
have been educsted in Hostern universities; and the supervisory end titular
edtinz'strstive posi ions are given to nationals. booked up by "non-nstionsls"
who perfors the ectusl megerlel functions. At all levels of the agricul-
tursl. sdsinietrstive. couorcisl end industrial otructure or thew coun-
tr ies. ”non-nationals" hold the posts which perforn the real executive
function.“

This situstion curries with it s subtle danger: the feet that tins. nationsls
of these countries are failing to gapple Iith their own pro‘ﬂens .-:¢suse of
s lack either of technicel competence or of n desire to tolv: than. Evan
tcdsy certain leaders of these countries are op .e:.t1y 511;; “locum: to
take into account the concretn realities of this m-..bl-.,n. A study cede in
1978 for the no was already plscing esphsMs on the noble-J'-

"Quite a. few sectors of the Arsb society of the Gulf,“ this study ssys,
"have become so veslthy that the neod for working in order to achieve this
neslth does not arise anew then, due to the Very fsct thst they hsve becose
wealthy beyond their wildest dresls without hen/ins had to calm the slightest
physicel effort. Under these circulstsnces it is understandable thet they
have no inclination to work. They do not think in term of oslaries end
hbre

"Althouya they have scquired s genuine evenness of the probless posed by
the labor shortage in their respective countries." the report continues.
"none cf the govern-eats of the Gulf countries hes node any conspicuous
effort to encourege its mtionsls to enter those sectors of tie nationsl
econosy in which the native population is least represented. 1n psrticulsr.
no encoursgcsent hes been offered to their netionsls to induce then to
enter the sector that 's by for the not sensitive of all: thst of the
for-stion and deVelopssnt of the industrisl infrsstructtu-e.”

Hhst hes heppened. in feet. is apperently the met opposite. Sons of
these countries hove crested jobs in the public aector for their own
nstionsls. but these Jobs ere by definition unproductive. The cleu: result
innue repestuthe reinforce-cut of the dependence of these countries on on
alien luhor force and ‘he sheence of my Iotivstion to work on the port of
1-. population thst is slreedy well provided for.”

This situstionuuhich is already s utter for concern st the econosic
level-do becosing equally serious st the social end politicdl level. In
feet. the econosic growth thst the Arabian Peninsuls hes experienced and
continues to experience hes inevitsbly produced under repercussions st
these tun leveln.

100
New eocial groupe have eaerged and have interposed theaeelvee between the
hierarchized claeeee of traditional Arab society: groupe such an engineere.
officere. ecientiete. lawyere. bueineeeaen. techniciane of every level. and
epecialized workers. A new intelligenuia haa eiaulianeouely been created.
together with new currente of thought.

Urbanization has reached euhetantial levels. in none caeee verging on 90
percent. and the principalitiee of the Arabian Gulf Eeic] are now nulbered
along the eoet hiyaly urbanised countriee in the wor d. Two-thirds at this
extraordinary growth. however. in due to theae Iigretory eoveaente.1 In
no other region of the Arab world has foreign inigration changed the coupe-
aition of the urban population no rapidly.

The urbanization plane. educational pregame, wage ecalea. civil rigtte and
eocial rights, however, pertain alaoet uclueively to the nationals of
theae countriee and serve to create a gulf between then and their 'gueet
workere." The presence of thousande of Ion who are separated m: their
fuiliea, are deprived of woaen. enjoy not even a aini-ul level of col-
forte. and cannot benefit fro- any of the advantagee offered by the hoet
countriee for which they are workigg has not failed to pose eeriom probleaa
that had previomly been unknown.1 The najority of the aocial love-onto
of recent yeare have been initiated in the non-Arab worker conunitleeu
Pakietanie in Dubayy in 1977; Indians in Bahrain in 197's and in can in
1976; mi? and Phkietanie in Saudi Arabia in 19763 and Korean. in Jubayl
in 1977.

Such actions nay well occur again and paralyse all or part of an econoaic
eector that is vital to a given country; and became the working maee
are increaeimly well organised they nay well, one day. becoae the focua
of political agitation or harbor the ger- of acne kind of revolution.

C. Attitude of the Govern-ante Toward the Inigation

I n the face of the increasing eeriouaneae of thee unsettled conditione.
the governeents of the Arabian Peninsula have eaintained a very tinoroue
poeture. This poature ie aanifeet in connection with the liaitatione
ilpoeed on the aultitude of i-ia‘ante. with the auiailation of foreign
workere already eaployed in their national econoaiea. and with the
vocational training of their own nationals.

To cope with the uninterrupted increaae in the migrant labor force. none
of theee govern-ante have adopted a nulber of lore or leee effective nature:
including a linitation on the nulber of entry viaae ieeued. strict con-
tracte governing the duration of etay in the hoet country. a requireaent
that foreign colpaniee naintain a atipulated aininun of Arab nationals in
their reapective labor forcee. and a requireaent that any troublenker"

and quite eiaply any alien who has entered the country illegally--be
expelled at once. 7

41
He have also seen that the co_'-t:iou of the .rabiu Gus-I have attempted to
be selective in see-ting their :oaigr. labor r'orce, ..:..‘:-r.g a. diminction as
to Arab, non-Arab. Muslim and son-Muslin. i‘he 53:?3ti0n, hoaever. is not
so sisplex on the one hand, the professional or '.'€‘-".l‘..i"a'.9.l skills sought
are not always obtainable in the desired category, mile on the ether hand
the cos: of this manpower varies widely. The mat .a considerably reduced
if the recruitsent is directs; toward the countries or the :nziiar. sub-
continent or Southeast Asia. I,

A new type of dialog has, it is true, arisen bemeen the ia'om wen-1.1.51:
countries and the labor-supplying countries. Thus dialob Ems use“ neces-
sary in order to establish precisely the qualifications-and .m o w.‘ resi-
dence-wt a labor force u‘noaa numbers are constantly increasing. Sonia.
Korea and India have accordingiq created agencies that are charged specifi-
cally with filling the needs of the Arab counties 8804125 manner. in
Korea the KCDQ'J [wreath Oversea Development Corporation] has developed a
plan for the dispatch of 250.0% skilled uorners our; Lm me next 6 years.
In Bosbay the Turner Hon'ison company is the exclusive :.g .3 for supplying
technicians to the United «rah ﬁnirstee. Gum and nuuait.

1t lust be recognized, however. that these lisited efforts to orguuize the
lnnigrazicn process in no way hinder the clandestine i. nisfration that
flourishes in proportions which all the local- wz:horit-as describe as
"alarsing." The clandestine workers mainly arrive on the ens.- coasi of
the Arabian Peninsula aboard s'niga of fortune that ry-ae mostly from
Iranian Baluchistan. Fakintani Ecluchistm. and the was". count of india.
Another source of clandestine Luigi-anon is incontesta‘oly .he Elect...
pilgrilage, which each year brings sore than 700.000 foreign nationals to
the holy places of Isles, and 2;. not inconsiderable grognrdon of this
total sttespts to remain on the Arabian Per.insuia.2

rational policies vary with respect to the insistent Homers who are
already established in the re:_:ective Gulf countries. although they are
unitoriiy characterised by a lack of eagerness to assisilate alien popula-
tions some of which have resided on their territory for years. The
recruiting countries have spared themselves the expense of the collective
facilities that would have been necessary in order to admit the workers'
fuiliesa housing, dispensaries, social services. and so forth.

The real proqu is that of the laws relating to labor and citizenship.
The fact is that no labor union is tolerated, and the rigxt to strike is
denied alsoet everywhere. Social conflicts sust be resolved by arbitration
insofar as possible. Hark permits are generally granted for a period of

1 year. but neither hiring nor dississal is covered by any guarantees.
There is nothing to encourage the inteaation of the foreign nationals; a
sponsor is everywhere a prerequisite for residence on the national terri-
tory. and foreign nationals do not have the man to be represented in any
legal jurisdiction. be it professional. political or municipal.
For the local authorities, therefore. it would appear to be a question of
absorbing as well as possible those individuals who--they believe-will
not rsaain in their country indefinitely. Althoudx the eaployer countries
would have the financial resources to aseliorste the living conditions of
the foreign workers. they would first have to resolve the probleas posed
by their own nationals who are displeased when they see iasigrants bene-
fiting free a part of the nation's riches. Not even the husanitarian or
religion. argulents used. such as the age-old tradition of hospitality or
the right to a dignified existence. prevent sose nationals fro- speaking
out in opposition to the ”intolerable” presence (as they put it) of such
a ease of foreigners. These nationals even go so far as to deeand the
total "nationalisation" of certain sectors of the econosy, that is to say.
reassusption of those responsibilities attendant on senaging and exploiting
their own resources.

To do so. however. the concerned authorities would have had to develop
rational plans. We have pointed out that nationals have too often been
assigned to positions for the responsibilities of which they had no speci-
fic training. Although sons are exceptions to the rule and their skills
and cospetence lust be acknowledged. they are still too few in nusber to
hold "key posts" in the national econoeies or national adsinistrstione.

It eeess clear that the action henceforth should be carried out in two
basic areas: the vocational training of the adults and the education of
the youth. Turning certain sectors of the econoay over to the national
cadres would involve extensive progress of specialised training in first-
clase technological institutes. Sosa countries have already authorised
substantial budgets to get such program under way but are currently
stysied by a critical lack 3f infrastructures and by the absence of cospo-
tent staffs of instructors. 1

To the extent that it is still based on the mopean sodel (which is
traditionally oriented toward the intellectual disciplines), the educational
systea. too. lust be cospletely recast. There is alsost no technical
education in the schools. and the students too often pursue orientations
that have nothing to do with the requiresents of the exceptional situation

ich prevails in their countries. A radical refers is therefore neces-
eery if one wishes to have a new generation of nationals on the scene
tosorrou to take over fros the foreign nationals who will have returned--
or will have been returned-«o their countries of origin.

The dileese facing the countries of the Arabian Peninsula today is a
serious setter. Because of their desographic deficiency the pstroleus-
producing countries of the area will always need eensgerial personnel and

a labor force to carry out their econoaic developsent progress successfully.

This influx of foreign workers, however. poses a fundassntel probles for
these countries: that of their very identity. This identity is in fact
threatened from outside as well as froa within their borderso-fros outside.
by the influence of western and Eastern managers and experts who bring

43
with the- a life style and culture which are viewed as no: very compatible
with the Islalic traditions to which the authorities and Arab society are

as a. whole very attached. and iron within. by the insidious threat repre-

sented by the deluge that an Arab inaigration--difficu1t to reject-would

inflict on the sovereignty of each of these countries.

The concerned governaents aust therefore take urgent measures-mot indi-
vidually, as a function of their own interests, but on a regional scale--to
unify their policies. A decision to encourage the assiailation of a
certain nusber of issigrants is desirable. and it is equally necessary to
revise the laws concerning labor by wosen. vocational training. and techni-
cal education in the schools.

The priaary tool of the national leaders should be realissuthe essential
condition for the undertaking of reforu. The use of this tool starts with
publication of the factual data concerning the issigration situation in
each of these countries, followed by a firm decision to alter certain
habits which today conflict with the vital interests of the concerned
states, and finally by the actual takeover of the key posts in the various
sectors of political and econosic life and by the nintenance of national
identity in the face of the "aggressions“ of the outside world.

This is the price that must be paid-~it is the only way--if the countries
of the Arabian Peninsula are successfully to not the challenges of the
future.

13001110755

1. This study will intentionally be liaited to the Arabian Peninsula, for
in Iraq and in Iran iaaigration takes place in a context that is quite
different fro- the sore specific context that prevails in Saudi Arabia
and the enirates of the Gulf.

2. Concerning the Arab emigration (7th-iith centuries} see also article by
U. Caskel. “Al 'Arab.“ in "Encyclopedie de l'lslsl' Btcyclopedia of
lslaa'], Vol 1: R. hantran. "u'expansion susulnne" [ e Muslin hpan-
uon]. Paris. Presses universitaires de Fiance. 1969.

3. P. Bonnenfant. "me Evolution of Bedouin Life in Central Arabia,”
REVUE 13 L'CCCIDBT HISULHAh‘ ET IE LA HIDITIRMFEB. Aix en Provence.
P30 23. 197%

1b. The borders between Iraq, Jordania and Saudi Arabia are a perfect
ample of a purely artificial partitioning of territory.

5. Statistics concerning the distribution of Palestinians thromhout the
world slat be evaluated with caution. The Uh in fact counts only those
Blestinim who are entered in the registers of UKRHA. that is to say.
the residents of the cups in Lebanon, the Case Strip and the Vest hnk.
6.

7.

8.

10.

11-

12.

13.

15.

16.

1?.

J. Marlowe. "the Persian Gulf in the hentieth Century," hondon, Crest.
1962.

m. proportion of ”non-nationals" in the respective Gulf countries is
as follows: Saudi Arabia. ‘60 percent: Bahrain. 18 percent; UAR. 75
percent; Kuwait. 5“ Percent; Qatar. 75 percent; Can. 30 percent.

The foreign presence on the Arabian peninsula can be estiaated at
approxiutaly 3 aillion residents. The principal "non-nationals" are
as follows. of Arab origin (Yeasni. 1 silliom Egyptians. 270,000;
Palestinians. 520.000; Lebanese. 85.000; Sudanese. 170,000: Son-all,
60.000); of Asian origin Undo-Pakistanis. 500.000; Bengalis, “0.000;
Indonesians, 20,000; Koreans. 20,000): at Heater-n origin (united States,
100,000: Great Britain. 13.000; ﬁance. Italy and Ger-any coabined. less
than 10,000).

See the following studies: Allan G. Hill. "Foreign Horkers in the
Countries of the Gulf,“ Paris. PUP, RENE TIES 10MB. he 69. January-
Harch 197?: Ahdslaegid H. Farrag, "hploynent and Regional Cooperation."
Vacuum/we u/u, Beirut. m 1975. -

He cite in this connection the following studies appearing in the MIDDLE
EAS'.‘ oooxomc DIGBI‘ (NED) SPECIAL RERJRT: 'ﬂanpouer and Recruitaent.”
27 June 197?: had Halliday. "The Kiddie last.“ April 1978. P 99: Andreas
3.7gerakis and s. mannithy. Bulletin nu (Uashington). 11 Septeaber

19 .

Concerning the hierarchisstion of Job categories see articles in the
IM‘ERIMIIGNAL HERALD mm!“ of February 3978 and Dace-her 197?:
"mam nouveaux" [New Markets], Kuwait. pp 18-20.

J .5. Birks and C.A. Sinclair. “Katine and Process of Labour Iaporting;
the Arabian Gulf States of Kuwait. Bahrain. Qatar and the thited Arab
mus.“ HEP 2-26/HP 30. Geneva. no. August 1978.

.{evin Rafferty. "The other Side of El Dorado." THE GUARDIAN 13 hove-bar
1978.

Concerning uhanisation probleae in the Arab countries see HAGHREB-
HACHREK. No 81. July-August-Septeaher 1973.

his subject has been analysed in the SPRIAL REPORT. op. cit..
p V-VIIO

Sources: INTERNATIOKAL HERALD TRIBULB. hoveaber 1977. February 1978:
l-, 6 May 19??-

Fbr additional details see IlD Legislative Series: Saudi Arabia. Royal

Decree No 11/21 of 15 hove-her 1969 (6 Rsladan 1389) containing Labor
Code (1969-Ar.Sa.1): Baluain, Prinoely Decree-Lav no 23 of 16 June 1976

45
18.

19.
20.

21.

1.

2.

6.

7.

8.

contsining the pro-Manon of the privste sector lsbor lu. 1976-Bsh.1a
"Annmire de ls manure de collerce Prsnco-Ars " [Yesrbook of the
WcorArsb crusher of Oolserce]. i978.

This tinseuon is psrticulsrly difficult to elucidste, for slthough the
sslsries of the dvil service sre known those of the prints sector
resein st best elusive and inscceseible.

mm SECIAL REPORT, op. cit.. 1) III.

Totsl masher of pilgrims. yesre 1975-1977:

1975: 1.557.867. of which totsl 8915.573 cue fro! shrosd.

1976: 1.b56,l&32. of which totsl 719.0% csse tron shroed.

1977: 1,627,589. or which totsl 739.319 cue tron shrosd.

It osn be mused thst fro- 3 to 5 percent of theee slien pdlgriss
renin in Ssudi Arsbis sfter the pilsrusge.

See "Hsnpouecr snd hploylent in the Arsb Countries: Sole Critics].
Issues.” pp 225-226, IlD/EOHA Salon, Beirut. Hsy 1975. Gensvs. no.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

J. 1). Anthony. ”Arsb Ststes of the lower Gulf--Peop1e. Politics.
Petroleum" Ilsehington. Middle inst Institute, 1975.

J. J. Clsrke and H. 3. Fisher. "Populstion of the Middle bet end
North Attics. s Geogrsphicsl Approsdn." london, University of London
Press. 1972.

<. C. hmlon. "The United Arab hirstes, sn Econolic and Social
Survey." London. Lonpsn, 1973.

Ph. Lucie, "has esirsts srsbes du Golfe. Koveit. ashrein, Qstsr.
Federstion dee hirsts Unis" [The Arsb hirstes of the Gulf: Kuusit.
Bshrein. dour, United Arab hirstes]. mu. M91, 1976.

”The Contesporsry Riddle East.” GUI]! 12 MORE. No 6. Psris.
Presses de ls Pondstion dee Sciences Politiquee. 1975.

Russel A. Stone. "one snd the Biddle Est. The Ilpsct of Oil on
Societal Developsent.’ New York. Prsegecr, 1977.

mm Misuddin, "Conﬂict snd corporation [sic] in the Persisn
Gulf," New York, Prsessr. 197?.

Hohssnd Ross Djslili. "he Golfe Pereique. probleses et perspectives“
[The Bereisn Gulf: Problem snd Perspectives]. Psris. mllos. 1978.

1.6
10.
11.

13.

1‘5.

15.

16.

17.

18.
1‘).

Thierry do Month-id: ”L'enersiez 1e ooopte o rebouro" [horas the
Reversed Account], Perle. J. c. new. 1978.

"Encyclopedie do 1'Ie1u" [Encyclopedio of men], 2nd edition.

”Ropulotion Bulletin of the United Notion Boom-ic couioeion for
Heatern Mic.” Beirut, 50 6. 197m ho 9. 1975: 5‘00 10-11. 1976.

"Solitaire hence-coho our la forntion profouionnelle doe odultoe"
Erratum-Are!) Selim on the Vocation-ml Training of Adults] (16-19 June
975). Porto. Franco-Ant: Che-box of Goneroe.

Second Franco-Irwin Colloquium (26-27 Fohrmry 1977) on "l‘ho Persian
Gulf and the Indian Ocean." Univeroity o! Moron. Center for Highn-
Intornotioml Studioo, Septonbou: 197?.

no Working Pope: 15: A Prolilimy Moose-em. of the Lobour Hove-em.
in the Arab Eegiom Momma. Perspectives and Project.“ by J. S.
Birko end C. 3. Sincloir. Genm. October 1977.

11.0: ”Role of the hployer Oraniutiono in the mo Countries”
(Alexondrio Round Toblo. 16-22 October 1976). lo roletione
profouionnellee" [Profouionol Relation. Series No 540. Genevo. 1976.

In): "Manpower end hployoent in me Countrioo: Solo (ritual
quoo" (Beirut Colloquiu. Hay 1975). (Seam. 1976.

no: "Docuente do lo Sorie legislative” Boon-onto of the Lesiolotivo
Series]: Saudi Arobio 1/1969: Bohroin 1/1 6.

110: ”Your Book of labour Sutiotioo.” 19??-
IID: "Lemur Force 1950-2000.“ Vol 1 (bio). 1977.

47
Salli Arab“
mm

KW t

Onn

UAR

Iraq

Jordan/ hlutino

Inhnon
Syru

Egypt
Other Aruba
inn

Indn
Micah
Other Asian
Atria

Grut Britain

Etu'opo
USA

Miscollmoom

To tal

Table 1

bunt. of tho Non-Bahrain Populgtion
of Bahrain in 1971 tnd 1976

1221
92293.12;
1‘_°u1 9.9.2210.
1.3 567

12% 52
In 9
10.785 3.6“;
770 Jb9?
83 36
1.338 55k
280 127
$2 17
58? 257
1.53? 1.370
5.097 2.592
6.657 3.769
5.377 2.170
180 133

u? 36

2 .901 1.23»
301 132
272 113
52 22
37.8% 22.351
Table 2

EVolution of the Active lbpuhtion of Kweit no. 195? to 1975

1.957.
Foreign population 83,51“!
Active foreign populetion 65,686
Percentage 66.? %
.unmiti population 107.2106
Active Kuwaiti populuion 215.602
Percent-.30 22.9 %
Totel populetion 190.79“
foul active populetion 80,288
Pucenteee “2.1 S

Source: 1975 Census, Pinning Board.

10992
05L : 1.800

49

12.55

2&7.280
1101.279
57-1 5

220,059
13,018
19-5 5

1:67.339
18a,297

39.“ %

mo

391.266
176.828
165.2 %

$7.396

65.369
18.8 x

738.662
2102.19?

32.8 f

1.9.71

92.95?
211.!!!“

“0-5 5

'$72,088
86,971
18.16 5%

990.83?
2983‘15
30.0 5
SHAYKH AL THAN! INTERVIEHED 0N FINANCE POLICY

Paris LE NOUVEL ECONOMISTE in French 22 Oct 79 pp 52-53

[Interview with Minister of Finance and 011 Shsykh 'Abd al-‘Aziz ibu
Khallfe Al Thani in Dcha--date not given]

[Text] Doha, Qatar: In his air-conditioned office looking out
over the tankers at anchor on the Persian Gulf, the white-

robcd son of the eair, shsykh 'Abd al-‘Aziz Al Thani, minister of oil

and finance, his conputer terminal close at hand and his accent
betrayinu his American 'bueineas-school‘ background, answered
the qvestions put to him by the reporter from the NOUVEL ECONO-
HISTE conﬁerning oil (at 100,000 barrels a day, he controls the
equivalent of three percent of the total supply of France), the
dollar, gold and the Euro-Arab dialog. His answers contrast re-
markably with those given a week earlier by his cousin, Shaykh
'Ali Jaydah, the director of the Qatar Petroleum Corporation,
proposing the abandonment of the dollar as standard currency, in
favor of n ”basket" of 12 currencies.

[Question] Are you going to follow the lead of Kuwait in rais-
ing the price of oil again by 10 percent?

[Answer] I am not saying that we will not raise it before the

next OPtC summit conference, to be held in Caracas in mid-December.
But for the moment we do not intend to do so. Moreover, we are
selling our best quality crude at only 821.h2 a barrel, whereas

the fixed ceiling for OPEC oil is 823.50. Our long-term interest
lies in price stabilization. Do not forget that we are buying
many products and plants from you cash down; we do not want to
import your inflation along with them.

The oil companies are responsible for the present rocketing of
prices. They are buying our crude oil at 82l.h2 and reselling it
on the "spot" markets of Rotterdam, New York and Japan at $35.00
or 8&0.00. This practice must stop: we have no need of such "spon-
sore”!

SO
[Question] have you lost a great deal of money on your sales
since the fall of the dollar?

[Answer] Yes indeed. For this reason we congratulate Carter
on his stabilization plan. For us the dollar remains the most
suitable commercial currency. After all, the high rates of in-
terest charged to our dollar inveetnsnts today coupensate us in
part for its disintegration. But I do not reject the concept
formulated by Saudi Arabia in l97h-oof replacing the dollar with
a ”basket" of 12 currencies. Even in that eventuality, however,
the dollar would maintain a key role.

[Question] Did you not play a IaJor role in the gold crisis?
It is said that 10 percent of your financial potential was in-
vested in gold. With such a huge sun, one night direct the
speculation . . . 7

[Answer] Neither singly nor as a group have the OPEC nations
ever played such a game. of course part of our reserves are in
gold. But we also have Swiss francs, German marks and yen.

[Question] what do you hope from the Euro-Arab dialog?

[Answer] It is in our best interests, and we thank President
Giscard d'Estaing for having worked to pro-ate it. We guarantee
the security of the European oil supply, but in exchange we want
Europe to struggle against inflation.

we need technological exchanges, “Joint ventures" with your own
enterprises. Therefore, when one of the. with which we are nego-
tiating a cash contract gives us notice that if we wait even a
month before signing, the price will go up by 20 percent, this
seems intolerable to us.

8117
C508 5800

S!
BRIBPS

FERTILIZER OOHﬂNY PRODUCTION--The Qatar Fertiliser Company SAQ (QAFCO)
pushed production of amnonia up to 201,090 tonnes in 1978 and output of
urea was 255,576 tonnes, according to the company. Both figures represent
a substantial increase over produCtion in 1977, when 127,700 tonnes of
mania and 165,500 tonnes of urea were produced. The directors of the
company, on whose board the Qatar General Petroleun Company, Norsk Hydro
and Hambros Bank Ltd are represented, said QAPOO achieved 84 per cent
utilisation of the designed capacity of its amenie plant and 96 per cent
of designed capacity for urea manufacturing in 1978. This was despite
compressor troubles in April and a gas shutdown which lasted for 11 days.
The company's exports of mania were down slightly from 54,000 tonnes in
1977 to 50,000 tonnes in 1978 but exports of urea almost tripled to
296,000 tonnes in 1978 from 114,000 tonnes the previous year. New plants
intended to double capacity of both chemicals had been planned to go on
stream in the spring of 1979 but are now not expected to begin production
until 1980, according to a report from Doha. After allowing for deprec-
iarion and allocations, the company reported a profit of Qatari Rials
3,617,610 ($969,000) on sales of QR 158,347,326 ($42.4 million) in 1978.
This compared with a loss of QR 31,147,354 ($8.34 million) on sales of
QR 64,794,839 ($17.36 nillion) the previous year. Profit before allow-
ance for depreciation and allocations was QR 47,455,439 ($12.71 nillion)
in 1978. The company had short term loans outstanding at the end of 1978
of QR 114.8 million ($30.7 million) and long term loans totaling QR 844.5
million ($226.3 million). Debts falling due in 1980 amount to QR 140
million ($37.5 million). [Text] [Paris AN-NAHAR ARAB REPORT 6 ram in
English 29 Oct 79 p 3]

080: 4820

52
CONFLICT REPORTED BETWEEN INFORMATION OIL MINISTERS
Paris AN'NAHAR ARAB REPORT 8 "END in English 29 Oct 79 P 9
[Text] Yamani vs Yemeni?

Last week saw Saudi Arabia's two Yamanis 011 Minister Sheikh Ahmed Zaki Yamani
and Information Minister Sheikh Mohamed Abdo Yemeni apparently speaking

at cross purposes. sheikh Ahmed, aiming his words at a Western audience

of oil consumers, revealed that a split existed inside the Saudi Arabian
government on oil prices and production levels which was being fuelled by

a "Y0ung Turk mafia" of technocrats who argued that the country could meet

its budgetary obligations on an output of only 5 million b/d. Sheikh

Mohamed promptly denied there was any split and described reports of what
Sheikh Ahmed had said as a "fabrication." whereupon, Sheikh Ahmed repeated
his statement the next day.

What was behind this imbrogiio? Of all Arab governments, the Saudi rulers
play their cards closest to their chests. But it is no secret that there
is a powerful party which thinks the country's regular production ceiling of
8.5 million b/d is too high, to say nothing of current output of about 9.5
million b/d. Sheikh Ahmed, by revealing opposition at home to his own pro-
Hestern position, was almost certainly seeking to add emphasis to his
repeated ahonitions to consumers of oil to curb their appetites for this
form of energy. In view of the almost unprecedented public revelation of
differences inside the Saudi ruling elite, the sincerity of the Oil Minis-
ter's warning cannot be doubted.

Sheikh Mohamed's denial was clearly aimed at a domestic audience. Offi-
cially, the Saudi Arabian government 1' never split and, in one sense, the
Information Minister was right. Important decisions derive from a consensus
of a small group of princes and the king and are based upon the advice of
experts. Often, however, no consensus can be reached and so no decision is
taken. One notable example of this method of preserving unity was the
failure of the princes to agree on the succession to the thrme when King
Khaled wanted to step down two years ago because of poor health.

CSO: 4820

53
BRIEFS

JAPANESE “ETHANOL Pun-Jive Japanese firms are to sign a 50-50 agree-ant
with the Saudi Basic Industries Corporation (SABIC) to build a $270 million
nethanol plant at the new industrial centre of al-Jubail, according to
reports Eran Tokyo last week. The reports, which quoted industry sources,
said the five trading houses--Hitsubishi Gas (helical Coquny, Sunitono
chenical Conpany Ltd, Hitsui Toatsu anenicals Inc, Kyowa Gas Carpeny and
C Itoh & Coqany Ltd-were expected to be joined in the venture by the
Japanese govern-cat's Overseas Economic Cooperation Fund. The fund would
take a 1.0 percent interest in an investnent fix-n being set up by the
consortium for the project with a capital of Y3 billion ($13 nillion) the
reports said. The plant is to have an annual capacity of 600,000 tonnes
and is due to be coqleted early in 1983. The reports said 85 percent of
its output would be exported to Japan and Southeast Asia. [Tut]

[mm Aux-m mm anon a mo in English 5 nov 79 pp 12-13]

(30: 4820