I'UK OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10302
4 February 1982

USSR Report

TRANSPORTATION
(F OUO 1/ 8 2)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.3. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAHS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OHNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
USSR REPORT

TRANSPORTATION
(r000 1/8 2)

CONTENTS

MOTOR VEHICLE
Method for Planning Road Construction in Western Siberia
(P. G. Purtov, V. A. Rybakov; “MANIA mamas-1"
SERRA 'NBFTWYSWOIE STROITBL'STVO' mum-rm
NAUGHNO-TEDNICHBSKIY SBORNIK, No 9, 1981) ..................

Briefs
Traffic , Traffic Comicsione

OCEAN ANDRIV‘BR

Soviet Book on Statistics of Ocean Transport
(H. I. Bruskin; STATISTIKA 140128me TRANSPGu'A, 1979) .......

- a - [III - ussa - 386 :
METHOD FOR PLANNING ROAD CONSTRUCTION IN "ESTER" SIBERIA

Moscow NEFTYANAYA PROMYSHLENNOST' SERIYA "NEFTEPROHYSLOVOYB STROITBL'STVO" REFBRA-
TIVNYY NAUCHNO—TEKHNICHESKIY SBORNIK in Russian No 9. 1961 (signed to press 9 Sep
81) pp 2-5

[Article by P. G. Purtov and V. A. Rybakov (Giprotyumenneftegaz [State Institute
for the Design of oil and Gas Enterprises in Tyumenskaya Oblastl): "0n the Proced-

ure for Forming a Basis for Building Roads During the Conquest of West siberia's
oilfields"]

[Excerpt] Substantial funds are invested each year in developing the road net of
West Siberia's oil-recovery regions. During the past 10 years expenditures for
building motor-vehicle roads was 13 to 20 percent or more of the total capital in-
vestment for building oilfield facilities for Glavtyumenneftegaz [Main Administra-
tion for the Oil and Gas Industry of Tyunenskaya oblast]. Since the start of the
conquest of the oilfields. more than 1.200 kilometers of hard-topped roads have
been put into operation. However, the requirement for such roads is much greater.
Failure to provide enough roads of high passability slows the pace of buildup
of the oilfields, leads to additional capital construction costs. increases operat-
ing expenditures, mandates a larger motor-vehicle fleet, and promotes premature
wear of transport equipment.

The lag in road construction in West Siberian oil regions can be explained by the

hign rate of growth in the amounts of oil recovered. the large scale of construc-

tion work in areas with a poorly developed economy, inadequate development of con-
struction organization capacity. and a lack of local labor resources.

One of the most important measures necessary for developing a large fuel and power
complex is the planning of capital construction in accordance with the resources
and capacity of construction organizations, that is. avoiding the emergence of dis-
proportiuns. Moreover. additional steps must be taken to expand sharply the scale
of capital construction. Main attention should be paid to increasing the produc-
tion of building materials and to reinforcing construction organizations with per-
sonnel and the required equipment.

Improvement of planning work is of great importance. For this purpose, it is de-
sirable to prepare drafts of the plan for the main directions for economic and so-
cial development for 10 years. with breakdown by year for the first 5-year period
but as a whole for the second 5 years (for capital investment), and also to intro-
duce a system of scientifically sound technical and economic norms and standards.

1
FOR!OFFKJA1.USE(NHLY
Ministries and agencies should engage in making up draft plans. Branch-of—industxy
institutes are doing the basic work of detenmining the prospects for development of
the branch. Giprotyumenneftegaz is engaged in making up integrated schemes for de-
veloping and siting oil-recovery enterprises and facilities in West Siberia. in-
cluding determination of the requirements for roads and their engineering categor-
ies. The essence of the method. which can be used also in otlar oilfield regions
of the country. consists in making up a scheme for development of the road net for
a long-term period. which is coordinated with plans for developing the region's oil
industry. The content. structure and method of preparing the scheme are as
follows.

1. The prospects for developing the oil industry in the region. that is. the geo-
logical-engineering nature of the fields and the main parameters of their develop-
ment,are determined: the number of producer wells put into operation; the inven-
tory of producer wells; the amounts of oil recovery and drilling; and the fields
that are producing at the start of the plan period. as well as those that are to be
introduced during the plan period. For the longer term. promising areas and struc-
tures are taken into account.

2. The characteristics of the transport network adjacent to the oil-recovery
region are given: the railroads; navigable waterways; ports and docks; airfields
with runways: and the highways that link the oil—recovery region with industrial
centers. ports. railroad yards. airports and large populated centers. The through-
put of the transportation routes and the possibility of expanding them and increas-
ing their number are evaluated. Then an outline map is prepared and the transport
lines are plotted.

3. The condition and development of the road net in the oil—recovery region are
evaluated. The characteristics of the existing network of roads are given: name;
length; engineering category; by whom and when the design and budget-estimating
documentation was approved; the cost of construction-—total, and specific cost per
1 kilometer of road; and the purpose of the road. Data on the total length and
the dynamics of the amounts of construction of the roads are cited. The extent to
which the oil-recovery region and individual oilfields are provided with roads is
evaluated. The capacity (potential) of construction organizations engaged in the
erection of roads is cited. and the potential for supporting road construction with
building materials is indicated.

4. The basic principles for developing the road net in the oil-recovery regions
are determined. classification of the road network into interoilfield, intraoil-
field and access roads to individual facilities and to well clusters is made the
basis for developing the road network. A strategy of the transport service for
the various regions and groups of wells is planned, and the basic directions for
freight traffic volume are chosen. giving consideration to the existence of trans-
port routes. as confirmed by design documentation. The road net that is erected in
a region being developed for the first time should combine maximum effectiveness
with the shortest length and the least cost of construction. The following condi-
tions satisfy the indicated principle:

now, developing fields should get reliable year-round transport links with base
locations. communities, rotating-duty settlements. bases for production-equipment

servicing, and the existing network of transport tics of the oilfield region.from
the very start of drilling-aver work. when t e greatest requirement arises for

construction and industrial freight;

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
the fields that are most important for carrying out the mandated plans for oil re-
covery-and among them are those located in situations least favorable for trans-
port service-~will receive preference when priorities are established for transport
ties; “Ly
when priorities and the amounts of construction are established. preference should
be given to highways over intraoilfield roads and access roads. since the former

serve the larger number of customers and are of decisive importance for transport
development of the region;

annual growth in amounts of road construction should be uniform to the extent pos-

sible in order that the buildup in capacity of road—construction subunits may be
smooth; and

studies on erection of the network of intraoilfield roads and access roads previ-
ously performed must be refined, since the original indicators for the development
of some fields may have been changed or refined.

5. The technical and operational characteristics of the roads and the indicators
that characterize the length. the traffic intensity of the transport equipment and
the engineering category of the road are determined. The length of the roads
depends upon the scheme for developing the oil industry and for the regional siting
of the oilfields. production facilities and supply bases, railroad yards, docks and
river ports, airports and communities. The length of each specific road is estab—
lished as the result of surveys or by the desk method in accordance with the
appropriate cartographic and aerial-photography information. taking selection of
the shortest distance into consideration.

Traffic intensity on a road It is determined by a summing up of the traffic of
freight transport hp, rotating-duty (passenger) transport 1. and special 1c
transport:

lx=lr+lo+lcz

average daily intensity of freight transport traffic is

Coc-

—__. motor vehicles/d
r'Qes'Kr'Kl ‘y'

I}-

where Qona is the total amount of freight hauled on the road in the year being
computed;

T is the number of workdays for freight transport per year (T = 300
days);

4:» is the average long-term freight-load carrying capability of a truck
(qcp - 9.5 tons):

Kr is the utilization coefficient of a truck's load-carrying capacity
(K, s 0.9); and

K3. is the utilization coefficient per truck run (kn a 0.55);

3
FYHI()FF1(1AI.I£5E2(NHLY
the intensity of traffic for rotating-duty personnel transport is:

N.-K.
«MB

1.:-

motor vehicles/day

where N. is the daily number of rotating-duty personnel haulings on the road in
the year computed;

K. is the share of buses in rotating-duty personnel transport (for West
Siberia 53 = 1);

q is the average seating capacity per bus, persons (q x 20-32);

v is the utilization coefficient of seating capacity (7 = 1); and

5 is the vehicle-run utilization coefficient.

The intensity of traffic for special transport in West Siberian oilfields is 6-10
percent of the intensity of the freight transport traffic. In the calculations it
is assumed that [C = 0.081? vehicles per day.

The amount of freight hauling is determined by direct computation of the require-
ments for freight for all stages of the operating cycle during assimilation of the
oilfields (drilling. the building of oilfield facilities. and oilfield operation)
in accordance with the norms for expenditures for freight and indicators for the
amounts of drilling. construction and production operations. For each road the
amount of freight haulage is found. totaling up the requirements for freight for
all customers (the oil, construction. timbering and other branches).

Qlloﬂl¥-lg1'zpj(l+Knp) thousands of tons,

where n is the number of freight customers:
g; is the standard for freight consumption for the j-th customer;
2'! is an absolute indicator that determines the total freight requirement

for the j-th customer (the amount of drilling, the introduction of pro-
ducer wells. the inventory of producer wells,vand the volume of sun
[construction and installing work! and so on);

Knp is the coefficient that considers freight for other customers (10-30
percent. depending upon the significance of the road in supplying the
region). bases for ATK's [automotive transport offices]. PTO's and K‘s
[production-equipment sections and offices] and RHH's [machinery repair
shops]. nonindustrial construction, and other agencies and branches of
the national economy.

The amount of hauling of rotating-duty personnel by road depends upon the reported
number of workers necessary for daily service at all workplaces at the oilfields
associated with the given road, and upon the principles of organizing the

[i
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

rotating-duty personnel hauling. The daily number of haulings of rotating-duty
personnel by road in the computed year (persons) is:

N.- 1%. 'ea'Kes'K9(1+K,-

where an is the scheduled manning of workers necessary for servicing the field.
for construction work, drilling,'and so on;

K}.. is the coefficient for converting the scheduled number of workers
to the reported number (Kcn = 60 percent);

K} is the coefficient that considers the delivery of rotating-duty per-
sonnel to work and return (kp = a); and

K is the coefficient that considers the daily haulings of rotating-duty
workers (K 2 1/16).-

The rated worker manning for each field is determined by the formula
. Vs
'gg-no H+na Iv8+ _c-'

where [1&[11 is the standard for the number of workers for drilling and for oil
recovery (in accordance with industry or regional norms);

He is the noun for output per worker in oilfield construction work
(according to output per day per worker in the region's construction
organizations);

H is the amount of development drilling. meters;

“5 is the active inventory of development wells; and

v; is the amount of SMR [construction and installing work] during build-
up of the oilfield facilities.

The technical category of the roads is established in accordance with average daily
traffic intensity. According to SNiP [Construction Norms and Regulations) II-D.5-7z,
when designating road categories for a common network. the calculated intensity is
considered to be the intensity expected in the last year of the prospective period,
and, for roads that service the technological hauling for the industrial enter-
prises. the calculated intensity is taken from a computation of their full capacity

'Rotating33uty workers. who are sent to the oilfields from rotating-duty personnel
settlements are hauled daily. full strength. by road, and one-sixth are hauled to

the communities (based upon the terms for gradual exchange of all workers who stay
in the rotating-duty personnel settlement. over a period of 6 days).

5
FOR OFFICIAL us: own
For roads that service oilfields, the highest traffic intensity is noted during the
period in which the field is drilled over and oilfield facilities are built up,
when the greatest amount of freight is required and the maximum amount of construc-
tion and installing work is being performed.

6. Road construction volume for the long-term period is determined on the basis of
calculations made in accordance with the requirements of the region's oil industry
and the principles for developing the road network. The computed requirement for
road construction is compared with development during the preceding period. the
roadbui1ding—organization capacity that is necessary is determined, and measures
for fulfilling the road construction program are planned.

A listing and the amounts of construction work adoptedd (consistent with the ca-
pacity of the roadbuilding organizations) for the construction of highways and oil—
field roads and the necessary capital investment are cited. The dynamics of the
planned a-ounts of construction of highways, intraoilfield roads and access roads
by year and by five-year period are given.

COPYRIGHT: Vsesoyuznyy nauchno-isslcdovatel'skiy institut organizatsii. upravleni-
ya i ekonomiki neftegazovoy promyshlennosti (VNIIOENG). 1981

11409
C50: 1829/55

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
BRIBIS

MIC, TRAFFIC wmISSIONS—On the basis of a regulation by the 0883 Council of
Hiniaters of 2 February 1976 an interim adlinistration traffic safety conission
was founded. to which belong first deputy chairsen of the union councils of tin-
isters (chair-en of the republic traffic ce-issions) as well as deputies of many
USSR ministries. republic committees and those of centrally placed top leaders.
The nudur of personal (private) cars now exceeds 120.000 in the 8888. Driver
training qualification is inadequate, traffic discipline is often lacking.

[By A. Salul, traffic co-ission secretary of the 388! Council of Hinisters]
[Excerpt] [Tallinn 12qu JA 10034183 in Estonian No 9, 1981 pp 26-25]
(mm: Kirjastus "Perioodika". "Tehnika 1a Tootuine”. 1981]

cso: 1815/9

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

OCEAN AND RIVER

SOVIET BOOK ON STATISTICS 0? OCEAN TRANSPORT

Moscow STATISTIKA mRSKOGO TRANSPOKIA in Russian 1979 (signed to press 22 Nov 79),
pp 1-2, 260

[Annotation and table of contents from "Statistics of Ocean Transport," 2d edi-

tion, revised and expanded by ".1. Bmskin, Izdatel'stvo "Transport," 3,000
copies, 260 pp.]

[Text] Approved by the Adainistration of Educational Institutions and the Ministry
of the Ocean Fleet as a teaching aid for students at higher ocean-going educational
institutions vho are specializing in operations and econonic engineering.

The teaching aid reflects the basic principles in the overall theory of statistics,
as well as containing a detailed exposition of the questions of the methodology and
practice of the statistics of ocean transport. Special attention is devoted to
questions of computing the system of indicators and evaluating the effectivencss of
the operational activities of the fleet and ports. It cites examples that charac-
terize the theory and practice of the statistics of ocean transport and the role
and importance of an automated control systea. The current edition discusses all
the changes in the practice of statistical accounting which occurred after the pub-
lication of the first edition in 1971..

The book is intended for students at higher ocean-going educational institutions,
and can also be used by workers in ocean transport in their practical activities.

Pour illustrations, 75 tables.

Mikhail Il'ich Bruskin
Statistika morskogo transports

Editor L. A. Vatulysn

Cover design by Ye. B. shapalina

Technical editor N. B. Usanova

Proofreaders L. Ye. Rozhkova, T. A. Hal'tseva
18 No. 1217

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Sent to typesetting shop 12 Jul 78.

ms OFFICIAL USE ONLY

copies printed, 3000. . . . Price 90 hopecks.. . .

Izd-vo mmr‘. 107176, Moscow. Banannyy tup., 6a

Signed to press 22 Nov 79. . . . number of

Copyright: Isdatel'stvo "Transport", 1979.

Table of Contents

Section 1: Principles of the Overall Theory of Statistics

Chapter

I
II
III
IV
V

VI

VII

VIII

Subject and aethod of statistics
Organisation of statistics in the USSR
Statistical observation
Sumerizing and grouping of statistical data
Absolute, lean, and relative values in statistics
Absolute values
Hess values
Relative values
Indues’and dynaaic series
Indexes
Dynamic series
Graphic nethod of depicting statistical data

Section 11: Statistics of Ocean Transport

Statistics of shipnents
Tasks and organization of accounting of ship-ants
Quantitative indicators of freight shipaents
The factor of accounting in the statistics of ship-eats
Grouping of statistical indicators of shipments
Statistical and tine-effective reports on the shipping of
freight and passengers
Statistical indicators of container and packet shipments
Statistics of the availability and operation of the ocean fleet
Statistics of the availability of the ocean fleet
Statistics of the use of the ocean-going transport fleet
Accounting for the distribution of the tine budget of transportation
ships when anchored in ports
Statistics of the level of technical equipnent and the operational
activities of ocean ports
Report on the availability and actual use of reloading conplexes
(PK). noorages. and warehouses
Accounting of the availability and use of port reloading equip-tent
Report on the operation of the reloading equip-ent
Motor truck transport
Statistics of ship turnover at the ports
Statistics of loading and unloading operations
Statistics of ship processing in ports

roaomcmussomv

52
52
53
SS
56

87
91
92
99

132
1100

160
l“
168
150
152
155
165
XI

XII

XIII

XIV

Dispatcher and tine-responsive accounting of the operation of the
fleet and ports
Statistics of labor and wages in ocean transport
Organization of labor statistics
Statistics of number of workers, their makeup and move-ant
Grouping of workers by types of activity

Accounting of turnover and replaceaent rate of workers
Statistics of wages

Statistics of labor productivity
Financial statistics of the basic activities of steamship agencies
and ports
Statistics of other types of activities in ocean transport
Statistics of operation of industrial enterprises
Statistics of material-technical apply
Statistics of fuel expenditure
Statistics of capital investments
Statistics and automated systa of control of ocean transport
Econonic analysis of statistical data

Copyright: Izdatel'atvo "Transport". 1979.

5075

C50: 1829/44 END

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY