FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/ 10572
7 June 1982

Worldwide Report

NUCLEAR DEVELOPMENT AND PROLIFERATION

(FOUO 6/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
MTB

JPRS publications contain infatuation primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
nation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or nases preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
ites originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.8. Government.

COPYRIGT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING WHERSRIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
WORLDWIDE REPORT
NUCLEAR DEVELOPMENT AND PROLIFERATION

03000 6/82)

CONTENTS

LATIN ”ERICA

ARCS“? INA

Cutro More on Pouible the of Nuclear Weapons
(um. 25 my 82) CO0.0IOOOOOOOOOOOO0.000000 ....... 00......

M8“! 3030?!

CZBCBOSIDVAKIA

Fut Breeder Reactors. Nuclear Power Ditcuued
(Vaclav Such; JADERNA masts. No l, 1982) . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

-a- [III-ww-lum

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
CASTRO HADEBD 0N POSSFBLB USE OF NUCLEAR "BANKS
W2518lo9 Buenos Airea DY“ in Spanish 1554 it Spanish 25 May 82

[Text] Buenos Aires. 25 Hay (DYN)-Vice Ada Carlos Castro Hadero, chairman of
the National Atomic Energy Co-ission [cm]. stated today that the runor that
Great Britain will use nuclear weapons in the conflict with Argentina is part

of British psychological warfare.

In remarks made on the progran "Magdalene and the News" on radio continental,
Castro Hadero stated that he sent a note to the International Atomic Energy

Agency [IAEA] denouncing the possible presence of "nuclear elements" on board
British ships in the South Atlantic.

"I have received a reply from the representatives of the nenber-states and of
the governor representing Great Britain in which they emphatically state that
it would be totally unthinkable for Great Britain to use nuclear weapons
against Argentina." he added.

Castro Hadero stated: "There is a world collitnent in this regard and if this
comitnent is not honored, than I would say that we are on the verge of World
war III. which I do not believe that the great powers will allow."

In answer to a question, the CNBA chairman confirmed that the Versailles Treaty.
signed after World War I [as received], prohibited the use of cheaical weapons

forever.

He added: "That this conflict—which is lilited to two countriesucannot
reach the point of using nuclear weapons by the power that has then against
another country that does not have then."

Castro Hadero added: "In my opinion. it would seem that authorization has
been given to resist an air attack. and this definitely gets my attention."

"It gets my attention because a nuclear weapon is not the most appropriate for
attacks which are generally carried out unilaterally. It would really sake

no sense," he added.

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In answer to another question. he pointed out that "unless a total war comes,
as happened during the late war, the typical atomic attack would be made with
small bombs of weak destructive power."

As for the danger of radiation. he stated that "the authorization to use those
weapons applies if the fleet is seriously threatened, but I have the inpreasion
that it refers to a lassive attack by the air force."

“I feel that it is totally impracticable. In the case of the subaarine, we.
the navy. were very concerned when the "General Belgrano" waa sunk. and the
investigating co-ittee carried out an analysis of the survivors and verified
that it was not a nuclear charge that sank the ship." Caatro Madero concluded.

680: 5100/2174

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FAST 33mm morons. NUCLEAR rowan DISCUSSED
Prague JADMA MI! in Czech lo 1. 1982 pp 2-7

[Article by Vaclav Stach. Institute of Nuclear Research, Ree: "Feet Breeder
Reactors and Nuclear Power Production"]

[text] In connection with the atertup of the Soviet ”-600
station. which narke the beginning of conercial operation

of fast breeder reactors. thie article presents current
information on the Iain characteristics of the aodiun-cooled
feet breeder reactor as a power source. A brief description

of the state of developnent of these eyetena in the leading
countries is given. and work done in the field by Czechoslovakia

ia described.
Introduction

Nuclear power stations are now operating in 23 countriea. and tneir net
electrical output ie 126 (3!. An additional 23‘ power units with a total
capacity of 213 G" are under construction [1]. Nuclear energy can directly
replace liquid and gaseous fuels for the production of electricity. and for
many countriee which lack both high-quality fuels and coal it promises a
considerable lessening of dependence on inport [2].

In this century. noet nuclear power units will be light water reactors (m
[pressurized water reactors]. WEI! [water-cooled. water-noderated power
reactors]. M [boiling water reactorsl). including graphite-water syatene
(Luca [light water graphite-noderated reactor]. Soviet deeimetion km).
with a certain number of heavy water reactors (Candu or M). These reactor
types of reactors have better characteristica and capabilities than foaeil-
fired units of the sane capacity. For example. according to the nest recent
annual report of Ed? [French nuclear power office; expansion unknown]. in
1979 the specific power production coat in nuclear power stations with M
reactors (900 We) waa 0.0868 francs/lath. compared with 0.1286 francs/lath in
coal-fired stations and 0.1536 francs/kWh in oil-fired stations [3].

In connection with the increasing role of nuclear power in the energy econo-
nice of the developed countries. the queetiona of long-tern fuel availa-
bility for existing typee of nuclear power stations and the linits on their

3
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

use resulting from the sire of natural reserves of nuclear fuel materials
are coming to the fore.

According to discussions held by the 8th INFCB [International Nuclear Fuel
Cycle Evaluation] working group [4]. the net integral consumption of natural
uranium by a 1.000-NHe generating unit with a light water reactor over a
30-year period with 70 percent utilization of nominal power output and an
enrichment residue of 0.2 percent is 2.730-4.220 tons. depending on the

fuel cycle (closed or open). Hence. used in this fashion. 1 ton of natural
uranium is the energy equivalent of 15 to 23 tons of standard fuel. According
to estimates by the joint NBA-0m!) and NAAB working group made at the end of
1977 [S]. as of 1 January 1977 proven reserves of econonically recoverable
uranium in the nonaocialist countries amounted to 2.191 Ht [megatons] and
additional assunad reserves to 2.096 Ht. for a total of 10.287 Ht. With

the equivalence figure given above. the energy content of these reserves

is equal to that of 64 to 99 billion tons of standard fuel. which is less
than the 150 billion tons of standard fuel which reference 6. for example.
cites for proven world petroleum reserves (in the noasocialist countries).

Naturally. eatinates of world uranium reserves are changing. Large areas
have not yet been explored in detail. According to reference 7. detailed
evaluations of reserves in the United States had been made by 1980. focusing
primarily in medium-grade ores; we may assume that they gave positive
results. in view of the recently published ".8. government regulations on
nuclear power production (involving a moratorium on the reprocessing of
spent fuel). A new report of the joint NBA-MAB working group at the end of
1979 [8] cites a figure for proven reserves in the basic price category 12
percent higher than that given in the preceding report. as a result of new
finds in Brazil and Canada and reevaluation of reserves in the Central
African Republic. Namibia. South Africa. Spain and the United States. But
even if reserves prove to be several tines today's estimates. at current
rates of energy consumption the energy potential is on the same order as
tnat of probable world petroleum reserves [6].

Thus uranium reserves are adequate for the impediate needs of nuclear power
development. but only their much more intensive use offers a long-term
solution. Since these reserves are unevenly distributed through the world.
the question of more intensive use is of varying importance in different
countries. But the basic trend is the sane everywhere. The bulk of nuclear
engineering research and development in the industrially developed countries
involves breeder reactors.

The Beginning of Connercial Operation of Past Breeder Reactors

0n 8 April 1980 a 600-)!“ generator unit with a fast breeder reactor went
into operation in the Beloyarsk Nuclear Power Station imeni I. 'l. Kurchatov.
The output of this unit. with the type designation BN-600. was snoothly
increased in succeeding months. until in September it reached 80 percent of
rated output. which was the technical maximal for the so-called "startup
configuration" of the cure. This third unit of the Beloyarek power station
has becone a reliable generating unit in the Urals electrification system.

Is
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The successful operation of the Eli-600 unit marks the beginning of comercial
operation of fast breeder reactors. which will make possible maximum
utilization of the energy potential of natural nuclear fuel sources and

will solve the basic fuel and energy problem for hundreds of years to come.
Construction of the Eli-600 was an extremely important step forward for
Soviet science and engineering marked out by the 25th CPSU Congress and

made more specific by L. I. Brezhnev at the November 1979 session of the
CPSU Central Couittee: "Our long-range planning must provide for exten-
sive construction of nuclear power stations with fast-neutron reactors."

[9]

The Bit-600 is the most powerful fast bruder reactor in the world. Follow-
ing its construction the Soviet Union is preparing to build similar units
with capacities of 800 and 1.600 m; the details of this construction are
expected to be decided in the near future. of the capitalist countries.
France is now reaching the conercial stage with the construction of a
1.200 a; station with a fast breeder reactor in cooperation with Italy and
West Germany; startup is planned for 1983 [10].

The current beginning of commercial operation of breeder reactors is a
logical result of world technical development to date. which can be broken
down into important periods each about a decade long.

The 1950's saw research on the physical principles of reactors and the con-
struction and operation of zero-power or low-power research reactors. The
1960's involved the development of the sodium teclmology and the construction
and operation of pilot reactors with heat outputs in the tens of megawatts.
followed by extensive fuel development. In the 1970's demonstration stations
with electrical outputs of 250 to 350 m were completed and put into opera-
tion. These were followed in the 1980's by connercial units. opening the
way to series construction in the next decade.

The construction of commercial breeder reactors in various countries is
affected by other factors in addition to the aspects of world development
described above. These involve primarily the degree of planned management
of nuclear power development. the size of the role to be assigned to nuclear
power in these countries in relation to accessible uranium reserves. and in
some cases an initial delay in the breeder programs. As a result of these
factors. the United Kingdom has put off for several years the beginning of
construction of the CDFR ((knlsercial Denonstration Past Reactor) with an
electrical output of 1.250 MU; it is not clear whether the United States
will build its demonstration station; and stations in West Germany and Japan
are to be finished in 1985 and 1987 respectively (the sun. with a capacity
of 300 Hue and the Honju station with a capacity of 250 Hue) [1].

Characteristics of Fast Breeder Reactors

The fundamental and well-known characteristic of breeder reactors is the
fact that they reproduce nuclear fuel. which is of fundamental importance
for the use of natural nuclear fuel sources for power production. With the
limited nuclear fuel conversion capabilities offered by thermal reactors.

5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the theoretical limit of their fuel base is l to 2 percent of available
uranium reserves. With the reproduction of fuel in breeder reactors there
is no such theoretical limit. and the full amount is usable.

In practice this means that breeder reactors can obtain 60 to 70 times more
energy from a given quantity of uranium than thermal reactors can. Thus
breeder reactors allow more intensive development of nuclear power produc-
tion without significantly increasing the need for extraction of nuclear
fuel materials. with the consequences that attend every extractive activity.
This adds to the effective usable reserves of these materials ores of much
lower grade. According to reference 5, attention has recently been turned
to deposits with average uranium contents of 0.01 to 0.1 percent. which
will expand known reserves. A uranium concentration of 0.01 percent means
extraction of 10 tons of ore per kilogram of uranium. so that terms of the
energy equivalent of uranium in light water reactors given above 1 ton of
ore is equivalent to 1.5 to 2.3 tons of standard fuel. With such an
equivalence figure. nuclear fuel loses its character as a concentrated
natural energy source. The economic consequences for its price. including
further complex processing. are considerable. But this situation disappears
if we multiply the energy equivalent by 60 to 70. as is the case with
breeder reactors.

Another important source of energy for fast breeder reactors is impover-
ished uranium. which is a waste product from the enrichment of uranium for
thermal reactors. The production of 1 kg of uranium at 3 percent enrichment.
which is the value used in pressurized water reactors. produces a waste of
6.5 to 5.5 kg of impoverished uranium (residue from the enrichment process).
This material is useless for thermal reactors. but if it is used as a fuel
for breeder reactors, according to reference 10 a ton of the impoverished
uranium is equivalent to 1 Mt of standard fuel. 0n the basis of the pro-
Jected fuel regime for WER reactors we may estimated that 30 years' opera-
tion of a set of power stations with reactors of this type having a total
capacity of 10 C" will produce 35 kt of impoverished uranium. This quantity.
used in fast breeder reactors. is the energy equivalent of 35 Ct of standard
fuel. or 350 times the current primary consumption in Czechoslovakia (100

Ht of standard fuel per year). According to reference 15. the 20 kt of
impoverished uranium already accumulated in Great Britain would. if used in
fast breeder reactors. be equivalent to 60 Ct of coal. which is 1000 years‘
output at current rates in the UK.

Thus there is a practically unlimited supply of fuel for nuclear power
production with breeder reactors. Accordingly their importance in the
history of power production is so revolutionary that it generally makes
people think that this stage is extremely far off and not currently prac-
ticsble. But with the current advent of comercial breeder reactors it is
possible to evaluate their other positive basic characteristics. which do
not call forth such ideas.

First. they are capable of competing economically with other types of power

stations. This is of course assumed by their investors. Data on unit
investment expenditures have already been supported by experience with the

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLV
construction of units on a commercial scale. while data on fuel expendi-
tures are supported by experience with semi-full scale operation. Even
though extrapolating from these prototypes to the characteristics of a
series-constructed station is a considerable step. the degree of uncertainty
has been narrowed. According to reference 11. the specific operating
expenditures of the Phenix demonstration plant (operation and fuel) are
now considerably lower than the price per kilowatt-hour at fossil-fired
stations. Investment costs for the first Superphenix station are high
(5.35 billion francs without fuel). but the cost per kilowatt-hour of

the station will probably be very close to that for conventional power
stations meeting modern air purity standards. With subsequent commercial
stations the price per kilowatt-hour is likely to be competitive with light
water stations in France. Hora precise data in terms of 1979 prices are
given by reference 15. According to this reference. the investment expendi-
ture on the Superphenix station is 7.900 francs/ti. compared with 3.445
francs/kw for a Pun with a unit output of 1.300 Mﬂe. It is expected that
this cost will decrease by about one-fourth in subsequent 1.500-HHe units.
The production cost for the Superphenix stations is expected to be 0.24
francs/huh. while that for subsequent breeder units is expected to be 0.16
francs/kUh. compared with 0.2 francs/huh for coal-fired stations and 0.12
francs/huh for PHR's (the latter two data obviously come from other sources
than reference 3).

Nuclear power stations with sodium-cooled breeder reactors. particularly
with an integrated primary circuit. have a number of inherent qualities
which make for safe operation with minimal undesirable effects on the sur-
roundings. They include:

--a practically pressure-free primary circuit in which a sudden disruption
of integrity of any size is extremely improbable. and even if it did occur.
could be dealt with decisively and without difficulty by built-in protective
vessels;

--a considerable margin between the nominal sodium output temperature and
the boiling temperature of sodium. which may be considered the point at
which the integrity of the fuel element surface, as the primary barrier to
fission products. is threatened;

--enclosure of the primary-circuit sodium in a single vessel of simple
shape: if the integrity of this vessel is breached the protective vessel

assures reactor safety and removal of excess heat by normal means;

--the possibility of cooling the core for reactor shutdown by natural con-
vection. with sufficient thermal capacity that the operator has time. in
case of a breakdown of the main heat removal and automatic control systems.
to put backup system into operation.

--reactor dynamic characteristics which cause "slow" station behavior. as
confirmed by all operators of demonstration prototypes. which makes control
easier. and in the hypothetical case of a breakdown in the automatic
systems allows deliberate manual control intervention and the like; the

7
FOR 0FI1C1AL.US£4DNLN
FIMR()FFK]AI.USE(YRLY

term "walk-away safety" is used figuratively to indicate that if the operator
left the plant it would remain in a safe state.

In order for permission for their construction and operation to be granted.
the stations had to meet safety criteria and requirements similar to those
currently applying to thermal reactors; they are universally recognized as
being at least as safe as the latter. As regards the radiation situation
in the facility and the surroundings. the measured radioactivity and exposure
values are far below the values prescribed by standards. The radiation
load on the surroundings will be smaller than that for current thermal
reactors. Reference 15 gives the following ranking in terms of radioactive
emissions [in ascending order]: oil-fired power stations. fast breeder
reactors. pressurized water reactors. coal-fired atationc. The Superphenix
station is 65 kilometers from Lyon. with a population in the millions. The
thermal load on the surroundings is considerably lower as a result of the
units' much higher thermal efficiency: for the same electrical power. the
quantity of heat liberated to the surroundings is a quarter to a third less.

Reprocessing of Irradiated Fuel

The use of breeder reactors involves the reprocessing of irradiated nuclear
fuel. Effective breeder characteristics are obtained with a uranium-
plutonium fuel cycle based on a plutonium charge and an external cycle. In
the future the production of these charges will be the objective. or rather
the result. of the operation of a set of such reactors. which will constitute
a self-developing system whose dynamics are characterized by the "doubling
time." During the beginning of commercial operation of breeder reactors
(and for a rather long time) the source of plutonium will be spent fuel from
thermal reactors. as a result of both the large group of already-completed
thermal reactors and the breeders' great plutonium-generating capability.
The requirements regarding reactor fuel cycle characteristics based on
minimizing the doubling .iae are currently aeaningless; the reprocessing of
irradiated fuel from breeder reactors will be rather similar to the reproc-
essing of fuel from thermal reactors.

But the necessity of reprocessing irradiated nuclear fuel does not apply
only to the use of fast breeder reactors: it is also a precondition of all
other possibilities for fundamentally increasing the energy utilization of
natural nuclear fuel reserves in a power production. The known facts in
this area (see e.g. reference 12) have recently been reviewed as part of
INFCB activities organized with the cooperation with HAAB. The conclusions
of INFCE working group No 8, whose task was both to examine the question of
how to make the best use of uranium in current thermal reactors and to
evaluate the thorium cycle. were that "Realistically. the possible saving
of uranium in the open fuel cycle is not particularly large and is only a
fraction of the saving possible in the closed fuel cycle. Nor would a
changeover to the thorium cycle produce a fundamental improvement in the
open cycle. A radical decrease in uranium consumption can be achieved

only by means of the closed fuel cycle" [4].

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Logical Aspects of Nuclear Power Production with Fast Breeder Reactors

Nuclear power productionwithfast breeder reactors is based on the Skundant
reserves of energy contained in the nonfissile (fertile) isotopes 2 U and
232Th in locations whose exploitation to supply thermal reactors would
probably not be considered, but which would be extracted for use in
breeders. and in materials which are already associated with. and already.
of course. "consumed" in. the "thermal" stage of nuclear power production.
with a ton of nonfiasile isotope being equivalent to a million tons of
standard fuel. these reserves are inexhaustible from the viewpoint of cur-
rent power production.

Some years ago. A. Weinberg gave a succinct description of the use of these
isotopes in fast breeder reactors as catalytic combustion. with the plutonium
charge functioning as catalyst. with a breeding ratio considerably greater
than unity an excess of catalyst (plutonium) is created. making it possible
to expand the process. Depending on specific conditions. it is also possible
to extract plutonium from the process and use it in another area.

From this follows the dual function of breeder reactors for the "thermal"
stage of nuclear power production. The first aspect is conservation of
natural fuel reserves. To the extent that we replace thermal reactors with
breeder reactors. we prolong the lifetime of the former. The second function
is that of replenishing the stock of fissile materials. or. in the figurative
terms just mentioned. of replenishing the catalyst which is consumed in
combustion of nonfissile isotopes in thermal reactors.

In the combination. or rather in the effectively managed symbiosis, of
breeder and thermal reactors we may find a solution to the problem of
nuclear power's increasing role in meeting the needs of society.

Breeder Programs in the Leading Countries

Even at the beginning of nuclear power. the Soviet Union devoted special
attention to fast breeder reactors because of their promising capabilities.
and thus far the Soviet breeder reactor progras has set the pace worldwide.
The BN-JSO demonstration plant in Shevchenkn began producing power a year
before the French Phenix and 4 years before the British PPR [1]. and it has
the highest output of these first prototypes. It was supplanted in first
place as regards output by the BN-600 unit. the starting point for com-
mercial construction. L. I. Brezhnev's report to the 26th CPSU Congress
mapped out the task of "faster development of nuclear power. including
breeder reactors." [l6] and the Document "Guidelines for the Economic and
Social Development of the Soviet Union" adopted by the 26th CPSU Congress
sets the task of “developing new designs for 800- to 1.600-NH power units
using fast breeder reactors" [17].

In France the commercial reactor program stems from the Superphenix station.
which is in the final stage of construction and is to go into operation in
1983. Construction of two units of the Superphenix 11 type. with an
electrical output of 1.600 M". is to be begun at approximately the same
time; these are to be completed in 1988 and 1989. so that by 1990 France

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE OVLY

will have an installed fast breeder reactor station capacity of 4.400 W.
In the next decade construction is likely to continue at a fairly rapid
pace; according to current forecasts. at least an additional 12.000 NH of
capacity is to be put into operation between 1990 and 2000, so that by the
year 2000 breeder reactors will account for 20 percent of installed nuclear
capacity; as early as 1991-1995 new construction of stations using PWR
reactors is expected to decrease.

The investor for the Superphenix stations is the joint economic consortium
NERSA. of which the French Ed? has a 51-percent share. the Italian SHEA
[expansion unknown] a 33-percent share and the West German-Belgian-Dutch—
British SBK (Schneller Brueter Kernkrsftgesellschaft [Fast Breeder Companyl)
consortium a l6-percent share [10]. The Italian share is represented by a
suitable volume of equipment deliveries (including reactor parts); the
participation of all the non~French organizations is motivated by access

to technology and information.

The mirror imge arrangement. i.e. 51 percent 88K. 33 percent DEL and 16
percent EdF. is proposed for construction of the Heat German sun-2 corner-
cial prototype. which will be based on technology developed in the De-benelux
program (West Germany. Belgium, Holland) and tested in the use-300 demon-
stration station. This program is lagging behind the French program because
of a later beginning and slower pace; the NSR-300 station in Kalkar. Heat
Germany is in the initial stage of construction and is expected to go into
operation in 1985. The design for the sun-2 prototype is currently being
refined 'and the prospects for further construction are not yet fixed. The
technical delay in the De—benelux program is expected to be compensated by
cooperation with the United States and particularly by participation of

the UK. the country with the longest breeder program in Western Europe.

The British program suffers from slippage in the construction of the PPR
demonstration station. which was put into operation only in 1977. In
addition the design prepared for the CPR commercial prototype (now the
(IBM!) underwent a number of modifications and no decision has yet been
made on the beginning of construction. The main reason is an overall
dampening of the conception of nuclear power's role in the UK. which in the
last decade has dropped from the world's largest producer of electricity
from nuclear power to sixth place.

A late beginning has also affected the situation in Japan. where the breeder
program is now proceeding rapidly. The constructon of the Monju demonstration
plant is to begin next year. with completion in 1987.

The breeder program in the United States has taken its own course. After
the failure with the Enrico Fermi station. whose construction was begun in
1956. at the same time as the first light water prototypes (Dresden-1.
Indian Point-l) and which broke down in 1966 before being brought up to
nominal power. the 0.8. program has remained in the research and develop-

ment stage. The total expenditure is already many billions of dollars
($500 sillion was allocated for 1980). and it is considered to be the

largest technical development program in any country's history [13].

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
This position does not seem particularly stable. and fundamental changes in
the near future are not ruled out. The main argument for the decisions taken
in the past has been world uranium resources. which will suffice to supply
expected development of nuclear power through the year 2000 based on light
water reactors with an open fuel cycle. The argments against it focus on
technical obsolescence and loss of technical and comercial position on
foreign narkets. There have been reports of preparations for licensing
negotiations between the leading u.s. reactor producers and the French.

The Situation in Czechoslovakia

Czechoslovakia is part of cm's joint program of breeder reactor develop-
ment. which is one of the cm countries' long-term special cooperative
programs in the energy field. The leading country and the one which has
dealt with most of the problems of the joint program is the Soviet Union.
Czechoslovakia is involved in this work in the areas for which we are well
suited and which currently represent the interests of our technical develop-
ment in accordance with the state technical development plan. The objective
is to make the most effective contribution to the joint program while
creating the technical preconditions for building breeder reactors in
Czechoslovakia with the technical assistance of the Soviet Union, and for the
production of certain equipment for these stations in Czechoslovak plants.
This is leading to an extremely inortant, innovative stage in the develop-
ment of the Czechoslovak nuclear power industry and the development program
for nuclear machine-building. The work in these areas is coordinated on a
nationwide basis and is focusing on the sodium type of breeder reactor.

The most progress with breeder reactor station equipment has been made in
the development of steam generators, which are designed by the Research
Institute of Power Production Machinery Plants in Brno in production coopera-
tion with Prvni brnenaka atrojirna [Brno No 1 Machine Works] National
Enterprise. Using design and process principles which were mastered in the
design of coz-water steam generators for the A-l station. the concept of a
modular sodium-water steam generator with special design of the modules

was developed. After a series of successful tests of the components in a
sodium test facility at the Research Institute of Nuclear Reactors in
Demitrovgrad, USSR, this concept was implensnted in a 30-m steam genera-
tor (PG 3010 which was installed in 1973 at the non-60 experimental

breeder reactor station in Dimitrovgrad. This was followed by development
work on a zoo-m steam generator for the Bil-350 station. which. together
with successful operating tests of the PG 301%. led to commercial delivery

of the steam generator with the type designation Nada [Russian "Nadya"]

for the Soviet IBM-350 breeder demonstration plant in Shevchanko. The Reds
steam generator was produced in 1977 and put into permanent operation in the
power station in 1980. In addition. another unit of the same type was
produced and delivered to the Soviet Union. while pre-contract arrangements
for an additional three units of the type are being nade, so that in about
1985 the entire Ell-350 station will be equipped with steam generators
designed and produced in Czechoslovakia. Thus Czechoslovakia has joined the
small number of leading countries which produce breeder reactor power
station equipment and is the first country in the world to carry out foreign
cosmercial deliveries of such components.

ll
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The PG 30R was operated successfully at the Dimitrovgrad station until this
year. running at power for a total of 35,000 hours. It demonstrated the
merit of the concept not only by its reliable operation in stationary and
transient operating states but also by its behavior in regard to a single
weld defect which was found during operation, and particularly in a so—called
"major emergency experiment" conducted with it. Because of its design. which
used a double tube plate. the loss of tightness of a welded joint between

a tube and tube plate on the water side. which was discovered after several
years' operation, did not lead to a reaction between water and sodium. It
was found by the operating detection system. and the generator was repaired
in 5 days. In the major emergency experiment. 7 kg of steam was introduced
into the liquid sodium in one branch of the steam generator to sinulate a
major loss of tightness. This did not cause a breach of the steam generator.
and accordingly after disassembly of the branch in which the emergency had
intentionally been produced and diagnostic testing of the equipment. the
steam generator was returned to operation.

At the end of this year [1981] the PG 803 was disassembled to make way for
the experimental PG 30R II. This unit incorporates the new concept of
"reverse design" (sodium in the tubes and water or steam in the space
between them), which is an approach used nowhere else in the world and
expands the variety of stean generators developed in Czechoslovakia.

‘rhe equipping of the Bil-350 station with the Nada steam generator. the
successful long-term operation of the. PG 3011, followed by the experimental
PG 30R 11, and the development of steam generators for additional power
generating stages at fast breeder stations which is now under way. consti-
tute an important technical basis for future production cooperation by the
Czechoslovak nuclear machine building industry in the "breeder" stage of
nuclear power production in the socialist coanunity.

Sigma's Research Institute, in cooperation with the Sigma Hodrany National
Enterprise, developed bellows-type valves for sodium which had nominal inner
diameters from 50 to 150 an. The prototypes of this series were produced in
19710 to 1975 and underwent detailed tests in Soviet test installations in
1975 to 1976. Design directives and technical specifications for production
were issued on the basis of these tests. and in 1979 to 1980 the production
of a test series of these valves with optimized design was organized for
long-term tests in the Soviet Union. Some prototypes were also installed

in test facilities in Czechoslovakia and East Geruny to gain further infor—
mation from long-term operation.

The successful development of the small valves was followed by work on
special fast-acting 350-nm diameter sodium fittings designed in accordance
with the original sectional concept (instead of the full cross section.

four sectors are opened or closed), thus giving the required operating

speed. The design and technical development led to the production of two
prototypes in 1977, of which one passed demanding tests at a sodium test
facility in Slovakia (500 open-close cycles, 5 thermal shock tests) without
any effect on its tightness and ability to function; its long-term testing
is continuing. 'lhe other prototype was subjected to tensometric measurements

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
and hydraulic tests at the Sigma Lutin National Enterprise. 0n the basis of
the tests. experience with production of prototypes. and research work. an
optimized design of the 350 mm fitting was developed. The prototype

RCA-350 was awarded a gold medal at an international mechanical engineering
exhibition in Brno in 1977.

Bellows-type sodium valves and the RCA-350 will be part of the set of
fittings in higher—power breeder reactors for power production; the design
of other special components of this system is under way. In addition.
successful development work has now created the technical preconditions for
extensive future production cooperation in this area.

In cooperation with the Research Institute of Ferrous Metallurgy and a number
of other research and production organizations. a design material has been
developed for the components described. Austenitic steels were checked for
the required properties under operating conditions in order to evaluate the
metallurgical processes used to produce them. A ferritic low-chromium

steel stabilized with niobium has been developed for the heat exchange
tubing of steam generators and the Vitkovice o.p. [sectorial enterprise]

has mastered its production. Process development conducted under operating
conditions has made it possible to replace import of design materials (which
was never undertaken) for the second P6 80! II by domestic production organ-
ized as a scientific and technical development project. In spite of
inherent shortcomings and complications. this material was made available
and the production of the PG son II was carried out under these conditions.
This was a valuable large-scale technological experiment. with the task of
developing construction materials; it yielded knowledge for the formulation
of guidance technologies for steel and pipe production.

The participation of Czechoslovak organizations in the CEHA joint program
for development of breeder reactors for power production. which is led by
the USSR. allows us to participate to a certain extent in the solution of
key problems in these systems and thus to create the scientific and technical
basis for their domestic application. The development of methods and
programs for designing physical and physico-technical characteristics of the
reactors. the making of energy calculations for the reactor. determining the
hydrodynamics and heat engineering characteristics of the fuel systems with
regard to reactor safety. and conducting theoretical and experimental inves-
tigation of shielding [stineni] involved cooperation and mutual division of
labor between the Institute of Nuclear Research and 288 Skoda I? Power
Production Equipment Plants]. Problems of technical and radiation safety
were allocated between ECU [expansion unknown] and the Institute of Nuclear
Research. Thermomechanicsl and strength problems of steam generators

were solved by SVUSS [State Research Institute for Machinery Construction].

A workable basis for these activities is the application of research
results in Soviet prototype equipment. which makes it possible to compare
computed and laboratory results with the characteristics of the finished
component. and with data obtained from critical systems during physical and
power-production startup or operation of reactors. This has allowed
Czechoslovak organizations to keep pace with the worldwide development of

13
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
roe OFFICIAL use own

knowledge in regard to certain key breeder reactor problems. The technique
of using joint design collectives. with division of labor. joint use of
experimental equipment. exchange of computer programs and data. and the
processing of results as joint technical reports and recommendations for
computations. plans and design work. has justified itself in international
cooperation.

Conclusion

As the role of nuclear power in the energy economies of the developed coun-
tries increases. the question of providing a long-term fuel supply for
nuclear power stations of existing types. against a background of limited
natural reserves of nuclear fuel materials. is coming to the fore. Only
much more intensive use of nuclear fuels can provide a long-term solution
to this problem. The importance of this solution differs in different
countries. but the basic tendency is the same everywhere. In all of the
developed countries. the bulk of research and development work in nuclear
engineering is devoted to breeder reactors.

Successful startup of the BN-600. the third unit at the Beloyarsk power
station, marks the beginning of commercial operation of breeder reactors.
which. according to long—term plans. will be built on a large scale in the
Soviet Union. France is now entering the commercial stage with the con-
struction of the Superphenix station and a predicted more rapid pace of
further construction. The situation in order countries is affected by
additional factors. particularly inadequate planned management of the
development of nuclear power. uncertainty about the size of the role to
be allocated to nuclear power in the various countries in connection with
available uranium reserves. and finally. in some cases. by initial delays
in the breeder program. Accordingly. plans for commercial construction of
nuclear power stations with breeder reactors have not yet been finalized
in these countries.

The energy contained in the nonfisaionable isotopes 2380 and 232Th. which
are in deposits whose use for supplying thermal nuclear reactors would
probably not be considered. but which will be extracted for breeder reactor
use. and in materials which have already been involved. and, of course.
"consumed" in the "thermal" stage of nuclear power. represents a literally
inexhaustible source of energy when used in fast breeder reactors. The
results of long-term operation of three demonstration plants and experience
with the construction of the first commercial designs proved the addi-
tional important positive capabilities of sodiumétype breeder reactors; these
are. in particular. safety and minimal undesirable effects on the environ-
ment. In a number of respects these reactors have shown better character-
istics than light water reactors. as well as econonic characteristics which
make it possible to expect economically acceptable production costs even at
current fuel prices. and an even better situation when expected increases

in the price of uranium occur.

The involvement of Czechoslovakia in CEHA's multinational program. led by
the Soviet Union. allows us to keep pace with worldwide state of the art in

15
FOIICNNWCJAL USElﬂﬂlY
research and development and to prepare for the breeder reactor stage in the
power and machine building industries.

2.

3.

7.

8.

9.

10.

11.

12.

13.

16.

15.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

"Prahlad jadernych elektrsren V were (atav 1: 1.7.1980) [Survey of
Worldwide Nuclear Power Stations (as of 1 July 1980)]. 08m]
Czechoslovak Atoaic bergy Co-iasionl-UISJP [expansion unknown].
Prague-ursslav. Septuber 1980.

Eklund. S. "Ranewed Confidence in Nuclear Power." IABA BULLETIN Vol 19.
No 3. 1977. pp 2-13.

"Operating Cost Cowarison for Edl’." AMIR‘ISCBAF’r-ATMBCNNIK Vol 25.
No 6. 1980 pp 282.

Roth-Seafrid. ll..and Files. P. "Uranim Conaunption by Thereal
Reactor System." amrmm-Ammx. Vol 25. No 3. 1980
pp 143-167.

"uraniua Supply and Demand." 1AM BULLETIN. Vol 20. No 1. 1978.
pp 210-34.

Giraud. A.; PecqunJL; and Ferrari. A. "The Nuclear Fuel Cycle:
Dark Spots and Bright Spots." norms D'INPORHATION CBA. No 5. May 1977.

Report of the Liquid Natal Past Breeder Reactor Program Review Group."
BRDA-l. U.S. ERDA. Washington. January 1975.

~"Supp1ying the World with Uranium" ammscm-Amscmx. Vol

25. No 11. 1980. PP 538-585.
RUDE PRAVO. 29 Novel-bet 1979.

"The Creys-Nalville Fast Reactor Station." BULL D'INF SCI ET TECH
cm 27. Jan-Feb 1978.

Rosenhold. 11.; Nagy. Y.; and Robert. E. "Breeder Reactors: Current
Situation and Prospects." Nuclex. 1978.

Stach. V. "Second-Generation Nuclear Reactors." UJV 63131. Rex.
Nova-bar 1978.

ATWIRTSCHm-AWINIK. V01 24. No 7. 1979. p 367.

International Working Group on Fast Reactors. "Twelfth Annual
Heating Su-nary Report." Part 3. INCH/3N3. 1AM. March 1979.

Rippon. S. "Past Reactors in the Public Eye." A70“. 281. 1980
pp 60-62.

15
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE 0-s'LV

16. "The 26th CPSU Congress." 8vobode. Prague. 1981. p loo.

17. "Guidelines for Economic and Social Develop-en: of the USSR for
1981-1985 and for the Period Through 1990," Supple-en: to HOSPODARSKB

mum 11. 1981. p 12.

COPYRIGHT: SN‘I'L. mp. Prague 1982

8680
(280: 5100/3014 END

16
non 0mm useouu