FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10491

4 May 1982

Sub-Saharan Africa Report

FOUO No.771

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. rucessing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.8. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
SUB-SAHARAN AFRICA REPORT

POUO No. 771

CONTENTS

CAMEROON

President Ahidjo Interviewed on Country's Future
(Ahmdou Ahidjo Interview; LATITUDE AUJOURD'HUI, Apr 82)

CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC

Tension with France Following Abortive Coup Subsiding
(mcns TROPICAUX ET mmrtmuttus, 19 Mar 82)

UBAC Report on EconOmic Situation in 1980
(MARCHES TROPICAUX ET HBDITERRANEENS, 12 Mar 82) .......

Briefs
Arrested Leader Tortured

ETHIOPIA

ELF-RC Elects New Leader
(REUTER, 1 Apr 82) .....................................

GABON
Briefs
Canadian Interest in Mining Project
Palm Oil Project
GHANA

Opposition Press Conference Pounds New Organization
(CNA. 2 Apr 82) ...... ..................................

Libyan 'Interference' Noted
'Csmpaign for Democracy'

- a - [III - NE 8 A - 1

mo ncnrru “CI“ OK" V
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Rawlinga: Secret Services Are Pursuing He
(JEUNE muons. 31 Mar 82)

Particularly Difficult Year Forecast for 1982
(Siradiou Diallo; JEUNE AFRIQUE, 3 Mar 82) ..............

IVORY COAST

Social Unrest Attributed To Move Toward Democracy, Economic Hoes
(Koffi Manane; AFRIQUB-ASIE, 16 Mar 82) .................

MAURITIUS

Refusal To Trade with Seychelles Alienates People
(Jonathan M'Haruis; AFRIQUE-ASIE, 1-16 Mar 82) ..........

MOZAMBIQUE

Chissano Views African Crises
(Joaquin Chissano Interview; AFRIQUE-ASIE, 29 Mar-

ll Apr 82) ..............................................

NAMIBIA

Briefs
Eight Guerrillaa Killed

NIGER

EDP Aid Goes to Agricultural Water Projects
(MARCHES TROPICAUX ET HEDITERRANEENS, 12 Mar 82) ........

Briefs
French Financial Aid
FRG Cooperation Agreements

SENEGAL

Three Changes in Electoral Code Proposed
(MARCHBS TROPICAUX ET HBDITERRANEENS, 12 Mar 82) ........

Briefs
Harseille-Foa, Dakar Container Shipping

New Ship on Dakar-Ziguinchor Line
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CAMEROON

PRRSIDENT AHIDJO INTERVIEHED 0N COUNTRX'S FUTURE
Paris LATITUDE AUJOURD'HUI in French Apr 82 pp 27-29

[Interview with President Ahmadou Ahidjo by Incienne Rubert-Rodier; date and
place not specified]

[Text] This Hay the Cameroonians will celebrate the 10th
anniversary of the founding of their republic. When all is
said and done, it is a quite rare success on the African
continent: some 200 ethnic groups are living together peace-
fully, there is political stability based on a representative
system, the agricultural potential is well utilized, and just
recently there has even been petroleum.

France is the chief partner of that country, which is governed
by President Ahidjo. Ahidjo "the unifier," Ahidjo the "Came-
roonian De Gaulle," and Ahidjo, one of the last of the African
"founding fathers," here explains to our special correspondent
how he views the future of his country.

He is called "the unifier," and rightly so. The first objec-
tive chosen by Haji Ahmadou Ahidjo, who was proclaimed presi-
dent of the Republic of Cameroon on S May 1960-the year of
independence for Africa-wss the reunification of his country.
His goal was to put together in one national body the English-
speaking western part of the territory and the French-speaking
community (nine-tenths of the country)--that is, British Cam-
eroons (placed under UN trusteeship with internal autonomy in
1958) and the former French-speaking Cameroons, which had

become independent in 1960.

On 1 October 1961, therefore, Ahmadou Ahidjo became president
of the Federal Republic of Cameroon.

The second stage: once the pacification of a country made up
of 200 ethnic groups (and a total of 7 million inhabitants)

had been achieved, the United Republic of Cameroon came into
being on 20 Hay 1972. This May the Cameroonians will cele-

brate the 10th anniversary of that reunification, the

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

crowning achievement of the "peaceful revolution" desired by
their chief of state. Having been reelected to a fifth
5—year term on 5 April 1979 (with 99.99 percent of the votes
cast), President Ahidjo can pride himself on having made
Cameroon a "governing democracy"-one of the few African
countries, along with Senegal, to enjoy a regime in which

the representative system operates normally. Political sta-
bility has been matched by an effort to achieve "balanced
development" enabling Cameroon to experience relative pros-
perity despite the fallout from the worldwide crisis. Harn-
ing his fellow citizens against the mirages of petroleum, the
recent discovery of which in the Kribi Sea gives new dimensions
to the country's economy (5 million tons beginning in 1984),
the Cameroonian president asserts that "black gold must in no
case replace green gold." In his opinion, agropastoral re-
sources are the most certain and lasting element in the coun-
try's development. He has translated that into the "green
revolution" and the "village communities" to facilitate a re-
turn to rural life by young people who have been attracted by
the lights of the city.

Added to all that is a foreign policy built around two basic
options: nonalignment (the assertion of a national identity
free of the blocs) and international cooperation (horizontally
with the Third World to achieve the solidarity necessary for
the transformation of economic relations, and vertically with
the developed countries to establish a two-way flow--both as-
cending and descending-of trade). That is the objective of
North-South dialogue, for which Cameroon is one of the Afri-
can spokesmen.

Lucienne Hubert-Rodier: whenever people speak of Cameroon, they say that it is
an "island of peace and stability." Can we ask you the secret behind such bal-
ance in a world racked by confrontations and, more specifically, in an Africa
ravaged by military ccups d'etat, but also in a world that is in complete tur-

moil?

Ahmadou Ahidjo: As you know, Cameroon became independent in the midst of being
torn apart by factions and of the development of disturbances resulting in
bloodshed--the consequence of agitation and violent demonstrations by the po-
litical groupings and their repression by the authorities of the time. Those
disturbances reappeared sporadically during the first decade of independence.

And as we know, those disturbances resulted in 1952 from confrontation among
the political parties that were formed in East Cameroon under the French
trusteeship. In the absence of a national consciousness, which was still in
embryo, the proliferation of those parties spotlighted the marked polyethnic
situation and the many cleavages in Cameroonian society which were often kept
alive by the colonial authority. In building this country, therefore, it was
necessary to start from a situation of instability, insecurity, and economic,
social, and cultural underdevelopnent.

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The great majority of Cameroonisns realized that basic options and choices were
needed and that it was necessary to establish and gradually strengthen modern
and efficient government institutions that would guarantee everyone's participa-
tion in the management of public affairs, to promote at the same time a modern,
diversified. and dynamic economy capable of insuring the happiness of all citi-
zens, and, consequently, to guarantee the country's political independence.

All those freely accepted options and choices constituted the first steps on a
long and difficult path which all Cameroonians are following wi'h public-
spiritedness and patriotism because they realize that our achievements must be
jealously preserved.

As Cameroon--a nation of many ethnic groups, languages, and religions-~facea a
troubled world and an Africa racked by destabilization, it realizes that it
owes its survival to unity alone.

The achievement and strengthening of unity have been possible only because of
the existence, strengthening, and affirmation of one party: the UNC.

The UNC did not come into being by spontaneous generation. As heir to the pre-
existing parties, it was born of the Cameroonian people's will to accept. in a
collective and solidary manner, their vocation and their historical destiny--
that is, to combine their efforts in building a united, just, and prosperous
nation.

what we wanted was a great unified national party that would be freely joined
by convinced Cameroonians: a party in which democracy, freedom of expression,
and freedom of discussion can exist and in which various trends of opinion can
exist, it being understood that the minority must accept the majority opinion.

What we are striving to establish is a "governing democracy"--that is, a regime
in which the state, although it is a state of law protecting the freedom of the
individual and allowing the people to participate in the management of public
affairs, nevertheless possesses the means of translating the general will of
the nation into reality, if necessary by overriding private interests.

Our philosophy of development is also designed to contribute to peace and har-
mony. Our economy is aimed at economic development with two goals in addition
to simple growth: the first is a better distribution of activity over the en-
tire territory to insure greater regional balance, and the second is parallel
and harmonious growth for all levels of society to insure greater social jus-
tice. Those actions are naturally intended to help reinforce the country's
national unity.

In our foreign relations as well, we are concerned to maintain our policy of
nonalignment, which expresses our will to be independent of any hegemonic bloc.
So we are open to international cooperation with anyone as long as that coop-
eration is mutually beneficial and does not erode our national sovereignty in
any way.

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

So there is no secret. It is a matter of rigorously and faithfully implement-
ing the freely accepted options.

L. ﬂubert-Rodier: Do you regard as achieved the objectives you chose first in
1960, when you assumed the country's highest office, and then again in 1972
during the "peaceful revolution of 20 May," which was the starting point for
the United Republic of Cameroon?

Ahmadou Ahidjo: All of Cameroon's progress since independence resides in the
above-mentioned options. which point to the need for Cameroonian unity in peace,
the building of the Cameroonian nation, and openness to international coopera-
tion.

Today the Cameroonian nation is a reality.

Politically, everyone recognizes that Cameroon is a stable country where order
and peace prevail. National unity is being constintly strengthened, and na-
tional democracy, in response to the profound aspirations of the vast majority
of our people, is being strengthened.

Economically, there is sound and rigorous management within the framework of a
planned liberalism that is intended to promote self-centered and balanced de-
velopment and is based on the rational exploitation of our national resources
and promotion of the various sectors, particularly agriculture. And all of
that contributes to economic independence, equilibrium in the trade balance,
self-sufficiency in food, and the financing of major infrastructure projects.

Lastly, in the social area, the work accomplished is reflected in a high level
of school attendance within the framework of a necessary cultural revival, in
health services that are to be expanded and strengthened, and in social justice,
which is so dear to Cameroonians because together with planning, it constitutes
the human and moral counterweight to possible excesses in our economic liberal-
ism. But while all those objectives have been or are about to be achieved, a
not inconsiderable amount of work nevertheless remains to be done. We are

aware of this, and we feel that the positive achievements to date are the pledge
and promise concerning what remains to be done.

L. Hubert-Rodier: "hat is the link connecting the various stages leading to
"planned liberalism" within the framework of "self-centered development" and
to the "control over development" that you made the objective of UNC action at
the congress in Bafoussam?

Ahmadou Ahidjo: "Planned liberalism" was chosen as a method of development.
While planning expresses our legitimate concern to make rational use of the
available resources, limit the element of chance in economic undertakings, and
consciously orient development toward moderate and previously determined objec-
tives, we are also convinced that liberalism remains a decisive factor for
progress. We are convinced of it because we do not believe that constraint

is effective in economic matters, since liberalism fosters initiative, prompts
responsible human participation in the struggle against underdevelopment, and
thus preserves for the economy its indispensable human dimension, and, lastly,

1.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

because it alone can harmoniously reconcile the requirement for rationalization
with the need for private international cooperation in a country where savings
are still insufficient and where the government, although compelled by the
force of things to play a decisive role in stimulating, guiding, and overseeing
the economy, is far from being able to assume the entire burden of development.
Because of that, our plans remain essentially indicative in nature so as to
provide scope for the spirit of enterprise, which is actually only another form
of the creative spirit and therefore requires freedom in order to bloom.

By means of "self-centered development." we want to mobilize all our national
resources and energies for the battle of development.

Thus Cameroon intends to fulfill its successive plans primarily with its own
resources by mobilizing national savings, by dignifying investment-notably in
the rural development sector--and by breathing more dynamism and rationality
into overall management and operations through an effort at control.

But Cameroon has chosen the human cause as the end and means of development,
with man to be master of his fate and judge and beneficiary of his happiness.

That is why, to round out our choice of planned liberalism, and to pursue and
strengthen the choice of self-centered development, control over our develop-
ment is seen as a search for ways and means likely to free us from a growth
model whose quality, rhythm, and goal would tend to elude the chief beneficiary
of that growth, meaning the Cameroonian individual.

This is a matter of the deliberate will of the Cameroonians to take charge of
their own development first of all and before soliciting and taking advantage
of the various kinds of outside assistance.

L. Hubert-Rodier: With the agricultural resources and energy potential at its
disposal, could not Cameroon overcome--at least in part-—the current serious
economic crisis, which, to use your own words, "renders fruitless and inopera-
tive all attempts to establish a more just international order"--meaning that
new economic order which is the object of North-South dialogue, which you have
always ardently desired, and whose major principles were further clarified at
the meeting in Cancun?

Ahmadou Ahidjo: Every country in the world is trying, more or less successfully,
to cope with the crisis that is currently raging. As far as Cameroon is con-
cerned, we have every reason to be happy with our economy's performance, de-
spite the hazards and pressures of the current international economic situation.

In that context, the vocation for agropastoral, fishing, and forestry activities
is undeniable, and it is one of the main elements of balance. The government
has therefore stepped up its efforts to turn the potentialities and vocations
to the best advantage. Unfortunately, our action has been undertaken against
an extremely unfavorable economic background. It can be said that for many
years, there has not been one of our agricultural products which has not expe-
rienced serious difficulties due to the anarchy and inconsistency that prevail
on the big world markets for tropical agricultural products.

5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Thanks to the "green revolution" program, we can at least pride ourselves on
having been self-sufficient in food at a time of shortages and famine in a cer-
tain number of Third-Horld countries. That trend will be continued thanks to
revitalization of the village communities.

In recent years, developments in the industrial sector have been marked by
large investments either to expand existing companies, such as CIHBNCAH [Cam-
eroon Cement Plant], CICAH, the brewery, and ALUCAH [Cameroon Aluminum], or to
complete new projects such as CELLUCAM [Cameroon Cellulose Company] and SONARA
[National Refinery Company].

Establishment of the National Hydrocarbons Company is in response to the need
for a maximum rationalization of the process of exploiting our potentialities.

There is active exploitation of our hydroelectric resources. It should be men-
tioned that the Song-Loulou Dam, fed by the reservoirs at the Hbskaou and
Bamindjin storage dam, has gone into service. And the Lagdo Project will go
into operation in 1983.

A vast program is underway to build infrastructure in the areas of communica-
tion, transportation, and telecommunications.

The efforts put forth by our national maritime shipping company (Camshipping
Lines) and the airline company (CAHAIR) are satisfactory.

The important thing is to concern ourselves with achieving better control over
the mechanisms and process of our growth through forecasting, planning, ration-
alization, and improved moral standards in connection with economic activities.

He must also call on all the imaginative resources existing in Cameroonians,
call for rationalization and self-control in their behavior, and appeal to
their creative spirit so that the strategy for economic growth will integrate
the problems posed by population growth, education, and employment with our
overall system of development.

L. Hubert-Rodier: In your eyes, the regional organizations constitute concen-
tric circles of solidarity. Do you consider that they are still best adapted
to Africa, and on the same subject, what do you think of enlarging the UDEAC
[Customs and Economic Union of Central Africa], as mentioned by President
Bongo at the 17th summit meeting in Libreville?

Ahmadou Ahidjo: As far as I know, it was not a question in Libreville of en-
larging the UDEAC, but of committing ourselves to the establishment of a com-
munity of Central African states in the spirit of the Lagos Action Plan. It

is obvious that the achievement of such a plan requires thorough studies aimed
at specifying the practical procedures for that community's establishment and

operation.

Tor its part, Cameroon is prepared to study objectively any idea likely to re-
ult in a strengthening of subregional cooperation in particular and African

)operation in general.

6
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

But it seems appropriate here for me to recall that in order to be serious and
durable, any grouping must be based on real and specific similarities, affini-
ties, and complementary features. Structures based only on emotional or polit-
ical motivations are doomed to founder unless they are supported by an under-
lying reality--by foundations that give them a reason for being, strength, and
awareness.

L. Hubert-Rodier: Does the Inter-African Force set up in Chad seem to be offer-
ing that country "a new chance" to solve its problems?

Ahmadou Ahidjo: The role assigned by the OAU to the Inter-African Force in
Chad is essentially that of keeping the peace and helping to set up an inte-
grated Chadian national army. In other words, that force has a duty to create
the conditions favoring a return to normal life in Chad and the reconstruction
of that country. In our opinion, it would now be appropriate to evaluate that
force's mission in the context of the resolution on Chad that was adopted by
the OAU Permanent Cmunittee at its meeting in Nairobi on 10 and 11 February.

L. Hubert-Rodier: You have just made an official visit to Nigeria. In your
opinion, can it be considered that the matter of last May's border incident is
definitely closed? What is the outlook now for political, economic, cultural,
and border cooperation between Cameroon and Nigeria?

Ahmadou Ahidjo: I have in fact just made an official visit to Nigeria at the
invitation of President Shehu Shagari. I would like to emphasize first of all
that my visit was a matter of reciprocity, meaning that it was not a consequence
of the incident you mentioned. I would also like to point out that long before
my visit, our two governments had agreed on a compromise concerning the solu-
tion to that problem after realizing that what it actually involved was a local
incident whose significance should not be overstated or dramatized.

That being said, my visit gave us the opportunity to lay new foundations with

a view to more active political cooperation that will enable us, through regu-

ler consultations between our two governments and especially our border author-
ities, to resolve amicably and peacefully, if not prevent, any incident likely
to harm the good neighbor relations between our two countries.

The visit also led to positive results in the area of economic cooperation. We
decided to sign new agreements in the areas of customs, posts and telecommuni-
cations, trade, and hydroelectric energy. So all in all, there are good pros-
pects for cooperation between Nigeria and Cameroon.

L. Hubert-Rodier: Are you satisfied with Franco-Cameroonian cooperation, and
in which areas might it be destined to develop as a result of the meeting by the
Major Franco-Cameroonian Joint Commission?

Ahmdou Ahidjo: Being based on the equality of the partners and respect for
their independence, sovereignty, and choices, cooperation between our two coun-

tries does not present any major problems. It therefore needs only to be con-
tinued, adapted to any possible and necessary changes, and, in that way, rein-
forced and improved.

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Cameroon is hoping for inprovenent in some areas of that cooperation having to
do with trade and, more particularly, a rebalancing of our trade so that our
trade balance will no longer show the deficit that has been recorded so far.

As far as the industrial area is concerned, it is desirable to encourage par-
ticipation by French industrialists in the promotion of small and medium-sized
enterprises and of more complex projects requiring sizable investments.

COPYRIGHT: Latitude SARL. loth trinestre 1981

11798
CSO: [019/792

ONLY
FOR 0511C1AL USEI(NHLY

CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC

TENSION WITH FRANCE FOLLOWING ABORTIVB COUP SUBSIDING

Paris MARCHES TROPICAUX ET MEDITERRANEENS in French No 1897, 19 Mar 82 pp 773-
774

[Article: "The Lesson From Patasae's Failure"]

[Excerpts] The tension existing between France and the Central African Repub-
lic since the abortive coup of Ange Patasse is subsiding. General Kolingba has
in fact publicly stated that he does not wish to make the surrender of Patasse,
who sought asylum in the French Embassy and to whom Paris has granted the right
of asylum, a test of relations between the two countries. This position seems
to have some merit, inasmuch as certain intransigent members of the Military
Committee for National Recovery (CMRN) would like to be able to try Patasse
and eliminate from public life an opponent whose personality lends itself to
controversy and who is a bothersome adversary.

When he was named minister of development in the first government set up by
Colonel Bokassa after he ousted President Dacko, Patasse, agricultural engi-
neer and director in the Ministry of Agriculture, had the reputation of being
a man of progress quite naturally associated with the policy of fighting cor-
ruption announced by the army chief of staff in order to justify his takeover.

The 12 years during which Patasse participated in government and witnessed the
degradation of the government, the development of the most total arbitrariness
and the reign of corruption even more frightful than that which existed before
Emperor Bokassa came to power, did not alienate the sympathy of a fraction of
the Bangui population, including teachers, professors and university and high
school students in search of a leader capable of ousting the tyrant. Moreover,
he knew how to maintain his popularity through acts of generosity to students
or the people living in certain low-income districts of Bangui. The origin

of the resources which Patasse used would be surprising to same.

When Emperor Bokassa was overthrown, Patasse, who founded the Central African
People's Liberation Movement (MLPC), was not in Bangui. Upon his return on

5 October 1979, he acted as leader of the opposition. He demanded a revision
of cooperation agreements with France and the departure of French troops, whose
presence was "a violation of national sovereignty." This nationalist talk

could only be welcomed by part of the population, especially the intellectuals
who had been humiliated by the circumstances of President Dacko's return to

9
F0!‘0FFNJA1.USEINMLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

power in a military plane and accompanied by French paratroopers.. Patasse's
test of strength of the new government caused him to be incarcerated a month
later and to remain in prison for 13 months. He was freed because of his
state of health and within the framework of an attempt to relax the political
atmosphere made by the chief of state. “is trial, for "an attempt on govern-
ment internal security," was to end in a dismissal which also applied to mem-
bers of his family being tried along with him.

The principal leader of the opposition, Patasse watched the number of his
rivals grow and opposition parties flourish while the dates of the referendum
on the constitution and the presidential election came closer. Five candidates
were to confront one another in the election campaign beginning on 1 March
1981. The proclamation of results by the Constitutional Council was postponed
several days and Dacko's election by a majority of 50.23 percent was violently
disputed by his adversaries because, they claimed, of serious irregularities

in voting. While Pehoua, Maiden and Goumba combined gathered less than 10 per-
cent of the votes cast. Patasse obtained 38.11 percent. He even won 5,000
votes in Bangui. the only city in the country to manifest real interest in
political life. From that time on. he would constantly claim that without

the manipulations of his adversaries. he would have won, thus contesting the
legitimacy of President Dacko.

A certain malaise marked relations between France and the Central African Re-
public after the election of Francois Hitterrand, not that relations between

the two governments were affected, but because of statements and positions
taken. either by individuals in the French Socialist Party expressing their
personal views or by the Socialist Party itself. Intervention in African inter-
nal affairs by preceding French authorities was denounced and it was recalled
that the resignation of the minister of cooperation at the time of the ouster

of Emperor Bokassa had been demanded in Parliament.

Criticisms grew even stronger when the Socialist Party, in a bulletin. ex-
pressed its "very strong disapproval of the repression" aimed at the Central
African opposition following the explosion of a bomb in a Bangui movie theater
on 14 July 1981, an attack attributed to opposition movements. Dacko's govern-
ment then ordered the state of siege, suspension of the constitution, dissolu-
tion of two political parties and the suspension of Patasse's HLFC. Certain
”authorized" circles manifested their "surprise" in Paris about the decisions
made in Bangui. Three weeks later, President Dacko, apparently encouraged by
the new French Government. took back the measure concerning the MLPC. Paris'
attitude regarding him undoubtedly encouraged him to restore power to General
Kolingba, who immediately set up a Military Committee of National Renewal
(CMRN) and hinted that he would turn it over to civilians when the economic
situation permitted him to do so.

It was in Europe. where he traveled during the 5 months preceding his attempted
coup -- generally in Paris -- that Patasse affirmed his position as the de-
clared leader of the opposition to General Kolingba. At a Paris press confer-
ence on 6 October, he revealed his party's proposals to the CHRN, accompanied
by a schedule for a return to normality of Central African political life.

He asked for presidential elections at the end of 1981 and legislative and

10
[113‘0F11CJA1.USIZ(HULY
FOR OFHCIAI. USE ONLY

municipal elections at the end of January 1982. Receiving no satisfactory
response, he filed a complaint, from Paris, with the Supreme Court of Bangui
against Dacko and Kolingba for high treason, deeming the suspension of the con-
stitution illegal. At the same time, he said that his party -— which he

claimed enjoyed a majority -— was ready "to assume its responsibilities in
obtaining a return to a normal situation." A little later. he accused leaders
in Bangui of planning the "liquidation" of his supporters with aid from “foreign
mercenaries," using the pretext of an attempted coup.

At the same time, Kolingba was naming representatives of the opposition to
posts of responsibility. After Abel Goumba, president of the Ubangi Patriotic
Front-Labor Party, named rector of the University of Bangui, prominent persons
who had enjoyed great influence in political life over the past 5 years acceded
to posts of high responsibility in the administrative hierarchy or in joint
ventures. Among those benefiting from these promotions expressing a desire

for a political opening vis-a-vis the opposition was Gabriel Dote-Badekara,

who was close to Patasse.

The latter returned to Bangui from Paris on 28 February. 0n the evening of

3 Harch, Gen Francois Bozize and Gen Alphonse Hbaikoua made their move, counting
on an uprising of the people. who remained indifferent in Bangui and the rest

of the country. The CHRN had no trouble restoring order in a situation that
was never seriously compromised. Patasse, sought by the authorities, then

[led to the French Embassy and asked for the political asylum which France has
just granted him.

nghtly or wrongly, Bangui has suspected that unofficial French police en-
couraged Patasse's attempt. It was reportedly not the 80663 [Foreign Intelli-
gence and Counterintelligence Service], which, on the contrary, warned the
government in Bangui of the plot being hatched. However, it is certain that
Patasse did have rather close relations in France, not with members of the
French Government, but with members of the Socialist Party whose sensitivities
prompt them to suspect the legitimacy of any government originating in a coup
d‘etat, especially if the author is a military man. Perhaps they speculated

on Patasse's promises to restore parliamentary democracy in Bangui. Or perhaps
they simply did not disapprove strongly enough. which led him to believe that
he was being tacitly encouraged by the highest authorities in the Socialist
Party, who cannot be seriously suspected of complicity.with him. But whatever
the hypothesis, the French Socialist Party has yet to learn that it bears
special responsibility because of the fact that it has a parliamentary majority
in France and tha- its statements or positions have repercussions on France's
international relations. The example of its recent statements on Moroccan and
Ethiopian policies is an illustration of this. Consciously or not, part of
French public opinion refuses to make a distinction between the French Govern-
ment and the Socialist Party. an essential element in the majority. It should
therefore not be surprising that foreign governments make the same mistake.

COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux et Cie Paris 1982

11.464
CSO: 4719/652

11
FOR OFﬂCIAI. USE ONLY
FOR‘OFFKJAL.USE(MVLY

CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC

UBAC REPORT ON ECONOMIC SITUAIION IN 1980
Paris MARCHBS TROPICAUX ET HEDITERRANBENS in French No 1896, 12 Mar 82 p 743

[Text] The activity report on the 1980 fiscal year of the Banking Union in
Central Africa (UBAC), an establishment affiliated with the General Company
group, provides information on the situation of the economy of the Central
African Republic, whose rehabilitation of the productive structure after the
events of September 1979 has not yet resulted in a lasting recovery.

Coffee exports for the 1979-1980 season totaled 10,945 tons (up 2,310 tons over
the preceding season). Despite the drop in prices, the purchase price to the

producer was raised from 300 to 330 CPA francs per kilogram. Action undertaken
in the coffee area should result in a production of 14,000 tons by 1984 by all

family crops.

For the 1979-1980 season, the cottonseed harvest amounted to 32,150 tons (down
4,387 tons), supplying 10,416 tons of cotton fiber (down 1,411 tons) after

ginning.

Because in the drop in area planted to 1,200 hectares. tobacco production
totaled 1,189 tons in 1980 (down 550 tons), including 573 tons of the Sumatra
variety (tobacco for cigars), grown in the western region. The tobacco was of
good quality and marketing was satisfactory.

Some 2.7 million hectares of useful forest were registered. Large-scale lum-
bering permits granted provided 479,600 cubic meters of rough timber in 1980

(up 30,500 cubic meters). Exports of rough timber, sawn wood and veneer
totaled (169,000 cubic meters (up 16,600 cubic meters). Reorganization of the

forestry sector should lead to an improvement in production.

In 1980, diamond production totaled 341,700 carats (up 27,500). Exports
totaled 333,500 carats of rough diamonds and 2,000 carats of cut stones, repre-

senting a total value of 8.4 billion CPA francs. Gold exports amounted to
521 kilograms, worth 1 billion CPA francs. The future working of the Bakouma
uranium deposit is still being studied and oil prospecting has been begun in
the north.

In the industrial sector, 1981 saw the establishment of two breweries and the
startup of the PAP Citroen vehicle assembly plant, which now assembles Visas.

12
INDR‘OFIIC1A1.lEﬂE(lQLY
FORIOFFKJA1.USE(NVLY

The River Transport Company (SOCATRAP) has been reorganized and its equipment
improved for container transport. In 1980, 263,400 tons'of goods were trans-
ported by river (upstream and downstream).

Thanks to diamonds and cotton. the Central African Republic has a favorable
trade balance (surplus of 2.1 billion CPA francs in 1979). The first nine
months of 1980 registered 14.6 billion CPA francs in imports and 18.5 billion
in exports, which would indicate, at year's end, a higher surplus than in 1979.

Hithin such a context. the Banking Union in Central Africa developed its
operations and strengthened its position. Its balance sheet on 21 December
1980 totaled 10.2 billion CFA francs. All customer resources (deposit and
long-term accounts) amounted to 4.9 billion CPA francs (up 66.4 percent over
the end of 1979). Reinvestments (portfolios and advances) represented 8.1 bil-
lion CFA francs (up 32.7 percent). The bank resorted to advances from the
Ussing Institute (.9 billion CPA francs) and foreign resources. Outside the
balance sheet. commitments for securities and guarantees and the opening of
loans confirmed for customers amounted to 1.3 billion CPA francs.

The increase in general expenditures resulted in a drop in the result which.
after amortizations, funds and taxes, amounted to 55.6 million CPA francs,

compared with 96.6 million for the 1979 fiscal year. The general assembly of
22 June 1981 decided to distribute a dividend of 9 percent on capital of 550
million CPA francs, capital matched by 52.5 million in reserves.

COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux et Cie Paris 1982

11,464
CSO: 6719/767

l3
FOR¢OFFKJAI.USE(RULY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC

BRI BPS

ARRESTED LEADER TORTURED—d’arie, 9 Apr (REUTER)-The major opposition group
in the CAR announced on Friday that one of the members of its political
bureau, Professor Simon Bedaya Ngaro, has been transfered to the Ngarsgba
prison in Bangui where he has been subjected to torture. The Central African
People's Liberation Hovenent, [MLPC] of foruer Prise Minister Ange Patasse
stated that Professor Ngaro, associate Isa-her of the French Acadeny of
Surgeons and former CAR ninister of foreign affairs, was arrested during

the March attempted coup to overthrow the government of President Andre
Kolingba. Ange Patasse, former prime minister to ear-emperor Bokssea and
preented as the brains behind the coup attempt, is still at the French
Embassy where he sought refuge, French sources state. Runors spread recently
that Mr Pataese would leave the French Embassy for Togo where he had been
given asylum The MLPC calls for the "mediate release" of Professor
Bedays Ngaro and all nilitants and supporters of the movement who were
"injustly arrested for breach of opinion." [Text] “31008110 London REUTER
in French 1766 M 9 Apr 82]

080: 4719/8110

14
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
EF-RC ELECI‘S NEH LEADER
JNOlleZ London REUTER in English 2055 GMT 1 Apr 82

[Text] Damascus, 1 Apr (REUTER)-—0ne of the main guerrilla organizations
fighting Ethiopia for the independence of Eritrea has elected a new leader,
the Eritrean news agency said here today.

At an emergency meeting in Eritrea, the Eritrean Liberation Front-Revolutionary
Council (ELF-RC) chose Abdulleh Idris, a 38-year—old soldier, to replace
Ahmed Nasser as executive committee chairman, it said.

The change was the second committee reshuffle since last suuner, when the
organisation came off worst in fighting with the larger and more powerful
Eritrean People's Liberation Front (EPLP).

The two guerrilla groups have long been bitter rivals for control of the
Eritrean secessionist movement and attempts to form a united front have
repeatedly foundered.

The ELF-RC lost most of its strongholds in Eritrea Province to the RPM"
and some 6,000 of its fighters fled to neighbouring Sudan.

It represents a come-back for Abdullah Idris. who was thrown off the
executive comittee in a reshuffle last November after 10 years as ELF-RC
chief of staff.

The new leader graduated from Syria's staff college in 1966 and has good
relations with senior officers in the Arab world, Eritrean officials said.

680: lo 700/1099

15
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

GABON

BRIEFS

CANADIAN INTEREST IN MINING PROJECT-ﬁn 5 March in Libreville, President Bongo,
accompanied by Gabonese Minister of Mines Etienne-Guy Mouvegha-‘l‘chioba, met
with a delegation of Canadian businessmen interested in the mining research
project on the Transgabonese line, 100 kilometers on both sides of the rail-

road, including the northern zone - that is, the Boone-Belinge section. Ac-
cording to L'UNION in Libreville, the four Canadian businessmen, part of when

then talked with the different Gabonese administrative and technical depart-
ments, continuing the discussion begun with the chief of state. Progress-ed
as part of the 1980-1982 interim plan, completion of the project will take
5 or 6 years, said Paulin Ampampa Gouerangue, Gabonese general director of

mining and geology, adding that soil .work has been underway for several months
by the Geological and Mineral Prospecting Office (3116!!) of France and the

Gabonese National Geological Service. The length of the project is extended
because of the fact that it involves 140,000 square kilometers. [Text]

[Paris HARCHES TROPICAUX ET MEDITERRANEBNS in French No 1896, 12 Mar 82 p 743]
(COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux et Cie Paris 1982] 11,464

Republic of the Congo. Some 10,000 hectares of oil palms will be planted.

[Tut] [Paris HARCHBS TROPICAUX ET HEDITERRANEBNS in French No 1896, 12 Mar 82
p 744] (COPYRIGHT: Rene Moreux et Cie Paris 1982] 11.464

CSO: 4719/74?

16
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
OPPOSITION PRESS CONFERENCE POUNDS NEH ORGANIZATION
Libyan 'Interference' Noted
A3021626 London GNA in English to 68A Accra 1615 GMT 2 Apr 82

[Text] London, 2 Apr (GNA)--The right of Ghanaians to choose their own
leaders is in danger because of the failure of the ruling Provisional

National Defense Council [PNDC] to announce a programme for the return to
civilian rule.

This situation is unacceptable because the right to choose their own govern—
ment is the birthright of all Ghanaians, Mr Justice R. J. Hsyfron-Benjamin.
until recently chief justice of Botswana. told a press conference here today.

The conference. at which he was the chairman but also principal speaker,
was to inaugurate a newlyformed "Campaign for Democracy in Ghana" [CD6]
aimed at advocating a return to civilian rule.

Mr Justice Hayfron-Benjamin who is a Ghanaian, said he had accepted the
invitation by all political groups represented in the disbanded parliament
to present a statement to the press for the launching because he felt his
birthright was threatened.

He traced Ghana's 25 years of independence and pointed out the democratic
rule in Ghana had faced threats of military interventions since 1966, thus
depriving the people of their right to freely choose who should rule them.

Mr Justice Hayfron-Bcnjamin said early return to representative government
is the only way the views of all sections of the people could be marshalled
for Ghana's reconstruction. adding:

"If one claims to represent the people, then he should put himself up for
an election."

Repudiating a suggestion that civilian governments had failed Ghanaians,
he said rather it was military regimes that had failed the people.

17
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

He added that if the PNDC failed to fulfill the (306's request to announce a
program for the return to civilian rule, the matters would search for the

appropriate means to exert the necessary pressure for such a change. He
would not give details of the nature of such pressure nor elaborate.

Mr Justice Hayfron-Benjamin referred to the erstwhile National Liberation
Council regime which he said fulfilled its promise and returned Ghana to

civilian rule until the 1972 intervention by the late Kutu Acheampong's
military coup.

He said when the Acheampong government failed to announce a similar
programe to return the country to democratic elections, the result was the
AFRO [Armed Forces Revolutionary Council] intervention. He noted that

the AFRC duly recognised the Ghanaian right to civilian rule and gave way.

The former chief justice therefore urged the PNDC to open the field soon

for the various political groupings in Ghana to contest a democratically-
organized elections.

He said it was the view of the groups involved in the campaign that Libya
was interfering in Ghana's affairs.

Mr S. Addae-Amoako, former national organizer of the PNP [People's National
Party] who shared the dais with Mr Hayfron-Benjamin. said the "bandwagon"
now going round Giana does not represent the people. They (PNDC) have
forced themselves on the people.

Mr Addae-Amoako, who said he was hot during the 3lst Decenber revolution,
told the press he had informed PNDC chairman flight-lieutenant Jerry Rawlings
he was not against him personally, but that he (Amoako) was opposed to
undemocratic takeover of government.

0n Libya, he asked: "Do we see democracy in Libya? How can Libya help
Ghana build democracy?"

He added that Libya's presence in Ghana posed a threat to West Africa and Africa
in general.

Among those who attended by were Mr Henry Djaba, Major (rtd) Boakye Djan,
Hutton Mills (Chappie). Alhaji Youssif Patty, former high commissioner in
Lagos. E. D. Mahami, former first deputy speaker and a host of former

PNI' officials and leading members who were there ostensibly as spectators.

'Campaign for Democracy '

ABOZMZS London cm in English to GM Accra 1330 Gm 2 Apr 82

[Text] London, 2 Apr (CM)--An organization calling itself "Campaign for
Democracy in Chem (606)" was inaugurated at a press conference at the Africa
centre here today.

18
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Mr Justice R. J. Hayfron-Benjamin, until recently chief justice of Botswana.
who read a state-ent, said he did so on behalf of all Ghanaian political
groups which were represented in the third republic's parliament.

0n the dais with him was Samuel Addae-Amoako, former national organization
of the proscribed People's National Party (PNP), who together with
Justice Hayfron-Benjamin answered reporters' questions.

Mr Justice Hayfron-Benjamin said the CD6 was being inaugurated by concerned
Ghanaians who are committed to a struggle to restore sanity and democracy
into Giana.

The statement went on: "For the record, about three months ago, the
constitutionally elected government led by Dr IIilla Limann in Ghana, was
overthrown in a coup d'etat led by flight Lt J. J. Rawlings.

"the initial misguided euphoria in the press which greeted the so-called
second coming of Rawlings and his Provisional National Defense Council [PNDC],
here and abroad, has now given way to embarassed silence even for the most
faithful disciplines of J. J. Rawlings. Within three months Rawlings' regime
has grown up to become an instrument of terror and anarchy. A regime, which
made promises for the hard-pressed ordinary man in Ghana. has gradually

made the plight of the average Ghanaian already unbearable.

"As of now, not only has the regime proved beyond reasonable doubt that it
is in no position to deliver the goods on its promise, but by its methods
and conduct, it is also not acceptable to many Ghanaians and freedom-loving
peoples of the world.

"He could list ad infinitum our grounds for asserting that the current military
regime cannot be acceptable to Glanaians and the international camunity. But

for the moment we would like to confine ourselves to the most pertinent of our
claims.

"me first striking thing about the regime is that it is unrepresentative,
even for a military regime. It is made up of people who were simply hand-
picked by known friends and hangers-on to the chairman of the PNDC,

J. J. Rawlings. The arbitrariness of the regime in appointing or retaining
people in many key posts has opened it to charges of tribalism and corruption
already. In any event, whole regions and districts which are not adequately
represented in the armed forces and the public services are effectively
disenfranchised. The runblings from this direction for those who want to
hear have already started.

"For three months now, the Rawlings' regime has not been able to come out
with a clearly formulated plan or program. It has merely set itself the task
of transforming the social and economic structure of the Ghanaian society on
the wings of social revolution. Experience has shown that when a group of

19
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

people take political power on the vague promise of organizing social
revolution without a clear-cut policy or strategy that group risks plunging
the country into fascism whose ugly aspects include intimidation, political
terrorism, arbitrary execution, curtailment of basic property and human
rights, and above all the threat of civil war.

"Within the last three months Ghana has been exposed to all these social
degradations and many more. Curfew has been in force in Ghana three

months after the military takeover and still is. This insistence on imposing
a curfew has infringed on the most vital of all human rights-freedom of
movement-~which has led to ruthless suppression of facts and truths
considered to be inconvenient to the regime while at the same time allegations
which are intended to discredit and smear public figures and successful
businessmen with probity are given free flow in the media.

'This is understandable because soon after the takeover a number of independent-
minded journalists were replaced with others who were given clear directives
to toe the line or be fired.

'The general ban on all political parties and pressure groups has not been
made to cover organizations like June 4th movement, new democratic movement,
Kwame Nkrumah Revolutionary Guards, from which the majority of Rawlings'
appointees came. They are actually allowed to operate openly. All known
state and traditional institutions in Ghana are under assault.

'The armed forces, police, students, prisons, the banks and courts are being
dismantled, demoralized or rendered redundant. In this unrepresentative
extra-legal structures like people's defense committees, national investiga-
tion committee and citizens vetting committee have become

ready instruments to be used. [sentence as received]

'hlthough statistics vary and evidence is tendentious, the indisputable

fact is that people are being killed in cold blood, property is being
selectively destroyed and Ghanaians are fleeing or planning to flee the
country. Those who have neither the means nor the will to leave are nervous.

'Vhat matters in all these to us is that these events have in turn led to

a kind of situation which has ominous consequences for our country. As of
now the country is reported to be hit by serious shortages of essentials of
life. Food and drugs are not only in short supply but those available are
beyond the reach of the poor farmer and the average worker whose answer to
their plight amounts to an incipient civil war. The country, in short,

is on the brink of disaster which can only be averted by an alternative
solution.

"It is against this background that we, the members of the campaign for
democracy in Ghana, are proclaiming here and now that only democratic

restructuring of our dear country can help stem the tide in which she is
caught. We are, therefore, demanding of the PNDC to announce a clear program
for a return to electoral and representative government in Ghana.

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"1. The announcement should be made immediately.
"2. The timetable should be planned to last not more than six months.

'Ve would like to announce at this stage that the responsibility for
organizing a peaceful return to constitutional rule rests fully with the
PNDC and our subsequent reaction to the PNDC regime will be largely
determined by their response to our demands.

"He would also like to end our statement on this note: That the campaign
for democracy in Ghana is non-sectarian. It is open to all Ghanaians

who are opposed to an undemocratic way of life-young, old. farmer, soldier,
student. policeman or ordinary worker and judges--as the only acceptable
method of identifying and solving our problem under relative peace, law
and order."

cs0: 4700/ 1099

2 1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
l1NR€NﬂﬂC1AL USEiﬂﬁlY

GHANA

RAHLINCS: SECRET SERVICES ARE PURSUING HE
PH061255 Paris JEUNE AFRIQUE in French 31 Mar 82 pp 25-29

[Excerpts] JEUNE AFRIQUE: It is normal in the region for a new head of
state to immediately establish contacts with his neighbors. Following

your coup you waited 3 weeks before sending a mission to explain matters

to the Ivory Coast, Togo, Upper Volta and Nigeria. th did you wait so long?

Jerry Rawlings: We were principally concerned with the domestic situation.
But foreign policy rules apparently require the immediate sending of a
delegation. May we be forgiven if we are not experts in protocol. We
told ourselves that it was a more pressing necessity to protect people and
property and to prevent anarchy.

JEUNE AFRIQUE: what do you expect from these countries? what is the nature
of your relations with than?

Jerry Rawlings: The delegation returned with much hope. But it is still
too early to say whether the messages brought back were sincere or not.

JEUNE AFRIQUE: You fear foreign interventions. Hhat substance is there to
this fear?

Jerry Rawlings: For the past 2 years the CIA and also. I believe. the French
services have been pursuing me.

In any case the secret services of the majority of West African countries

have done their utmost to prevent the coordination of revolutionary activities.
Their aim is clear: to prevent the liberation of our countries. Now that

the irreparable has been done, they are again working to try and achieve what
they failed to do before: to multiply the number of conspiracies designed

to eliminate us. If I live for long I will have time to talk about these
matters. For the time being only my country's survival is important. We

have reached such a low ebb that it is no longer a matter of dignity but

a matter of survival.

22
FOR 0FT1C1AI.USEIDNLN
JEUNE AFRIQUE: If you were to pay a visit abroad, which country would
you visit first?

Jerry Rawlings: 1 do not know. That depends on who invites us and on the
aim of the visit. It is natural for us to reply to countries that have
been honest with us.

JEUNE AFRIQUE: Libya and the Soviet Union. Are they more honest than the
rest?

Jerry Raulings: Libya and the USSR can be really honest. After all, the
Libyans are not comunists. Ghana is more important than anything else.

I would like to see myself in the mirror and see only my own reflection,

not the white man's reflection.

We must rediscover our own real culture and depend on our own strength.
This is what 11. million Ghanaians want.

COPYRIGHT: Jeune Afrique GRUPJIA 1982

C80: 4719/829

23
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

IVORY COAST

PARTICULARLY DIFPICULT YEAR FORECAST FOR 1982

Paris JEUNE AFRIQUE in French 3 Mar 82 pp 14-15
[fhrticle by Siradiou Diallo: "Ivory Coast: a (Very) Difficult Year"_7

[fText_7 Houphouet's country is a successful construction,
but a fragile one. Unity is more necessary than ever. For
a failure would be the failure of all of West Africa.

There is every indication that 1982 is. and will be a particularly difficult
year for Ivory Coast. To be sure, the country has experienced some shocks in
the past. The pseudo-conspiracies in 1964-1965 that nearly beheaded the poli-
tical general staff and the high levels of the administration, as well as the
uprising that at the instigation of Niagbe Kragbe broke out in October 1970
in the Gagnea area still remain in the nelory of all.

But compared to today's violent convulsions.theseevents tend to see- like
more epiphenomena. Indeed. for several months. a strong wave of discontent-
nent and disputation has been washing over the country. Dissatisfied over
the gradual lowering of their buying power. workers in the public and private
sectors are resorting to wildcat strikes to exact wage increases. Thrown out
of their jobs as a result of the falling-off in operations. young unemployed
persons do not hesitate to take to the streets to get the attention of the
authorities. "Papa Houphouet must give us werlc.’I they proclail as a sort of
refrain.

Spoiled in the past, cadre make no secret any more of their anger at the freez-
‘ing. and even sometimes the substantial lowering of their salaries. Those in '
state companies. whose rates are aligned with those of their colleagues in the
ciVil service. are particularly vociferous with their bitterness. And are
openly threatening to go to war against the government. It is true that some
of them. who used to lead n life of luxury in Abidjan, have been unemployed
nlncc the dissolution of their enterprises nearly 2 years age. Unemployment
in also the obsession of students . whose violent deaonstrations induced the
authorities to close the University of Abidjan as of 10 February.

Up until the past few years. indeed. Ivorian students had no trouble finding
work once their studies were over. They were not only hired immediately.

either in the civil service or in the private sector, at comfortable salaries.
but they were automatically housed in areas specially built for them. Sometimes.

26
FIM!(MHW(]AI.USEIDNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

even. the state helped them through subsidies and special opportunities. to
soon become the owners of their private houses. However. 3 or 4 years ago.
the butter of abundance began to melt in the hot sun of circumstances. So yes-
terday's happy. carefree privileged persons quickly yielded to the gloomy
white-collar unemployed of today. Is it not whispered about that some 2.000
cadre from the faculties of letters and law of Abidjan University are now
tramping the sidewalks in search of jobs? Hence their anger. expressed in
pamphlets. in which among other grievances. may beread:"He refuse to be out-
of-work intellectuals."

Oddly. the reopening of old wounds believed forever healed is being witnessed.
For example. theBetes’veiled opposition to the regime. It is known that the
inhabitants of Daloa and Gagnoa only rallied at the last moment (and in a way
lacking spontaneity) to President Felix Houphouet-Boigny. So it is not sur-
prising now to see the latter asking the Bete cadre. among them Gen Zeze
Barouan. head of the general staff of the armed forces. to censure the "desta-
bilizing action“ of "those among the students and teachers"(Bete understood)
at the university.

In fact. all this agitation is only the foam onatidal wave of which the sub-
structure is above all of a political order. Given the head of state's ad-
vancedage.candidates for the succession are getting impatient. Clans are mul-
tiplying. competing with each other and tearing each other apart. each using
all the means at its disposal in hopes of being in the best place. One delega-
tion follows another to the country's hinterland at a rapid rate. making all
sorts of promises: water supplies. electrification. paved roads. hospitals.
schools....Marabouts. soothsayers. and wizards are having a very fine time.
Some candidates are bringing them in from the four corners of Africa. while
others have no qualms about sending missions as far away as India and Pakistan.

The tension is all the higher because the "Old Man" remains calm and refuses to
give the slightest hint about the choice of the vice president destined to sue-
ceed him. What is more. there has to be one-upmanship. So recently he dropped
this remark on the dumbfounded cabinet: "I know which people are hustling.
They can go on doing so. But be sure of this. none of them will be designated.
You are in for a surprise...." The head of state has so successfully spread
confusion that any forecast is proving extremely foolhardy.

In the face of the fog enveloping the institutions and giving rise to doubts
and uncertainty as to the country's future. it is not surprising that the
nation's driving forces are stirred to anger.Buihoweverlegitimate their irri-
tation. t should not go so far as to call into question what has been achiev-
ed already. Even though some may be in a hurry to take over from the "Old
Man." even though others feel he should no longer stay beyond his time in
office. they should still all show calm and cool-headedness. And above all.
not let their ambition come before the unity that Ivory Coast needs.

This country. which is nothing other than the fruit of Felix Houphouet-Boigny's
political genius. is in fact a successful construction. but a fragile one.
Despite present difficulties. it is the only country in Africa south of the
Sahara to have an infrastructure strong enough to pursue rapid. coherent devel-
opment. In every area. the work accomplished by the "Old Man" over the past
20 years is immense.

25
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFI-‘K'IM. USE ONLY

ivory Coast is one of the few countries. if not the only one, south of the
Sahara. that can be crossed in every direction.thanks to a road system that
leaves little to be envied of those in developed countries. In which any city
in the interior can be reached by dial telephone. while the same system pro-
vide: links with about 50 foreign countries. including the principal ones in
Africa. America, and Europe. In which electricity and running water, in common
use in all the towns. are reaching the rural areas with astonishing speed. Not
to mention that Ivory Coast. along with Cameroon. is one of the only two count-
ries in the south Sahara in a strong position to be self-suffient in foodstuffs.
It is a notable fact that these worthy results have been achieved without viol-
ence. and especially without shedding Ivorian blood.

Proof of the confidence that the country continues to enjoy abroad are the re-
cent visits to Abidjan by eminent western bankers. such as_the Americans

Wiilam Draper. president of EXIMBANK L Export-Import Bank_/. and David Rocke-
feller. for Chase Manhattan Bank. or the head of Barclay's Bank (British). This
shortly after the large loans Just granted by the World Bank and the L Interna-
tional_7 Monetary Ennd. And Just before a huge loan that Paris is reportedly
preparing to grant. The enticing oil prospects being offered Ivory Coast are
surely not unrelated to this shower of amiable gestures.

But still, Ivorians must not be beguiled by illusions. If their country is
being so much courted. it owes it above all to the stability and tireless ef-
forts incnmated by Houphouet-Boigny for nearly 40 years. All it would take
would be for the “Old Man's" dialogue. understanding. and realism to be re-
placed by parochial quarreling. rivalries. and personal ambitions. to send for-
eign cadres,experts. and investors flying off like a flight of sparrows from

a rifle shot. And for the dazzling Ivorian showcase to shatter into a thousand
fragments. leaving the country to sink as other African nations have sunk be-
fore it, under the dual influence of the impatience and irresponsibility of
their leaders.

That is why. at this crucial time that Ivory Coast is going through. it is up

to all the nation's driving forces to help the "Old Man" to get past the relay
in the best of conditions. In any case, a failure would not belong to Ivory
Coast alone. it would be the failure of all of West Africa. whose precious
symbol of wisdom it is. as well as its last keystone. Especially since the vol-
untary withdrawal, a year ago. of Leopold Seder Senghor in Senegal.

COPYRIGHT: Jeune Afrique GRUPJIA 1982

1211.9
cso: 4719/6613

26
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

IVORY COAST

socm. unassr ATTRIBUTED T0 nova TOWARD DEMOCRACY. zcoxouxc woes
Paris AFRIQUE-ASIE in French 1‘ Mar 82 pp 12. 13
[Article by Koffi Manna: "why the 'Insurrection' "J

[rText_7 A paradoxical result of the move toward democracy de-
sired by the head of state and the revealer of a difficult
economic situation.

Closure of the University of Abidjan: suspension of higher education teachers'
salaries: question of "destabilization outside Ivory Coast" brought up. The
social climate. already somewhat touchy, suddenly got glooaier early this year
in a state which until now seenedtobe one of the most stable on the African
continent. The fact that the current show of peevishnessgotits start at the
University of Abidjan is certainly raising questions about realities in Ivori-
an society: the Abidjan campus has no reputation for being a hotbed of cri-
tics nor a haunt of great var-chiefs. The student-teacher rebellion began.
anyway. in a fashion that that some intellectual circles in Abidjan describe

as banal.
Groundless Rumor

Professor Laurent Gbagbo. one of the nest prominent figures among Ivorian in-
telligentsia, was to give a public lecture on the topic of democracy. The
hall is ru11 for all his public pronounceaents. and at the beginning of Febru-
ary. the tradition did not fail: notables of the sole party. the Democratic
Pnrty of the Ivory Coast -- African Democratic Rally section (PDCI-RDA) attend
Professor Gbagbo's nesting. And. as usual. the students. who consider that
the lecture is primarily "their business," rerse to give up their arachairs
and seats to the government party officials. Provocation or none. the lights
go out in the middle of tho lecturer's address. and he is even bullied and
Joatlcd.

The next day, 12 February. there is a rumor about that Laurent Gbagbo has been
arrested. A groundless rumor. but enough to bring school children and stud-
ents into the streets of the capital. An unprecedented event. the jobless
from Abidjan's ehentytovns join the demonstrators. Some official vehicles
are overturned and some shops attacked. which is nothing nevin itself. but

in Abidjan is something of an innovation.

27
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL IISE ONLY

Concerned about law and order. the political bureau of the PDCI-RDA. susmoned
by the party president and head of state. Felix Houphouet-Boigny. holds an
extraordinary meeting expanded to include the government. on 13 February. At
the close of this meeting were decreed the closing of the university and the

the party. The teachers' union is mainly SHARES. the African Union for Re-
search and Higher Education. . Since its inception. SHARES has never been
willing to be affiliated with the General Union of Ivory Coast Workers (UGTCI)
a section emanating from the sole party. That. incidentally, reveals the sort
of atmosphere prevailing between the teachers' union and the government. Not
only that, but Ivorian teachers. as a whole, have always kept apart from PDCI-
RDA activities, which. in some people's opinion, makes them "potential oppon-
ents." Could SYNARES have decided to "go on the offensive"? A few isolated
nets, though effectively carried out. do not permit that conclusion to be
drawn. Neither do they provide any categorical or genuine proof of subversion

from abroad, an expression which causes glances toward neighboring Ghana.
where Captain Rowling's hasjust taken power.

There is every indication that the dissatisfaction being demonstrated in
school and university circles is. on the one hand. the paradoxical outcome
of the movement toward democracy desired and led for nearly 2 years now, by

the head of state. and on the other. revelatery of a troubled economic situa-
tion.

long run. has also revealed its own limits. With the ﬂoodgates open, it
also looks as if an appetite for broader democracy and greater freedom of
expression. inevitable ""pitfalls" after two decades of economic growth. is
making itself felt. The more. :‘0, in that rinse independence. fearful and
rightly so for national unity that is still being sought. the authorities have
been controlling the movement of ideas to the utmost. for fear that they

might lead to a renewal of regionalist or ethnic sentiments. Result: Felix
Heuphouet-Boigny's regime has maintained and strengthened national unity.

assured the security of foreigners by fighting xenophobia. but it has also
had to rein in all opposition.

It is equally true that the student unrest is the result of an economic situa-
tion which hm; been on the verge of stagnation since 1979, as a result of the
drop in market price and the sale at less of coffee. cocoa. and wood, the coun»

Lry': main source of foreign currency. The regime is also paying the price of
its. "vendor" toward Glscard's France.

A sentimentalist like most Africans of his generation. faithml to the end in
his friendships. President houphouet-Beigny tried to pursue with the former
French regime a policy that he had fostered since independence. in 1960: privi-
leged ties and unfailing solidarity with Paris. protection of French interests.
In return, Paris had not been grudging in its support of its partner, particu-
larly in relentlessly defending Ivorian raw materials on the world market.

28
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Painful Awakening

All. that was gradually to change under discard. So Abidjan found in Giscard'e
France only a profiteering partner. without idealism in cooperation. concerned
only with grabbing juicy contracts of no ﬁxture benefit to Ivory Coast. or
carry off lucrative operations that soaetimes smacked of highiny robbery.

So. besides questionable deals in Ivorian sugar. some turnkey factories that
will never work would have been sold to Ivory Coast through businessmen that
are reportedly very close to the former French authorities. The awakening is
said to have been a very rude one for President Houphouet. who, as a sign of
disapproval. closed the Ivorian market on several occasions in 1980 and 1981
to French businessmen to the advantage of their West German, American. or Ital-
ian competitors.

And it was probably with relief that the "Old Man" learned of Valery Giscard
d'Estaing's departure and the arrival in office of his old friend Francois

Hittcrrand. Felix Heuphouet-Boigny was. incidentally. the first African head
of state to be welcomed by the new French president. He paid a long visit

African matters. such as French-Guinean relations. which are having trouble
in recovering after the quarrel that brought the French Socialist Party into
opposition with the Democratic Party of Guinea (PDQ).

The fact remains that under Giscard's seven-year period of office. Ivorian

state funds. that had formerly prospered. got into some real difficulties.

So it is therefore not at all surprising that the jobless of Abidjan, like

the academics. less and less buoyed up by "the Ivorian miracle." and in the
absence of a plan for society, should call the government to account or get
restless.

COPYRIGHT: 1982 Afrique-Asie

1211.9
030: 4719/666

29
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MAURITIUS

REFUSAL T0 TRADE WITH SEYCHELLES ALIENATBS PEOPLE
Paris AFRIQUB-ASIE in French l-llo Mar 82 p 17
[Article by Jonathan M'Haruia: "Ramgoolam Is Hoist Hith His Own Petard"]

[Text] By adopting a negative attitude toward trade with
Seychelles, the Mauritian Government has succeeded on one
score: creating unanimous antagonism toward itself.

Intracorp Company, whose basic objectives seek to promote trade cooperation
within the framework of the regional economy (see AFRIQUE-ASIE No 257.

18-31 January 1982), was formed by certain leaders of the Mauritian Militant
Movement (MMM). in particular Paul Berenger, Kader Bhayat, and Vishnu
Lutchmeenaraidoo. Less than 2 months after the company's formation, the
concrete results already recorded show, on the one hand. that a big step has
been taken in the area of regional trade cooperation. and on the other hand
they refute the accusations brought by the men of Sir Seewoosagur Ramgoolam's
regime against the principal opposition party.

In fact, following an initial Seychellois mission organized at the end of
January by Intracorp Company and headed by B. Deanousses, director of SEYCOM
(Seychelles Commodity Company, a Seychellois import-export company), and

E. Hoareau. director of ULC (Union Lightersge Limited, a state company which
owns the Seychellois ship "5 June"). firm contracts were settled on involving
annual trade worth 20.3 million rupeea,* 16.7 million to be shipped to
Seychelles and 5.3 million in the other direction [figures as published].

At the beginning of February a second Seychellois mission, headed this time
by D. Bradburn, director of "BL (Horks Enterprises Ltd), who has the role

of minister of public works in Seychelles, signed contracts for orders worth
more than 6 million rupees for 1982.

On the occasion of its first voyage--the "5 June" arrived in Port Louis on
Wednesday. 10 Pebruary--the Seychellois government ship took off again
several days later with orders signed by "EL and SEYOOM amounting to nearly

 

*One French franc equals 1.7 Mauritian rupees.

30
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

3 million rupees. Although the ”5 June" left Mauritius headed for the
Seychelles with its hold filled with Mauritian goods-~this will be positive
for Mauritius's balance of payments and for the island businesses
involved--it had been able to bring in only 50 tons of copra and 63.000
coconuts. The Mauritian Government had in fact refused two Mauritian
importers permission to import 9 tons of frozen fish and 10 tons of salted
fish.

Even though the reciprocity principle favors the Mauritian side, in view of
Mauritius's greater export potential compared to that of Seychelles, Sir
Seewoosagur's regime has not modified its negative attitude one bit. On
one score, at least, the Mauritian Government has succeeded: it has created
unanimous antagonism for itself, since in all political and economic
circles there had been the expectation of a goodwill gesture on its part
vis-a-vis the Seychelles--all the more so since the latter country has made
important concessions that benefit Mauritius, especially regarding selling
prices.

While this negative attitude on the part of the Mauritian Government is
aimed mainly at Intracorp. which through its successes is inaugurating a new
era in relations between the region's sister islands-and in the process
this attitude undoubtedly allows the M to score some points countering
the policy of Sir Seewoosagur's regime of subservience to Pretoria—the

fact remains that the govern-ent in office in Port Louis has in that very
fashion demonstrated its total lack of interest in genuine regional
cooperation, which is necessarily the way of the future for the Indian
Ocean nations. This has resulted in more than one individual in Port Louis
saying that there would be genuine regional trade expansion after the general
elections which will take place toward the end of April. In the meantime,
the MMM leaders who founded Intracorp Company, and in particular Paul
Berenger, Kader Bhsyat, and Vishnu Lutchmeenaraidoo, who have been assigned
the role of being the driving force in promoting trade and cooperation
among the Indian Ocean countries, have already made contact with Reunion's
socialists. This contact followed a request expressed by the latter for
Intracorp Company to have a representation on Reunion which would make it
possible to expand comercial links with its sister island. The next
objective after Reunion will be Madagascar.

Nodul es

Intracorp Company is already giving the impression that it would be possible
for it to export Mauritian goods to Reunion as well as to reexport
Seychellois and Indian products there.

In addition to trade. regional cooperation could take on a new dimension,
what with the discovery by an Indian research vessel, the "Gaveshani," of
impressive-sized nodules in the Indian Ocean, including the Mauritian and
Seychellois zones-modules containing several metals.

The mining of these nodules-which are made up usually of manganese and
iron but also of copper, cobalt, nickel, titanium, and mlybdenum--could

31
be carried out via a consortium of Indian Ocean countries, as proposed by
two Indian researchers. 8. Saigal and Dr Qasim, who took part in the
exploration. especially since India envisages developing the necessary
technologies.

While India has decided to send six research ships soon into the Indian
Ocean with a view to examining more thoroughly the nodule deposits
discovered there by the "Gaveshani," regional cooperation will nonetheless
be able to expand in sufficient scale in this area only after the

impending vote in Hauritius--and only if the progressive forces emerge
victorious from it. In reality, relations between Port Louis and New Delhi
distinctly deteriorated after Sir Seewoosagur's government aligned itself
completely with Washington's views, particularly regarding the Diego Garcia
base.

COPYRIGHT: 1982 Afrique-Asie

9631
080: 4719/669

32
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MOZADIQUE

aussano VIEWS AFRICAN CRISES
”(141513 Paris AFRIQUE—ASIE in French 29 Mar-ll Apr 82 pp 28-30

["Exclusive" interview with Mozambican Foreign Minister Joaquim Chissano in
Rome by Augusta Conghiglia: "The Total Decolonization of Africa, That Is
Our Task. .."--date not given]

[Text] [Question] The last OAU Council of Ministers meeting finally conse-
crated the admission of the Saharan Democratic Arab Republic [SDAR] into the
continental organization. Can this be described as a victory for progressive
Africa?

[Answer] After the majority of African states had sent a letter to the
general secretariat stating that the SDAR was a sovereign African state
and therefore had the right to be a member of the organization in keeping
with the charter, Morocco refused to accept that fact for 2 years. Since
the various mediations did not succeed it was not possible to wait any
longer. Therefore. it was necessary for the decisions taken by a majority
to be respected and for the secretary General to implement the letter and
spirit of the charter. lhe same countries wrote to Eden Kodjo and that

prompted him to take the decision which everybody knows was taken at the
Council of Ministers meeting in Addis Ababa.

[Question] Thus going against the decisions taken by the implementation
committee at the third Nairobi sumit....

[Answer] How could the committee reach a decision leading to the holding

of elections-which presupposes the signing of a cease-fire-dwithout
specifying the parties in conflict? That tended to show that Morocco was
busy pushing the OAU into adopting an unjust position toward the Nest Saharan
people. We could not tolerate that any longer.

[Question] At the same Nairobi meeting in January, another committee,
meeting on the Chad question, took decisions which went against all the
OAU's previous resolutions. What do you think of that?

[Answer] During the last OAU sumit in Nairobi, it was clear that
President Goukouni Oueddei was asking that the inter-African force should
help train a national army to replace the foreign troops who were then
guaranteeing the defense of the territory. There had never been any talk
of any reconciliation at all.

33
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Thus there has been a change in the OAU attitude compared with the June 1981
assembly. But this problem is different from that of the Sahara: in the
latter case it was a question of the administrative implementation of a
decision. In Chad's case we are still awaiting a report which the ad hoc
committee is to submit to the member countries. Chad has a government
recognized by the OAU with which we have met for discussions on several
occasions and which cannot be compared to any force in opposition. There
is no power vacuum. Power is in the hands of the National Unity Transition
Government [GUNT] which has. however, decided to hold elections. It was
with the aim of creating the right conditions for those elections that
President Goukouni had hoped to be able to count on a force capable of
guaranteeing order and peace in his country.

[Question] what view should be taken of the decision taken by the heads of
state committee to draw up a timetable for holding elections and the
withdrawal of the inter-African force on the one hand and achieving a

reconciliation with Hissein Habre's PAN on the other hand before the next
OAU summit?

[Answer] When we have seen the report we will be in a position to decide.
There could be no solution without the CUNT's agreement. And the GUNT has
rejected the committee's decision.

[Question] After the third Nairobi summit several African capitals expressed
their disappointment, among others Tanzanian President Julius Nyerere, who
even spoke of the "need to restructure the OAU." Do you share that view?

[Answer] I think that the differences and conflicts which exist among the
various members should be expressed. It is a way of consolidating ourselves
and settling them through debate. It is not the first time that our
differences have been openly expressed. when Angola was admitted, we took
a clear stance: If the OAU refused that country's admission then that
organization no longer had any reason to exist. The only possible decision
was admission. As far as the Sahara is concerned it must be said that
since the days of Spanish domination the CAD had remained rather on the
fringe of the decolonization process. That problem had been debated more
at the United Nations than in the pan-African organization and the OAU did
not play its rightful role in the affair. That partly explains the
vacillation of some African countries.

We have now reached another critical point in our history. If the GAO
were to disappear because some countries leave it. it would mean that it
is no longer the OAU as laid down in the charter.

The countries which have withdrawn. on the other hand, have not abandoned

the organization. By leaving a meeting like the Addis Ahaba meeting they
have started a kind of struggle, a show of strength. There are some among
them who dispute the admission procedure and not the SDAR's rights. MoroCCu,
however. constantly withdraws from meetings....
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

0n the other hand it is possible that these "crisis" might lead us to re-
define our positions, for instance to locate the common enemy once again
and thus have a more combative and determined organization. It is in that
sense that we can talk of restructuring. In Lagos we had explained in
detail the content of the battle to be waged for economic independence.
Today we must jointly define the new objective without allowing ourselves
to be diverted from the real problems: this complete decolonisation

of Africa is our task. Africa's political liberation is our task.
Africa's economic independence is our task. The latter has been neglected
too often as is shown by the little attention paid by the member countries
of the OAU's '3" commission.

[Question] The decolonization of Namibia is still a burning issue. What
is the present position with the contact group's latest proposals?

[Answer] SHAPO and the Frontline Countries have given their answer to

the electoral system proposed by the Group of Five. The ball is now in
dieir court. They were disappointed by our refusal but they must have
expected it. The "one man, two votes" system proposed cannot be accepted.
It goes against democracy and facilitates the infiltration of South African
and imperialist agents into the government bodies with which an independent
Namibia would be equipped. The contact group claimed it was not putting
forward proposals in accordance with South African wishes but the fact is
that they are exerting pressure on SHAPO to agree and not on South Africa
to implement UN Resolution 535.

[Question] At the same time South Africa is pursuing its attacks on the
Frontline Countries and stepping up repression in Namibia....

[Answer] He--I am referring to all the countries in the region-—should
continue to act on two fronts: on the domestic front by mobilizing the
masses against outside dangers and at international level by showing,
particularly to world public opinion, the dangers which this situation
poses for peace and by arousing greater solidarity.

We have always known that the situation would not be settled while South Africa
was led by a minority racist regime. It has the support of some Western
countries but, as during our liberation struggle, we are trying to prompt

their peoples to support us. We are waging a diplomatic battle by making

our interlocutors aware of the problems which all the southern African
countries are experiencing. The regional cooperation which we are trying

to develop is encountering owing partly to the indifference of the countries
which are supposed to be contributing to the efforts we are making for greater
economic independence from South Africa.

[Question] Is u.s. policy playing a role in the Western countries' slowness
and caution in responding to the wishes of the Frontline Countries and the
SADCC (note) (Coordination Conference for the Development of Southern Africa
which comprises Angola, Botswana, Lesotho, Malawi. Mozambique, Swaziland,
Tanzania, Zambia and Zimbabwe.)?

35
FOR OFFICIAI.USEGDNLN
FOR‘0FFKJAL.US£1DNLV

[Answer] Some countries are, of course, aligning their policy with 0.8.
policy. In addition the United States controls a large number of inter-
national economic institutions and relies on its allies' participation
in implementing its policy.

But in addition to those elements, there is a clear lack of political will

on the part of some Western countries. Some of them have not realized

that they could not cooperate with us in the same way as with any other
partner, that the nature of our struggle implied stances requiring sacrifices
from them. Thus they have not pledged to help our vital struggle to release
ourselves from the South African hold. That may be because they identify
with South Africa and it is always difficult to fight yourself....

Leaving aside their short-term interests they ought to understand how
important it is to eliminate that odious regime and hence guarantee the future
of their relations.

[Question] Is that a case of shortsightedness?

[Answer] Let's say it is excessive obstinacy on the part of the West which
is failing to learn from the past. He became independent at a time which
was not chosen by them and they continued to fight us. In Zimbabwe, after
supporting forces which did not represent the people they were surprised
by the Zimbabwe African National Union's victory. In Angola they continued
to give their support to the antipeople forces well after the victory of
the Popular Movement for the Liberation of Angola. And they have still not

abandoned hope of undermining the country's progressive forces once and for
all.

[Question] Especially since the example of those independent countries in
southern Africa has started to awaken other peoples in the region. In that
connection Mozambique's action is aimed at stirring up the governments of
those countries most of which were just passive satellites of South Africa....

[Answer] We wanted to develop regional cooperation with the governments

of those countries, moving beyond the differences which exist between us.
The economic situation itself is prompting us to do that. The countries in
the region with which we had virtually no relations before independence
have begun to show interest in our economic policy and to understand it.

we explained to them that our interests were the same and the trade or
transport agreements which we concluded together prove it. Our common goal,
beyond our differences. is to liberate ourselves from dependence on

South Africa which we inherited from colonization.

[Question] Is not the normalization of relations with Portugal on the basis
of real reciprocity a new positive point to the credit of Mozambique diplomacy?

36
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Answer] Certain circles in Portugal completely disdained our independence.
We were intransigcnt and firm and, finally, thanks also to President Banes'
clear will to establish relations on an equal basis, we achieved that
normalization consecrated by his recent visit.

While having no preferential status, the former mother country and our
country can have particularly advantageous relations owing to the importance
of the economic sectors under consideration. The effective development of
those relations will depend on Portugal's will.

[Question] It is said that Portugal's entry into the EEC could have the
positive effect of drawing with it its former colonies which have not signed
the Lone agreements. . . .

[Answer] Those are not the terns in which the probl- is posed. Hhat objective
interest do we have in adhering to that convention? None for the time being.

It must not be forgotten that there is an BC with common economic and financial
interests, composed of countries governed by similar systems and constituting
a relatively monolithic entity.

But that is not true of the countries which have signed the Lone agreement.

It forms an apparent unit described as the "southern" bloc. It seems

preferable to us to promote bilateral relations with the m: which was not
created solely to cooperate with the African, Caribbean and Pacific countries....

[Question] Do you have observer status in CEMA?

[Answer] No yet. We were invited to several meetings and then asked to be
full members of it. Indeed there is intensive cooperation between us and
CEMA meubers in various spheres and this is constantly being developed and
new requires coordination.

[Question] Are the situation in the Indian Ocean, with the Diego Garcia Base,
the instability of the Comoro Islands, the reactionary maneuvers in Mauritius,
the latest events in the Seychelles and the attempts to destabilize
hadagascar worrying for you?

[Answer]. Of course and we support all the initiatives taken to demilitarize
that zone. We hope that the United States, which is clearly not very
"interested," will resume talks with the Soviets. The probl- of that
strategic zone will be debated in the United Nations next year and
Madagascar has also proposed a conference.

The dangers of war in that region involve Africa but also Asia. The United
States must, therefore, withdraw its bases. But that is not enough while

37
FOR OFFIGAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the Western countries make use of South Africa for their strategic plans

in the region. And those plans are still being developed. Indeed it must
be noted that although Brazil has withdrawn from the plan to form a South
Atlantic pact—a decision which we welcomed--that plan has nonetheless

not been abandoned and, only recently a meeting aimed at reviving the
South Atlantic Treaty Organization took place in Argentina and was attended

by South African military.

COPYRIGHT: 1982 Afrique—Asie.

C80: 4719/8102

38
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
BRIEFS

EIGHT GUERRILLAS KILLED-Windhoek, Namibia (South-Nest Africa), Apr 13.
REUTER--A police counter-insurgency unit killed eight guerrillas of the
South-West Africa People's Organisation (SHAPO) during a clash in northern
Namibia at the weekend, a police spokesman said today. A Namibian hone
guard died in the skirmish with about 90 SWAPO men 75 km (50 miles) north
of Crootfontein. the spokesman said. Although this is outside traditionally
white taming area, farmers in the Grootfontein District have been warned
to be on the lookout for SHAPO infiltrators, he said. Special police units
form part of the South African-led forces fighting a 16-year-old bush war
against SHAPO guerrillas based in neighbouring Angola. [Text] [ABl3l338
London REUTER in English 1028 GMT 13 Apr 82]

C50: 4700/ 1090

39
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR‘OFFKJAI.USElNVLY

NIGER

EDP AID GOES TO AGRICULTURAL UAIBR PROJECTS
Paris HARCHBS IROPICAUX ET MEDITERRANEENS in French No 1896, 12 Mar 82 p 737

[Text] The European Development Fund (EDP) has just granted 2 billion CFA
francs in nourepayable aid to finance four agricultural water projects in the

Niger River Valley, it has been learned from the ED? delegation in Niamey on
3 March. The projects include the development of an irrigated permiter at
Nanarde-coungou (260 hectares), rehabilitation of the Karma and Karaigorou
projects (300 hectares) and total overhauling of the Tillaikaina terrace

(70 hectares).

Since the first EDFgrantand with the startup of Koutoukale. over 1,200 hec-
tares in the Niger River Valley will have benefited from the total harnessing
of water.

These developments should make it possible to support a population (farmers

and their families) of some 18,000 persons. The area will have a total produc-
tion of 12.000 tons of paddy rice and 1,500 tons of fruits and vegetables,
according to Ms Gabrielle Von Brochowski, EDP representative in Niger.

She emphasized that the projects are part of the Nigerien Government's policy
to promote the ”integrated development" of the population, which will be en-
couraged to become "self-managing," and achieve food self-sufficiency by diver-
sifying crops by joining livestock raising and agriculture.

Finally, additional actions are planned within this framework, such as ensur-
ing a drinking water supply, reforestation, rural development and cooperative
training.

EDP sources say that on the whole, with the completion of these projects, the
EEC will have financed 25 percent of the agricultural water proejcts in Niger.

The project will take 24 months for the work itself and another 36 months for
operating assistance. Its cost will be borne as part of the nonrepayable
aid of the 4th and 5th EDP grants.

COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux et Cie Paris 1982

11.466
C50: 4719/747

60
FIH!(HHW(1A1.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

NIGER

BRIEFS

FRENCH FINANCIAL AID--Through the Central Fund for Economic Cooperation (CCCB),
the French Ministry of Cooperation and Development has granted‘Niger special
financial aid amounting to 5 billion CPA francs, it was learned from the French
Cooperation Mission in Niamey on 4 March. The aid is in two parts. The first
is a CCCE loan backed by the Aid and Cooperation Fund (PAC) for 3 billion CPA
francs and will be used to finance four projects: repair of rural trails

(500 million); additional work on the Gaweye Hotel in Niamey (910 million);

the balance of the Nigerian Government's participation in the Nigerien Coal Com-
pany at Anou Araren (SONICHAR) (1,515,000,000); and a forestry project (75 mil-
lion). The second phase includes a CCCE loan for 2 billion CPA francs and

will finance Nigerien projects not yet submitted. This special aid of 5 bil-
lion CPA francs corresponds to the amount of the request made by Nigerien
authorities to the French Government within the framework of financing their
National Investment Fund (FNI) for 1982. [Text] [Paris MARCHES TROPICAUX BT
MEDITERRANEBNS in French No 1896, 12 Mar 82 p 737] [COPYRIGHTz Rene Moreux

et Cie Paris 1982] 11,464

FRG COOPERATION AGREEMENTS--On 6 March, Konrad Porzner, secretary of state in
the Ministry of Economic Cooperation of the Federal Republic of Germany, was
received by Col Seyni Kountche, Nigerien chief of state. The meeting concluded
the one-week visit made by Porzner to Niger beginning on 2 March. Two finan-
cial cooperation agreements for 14.6 million German marks (1,825,000,000 CPA
francs) were signed. The first, involving additional financing totaling

13.6 million German marks (1.7 billion CPA francs), will be used to finance
the second phase of construction of the Niamey Radio Station. An initial
agreement for 12 million marks (1.5 billion CPA francs) was signed for the
project by the West German minister of economic cooperation, Rainer Offergeld,
at the time of his visit to Niamey on 16 January 1981, the Nigetien Ministry
of Foreign Affairs recalls. The second accord, for 1 million marks (125 mil-
lion CFA francs), will provide additional financing for the Tiaguirire Forage
Ranch, 50 kilometers south of Niamey. The PRG has already contributed some
12,075,000.000 marks, or 1.51 billion CPA francs, to the project. [Text]
[Paris MARCHES TROPICAUX ET MEDITERRANEENS in French No 1896, 12 Mar 82

p 737] [COPYRIGHT: Rene Moreux et Cie Paris 1982] 11,464

C80: 4719/767

41
FOI‘OFFKJAI.USE(NVLY
FOR OPHCIAI. USE ONLY

SENEGAL

THREE CHANGES IN ELECTORAL CODE PROPOSED
Paris HARCHES TROPICAUX ET MEDITERRAREENS in French No 1896, 12 Mar 82 p 731

[Text] At its 2 March meeting, the Senegalese Council of Ministers approved
various bills and orders aimed at reforming the current electoral code. Three
major innovations are proposed by the government and will be submitted to the
National Assembly.

1) A combination of two types of voting: on the one hand. voting out of a
majority list on one ballot at the departmental level for the election of half
(60) of the deputies; and on the other hand, proportional voting at the na-
tional level for the election of the other half. In addition. only parties
having obtained at least 5 percent of the votes will be represented in the
Assembly.

According to Minister of Information Djibo Ka, the adoption of this combination
of different types of voting is aimed at taking into account the integral multi-
party system instituted in Senegal, where there now exist 12 political parties.
compared with only four at the time of the drafting of the 1977 code. The
proposal would also modify the electoral code, which provided for the election
of all deputies by proportional voting at the national level.

2) Chairmen of the polling places and their assistants will be named. not by
the mayors and rural council chairmen as in the past, but by the prefects and
therefore, the administration.

3) Only political parties recognized at least four months before the elections
will be authorized to present candidates for the presidential and legislative
elections. Any candidacy must also be presented by a political party.

In addition, the 16 January 1982 issue of the Senegalese JOURNAL OFFICIEL car-
ried Organic Law No 8180 of 28 December 1981 relating to the election of the
president of the republic and deputies in the National Assembly. The provisions
of that law concern: the declaration and filing of candidacies; the election
campaign; counting of the votes and the proclamation of results; and election
disputes.

This text. which abrogates certain provisions of the electoral code and any
preceding texts relating to the election of the president cf the republic,

“2
IN)! OFIICIAl.lEﬂE(MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

stipulates that the candidate for the highest office in the land must have the
backing of a legally established political party_.

Regarding deputies, their number increases from 100 to 120 (Article 31).

It should be noted that Law No 8180 of 28 Decenber 1981 gives the Supreme Court
extensive powers in order to ensure that equality between candidates be re-
spected. When a candidate appeals to the Supreme Court, the Court may (Arti-
cle 10) send injunctions to administrative authorities, who are required to
take the measures requested by the Supreme Court.

COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux et Cie Paris 1982

11.464
650: 4719/7107

(.3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SENEGAL

BRIEFS

HARSEILLE-POS, DAKAR CONTAINER SHIPPING—The Senegalese maritime company
SIIHAR (Senegalese-Iberian Maritime Industries). recently set up in Dakar, has
announced that it will soon establish a regular "all container" line between
Marseille and Dakar. It will initially serve Senegal with the "Diego Nabou,"
a lJO—BVP [expansion unknown] container ship, which will depart from Pos every
18 days. The ship's first stop at the container terminal in the western basins
of the Autonomous Port of Marseille is scheduled for 27 Hatch. Service to
Dakar from Fos will be direct, without any steps in between, resulting in a
transit time of 9 days between Fos and Dakar. With the "Diego Nabou," SIIHAR
will provide its clients with the entire range of 20- and 40-foot dry contain-
ers, as well as 20- and loo-foot isothermic containers that can carry all types
of goods at hot or cold temperatures. In addition, it will provide group ser-
vice with "outfitters' containers.“ A second ISO-EV? all-container ship will
be put into service very soon by SIIHAR, which will enable it to provide a
departure every 12 days. It will also soon have a cold-storage facility in
Dakar, enabling it to hold isothernic containers upon arrival or departure.

It should be noted that SIIHAR—Dakar has asked Francemer International, whose
main office is in Marseille, to act as its general agent for service. [Text]
[Paris MARCHES TROPICAUX ET HEDITERRANEENS in French No 1896, 12 Mar 82 p 732]
11,466

NEH SHIP 0N DAKAR-ZIGUINCHOR LINE-On 2 Hatch at the shipyards of the Autono-
mous Port of Dakar, Hrs Elizabeth Diouf. wife of the Senegalese chief of state,
christened the "Casamance Express," a new ship that will replace the "Cap Skir-
ring" on the Dakar-Ziguinchor line. Hrs Diouf was accompanied by Assane Seek,
minister of state for equipment, and Robert Sagna, secretary of state for
maritime fishing. The new vessel also makes it possible to resume traffic,
interrupted for over 3 years, in keeping with the desire repeatedly expressed
by the people in the southern region of the country, particularly at the time
of the trip of then Prime Minister Abdou Diouf to Casamance in 1979. The
"Casamance Express," 77.53 meters long outboard and 12.03 meters wide. is
equipped with two main engines, each capable of developing 1,500 hp. Maximum
speed is 14 knots. The ship will be able to carry 500 passengers and 100 tons
of goods. Tickets for the "Casamance Express" range from 3,000 francs to
30,000 francs, depending on whether one travels third class (benches) or

first class (air-conditioned cabin with seals). Minister of Equipment Sock

1.4 '
roe omau. us: on“
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

emphasized that the vessel, purchased thanks to the services of Danish ex-
perts. is the best suited to the task assigned to it. According to him,
although the purchase price of the boat is unbeatable (700 million), it must

be admitted that under the present circumstances. it cost the government dearly.
[Text] [Paris MARCHBS TROPICAUX ET HEDITBRRANBBNS in French No 1896. 12 Mar 82

p 732] 11,464

COPYRIGHT: Rene Moreux et Cie Paris 1982

cs0: ans/747

45
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UGANDA

SBOOTING REPORTED IN KAMPALA 10 APRIL
A3101047 London REUTER in English 1037 GMT 10 Apr 82

[Text] Nairobi, 10 Apr, REUTER--Residents reported heavy shooting and fresh

security sweeps in the Ugandan capital. Kampala, today on the eve of the third
anniversary of the overthrow of dictator Idi Anin.

The residents, contacted by telephone. said the shooting lasted for three
hours and seemed centered on the northwest suburbs of Dwaise. about
five kn (three miles) from the city centre.

It was not clear who was involved in the gunfire, the residents said.

Security forces have stepped up operations against anti-government guerrillas
in recent weeks but Bwaise is not an area where the guerrillas have been
active, they said .

Shortly after the gunfire died down seven army trucks were seen coming from
Bwaise and driving through the city centre carrying about 100 male
civilians each, they added.

This week Ugandan security forces arrested thousands of civilians for identity

checks in a vast operation aimed at flushing out guerrillas and their supporters,
diplomats said.

Ugandan President Hilton Obote was seen driving into Kampala early today with
an escort of 20 heavily—armed vehicles. He is normally accompanied by six.
the residents said.

Kampala has been rife with rumours this week of a guerrilla attack planned
to coincide with the third anniversary tomorrow of Kanpala's capture by
Tanzanian troops and Ugandan exiles which ended Amin's bloody reign.

Diplomatic sources said that the centre of Kanpala was normal with shops open
and people going about their business. There was even a traditional Easter
holiday yacht race on Lake Victoria, the sources added.

Ugandan security forces have stepped up operations against anti-government
forces since guerrillas attacked the capital's main aruy barracks on
February 23 in some of the fiercest fighting since Amin's overthrow.

66
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Residents said that the majority of those detained in this week's
security operatiom had been freed. Some rocket launchers and mortar
tubes were found in the operation, diplomatic sources said.

cso: 4700/ 1090 EN!)

67
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY