FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/]0696

29 July 1982

USSR Report

MILITARY AFFAIRS
' (FOUO 10/82}

FBIS FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information prinarily from foreign
nevspapers. periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item. or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. "here no processing indicator is given, the infor-
nation was summarized or extracted:

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the u.s. Government.

COPYRIGHT LABS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10696
29 July 1982

USSR REPORT
MILITARY AFFAIRS

(P000 10/82)

Coureuts

ARMED FORCES

Excerpts From Book on Electronic Hat-fare
(RADIOBLBRTRONNAYA BOR'BA (SEEDSTVA I SPOSOBY PODAVLBNIYA

I ZASHCHITY RADIOBLBHRONNYKH SISTEM), 1981) .............. 1

Book Excerpts: Training For Modern Battle
(CHEIDVBK V SOVRDIBNNOY VOYNB. 1981) 11

Book Excerpts: CPSU Documents On The Armed Forces
(KPSS 0 VOORUZEBNNYKH SILAKH SOVETSKOGO SOYUZA: DOW.

1917-1981. 1981) cocoosoooooosoo.nosossosoooooooooooovoooooo 27

NAVAL FORCES

Book Bkcerpte: Soviet Submarines in Great 2striotic Us:
(SOVBTSKIYB PODVODNYYE won V VBLIKOY O'IECHES‘I'VENNOY WM.

1981) on...coco-Clot000000onoCocooooooooloooooooooooooooooo. 52

Pancapno'us, vmts, commas

International Symposiun 0n History of World War 11
(AM. Pilitov; VOPROSY IS‘rORII. No lo, Apr 82) .............. 60
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 621.37/.39

EXCERPTS PROM 300! ON ELECTRONIC HARPARB

Moscow IADIOELEKTRONNAXA BOR'BA (SEEDSTVA I SPOSOBY PODAVLENIYA I ZASHCHIT!
RADIOELIKTIONNYKH SISTEM) in Russian 1981 (signed to press 10 Sep 81) pp 1-8.
152-153, 228. 316-320

[Annotation, table of contents, introduction. excerpts from parts I, II and
III. and bibliography from book "Electronic Warfare (Means and Methods of
Jamming and Protecting Radio Electronic Systems)”. by Aleksandr Ignat'yevich
Paliy. Order of Labor Red Banner USSR Ministry of Defense beennoye
Izdatel'stvo, 20,000 copies. 320 pages; passages in slaatlines printed inboldfsce]

[Execrpts] The book generalizes material from open Soviet and foreign litera-
ture on means and methods of communications jamming and protection of radio
electronic systems. illustrated with examples of combat actions by armies of
capitalist states in Vietnam and the Near East.

The book is intended for Soviet Arty and Navy officers.

Contents

Introduction.............................................................. 3

Part I - Electronic Countermeasures and Destruction of Electronic Equipment

Chapter 1. Active Communications Jamning.................................. 8
1.1. Classification of Active Communications Jasming.................... 9
1.2. Kinds of Modulation of Active Communications Jamming............... 14
l.3. Active Jamming Equipment........................................... 40
l.4. Effective Range of Active Jamming Equipment........................ 62

Chapter 2. Passive Communications Jamning................................. 73
2.1. Scattering Properties of Military Equipment and 0bjects............ 74
2.2. Chaff..... ..... .................................................... 77
2.3. Corner Reflectors.................................................. 90
2.4. Lens Reflectors.................................................... 97

2.5. Reradiating Antenna Arrays......................................... 99

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
F011 OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Chapter 3. False Targets. Decoys and Unnanned Electronic Warfare [EH]

Aircraft......
3.1. False Targets.......................-.............................
3.2. Decoys for Guided Weapons....
3.3. UnnannedEHAircraft.............................................

Chapter 6. Disruption of Electronics by Ionizing and Electrongnetic

m..1°n‘eeeeaaoso-aeaeoaeeleoeaoeases-assessOeeoseoaoaeseeaooaesooaaoeeo

6.1. Conditions for Propagation of Electromagnetic Haves. . . . . . . . . . . . . .

6.2. Effect of Ionizing Radiation and Electronsgnetic Pulses on
Electronic Equipment Operation...................................

Chapter 5. Reducing the Effective Scattering Surface of Military
Equipment and Objects....................................................

5.1. Radar Absorbent Materials........................................
5.2. Giving Military Equipnent and Objects Low Reflecting Shapes......
Chapter 6. Special Means for Destroying Electra nic Equipnent . . . . . . . . . . . .
6.1. Equipnent for Passive honing of Missiles on Electronics. . . . . . .
6.2. Hissiles Honing on Sources of Radio-Frequency Emissions. . . . . . .
Chapter 7. Features of Jet-sing Electro-Optica. . ........... .. .
7.1. Reduction of Intensity of Radiation and Scattering of Light Waves

by 0bjecta.......................................................
7.2. False Thermal Targeta............................................
7.3. Active Ja-ing of Electro-Optics.................................
7.6. Aerosol For-ationa..

Chapter 8. Features of Sonar Je-ing....
8.1. Passive Sonar Jan-ling Heaaures...................................
8.2. Active Sonar Jenning Heasures....................................

Part II - Electronic Countercounter-aaures [ECCM]

Chapter 9. ECCH Against Intentional Co-Iunications Janing..............
9.1. Basic Concepts and Definitions...................................
9.2. £0611 Technical Methods and Means.................................
9.3. Organizational Measures of 3001!.

Chapter 10. Unintentional Communications Janing and the Electro-
magnetic Compatibility of Electronics....................................

10.1. Basic Concepts and Definitions..................................
10.2. Unintentional Interference fron Electronic Equipnent............

10.3. Industrial Electronic Interference..............................

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

102
102
105
106

109
109

110

116
117
123
126
125
132
160

160
161
162
163
167
167
169

152
152
153
206

206
206
211
216
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

10.1.. Methods of Ensuring Electromagnetic Coqstibility of
Electronic Equipment.

Part III - Electronic warfare in Cosbat Operations

Chapter 11. ER in Ground Forces Combat Operations.......................
11.1. Ground Forces EU Forces and Equipment
11.2. Methods of ER in Ground Forces Combat Operations................
11.3. Conducting EU in Ground Forces Combat Operations................

Chapter 12. EH in Air Force Combat Operations...........................
12.1. Air Force EV Forces and Equipment.
12.2. EH Methods in Air Force Combat Operations.......................

Chapter 13. E1! in Naval Combat Operations...............................
13.1. Naval EH Forces and Equipment...................................
13.2. EU Methods in Naval Combat Operations...........................

Chapter 16. EN During Missile Penetration of Antimissile Defense........
_ 16.1. General Description of Antimissile Defense Systems and Means....
10.2. EU Means and Methods for Penetrating an Antimissile Defense.....

Appendices:
1. Bands of the Electromagnetic Spectrum

2. Designations of Military Electronic Equipment Used in the United

statgsoeseeseee-assesses.ssoeoesssea'oeeosessosemotesesssoooessooss

3. Basic Characteristics of Foreign Active Cor-unications Jar-ling

Equipment..........................................................

lo. Basic Characteristics oi Foreign Chatf Dispensing Devices. . . . . . . . . .

5. Basic Characteristics of U.S. Unmanned Aircraft Intended for
Reconnaissance and Conunications Jamming....

6. Characteristics of Foreign Missiles homing or. Electronic

Equipment......... ....... ..........................................

7. Basic Characteristics of Foreign Electro-Optic Jar-ling Equipment...

8. Equipment of Foreign EU Aircraft and Helicopters......... .....

Bibliography......... ................ .
Introduction

218

228
228
238
252
256
256
263
271
272
278
281
281
286

291

292

296
306

306

308
310
312
316

After means of radio coumnications were introduced into the Army and Navy in
the early 20th century. signal intelligence and co-Iunications ja-ing began

to be employed. Subsequently new methods and technology were developed for

intercepting and jam-sing radar, radio navigation. radio cousunications

(including radio relay) as well as other radiotechnical equipment. Later the

jamming of electro-optics and sonar began to be employed. Measures were

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

developed simultaneously for ensuring the security of electronic equipment
against signal intelligence and for preserving its working capacity under the

effects of intentional ja-ing and honing weapons. Genuine engagements devel-
oped in the field of electronics. which were called electronic warfare (sons
foreign armies specifically use the tern warfare). Use of BH means helped
achieve success in conbat operations on the land, in the air and at sea.

Electronic equipment (RES). which includes apparatus for radio comnications.
radar. radio remote control. radio navigation. radio telemetry. television.
electro-optics and sonar equipment.allows the accowlishnent of diverse nia-
sions in intelligence and control of forces and means of arud conflict. The
detection, identification and determination of coordinates of targets. guiding
weapons to then, the collection and processing of data on the enemy. naviga-
tion support to combatants. aircraft and spacecraft. and the transmission of
orders. instructions. reports and other infomtion needed for activities of
the armed forces is a far from conplete list of the capabilities of electronic
equipment. Electronic gear has become the most important component of many
kinds of weaponry. military equipment and automated reconnaissance and control
systems. It considerably increased the efficiency and reliability of control-
ling troops. naval forcea* and weapons and increased the conbat capabilities
and effectiveness of the means of armed warfare.

The stability with which the RES functions has a substantial influence on the
effectiveness of reconnaissance. comaand and control and weapons control.
This is why all armies of capitalist states are intensively developing and
perfecting technology and nethods of combat ing enemy RES and ensuring stabil-
ity in the operation of similar means of their own armed forces. As an analy-
sis of the foreign press shows. electronic warfare (RBI!) is taken to nean a
systen of measures and actions by troops (forces) for the use of special elec-
tronic equipment. and tactical and technical procedures for the detection and
ja-ing of enemy electronic equipment and co-Iand and control and weapons con-
trol system. and for protecting similar equipment and systems of friendly
troops (forces) against enemy jasming. According to official views of the
North Atlantic Alliance (NATO) couand element. and the United States and the
no above all. its component parts are: electronic countermeasures, electronic
security and neasurea for their support.

[Electronic countermeasures] (REP) consist of the neasures and actions con-
ducted by troops (forces) in combat and in an operation to disorganize or
reduce the operating effectiveness of enemy electronic systems and equipment
by acting on them with electromagnetic or acoustic enissions. REP includes
the creation of active and passive electronic jamming. the use of radar.
infrared (thermal) and sonar decoys. acting on the environment of the propa-
gation of electromagnetic (acoustic) waves. and radio deception.

Various weapons are used in coﬂination with the REP equipnent for neutral-
izing RS.

————11—— .
*Subsequently naval forces" are called ' forces" for short (editor's note).

1.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Electronic security1(RBz) represents the aggregate of methods and means
assuring stable operation of R38 under conditions of pressure by means of
REP and special enemy homing weapons. It is achieved by concealing RES
emissions from signal intelligence. by protection against electronic jam-dug
and destruction by homing weapons. and by training crews to operate under ICH
conditions.

IREB support measures] provide for collecting data on enemy IRS. target desig-
nation for REP equipment. and warning friendly troops when they are being
illuminated by electronic equipment and about enemy use of communications
jamming and use of weapons homing on RES. Signal intelligence—-a form of
military intelligence conducted by means of the detection. interception and
analysis of electromagnetic emissionssnddetermination of the location of
RES--is considered to be the primary element of BBB support. Information
collected by signal intelligence is used in analyzing the enemy grouping and
actions as well as in organizing and conducting electronic warfare.

The idea of the possibility of combating electronic equipment was expressed
for the first time by the inventor of radio-the Russian scientist. Professor
A. S. Popov. In a memorandum to the Russian military department in 1903 he
expressed the idea of the possibility of performing reconnaissance and
creating radio interference for means of radio communications. and he sug-
gested measures for protecting such means against reconnaissance and jamming.
In 1935-1936. when the first Soviet models of radars were being tested. one of
their creators. Professor A. H. Bonch-Bruyevich. pointed out the need to com-
bat radio jamming and to develop radio countercountermeasures.

The first instances of the performance of signal intelligence and communica-
tions jamming were noted in 1906 during the Russo-Japanese War. For example,
during the Battle of Tsushima the commanders of the cruiser "Isumrud" and the
destroyer "Gromkiy" ordered the jamming of radio communications of the Japan-
ese ships. Signal intelligence and communications jamming saw further devel-
opment during Horld War I and especially during World War II. and later in
the largest local wars unleashed by imperialist states in Korea. Vietnam and
the Near East.

During World War 11. beginning with the summer of 1943 British and American
bomber aviation successfully created passive and active jamming of gun laying
radars of fascist Germany's air defense system. Radio deception was conducted
during combat operations. Air and artillery strikes were delivered against
radar posts and communications centers. The use of communications jamming led
to a reduction in effectiveness of German AAA fire. For example. an average
of some 3.000 rounds would be expended by AAA to destroy a bomber under condi-
Lions of jamming. and only 600-800 rounds in the absence of jamming.

During the postwar years scientific research in developing new RED equipment
was expanded continuously in developed capitalist countries. In 1950-1952
special commissions for scientific research in the field of creating RED
equipment were set up in the United States and Great Britain. The commissions
drew up recommendations on the further development of RE! equipment and
methods of its use and proposed methods for evaluating its effectiveness on

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the basis of an analysis of the experience of combat employment of jamming
equipment during Hbrld Har II.

In 1953 the United States adopted a special REP equipment development
program—-QRC (quick reaction capability) program. In the opinion of the
developers of this program. electronic jamming equipment differs from other
electronic equipment above all by the fact that it has to have the capability
of aquick reaction to a change in characteristics of the RES being jammed. It
was believed that in comparison with means of destruction. the REP equipment
and methods of its use change faster. In the 1950's the United States deter-
_mined the role and place of RE? equipment in the armed forces and developed
the basic principles for organizing a system of this equipment as well as
tactics of its use.

During the wars in Vietnam and the Near East the air force. ground forces and
naval forces employed active and passive jamming of radars. radios and the
homing heads of surface-to-sir missiles. It was then that they began to
employ antiradiation missiles for the destruction of radars, and decoys for
deceiving the operators of these radars. Technical means and methods of pro-
tecting RES against jamming and the destruction by homing missiles also were
employed.

According to foreign press statements. the capabilities and role of electronic
countermeasures and electronic security are growing even more at the present
time in connection with an increase in the scope of use of RES in the armed
forces. The imperialist states have created ground-based, airborne. shipborne
and space signal intelligence systems which continuously intercept and

analyze electromagnetic and acoustic emissions and determine the location of
their sources. The means and methods of R13 are developed or improved with
consideration of the data collected.

Thus a contiuous struggle is going on in the world between the means and
methods of electronic countermeasures and electronic security. Examples of
the use of means of RES in combat operations are described in the book based
on the experience of local wars and exercises conducted in armies of the
capitalist states. Only publications from foreign sources were used in
writing chapters 3. 6-8 and 11-14.

Part I - Electronic Countermeasures and Destruction of Electronic Equipment

As shown by the experience of local wars unleashed by imperialist states in
Southeast Asia and the Near East. electronic equipment was destroyed or

jammed basically by homing missiles and means of REP. Destruction of RES also
was accomplished by aviation. artillery and reconnaissance-sabotage subunits.
Missiles homing on sources of electromagnetic emissions are considered to be
the most effective means of destroying RES.

Electronic countermeasures are conducted by creating electronic jamming. by

using false targets and decoys. by changing the electrical properties of the
environment (in which electromagnetic and acoustic waves are propagated). by
reducing the radar. optical. thermal and acoustic contrast (visibility) of

military equipment and objects. and by radio deception.

6

FOR OFHCIAI. USE ONLY
FOR OFFKJAI.USIZONL¥

Part II - Electronic Countercountermeasures

Chapter 9 - Electronic Countercountermeasures Against Intentional Communications
Jasming

9.1. Basic Concepts and Definitions

Protection of RES against intentional and unintentional electronic jamming is
achieved by using technical means for ensuring noise stability and by the
accomplishment of organizational measures [1. 4. S. 12. 18]. Noise stability
(PU) characterizes the capability of electronic equipment and systems to
operate with the requisite quality under the effect of interference. It is
evaluated by the probability that the RES (system) will perform missions under
conditions of intentional and unintentional ja-ing. For examle, the P0 of a
radar often is characterized by the probability of correct detection of sig—
nals reflected from targets. The demands on P0 are distinguished by great
diversity depending on permissible distortion of the signals (data) being
received. For example. in some data transmission systems using EVH [elec-
tronic computers]. a distortion of no more than one character per million
transmitted is permitted. while a radar sometimes can perform its functions
with a loss of up to #0 percent of the signals reflected from the targets.

The accuracy with which a signal is reproduced at the receiving location under
conditions of jamming or the signal-to-noise ratio often are taken as a quan-
titative measure of PU. This means the minimum signsl-to-noiae ratio at the
input of the receiver's linear part which provides a g.¢en quality of recep-
tion of the data (signals). The less the signal-to-noise ratio required for
operation of R28 with the necessary quality. the greater its PU with all
other conditions being equal. In addition. the PU can be evaluated by the
probabilities of a false alarm and missing a target. by mistakes in transmis-
sion of saned data. and so on.

As shown in information theory. all methods of providing the requisite PU are
based on obtaining redundancy in the message being transmitted. i.e.. on
increasing signal volume Vc by increasing duration ‘c (transmission time).
signal bandwidth sf; and the signal-to-noise ratio. This provision of inform-
stion theory is described by the expression vc - tcofhlogz(;gj.

I

It is not only the PU of electronic equipment and systems that are distin-
guished. but also the PU of their individual elements-~receivers, range meters
and so on. Noise stability is provided by using technical methods and means
of protection against jamming,accomplished in designing the R38, and by per-
forming organizational measures during operation.

Part 111 - Electronic warfare in Combat Operations
The armed forces of capitalist states have special EH units. subunits. air-
craft and ships for jamming RES in combat operations. outfitted with signal

intelligence equipment. equipment for active and passive electronic jamming.
antiradar missiles. devices for using decoys. and means of radar, thermal and

7

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

optical csaouflage. During coubat operations the protection of RES against
electronic ja-ing is assured by organizational measures and by use of techni-
cal devices for protection against ja-ing. In addition. missile systems.
field artillery. aviation and naval forces are employed for the destruction of
electronic objects [26. 27, 28. 29].

Bibliography

1.

7.

8.

9.

10.

ll.

12.

Atrashav. M. P.. ll'in. V. A.. and Mar'in. N. P.. "Bor'ba s radioelek-

tronnyli sredstvaai" [Electronic Countermeasures]. Moscow. Voyenizdat.
1972. 272 pages.

Beketov. A. A.. Belokon'. A. P.. and Chemshentsev. s. 0.. "Maskirovhs
deystviy podrasdeleniy sukhoputnykh voysk" [Conceal-eat of Ground Forces
Subunit Operations]. Moscow. Voyanizdat. 1976. 232 pages.

Vakin. S. A.. and Shustov. L. 11.. "Osnovy radioprotivodeystviya 1 radio-
tekhnicheskoy razvedlti" [Fundamentals of Electronic Counterseasures and
Electronic Intelligence], Moscow. Sov. radio. 1968. 646 pages.

Vishin. G. M.. "Selektsiya dvishushchikhsya tseley" [Moving Target Indica-
tion]. lbscov. Voyenizdst. 1966. 276 pages.

"Zashchita ot radioponekh" [Electronic Countercountemessures], edited by
Msksinov, M. V.. Moscow. Sov. radio. 1976. 496 pages.

Zyuko. A. 6.. "Poaekhoustoychivost' i effektivnost' sisten svyszi" [Noise
Stability and Effectiveness of Co-unications Systems}. Moscow. Svyaz'.
1972. 359 pages.

"lspol'sovsniye radiospektrs” [Using the Radio Spectrum}. translated from
the English. Moscow, Svyaz'. 1969. 272 pages.

Kayasev. A. 0.. and Pchelkin. V. 7.. "Probleny obespecheniya sovncstnoy
raboty radioclektronnoy apparatury" [Probleas of Ensuring Joint Operation
of Electronic Equipment]. Moscow. Sov. radio. 1971. 200 pages.

Kansreyltin. n. 3.. Potekhin. v. A.. and Shishkin, 1. r.. "Morskaya
polyarinetriya" [Naval Polarinetry]. Leningrad. Sudostroyeniye. 1968.
328 pages.

Kobak. V. 0.. "Radiolokatsionnyye otrazhateli" [Radar Reflectors]. Moscow.
Sov. radio, 1975. 268 pages.

Kllmvich. Ye. 8.. and Klinovich. 1.. 8.. "Zenitnyy kospleks protiv
saloleta" [The Air Defense Systes Against the Aircraft], Moscow. Voycnis-
dat. 1978. 192 pages.

Lit. E. 3.. "Aren't the Ground Forces Overloaded with Conunications
Equipsend". ARMY (United States). No 9. 1973. p 93.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
13.

No.

15.

16.

17.

18.

19.

20.

21.

22.

23.

24.

25.

26.

27.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.

Mayael'a. Ye. 11.. and Torgovanov. V. A.. "Imreniye kharakteristik
rasseyaniya radiolokatsionnykh tseley" [Measurement of the Scatter
Characteristics of Radar Targets]. Moscow. Sov. radio. 1972. 232 pages.

"Obshchesoyuznyye noruy dopusuayeuykh industrial'nykh rsdiopoaekh"
[Unionuide Standards for Permissible Industrial Interference], Moscow.
Svyaz'. 1973. 73 pages.

Paliy. A. 1.. "Radiovoyns" [Electronic Warfare]. Moscow. Voyenizdat.
1963. 208 pages.

Paliy. A. 1.. 'Radioelektronnaya bor'ba" [Electronic Warfare]. Moscow.
Voyenizdat, 1976. 272 pages.

Prostakov. A. I... "Sonar Countermeasures." ZARUBBZHNOYE VOYENNOYE
OBOZRENIYE, No 9. 1973. PP 58-65.

Pchelkin. V. P.. "Blektrolagnitnaya somatimst' radioelektronnykh
aredstv" [Electromagnetic Compatibility of Electronic Equipment]. Moscow.
Znaniye. 1971.

"Radiopriyemyye ustroystva" [Radio Receivers]. edited by Zyuko. A. 6..
Moscow, Svyaz'. 1975. 400 pages. '

'Radiotekhnicheskiye aistaly v raketnoy tekhnike" [Electronic Systems in
Missile Technology]. general editors Galkin. V. 1.. Zakharchenko. 1. 1..
and Mikhaylov, 1.. V.. Moscow. Voyenizdat. 1976, 3100 pages.

"Spravochnik po radiolokatsii" [Radar Reference], translated from the
English, Moscow. Sov. radio, 1976-1979. vols l-lo. 1,768 pages.

Hhite. Donald R. J .. ”Elektrolaagnitnaya sovnestinost' radioelektronnykh
srcdstv i neprednanerennyye poaekhi" [Electromagnetic Compatibility of
Electronic Equipment and Unintentional Janina]. translated from the
English, Moscow. Sov. radio. 1977-1978. lat ad., 350 pages. 2d ed.. 272
pages.

Fel'dnan. Yu. 1.. Gidaspov. Yu. _B.. and Gonzin, V. N.. "Soprovozhdeniye
dvizhushchikhsya tseley" [Tracking Moving Targets]. Moscow. Sov. radio.
1978, 288 pages.

Khorbenko. I. 6.. "Ul'trazvuk v voyennou dele" [Ultrasonics in Military
Affairs]. Moscow, Voyenizdat. 1976. ['39 pages.

Shirshev. L. 6.. "Ioniziruyushchiye' izlucheniya i elektronika" [Ionizing
Radiation and Electronics]. Moscow. Sov. radio. 1969, 192 pages. »

AVIATION use: AND SPACE TECHNOLOGY, Vol 102. No a. 1975. pp 40-142.

Latur. N.. "Electronic Warfare. NATO'S FIFTEEN narrows. April-May 1974.
pp 73-79 (NATO).

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

28. McMillan. D.. "Blectronlc warfare," INFANTRY. Hatch-April I974.

29. Miller. 3.. "Electronic Warfare." AVIA‘I‘Iw Ham AND SPACE mummy.
Vol 91. No 10, 8 Septewer 1979. pp 67-82.

COPYRIGHT: Voyenizdat, 1981

6904
C80: 1801/2232

10

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOI(NﬂﬂC1AlllﬂEONlY

ARMED FORCES

BOOK EXCERPTS: TRAINING FOR MODERN BATTLE

Moscow CBELOVEK V SOVREHBNNOY VOYNB in Russian 1981 (signed to press 25 Sep 81)
pp 256. 255, 3-7. 8-9, 27-28. 33, 39-40. 62-63, 64-55, 46-47, 66, 67. 69. 79. 80.
127, 210, 211-213. 248-253

[Table of contents. annotation. introduction. conclusion. and excerpts as indicated
from the book "Man in Modern Battle". by G. V. Sredin, D. A. Volkogonov. and H. P.
Korobeynikov, Voyennoye Izdatel'stvo. 35,000 copies, 256 pages; passages enclosed
in slantlines printed in italics]

[Text] Contents Page
Introduction..... ..... ..................................................... 3
Chapter I. The Spiritual Factor and its Role in Modern Var............ 8
Chapter II. Social Consciousness as an Object of ﬂoral-Political and

Psychological Training................................... 27
Chapter III. Methodological and world-Outlook Bases of Moral-Political
and Psychological Training............................... A6

Chapter IV. The Essence and Tasks of Moral-Political and Psychological
Training................................................. 67
Chapter V. Principles and Methods of Moral-Political and Psychological

Training................................................. 80
Chapter VI. Holding a Coanunist world Outlook-othe Most Important

Direction of ﬂoral-Political and Psychological Training.. llZ
Chapter VII. Holding Correct Impressions of Possible Var in the Hen..... 127
Chapter VIII. The Holding and Solidarity of Military Collectives......... 150

Chapter IX. Instilling a high Sense of Discipline--An Important Direc-
tion of Moral-Political and Psychological Training....... 171

Chapter x. Generating a Readiness for Heroic Actions in the Hen....... 192

Chapter XI. Holding Psychological Stability and Physical Endurance in

the HenOQD0.0.0IOOODOOODO00......000000OIOOOOOCOODOOOOOOO 230

Chapter XII. Exercises. Cruises, Flights. Launchings--the Basic
Practical Eleaent of Moral-Political and Psychological

Training...... ..... ...................................... 229
Conclusion........ sssssss seessassassessooaooeeesoeooosaoosooposoases-0000.0 2‘8
.11

INJI1OFIHCJAI.IISEZ(NVLY
itNlOFFKJAl.USE(NmLV

Annotation

The book examines the theoretical bases and methods for the moral-political and
psychological training of the Soviet servicemen. The anthers analyze experience

in this work and show the broad complex of ways for its improvement with considera-
tion of the contemporary level of development of military affairs.

The book is intended for co-anders. political officers. and teachers of the higher
military educational institutions of the Soviet Armed Torces.

Introduction

A special feature of the contemporary era consists of the intensification of the in-
fluence of real socialism on the entire course of world development. The further
strengthening of the socialist commnnnalth's positions is continuing. The sphere
of imperialist dominance in the world has narrowed. Internal contradictions in the
countries of capital and competition between them have become aggravated.

As was noted at the 26th CPSU Congress. "the difficulties which capitalism is ex-
periencing also influence its policy. including foreign policy. The struggle around
the basic questions of the capitalist countries' foreign-policy course has become
intensified. Recently. the enemies of detente. arms limitations, and improvement of
relations with the Soviet Union and other socialist countries have become noticeably
more active."1 lmperialiem's aggressive nature and. first of all, American. has in-
creased sharply.

The CPSU and the Soviet state are opposing imperialism's dangerous intrigues with
firmness and self-restraint and a consistent, constructive policy of peaceful co-
existence. mutually advantageous and equitable collaboration. and the decisive de-
fense of the vital interests of the peoples. In the accountability report of the
CPSU Central Committee to the 26th Party Congress. Comrade L. I. Brezhnev put_forth
new, cardinal ideas and important, constructive suggestions in the field of foreign
policy. They are the organic continuation and development of the historic Peace
Program which was proclaimed by the 26th and 25th CPSU Congresses as applicable to
the most urgent problems of international life. It is a Peace Program for the 80‘s.
At the same time. considering imperialism's increased aggressiveness. the Soviet
Union has been forced tc concern itself with the strengthening of its defensive
capability and the improvement of its Armed Forces.

V. I. Lenin's instruction that any revolution is worth something only if it is able
to defend itself2 remains exceptionally timely for our time. too. Lenin's scientific
substantiation of the objective necessity for the armed defense of the socialist
fatherland comprises an important part of the theory of socialist revolution, for
there has not yet been a case in world history where the exploiter class. having lost
power. would not try to regain it by force. That's how it was in the past, and

that is how matters stand even now. 'The experience of the revolutionary movement of
recent years.“ noted Comrade L. I. Brezhnev. "has shown graphically: if a real
threat to the domination of monopolistic capital and its political henchmen arises.
imperialism will stop at nothing. rejecting any appearance of democracy whetever."’

12

INJR‘OFIICJAI.IISE1(NVLY
FORIOFFICJAL USIZCHULY

The entire history of the struggle for socialism proves convincingly that the vic-
tory of the socialist revolution and its achievements require reliable guarding
against the encroachments of imperialist reaction As historic experience shows.
possible errors. omissions. and miscalculations in this field are fraught with seri-
ous consequences. In characterizing the content of the regularity of the defense of

the socialist revolution's achievements and its attainments. a number of important
aspects can be noted.

First. Armed revolutionary violence as a responsive measure in regard to counter-
revolution and imperialist aggressors is completely and historically justified.
proper. and necessary. Violence never was an ideal of socialism. The working masses
have recourse to it only as a forced. responsive measure necessary to defend their
fundamental class interests and uphold freedom and independence. Therefore. the
fantasies which bourgeois propagandists are spreading to the effect that a striving
for violence allegedly is inherent in socialism only plays the role of covering the
military circles' own aggressive preparations.

Second. The armed defense of socialism is not exclusively the domain of military
affairs. It is connected with all spheres of public life: politics. economics.
ideology, science. and culture. The Soviet people, having built a developed social-
ist society. created all the necessary material and spiritual preconditions for the
maintenance of the combat might of the Armed Forces at the level of contemporary re-
quirements. This became possible thanks to the big successes of our state in the
field of economics. science. education and indoctrination of the Soviet people.

and the steady improvement of military organizational development.

Third. The defense of socialism bears a clearly expressed international nature. In
all the wars which were imposed on our people by imperialism. and especially in the
Crest Patriotic Her. the Soviet Armed Forces. in defending their fatherland. also
accomplished a liberation. international mission. And new. when newer and newer
countries have set forth on the path of building socialism. class solidarity in en-
suring the security of creating a new life acquires special significance.

Fourth. As long as imperialism exists. the necessity to protect socialism will be
preserved. Aggressive imperialist forces are whipping up the arms race. which re-
presents a serious threat to the peace and security of peoples.and are trying in
every possible way to prevent the relaxation of tension. The CPSU proceeds from the
Lenin principle thatpeace"will move the matter forward an infinite number of times
better than war...."“ Therefore. the struggle for the confirmation of the principle
of peaceful coexistence in the practice of international relations is not only an
objectively desirable form of mutual relations of states with different social sys-
tems. but also an important method for blocking the main reason of contemporary wars
which is rooted in the aggressive essence of imperialism.

It is known that the Soviet Armed Forces now have no domestic function. which is re-
flected in the CPSU Program. In a developed socialist society where a high level

of socio-political unity of the people has been attained. there are no social forces
against which the employment of the army would be necessary.

The external function of the Soviet Armed Forces has become even more multifaceted.
It is accomplished in two main directions.

13

FOR OFFKJAI.USE(HVLY
FOIMOF31CJA1.U5210NLN

The first of them reflects the necessity for the reliable defense of the socialist
fatherlend as well as of the entire socialist commonwealth. This is attained by the
maintenance of constant conbat readiness to repel a possible attack by any aggressor
and to stop the provocative attacks on the pert of militaristic forces. "A strong
alloy of high technical equipping. military skill. and invincible norale-—suoh is

the combat potential of the Soviet Armed Forces." noted Comrade L. I. Brezhnev at
the 26th CPSU Congress.s

tion.

Another expression of the external function of the Soviet Armed Forces consists of

the fact that they are a powerful factor in the security of all peoples and the
prevention of a new world war.

After Uorld war II. imperialism crested many centers of tension. conflicts. and local
wars. It repeatedly brought the world up to the dangerous line of a big nilitary
conflagration but. considering the night of the socialist commonwealth and its re-
solve to defend peace. it was forced to withdrew. New. operating from a position of
strength. it is all the more difficult for imperialism to dictate its will to
peoples and unleash war with impunity. A paradox appears in ever greater relief:
the ailitary capabilities of imperialism's aggressive blocs are increasing. and
their ability to attain their political goals with the use of military force is de-
creasing. This is the direct consequence of the objective changes in the correla-
tion of forces in favor of socialism.and the intensification of the role of social-
ist armed forces as the guarantee of peace and international stability.

In implementing the najestic plans of communist creation the Soviet Union. at the
same time. is devoting the necessary attention to strengthening the country's de-
fensive capability. "...Iftheyforce us." said Comrade L. I. Brezhnev. "we will
find a rapid and effective response to any challenge of militant inperialism."‘

The contemporary situation inposas special demands not only on the technical equip-
ping of the Soviet Armed Forces. but also on the ideological maturity and moral-
political qualities of the personnel. Ever greater significance is being attached
to the spiritual factor under contemporary conditions. The morale of the people and
the army has not played such an active role in the solution of the probles of war
and peace in any era as it does now.

Instilling lofty moral-political and psychological qualities in the personnel is one
of the main directions in raising the level of combat readiness of the Soviet Armed
Forces. The strengthening of the role of moral-political and psychological training
now is caused by a number of factors.

The improvement in the means of conflict causes a change in the procedures and meth-
ods for the conduct of war. The increase in the scope of combat operations. their

dynanism. changeability in the situation. the lack of sufficient and checked infor-
mation about the combat situation. interruptions in control. the constant threat of
the eneay's employment of weapons of mass destruction. exhaustion. and wearing down

14

l!”l(ﬂﬂﬂ(1Al.lﬂﬂE19Nl¥
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of the troops. the necessity to restore their combat effectiveness and organs of
control. and other conditions of contemporary battle require of the men mobility of
thought. independence. self-control. endurance. steadfastness. activity. selfless-

nese. and other qualities. Moral-political and psychological training is aimed at
their formation.

The general-educational. technical. and cultural level of the personnel of the
Soviet Armed Forces has now grown significantly. This requires the introduction of
certain adjustments in the forms and methods of work with the men and the scientific
organization of moral-political and psychological training. Considerable experience
on these problems has been accumulated in the Armed Forces. Supported by the basic
provisions of Harxism-Leninism and the decisions of the CPSU. commanders. political
officers. and party organizations are improving the process of the personnel's moral-
political tempering. Hany scientific reconendations are being introduced success-
fully into troop practice. which leads to an increase in the combat readiness and
combat capability of the units and subunits. The main goal of this book is to fur-
ther the improvement of the process of moral-political and psychological training of
the men for actions under conditions of contemporary war.

Chapter I. The Spiritual Factor and its Role in Modern Her

The spiritual factor has always played a tremendous role in the course and outcome
of war. but now its significance is great as never before. This is explained by the
ever increasing scope of the ideological antagonism of two social systems and the
special features of contemporary war. "Our party ." noted L. l. Brezhnev. "proceeds
fron the Lenin teaching that however great may be the technical equipping of the
army.man. who has mastered the equipment to perfection. remains the main and de-
cisive force in war. This is especially important now. in the age of nuclear mis-
siles. when the fate of the war will be decided by people who have mastered weapons
and combat equipment. are morally and physically tempered, and are boundlessly de-
voted to their motherland. the party. and the people."7

The significance of the spiritual factor in war. its essence. structure. and func-
tions can be disclosed and understood correctly only on the basis of the basic pro-
vision of Marxism-Leninism concerning the most important role of social existence With
respect to public consciousness which possesses relative independence and is able
to exert an active influence on the course of social processes.

An analysis of the spiritual factor and its manifestations and role in war presumes
the elucidation of the nature and political content of a specific war. Without this.
it is impossible to see the socio-political direction of the spiritual factor for
each of the warring sides. "The social nature of war." wrote V. I. Lenin. "and its
true significance are determined...by [what policy/ the “It continues

('war is the continuation of politics') and [what class/ is waging the

war for what goals."' The reasons. goals. and nature of a specific war directly
cause the content and manifestation of the spiritual factor in war. A just war ex-
pands the spiritual possibilities of the fighting masses and. conversely. an unjust
war limits and reduces them.

15

FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE(MNLY
FOI‘OFNKJAL.USE(NULY

Chapter 11. Social Consciousness as an Object of Morel-Political and Psychological
Training

The system of ideological indoctrination which exists in a socialist society proceeds
from the necessity to so change and develop social and individual consciousness that
communist world-outlook lines and the spiritual direction which characterizes the
new man dominate in it. Our party's activity in this field is determined by the
east important Lenin proposition that "the development of the consciousness of the
masses remains. as always. the basis and main content of all our work."’ In the
decree of the CPSU Central Committee. "On further improvement of ideological and
political-indoctrinationsl work." it is stressed that its goals are "the indoctrina-
tion of all workers inaspirit of high ideological content and devotion to the social-
ist motherland and the cause of co-unism. a cos-mist attitude toward work and pub-
lic property. completely overcoming vestiges of bourgeois views and morals. the
comprehensive and harmonic development of the personality. and the creation of
genu1ne wealth of spiritual culture." 0

Under conditions of the Armed Forces questions of the formation and development of a
social and individual conICiousnesshavespecialsignificance.It is not difficult to
imagine how tremendous would he the spiritual loads and moral and psychological
strain which would come down on the consciousness of a person in case of var. And
if a situation of constant mortal danger. uncertainty. dynasism of the situation.
and the uncompromising nature of the struggle require of a person. the collective
and society the maximum straining of all spiritual strength in order to hold out in
this competition and win. then both social and individual consciousness should be
ready for this ahead of time. Therefore. it is important to have good knowledge of
the structure. content. and regular laws in the forming of social consciousness-the
main objective of the moral-political and psychological training of the trcops.

Social consciousness is derivative and secondary from social existence. They do
not oppose each other. but always step forth in dialectical unity. In stressing
that social existence is primary and social consciousness is secondary. the
classicists of Marxism thereby solved a basic question of philosophy as applicable
to society. Social existence and its central. main part-productive relations.
step forth as the basis for social consciousness. "Just as a person's knowledge
reflects existing nature irrespective of him. that is. developing matter. so does
the [social knowledge/ of a person (that is. different views and philosophical.
religiousi political. and other teachings) reflect the [economic system/ of
society."1 The specific condition of social existence of any historical era also
finds its reflection in the corresponding social consciousness.

Social consciousness is the totality of the ideas. views. and concepts which exist in
society in a given era and in which social reality is reflected. It comes forth as
an integral spiritual system which expresses the lost essential features inherent in
a specific social system and material base. Corresponding to a developed socialist
society and a state of the entire people is a specific qualitative state of spiritual
culture. the most important part of which is socialist social consciousness. Certain
types of social consciousness are inherent in each era and in each social system.

Ordinary consciousness is the synthesis of the knowledge of people which is acquired
in the process of production and other experience and of social psychology.

16

INDI‘OFIICIAI.IISEZ(NVLY
FOI‘OFFRJAL.U8310NLY

Empirical experience is accumulated over the duration of the millenia of human
civilization in the course of man's struggle with nature and social forces. and

as a result of the formation of a specific tenor and way of life. This experience
was passed down from generation to generation in the form of traditions. sorals.
customs and views on various spheres of human activity and phenomena of social life
which have been formed.

in the military field special significance was had and is had by past wars and the
experience of enduring difficulties and overcoming dangers and burdens of field and
campaign life. Of course. much of past military experience is gradually losing its
significance because of the ever more decisive intrusion of the achievements and

recommendations of science. new experience. and new. more improved knowledge into
practice.

Political consciousness occupies a special place in the structure of social con-
sciousness.for the systematised theoretical expression of the fundamental interests
of specific classes and their goals and means of attainment is accomplished with its
help. The provisions of political ideology are the most important tool in the strug-
gle for power. its formation. and its strengthening. Political ideology is expressed
in the form of party and state documents. political concepts. programs. platforms,
plans. and declarations. In the society of developed socialism. political ideology
is expressed in its most brilliant form in Harsiet—Leninist teaching, our party's
Program and Regulation, the Soviet constitution, and the decisions of the CPSU and
the plenums of its Central Committee. The entire meaning and entire content of con-
munist ideologysreconnected with serving the working people and their interests.
requirements. and needs. The political form of social consciousness of a developed
socialist society is characterised by a high degree of maturity. class wisdom. and

an understanding of historic responsibility.

Political consciousness is expressed not only in ideological form, but also in
psychological refinements: class feeling. social attitudes. spiritual atmosphere.
revolutionary enthusiasm. and so forth. Class interests and requirements also step
forth as the basis of the formation of socio-psychological elements of political
consciousness. The working masses are capable of comprehending then in full measure
and expressing them scientifically only in revolutionary theory-.the teaching of
Marxismeeninisn which opens up historical perspective for them. arms them with goals
and the ideological means of conflict. and rallies the masses with their vanguard at
the head-~the columnist parties. The political consciousness of bourgeois society
reflects basically the class interests of the predominant. exploiter social forces
and ideologically provides the appearance of legality of existing inequality. in-
justice. and social oppression.

The military content of political consciousness in a socialist society is expressed
in the Harxist-Leninist teaching on war and the army and the defense of the social-
ist fatherland. and in military doctrine. the principles of military organizational
development. and the theory of party-political work in the Armed Forces. The
assimilation and realization of their provisions in practice have tremendous signi-
ficance for ensuring the security of our state and raising the combat readiness of
the Soviet Armed Forces and the ideological indoctrination of the personnel.

l7

FINR(HWWCIAL USEioNLN
res omcut ts: ONLY

Legal consciousness reflects the will of the ruling class. which has been raised to
a law. in the spiritual sphere. The political superstructure always includes a
certain system of juridical standards which have been established by the state.
People's realization of the essence of law and order and the understanding of the

legal and illegal. just and unjust. should and must comprise the content of people's
legal consciousness.

Moral consciousness reflects the moral interrelations of people. It exists in the
form of moral standards. principles. aesthetic categories of good and evil. duty.
honor. conscience. dignity. bravery. heroism and so forth which have been formed.
The relation of society. class. and specific people to the interests of the mother-
land, the people. the collective. the family,and their own obligations is expressed
in ethical categories. Society inposes moral requirements primarily in the fore

of public opinion. rules and standards of conduct. and socialist customs which have
been formed.

Aesthetic consciousness is an artistic, figurative view of the world. The developed
personality relates to the surrounding world not only with utilitarian yardsticks.
but also with aesthetic ones for. in his social essence. man is capable not simply
of producing material good. but also of creating. "he also forms materials according
to the laws of beauty."12 Art. as the most important manifestation of the aesthetic.
not only accomplishes the function of satisfaction with the beautiful and the ele-
vated. but it also creates a creative. constructive.andinnovational element in the
consciousness. At the same time. art performs political and moral-pedagogical func-
tions. expressing in artistic forms one's attitude toward reality. social processes.
and social existence. The role of art does not presume only copying reality and
creating pale shadows of real life. Art reflects life from the viewpoint of the
interests of various classes.

Religious consciousness. which still also occurs in a socialist society. is the
fantastic reflection of reality which has been engendered by certain social reasons.
The basis of religious consciousness is formed by faith in supernatural forces and
submission to the Host High’s will. Its origin is connected. in the social plane.
primarily with the weakness of people when facing nature and the blind forces

of social existence. In the past. the world-outlook lines of the workers and their
feelings and aspirations depended to a trenendous degree on religious consciousness.
“The feelings of the masses." the classicists of Marxism noted. "were fed exclusively
with religious food . . . . ""

The materialist world outlook has always come out against religious consciousness.
In a socialist society the proportion and significance of religious ideas and views
are decreasing more and more with the further strengthening of the materialist
world outlook.

The forms and levels which are in social consciousness manifest themselves. but in a
different plane and in the individual consciousness.

Ideological-indoctrinational work which is directed toward social consciousness and
collectives of people requiresconstsnt differentiation and knowledge of the special

features of each personality. The concept of an "individual approach" means not
only the method and way of accomplishing indoctrinational influence. but also

18

FOR OFiNCIAl.USIICMQLY
lililOlllCJAl.USlI(ﬂVLY

consideration of the specific character of the consciousness of each individual.
his capabilities. inclinations. level of.developmant. interests. and life's goals.
There are no two absolutely identical people in the world. either. Even with great
physical similarity twins differ in various parameters which characterize their
psychophysiological. moral. and socio-psychological features. Bach personality is
iniaiteble and unique. And success in molding the needed qualities depends (along
with many factors) on the degree of the study of each person's special features and

the ability to find the east effective methods for indoctrinational influence on his
consciousness. requireaents. and interests.

An individual approach in ideological indoctrination and moral-political and psy-
chological training presumes consideration not only of the level of education.
professional preparedness. experience. and culture. but also of the personality's

psychological features: requirements and motives. character. temperament. capa-
bilities. and so forth.

Even a brief examination of the structure. forms. and special features of social
consciousness shows how important it is consistently to consider all the special
features of the object of our molding influences in the process of training a
person for the most difficult tests of contemporary war. a genuinely scientific
approach to moral-political and psychological training also consists in considerable
measure of knowledge of the essence. features. and specific character of the con-
sciousness of the collective. group. and individual servicemen.

Chapter 3. Methodological and world-Outlook Bases of Moral-Political and Psycholo-
gical Training

In getting to know and transforming reality. people are guided by a specific meth-
odology. ”hen we are discussing the transformation of reality. by methodology we
mean the teaching on the structure. logical organization. methods. and means of ac-
tivity. If we are speaking about science. methodology is defined as teaching about
the principles of the structure. forms. and methods of scientific knowledge.

F. Bacon compared the role of method in scientific knowledge with a lamp which lights
the road for the traveller in the darkness. As in theory. so in practice a person
uses various methods. Some of them are general. They are used in all sciences and
in all cases of practice. Others are special. They are employed only in particular
sciences and in corresponding particular spheres of practical activity. The main
and determining role here is played by general methods. Philosophical teaching about
general methods of knowledge and the transformation of reality is also called
Imethodolosy/ [in boldface]. Dialectical and historical materialism is accepted as
the general methodology of scientific study in Soviet science. harxist-Leninist Nth“
odology comes forth as a tool not only of theoretical knowledge. but also of the
revolutionary transformation of reality. Problems of war and the army are investi-
gated and studied within the framework of all component parts of Harrism-Leninism.
The complexity of the scope and delving into the essence of the processes of war and
the army is attained by this. The lost important provisions of Marxist-Leninist
teaching on war and the army rest first of all on the basic conclusions of dialec-
tical and historical materialism as well as of political economy and scientific com—
munism.u B'cause war. speaking in the words of V. l. Lenin. is an ”arch-ottled"
phenomenon. consideration of all its aspects. the combined enployment of the

means and methods of all component parts of Haraism-Leninism. and reliance on the
achievements of other social sciences and. in particular. military history are
necessary.

19

FOI‘OFIICIAI.USIZ(HULY
FORiOFﬁKJAl.USE(NMLY

Chapter IV. The Essence and Tasks of Moral-Political and fsychological Training

The tasks of soral-political and psychological training are determined by the ob-
jective requirements of var and the nature of contemporary combat operations. The
armies of the socialist states determine these tasks and the ways for their accosp-
lishsent from scientific positions. The Soviet Minister of Defense. Marshal of the
Soviet Union D. F. Ustinov. in speaking to the personnel of a unit. stressed that in
the field of moral-political and psychological training of the Soviet Armed Forces
the tasks consist of developing in the men the abilities and skills to operate under
the most difficult conditions of contemporary var. Ideological indoctrination forms
the basis of this training.15

Psychological training ensures the instilling in the men of those qualities vhich
sake thes capable of operating successfully under dangerous. strained conditions

of contesporary war and accomplishing the combat mission in complete conformance
with their co-unist conviction and moral principles of conduct. The qualities of
the man's mind are improved in the course of psychological training: needs and
motives. character. temperament and capabilities. sensations. perceptions. ideas.
attention. memory. imagination. thinking and speech. feelings and will. knowledge.
abilities. skills. and habits necessary for successful operations in contesporary
war. The basis of psychological training in arsed forces of the socialist states is
moral-political training.

The requirements imposed on the intellectual components in the men's activity have
now increased sharply. It should be noted that in uorks on the psychology of think-
ing, including operational-tactical thinking. a withdrawal has been noted fro. the
traditional analysis of thinking types. forms. and operations and the qualities of
the mind to an analysis of the structure of the thinking act-understanding the sis-
sion. estimate of the situation. and adopting a decision.

Thus. the essence of natal-political and psychological training consists of the
purposeful molding of the aural-political and psychological stability of the person-
nel and their constant readiness to endure the most severe tests of contenporary ear
and not to lose the will for struggle and victory. The tasks of moral-political

and psychological training are determined by those requiresants which contemporary
var isposes on the spiritual strength of the men. The most inportsnt task of moral-
political and psychological training is teaching the sen the ability to control
their behavior in battle. Moral-political and psychological training is not an in-
dependent type of training of the personnel. Its basic content is envisaged by the
entire systes of political and cosbat training. silitary indoctrination. and the
organization of military life.

Chapter V. Principles and Methods of Moral-Political and Psychological Training

The moral-political and psychological training of the troops is inseparable from
party-political work in the Soviet Armed Forces. Party-political work is the
scientifically substantiated ideological and organizational activity on the isple-
sentetion of party policy in the Arsad Forces. It is directed toward the indoc-
trination of the servicemen in a spirit of communist conscientiousness. Soviet
patriotiss. socialist internationalisn. political vigilance and class hatred toward
the enemies of our sotherland. loyalty to military duty and the military oath. and
constant readiness to case forth for the defense of socialist achievements.

20

FOI‘OFFKJAI.USEENVLY
FOI‘OFFNJAI.USEGN‘LY

The tasks of party-political work are the rallying of the Armed Forces personnel
around the Coasmnist Party and the Soviet government. strengthening the combat sight
of the Soviet Armed Forces. molding lofty noral-political and combat qualities and
firm discipline in the men. nobilization for the attainment of high effectiveness
and quality of combat and political training. improvement of field. air. and naval
ability. and the mastery of new combat equipment and weapons; under colbat condi-
tions-nobilization for the accomplishment of the commander's combat order. for

the defense of the socialist fatherland. and for the complete defeat of the enemy.

Chapter VII. Holding Correct Impressions of Possible War in the Men

Contemporary war is a phenomenon for which it is not easy to prepare. An incorrect
notion of the processes of war and the nature of its course spiritually weaken a
person in a combat situation. And if the training and indoctrination of the men do
not fully prepare then for the possible tests of contemporary war. this will inflict
great damage on combat readiness. "Nothing has such a negative effect on the tac-
tical training of troops as simplifications and indulgences in combat training.
They create in the personnel incorrect notions of contemporary battle, hamper the
generation of lofty combat qualities in the men. and limit creativity. To teach
the troops in a difficult and strained situation and under conditions as close as
possible to combat conditions." stressed the Minister of Defense. Marshal of the
Soviet Union D. F. Ustinov. "is an immutable law of high combat readiness and it
must be strictly observed."“

Chapter XI. Holding Psychological Stability and Physical Endurance in the Men

The performance of duty in peacetime and the conduct of combat operations in time of
war are connected with the overcoming of difficulties and tests. Therefore. the
servicemen must possess such qualities as psychological stability and physical en-
durance.

Psychological stability and physical endurance are unthinkable without the men's
optimism. It is difficult to expect decisive and bold actions from people who are-
pessimistically attuned. A spirit of cheerfulness and optimism-this is what is
typical of the psychological atmosphere of a collective which is well ssrried on an
ideological basis and ready not only to stand its ground inaperiod of failures. but
also to impose its will on the enemy and win. Formed in the consciousness of the
servicemen along with optimism and faith in victory is conviction of the necessity
for the complete defeat of the enemy who has unleashed war against our motherland.

Psychological stability of the servicemen is impossible without a high sense of his
own dignity. Ambition should also be stressed. A sense of human dignity. noble
pride.and thedeepest spiritualrequirementnooperate always and everywhere as a per-
sonality richly endowed with intellect. will. and feelings help the servicemen to
maintain the presence of spirit. A man who possesses a sense of personal dignity

is able to submit to reason even at the moment of the strongest spiritual shocks.
This ability is called self-control. The predominance of reason in such a man by no
means weakens suffering. but only introduces a certain balance in its interaction
with thought. It is important that the man have sufficiently developed self-
respect.

21

FOI‘OFFICIAI.I£§E|MNLV
ltlltlﬂﬂC1A|.US£'0NLN

Under contemporary combat conditions. it seems that everything is directed toward
making the servicemen psychologically unstable. Danger. physical strain. uncertain-
ty. and chance--these are the obstacles and distracting circumstances which are di-
rected toward disorganizing the mind. And when a man perceives the surrounding
world, evaluates it. and foresees further development coolly. calmly, and quickly;
then bravery is spoken of as the manifestation of the presence of spirit.

A man's behavior in a dangerous situation. his psychological stability. and physical
endurance depend to a considerable degree on his temperament or type of higher ner-
vous activity. Generally accepted vital indices of a psychological property are
endurance. fitness for work. degree of fatigue. even temper. restraint. patience.
assiduity, the ability to wait. evenness of mood. mobility, speed in shifting atten-
tion. ease in changing feelings. and ease in breaking an old stereotype and estab—
lishing a new one.

As psychological studies show. among persons with a weak nervous system hindrances of
various types during work time and the distraction of their attention sharply worsen
the accuracy and speed of perception and remembering. which leads to a rapid increase
in errors; among persons with a strong nervous system. conversely. these functions
may even improve in a difficult situation. Thus. for example. the very same side
irritant (sharp. prolonged noise) lowers light-color sensitivity in people with a
weak nervous system and. conversely. increases it in people with a strong nervous
system. The same thing is also noted in relation to the distinguishing and remember-
ing of various information (for example. blips on a radar scope).

Conclusion

In contemporary war. as always the decisive role belongs to man. The moral-politi-
cal snd psychological ability of the people and the army to endure the most difficult
tests and not lose the will to victory depends on many factors. In addition to the
determining ones--public-social. economic. and ideological-great influence on the
spiritual strength of people is exerted by successes or defeats. the combat experi-
ence of the personnel. the quality of combat equipment and weapons. the maturity of
command personnel and the ability to withstand the enemy's ideological sabotage.

Spiritual steadfastneas and conplete confidence in the certain triumph of our just
cause provide the men of the socialist armies with indisputable moral-political
superiority over the personnel of the imperialist armies. V. I. Lenin noted. "That
people will never be defeated in which the majority of the workers and peasants
recognized, felt. and saw that they are defending their own. Soviet power--the power
of the workers. that they are defending that cause whose victory will ensure for
them and their children the possibility to enjoy all the blessings of culture and
all the creations of human labor.""

without belittling the significance of other factors which decide the outcome of
war. it can be stated that questions of the moral-political and psychological train-
ing of the troops for operations under conditions where contemporary means of con-
flict are enployed have especially important significance.

In reading Napoleon's book "Thoughts." V. I. Lenin extracted the following sentence
which interested him: "In each battle. there is a moment when the bravest soldiers.

22

FINICNHWCJALIﬁSEGMVLY
Ftll()FFICJAl.USlZ(HULY

after the greatest strain, feel the desire to run; this panic is engendered by a
lack of confidence in their courage. An insignificant instance. some pretence is
sufficient to return this confidence to them: high skill consists in creating
them."1° The combat experience of the Soviet Armed Forces shows that in such s
situation great significance is had by the ability of military leaders and commanders
to master the situation when it is most critical and inspire the personnel with the
inflexible resolve to accomplish the assigned mission. The personal example of the
communists and Komsomols also plays a large role. In other words. in order to free
some men from possible temporary confusion. a sudden thrust from without is neces-
sary: the commander's confident behavior, a firm command, personal example. The
goal of this energetic influence of commanders and political officers on the ideolo-
gical and psychological elements of consciousness consists of seeing that each mem—
ber of a section. crew. and subunit directs all his will. thought. and feelings
toward the continuous accomplishment of his responsibilities and his military duty.
In the words of V. I. Lenin, in the most difficult situation it is necessary not to
let oneself become demoralized or disorganized but to preserve a sober estimate of
the situation and maintain courage and firmness of spirit.""

By means of an external influence a person successfully overcomes possible temporary
manifestations of spiritual weakness. and the public. social aspect of his behavior
gains the upper hand over the instinct of self-preservation. Commanders' and politi-
cal officers' constant contact with the personnel. their confidence and firmness in
handling people. and the maintenance of high discipline guarantee against the mani-
festation of panic or confusion. V. I. Lenin repeatedly stressed the thought that
"war is war. it requires iron d1scipline."’° The maintenance of a high degree of
organization. discipline, and strict order strengthens the spiritual strength of the
men and imparts even greater courage and steadfastness to them.

It is important that in foreseeing possible tests. each man possess sufficient ex—
perience in moral-psychological control of his behavior and be able to suppress or
block some feelings (fear, confusion) and strengthen others (hatred for the enemy, a
sense of military honor. and others). And here a special role belongs to commanders
and political officers who can reliably control the spiritual condition of people

by various methods of their influence.

What do we mean by controlling the spiritual condition of the personnel? In essence,
it is the process of restructuring and making more active the moral-psychological
capabilities of people so as to effectively ensure to the maximum high readiness

and inflexible resolve for the fiercest struggle and victory over the enemy. If we
define this thought concretely, it can be said that control of spiritual forces
presumes good knowledge of the attitudes and opinions of people and constant moral
influence on their consciousness so that feelings of firm confidence, calmness. and
optimism dominate in the spiritual atmosphere of the military collectives. Control
of the spiritual processes also means the timely disclosure and elimination of
unfavorable elements in the moral-psychological state of the personnel.

The central element in indoctrinating necessary qualities in the personnel is
political training. Mastery of Marxist theory permits molding a scientific world
outlook in people. The system of political training of the personnel which has de-

veloped in our army meets contemporary requirements and is the most important ele-
ment in training a person for the defense of the socialist fatherland and for the

most difficult tests of war.

23

FOR OFFﬂJAl.USE(MVLY
FOR'OFFKJA1.USE(MHLY

The decisions of the 26th Party Congress disclose may. broad possibilities to raise
the quality of the personnel's political tot-perineum! their indoctrination» in a spirit
of Soviet patriotism and socialist internationalism. As L. I. Brezhnev noted in a
report at the Congress. "A strong alloy of high technical equipping. military
:kill. and invincible morale-such is the combat potential of the Soviet Armed '
orces.

In response to the decisions of the 26th Party Congress. socialist competition is
being initiated more and more widely in the Armed Forces. The Soviet servicemen are
accomplishing the socialist obligations assumed for combat and political training.
raising ratings. and mastering new equipment. An important place in competition is
occupied by moral questions: the struggle for observance of the standards of military
ethics. overcoming antipodes of communist morals. and the creation of the most favor-
able moral climate in the troop collectives. All this helps raise to an even higher
level the content and effectiveness of the troops' moral-political and psychological
training.

One of the most important conditions for moral-political and psychological training
is strict observance of the established tenor of army life. its traditions. and
military customs. Scientifically substantiated strict regulation of military activi-
ty instills in the servicemen accuracy, execution. and self-collection and it trains
them to value the time factor. Houever. the measured rhythm of everyday army life is
interrupted occasionally by the assignment of unexpected missions and the most

varied special situations with the subsequent execution of marches, firings. missile
launches. and so forth in order to develop the personnel's readiness for a rapid
transition from peacetime to combat conditions.

In molding the servicemen who is ready for any tests. the entire system of routine
army days also accomplishes an important national. state indoctrinational task. By
the decree of the CPSU Central Committee. "On further improvement of ideological and
politicakindoctrinational work," the Ministry of Defense and the Main Political Di-
rectorate of the Soviet Army and Navy have been charged with implementing measures
directed toward the further strengthening of the Soviet Armed Forces' indoctrination—
a1 role. The CPSU Central Committee points to the necessity for the further increase
in the glorious traditions of the Armed Forces. service in which is a remarkable
school of work and military ability. moral purity and courage. patriotism and com-
radeship. The Soviet servicemen. it is stressed in the decree. should have a pro-
found realization of their duty to ensure the peaceful labor of the Soviet people

and the defense of the cause of peace and socialism.

Military service occupies a special place in the indoctrinational system of our
society. In fact. it arrives at the age (from 18 years of age) when the process of
the formation. development, and consolidation of a person's basic qualities is es-
pecially intensive. During service, the general process of cat-unist indoctrina-
tion and the formation of a comprehensively developed personality of a socialist
society continues extremely effectively.

Tho groups of interconnected preconditions exert a certain influence on the spiri-
tual development of the Soviet servicemen: the basic group consists of the socio-

political conditions and spiritual factors uhich exist in a developed socialist
society as well as the specific conditions of military service and way of life.

24
FOR OPHCIAL USE ONLY
me OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The main feature of the conditions for today's military service consists of the
necessity to be in a state of constant combat readiness. This special feature is
a factor of tremendous social significance which has iaposed a noticeable imprint
on the entire structure. rhythm. and features of contemporary army life and its
spiritual atmosphere. Realization of his direct responsibility for the security of

the fatherland and for the future fates of the peoples accelerates the molding of
the qualities of patriot and internationalist.

A system of combat and political training has developed and is being continuously
improved in the Armed Forces. contributing in every possible way to the political,
moral. professional. and physical development of the motherland'e young citizens.
The role of military labor is exceptionally great here. A high degree of regu-
lation of actions. great tension. and the necessity constantly to subordinate one's
efforts to the previously assigned task are inherent in it.

Army life itself with the special order inherent in it exerts a specific influence
on the development of consciousness. habits. and many qualities of the personality.
The generation of new rules, habits. and standards of behavior under the influence
of the specific processes of service and life affects the development of the per-
sonality and its qualities. capabilities. and inclinations.

Under conditions of military service. these and other molding factors create extreme-
ly favorable preconditions for the formation of the personality. And the indoc-
trinators--commanders and political officers-always face an important methodological
task: to be able to use, coordinate, and direct these molding factors. The essence
of controlling the process of the spiritual development of the personality of the

servicemen and the military collective also consists of this to a considerable de-
gree.

Success of moral-political and psychological training is ensured by the joint. co-
ordinated work of commanders. political officers. and party and Komeomol organiza-
tions which are tirelessly attaining new achievements in the training and indoc-
trination of the personnel and the development. in them. of the moral-political.
combat. and psychological qualities which are necessary for the accomplishment of
the missions facing the Soviet Armed Forces which are called on to be in constant
combat readiness guaranteeing the immediate rebuff of any aggressor.

FOOTNOTES

1. "Haterialy XXVI s"yezda KPSS“ [Materials of the 26th CPSU Congress]. Moscow.
1981. p 20.

2. See: Lenin. V. 1.. "Polnoye sobraniye sochineniy" [Complete Works]. Vol 37.
p 122.

3. Brezhnev. L. 1.. "Leninskim Kursom" [Following the Lenin Course], Moscow. 1976,
Vol 5. pp 481-482.

4. Lenin, V. 1.. op. cit., Vol 40. p 267.

25
FINI()FFIC1AI.[EHE(MNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

5. "Hateriely XXVI e"yezde KPSS." p 66.
6. KBASNAXA ZVEZDA. 10 Hay 1981.

7. Brezhnev. 1.. 1.. "Ne etrezhe air. 1 eoteiellm" [On Guard Over Peace and
Socialite]. Moscow. 1979, p 139.

so Lenin. v. 1.. op. cit.. V01 3‘. pp 896-1970
9. 11:111.. Vol 13. p 376.

10. "On Further Inproveuent of Ideological end Polldcel-Indoctrinettonel Bork":
Decree of the CPSU Central Coulttee of 26 April 1979. p 3.

11. Lenin. V. 1.. op. cit. Vol 23. p M.

12. Marx. K. and Engels, F.. "I: rennykh prolrvedenly" [Pro- hrlier Works].
Moscow, 1956. p 566.

13. Hen. K. and insole. P.. "Sochtneniye" [Herb]. Vol 21. p 314.

14. See: Yeplehev. A. A.. "ldeologtcheeluye rebote v Sovetekikh Vooruzhennykh
Silekh" [Ideological work 1n the Soviet Armed Forces]. 9 204.

15. See: Ueunov. D. 1?.. "Izbrennyye rechl 1 etet'yl" [Selected Speechee end
Articlee]. Moscow. 1979. p 355.

16. lbld.. p 395.

17. Lenin. V. 1.. op. cit” Vol 38. p 315.

18. "Leninekly ebornik" [Lentn Collection]. 12. p 383.
19. See: Lento. V. 1.. op. cit” Vol Mo. 9 229.

20. 11:141.. Vol 60, p 178.

21. "Mcterlely XXVI e"yezde KPSS." p 66.

COPYRIGHT: Voycnlzdet . 1981

6367
C80: [801/229

26

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OF‘ﬂC1AI.USE(MNLY

ARMED FORCES

BOOK EXCBRPTS: CPSU DOCUMENTS ON THE ARMED PORCBS

Moscow KP88 0 VOORUZBENNYIB SILAKH SOVBTSIOOO SOYUZA: DOKUHENTY 1917-1981 in
Russian 1981 (signed to press 31 Her 81) pp 1-16. 609-623

[Poreuord. Table of Contents and Annotation free book “The CPSU on the Arsed

Forces of the Soviet Union: Doom-ants. 1917-1981". conpiled by N. I. Ssvinkin

and K. H. Bogolyubov with assistance in preparation of material by A. I.
Colyakov. in the "Officer‘s Library" series. Order of Labor Red Banner
Voyennoye izdatel'stvo of the USSR Ministry of Defense. 95.000 copies. 623

pages]
[Excerpts] Contents

Foreword...................................................................

1917-1920

2d All-Russian Congress of Soviets of workers' and Soldiers' Deputies.
Zyuoa®u(F8Mwwu)”Unnunuuuunnnuunnnunnuu

V. I. Lenin. To the workers. Soldiers and Peasants!......................

V. I. Lenin. Decree on Peace ...... .......................................
V. I. Lenin. Declaration of the Rights of the Barking and Exploited People.
V. I. Lenin. To the All-Arty Congress on Army Desobilitation...............
0n the Horkers' and Peasante' Red Arsy. Decree of the Council of People's

Conniesars.................................................................

V. I. Lenin. The Socialist ﬂoseland is in Danger!..........................

V. 1. Lenin. Position of the RSDRP [Russian Social Delocrstic Labor Party]
(Bolshevik) CC on the Issue of a Separate and Annexational Peace...........

7th Special RKP(L) [Russian Communist Party (Bolshevik)] Congress.
6-8 Hatch 1918..... ooooooooo aoaoaeeaaoaasaaaaoaaaaaooases-cacao ccccc coco-ea

V. I. Lenin. Resolution on War snd Peace.................................
V. l. Lenin. 0n the Supreme Military Council. 1 April 1918.................
V. l. Lenin. RKP(h) CC Decree on the Question of the International

Situation.o................................................................

27

FOR OFFKJAI.USE(NVLY

3

17
17
18
21
26

25
26

28

31
31
32

33
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

V. l. Lenin. Telegram to the Petrograd Co-ittee of (Jo-waists.
27 July1918...0.0....CO0.0000009.0000.0.00.00.00.000000000QOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO 33

V. l. Lenin. To C. Ye. Zinov‘yev........................................... 310

V. I. Lenin. Speech at Rally of the Warsaw Revolutionary Reginent.
_ 2 Msu.t1918.00.00.00...000.000.000.00000000000000QOOOOIOOOOOOOOOO00...... 35

V. I. Lenin. Greeting to the Red Army on Occasion of the Taking of Kazan'.. 37
V. l. Lenin. Telegram to Conand Courses in Petrograd. 18 September 1918... 38
V. 1. Lenin. Letter to Red Army Men Who Participated in the Taking of

' 38
“z.“ aaeeoeoeooeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeoeeooeeeeoaeeeeoeseeeeeeoaeeeeaeooeeaeeeee

V. I. Lenin. Central Conittee Circular Letter to All Party Meabers Who
Are Coniasars. Conanders and Red Army Men. Fall. 1918.................... 39

V. l. Lenin. Telegram to CIC of 2d Army. 7 November 1918................... 60
V. I. Lenin. Speech on "Red Officer's Day." 26 Rove-her 1918............... 51
V. l. Lenin. Telegram to CIC 1. I. Vataetia................................ 41
On the Policy of the Military Departeent. RIP Central Committee Decree..... 62
8th RK!(b) Congress. 18-23 March 1919...................................... 63
V. I. Lenin. From Central Committee Report. 18 March..................... 43
From Program of Russian Connunist Party (Bolehevik)...................... 65
In the Military Pield.................................................. 65
Resolution on the Military Question...................................... ‘7
A. General Provisions.................................................. 67
B. Praccical Measures................................................. 57
Greeting of the 8th RKP(h) Congress to the Red Army...................... 59
V. I. Lenin. Prom Speech at Closing of the Congress. 23 March............ 60
V. I. Lenin. Address to the Red Arny....................................... 61
V. I. Lenin. Letter to Petrograd Workers on Assistance to the Eastern

Front............o........-...........o..ooo.o.o...............oo.n.o....-. 63

V. l. Lenin. RKP(b) CC Theses in Connection with the Situation of the
Eastern P'onto0oeoeseeaeseeeeeaeeveeeeeaeaeaeeaaseoeeaoeeeeeeaaeeeoeeeaooss 63

To All (:uberniya and Uyezd Committees..................................... 66
V. I. Lenin. Draft CC Directive on Military Unity.......................... 69
For Defense of Petrograd................................................... 71
To All Party Organizations................................................. 72

Instructions to RR? CC Representatives in Guberniyae....................... 74

V. 1. Lenin. Note over the Direct Hire to Chairman of the Sovnarlwn
[Council of People's Comissars] of the Ukraine. 28 May l9l9............... 75

28

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

V. l. Lenin. Beware of Spies!.............................................. 76
V. l. lenin. Telegram to K. Ye. Vbroshilov. Copy to F. A. Artem. Khar'kov.

'June1919...”u..........................o........o.......u...o..oo.... 77

V. I. lenin, Telegram to V. I. Mezhlauk. K. Ye. Voroshilov. G. N.
Mel'nichanskiy, P. A. Arten and G. N. Kaminskiy............................ 78

V. 1. Lenin. Telegram to Revvoyensovet [Revolutionary Military Council]
of the Eastern Front....................................................... 78

On Importance of the Petrograd Front for the Situation of the Entire
Soviet Republic, From RKP(b) CC Decree. 10 June 1919....................... 79

From Account of EXP Central Committee...................................... 80

V. l. Lenin. Everything for the Struggle Against Denikin! (Letter of
EKP(b) CC to Party 0rganiuations).......................................... 83

To All RKP(b) Organizations................................................lOO

0n Mobilization of Party Menbers for the Front, REP(b) CC Decree,
[9 July1919eeeeeeesoeeeeeee.eeeeeeooeeoeeoeeoeeeeeeeeeeeaeeeeeeooeeeeeetoelol

V. l. Lenin. Directives on the Defense of Odessa and Kiev..................102

V. l. lenin. Letter to workers and Peasants on Occasion of the Victory
over Kolchak.. ..... ........................................................103

V. l. Lenin. To 8. I. Cusev................................................llO
RKP CC Circular Letter.....................................................lll
V. l. Lenin, To B. M. Sklyanskiy...........................................ll3
0n Party Hark in the Red Aruy..............................................ll3
V. I. Lenin. Example of Petrograd Horkers..................................llb

The Question of the Situation at the Fronts. Prom RKP(b) CC Decree.
[5 October 1919...... ....... ...............................................116

On Mutual Relationships of Revvoyensovet's and Staffs with Party
Organizations..............................................................118

V. 1. Lenin. To the Workers and Red Army Men of Petrograd..................ll9
V. l. Lenin. To Comrade Red Army Men.......................................120

V. I. Lenin. To C. N. Kaninskiy. D. P. Os'kin and V. I. Mezhlauk.
'20 October 1919. .......... .................................................121

V. l. Lenin. Greeting to the Petrogrsd Workers.............................122

To All Cuberniya and Uyezd Committees of the RKP and to Front and Army
Political Departuents......................................................123

V. I. Lenin, Letter to Workers and Peasants of the Ukraine on Occasion
of Victories over Denikin..................................................125

9th RKP(b) Congress. 29 March-5 April 1920.................................l3l
V. l. Lenin. From Central Connittee Report, 29 March.....................l3l

29

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHC‘IAI. USE ONLY

Resolution on Transition to a Militia System.............................l33
Greeting of 9th RKP(b) Congress to the Red Arly and Red Fleet of the

38'“... ..... Q....................‘ICO.I...............O..................‘l36

The Polish Front and Our Tasks. RKP(b) CC Theses. 23 Hay l920..............l37
V. I. Lenin. For Assistance to the wounded Red Aray Mani...................lbl

Proa Account of RKP(b) CC for the Tine fro. the 9th Congress through
15 Septemr [920.000.00.0000.0.00...0.00..0‘.OOOOOOOOOOOOOOOIOOOOO...COIitlkz

To All RKP(b) Cuberniya Connittees. RKP(b) CC Circular.....................lh7
9th All-Russian RKP(h) Conference. 22-25 Septeaher l920....................158

Resolution on Organizational Account of the CC...........................168
V. l. Lenin. To the Poor Peasants of the Ukraine...........................169
For Assistance to the Front................................................150
On Social Security for Paailies of Red Arly Hen............................151
V. l. Lenin. Labor and Defense Council Decree. 24 December l920............152

l921-l9b0

0n the Red Army. Fron RKP(b) CC Circular Letter. 12 January l921...........153
10th RKP(h) Congress. 8-16 March 1921......................................l$b

Pro: Resolution on Glnvpolitprosvet [Main Political Enlightenment
Collittea of RSPSR People's Col-iasariat of Education) and the Party's
Agitprop Tasks...........................................................l$4

Decree on the Military Question..........................................lSS
0n Strengthening the Red Aruy..............................................lS9
0n Servicing Red Army Men Released for Long-Tern Leaves....................l66
More on Servicing Persons Released on Long-Term Leaves.....................166
To All Party Members Released fron the Red Aruy on Indefinite Leave........167
0n Staffing Military educational Institutions..............................169

0n Mutual Relations of Political Departments of the Red Arny and Fleet
with Party Organizations of the RRP(h).....................................l7l

For Strengthening the Staffing of Hilitary Educational lnstitutions........l72
0n halting Desobiliration of Political Workers.............................l76

RKP(b) CC Instructions to Organizations of Red Army and Fleet RKP(b)
Cells in the Rear and at the Pront.........................................l75

V. l. Lenin. Letter to G. K. 0rdzhonikidze on Strengthening the
Georgian Red Aruy............. ..... ........................................186

On Connissers and Political Workers in the Red Arny........................186
llth RRP(h) Congress. 27 March-2 April 1922................................189

30

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOII OFFICIAL USE ONLY

From the Resolution of the Decenher 1921 RIP Conference on the Question
of Strengthening the Party. in Connection with Consideration of Experi-
ence in Checking Its Personnel...........................................189

Decrees on Question of Strengthening the Red Aruy........................l90

0n the Cstaign of Recruitment to Military Educational Institutions.
m(b) cc [lettertconne00....OOOOOOOOOOOOCOOOOICQOOOO00....0.0.0.00000000000192

0n Participation of Cuherniya Co-ittees in Red Am and Fleet
P011t1c‘1worke-sessseessseesesesseeeseeeeeeseeeoeseoeseseeeseeeessseessssel9‘

0n the Red Arly's 5th Anniversary..........................................l95

From Account for a Year of Bork of the RRP(h) CC fro. the llth to the
12th m(b) C003!“8.......o......o.o.o..u......-.o.....o.............o...l96

12th RKP(b) Congress. 17-25 April 1923.....................................206
Fro- Resolution on RIP CC Accomt........................................206
Pros Resolution on Questions of Propaganda. the Press snd Agitation......206
Fron Resolution on Work of the RKSM [Russian Col-mist Youth League].....207

loth RKP(h) CC Conference with Responsible Horksrs of National Republics
and ObIRStS. 9-I2 June 1923...ssossessosssosssesessoeessssseeseesssesssssss207

Fro- :he Resolution "Practical Measures for Inplenenting Resolution
of 12th Party Congress on the Question of Nationalities". . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .207

RKP(b) 0C Statute on Political Indoctrination of Predraft-Ags Youth and
Hum“ Relations of PUR [Rewoyensovet Political Directorate] Entities
"1th the"SHOOOOOIOOOIOOOOIOOOOOOOCCOO...‘0.0.0.0...0.0.0....0000000.0.000208

0n Strengthening work in the Red Army. Fron RRP(h) CC Circular Letter.
29 October l923............................................................210

Moat Inportant Upcoming Party Tasks in Area of the Press. Fran RRP(h) CC
Decree, 6 February1924....................................................21l

0n work Along Dcmohilized Red Artsy Men and Those Called into the Arty.
m(b) CC Circular Letter. 17 Hitch1925......”"oo.o...o......o....-.....212

0n the Military Department, From RRP(b) CC Plenum Resolution.
31 Hatch-2 April lgzéeeeseesseeseeseeslleeeeseosoeeeeseeeeeseososeeeeeeeeeezl‘

13th W(b) Conaess, 23-31”192‘s...oeoeseesseeeeeeeseeessssseseeeseseezls
From Resolution on the PressZIS
From Resolution on work Along the Youth..................................216

0n Predraft Training.216

From RKP(b) CC Instructions to RKP(b) Cells in the Red Any and Fleet.
20 December I924 ....... ....................................................217

Greeting of RKP(h) Central Comittee to Editors and Associates of the
Newspaper KRASNAYA ZVEZDA.................................. ....... .........223

Questions of the work of Military Cells............................. ....... 223

31

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

OnOne-Han (Jo-and in the Red Arlyn”.....................................227
Training Persona on Leave free the Red Array. 800) CC Decree..............229

0n Hort Along the Denobilieed Red Army Men. 300) CC Letter.
25 July1925......0......OOCOOOOOCOIOOOOOOOCOOOIOCOOOOQOOOOCOOOOOOOOOOOQOOOZw

Statute on Bork Among m (Russian Leuiniat Co-uniat Youth League]
Henbera in the Red Amy and Red Fleet. Approved by 300) cc. Ills}! CC
and P“. 27Ju1y1925.00.00.00.UOOOOOOOOOOOOIOOOOOOOOOIIOOOOOOOO0.0.0.0....232

0:: Supporting Released Co-and Personnel...................................237

To All V00) [All-Union Co-uniat Party (Bolshevikn Organizations and
to All Workerz. and Peasants. Proe Appeal of V00) CC......................238

Prom Slogans for ”Defense Heek"............................................240

0n Recruitnent Campaign to Hilitary Schools, V00) CC Decree.
15 July ‘927000OOOOOOCOIOOOC00'...0......D.OOCCOCOQOOOGCOOGOOC0.0.00.00.00.2‘2

0n Using Persona Deaobilized from the led Army in Local Soviet.
Cooperative and Social work. V00) CC Decree. 16 October l927.............263

0n Celebrating the 10th Anniversary of the Red Army. tron V00) CC
Decree. ‘9Jamq1928...OQIOCOCOOO..0..0.00000COOUOOOOOIOOC00.9.0000000002“

Fron V00) CC Slogans for 10th Anniversary of Red Aruy....................2A6

0n Political-Moral Status of the Red Arty. l’roe V00) CC Decree.
”October 1928.0OOOOOOOOOOQQOOOIOOOOOCOIl..‘0...OI.OOO.'OO'OCOCOOOOOOOOOOOZ‘a

0n the Work of nilitary Cells. V00) CC Decree of 10 Deceeber 1928
med on Rmtt of tn PWOOOOIOI‘OUOOOOQ.OIOOOOOOOQOQOCOCCI.0.00.00.00.9002‘9

0n “RA [Vorkers' and Peasants' Red Arny] Cot-and and Political
Personnel. V00) OC Decree. 25 February l929..............................253

On Training Persona on Leave for the MA. V00) CC Decree.
12 April [929.00.0.90.0.0...OI.00.0.0.0...CIOOOOO...l.I‘OOOOOOCCCOOOQOOOCOOZ”

0n the Status of USSR, Defense. Fro. V00) CC Decree. is July l929........258
16th mm Congress. 26 June-13 July l930.................................26l

Fro. Resolution on Account of V00) Central Conittee...................26l
0n the "Defense Decade." V00) CC Decree. 5 October 1930..................261
0n MA Conand and Political Personnel. V00) CC Decree. 5 June 1931.....262

0n Publication of "Hiatory of the Civil Her.” Prom V00) 0C Decree.
30July1931....C.GUCCIOOICOOCO‘GIOCOCOQ0.0...OOOOOOQOOOOOO0.0IQOOD'0......26s

V00) CC Greeting to Horkera' and Peasants' Red Any and the USSR
Revolutionary Military Council.............................................266

17th V00) Congress. 26 January-lo February 1936......................... 267
On Party Organizations in the Red Army. Pron V00) Bylaws...............267
V00) CC Greeting to the let Horse Arty on 15th Anniversary of Its

Actlvltimu.o........................................n....e........o.....268

32

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

0n Creation of the USSR Defense Co-ittee. Pros ma») CC Decree.
27M:11 1937..00.0.0000...0.0.0.0.000...OI.0.00......00.000.000.0000000000268

0n Creation of Military-Industrial Connission under the Defense
Conittee. Pros VKP(b) CC Decree. 31 January 1938..........................268

For the 20th Anniversary of the Uorhsrs' and Peasants' Red drag and
Navy. From Theses of the mm DC Department of Party Propaganda end

Agita‘tooooeseeeeoeeeeeoeesnoteeoeeeeeeoe.Oee.e0.eeeoeeoeoeeeeeeoeteeeott0.269

0n National Units and Formations of the mu. Prom VIP“) 0C and USSR
SN! [Council of People's Con-issars] Decree. 7 March 1938..................286

0n Selection of 6.000 Party Msdnrs for Politics! Bork in the am.
Pros CC Politburo Decree. 29 August 1939...................................287

0n Military Retraining. Recertificetion of Party Cosmittee workers and
on the Procedure of Their lbbiliution into the am. mm CC
Politburo Decree (Extract). l3 March1960...”.............................288

0n Strengthening One-Man Comand in the Red Army and Navy. USSR
Supreee Soviet Presidium Uhse..289

1961-1965

On the Military Situation. From USSR Supreme Soviet Presidiun Ukase.
22 Jme19“...e..00...0.000DOOOOOOOOOOOOUOOOOIOOO00.0.0000000IOOOOI00000000291

0n Mobilization of Reservists in the Leningrad. Baltic Special.

western Special. Kiev Special. Odessa. Khar'kov. Oral. Mascov.

Arkhangel'sk. Ural. Siberian. Volge. North Caucasus and ‘l'ranscaucasus
Military Districts. USSR Supreme Soviet Presidium Ukaee. 22 June 19“....”293

0n the General Headquarters of the High Co-nand of the USSR Arned
Forces, Decree of USSR Sovnsrkon and VKP(b) CC (Extract). 23 June 1%1.....29b

0n the Soviet Information Bureau. VRP(b) CC and USSR Sovnsrkom
Decree. 24 June 1961. ..... .................................................296

On Conditions of Working Time of workers and Esployeee in Hertime.
USSR supreu $01718: Presldlull UN”. 26 June lg‘leeeeoeoeeseeeaeeeeeeteeeeez95

0n Selection of Party Mowers for Strengthening Party-Political
Influence in Regiments. 1100:) CC Politburo Resolution. 27 June 1961.......296

To Party and Soviet Organizations of Front Oblaste. USSR Sovnarkom
and VKP(b) CC Directive (Extract). 29 June 1961............................297

Formation of the State Defense Comittee. USSR Supreme Soviet Presidium.
VKP(b) CC and USSR Sovnarkom Decree. 30 June 1961..........................299

0n Motor Vehicle-Tractor and Cart Transportetion Supplied for the
Red Army. USSR Supreme Soviet Ukase. 30 June 1941. .. . .. . . . .. . . .. .. ..... . ...300

On Universal Compulsory Training of the Population for Air Defense.
USSR Council of People's Conmissars Decree. 2 July 1901....................300

0n Voluntary Mobilization of the workers of Moscow and Moscow Oblest
into Home Guard Divisions. Fron GOKO [State Defense Comittee] Decree
No 10 Dated lo July 191.1302

33
POI! OFHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

On the General Headquarters [cm] of the High Col-and. State Defense
Co-ittee Decree (Extract). 10 July 1941.303

0n Reorganization of Entities of Political Propaganda and on
Establishing the Inst itution of Military Conisssrs in the Workers'
and Peasants' Red Array. USSR Suprene Soviet Presidiun Ukase. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .306

Statute on Military Comiasars of the Horkers' and Peasants' Red Army,
Approved by USSR Suprene Soviet Presidium.................................305

On Organization of Struggle in the Rear of Ger-an Forces. VRP(b) CC
Decree (Extract). 18 July 1961..306

0n the Suprene Co-ander. USSR Suprene Soviet Presidiua. USSR Sovnarkoa
and VRP(b) CC Decree (Extract). 8 August 1961.308

On Strengthening Military and Physical Training of Pupils in
8th-10th Grades of Secondary Schools. USSR Comcil of People's
Co-issars Decree. 11 August 1961. .308

On Conferring Military Ranks on Supervisory Personnel and Red Arly
Men Distinguished in Fighting for the Motherland. USSR Supreme Soviet
Presidiun URase. 18 August 1961............................................309

0n Procedure for Acceptance into the Party of Red Arny ﬁn and
Red Anny Supervisory Personnel Hho Especially Distinguished
Theaselves in Fighting. VKP(b) CC Decree. 19 August 19“. .. . ...........309

On Collection of Harm Articles and Underwear for the Red Arly
Anong tie Population. 110(1)) CC Decree. 5 Septenber 1941...................310

On Universal Compulsory Training of USSR Citizens in Military
Affairs. CORD Decree. 17 Septeaber1961....................................311

0n Organization of All-Union Assistance Co-ittee for Serving Sick
and wounded Fighting Men and Co-anders of the Red Artsy. Fron CC
Politburo Decree. 8 October 1961..313

0n Establishment of a State of Siege in Moscow. State Defense
Conitte. Decree. 190ctober1941...........................................31/o

0n Selection of VKP(b) Meabers for Political Managenent Bork in
the Rm. VKP(b) CC Politburo Decree. 10 Hove-tar19101.....................315

On Procedure for Conferring Next Military Rank on Supervisory
Personnel of the Arly in the Field. State Defense Co-ittee Decree.
20 November 1941315

On Acceptance of Candidates for VRP(b) Membership Distinguished in
Fighting Against the Gen-an Invaders. VKP(b) CC Decree. 9 December 1961....317

On Party-Political Hark in hospitals of the USSR Narkonzdrav
[People's Conisssr for health]. VKP(b) CC Decree. 12 January 1962.........317

On Measures for Preventing Epideaic Diseases in the Country and the
Red Army. State Defense Conittee Decree. 2 February 1962. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .318

On Celebrating the 210th Anniversary of tre Red Artsy. mm CC Decree.
20 February 19b2...........................................................321

34

NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Pron Slogans of the m(b) CC for 25th Anniversary of the Red Aruy.........321

On Measures for Reinforcing Rear Directorates of Fronts. Arnies.
Corps and Divisions. State Defense Co-ittee Decree. 19 Hay 1952... ... .....32b

Questions of the Partisan Novenent. State Defense Co-ittee Decree.
30 my ‘9‘20‘00000OOOOOOOODDIOOOOOO0.0.0.0....OOOOOOOOO0.0.0.00000000000000324

Questions of the Partisan Hove-ant. State Defense Co-ittee Decree.
28 Sept”: l96200.000000000000COOCCOOOIOOOOOOOOOO‘UUOOOOO0.0.0.0.90'00000325

0n Establishment of Cowlets One-Han (Jo-and and Abolishing the
Institution of Hilitary Co-issars in the Red Arly. USSR Supreae
Soviet Presidiua Decree....................................................326

On Extension of the USSR Supra-e Soviet Presidiun Decree on
Establishing Cowlete One-Han Co-end and Abolishing the Institution
of Military Seminars in the Red Aramto the Navy.........................328

Fron VRNb) Slogans for the 25th Anniversary of the Red Arny...............328

0n Reorganization of the Structure of Party and RoesonoI Organizations
in the Red Any and on Strengthening the Role of Front. Arty and
Division Newspapers. VKP(b) CC Decree. 26 Ray 1963. . .. . .. .... .....330

On Procedure for Conferring Military Ranks on Red Arny Serviceman.
USSR Suprene Soviet Presidiun Decree. 26 July 1963. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .332

On Division of Navy Servicenen into Rank-and-File. Petty Officers and
Officers. USSR Suprene Soviet Ukese. 10 August 1963. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. ..333

On Organisation of Suvorov Military Schools. Special Trade Schools.

Special Nurseries and Children's Receivers and Distributors for

Children of Red Army Soldiers and Partisans of the Patriotic Her as

Nell as for Orphans Whose Parents Died at the Hands of Oernan

Occupiers. Pron USSR SN! and VKP(b) CC Decree. 21 August 1943..............336

On Approval of a Nev Model of the Red Banner. the Guards Red Banner
and Statute on the Red Banner of Troop Units and Combined Units.
and of the Navy. USSR Suprene Soviet Ukase. 5 February 1966................336

Pros VKP(b) CC Slogans for 26th Anniversary of the Red Any................337
Pros VKNb) CC Slogans for 27th Anniversary of the Red Arny................339
1966-1981
19th CPSU Congress. 5-14 October 1952......................................3lol

Party Organizations in the Soviet Artsy. Naval Forces and in
Transportation. Fron CPSU Bylaw.........................................361

20th CPS" Congress.16-25 17¢me 19560seesoossseeeeesoasoeassesses.sesses3‘2
Fron Resolution on Accountability Report of the CPSU Central Co-ittee...3b2

For the 60th Anniversary of the Great October Socialist Revolution
(1917-1957). From Theses of CPSU CC Departmnt of Propaganda and
Agitation and Institute of Heraisn-Leninisn of the CPSU CC. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .3452

35

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

For Soldiers of the Valorous Armed Forces of the Soviet Union--Privates

and Seanen. Sergeants and Petty Officers. Officers. Generals and

Adairals. Party and Knnsonol Heaters. Address of the CPSU cc. USSR

Council of Ministers and USSR Supreme Soviet Presidium in Connection

with the 60th Anniversary of the Great October Socialist Revolution........368

0n Iwroving Party-Political Hort in the Soviet Army and Navy. Prom
CPSU CC Plenum Decree. 29 October l957.....................................357

0n Erection of a Monuaent in the City of Stalingrad to Co-enornte
the Victory over Fascist Gernan Troops at Stalingrad. CPSU CC Plenum Decree
23 January 1958.358

Greeting of the CPSU CC. USSR Supreme Soviet Presidium and USSR
Comcil of Ministers to Personnel of the Valorous Amd Forces of
the Soviet Union...........................................................359

0n Military Councils of the Soviet Army and Navy. Frou CPSU Central
Couittee and USSR Council of Ministers Decree. 17 April l958..............361

Extraordinary 21st CPSU Congress. 27 January-5 February 1959. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .362

From Resolution on the Report "On Control Figures of Development of
the USSR Nation‘l Economy for1959-196s"e eeeeee eeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeseeeeeee362

To the Main Political Directorate of the Soviet Army and Navy. Greeting
of the CPSU Central Co-ittee..............................................362

On Job Place-ents and Material-Personal Support of Serviceman Released

from the Armed Forces in Accordance with the Lav on a New Significant
Reduction of the USSR Armed Forces. in the CPSU Central Connittee and

USSR Council of Ministers........................ ..........................363

On Creation of the Military Council of the Missile Forces. CPSU
Central Committee and USSR Council of Ministers Decree. 22 June 1960..... ..369

On the Hark of Voyennoye Irdatel'stvo. From CPSU CC Decree. 13 March 1961..370
22d CPSU Congress. 17'31 October lﬁleeeeeeoeeeeeeeooesoeoeeoeseoeosoeeoe'037]

Strengthening the Areed Forces and the Soviet Union's Defenses.
Fto‘ CPSU Prosta000000OOOOOOOUODOOOOOOOI0-000.0GOOOOOOOIOOOQ 000......00371

'l'o Soviet Armed Forces Personnel. Greeting of the CPSU Central
Co-ittee. USSR Supreme Soviet Presidium and USSR Council of Ministers.. . ..373

On Creation of the Political Directorate of the Missile Forces.
From CPSU CC Decree. 1. April l963..........................................376

0n the Next Tasks of the Party's Ideological Bork. From CPSU CC Plenum
Decree. 2! June 1963.......................................................376

0n Measures for Further lnproveaent of Preparation of Predraft-Age
and Draft-Age Youth for Service in the USSR Arned Forces. Pros
CPSU CC and USSR Council of Ministers Decree. 20 July l966.................378

0n Celebration of the 20th Anniversary of the Soviet People's Victory
in the Great Patriotic War of the Soviet Union 19101-19105. Fro-
CPSU CC Decree. 30 March 1965..............................................380

36

Iron omcm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

L. l. Brezhnev. From the Report "Great Victory of the Soviet People"

at Ceremonial Meeting in the Kremlin's Palace of Congresses Dedicated

to the 20th Anniversary of the Soviet People's Victory in the Great

Patriotic "at. 8m1%500DOC...OOOOOOOOOIOIOOOOOOO00.0.0000...0.0.0.0....3“

0n Serious Deficiencies in the Work of Party Organizations and

Political Entities of the Odessa Military District and the Red Banner

Baltic Fleet in Acceptance into the Party and Indoctrination of Young

Party Members. Prom CPSU CC Decree. 22 June 1965...........................é10

L. I. Brezhnev. Prom Speech in the Kremlin at Reception in Honor of
Military Academy Graduates. 3 July 1965....................................612

23d CPSU Congress. 29 March-8 April l966...................................621

L. l. Brezhnev. Prom Accomtability Report of CPSU Central Conittee
to the 23d CPSU Congress.................................................621

From Resolution on the Accountability Report of the CPSU Central
comtteeoi.IIIOOOIOOCOOOOOO0..0.0.0.0000...OOI...O0.0.00.0...0.0.0.0....423

On Status and Measures for Improvement of the Work of the Voluntary
Society for Assistance to the Army. Air Force and Navy (USSR DOSAAP).
CPSU CC and USSR Council of Ministers Decree. 7 May 1966...................b25

L. l. Brezhnev. From the Speech at Kremlin Reception in Honor of
Military Academy Graduates. 1 July l966....................................ﬁ32

0n Celebration of the 25th Anniversary of the Soviet Guards. From
CPSU CC Decree. 23 August l966eeeeeeteseeeeeoeseoeeooeseseeoeeesssesessoostb‘2

0n Organization of the Military History Institute. From CPSU CC Decree.
27 August 1966eseeoeosoeoeeeeseeeseOIeeseessOOeesses0esee-smsoeosslesssesss“3

To Workers of the City of Moscow and Moscow Oblast. to Participants of
the Great Battle of Moscow.................................................b66

0n Measures for Improving Party-Political Bork in the Soviet Army and
Navy. Prom CPSU CC Decree. 21 January 1967.................................6£6

50th Anniversary of the Great October Socialist Revolution. From
CPSU Central Committee Theses..............................................b51

L. l. Brezhnev. From Speech at Kremlin Reception in Honor of Military
Academy Graduates. 5 July 1967...... ..... ..................................46l

0n Establishing Memorial Banners for Military Combined Units. Units and
Ships in Honor of the 50th Anniversary of the Great October Socialist

Revolution. CPSU CC, USSR Supreme Soviet Presidium and USSR Council of
Ministers Decree. 10 July 1967.............................................669

0n Creation of Political Directorates of National Air Defense Forces.

Air Force. and Navy. Political Department of Airborne Troops and on

Structure of the Main Political Directorate of the Soviet Army and

Navy. CPSU CC Decree. 30 September 1967....................................470

0n Measures in Connection with Adoption of the New Law on Universal
Military Obligation. CPSU CC and USSR Council of Ministers Decree.
l2 Octubef 1967.eassessesssesssseeeeeesestIsseeeesosesoeeeeeeseesssseeeeesoaTO

37
FOR 0FFK]AI.USE<ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1.. I. Brezhnev. Fifty Years of Great Victories of Socialism. From

Report and Concluding Speech at Joint Ceremonial Session of CPSU

Central Conittee. USSR Supreme Soviet and RSFSR Supra-e Soviet in

Kraslin Palace of Congress. 3-4 November l967..............................671

Pros Address of CPSU CC. USSR Supreln Soviet Presidius and USSR
Council of Ministers to the Soviet People and to all 'roilers of
the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics....................................480

Greeting of the CPSU Central Co-ittee. USSR Supreme Soviet
Presidium and USSR Council of Ministers to Soldiers of the Heroic
Armed Forces of the Soviet Union...........................................1080

To Soviet Border Guard Personnel. Greeting of CPSU Central Co-ittee.
USS! Supreme Soviet Presidium and USSR Council of Ministers. . . . . . . . .. . . . . ”‘86

L. l. Brezhnev. From Speech at Reception in Honor of Higher Military
Educational Institution Graduates. 8 July 1968.............................685

0n Preparations for Centennial of the Birth of Vladimir Il'ich
Lenin. From CPSU CC Decree, 23 July 1968...................................lo9l

‘ro Political Entities. Commanders and Political Horkers of the
Soviet Army and Navy. Greeting of the CPSU Central Co-ittee...............492

0n Publication of "history of World War II 1939-1945." CPSU CC
Decree. 27 June l969.......................................................b93

0n the Centennial of the Birth of Vladimir Il'ich Lenin. Prom
CPSU Central Comittee Theses. 23 Deced>er1969............................493

L. I . Brezhnev. Train and Indoctrinate Soviet Military Personnel
in a Leninist banner. froe Speech at Critique of "Nine" ‘l'roop
Maneuvers on 16 March 1970 in City of Minak................................695

On Celebration of 25th Anniversary of the Soviet People's Victory
in the Great Patriotic War of 19101-1965. CPSU CC Decree. 16 March 1970.....698

L. I. Brezhnev. From Report "The Cause of Lenin Lives and wins"

at Joint Ceremonial Session of CPSU Central Comittee. USSR Suprene

Soviet and RSPSR Supreme Soviet Dedicated to the Centennial of the

Birth of Vladimir Il'ich Lenin. 21 April 1970..............................SOl

To Military Academy Graduates. Greeting of the CPSU Central
Couittee. USSR Supreme Soviet Presidiul and USSR Council of
“thistersg 4 July1970Iaaaasaassaseaaoe-acesassees--aeeaeesoeeeeeeeeeeseeeeso3

24th CPSU Congress. 30 March-9 April 1971..................................505

L. I. Brezhnev. Prom Accountability Report of CPSU Central
Conittee to 219th CPSU Congress..........................................505

From Resolution on Accountability Report of the CPSU
Central Comittee........................................................508

'l‘o Military Academy Graduates. Greeting of CPSU Central Conittee.
USSR supreme Soviet Presidium and USSR Council of Ministers. . . .. ...........509

38

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

0n Preparations for 50th Anniversary of Foundation of the USSR.
From CPSU CC Decree. ZlPebruary1972......................................Sll

To Soviet Military Academy Graduates, Greeting of CPSU Central
Couittee. USSR Supreme Soviet Presidium and USSR Comeil of
Ministers, 11 July 19720sseeeoeseeeeeeeeeeoeeeeeeeetseeeseeeeeeeeeeeees00e0513

L. l. Brezhnev. From Report "On 50th Anniversary of the USSR" at
Joint Ceremonial Session of CPSU Central Committee. USSR Supreme
Soviet and RSPSR Supreme Soviet in Kremlin Palace of Congresses.
ZlDecesIber1972...........................................................515

Instructions to CPSU Organizations in the Soviet Army and Navy,
Approved by CPSU CC. 16 February 1973......................................518

Greeting of CPSU Central Couittee to All-Army Conference of
Party Organization Secreteries.............................................530

To Military Academy Graduates. Greeting of CPSU Central Comittee,
USSR Supreme Soviet Presidim and USSR Council of Ministers.

2 July1973eeeeeaeeeeeseeeseeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeaeeeoeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeseeeeeseeees32

To Newspaper KRASNAYA ZVBZDA. Greeting of CPSU Central Comittee. . . . . . . . . . .534

To Military Academy Graduates. Greeting of CPSU Central Comittee,
USSR Supreme Soviet Presidiu and USSR Council of Ministers,
[July197‘COI0.0COQCCOOOOOOOIOCOO...I..C...’....I............O...‘........5§

On 30th Anniversary of the Soviet People's Victory in the Great
Patriotic war of 1961-1945. CPSU CC Decree (Sn-nary).
alJanuaw1975.0...OIOUQOOOQOIOOOOOO0.0OOOOOOIOOOOCOOIOIO0.0.0.00000000000536

0n Supplementary Benefits for Patriotic War Invalids and Paulies
of Deceased Servicemen. CPSU CC and USSR Council of Ministers
Decree. 18 April l975......................................................563

0n Provision of Living Space to Serviceman Released from the
USSR Armed Forces to the Reserve or into Retirement. CPSU CC
and USSR Council of Ministers Decree (Summary), 29 April l975..............566

L. 1. Brezhnev. From Speech "Great Exploits of the Soviet People"

at Ceremonial Meeting in Kremlin Palace of Congresses Dedicated

to 30th Anniversary of the Soviet People 's Victory in the Great

Patriotic Her. 8 May 1975....568

To Military Academy Graduates. Greeting of CPSU Central Conittee,
USSR Supreme Soviet Presidium and USSR Council of Ministers.
27 June I975...............................................................555

25th CPSU Congress. 24 February-S March 1976...............................SS7

L. I. Brezhnev. CPSU Central Comittee Account and the Next
Party Tasks in Domestic and Foreign Policy, from Report to
25th CPSU Congress...... ....... 557

To Military Academy Graduates. Greeting of CPSU Central Comittee.
USSR Supreme Soviet Presidium and USSR Council of Ministers,

30 June 1976...............................................................561

39

POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR‘OFFK1A1.US£40NLM

On 60th Anniversary of the Great October Socialist Revolution.
From CPSU CC Decree. 31 January l977.......................................562

To Military Academy Graduates. Greeting of CPSU CC, USSR
Supreme Soviet Presidiun and USSR Council of Ministers.
29‘1“:1977......IQOOOOOOOOOOO0.00.0000000.000.0000.0.00.0.00000000000000056‘

Prom Constitution (Basic Law) of the Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics. Chapter 5. Defense of the Socialist Bomaland....................566

L. I. Brezhnev. From the Report "The Great October and Progress
of Mankind" at Joint Ceremonial Session of CPSU CC. USSR Supreme
Soviet and RSPSR Supreme Soviet in Kremlin Palace of Congresses,
2 November I977............................................................566

Greeting of CPSU CC, USSR Supreme Soviet Presidium and USSR
Council of Ministers to Personnel of Valorous Armed Forces of
the Soviet Union...........................................................S70

To Soviet Border Guard Personnel. Greeting of CPSU CC. USSR
Supreme Soviet Presidium and USSR Council of Ministers.....................S73

To Military Academy Graduates. Greeting of CPSU CC. USSR
Supreme Soviet Presidium and USSR Council of Ministers.
28 June1978..OGOCGOOOOIOIOOQOOOOOC0000...OO..00....OOGOOCOOO'OOOOIIOO0.0.0574

0n Measures for Further Improvesent of Material and Personal
Conditions of Great Patriotic Uar Participants. CPSU CC and
USSR Council of Ministers Decree. 10 November l978.........................576

0n Further Improvement of Ideological and Political Indoctrination
work. From CPSU CC Decree. 26 April 1979...................................578

To Political Entities, Commanders and Political workers of
the Soviet Army and Navy, Greeting of CPSU CC Central Committee............579

To Military Academy Graduates. Greeting of CPSU CC. USSR
Supreme Soviet Presidium and USSR Council of Ministers.
29 J‘me197900000000OO000000000OIOIOGOOIOOOIOOOOOODOOOOOOOOOOIOOOIOOOOOOOQOSM

0n the 110th Anniversary of the Birth of Vladimir ll'ich Lenin.
Prom CPSU CC Decree. 13 December l979......................................581

0n Celebration of 35th Anniversary of the Soviet People's

Victory in the Great Patriotic War of 19b1-1945, CPSU CC Decree.
la J‘nuary l9mctochC'COOIOOIOOOOOOOOOOOIIOOOOI.ma0.0.0000.00.00.00.000000582

L. I. Brezhnev. From the Speech "Our Course is Peaceful Creation”
at a Meeting with Electors of the Baumanakiy Blectorial District
of the City of Moscow. 22 February l980....................................586

0n Additional Measures for Improving the Material and Personal
Conditions of Great Patriotic Uar Participants. in the CPSU
Central Committee and USSR Council of Ministers............................590

60

IWDR 0FFNJAI.US£|DNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

0n the International Situation and Foreign Policy of the Soviet Union.
CPSU CC Plenum Decree. 23 June 1980........................................S92

To Military Academy Graduates, Greeting of CPSU CC. 0883 Supreme Soviet
Presidium and USSR Council of Ministers. 27 June 1980......................596

26th CPS” were... 23 Fatality-3 “arch 198100000000...seeeesooeoseoeseeeess98

L. I. Brezhnev. Account of CPSU CC to 26th CPSD Congress and Next Party
Tasks in Domestic and Foreign Policy (Bxcerpt)...........................598

From Basic Directions of the 0583's Economic and Social Development
for 1981-1985 and for the Period up to 1990. Approved by 26th CPSU

Congrelioooo...o.u........o.o...o.ou.o.n.u...-o...................o”Q7

FORBHORD

The Great October Socialist Revolution opened up a new historic era--an era of
revolutionary renewal of the world. an era of transition from capitalism to
socialism. The victory of the Great October. the major event of the 20th cen-
tury. fundamentally altered the course of development of all mankind. The

world split into two opposite social-economic systems: socialist and capital-
ist.

Imbued with class hatred for the popular masses. the international bourgeoisie
decided to stifle the proletarisn revolution no matter what and restore capi-
talist orders in our country. It not only was supporting the internal coun-
terrevolution by all means. but also itself took the path of direct military
intervention against the young Soviet state.

History placed the Communist Party face to face with s most difficult and at
the same time urgent task of organizing armed defense of the first republic of
workers and peasants in the world and countering the aggressiveness of the
class enemy with the indestructible military might of the socialist state. In
substantiating the objective need for creating a new type of army for protect-
ing the socialist homeland against an attack by the joint forces of interna-
tional imperialism and internal counterrevolution. Lenin emphasized that "any
revolution is worth something only if it is able to defend itself,"1 and that
"we could not exist without armed defense of the socialist republic."2

Vladimir ll'ich Lenin. the greatest theorist and strategist of the proletarian
revolution. was the organizer of the Armed Forces of the Soviet state. The
birth of the Soviet Armed Forces and their heroic history are linked insepara-
bly with the name of V. l. Lenin. he deserves the historic credit for sub-
stantiating a military program of the proletarisn revolution and for elabora-
ting the tesching on defense of the socialist homeland.

Lenin's immortal ideas about defense of the Motherland and the principles of
military organizational development he elaborated became the basis of the
Communist Party's military policy. From the very beginning they ensured the
party's undivided management of the entire matter of national defense. The
Central Committee Decree dated 25December 1918 stated: "The policy of the
military department as well as of all other departments and establishments is

61

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ms OFFICIAL USE ONLY

conducted on the precise basis of general directives issued by the party in

the person of its Central Co-ittee and under the direct supervision of the
Central Conittee." -

Leninist principles of party nsnageunt of the Army and Navy have been firm in
all historic stegea of the Soviet state's development.

In fulfilling Vladimir Il'ich's behests. our party performed an enormous
amount of work in creating socialist armed forces. Proceeding from Lenin's
guidelines. the CPS!) believed and continues to believe that the teaching on
defense of the homeland is part of the Marxist theory of socialist revolution
and that defense of revolutionary achievements is one of the principles in
building socialism and comeunism. Analyzing some of the lessons of social-
ism's contemporary development. Comrade L. I. Brezhnev eqhasised that
"socialism can be established only if the power of the workers is able to
defend the revolution against all attacks of the class may (and such attacks
are inevitable. both within end most probably from without)."'

This edition of the collection "KPSS o Voorushennykh Silakh Sovetskogo
Soyuzs" contains resolutions of CPSU congresses and conferences. and of CC
plenum; Central Conittee decrees. direct as. letters. addresses and greet-
ings; V. l. Lenin's eccomtability reports at party congresses. addresses.
letters and telegrams; Comrade L. I. Breshnev's speeches; and other documents
reflecting the enormous work of the Mist Party to strengthen the Soviet
Army and Navy and to increase their combat effectiveness and combat readiness.

The CPSU's work of strengthening national defense and organising protection of
the socialist homeland is exceptionally many-sided and encoemasses many
aspects of the life of Soviet society. This collection contains documents
reflecting chiefly the political. ideological and organisational work of the
Cot-unist Party in the Soviet Armed Forces. A number of party CC documents on
these matters are being published for the first time in this book.

The collection's contents graphically show the primary directions in the
Communist Party's work of organizational development of the Soviet Armed
Forces. the build-up in their combat might. and the increase in combat effec-
tiveness and combat readiness of the troops. One can trace clearly in the
documents how our party. in various stages of development of the Soviet Armed
Forces. managed the work of their manning. technical outfitting and logistical
support. and showed concern for improving troop organizational structure and
the training and indoctrination of Army and Navy personnel.

A major place in the collection is occupied by documents devoted to party-
political work in the Armed Forces and to organisational development and
strengthening of political entities and party organizations. One of the m
CC letters published states: "In order for the Red Army to be really social-
ist. it not only must be class in composition. but its personnel also have to

perceive their class interests clearly and correctly. For this we need party
work in its midst."

102

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Lenin viewed the work of Army and Navy party organisations. cosmdssars and
political departments as a powerful means of ideological conditioning of per-
sonnel and of raising the combat effectiveness and combat readiness of the
Soviet Armed Forces. he emphasised that "where party policy is conducted the
strictest . . . where discipline is firmest and where political work is con-
ducted most solicitously among the troops . . . there is no slackness in the
Army. its order and spirit are better and there are more victories."‘ The
party's leader revealed the essence of communist indoctrination of military
personnel and elaborated principles and methods of party-political work among
the troops. he taught military cadres and all party members to arrange ideo-
logical indoctrination work in the Army on a class basis and to develop in
soldiers an unshakable ideological conviction and utter dedication to the
cause of communism.

Lenin's statements on the need for perfecting all party-political work. ele-
vating the role and influence of Army and Navy party organizations. and
shaping and developing in military personnel high political and moral-combat
qualities can be traced through all resolutions of party congresses. CPSU CC
decrees, instructions to party organizations in the Soviet Army and Navy. and
other documents. The Leninist science and art of political work among the
masses and the party’s enormous historical experience in managing the Armed
Forces is a guarantee of successful accomplishment of the tasks of communist
indoctrination of military personnel and of developing in them the political.

moral-combat and psychological qualities needed for winning victory in modern
warfare.

The documents contained in the collection attest to the fact that in creating
and strengthening the Armed Forces of the Soviet state V. I. Lenin and the
Communist Party showed daily concern for the training. indoctrination and
placement of military cadres.

The party Central Committee took very effective steps aimed at mass training
of commanders from among the workers and peasants. As early as late 1920 the
country had 158 military educational institutions in which 56.000 cadets were
training. In subsequent years the party did n0t relax attention to the train-
ing and indoctrination of military cadres. The work of training command-
political and engineer-technical personnel of the Army and Navy seamed enor-
mous scope in the Great Patriotic Her years.

Following Lenin's behests. the C980 has shown constant concern for military
cadres and for their Harxist-Leninist conditioning and military-technical
training even in postwar years. Our Armed Forces now have remarkable. highly
trained officer cadres. Over 90 percent of all Army and Navy officers are
party or Komsomol members. A majority of the officers have a higher military
or military-special education.

All documents included in the collection are arranged in chronological order
and reflect the most important historic stages of development of the Soviet
state's Armed Forces. They are living proof of how the Communist Party devel-
oped and carried out measures for strengthening our Hotherlsnd's defenses step
by step. In so doing the party gave thorough consideration to the features of

53
FOR 0F11C1A1.USE(NNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the socialist revoluticn's historic development. the developing international
situation. successes of socialist econoaics. the development of military
science and the means and methods of warfare. as well as the growth in politi-
cal awareness and in the general educational. technical and cultural level of
Armed Forces personnel.

The collection '1rss o Vooruzhennykh Silakh Sovetakogo Soyuza" opens with the
address of the 2d All-Russian Congress of Soviets "To Workers. Soldiers and
Peasants!" and "Declaration of the Rights of the Horking and Exploited Peo-
ple," written by V. l. Lenin. These documents for the first time advanced the
task of arming the workers and forming a socialist Red Army of workers and
peasants. which was legalized by the Council of People's Commissars Decree on
Organization of the Uorkers' and Peasants' Red Army.

Subsequent documents. encompassing the Civil war period. reveal the titanic
work of Lenin and the Communist Party to build the Armed Forces and manage
their combat activities. The nuneroua party mobilizations and the dispatch of
revolutionary workers to the front played an enormous role in the combat
development of Red Army units. in increasing the personnel's solidarity about
the party and Soviet power. and in reinforcing discipline and steadfastness in
combat.

The 8th party congress was of very great importance for strengthening the Red
Army. The congress approved Lenin's guidelines on building a mass. standing.
regular Red Army; formulated the basic provisions of the party's military
policy; and defined tasks in military organizational development and party-
political work among the troops. "The Army must be an Army trained. armed and
organized according to the last word of military science." it was emphasized
in the congress resolution on the military question. The congress devoted
particular attention to the planned allocation of party forces in the Army and
Navy and to strengthening political work among the troops. The congress wrote
in the resolution it adopted: "Shift the center of gravity of communist work
at the front from front political departments to Army and division political
departments so as to animate it and bring it closer to units operating at the
front."

Party documents published in the collection define tasks during the fight
against armies of the White Guard and foreign interventionists and contain
concrete instructions on organizational and political strengthening of the Red
Army and its logistical support.

The victorious conclusion of the Civil Var marked the beginning of a new stage
in developeent of the Soviet Armed Forces. The Soviet state was ringed by
hostile forces which might act against our country at any time. "We ended one
period of wars." said Lenin at the 8th All-Russian Congress of Soviets. "and
we must prepare for a second; but we do not know when it will arrive and we
must make sure that when it comes we can be up to it."5 Proceeding from these
tasks. the RKP(b) CC stated in a circular letter dated 12 January 1921: “The
party decided and the All-Russian Congress of Soviets unanimously affirmed
that the Army has to be preserved and its combat effectiveness raised."

44

POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The 10th ems) Congress outlined ways for reorganizing the Red Army. Congress
resolutions on the military question reinforced Laniniat principles of mili-
tary organizational development in peacetime and outlined a program of party
activity to strengthen and develop the Soviet Armed Forces under new condi-
tions of socialist reorganization of the country's national economy.

Documents contained in the collection and taking in the period from the end of
the Civil war to the beginning of the Great Patriotic Var clearly attest to
the Communist Party's constant concern for strengthening the Army and Navy.
for their technical reoutfitting. for improving party-political work and ele-
vating the role of party organizations among the troops. for ideological-
political indoctrination of Soviet military personnel. and for training mili-
tary cadres.

In the face of ininent threat of aggression on the part of fascist Germany.
the Commist Party took energetic steps to deploy the Armed Forces and out-
fit them with contempuraxy combat equipment. relying on successes of the
socialist economic system achieved thanks to the country's industrialization
and the collectivization of agriculture. There was a rapid expansion of the
industrial base of artillery and small arms in the prewar years. and the best
tanks in the world and new types of aircraft and warships were created.

Much attention was given to reinforcing Army and Navy party organizations.
From 1939 until mid-196! the number of party embers in the Armed Forces rose
more than threefold and consisted of over 560.000 persons. Some two million
Soviet military personnel. were Kcnsomc‘. members.

The party's vigorous work of preparing the country and the Army to repulse
aggression. carried out in the period of peaceful construction and especially
in the prewar years. laid the material and moral-political fomdation of our
victory over the fascist German invaders.

The Great Patriotic War was a serious test for the Soviet state and its Armed
Forces. The Communist Party unfolded enormous work of mobilizing all the
country's physical and spiritual capabilities and all the people's energy to
combat the foe. it was the party which organized and rallied tens of millions
of people and directed their energy and will toward a single goal—victory.
The country became a single military camp. The party shifted the national
economy to a wartime footing. Major industrial bases for producing arms were
created in the east in short periods of time. In surmounting the unbelieva-
ble hardships of wartime. Soviet citizens in the rear assured the uninter-
rupted Hcpplyof thcfrnnt with combat equipment. weapons. a-unition, food and
clothing by their selfless labor.

The party performed enormous work of comprehensive strengthening of the Soviet
Armed Forces and a continuous build-up in their combat night. The docuents
being published indicate how the party took vigorous steps in the war years to
raise the Army and Navy's combat effectiveness. to perfect their organiza-
tional structure. to Outfit the troops with the latest combat equipment, to
provide them with experienced cadres, to reinforce political entities and
party organizations. and to improve party-political work among the personnel.

45
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The party's Central Conittee was the staff from which supreme political and
strategic leadev ship of military actions was exercised.

The Soviet people. led by the (Jo-mist Party. won not only a military victory.
but an ideological victory as well over the enemy. The party's ideological
influence was supported everywhere: at the front. in territory teaporarily
occupied by the enemy. and in the country's rear areas. Lenin's ideas of
defending the socialist homeland took hold of the masses and were an enormous
force which united millions of Soviet citizens for the selfless struggle for
the freedom and independence of the Land of Soviets.

The defeat of fascist Germany and imperialist Japan. involving the Soviet
Union's deciding role. and victory of revolutions in a number of countries of
Europe and Asia sharply altered the arrangesmnt of class forces in the inter-
national arena. A world socialist system formed and there began an active
process of the downfall of colonialism.

These new achievements by forces of socialism and democracy caused fear and
bitterness in the imperialist can. Reactionary forces of the primary
capitalist countries. and U.S. inerialists above all. waged a struggle
against socialist states and liberated peoples. Irperialiat circles began to
whip up international tension. They created the aggressive North Atlantic
Alliance (NATO). untwisted a mad arms race. and unleashed a "cold war" against
countries of the socialist com-unity. and against the Soviet Union above all.

In the face of the growing aggressiveness of imperialism the Comaunist Party
undertook cardinal steps for further strengthening of the Soviet Armed forces
and outfitting them with the most up-to-date combat equipment. including
nuclear missile weapons. As a retaliatory measure and in order to unify
forces for stopping possible aggression on the part of states of the aggres-
sive NAN bloc. the socialist comtries of Europe formed a defensive military-
political alliance which went down in history under the name of the Warsaw
Pact.

Documents of the postwar period published in this collection characterise the
work of the Comnist Party and its Central Conittee to manage the Soviet
Armed Forces in the difficult international situation and under conditions of
scientific-technical revolution and fundamental transformations in military
affairs. The docunents formulate tasks of indoctrinating personnel in a
spirit of utter dedication to the cause of comaunism. in a spirit of Soviet
patriotism and socialist internationalism. allegiance to military duty and
constant readiness to defend the socialist homeland. The resolutions of party
congresses. Central Committee decrees and addresses on military matters. and
speeches by CPSU CC Gemral Secretary. Chairman of the USSR Supreme Soviet
Presidium. Chairman of the USSR Defense Council. Comrade L. l. Brezhnev out-
line paths of further development and strengthening of combat might and
increasing the combat readiness of the Soviet Armed Forces.

Documents published in the collection indicate that the party and its Central

Comittee are keeping a constant focus on questions of nilitary organizational
development and improvemnt of the USSR Armed Forces. The concern of the CPSU

(06

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and Soviet state for strengthening national defense is reflected in the USSR
Constitution. where it states: "Defense of the socialist homeland is sung the
most inortant state functions and is a matter of all the people...

"It is the duty of the USSR Armed Forces to the people to defend the socialist
homeland reliably and to be in constant cadet readiness guaranteeing an
i-ediate rebuff to any aggressor.”

Our country strode far forward in the postwar time. Successes achieved in
economic development and the outstanding victories of Soviet scientific-
technical thinking permitted a fundamental change in the Army and Navy's tech-
nical outfitting as well. First-rate combat equipment and weapons were
created by the hands of Soviet scientists. designers and workers.

The appearance. development mad inrovement of nuclear missile weapons and the
outfitting of our Armed Forces with missiles of various classes and other new
means of warfare led to a sharp increase in their cadet might and had a deci-
sive effect on the forms and methods of conducting military operations.

In December 1959 the CPSU cc and Soviet government adopted a resolution on
creating a new branch of the Arcd Porces--the Strategic Missile Forces. This
was a fundamentally new step ensuring a further increase in the 0883's defen-
sive night and in the security of fraternal countries of the socialist
coaqunity. The party conducted a fundamental reorganization of all branches
of the Armed Forces and coabat arms. 'l'heir arms. combat equipment. organiza-
tional structure. and methods of training and controlling the troops were
placed in conformity with the demands of conducting military actions in modern
warfare.

Together with the technical outfitting of the Army and navy and assurance of
the harmonious development of all branches of the Arud Forces and cowat arms.
the Co-unist Party and Soviet government give unremitting attention to the
training and indoctrination of military cadres. A special place in resolving
the couple: tasks of troop management is given to military councils. which
have the rights of examining and resolving all the most inortent issues in
the life and activities of the Army and Navy and which bear responsibility to
the CPSU CC and Soviet goverrasent for the status and combat readiness of the
troops.

The transformations in military affairs place higher demands on our Armed
Forces personnel. In exercising its management of the Armed Forces. the
Commmist Party and its Central Co-ittee consistently strengthen one-man
cot-sand and at the same time elevate in every way the role and influence of
political entities and party organizations. The CPSU demands that contend-
ers. political workers. and all Army and Navy party members steadfastly
improve the combat schooling of unit and ship personnel and indoctrinate
Soviet military personnel in a spirit of high ideological conviction. effi-
ciency. unreaitting vigilance and constant combat readiness.

The party teaches that the inortance of moral-political and psychological
training of UN: troops rises sharply in modern warfare. especially with the

107

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

use of nuclear missile weaponry. In order to endure in combat and win victory
over a strong enely. Soviet nilitary personnel not only have to master weapons
and sophisticated combat equip-ant. but also he ideologically convinced and
possess high volitional qualities and the ability to overcome ell hardships of
andern combat physically and psychologically.

The need to strengthen the ideological-political indoctrination of Soviet
nilitary personnel under prescnt-day conditions also is determined by the
sharp aggravation of ideological opposition between socialisl end capitalise.

The development of countries of the socialist enmity, the growth in their
eight and the strengthened beneficial effect of the international policy they
conduct now make up the primary direction of eankind's social progress. The
attractive force of ideas of scientific socialise is growing steadily and more
and nore millions of people on all continents are assieileting these ideas.

In an attempt to check this process, the forces of imperialism and reaction
intensify ideological struggle. lwerialist propaganda. with which the
propaganda of ceijing hegemnists openly coordinates. continuously wages a
furious assault on the minds of Soviet citizens and attelpts. with the help of
the nest refined eethods and modern technical esene. to poison their awareness
with slender of Soviet reality. to blacken eocialisa. to embellish imperialism
and its predatory. inhuman politics and practices. Hired ideological subver-
sives nake atteqts to disare Soviet citizens and our nilitary personnel
spiritually.

The Commist Party proceeds from the assuption that there can be no place
for neutralise and comroeisee in the struggle of the two ideologies. High
political vigilance. vigorous. efficient and persuasive propaganda work. the
expoeure of hostile ideological subversive acts and a prompt rebuff to the
are needed here.

All ideological work in the Soviet Arned Forces is conducted on the basis of
resolutions of party congresses and CPSU CC plenum. Central Conittee decrees
and instructions of Conrade L. I. Brezhnev. The docuuents published in the
collection contain the CPSU's demands for a further strengthening of the
indoctrinational role of the Soviet Armed Forces. a comprehensive ilprovenent
in party-political work. and the developnent in Soviet soldiers of a scien-
tific outlook. high ideological conviction and irreconcilability toward the
class enemies.

Enornous successes have been achieved in recent years under the tested manage-
ment of the Leninist party in our country's social-econonic development and in
the increase in the workers‘ welfare andthc culture and awareness of broad
leases of the people. A developed socialist society has been built in the
USSR by the selfless labor of Soviet citizens. The Soviet state's econonic
and defense night has become stronger as a result and a further inrovenent of
the USSR Areed Forces is taking place.

In directing military organizational development the party always has pro-
ceeded and is proceeding from the assulption that it is an inalienable part of

48

NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR O‘TWCIAI.USEGDNLY

statewide organizational development. This is why all characteristic features
inherent to our Armed Forces were developed further and were enriched with new
content in the stage of mature socialism.

The USSR Armed Forces now are the armed forces of a state of the whole people.
They act as a powerful tool for protecting the interests of the whole people
and assuring security of the socialist homeland. Soviet soldiers. true sons
of their people. are closely rallied about the Leninist Co—unist Party and
the Soviet government. They are distinguished by a deep love for the people,
high political awareness and a sense of responsibility for their Hotherland's
destiny. Brought up in a spirit of friendship of nations and proletarian
internationalism. Soviet Army and Navy personnel are steadily strengthening
the combat cooperation with personnel in armies of fraternal countries of
socialism. The present generations of Soviet military personnel. like their
grandfathers and fathers. are ready and capable of acting at any time in
defense of the peaceful labor of the Soviet people and the cause of peace and
socialise. Conrade L. I. Brezhnev remarked in the C950 CC Accountability
Report to the 26th party congress that "a firm alloy of high technical out-
fitting. military proficiency and indestructible morale--that is the combat
potential of the Soviet Armed Forces. Now it is the sons and grandsons of
Great Patriotic Her heroes who stand in the ranks of the Hotherland's defend-
ers. They did not go through the severe ordeals which fell to the lot of
their fathers and grandfathers. but they are true to the heroic traditions of
our Army and our people. And each time the interests of national security
and the defense of peace demands it. when it is necessary to assist the
victims of aggression. the Soviet soldier stands before the world as a self-
less and courageous patriot and internationalist. ready to overcome all diffi-
cultics."

The CPSU and Soviet state are steadily conducting a peaceloving Leninist
foreign policy. in the 1970's a normalization of the international situation
was achieved above all as a result of the many-sided. vigorous work of the
Soviet Union and socialist community. with reliance on a growth of the
economic and defense might of countries of socialism. Peaceful coexistence
among states with different social systems became established in the process
of detente and began to be filled with concrete economic and political con-
tent. and a clear abatement of the "cold war" was seen.

But at the borderline of the 1970's and 1980's the international situation
became seriously complicated through the fault of imperialist circles. The
aggressive nature of the politics of imperialism. and American imperialism
above all. rose sharply. Not wishing to reckon with the realities of the
modern world. the aggressive NATO circles headed by the United States set a
course for disrupting the military balance existing in the world in their own
favor and to the detriment of the Soviet Union and the socialist community as
a whole. to the detriment of international detente and the security of nations.

Hence imperialiam's line on strengthening the arms race, unleashing provoca-
tions against socialist and other independent states, the creation of centers

of tension. and NATO's militaristic activeness. Antisovietism and anti»
communism have been turned into an instrument for whipping up the arms race;‘

49

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

into a tool of struggle not only against the USSR and other countries of the

socialist conunity. and not only against col-mists. but also against all
enemies of war and peaceloving forces; into a means of undermining detente.

A rapprochement of aggressive circles of the Heat, and the United States above
all. with the Chinese leadership is occurring on an antisoviet basis inimical
to the cause of peace. The partnership of imperialism and Beijing hegemonisn
represents a new. dangerous phenonenon in world politics.

The Communist Party of the Soviet Union is steadfastly continuing the course
for preserving and developing international detenta. At the sane time the
CPSU believes that intrigues of iaperlalisn and other enemies of peace demand
:onstant vigilance of Soviet citizens and coqrehensive strengthening of our
state's defenses in order to disrupt iaperialisn's plans for attaining aili-
tery superiority 'and exercising world diktat.

Comrade L. l. Brezhev emphasized in the CPSU CC Accountability Report to the
26th party congress that "the party and state have not lost sight of questions
[of strengthening the country's defensive night and its Armed Forces/ for a
single day. The international situation obligates us to this."

hit

Material included in the collection will help the reader understand even more
thoroughly that CPSU management is the prinary source of the night and invin-
cibility of the Soviet Armed Forces and the be-all and end-all of Soviet mili-

tary organizational development .

Thanks to the CPSU's vise Leninist policy in the area of nilitary organiza-
tional develop-est. the Soviet state of the whole people has powerful Armed
Forces which possess all necessary means. for perforning their responsible mis-
sion of being a guardian over the Soviet people's peaceful labor and the bul-
vark of universal peace.

This collection of documents unquestionably will be a valuable aid for all
USSR Arned Forces personnel as well as for a wide range of readers studying
the CPSU's activities in military natters.

reasons

I. V. l. Lenin. "Polnoye sobraniye sochineniy" [Complete Collected Works].
XXXVII. 122.

2. Ibid.. XXXVIII. 138.

3. L. l. Brezhnev, "Leninskin kurson: rechi i stat'i" [Hith a Leninist
Course: Speeches and Articles]. Hoscov. 1978, VI. 588.

lo. Lenin. XXXIX. 56.
5. 1bid.. 31.11. 163-144.

50
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Annotation

The collection contains documents drawn up by V. I. Lenin, resolutions of CPSU
congresses and conferences, party CC plenuns. CPSU cc decrees, directives,
letters and addresses. Conrade L. l. Brezhnev's speeches, and other documents
reflecting the nany-sided work of the Connonist Party in Soviet military
organizational developnant and in the creation. strengthening and constant
improvement of the USSR Arned Forces.

The book is intended for a wide range of nilitary readers and everyone inter-
ested in the CPSU's military activities.

COPYRIGHT: Voyenizdat, 1981

6906
C80: 1801/262

51

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Ftl1(ﬂﬂﬁ(JAI.US£|DNLY

NAVAL FORCES

BOOK EXCERPTS: SOVIET SUBHARINES IN GREAT PATRIOTIC “AR

Moscow SOVETSKIYE PODVODNYYE LODKI V VELIKOY OTECHESTVENNOY VOYNE in Russian 1981
(signed to press 8 Sep 81) pp 191. 189-190. 3-8. 169-173

[Annotation. table of contents. foreword, and conclusion from book "Soviet Submarines
in the Great Patriotic Hat" by L. A. Yemel'yanov, Voyennoye lzdatel'stvo. 39,000
copies, 191 pages]

[Excerpts] Annotation

The book tells about methods of combat employment of the Navy’s submarines during the
Great Patriotic War and presents a great number of the most typical examples of how
our submarines operated on sea lines of communication, during mine laying, in the
conduct of tactical reconnaissance, the navigation-hydrological support of assault
landings. and the accomplishment of other missions.

The book is intended for naval officers and officer candidates of higher naval edu-
cational institutions and is of interest for all those who are interested in the

Navy's combat past.

Contents Page
Formrdosostt0.0.COOOOOOOOOOOOOOOODOOOCCOOIOOOOOOOOOI'OOOOOOOOOOOOOOOCOOIOO 3

Chapter 1. Soviet Submarine Forces of the Period of the Great Patriotic war

Quantitative composition of submarine forces. classification. and basic
technical specifications of elements of submarines...................... 9
Distribution of submarines among the fleets. organization of forces,
control of submarines................................................... 15
Methods of submarine combat employment.................................... 17

Chapter 2. Submarine Combat Operations on Enemy Sea Lines of Communication

Operations of submarines of the Northern Pleet............................ 21
Operations of submarines of the Red Banner Baltic P1eet................... 62
Operations of submarines of the Black Sea Pleet........................... 95
Operations of submarines of the Pacific Fleet............................. 115

52

FOR‘OFIHCIAI.USE(NVLY
FOI‘OFFKJAI.USIIONLN

Page

Chapter 3. Protection of Sea Lines of Communication. Reconnaissance.
Patrol Duty. and Other Submarine ﬁissione

Protection of sea lines of communication................................... 119
Reconnaissance............................................................. 126
Puma.may".n.u.n.u.u.u.u.n.u.n.u.n.n.n.u.u.n.u.n.n..1M
Navigation-hydrological support of combat operations....................... 136
Transportation of people and cargoes by submarine.......................... 137
Gunnery firing on shore installstions...................................... 161

Chapter 4. Overcoming the Counteraction of Enemy Forces and Means of
Antisubmarine Defense by Submarines

Overcoming minefields..................................................... 166
Overcoming booms.......................................................... 169
Overconing counteraction of antisubnarine warfare ships................... 151
Combating 80503111128............-on.no...u............................. 159
Forced crossing of antisubnarine barriers................................. 161

c0ﬂ6111310n................-.............o...c..........o......o............. 169

Appendices: 1. Basic technical specifications of the Navy's submarines
of the ”’1“ of the Gr“: Patriotic "arOOOCOOQOOOOOIOOOOO. 17‘

2. Losses of the German merchant marine and navy and those
of its allies in the Great Patriotic Her................... 178
3. Chronology of events....................................... 179

AbbreviationsuaedotoI0.0.0...OOODOOOOOOOII.b.0000.00.0.00...DOOOOIOOOOOOOO.186
BibliograthOOOOOO0.0.IOOIIOOOIOOIOOOOOOOOO0.000000.000.00.000...0.0.0.0.... ‘87
Foreword

Guided by the Lenin precepts on the reliable defense of the achievements of October.
the Communist Party of the Soviet Union and the Soviet government always attached
great significance to the creation of a strong and combat-effective submarine fleet
in the country. The six-year naval development program (1926-1932) which was ap-
proved in December 1926 envisioned the construction of 22 submarines. In addition
to this class of ships, the fleet was to receive 3 destroyers. 18 destroyer escorts.
S hunter-killer ships, and 36 torpedo hosts.

In the years of the Second Five-Year Plan (1933-1937). in foreseeing aggression
against our state and wide-scale combat operations at sea. the construction of 137
submarines was begun. Of surface ships. 5 cruisers. b leaders. 46 destroyers. 6
destroyer escorts. and 27 ninesveepers were leyed down. During the preusr decade.
the shipbuilding industry transferred more than 200 submarines to the fleet. By the
start of World Var II (1 September 1939). the Soviet Navy had occupied first place
among the world's naval fleets for number of submarines.

During the years of the Great Patriotic War. the Soviet submarines accomplished a
broad range of combat missions: they fought on enemy sea lines of communication,

53

FOR OFFICJAI.USE‘0NL¥
FIHICHﬂﬂK]Al.USE(NHLY

defended their own sea lines of communication. layed mines. conducted reconnaissance.
transported people and cargo. and accomplished navigation and hydrographic support

of naval forces. Their operations on enemy sea lines of communication were most
effective. Destroying enemy vessels travelling with reinforcements for the front
line and transports shipping strategic raw materials. submarines not only rendered
assistance to our troops which were operating on the maritime flanks. but they also
inflicted direct damage on the war-economy potential of fascist Germany.

Submarine combat operations played a large role in the Far North where the waterways
had exceptional significance for supplying the German-fascist troops with ammunition.
warm clothing. and food. Already in the third month of the war the fascist command
was forced to admit that the strikes of Soviet submarines on the coastal communica—
tions in the Arctic significantly hampered the implementation of plans to capture
Murmansk as early as 1941.

In the Baltic Sea. due to the activity of our submarines the enemy was forced to re-
duce water shipments significantly and to use the already loaded land roads to sup-
ply his troops at Leningrad.

0n the lines of communication of the Black See. the attacks of our submarines were
especially effective during the period when the occupiers were forced to evacuate
the Crimea.

Some of the strikes of the Soviet submarines on the lines of communication proved to
be especially telling for the enemy. In January 1965. submarine "5-13" of the Baltic
Fleet attacked and sank the liner ("Hilhelm Custlow") on board which were more than
7,000 soldiers. seamen. and officers including about 1.300 submariners. Three days

of mourning were declared in Germany on this occasion. The convoy officer responsible
for the safety of the crossing was shot. and the commander of "8-13." Captain 3d Rank
A. I. Harinesko. was placed on the list of personal enemies of the Third Reich.

In April 1945 the transport 'Coya" was sent to the bottom in the Baltic. The Hitler-
ites lost more than 5.000 soldiers. officers. and cadets as a result of the torpedo
strike launched by the Guards submarine "L-3" (commander Captain 3d Rank V. K.
Konovalov).

Exceptional significance, measured first of all by the material loss inflicted on the
enemy. was had by the minefield barrier operations of the submarines. They also
hindered the fascists in the deployment of combat ships. restricted the transports'
freedom of movenent. and attracted a considerable quantity of mine-sweeping and
other supporting forces. The mines were placed in places most vulnerable for the
enemy: at exits from bases. in narrows. and at communication hubs. For number of
mines placed in active mine barriers (that is. in enemy waters). the submarines
occupied first place among all naval forces.

Submarine operations proved to be effective in the defense of their own sea lines of
communication. They played an exceptional role in the North where external water-
ways had a strategic character.- At that time. the Soviet Navy could send out against
the enemy's big surface ships based in northern Norway only submarines and. partial-
ly. aviation. Deployed near the exits from the fjords. the submarines were a factor
which restrained the activity of the German squadron in that region. It was namely

56

FOR‘OFFRJAI.USE(NVLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

here that the flag battleship "Tirpitz." which had moved out as part of the squadron
to intercept an Allied convoy. was attacked by submarine "K-Zl" (commander Captain
2d Rank N. A. Lunin). As a result. the squadron was forced to abandon accomplish-
ment of its mission.

Submarines achieved great successes in accomplishing naval reconnaissance missions.
Possessing the ability for covert operations. they penetrated into areas defended by
the enemy where they observed his forces and means and reported important informa-
tion to the command. The landing of reconnaissance groups on the enemy-occupied
coast by submarines had substantial significance.

Submarines operated successfully when supplying besieged Sevastopol' with ammunition
and with navigation and hydrographic support of amphibious forces, especially during
the execution of the Kerch-Feodosiya amphibious operation in December 1961.

Submarines were the most universal forces in the fleet as regards the variety of the
missions accomplished.

Soviet submarines had to accomplish combat missions under the most difficult condi-
tions-—in constricted and shallow areas and in the presence of serious mine danger

and a strongly developed enemy antisubmarine defense. Not one foreign fleet which

participated in "arid War Ilexperienced such difficulties. Submarines of Germany.

the United States. and Japan operated primarily in the oceans. outside a developed

enemy antisubmarine defense. The opposition which was exerted against them. which

proceeded primarily from ships for the close-in protection of convoys. remained not
very effective for a long time.

In the Barents Sea. the sailing of our submarines was complicated by the long periods
of the polar day and night. the fact that the enemy had skerried channels which were

difficult for submarines to reach. frequent fogs. intermittant snowfalls. and strong

tidal currents.

In the Black Sea. where communications passed close to the shores. submarines were
forced to maneuver in areas with depths not exceeding 15-20 meters. “hen a sub-
marine moved in the submerged position, a trace from the silt which was raised by the
propellers,which was long and easily noticeable from a ship and airplane.often trail-
ed behind it.

The most difficult conditions developed in the Baltic. Here. in order to emerge in
the open sea our submarines had to cross the narrow and shallow Gulf of Finland
which was densely crammed with enemy mines and nets.

Conditions for the combat operations of Soviet submarines became even more difficult
in the course of the war. The loss of bases in the Baltic. in the northwest and on
the Crimean coast of the Black Sea. and the blockade of Leningrad hindered the de-
ployment of submarines and worsened conditions for their basing and repair.

Despite all this. our submariners operated actively. decisively. and boldly. They
persistently looked for and sank enemy ships at sea. Their cosbat skill was

strengthened and improved in difficult battles. Tactics were developed and new.
more effective methods for the combat employment of submarines were employed.

SS

lNJI‘OIWﬂCJAl.lﬂSEVCHQLY
FOIIHHHKJALlEEZONLY

The position method was practiced initially. and then they began to employ cruising
in limited areas. In the course of the war. submarines changed over to group actions.
Instances of coordination with aviation. especially reconnaissance aviation. occurred
considerably more often.

Methods for the combat employment of submarine weapons. primarily torpedoes. develop-
ed and improved. Prom firing single torpedoes. the submariners changed over to fir-
ing several torpedoes at time intervals. and subsequently. to firing a salvo with a
"spread." The employment of more modern methods of torpedo firing increased the ef-
fectiveness of submarine operations.

When they did not have the opportunity to employ torpedoes. the submarines often
surfaced and entered into a gunnery battle with enemy ships.

Even bourgeois military historians were forced to acknowledge the high combat skill
of the Soviet submariners which was displayed in the years of the Great Patriotic
Her. For example. a former admiral of the Hitlerite fleet. (Yu. Rover). writes:
"The strength of the Russian submariner consists of his readiness for self-
secrifice.... The Soviet subaariners have no shortage of combat readiness and
steadfastness or...the necessary navigational and tactical abilities."‘

Typical of the Soviet submariners was the striving to accomplish the combat mission
come what may. Even at the most difficult moments, none of the submarine crews lost
the presence of courage, panicked. or permitted thoughts of abandoning the accomp-
lishment of the combat mission or voluntary surrender to the fascists.

Much was told in our press about the military labor of submarine commanders and crews
during the years of the struggle with fascism. Remarkable books by famous submarin-
ers have been published-.by heroes of the Soviet Union Ya. K. Iosselian'. I. A.
Kolyshkin, V. G. Starikov, I. V. Travkin. I. I. Pisanovich. and G. I. Shchedrin.
submarine officers P. D. Grishchenko. I. S. Kabo. V. Ye. Korzh. H. K. Chuprikov, and
0. G. Chemesov. and other authors. Prominent naval commanders Admirals N. c.
Kuzneteov. A. G. Golovko. Yu. A. Panteleyev. and V. P. Tribute devoted many pages to
the submariners in their memoirs.

This book will acquaint the reader with th. nature and conditions of the combat opera-
tions of our submarine forces in 1961-1965. with their quantitative and qualitative
composition, and with examples of the accomplishment of various combat missions by
submarine consanders. The book does not claim completeness in illuminating these
questions; it should be considered only as the next step in the study and generaliza-
tion of the experience of combat activity of Soviet submariners during the Great

Patriotic Har.

Conclusion

In the years of the Great Patriotic War Soviet submarines accomplished a broad range
of combat missions. Possessing great cruising capacity they went out to the enemy's

7"" ' "-"'
(Power. Yu). "Operations of Soviet Submarines in the Baltic in 1939-1965."
Translated from the German. Central Naval Library (TsVHB) No 78. 1958. pp 21, 23.

S6

FOR‘OFFKJAI.US£(NVLY
FIIICHHWCJAI.USE(NVLY

sea lines of communication and. without giving themselves away. theyattacked enemy
vessels. In the Barents. Baltic. and Black Seas the submarines destroyed more than
300 transports with a total tonnage of more than 1 million gross registered tons
and about 100 combat ships with torpedoes and mines.

Submarines played an important role in the accomplishment of such missions as the
defense of their sea lines of communications and naval bases. reconnaissance, per-
forming patrol duty. delivery of ammunition and food to besieged Sevastopol'. and
navigation and hydrographic support of amphibious operations.

The active operations of the submarines forced the Hitlerite command to divert con-
siderable forces and means from the accomplishment of other missions. in particular
from rendering assistance to their ground forces on the maritime directions, which
reduced the combat capabilities of the fascist fleet as a whole.

The Great Patriotic war was not only a serious and comprehensive test of the combat
qualities of the Soviet submariners. but also an important stage in the development
of the tactics for employing submarine forces. At the start of the war. primarily

the position method for employing submarines was practiced; later. the Soviet naval
command began to plan cruising in limited areas and the redeployment of the subma-

rines using the method of maneuvering positions. At the end of the war. the group

employment of submarines in screens became widespread in the Northern Fleet.

The submarines changed from the independent accomplishment of missions to coordina-
tion with other fleet forces. Beginning with 1963. naval operations began to be
conducted with the active participation of submarine forces. Submarines coordinated
most closely with reconnaissance aviation which. through shore-based command posts,
provided them with data on enemy ships and vessels at sea. Subsequently. when
extendahle antennas appeared on the submarines. it became possible to receive infor-
estiondirectly from the airplanes.

Attempts were undertaken to organize the operations of several submarines in a tac-
tical group; however. due to the imperfection of means for hydroacoustical communi-

cation. this proved to be impracticable.

The main weapon of submarine forces were the torpedoes. During the war. submarines
accomplished 679 torpedo attacks and expended 1550 torpedoes. 0n the average. four
or five torpedoes were expended for’each sunken ship. At the beginning of the war.
the aimed method of firing torpedoes was widespread in the fleets. but already by
the end of 1961 the Soviet submariners had changed over to salvo firing with several
torpedoes at time intervals. The method of firing with a "spread" began to be prac-
tlsed from the second half of 1963. By this time. proximity fuses began to be in;
stalled on the torpedoes.

At the start of the war. torpedo attacks were accomplished under conditions of a
relatively weak antisubmarine defense. which permitted closing with the target and
launching torpedoes at short distances. Subsequently. when the system for the pro-
tection of transports became considerably stronger. the submarines were forced to
fire from great distances. through the escort screening line. The number of night
attacks increased significantly in the course of the war. The best trained com-
manders of submarines were the first to accomplish torpedo attacks using sonar data.
This progressive method later became widespread in the Northern Fleet. especially
at the end of the war.

57

FINR(HWWCJAL.USE(NVLY
FOR‘0FFKJA1.USE(MVLY

The working out of new methods of torpedo firing. the installation of more improved
instruments and, of course. the growth in the combat skill of submarine commanders
ensured an increase in the success of torpedo firing from 30 percent at the start of
the war to 70 percent by its conclusion.

The submarines had recourse to guns primarily when attacking single transports when
the employment of torpedoes was impossible for some reasons. In some cases. the
submarines entered into a gunnery battle with antisubmarine warfare ships. but only
for purposes of self-defense in order to break away from enemy pursuit.

Despite their relatively small scale. nine barrier operations of submarines greatly
hindered the navigation and combat activity of the German-fascist fleet. During the
war. submarines accomplished 90 mine-laying operations. There were 1.769 nines
layed on which more than 50 enemy transports were blown up. The greatest effect was

provided by laying nines in nests. They hindered sweeping and made considerable
water areas dangerous for ships.

The organizational structure of submarine forces did not undergo any substantial
changes in the course of the war. Brigades formed of several divisions completely
justified themselves. At the ease time. war experience showed that the control of
submarines needed centralization. For this. on the Black Sea as wall as on the
Baltic several brigades were merged into one under a single command.

Fleet commanders assigned missions to submarine commanders and determined the areas
and times for combat operations. In individual periods. they personally controlled
submarine operations at sea. Such aoments were typical of the Northern Fleet at the
start of the war and of the remaining fleets during the preparation and conduct of
sea operations.

Force staffs controlled the combat operations of submarines skillfully at all stages
of the war.

Division commanders were occupied with the preparation of submarines for combat opera-
tiona. All division commanders were participants in many combat cruises and taught
subordinates the skill of fighting based on personal experience. As the closest
teachers. they played a large role in molding lofty moral and combat qualities in
young commanders.

Great significance for the success of submarine operations was had by all types of
support. primarily the timely transmission of reconnaissance data on the coordinates
and elements of the movement of enemy convoys (transports) and on their defensive
system to the submarines. Information on the condition of antisubmsrine defense.

the intensity and disposition of minefields. and the routes of advanced cruiser

lines and antisubmarine warfare airplanes meant much. The main role in reconnaissance
of enemy lines of communication was played by naval aviation. Electronic reconnais-
sance equipment was widely used in the Northern Fleet and useful information was
delivered by reconnaissance groups landed in the enemy rear.

One cannot imagine the combat activity of subnarines without maintenance support.
Thanks to the selfless labor of the workers of the maintenance enterprises and bases.
the submarines eliminated damage received on combat cruises in the shortest times and

58

FOR‘OFFKJAL.USE(MVLY
returned to action. The workers of the ship~building industry gave the Navy 52 new
submarines in the course of the var. To build up forces on the most important sec-
tors, submarine units were transferred from one fleet to another. The Pacific Fleet
performed the role of a unique submarine reserve for the Northern and Black Sea

strived to inflict maximum damage on the enemy end to accomplish their assigned mis-
sions with honor. Under unusually difficult and complex conditions of combat cruises
and. at times. in very dangerous and critical situations. the seamen displayed high
military skill. inflexible steadfastness, and an unbending sill for victory.

Submarine Brigade of the Black Sea Fleet--the Order of the Red Banner. and the 2d
Brigade--the Order of Uahakov. 1st Class.

In the postwar years. thanks to the tremendous successes in the development of the
economy. science. and technology. and as a result of the heroic labor of the Soviet
people, revolutionary transformations were accomplished in our country in all fields
of military affairs. The Soviet Navy was transformed beyond recognition and made a
sharp qualitative leap in its development. It became a genuinely ocean-going
and nuclear missile navy which meets all the requirements of modern var. Nuclear

In their combat capabilities. contemporary nuclear submarines can in no vay be com-
pared with submarines of the period of the Great Patriotic Her. Armed with mis-
siles. homing torpedoes, and various electronic equipment and possessing virtually
unlimited cruising range. these underwater ships are capable of inflicting destruc-
tive strikes against shore installations on the aggressor's territory from any

The new generation of Soviet submariners are worthy successors and continuers of
the glorious traditions of the war's veterans. with their patriotic deeds, they
are constantly enriching this priceless heritage and are cherishing aacredly

COPYRIGHT: Voyenizdat. 1981

6367
C80: 1801/26]

59

FOR OFIWCIAI.USEINVLY
me OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PERCMIONS. VIBES. comm-rs

NATIONAL SYMPOSIUH 0" HISTORY OF "ORLD WAR 11
Moscow VOPROSY IS‘IORII in Russian Mo 5. Apr 82 (signed to press 5 Apr 82) pp “8-150
[Article by A. M. Filitov: "Syaposius on the history of World War 11"]

[Text] An international scientific synposiun devoted to the men anniversary of the
military events of 1961 took place in Stuttgart (no) on 17-19 Septelber 1981. Three
Rest German institutions served as its organizers: The Library of Modern history.l
the Institute of History of Stuttgart University. and the Meet Ger-an Co-ittee of
the International Society for the Study of Uorld Uar II. Along with historians of
the F116. taking part in the work of the smosim were scholars of the United
States. Great lritain. Italy. Japan. and s umber of other capitalist countries as
well as a Soviet delegation consisting of corresponding neebsr of the USSR Acadeuy
of Sciences A. M. Saesonov (head of the delegation) and A. M. Pilitov. The layer of
Stuttgart. M. Ros-cl. opened the sylposiul with a brief introductory speech.

The original case of the synposiun was: "Decenber l961—‘Iurning Point of the Her."
According to the program worked out by the organizers. it was intended to throw light
on this subject on the basis of an analysis of events in the four theaters of opera-
tion of world Her II. Accordingly, four sessions of the syuposiun were devoted as
follows: the firstwto the start of the war in the Pacific (reports by (S. ’onany”
(Japan) and (P. Khorde) (ERG). the secondnto the Atlantic Theater (reports by c.
Weinberg (United States) and (Yu. Rover” (M). the third--to nilitary operations
in the Mediterranean region (reports by (G. Sauerville) (Britain) and A. Ssntoni
(Italy). and finally. the fourthnto events on the nain front of World Mar II, the
Soviet-Gerian front (reports by A. M. Sassonov and (K. Reynkhard) (“GD were devoted
to the Battle of Moscow).

with such a variety of theses and subjects. the definition of the concept of
"turning point of the war" depended on finding the basic elesent and decisive event
which caused the start of the radical turn in the course of World liar II. Marxist
historiography. as is known. considerethe battle of Moscow as such an event. m1-
cal of bourgeois historiography is the tendency to belittle the significance of this
victory. sowing other factors and events to the foreground. Mical in this

 

1 Founded in 1915 under the use ”Library of the Uorld Mar," the Library of Modern
history. which is now located in Stuttgart. is not only the biggest collection in
the no on the history of both world wars and on military history in general. but
also one of the leading Heat Ger-nan coordination centers on the study of these
probless.

60

“OFFICIALUSEONLY
FOIJOFIWCUALVUSEGJNLN

regard were the introductory remarks of the chairman at the first session. (Ch. fon
Lyuttishou) (United States). who represented the U. S. Arwy Center for the Study of
Hilitary History. On the one hand. he adsitted the decisive role of the Battle of
Moscow in the events of 1961 and in the failure of the Bitlerite blitzkrieg strategy.
and on the other-he declared that the roots of the Soviet Army's success should be
sought...in the events in the Pacific. in the peripetis of American—Japanese rela-
tions. The essence of his discourse was reduced to the fact that, he said. the
United States and Britain "attracted” the strike of the Japanese aggressors and thus
secured the eastern boundaries of the Soviet Union and pernitted the Soviet connand
to acconplish the "mass" shifting of forces fro. the Far East to the west. which
also decided the outcose of the Battle of Moscow.

The Soviet historians rejected this point of view as groundless. A. H. Sensonov
showed that even prior to the entry of the United States in the war against Japan
(and it began with defeats for the United States and Britain. so here in no way can
a "turn" in favor of the allies be seen) the blitzkrieg strategy in the war of fas-
cist Germany against the USSR had begun to suffer failure. He presented data on the
disposition of Soviet troops by the start of the counteroffensive at Moscow. stress-
ing the limited nature of the transfer of troops from the Far East and noting that
for the duration of the entire war the USSR was forced to keep a considerable con-
tingent there in case of a Japanese attack.

In concentrated form. the pro-Alerican apologetic found expression in the report of
the professor from the University of North Carolina. G. Ueinberg. concerning Aleri-
can-German relations in 1939—1941. In accordance with his concepts. the entire
course of world "at 11 was determined by the United States even before it began to
participate in it (l). he explained the initial failures of the allies by the "un-
derarning" of the United States in the prewar years. and the final collapse of Hitler
--by the fact that he "underestimated" the silitary-econosic and moral potential of
the United States. Despite the facts. the speaker tried to ascribe to the Soviet
Union a tendency toward a deal with the aggressors-both with Germany as well as with
Japan. and even toward giving then "assistance"(l). he stated that. allegedly. the
neutrality pact between the USSR and Japan of 13 April 1961 was a "success" of Ger-sn-
Japanese diplomacy. It untied the hands of the aggressors even more in their policy
of expansion.

These statements received a well-reasoned rebuff not only on the part of the Soviet
delegation. Typically. they were also subjected to criticism in the presentations of
other participants in the synposiun. (P. Kherde) noted that Japan's decision to re—
train froa attacking the USSR was not so much the consequence of various actions by
the western powers as the "experience of Khalkhin—Gol." that is. consciousness of the
futility and danger of a policy of military adventures against the Soviet Union. He
stressed that it is incorrect to interpret the Soviet—Japanese pact as proof of a
concession by the Soviet side in face of the aggressor's policy. (P. Kherde) presented
an extremely expressive example: Japan demanded as the "price" for concluding this
pact the cessation of Soviet help for the victin of its aggression-China. however.
the Nest German scholar stated. they'did not succeed in achieving this--the USSR
continued to assist her even after the signing of the pact. (A. Khil'gruber) (ERG)
recalled the role of the Battle of Snolensk in Japan's decision to postpone the attack
on the USSR.

61

FOI‘OFFK]A1.USE(MULY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Further discussion. especially on problems of the "Battle of the Atlantic" and events
in the Mediterranean Theater of Operations. was reduced in considerable neasure to a
discussion of the military-technical aspects--primarily to an evaluation of the role
of radio intelligence in operations to intercept transports and military vessels

of the warring powers.

The futile attempt to belittle the significance of the Soviet people's heroic strug-
gle against the German-fascist aggressors was displayed especially strikingly during
the discussion of problems in the history of the battle of Moscow. A. H. Samsonov.
in his report. disclosed the natural character of the Wehrmacht's defeat at Hoacow
and showed the significance of this battle for the further course of the war as an
event which marked the beginning of the radical turn in the course of Horld liar II.
The report showed the role of the defensive battles of the Soviet troops in the
aux-oer and fall of 1941 in the undermining of the Hehrmacht's striking force. the
heroism of our fighting sen. the role of the CPSU in organizing the enemy's rebuff.
and the activity of the military co—and in directing the defense and preparing the
counteroffensive of the Soviet troops at Hoscow. A. H. Samsonov stressed the inter-
national significance of the Battle of Moscow for the cause of the cot-on struggle
of all peoples against the fascist sggressors. The report of A. H. Pilitov on the
historiography of the Battle of Moscow conducted a comparative analysis of the con-
cepts "turn in the war" used in Marxist and bourgeois literature and subjected to
criticism the thesis which exaggerates the role of the Uestern lend-lease deliveries
in the victory at Moscow.

The basic propositions expressed by the Soviet historians did not cause any fundamen-
tal objections on the part of the Hestern participants in the symposium It also
proved to be no less characteristic that sany important provisions of the report of
(K. Reynkhard) proved to be in consonance with the theses of the Soviet speaker.

The author of the book "Povorot pod Hoskvoy" [Turning st hoseow] disclosed once again
the catastrophic dimensions of the Hebrmacht'a defeat at Moscow and its regularity.

In the course of the symposium. attempts occurred at artificially aggravating the
polenics and "politiciring" the discussion using far-fetched statements about the
"expansionism" of Soviet foreign policy. The matter was not limited to a repetition
of the hackneyed stock phrases about the "striving of the USSR for hegemony" in
Eastern Europe. One of the members of the American delegation—a teacher of the
U.S. Army Bar College. ll. Deutch. even stated that allegedly at the end of the
1930's the Soviet Union had the intention...to take Alaska from the United States.
At times. the tendency was also displayed to uphold the "honor" of the Uehrmacht and
whitewash the criminal policy and practice of the fascist aggressors on the terri—
tory of the USSR. Thus. (Yu. Ferater) (FRO) actually expressed the "military neces-
sity" for the Hitlerite "order about cornissars". thus making cot-son cause with Nssi

propaganda .

At the same time. condemnation of a number of falsification exercises of neo-fascist

historiography were heard in presentations of participants in the synposium. Thus.
(E. Yekel') (17116) stressed that the Ilitlsrite attack on the USSR "was not provoked"
and was not a "preventive war." Even in the report by G. Heinberg. along with the
apologetic theses noted above. there was present admission of the fact that Hitler's
aggressive plans were not at all the fruit of "isprovisstion" and that they had in
mind not only the attainment of hegemony in Europe. as neo-Nazi authors write. but

62

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
also the establishment of world domination. In this connection. 6. Weinberg acknow-
ledged that only the collapse of ”Plan Barbarossa" forced Hitler to "put on the
shelf“ plans to attack the United States and capture the American continent.

Acknowledgements of this type testify once again to the significance of the exploit
of the Soviet Army and our entire people who. 60 years ago, were the first to turn
back the giant marauding military machine of the Wehrmacht. In an environment of
acute ideological confrontation and faced by numerous more or less open or disguised
attempts to belittle the significance of this exploit. the truth of its majesty and
historic significance found understanding and response in the audience (among those
attending the symposium were not only representatives of scientific and teaching
circles of the PRC. but also the student youth which displayed great interest in
the Soviet delegation).

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Pravda", "Voprosy istorii", 1982

6367
C80: [801/235 END

63

ltll(”ﬂﬂ(1Al.USE(NVLY