FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10891

I6 March 1982

USSR Report

CYBERNETICS, COMPUTERS AND
AUTOMATION TECHNOLOGY

-(FOUO 4/32)

/

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also froa news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials tron foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRs. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief. indicate how the original infornation was
processed. “here no processing indicator is given, the infor-
aation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original bu; have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the u.s. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAMS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE TRAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
USSR REPORT
Cvaenuencs, COMPUTERS AND AUTOMATION TECHNOLOGY

W00 4/82)

CONTENTS
WARE

Data Control Medium Modules for Automation of . , .
Mica Optic! ReleuCh ooooooooooecooooooooooooooeoooooooooeooe 1

Basic Applications of Bubble Mallory for Microcomputers 0000000000.. 8

Flat Metic Danain Memory Modules With Advanced Level

0: Integration 000000oso.no0.000o00.00.000.000000000000000000000. 18

Interfacing of Digital Strain Gage Bridges With
'ElektroniMO' new?“ ooooooeooeooeseoooooooooeooeooeooo 26

81“ Pm]- for AM” conml mm oooooooooeoooooeoooooeoo

33

_ Alphanumeric Cabined Keyboard for Readout of Characters
in 16-81“ P0'1uon CO“ oooooooooeoooooooooooooooeoooooooooeooooo 30

Miniature Vibrationproof ltultipoint Electrical Connector . . . . . . . . . . 33

Autonation of Testing and Manet-ant or ﬁbrid .
Integrated. Circuit ROUiItOﬂ With Couputer Control 9000000000000 35

Accessory Module for Input of Initiative Signals ................. ho
System for Input of Analog Signals Into 14-6000 Gouputer ........... 1&2
suchsalooo and Shchsaooox Printers ...... us
Graphic Data Input Unit ooooeoooooeoooosoooooeooooeoooooooeooeoooo '68

mta Display Unit With m‘ic Indic‘tion oooooooooooooooooooooooo 50

- a - [III - USSR - 21¢ 8&1’ 3000]

NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
GRAPHIC DISPLAY UNITS
'Grefit' Graphic Displq' o......................u.................
(merecter-Grsphic Information Display .............................
lunieture Intonation Dispm Unit Utilizing Im-l Display ........
Color director-Graphic Display ..................................
30mm
Abstrecte Fran Journal 'PROGRAHHING'. Homer-December 1981 ......

Introduction to Theory of Analysis end Parallel Operstion of
mar Prosrells Dun“ hml‘tion eeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeseeeeeee

Using Funnel Calculations Model To Investigate Structure
Of oriented GNP!“ eeeeeeeeeeeeeeeoeeeeeeesees-eeeeeeeeeeeeeeoee

”cumin“ PL/l 00.9““: Sy‘m OOOOOOOQOOOOO...DCOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO

Software or Type “5000 Computer Complex and Description

Of ItS Elements ooeeeeeeoee-eoeeeeeoeesoeeeeeeeeeeeoeeeeeeeeoeoeo

Systen Approach to Automated Design of Micrcprocessor Co-puters ...
Autonetion of Development or Program for Dete Recorders ..........
APPLICATIONS

Application of Modern Microprocessor Technolog‘ in
PrOblm-oriented syatm eoeeeeeweessseeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeee

Automation of Intonation Processes in Integrated

52

61
63

98

Automated Industrielﬁsnegenent Systems ......................... 112

WGAIIZATIOSS AID PERSONALITIES

M080“ University's Cmputer Center eeeeeeeeeeeeee-eeeeeeeeeeeeeee 129

ﬁftieth 311'de Of m1. Akhnetovich Valve"! eeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeee 1%

.1).

FOR OFFICIAL USE (ELY
'mmtuaomv

mm

0130 681.327.8

DATA comm mm: mums M manner 0! PHYSICAL OHICS RESEARCH
lioscow PRIMY I SISTER WWIYA in missian Ho 10. Oct 81 pp 9-11

[Article by v.6. Tsyvinskiy. candidate of technical sciences. and 6.6. Bondarovich
and ILA. Sokolova, engineers]

[Text] The job of creating automated systems for scientific research is one of
the most important. The experience of developing system for automating technolo-
gical processes has pointed out the need of developing general-purpose complexes
based on digital control and computing equipment making it possible by means of
configuration to construct various automation system. Existing automation com-
plexes of the asv'r-u [modular computer hardsere system], Km: [cut] end as
1.108 [local data control system hardware complex] types reflect in their structure
the ideology‘of a third-generation counter, which involves the concentration of
the "intellect" and infomtion in a single center—a processor with an on-line
memory. _

The development of microprocessor engineering has provided an opportunity for s
new approach to solving automation problems, by dispersing the "intellect" over

the system and by bringing it as close as possible to the points of the pickup

and output of infatuation. One possible solution is the creation of data control
media (1113's), which must lend themselves easily to configuration; adjustment of .
the medium for a specific object (the apparatus)- can be called "loading" the test
bed into the 108. Interaction of the experimenter with the apparatus and medium is
accomplished by means of an experinenter's autonated work place (console) furnished
with a screen type of display and an external memory.

It is possible to design control systena based on 108's by placing certain limita-
tions on their structure. for example. the structure of an ms can be in the fern
of a "tree." Let us note that the najority of experimental apparatus has the same
structure: It contains a basic subsystem (the top of the tree) connected with the
output for the main "product" of the apparatus, and a nuwer of support subsysteas
interconnected hierarchically. An ms with a tree structure can, in a certain in-
fomtign sense duplicate the structure of the apparatus. whereby: subsystems of the
IDS interact with respective subsyete. of the object, performing the pickup of
experimental data and subsystem control (fig 1). '

1

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
H‘.

n‘

I.

FUR ennui. USE ONLY

 

figure 1.. Stnscture of Data Control nediun

Key:
1. Screen 5. Subsystem l
2. moroconputer 6 . Object
3._ Bxperinenter'a console 7. Can 1
4. to superior level 8. Date control nediun (ms)

Thus, each subsysten is able to be connected to one superior aubeyeten and several

. inferior subsystem can be connected to it. Obviouely, with this ms structure

each superior branch point of the tree can act as a redundant facility for any
inferior one. ' Below is considered a variant with redundancy of a level of one.
This makes it possible easily to share resources between tvo neighboring levels and
at the seas tine to ensure a sufficiently high degree of reliability (etebility).
It in possible to denonetrate that the probability of failure of the syaten depends
on the inn branching ratio of the tree, the total nunber of subsystena and the
total nulbet of ms "clusters," Q . whereby this probability is lens the hither
nunber Q is. Even for the nininun value of Q (Q - 3) the probability of
failure is reduced five- to eixfold, and for Q I SO , by more than 1.5 orders.

Structurally a subaysten consists of a plug-in nodule (systen of buses, connectors
and installation points) which can include a nicroprocemr (HP). nenory unite

(an on-line senipernanent net-cry (PPZU)'end Rm). an adapter for connection between
the processor and an upper level and nodules for interfacing with the object. and
in .which points are provided for the connection of adapters for connection between
the processor and inferior subsyste- (fig 2). All cowonente of e aubeysten are
unified on the basis of a single parallel interface.

A aubeysten nuet swap data with the object (apparatus) through a all (maximal: of
10) nunber of infatuation channels and accordingly the nuder of object interface

nodules is not great. This is an iQortent fact governing the flexibility of the
mten. Lists of nodules and teblae of routines in eubsyetena are thereby easily

2

I70! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
visible. they are sinple to put together and easy to change. ‘fheptweically dis-
persed nature of the software detersining the systen's "intellect" thus ilproves

not only the stability but a_lso_thg {testability of the systen.

 

    

“matter
n 06an

Figure 2. Subsysten (Coll) of Data Control Hsdiun

Key:
1. To superior subsystem 6. To object
2. Processor interface adapter 7. Plug-in board
(separator) 8. m1 interface
3. Microprocessor 9. from inferior subsystems
lo. Henory

5. Object interface nodule

A subsystsm'serves as a' building block for a combination of any configuration of
the tree type. "hen a direct link is required between subsystems (without access
to superior subsystem) it can be organized by means of duplex registers connected
to individual subsystem (in fig 1 such a link is shown between subsystems S and
8). Thus, s structure of the oriented graph type can be organised. Recover, it is
impossible to organize redundancy by aesns of duplex registers; therefore. with
respect to redundancy the structure represents a tree.

Let us discuss the redundancy of the "intellectual" (nicroprocessor) nodule in
greater detail. First. redundancy sakes obligatory designing of the interface
according to the parallel principle (an interface of the Dis-l type. "Co-non Line").
Second. the microprocessor interface adapter lust asks possible comction (and
accordingly disconnection frou) with the superior subsystea of like lines of the
redundant subsyeten's interface. Thereby a single "transparent" interface is
forned under the control of the nicroprocessor nodule of the superior subsysten.
The execution of routines is slowed solswhat (the operation of subsystem becomes
serial), but it is not halted. Obviously. the address fields of the on-line
sensory and of object interface nodules of subsystens adjacent vertically, in order
to avoid lack of uniqueness, lust not neet. but must be divided anong levels

3

Iron omcm. use ONLY
adjacent vertically. The control. routines of a subsystem must be allocated to
the ROM. which is part of the microprocessor nodule. With this solution these
routines (identical for each subsystem) can occupy the same absolute region of
the memory. i.e.. they are not taken into account in dividing memory resources
among subsystems.

Unlike coquting media. in data control media the redistribution of tasks among
subsystems in the operating process does not take place; such a redistribution is
observed only when changing the structure of the autonted object (the apparatus)
and also when a cell (subsystem) is made redundant.

Data control nedis can be used to autoute experinents of various classes. Fur-
thernore, the structure of object interface modules can be changed. In particular,
for the purpose of automating physical optics studies a set of object interface
nodules has been developed which is designed for working within the structure of
IDS subsystems designed on the basis of a type 580 IR 80 nicroprocessor with an
output to an Dis-l interface.

The following basic principles were observed in designing a set of modules for
these purposes.

The program exchange algorithm is the most important algorithm for interaction
between nodules and the microprocessor.

For modules triggered by the research object either the exchange of information
in the memory direct access (PD?) node is provided, or the output of data to

a RAH of the magazine type (020:1) connected directly to the nodule's output. In
the program exchange mode the m assigns the operating mode for these modules
(number of measurements, size of memory array allotted).

Disruption of the normal operating mode results in an interrupt enabling signal's
(ZPR) being sent to the module. In units in which a m can be caused for sore

than one reason. the output of a state word determining the reason for the inter-
rupt or its place, to the interface in the program exchange node. is provided for.

The proposed set includes the following modules.

1. Module ATsPl, consisting of a multiplexer, a level fixer (I'll) and a digital-
balance analog-digital converter (Al‘s?) which are electrically not interconnected,
which makes it possible to put together various structures from then. Upon the
"Output" instruction the module perceives the output data as the address of the
multiplexer's channel, and upon the ”Receive" instruction outputs the neasurenent
result to the interface.

Also provided in the module is the serial interrogation of channels with a frequen-
cy determined by the A'Iaf'a conversion tine or by an external oscillator. In

this mode infatuation is output from the A‘rsP‘s output ainilary to program exchange
upon the ATsP's initiative without outputing the address of the information
receiver's unit (in the magazine-type W).

1.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The parameters of the nodule are as follower nunber of channels—l6 with the
possibility of expanding to 32; number of Al‘s! bite—d; interrogation tine (or
a single channel—lo us; input voltage from 0 to +5 v: error—0.5 percent.

2. The voltage switching (KM) nodule is einilar to the ATsPl nultiplexer and can
be used independently or together with the Marl nodule for constructing a 256-
(512-) channel mlti'plexer with 2-stage switching.

3. An 0211:: [nagazine-type wt] nodule designed for the serial input. storage and
serial output of a data array. This nodule has an output to the interface and an
independent input for the write-in of information fron peripheral units (e. g.,
ATsPl).

Interaction with the multiprocessor is carried out in the program exchange mode.
"hen the nenory is filled the nodule stops receiving and sends an interrupt
enabling signal to the interface. Service requests from a peripheral unit and the
HP are attended to in order of arrival. Parameters: capacity—512 bytes (with
possibility of expansion to 1024); write-in tine-1.5 us.

lo. A clock (GVI) designed for forming a sequence of clock pulses arriving with

a specific frequency. This nodule represents a controlled frequency divider (fre-
quency of on internal or external oscillator). The division factor is set by
neane of the interface in the progran exchange node in the ions of a 2-byte pulse:
The basic division factor in binary code and the additional (deternining additional
division of the frequency by 10, 100 or 1000) in a 3-bit parallel unit-counting
code.

Parameters: basic division factor—l to 100 with intervals of l; additional-40,
100 or 1000; frequency of internal oscillator-40 an: t 10 percent with instability
not greater than 0.01 percent.

The set described above is supple-outed by the following nodules:

S. An interface controller nodule enabling step-by-step representation of the
control routine with an indication of the state of interface lines. This module
is designed for connection to any connector of the interface and for reproduction
from the control console of all signals put out by the nicroprocessor (duplicates
the microprocessor). .

b. nodule ATsPZ—sn 8-bit analog-digital converter of the conveyer type with a
conversion tine of 1 us. The ATsP is started through an external signal. In-
formation is output to the legacies-type BAH or'to the interface in the nenory
direct access mode.

7. A calibration signal source nodule which ferns through external instructions

two calibration potentials (approximately zero and approximately the upper linit

of the dynamic range) and a test signal which increases stepwise at a rate deter-
nined by an external frequency. The test signal has four slope values which are

also chosen through external simls.

5

son omml. use any
8. A noraalizing amplifier nodule consisting of tour d.c. anpliiiars with vari-
able gain (10. 100 and 1000) and the ability to Operate in the current-to-
voltsge conversion (1"!!!) node. The operating node (gain or HR) is set via the
interiace in the progre- exchnnge node.

9. A nultipoint analog nenory nodule (MID—a 32-point analog senor-y designed as
a deviation-controlled slave systen with the correction of errora introduced by
the stray capacitmce of switching ole-ente. the rate of switching of memory ele-
gents to the input (output) of a nodule is determined by an external frequency
and the nuber of readings stored is determined by the number of clock pulses
arriving.

10. A control nodule—s special-purpose unit for controlling the subsystes for
the investigation of rapidly occurring processes (30).

Two possible structures for designing a data control medium (103) cell are suggested
on the basis of the nodules described (fig 3).

     
  

". 71‘: .‘1 LQJI'J-Z li-KTIHILIIJi LX7—

     

Pigure 3. Structure of Data Control {indium Subsystem for Automation of
Physical Optics Investigations

Key:
1. Subsystem 2 9. Analog inputs
2. Input 1 10. Address
3. A20 1 11. liicroprocessor interiece
lo. Progran 12. A‘l‘s? input. to output, 10 input,
5. Address n1 output, A‘l'sPl
6. Start. stop 13. hterisce/nagsrine-type RAM
7. 30 16. ﬂeasurenent result
8. Number of channel 15. Clock

6

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The first is designed tor prograe interrogation of 256 sensors with relatively
slowly changing signals. The normalizing amplifiers are not shown in the figure.
In this structure identical addresses are aaaiped to comtatora and analog-
digital converters. The tour lover-order bite read out in data lines are the
channel address in multiplexers oi the first stage (the m module) and the four
higher-order bits in the second stage (the'A'rePl multiplexer). An individual
sensor is connected to the A‘rsP‘s input according to the address read out, of the
required channel in data lines, accompanied by the "Output" instruction. The
analog-digital converter is started by means of internal circuits. Upon the termi-
nation of conversion data are read out-from its output upon the "Receive" instruc-
tion.

The second structure is deeimed for measuring the instantaneous values of voltage
pulses arriving simultaneously through 128 channels. The required number of read-
ings (instantaneous values) in the input signal is stored by means of analog nem-
ories (AZU's). Stored values are read out by the analog-digital converter (Al's?)
at the conversion pace. Data are read out from the Al's? to the magazine-type RAM
for subsequent prograe readout by the microprocessor. Control of the system is
accomplished by means of. a control module which is assigned its operating mode

by the mulitprocessor (number of channels to be interrogated. pace and timber of
required readings). Calibration of the neasuring section is provided for in the
cell.

Both structures can be united in a single data control medium cell.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Hashinostroyeniye". "Pribory i sistemy upravleniya", 1981

8831
C80: 186 3/103

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 681.327.6.006.122
MSIC APPLICATMS 0P BUBBLE HEIDI! FOR HICKOCOWU’I‘SIS

Hoscov PRIBORY I SISTER UPMWHA in Russian No 10, Oct 81 pp 11-1“

[Article by 3.“. Ram. 0881! Academy of Sciences corresponding meter, 'V.K.
kayev, candidate of technical sciences, and 0.1. harkarov, engineer]

[Text] Bubble nsmoriea from the moment of their origin were intended to replace
external electromechanical memories, primarily magnetic disks. One of the main
obstacles for this replacement is the relatively high cost of bubble nenories.
Nevertheless, such important advantages of a bubble memory as independence of
power and low pover consumption, high information density and speed of response,
the lack of rotating mechanical parts and the ability to increase the capacity of
the memory block by block. nake profitable the use of bubble memories in many
general-purpose end special-purpose units. at special interest is the use of a
bubble memory in units based on microprocessor sets and in microcoquters, where
requirements for nemory capacity are often limited to figures on the order of

10 hits.

A nui>er of foreign firms have already begun the series production of bubble in-
tegrated nicroassenblies (0111's) and nemories based on them, designed as a rule
for use as the external memory (VP) of a microcomputer. The key parameters of
series our. suitable for use together with large-scale integrated circuit micro-
processor sets are presented in table 1.

Three mains trends are known in the use of bubble memories for microcoquters [l]:
for constructing an external nemory, for expanding an on-line memory (0?) and for
designing a control memory (111’). The use of a bubble memory controlled by a micro-
processor is promising for organizing dynamic redistribution and associative

search in relative data bases, ordering information, editing texts. etc.

The goal of this article is a prelininary analysis of the effectiveness of using
bubble nemoriee for nicroconputers in the three trends listed.

ﬂoppy disk nemories (Ram's) and cassette memories mom's) are used as external
memories in the majority of nicroconputers. The key. characteristics of modern
sun's, M's, ’oubble memories and charge-coupled memories are presented in table
2 [2], from which it can be concluded that bubble memories considerably surpass
in all their technical data electromechanical floppy disk and cassette memories.

FOROFHCIALUSEONLY
P-S,
P's ,

P-S,
P’s .

P-si-

P
P’s ,

P-S,
P-S,
P3

P—S,

|ce register. sz0 types with 18 and 20 terminals. 3Open

.1 International (USA). P-S - parallel-aerial; P - parall

260x1025
S72X2052

zssxloza
58332048

1383587
265X1033

256X6096
256x6096

26011025

260K
1024K

256K
1026K

'81K

74K
270K

1026K
1026!
64K

260K

co 90°
hart rah-c

e

o

0.15

-.
bUl

N5 0“!“

I.

0.82

9.0
0“

OD 960
NO GUIUI
~J

0.82
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A charge-coupled memory is better in terms of speed of response characteristics
than a bubble memory, but such an inportmtdisadvantage of a charge-coupled
nemory as its pover dependence makes it practically unsuited for constructing an
external memory.

Because of the ability to increase the mry‘s capacity block by block, character—
istic of bubble memories, their unit cost almost does not depend on information
capacity. The approximate relationship between unit cost and information capacity
for bubble memories, floppy disk memories and cassette memories (curves 1, 2 and

3, respectively) is presented in fig 1. Although the unit cost characterizes
memories only in the static mode (storage mode), even with respect to this indica-
tor, as is obvious from fig 1, a bubble memory with a capacity of 3 to 4 "bits
surpasses a floppy disk memory.

 

Table 2.

Memory charac- _ 322‘ of memory

teristics Bubble marge-coupled Cassette 1710222 disk
Access time 6-10 ms* 100 us 1.0 s 300 a

Data transfer rate 8001( bits/ 2 Hbits/s 10K bits/s 250K bits/s

s
Frequency of
occurrence of

errors 10-12 10-10 10-7 10-8
Hean time between

failures in hours 40,000 7000 3000 6500
Unit power re-

quirement in

uw/bit 10 15 . 8 35
Unit cost in

cents/bit 0.1-0.2 0.2-0.2!) 0.07 ' 0.15
Power indepen-

dence Yes No Yes Yes

*Reduction of this time to 0.1 to 1 ms in the future involves the use of current

accessing [10] and the employment of a 2-stage hierarchy in the storage structure
of a bubble chip.

Hemries are characterized more fully b the price of productivity, taking into
account speed of response parameters [3‘1 1'0: external memories designed for use
in a specific system it is determined as follows: Iv a C (T + lib/v) . where

C is the unit cost, I is the access time. “b is the 2123 of a transferred
block of data and v :3 the data transfer rate. minimization of the price of

productivity can serv ion selecting the type of external memory.
Prom the condition 1’?” hﬁiﬁﬁ < Pia» it is possible to obtain the region of

10

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
external memory capacities in which bubble memories are more efficient than
floppy disk memoriea. Rith the values of speed of response characteristics pre-
sented in table 2 and dependencea of unit cost on information capacity preeented
in fig 1 the upper limit of this region is about 20 hits.

  

_6123~ssiou...

Figure 1. Dependence of Unit Cost on Intonation Capacity for Bubble,
Floppy Disk and Cassette Memories

Key:
1. Cents/bit 2. bits

Since an external memory capacity of not greater than 10 Hbits is basically needed
for modern microcomputers, bubble memories are more effective in this application
than are floppy disk. Approximately the some results are gotten when comparing
bubble memories with cassette memories, whereby the use of the latter is quite
limited because of their relatively slow speed of response and low reliability.
Thus, at the present time it is wisest to design a microcomputer external memory
based on a bubble memory. A considerable advantage of a bubble memory is the
ability to place the external memory on the same circuit board with the micropro-
cessor and at the same time to create a microcowuter on a single board.

A criterion of no small importance in selecting an external memory is the siqli-
city of the controller. Bubble memory and floppy disk controllers are identical
for the moat part, which is due chiefly to the similarity of the control functions
performed by them. The main principle for the implementation of a programble
controller for a floppy disk memory by Rocloaell International (USA) designed for
use in a microcomputer [6] consists in the use of an "external data block" placed
in the microcomputcr's on-line memory and designed for controlling the organiza-
tion of the write-in format and for forming tag codes. This approach not only
makes possible sufficient flexibility in controlling the for-Int but also makes it
possible to reduce the number of controller registers needed for this and at the
same time to minimize the structure of the floppy disk memory controller.

The use of a bubble memory in contradiction to the use of a floppy disk memory
makes possible the parallel (byte by byte) access to information, which eliminates
the need to implaaent in the controller functions of parallel-serial conversion

when writing information in and serial-parallel when reading it out. in addition,
a bubble memory easily makes possible a start-stop operating mode. This. first,
makes it possible to realize the write-in and readout of information at a variable

11
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
INJR‘OFF1CJAL.USII€MVLY

speed, which in the majority or cases eliminates buffering of data. Second,

it assumes rapid response of the system and consequently makes possible addressing
without the use of tag codes. The latter fact considerably simplifies and some-
times even completely eliminates from the'controller's structure a format control
block and an address and date comparison block and simplifies the instruction
decoding and control block. On the whole, the controller of a bubble memory can
become approximately twofold smaller than a floppy disk memory controller in terms
of hardware input.

The bubble memory controller made by Texas Instruments (USA). whose structural
diagram is shown in fig 2, is a general-purpose programmable controller designed
for use in a microcomputer [5]; it stores information on the instantaneous posi—
tion of data in storage registers, makes possible a start-stop operating mode

and generates signals for controlling the functions of a bubble memory. Universal-
ity is achieved by means of software loading in the internal registers of the
controller of individual parameters determining the structure of the chip and of
the entire bubble memory and the size of a data block which can be transferred.
Thereby an on-line change in the contents of internal registers makes it possible
for the controller to work with a bubble memory consisting of chips of various
structures and capacities and to accomplish the transfer of information in blocks
of various lengths and in several blocks in succession. Through instructions
arriving from the microprocessor the controller organizes the execution of the
functional operations required for accessing one or more blocks of data from the
bubble memory.

     

   

:h as.“ I
v mun-n.
1) ”when"

(""00“

     
  
  

“0'10“:
(nus-u

.3)

lam: m

      
        
 

WUIM

7)
A???” ‘ 3) [unclut-
mu- mo»- inn-35221:. a ﬂow-3m
ass-wt ulsuu . 15) 16)

Figure 2. Structural Diagram of Bubble Memory Controller

Key:
1. Control ROM and control signal 8. control.lines 16. Date output
former 9‘ Control of functions
2. Output butter register 10. Registers
3. Control signals ll. Date buffer
4. Counter 12. Page size control
5. Data line 13. Timing signals
6. Input/output buffer 16. Data input
7. Address line 15. Data register
12

FOI‘OFFNJAI.USEZONLN
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The possibility of the loss of information when the power is cut off , when this
information is in an interface register, is characteristic of the structure of

a bubble memory chip with parallel-aerial organisation of the data array and

a closed interface register. However, in'the circuit of the controller presented
in fig 2 the automatic return of information to storage registers and setting of

the bubble memory to the initial ("zero“) address upon a signal warning of the
cutoff of power are provided for. Thus, comparison of floppy disk and bubble memory
controllers demonstrates the considerable simplicity of a bubble memory controller,
although at the same time great universality and the ability to perform more varied
control functions are characteristic of it.

It is possible to organize in a bubble memory information and a sequence for
accessing it by analogy with their implementation by means of a floppy disk memory.
This, in fact. imitation makes it possible in the majority of instances to use
already existing floppy disk memory controllers for controlling bubble memories.
With this, of course, the ability to utilise such important advantages of a bubble
memory as the parallel transfer of data, the start-stop mode, etc., is eliminated.
0n the other hand, a microcomputer user is able without special difficulty, at the
first stage of using bubble memories (before the development or acquisition of a
bubble memory controller) to successfully replace a floppy disk- memory with a

less expensive, faster, more reliable and more compact bubble memory because of the
utilization of available controllers.

Slight modification of a floppy disk mory controller makes it possible to use it
for controlling a bubble memory without imitating in the bubble memory the informa-
tion structure of a floppy disk memory. With this approach the advantages of a
bubble memory are utilized more completely. However, modification of the controller
involves the introduction of changes in wiring and is iwossible if the controller
has been implemented as a large-scale integrated circuit. Standard microprocessors
can act as controllers of an external bubble memory and for floppy disk memories.

This application, as a rule, is justified when great universality and flexibility
in controlling a memory are required.

Expansion of Hicrocomputer On-Line Memories

Microcomputers are usually used in the single-program mode, when for the purpose of
increasing the effective capacity of the on-line memory in combination with high-
speed semiconductor memories with random access (ZUPV's) it is possible to use
less-high-speed mmories. Let us discuss the feasibility of using as these devices
bubble memories, which are distinguished by relatively low cost and relative aim-
plicity of matching with a microprocessor. No less iqortant is the fact that
thereby the greater part of the microcomputer's on-line memory becomes independent
of power.

The exchange of information between levels of such a 2-level on—line memory is
accomplished through a single word. This considerably simplifies the structure

of the bubble memory controller. As an example. in fig 3 is presented a structural
diagram of a simple controller made by Rocluvell International (USA) [6], which
makes possible the exchange of information with a bubble memory in a single byte
in the start-stop mode, as well as working with several bubble memory blocks.

It is not difficult to see that the controller whose structural diagram is shown

13
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OHIO“. USE ONLY

in fig 3 is much aiwler than the universal bubble not! controller illustrated
in fig 2.

 

figure 3. Structural Diagram of Bubble Henry Controller with Byte-by-Byge
Exchange of Informtion: cc. 3, A, > -!lip-£lop inputs; Q, Q -
tlip-flop outputs

Key:
1. Accessing of block 11. Synchronizing signal
2. To other block . 12. Control
3. Access 13. Start
lo. Readout 16. Ready
5 . write-in 15 . State
6. Erase 16. Operate
7. Start-atop l7. Fran other block
8. Bubble neuory block 18. Data input
9. Step 19. Data output

10. End signal

The effectiveness of using a bubble memory for expanding an on-line usury can also
be evaluated according to the criterion of minimizing the price of productivity.
deter-lined in this case as follows: 1’ - c T , where (:o is the unit cost of
the on-line neaory and to is the act as ting.

when using a bubble nenory together with e randoe-ecceaa memory, the expanded on-
line memory rapt-aunt??? two-level hitrlarc whose mean acceaa tile is deter-1m
bytheexpreeeionin : III-1+ + 1' .uharer and 'r- arethe
access than tron the randongacceie Query and'buhhle needy, reapeﬂively. and

h 1a the “percentage of aucceeeee," repreaenting the relative share or accusing
events satisfied by the tint-level gallery and depending baeicallx on ite capacity.
with this the nean unit cost of the on-line nanny can he conputed by the equation:

co - (c‘tlz + cts‘tewmr + a") , vhere cz . c“. N‘ and N“ are respectively

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
the unit costs and information capacities of the random-access sensory and bubble
memory. Thus. the price of the productivity of the expanded onnline memory will
equal:

line memory), taking into account the dependent: of index h on the information

capacity, 'Nz , and the constancy of the capacity of the on-line memory, N: + N“ .

Microcomputer Control Memory

The use of Ron's with the one-time write-in of information as control memories for
microcomputers to a great extent determines their narrow specialization for the
solution of a single specific problem. On the other hand, ever more often it has
become effective to enlist microcomputers to solve not a single problem but some
set of problems. In connection with this, devices which permit the repeated write-
in of information, so-cslled reprogrssnable devices [8], are needed as control
memories. Randomaccess memories permitting the rapid write-in and readout of
information and semipermenent memories with the erasure of information by means of
ultraviolet light or by the electrical method [8] serve as reprograuable memories
suitable for operation as control memories for microcomputers. Bubble memories.
distinguished by low unit cost, high information density and high reliability [1),
can be used for the same purpose. As stated, the main disadvantage of a bubble
memory in this application is the serial accessing of information and, as a result
of this, the long random-access time. However. random access. characteristic of
random-access memories, is not a typical requirement for control memories.- More-
over, usually special software or hardware is used. e.g., an instruction address
counter. which essentially makes possible the simulation of serial accessing, since

the program is written into serial cells of the control memory. Thus. serial

The price of the-productivity of the control memory of a microcomputer designed for
running a certain set of programs can be determined as follows: 1’ - C 1‘ ,

where cu is the unit cost or the control memory, In is the acegee ting for

a single instruction, averaged by taking into account the program replacement time,
and computed upon condition of the identity of the programs of the set by the
equation: '1‘ u - 11‘:I + 1' [km . where 1" is the average instruction access time for
a program. 1‘ is the fine for replachg one program with another. It is the number
of repetitioas of each program and m is the number of instructions in a program.

ninimization of the price of productivity can serve as the criterion for selecting
the type of control memory. The condition for greater efficiency of a control

15

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

memory constructed by using a ”PM" mm as compared with a random—access
memory. for example. will be I’ 4 r . Quantities '1" and 1'. when
using a 20?? [random-access memgry] can be determined as follows: 1" - 'I2 and
T - ‘1' m , and if a bubble memory is used as follows: 1'". I (l + ”[3 . and

'1" - mIv , where B is a parameter characterizing the degree of hchhing of
ptogrsmscind equal to the product of. the percentage ot control transfer instruc-
tions and the mean difference between a control transfer instruction address and
jump address (for the instruction to which the jump is made). and v“ is the
rate of transfer of data from the bubble memory.

Taking into account the expressions presented, the condition for the greater effi-

ciency of a bubble memory as compared with a random-access memory is written as
follows:

(cu/v“) (1 + l/k + e) < ctrzu + l/k) .

From this inequality it is possible to determine the region of parameters charac-
terizing the degree of repeatability, It . and branching, B . of programs of the
set in which the use of a bubble memory as a control memory is more efficient
than of a random-access memory. This region is determined by the equation:

a< [(cz'rz - culvuﬂmulvu)! [1 + 1m .

Reprogramble memries of other types can be compared with bubble memories and
regions of the parameters of the set of programs in which the use of bubble memo-
ries is more efficient can be found similarly.

It is of no minor importance that bubble memories can be used simultaneously as
control memories and on-line memories for microcmuters [1, 9]. Furthermore, the
use of a special instruction set can make it possible to interpret a bubble memory
as a set of processor registers which results in considerable reduction of the
size of programs and simplification of programing a microcomuter. In addition.
the existence of this number of processor registers considerably simplifies the
structure of the processor.

The studies presented in this article demonstrate that the state of the art of the
development of bubble memories has occasioned the need to make a serious study of
ways of more effectively using bubble memories in microcomputers. Furthermore.
bubble memories designed on the basis of chips with serial and parallel-serial
organization of the data array can find an application. It can be suggested that
for designing microcomputer external memories large-capacity chips (a megabit and
greater) with a parallel-serial structure are preferable. rurthermore, it can
prove advisable to use low—capacity chips with - serial structure for expanding
the on-line memory and especially for constructing the control memory.

Bubble memories constructed on the basis of existing bubble integrated micron
assemblies in the majority of cases cover in terms of capacity requirements for
use in microcomputers. In this connection. the major direction for iwrovement of
bubble memories oriented toward use in microcomputers will become. in our opinion,
not increasing the capacity of chips, but increasing the speed of response of

16

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR¢NHHCLALIK§EONLY

devices. further-ore, whereas at the present stage o: development of bubble devices
physical and techmlogical limitations are to a great extent havering progress

in improving the clock rates of chips. in the future proh1ens of finding nev. archi-
tectural solutions and intonation exchange algorithm conducive to improving the
virtual speed of response of bubble neeories can cone to the forefront.

Bibliography

1. Naunov, 3.1L. Rayev. V.K. and Harhrov, 6.1. ”Promote in Using a Bubble
Memory in s Hicroconputer" in "xagliitnyee elasnty avtosstiki i vychislitel'noy
tekhniki: XVI Vseeoyuznoye soveshchaniye; Tezisy dok1adov" [Hsgnetic Elements
of Automation and Computer Technology: 16th All—Union Conference, Theses of
Papers], Hoscow. Nauka, 1979.

2. Juliussen. J.E. COMPUTER DESIGN, V01 15, No 10, 1976.

3. Ponina. LH. "0n the Question of Local Economic Criteria for Eating the
Quality of Bubble Hemries" in "Trudy INEUH, vyp. 69" Works of the Institute
of Control Conputers, No 69], Hoscov, 1978.

lo. Peat-an, J.B. ”Hicroconputer-Based Design," New York: McGrsv-Ein, 1977.

S. Lee, D.M. "IEEE CMCON, Spring 77, Digest of Papers," New York: IEEE Press.
1977.

6. Norton, R.R. "1838 0019001, Spring 77, Digest of Papers," New York: 1383
Press, 1977.

7. Anacker, W. 1383 TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, V01 HAG-7, No 3, 1971.

8. Prangishvili, I.V. "Mikroprotsessory i nikro-EVH" [Microprocessors and Micro-
computers], Moscow, Energiys, 1979.

9. Naunov, 3.1L, Rsyev, V.K. and Harkarov, 6.1. "Bubble Hemries for Microcom-
puters" in "Pisicheskiye svoystvs i prineneniye tsilindricheskikh negnitnykh
donenov v priborostroyenii" [Physical Properties and Application of Magnetic
Bubbles in Instrument ﬂaking], Moscow, mum: priborostroyenii [Central
Scientific Research Institute of Information and Technical and Economic Research
on Instrument Making for Automation Bquipnent and Control Systens], 1979.

10. Eobeck, AJL, Blank, 8.1... Butherus, A.D., Cisk. 7.3. and Strauss, HZ
nan. svsm momma. JOURNAL. Vol 58. No 6, 1979.

COPYRICRT: Izdatel'stvo 'Hsshinostroyeniye". "Pribory i sistely upravleniya", 1981

8831
080: 1863/43

17
FOI‘OFFKJAI.USE(NVLY
roe omcm. use out»!

unc 681.327.66
' rut mmuc 06mm war me me mmcsn 1.3sz or mmmmu‘

Moscow rum r srsrnn‘ mmm m kussian Ho 10. Oct 81 pp 23-21.

[Article by AJ. lshchenko, engineer]

[Text] A trend in nagnetic engineering involving the use of nobile nagnetic do-
neins as information India has received strong develop-ant in recent years here at
home and abroad. The storage mediu- for devices of this class is a thin nagnetic
film with uniaxisl nagnetic anisotropy. Two different types of domain nenories
(020's) are distinguished depending on the orientation of the anisotropy vector:
based on flat ugnstic domains (M's) and cylindrical Isgnetic domins (Tsm's)
[19 6]. I I

In the first kind of device the storage nediun is' a thin polycrystalline ferroneg-
netic fill with an axis of easy mgnetisstion (om) lying in the plane of the filn,
and in the second thin films and wafers of ferrosngnetic single crystals with an
om perpendicular to the plans of the filo.

Characteristic to an equal degree of both kinds of devices are the properties of
power independence and high reliability. caused by the absence of a moving mhani-
csl nediun; relatively low cost; and sufficiently high speed of response; which '
in my cases Inks their use extremely effective. Areas of application of 020'.
include nunsrical progra- control equipment, equipment based on nicroprocessors,
nicroperipherals, industrial robots, etc. The creation and use of 0211's will make
it possible to fill the gap with regard to speed of response between a fast on-line
nenory and external storeges for various kinds of colputing system, which in turn
will increase to a great extent the execution rate of computer hardware.

However, in addition to these general features, flat nsgnetic donain nenories have
s nunber of iwmt advantages over bubble nenories: a sinpler integrated tech-
nology. the absence of expensive-raw nterials. better speed of response owing to
the ability to distribute several readout data transmitters over the senory plane
and to organize parallel write-in and readout of information, the ability to func-
tion over an expanded telperature range, and cost which is more than an order of
negnitude lower. All this lakes it possible to reco-Iend the extensive use of
flat nagnetic donain nuories for instruments and automation equip-ant where the
cost of equipment is low and the anount of output is considerable.

18

F0. OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLV

Operating Prmciple of flat liegnstic Death Devices

A thin polycrystalline film with induced uniaxial anisotropy of about 30 0e and
an om in the film’s plane is used as the storage medium in which flat magnetic
domains are maintained and move. These films are produced by vacuum deposition of
a permalloy, .‘n a constant magnetic field. onto a high-quality glass substrate
consisting of horonilicate glass 0.2 to 0.3“. thick.

For the purpose of restricting the movement of M's in a continuous film. special
channels are formed which are surrounded by a mass having high coercivity. for the
purpose of forming the structure of the storage medium it is possible to employ
methods of diffusing a nonmagnetic smterrial into magnetic films, chemical etching
of the surface of films. the creation of irregularities on the surface of the sub-
strate before deposition, deposition onto the substrate of a layer of nonmagnetic
material. as well as a hard-magnetic film onto a soft-mgnetic. etc.

Methods which have men developed at the present time for controlling the movement
of flat magnetic domains in storage media can be divided into two classes: 1) me-
thods based on the movement of unstabilized domains: and 2) methods based on the
movement of domains stabilized by means of local magnetic fields.

methods of the first class are characterized by the fact that the width of flat
magnetic domains is predetermined by the width of the movement channels. and their
length by the dimensions and spacing of control lines. The growth and interaction
of domains are caused by the influence of pulses of the magnetic fields of the con-
trol lines. The unneeded part of a domain is erased by means of pulses of an eras-
ing field, which nullify domains of reverse magnetization over the entire surface
of :he film, with the exception of just those sections protected by the effect of
local confining fields which compensate the effect of erasure fields.

In devices of this class the preservation of flat magnetic domains is mde possible
in the absence of control fields only by the existence of coercivity on the part of
the magnetic film storage medium. The minimum dimensions of stable flat magnetic
domains are inversely proportignsl to the coercivity and for typical parameters of
the medium (thickness of 1000 A, magnetization of 1000 Gs. anisotropy field of

30 0e and coercivity of 3 to 6 0e) equal a width of 5 to 7 u and a length of 30 to
40 u, which with the required stability margin corresponds to an information allo-
cation den ity of about 10 bite/cmz .

Hethods of the second class are characterized by the fact that the retention and
movement of flat magnetic domains are accoqlished by a combination of variable
rrrrol fields and stationary local stabilization fields. Studies [2. 3] have
demonstrated the possibility of the existence of stable flat magnetic domains in
external stabilising fields with dimensions smaller than those occasioned only by
the coercivity of the medium (for certain domain models and tutorials used the
length of a domain is at least 10 11! which corresponds to an informtion allocation
density of about 0.25 x 10' bits/cm and makes it possible to create memory modules
with a capacity greater than 1 Hbit on a substrate measuring 30 x 1:8 ma).

The operating principle of devices of this class is explained by fig 1. Static
stabilization fields induced'by a special method along the channel (curve 1) and

19

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the control line field (curve 2) ere ehoun in fig It. At the etertins nonent.

in the ebeence of e control fi , the dentin, under the influence of the stabiliz—
ing field, is at position I (fig lb), and then'under the influence of the total
control and stabilization field grows to dineneiens determined by the condition

R 3 ﬁt (position II). where R is the donein propagation field. which depends
on the properties of the magnetic neteriel of the medium and the sea-etricei para-
neters of the syetel. Then with reduction of the control field to zero the domain,
under the influence of stabilization fielde. is split into two domains (fig 1c).
and under the influence of a control field of opposite polarity the right domain
collapoea and the left accomplishes further propagation through the structure of
the channel (fig 1d).

 

Figure 1.
Key:
1. H‘ , 0e , 3. Position l
2. u 4. rropagetion channel

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Results of Investigation of Local Stabilization Home

There are several practical methods which make it possible to form local stabiliza-
tion fields: by means of current-lines, by means or hard-engnetic overlays and

by the creation of propagation channels with a special configuration [2, S]. The
first of these methods does not make possible power independence or a memory and

is not described in this article. fig 2 illustrates the idea of using stabiliza-
tion fields formed by the second (a) and third (b) methods.

Annoy-suds

 

Figure 2.
Key:
1. Overlays lo. Haas
2. Axis of easy magnetization S. Propagation channel

3. Flat magnetic domains

Let us discuss the second method. A periodic structure of hard-magnetic strips
(overlays) magnetized opposite to the magnetization of the storage medium is placed
at a certain distance from the storage plane. The strength of the stabilization
field created by the overlays depends on the geometrical parameters of the system
and the magnetic properties of the overlay material. The results of a theoretical
study by the author of the mgnetic fields of overlays for various distances, d .
from the overlay plane to the storage medium are presented in fig 3. The parameters
of the overlays are as follows: thicknesst - 500 X, widthub - 35 u, magnetiza-
tion-41 - 1632 Gs, coercivity—ﬂ - 150 Oe. In analyzing the distribution of the
field i? was assumed that the mgﬁetization is distributed trapezoidally over the
width of the overlay, which made it possible to reveal magnetic field inhomogenei-
ties associated with the influence of the width of the edge zone.

Also, by scans of computer methods. an analysis was made of the distribution or the
magnetic field induced by a channel 01 special configuration without the use of
hard-eagnetic overlays. The results at calculation 0! the magnetic stabilization
field for a magnetic iilm with the parameters 14 '- 850 Cs . H I 40 0e and d -

2 1220 A , where Y is the coordinate of the chimnel‘s width, ﬁre presented in
13 .

A comparison of these two methods of forming stabilizing fields makes it possible to
rate their advantages and disadvantages. The advantage of the second method is the
simpler technological process whereby the channel‘s configuration is formed

21

FOR OFl-TC’IAI. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

simultaneously with the creation of a high-«enmity mass, and its disadvantage

as compared with. the first netbnd is the greater inhonogeneity of the stabilization
field over the width of the channel. which necessitates additional consideration of.
the properties of flat esoteric domains in museums fields.

 

 

 

figure 3.
Key:
1. Ex , 0e 2. u
‘ an an- .
I In sun ‘)
Figure lo.
Key:
1. Mass 4. u
2. Channel 5. 00
3. 850 Gs

Results of Investigation of Elements of Closed Registers

The designs of flat magnetic domain sentry matrixes with local stabilization fields
which have been inplenented at the present tine are characterized by the presence
of unclosed registers representing a system of straightv-line lmoercivity channels
in which the nunber of readout data transmitters equals the number of registers and
the copying of information is performed by means of electronic regeneration circuits
[2]. However. in a umber of applications it is note effective to use long closed

22

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
registers, which makes it possible to reduce considerably the amber of terminals
in a matrix. to sicplify the circuit and to lower the cost of the memory- control
unit.

In this connection in designing flat magnetic domain memory matrixes of great im-
portance is the consideration of structural elements Implementing turning of a
lowbcoercivity channel and of the magnetic fields associated with the geometry of
these elements. Taking into account the leakage fields created by the edges of

the high-coercivity mass makes it possible to simulate properly the passing of a
flat magnetic domain through a structural "turn" element and to determine the para-
meters of the structure required for obtaining a sufficiently broad range of stable
operation. An analysis was made of a number of element configurations in the re-
search process. As a result it was established that the configuration illustrated
in fig 5, where the distribution of the magnetic leakage field in this element is
given. is characterized by the greatest inhomogeneity of leakage fields. The para-
meters of the magnetic film medium correspond to the example of calculating stabili-
zation fields in a channel of special configuration. The field in the "turn" is

a brake field and therefore at the moment the flat magnetic domain passes through
the turn an additional compensating field is required, created by the control line
in the direction of the axis of easy magnetization. A fragment of the topology in-
cluding the key elements of a shift register-the shifting element and the turn
with control lines-is illustrated in fig 6.

 

_._. .-
.. ,-‘ _...__. ..

   
  

    
  

-'-:°3""-" y s"

Figure 5.
Key:

1. Conductors for passing through 3. Channel
turn '

2. Control conductor

Conclusion

23

FOR(MNHCJAL.USE(MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

specific magnetic parentage ot the etogese mm. a «ll u. by taking into
eccount the power relationehiye cum 131-13]. to optiaize than and crate
mtrixea with an advanced level of attestation.

Y’auhi '

l 7' 40 00 M IWXNKH

1)

"It: 2)

 

o 29 n so no mo wow
It...»

so

"a y."

79 '

o n «so wax...“
u”:

so
'40 .
20

 
  
  

Y-O

0 20 u U 00 '00 X,mm

Figure 6.

1.11 - 2.0e

Bibliography

1. Boyerchenkov. ILA” Vasil'yeva, NJ’. and Rozental'. Yu.D. "Logicheokiye
uatroyetvena Ingnltnykh oredakh s upravlyayenyn dvizheniyen donenov" [Logic

Devices annoying Hapetic Hedi: with Controlled Motion of Domino]. noncov.
Energiya, 1978.

2. Battarel. C.P., Hat‘llle, Il- and Nari. J.P. I!“ TRANS. MGM, V01 HAG-13,
1977, pp 1302-1304.

3. Veeil'yeve. rm. and Smov. v.s. "Stability of ﬂat ﬂesnetic Domino."
AWN I WW. No 8. 1980.

’0. Sukhu. R. "msnitnyye tonnye plenti" [min Magnetic film]. Honor, Mir. 1967.

210

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
5. Patent No 2406286 (trance). .

6. "Prospects for the Appncactan o! manic Him with Controlled notion of
Don-1n- In 00:19th Technology Devices. a manic Nation.“ m 1‘
SISTER? UPIANLENIIK. No 6, 1973.

COPYRIGHT: Izdacel'stvo 'thnoncroymiyc". "rrtbory- 1 “stay upravleniya".
1981 '

8831
CSO: 1863/43

25
FOR OFFNJA1.USE(NVLY
FOIOFl-‘ICIALUSEONLY

UDC 681.3:531.78.2
WACW 0’ DIGITAL M GA“ mass m 'mnmm-so' “1630mm!!!
Hoscow runner 1 5mm mm in Russian No 10. Oct 81 p 32

[Article by N). Uspenskiy and 14.6. hgovatov. engineers, and AJ. Burlap. candi-
' date of Physical and lathenatical sciences]

[Text] . For repeated leasurenmts of static strains and stresses originating in
mechanical elements and structures extensive use is nade of digital strain gage
bridges of the Tam-3 and rem-s type with recording of the results on a printer
or punch. The further processing of measurement results is periorled on keyboard
or general-purpose computers.

At Giprouglenash [State Planning and Desim and Bxperinental Institute of Coal
Machine Building] (lioscow) a unit has been developed for interfacing digital strain
gage bridges with an "Blektroniha-éO" uicroconputer for the purpose of coIbining
the processes of recording and processing uperinentel data.

The interface (08) (fig 1) includes latching switches (SK's) required for trans-
forming the levels of the signals of digital strain gage bridges (Terri's) to
standard torn; level converters (Prtl's) which convert negative logic into 111. logic;
‘a code converter (Pr!) which converts binary-decinl code into binary according to
an algorithn for dividing the hinery-decinal nuaber by two with carryover oi the

lower-order hit to the corresponding bit of the binary nulber; and a control circuit
(SkhUpr) which starts Ts‘m bridges. controls the PrK converter and swaps service

signals with the colputer. The interface is linked with the "Blektroniha-GO"
computer by scans of an 11 parallel exchange board. '

when the cmuter is turned on and the progra- is started the processor generates

a "least 3" signal which sets {lip-flops 1'1 and 1‘2 in the control circuit to the
initial state (fig 2). ' .

Before each :1!“th cycle the computer tor-s an I‘Output h“ instruction which
triggers tor-er rs. The length of. the pulse in the latter‘s output is deter-lined
by the ties for the operation of eiectronugnatic relay I. whose contacts control
the channel switch (PK) (ct. fig 1) and start the ram bridge. At the end of the
measurement tine the ram bridge issues an ”ﬁnd Conversion" signal (Hr) to trigger
for-er n. by asses of its pulse ilipvilop 1']. is set' to the ”1" state and the
pause tort-er. 12, is triggered. With this the appearance at a signal for enabling

MOWUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the operation of the code conmter (Rh) iron the "1" era of flip-flop ‘Il
enables the operation at converter Pr: (ct. £131). The duration 01 the "Faun"

pulse is determined basically by the tine lag of the relay unit of the ram bridge,
as well as by the tine delay for the operation of converter PrK and equals 50 to

60 us.

 

Figure 1. Block Diagram of Automated Strain Gage System: OI-otest object

Key:
1. Test object 7. Computer
2. Channel switch 8. Interface
3. Digital strain gpge bridges 9. Control circuits

6. Matching switches
5. Level converters
6. Code converter

 

Figure 2. Circuit Diagram for Control of Digital Strain Gage Bridges and
Input 0! Information into the Conputer

Key: .
1. "End Conversion" signal 5. To digital strain 9. "Input 3"
2. us gage bridge 10. "Output 3"
3. + S V 6. na 11. Relay
lo. Code converter Operation 7. "flag 3"
enabling signal 8. "Reset B"
27

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
At the trailing edge of the “Pauee” pulee' for-er 1’3 ie triggered. eettins mp-
ilop 1'2 to the initial etate. interning thelcoaputer that the measurement cycle
hae been capleted.

with the appearance of the "flag 3" aignal the coaputer form the "Input 3" in-
etruction, with which readout oi the monument reeult taken place and former 1"»

is triggered and flip-flop. Tl and T2 are react by the latter to the initial

state, after which the aeaeuraent cycle in repeated. The interface control circuit
has been executed with eerie. K176 :icrocircuite. The data accumleted are pro-
ceeeed by Deane or an appropriate progreu with the output of proceeeing reeulte

to a couputer printer.

The interface is designed as a coupleted structure on vhooe frame are installed
connectore ot the mazzaacreo.364.209 TU type. Connectione are inetelled by
the twist-on method. .

No changes have been introduced into the circuit diagrea: of the digital strain
gage bridge, which takes it poeeible to uee the inetrunent independently.

COPYRIGaT: lrdatel'etvo ”Heehinoetroyeniye". "Prihory i eieteny upravleniya". 1981

8831
C80: 1863/ (03

28
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

m (53.085. 3265*52).004.1

SIGNAL PANEL M W comm. 5m
Hoscov rumour r srsrm urnvmmm in Russian No 10. Oct'81 pp 32-33
[Article by All. Prid. engineer]

[Excerpts] In an ASU [automated control system] it is necessary to present person-
nel with on-line infornation regarding the state of the controlled systen. In. the
case of binary information it is a good idea to use a 2~position signal panel for
its representation.

At TsNII'l'U [Central Scientific Research and Design and Technology Institute of
Control Organization and Bquipnent] (Minsk) a signal panel has been developed for
the Ninsk Tractor Plant's production ASU.* It has been installed at the plant
controller's station and serves the purpose of representing the' state of the pro-
cess stock of completion items along the intershop part manufacturing production
process route and on a shop‘s essenbly line. The panel is connected to the in-
formation source (a Yes-1030 coquter) by leans of an lit-8901 remote data acquisi-
tion unit. With the failure of this co-anication channel the input of nessages
to the panel is performed from an ”-7301 data recorder situated at the assembly
shop controller's station. '

The panel can be connected to series Yes and 8!! computers vie modifications of
equip-eat of the ”0-218 type, designed for operating with these computing complexes.
For connection of the unit to A?!) [data transmission equip-eat] of another type or
directly to a cosputer it is sufficient to replace in it the an interface.'

The panel's field consists of unified renovable nosaic alenents neasu'ring 4.0 x 100
III produced by the Zhitomir Pronvto-tika Plant.

‘l‘echntcel Data of Panel

Hunter of signal cells ' 127
Haxinun distance berm panel and intonation source. b 10

Rate of reception of data in characters per' second 100
Distance for reliable. tending of displny. a 8

Size 0! field. a 1200 x 1200

‘w_._'1uko',"ro.1. and Dudkin, c.u.. "Automation 'of Intershop On-Line Real-rise
Control." person 1 srsmnr mama,” 6, June 1979.

COPYRIGHT: Isdatel'stvo "Heshinostroyeniyﬂﬁ‘l’ribory i aisteny uprevlaniya", 1981

8831
080: 1863/53 29

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 681.1‘a681.616.065

WMMWMWWWHlHHNSRMMB
Dbscov PRIW I srsrm 0mm in Iranian No 10, Oct 81 pp 33-36

[Article by v.11. Borovskikh. 0.1!. Pospalov, I..V. Pikalevskiy. A.I. Hartynsnko
and NJOI. 81'0". engineers]

[Text] At Nll uvu [Scientific Research Institute of Control Counters] (Severa-
donetsk) a set of keyboards has been developed for inputing information into a
computing coupler, designed for use as part of the work site of an industrial en-
gineer operator. They differ in character set, structure and purpose. The prin-
ciple of coding characters is co-on to all these keyboards. A description of
one keyboard of the set is given belt.;.

The key area of the keyboard, containing 128 keys, is divided into groups of 16

keys each (groups can be incoqlete) according to the principle illustrated in

fig 1. The keyboard is designed with keys without holding. A given circuit accesses
one group of keys, which nkes it possible to deterline the state of keys of only
the polled group (06). Iron the processor a word arrives containing the under of
the 06 in binary code, which is stored in a buffer register and is decoded by tune
of a 4-bit decoder. A low-level signal appears in the input line of the 06 and

if thereupon a key has been pressed a loci-level signal is for-ed in the correspond-
ing bit of the word arriving in the processor. Thus, inforntion obtained fron the
processor regarding accessing of the group and information transferred to the pro-
cessor regarding the bit relating to the key pressed sake it possible for the nicro-
progra- to code the transferred character by neans of an appropriate code, e.g..

ROI-7. ROI-8 and 0&0]: [MI] code, using code expansion facilities in keeping with
can Standard ST SEV 360-76.

In the exchange of intonation a zero signal lust be in only one bit of the trans-
ferred word. The appearance of two or more signals means two or note keys have been

pressed (i.e., an operator error). is recopized by the processor as an error and
accordingly is not coded.

This organization of the keyboard enter it poaaible to increase the amber of
polled groups to 16 and accordingly the meter of keys to 256. and when necessary
‘vith an increase tn the word length of the buffer register and decoder. to any

required nuﬁer. It is possible to connect several keyboards to a single control
circuit.

FOIOF'I'ICIALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

rigure 1.

Key:
1. has processor 5. Second group
2. K1551!” _ 6. Eighth group
3. K155?!“ 7. Keys
6. rirst group 8. lo processor

Because of the sheence of keys with mechanical holding. for node and control keys
s light signnling system has been sdded. The switching of this system on end off
is progrsn controlled and the pressing or release stste is stored in the keyhosrd's
flip-ﬂop memory. The light signeling syncs. control circuit is presented in fig
2. 'dhen infatuation is obtained on the pressing or release of node or control
keys, in the processor s binsry code is formed for turning 'on the sppropriste

lsnp element; the nunber of lamp elements slso can be increased by incressing the
control elements.

 

1. Pros: processor 3. "l”-on 5. HSSRAlB-l 7. "Check Display“
hr

31

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
For the purpose 02 indicating to the operator working with the keyboard specific
actions, an electrodynamic loudspeaker is provided in it. which is program conv-
troIled (ct. circuit in Its 3). Intertactng and the exchange 0: information
between the keyboard and processor are performed by means of a standard ms inter—
face (object interface unit).

1)

 

Figure 3.

Key:
1. From processor 3. + 5 V
2. KlSSPAl3

 

Figure ’0.

Structurslly the keyboard consists at a keyboard unit in the form of a desktop or
built~in unit containing a key area, lamp elements and an electrodynsnic loudspeaker.
and of s connecting cable assembly and control unit connected to the processor. The
general appearance at the keyboard is shown in fig 6. The small number of equipment
units, utilizing nicrocircuits, end the simplicity of the keyboard unit hsve made
possible high performance characteristics and reliability for the keyboard.

a

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel’stvo "Hashinostroyeniye". 'Trihory i sisteny upravleniys", 1981

8831
cso: 1863/43

32
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
MINIATURE vnwmnoor ”11.130111! mm mercy!
Moscow P3130“ l 8181‘” mm in kneeien No 10. Oct 81 p 36
[Article by ON. Smirnov. engineer]

[Text] Because of the extensive use or printed circuitry in electrical unearths
equipnent there hes been e drastic increeae in the need for connectors which inter-
connect functional unite mouted on a einsle printed circuit boerd.

At the special design bureau for teating and control equipment et the Kresnoyarskiy
ZIP [Mooring Instrument Plant] Plent a design, which is aisple in. tern of labor .
inteneiveneea (ell parts are fabricated on autonetic nechinee), of. an intreunit

connector has been developed end is being uaad successfully in high-precision elec-
trical neaeurins instruments.

A connector in the position of the connection of the current-carrying trecke of, a
printed circuit board with it (a) ia ahown in fig 1 end the positions of the dis-

connection (b) and connection (c) of the printed circuit board with the connector
are shown in croee eectfon. .

 

Figure 1.

*0583 Patent No 538440.

33

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The electrical connector. 10. includes a case, i, made oi a nnlded insulating na-
terial of the memo type. In it on the sides: the connection oi the reciprocal
halt there is a couon slot iron which cella...2. run to one side over the entire
depth. In each oi then is placed‘a stiii contact, 3, nde in the torn of a current-
conducting ilat piece fastened in a slot in the base oi the case. 1. The contact.
3. adjoins on one side the side wall of the'cell. 2. and on the other the outside
diameter oi a coiled spring. lo. Ms 5 and 6 oi the' coiled spring. of end turns

7 and 8, are fastened to contact 3. for which in the contact there ara notches made
at the sane tine the contact was pmched out.'and the axis 01' the spring is parallel
to the plane oi the contact.

The reciprocal half. 9, of. the cotmector is an element at the board's general cite
cuitry. it is nade oi a thin sheet at glass-cloth-base laainste or paper-base
laminate with current-conducting tracts 2 In wide uith'a spacing 01' 3.75 1-.

Prior to connection of the reciprocal half to the connector. each oi the turns of
the coiled spring in in the tree state and is situated perpendicular to the plane
of the contact and ashes reliable contact with it with its outside side surface.
Between the side wall of the slot opposite the contact and the coiled spring a gap,
11, is formed. into which the reciprocal half of the connector is inserted. and its
width is always smaller than the thickness of the reciprocal half. when the latter
is connected to the connector the distance between the current-conducting tracks of
the reciprocal halt and the contact plane oi the contact becomes less than the out-
side dianeter of the spring. to this case each turn or the spring is iorced to
occupy an oblique position relative to its initial position and because oi its
elastic properties and tendency to return to its initial position ensures a reliable
electrical contact by scans of its outside surfaces.

The number of turns can be made rather great (n - 15 to 20 without any increase
in overall dimensions) and thus it is possible to term a highly reliable electrical
contact with minimal: variation in contact resistance. for example. on the basis of
a coiled spring with an outside diameter of 2.8 an, a bronze wire diameter of 0.2
In, a number of turns equal to 10, thickness of the flat contact equal to 0.3 In.
thickness of the reciprocal half equal to 1.5 In and a working gap 0.5 II wide.
static variation of contact resistance equal to 0.5 bﬂ and dynamic of 1 m are
made possible, as well as high reliability of contact over a long time. including
under conditions of jolting and vibration. The introduction of this design has
made it possible to gain a savings of 1.464677 Iillion rubles at the Krasnodarskiy
ZIP Production Association and to iamrove considerably the reliability of instru-
ments.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Hashinostroyeniye". "Pribory i sistsuy upravleniya", 1981

8831
050: 1863/ ’03

31:
FOR OFFIGAI. USE ONLY
UDC 658.562.63002.56

ANIMATION 0P TESTING AND ADJUSTMENT 0F HYBRID _IJUTEGRATBD CIRCUIT RESISTORS
WITH mm com

Hoscow PRIBOK! I SISTER mum in Russian No 10, Oct 81 pp 39-61

[Article by SN. Karavaykin. v.3. Punkevich, 0.1L Selyutin and VJ. Umov.
engineers]

[Text] The most important and labor-intensive operations in the production of
hybrid integrated circuits are the testing and rejection of morocircuits on a
substrate and the adjustment of passive elements in each nicrocircuit. At the
present tine the trend has been observed of developing conbined technological
equipment asking it possible to combine these operations. ‘

At the Pensa branch of WIIrIpribor [All-Union Scientific Research Technological
Institute of Instrument ﬂaking] an automated unit of the us:- 0637 type has been
created for testing and adjusting resistors with control by a programsble key-
board coquter (rm) of the "ultra-125" type. In the unit is used the method of
adjustment based on removal of a part of the resistive layer by means of a laser
beam, because of which the resistor's resistance is increased.

The accuracy and efficiency of adjustment depend not only on the equipment used.
but also on the configuration of the section revved [1]. Therefore, software is
provided in the unit for making cuts of three types: 1.. Y and U (figla to lc,
respectively). An L—cut is used in cases when it is necessary to have high effi-
ciency and an energetically optimun configuration of the resistor after adjustment
with relatively low precision (0.5 percent); a Y—cut makes possible high adjustment
precision (not worse than 0.05 percent) and the ability to adjust resistors whose
layer is intersected by a contacting probe; a U-cut is used when the topological
dimensions of the microcircuit deviate from the nominal by nore than 0.05 In.

The amount of cross cutting, t1 , is computed from the equation

”..-: _ -.-.-...______._. ..._
t. In”! n+—"-—-m)+c.

where b , is the width of the resistor to be adjusted or of the additional
adjustmeét section; C is the program amount of correction, taking into account

(‘1)

35

FOR OFT-10A]. USE ONLY
FOR OFTNCJAL USEIMNLY

the zone of recession from the contact areas of the resistor and the configuration
of the cut (the value of quantity c is negative for L- and menu and positive

for a Y-cut); is the relative deviation_of the resistor‘s resistance from
a ( is the cal-

the nominal value of ° and n - a /
culated value of the :ﬁEiﬂchce of the $3¥c[3§‘tﬁ§°¥&§1a:5£"co be jolted).

    

Figure 1. Configuration of L- (a). Y— (b) and U-Cuts (c)

Key:

1. Rdob 2. Probe

In adjusting non-compound rectangular resistors equation (1) is simplified, n - l ,
and assumes the form:

‘1'516‘Sﬁc- (2)

A structural diagram of the unit is presented in fig 2.

The "Iskra-125" computer is intended to control the operation of the system and the
unssuring and actuating units included in it, for enabling the exchange of informa-
tion between functional blocks and units of the system, and for processing informa-
tion arriving from functional blocks and units.

In order to increase the capacity of the on-line memory, equal to 1K bytes. the
"Iskra-lZS" PENN“ has been giVen an additional cassette memory with a capacity of
80K bytes.

The interface unit serves the purpose of 2-way conversion of information circulat-
ing between the "Iskrs-lZS" PBRNH and functional blocks and units of the apparatus,
which has special-purpose sets of information and control lines. as well as for
executing certain logic and control operations directed toward increasing the unit's
speed of response.

The most important part of the unit determining its metrological characteristics is
the type AHTs 1442 analyzer. The analyzer consists of a block of standard resistors
(Boa) which upon instructions from external units forms nominal values of the

36

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
resistance of the resiatora to he adjuatsd in the range of 102 to 106 9, and or
a testing (It) and processing (l0) unit.

 

Figure 2. Structural Diagram of ﬁnit: Mmesette my; Bun-unit for
controlling motors oi coordinate table and laser; Lulaser; m—
!ocushng and observing unit; (IS—interface

Key:
1. M 9. Switch
2. nanual control panel 10. Hultiprobe air-floated head
3. EU . ll. hybrid integrated circuit substrate
lo. I. 12. Processing unit (30)
5. UN 13. Testing unit (BR)
6. Coordinate table 15. Standard resistor block (son)
7. "Iskra-IZS" 15. Analyzer
8. US

The BK unit includes two key elenents: a comparator (K) and a resistance-deviation-
to-tine-interval converter (POSV).

The comparator is intended to test the resistance or a resistor in the adjmtnent
node. Its measuring circuit is in the torn of a balanced bridge two arms of which
are formed by a code-controlled divider which specifies the percentage deviation
from the nominal value of the resistor to be adjusted and the other two are standard
resistors and the resistor to be adjusted. The mat of equilibrium of the bridge
ensues with equality of the value oi the resistor being adjusted to the nominal
value with the specitied percentage deviation. This moment is recorded by means of
a comparison unit whose output signal is averaged for the purpose oi eliminating the

37

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

influence of ippulse noise. The total comparison time is not longer than 100 vs.
The comparison error is not greater than 1 2 percent.

The restscanoe-deviation-to-tims-intsml converter makes possible operation of the
analyzer in the precise adjustment and measurement mode and is in the form of an
integrating percentage-deviation-to-time-interval converter based on the unit de-
scribed in [2].

The total measurement time in the measuring and precise adjustment modes is not
greater than $5 a. The relative conversion error in the 10’ to 10’ {2 range is not
greater than 1 0.05 percent and in the 102 to 10’ and 10" to 10° 9 ranges not
greater than i 0.1 percent. The power dissipated in the resistor adjusted is not
greater than 5°10" H.

The 80 unit represents a unit which forms pulse trains with the frequencies required
for the functioning of the comparator and POSV circuits, as well as for processing
the POSV's output signal and indicating the measurement result in digital form.

The snalyzer's inputs are connected to the resistor being tested via a switch (10!)
and s multiprobe air-floated head (MPG). The latter is not rigidly fastened to the
coordinate table; therefore, adjustment can be performed on substrates with any
number of microcircuits. Because of this characteristic of the head it is possible
rapidly to readjust the unit for a microcircuit of another type by changing boards
with probes.

The coordinate table (K8) is moved along axes x. Y and 2 by means of motors con-
trolled by unit BU. A circuit of amplifiers with electronic boosting of the phase
current of the stepper motors is used in this unit, which made it possible to lower
the electric power required by the apparatus.

The apparatus operates in the following manner. The operator places on the stage
the hybrid integrated circuit substrate which is to be tested and by means of a
manual control console (PRU) places the first microcircuit at the initial adjustment
point, checking the correctness of this placement by means of the cross-hairs of
the optical system. With this the preparatory operations are concluded and the
operator by pressing the SPr (Program Calculation) key on the "Islam-125" Pm's
console switches the apparatus to the automatic operating mode.

The unit's software makes it possible to program the adjustment starting points
and to select automatically the optimum by-path for hybrid integrated circuit
resistors when adjusting according to the results of tolerance testing.

Technical Data of Apparatus

Error in adjustunt of resistors, percentage 1 (0.1 to 0.05)
Resistance range of resistors which can be adjusted, R 1.102 to 10106
Maximum number of resistors which can be adjusted on
a single microcircuit. units, not greater than 30
Comparison time in me, not greater than:
Rough 0.2
Precise 60
38

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

.‘laxuaull size of area oi board on which it is poeaible to
adjust resistors. III. not greater than

Intervals in which substrate can he med; 1:.

Rate of wt of substrate. .ls

Travel of stage along axes x and 13-. not greater than
Nunber at fixed postiena or atase along axis 2

Honochromtic radiation source

Width of cut. 1:. not greater than

Program ledtull

Continuous operation tine. b, not sore than
Supply voltage. v

Power require-elm, kﬁt. not greater than
Overall dimensions. Ill

Weight. kg

Bibliography

60368

5 2
0e& to 3
20

3

1-62-21 laser

30

“1-60 cassette with
auntie tape

8

380 1 10 percent
1.5

2500 x 750 x 1270
300

l. Selyutin. OJI. and Um. V.P. "Analysis of Hethodical Errors in Adjuetnent
of Film Resistors of Microcircuite" in '“rekhnologicheekiy kontrol' v priboro-
stroyenii" [Technological Testing in Instrument Making]. Hoscov. WITIpribor,

1977.

2. Frolov, V.H. and Andreyev, .A.B. "Integrating Voltage-to-‘l‘ine-Interval Con-

verter," anon I mm mm. No 4, 1979.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo ‘Mashinostroyeniye". "Pribory i siste-y upravleniya", 1981

8831
080: 1863/ 103

39
FOR OFFICIAL [SE ONLY
ACCESSORY mum FOR INPUT 0? INITIATIVE SIGNALS
HoacowPRIDOKYISISTMUPumminmlianNolz.Doc81pps-9

[Article by 1.1. Popov and 6.3. Pyatlina, engineers]

[Excerpts] The digital data input nodules OiWDI'e) and initiative signal

input nodules les's) widely used in the structure of W and 11-7000 pro-
cess control comutere do not always nest the denands of users. The absence

in the inputs of these nodules of usury elements and of blocking of the entry

of new data while nodules are being polled linits their application in the input
of pulse data. Therefore. with a high frequency of the entry of input signals.
when each pulse carries infornstion. a loss of infornation takes place while data
trensnitters are being polled and this restricts the range of application of these
nodules.

An initiative signal input nodule which is without these disadvantages has been
developed at the Karelian Scientific Research Institute of the foresty Industry
(Petrotavodak) for the purpose of the acquisition of data fron pulsed data trans-
nitters entering a process control cowuter for processing. The UNIS proposed
is designed to receive. nor-elite, store and input into a process control coquter
a parallel 8-bit binary code. The nodule can be polled both by progran and upon
the nodule's initiative.

Main Specifications of Module

timer of input channels 8
Level of input signals Corresponds to lev-

els of signals of
M224 standard no-

dule
Possibility of input fron contact pickups Yea
liner of nodifications of nodule depending on type of input
signals 16
Maxim frequency of input signals in has 200
Capacity of nenory for each input in bits 1
Formation of interrupt signal When any register

location is filled
Interface rank 2!
Supply voltage in volts 5 1 0.25
Current requirenent in n, not note than 600
no

FOIOI'FICIALUSBONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The use of an sccessory HWI‘S makes it possible to into” the spociticationa and
to expand the functional capabilities of procm control counters designed on the

basis of “-6000 and 24-7000 processors.

COPYRIGHT: Izdstsl'stvo "Hashinostroymiye". "Prihory i sister] upravleniys".
1981

8831
080: 1863/80

161

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

WC 681.337

nmmmormmstmmu—eooommn
Moscow WY I srs'mnr MAMA in man No 12. Dec 81 pp 9-10
[Article by AJ. Ionotopov and v.3. lihnl'ehin. engineers]

[Excerpts] In the creation on the basis of the hardware of the “-6000 ”VT
[nodular counter hardware system] of ASUTP‘s [auto-ted systena for controlling
teclmological processes] for ayateae with a high level of electrical noise. e.g..
electric arc units, special difficulties arise in naming low-level signale
transnitted over distances greater than 15 a.

The output signal of sensors such as thernocouples (types m. m and VES/ZO).
resistance therunaters. etc., under working conditions is not greater then 25 to
35 iv. Experience has denonstreted that the electrical interference of a noise
nature in lines for the electrical connection of priaary transducers with the
input of a counter can reach 0.5 V. The ratio of the aulitude of noise to the
range of. the input sinel is 15 to 200'. which emceeds the pernissihle value of '
10 for the “13-6 filter nodule [1]. In addition, high operating currents of
automated systeas are dangerous with regard to the appearance of an additional
difference in potential (10 to 20 v) betwen the grounds of units and the ground
of the counter. This difference in potential causes additional longitudinal ‘
noise, which in a nnnber of cases can becone the reason for counter units' fail-
ing, since there is no galvanic input-output isolation in the 14-6000 conputer.

An atteut to use the co-only known scans for suppressing noise and interference
in such an unfavorable case has not resulted in success [2]. Such a neth of
solving the problen as installing in the direct vicinity of each prinary trans-
ducer an eulifier-nornelieer with galvanic input-output isolation, e.g.. of the
10-5-31 type, with a large anount of data to be picked up becones quite expensive
and requires additional space.

For purposes of reducing the expense of creating an A801? we have proposed that

a single anplifier be used for anplifying a group of identical signals. In this
case the layout of the system for the input of analog signals (the SVAS) into

an 11-6000 computer has been changed. Its structural diagran is presented in fig 1.

Nor-slicing converters of the IIP-S-Bl type with appropriate calibration are used
as aulifiers in the system, which have galvanic input-output isolation and
aultistage filter discrinination. The converters selected can each operate with

152

FOIOFI’ICIALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

a group or sensors or the sans type nuabering up to M. The tine tor ares-a1
converters to reach their rating from the nonent of the end of the switching of
input circuits is not greater than 80 ns [3]; therefore, the real switching tine
for a single point is close to 100 to 120 a. The Mr-l tine delay unit was
reset in order to make possible this 49.1.81 in the switch control nodule [lo].

 

Figure 1.
Key:
1. Switch control nodule 6. Switch control expander
2. Cross bay 7. Nornalizing unit
3. Additional line 8. Line 1
lo . Amplifier 9 . Sensor
5. Switch

It is also feasible to input nediun-level signals via switches of the first
switching stage, taken out to the autonation system.

The SVAS described makes it possible to reduce the nunber of anplifiers required
(10- to 16-fold) and the number of lines for electrical connection of the auto-s-

tion systen to an “-6000 computer.

An ASUTP which has been developed and introduced for an electric arc unit with the
SVAS described in its structure makes it possible to gather and process inform-
tion (ran 1? frequency signal pickups and 146 analog signal converters, whereby

84 of these converters have lowblevel signals in their output. A total of eight
amplifiers is used in the low-level SVAS. Since only nediun-level signals are
supplied to the inputs of the second switching stage. it was possible to inplenent
group polling with a polling tine for all 156 prinary analog signal converters of
not greater than 2 s.

The use of this SVAS as part of the structure of an ASUTP for an electric arc
unit over the course of a year denonstrated its high reliability and sufficient
noise inc-unity. The noise innunity level of. the systen described is witnessed by
the fact that the noise level in the input of the second switching stage of the
H—6000 computer is not greater than 50 1V.

us
roe o'mcm. use ONLY
The layout proposed for the S?“ is especially advantageous in the creation of
ASU'I'P'e for systems characterised by n great nun: of controlled para-stars and
which are at distances of greater than 13 I tron the couputer.

1.

2.

3.

‘0

Bibliography

"Kouponovka slate-y vvoda anslogovykh sigmlov 11-6000: Instruktsiya" [Layout
of System: for Input of Analog Signals for the “-6000: Instructions].

Ott. G. "lhtody podavlcniya ohm i ponekh v elsktronnykh sistemkh"
Methods of Suppresaing noise and Interference in Electronic Syst-s],
translated tron English. edited by NJ. Gnl'perin. lbscov. Kit. 1979.

"Preobrazovateli imitel'nyye hystrodeystvuyushchiye NP-S-Il, 10-6-32.
NP-S-BJ: Tekhnicheskoye opinaniye i insttuktaiya po ekapluatatsii
0Yaa.160.$010‘£0, 1975” [NP-S-Bl, 10-5-32 and 10-5-33 lush-Speed Wag Con-
verters; Technical Description and Instructions on Use. Gran.lloo.50£'ro. 1975].

”nodul' upravleniya homtatorani A6124: Rukovodstvo po ekspluatataii
2.320.00233.2.320.002332" [A6124 Switch Control Mule; the Manual
2.3zo.oom,2.3zo.ooznzzl.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'ntvo "Hnnhinontroyeniye". "rum 1 slate-y upravleniya".
1981

8831

080:

1863/80

his

. FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOIOFFICIALUSEONLY

UDC 53.087.62:681.32

ShchGBloOO m Sheh68000! ram-rm

Moscow rumour 1 3:31:31! mum in Russian so 12. Dec 31 pp 27-28

[Article by 0.V. 'Kaaperova and 1.6. Provorova. engineers]

[Text] The Shch68lu00 unit is designed for the auto-atic recording on paper tape
of informtion entering from digital measuring instrulents and other infer-scion

sources.
Specifications of 8hch68600 Unit

Printing speed in lines per second
umber of:

Digits .

Printed characters

Spacing in -:

Between digits

Between lines

Field of printed characters in In:
height '

Width

Discrepancy in height of characters in e line. in -, not greater
than

Overall dinenaions in .

Height in kg
Supply voltage in V

Power requirenent in WA
Tentative price in rubles

*Oto9,-.-.+.epace,> and 4.

155

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

538
ﬂ

0"” b”
O O 0.

0 NM
"0 05
o.» I+I+
HM 0°
0 O O
0 VI“

”HH-
530 u
o .-
cum

:1

20'

220 +10.
3-15 percent
(50 II: + 1
percent;-
190

3000
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The unit contains an interchangeable interface. has semiautomatic setup of paper
tape and mkea possible the display and printout of recordmg time.

The external appearance at the instrument is shown in fig 1.

 

Figure l.

The Shch68000R unit (fig 2) is designed for the automatic recording on paper tape
of information arriving in 1-2—10-8 parallel binary-coded decimal code from digital
measuring instrunents and other intonation sources.

 

Figure 2.

The unit is produced in keeping with T0 [Specifications] 25—06—3018-75 and contains
a printing mechanism and a transcriher.

1+6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The printing mechanism consists of a character wheel unit, code electroengnete,
a paper tranaport. an inking unit, an electric motor and an induction-type
synchronizing generator.

The transcriber includes stabilized pover supplies, printing electronegnet drive
and paper transport asplifiers, an electric motor operating node control unit.
a buffer storage for a single line of printed intonation and latching units.

Printing is accomplished by neane of the impact of printing strikers on the paper
with the character drum constantly rotating.

The operating principle of the unit consists in synchronized control of the code
electromagnets as a function of the content of the infatuation to be recorded and
the position of the constantly rotating character drum. Intonation for printing
a single line is received in 1-2-6-8 parallel binary-coded decimal code through

66 channels. The unit operates with the information source in the request-response
mode. Bach code pulse from the source must be accompanied by a "Request" signal
and intonation can be recorded in the buffer storage only with the presence of

a "Readiness" signal from the unit. The possibility of an independent check of

the unit‘s working ability is provided for in it in the "Test" node.

Specifications of Shch68000X Unit

Maxi-nun printing speed in lines per second 30
‘ Nuwer of:

Digits in a line 16

Printed characters 16

Printed characters 0 to 9, + , point. - .

2 , space, *
Size of printed characters in II 2.1 x 1.6
Width of paper tape in In 65

Parameters of coded input eipals:
Level of logical "0" of positive and negative polarity

in v. not greater than 0.6
Level of logical "1" of positive and negative polarity
1nV 3:0.6.6_4_-_1.2,121
1 2.10, 26 _+_ 2.6
Supply voltage in V , 220 +10. -15 percent
(50 ll: 1 1 percent)
Power requiresent in H 130
Overall dineneione in III 130 X ‘80 X 685
Height in kg 18

Orders for the unit can he sent to the following address: 172218, Moscow. ul.
Krrhirhanovskogo. 16, Telex 112906.

Information can be obtained from the following address: 357030, Nevinnonyssk, 6.
Stavropol'skogo kraya, ul. Gagarina. 217, Nevinnonyaskiy saved elektroirneritel'v-
nykh priborov [Nevinnomyssk Electronic measuring instrument Plant].

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo ‘Ihshinostroyeniye". "Pribory i sisteny upravleniya", 1981

8831
C80: 1863/80

It?

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
MIC DATA INPUT UNIT ’
Moscow PM! I SISTM mm in Russian lo 12, Dec 81 pp 7-8
[Article by Ad). Bekh. V.V. Chernetekiy and LP. Canin, engineere]

[Excerpts] Characteristic of the state of the art of the developnant of graphic
data input unite is the enornous diversity of deaign principles and engineering
solutions. Unique nodele of. nechanical, acoustic, piezoelectric, optical, elec-
trical and electronapetic units have been created. however; in connection with
the noted extensive introduction of nicroproceeaors into the national economy,
quite urgent ia the tee]: of creating input units which will not be inferior to
nicroprocessor equip-ant in tern of availability and technical and ‘econonic para-
netera.

This problen has been solved “the Ukrainian 883 Acadely oi‘ Sciencea Inatitute of
Cybernetics (Elev) by atudying the poeaibilities of uaing the physical and tech-
nological baae oi nicroelectronics for deaigning these unita.- _An array of discrete
coding elenents based on strip transforncra fabricated by the pho‘tochenical print-
ing nethod in used aa the working field of the plotting board and standard logic
nicrocircuita are used as the electronics for controlling the plotting board's
working field. The coordinate upper hes eingle-turn coila alao produced by the
printed nethod on a ileuihle foil-covered insulator.

The graphic data input unit developed differs advantageously iron the heat foreign
nodela in tern of overall size, weight and power requirenent with a analler 'digi-
t'itation interval oi the working field (cf. colparative specifications in table 1).

Table 1.

Characteristic Unit devegped ”at Autonation
firm a unit

Working field of plotting board

in In 320 X 320 1290 x 915

Under of coordinate lines.

units 256 X 256 256 X 182

Maxim thickneaa of data nediul

in II 0.6 0.6

[Continued on following page]

158
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Bate of output of coordinates

in Hz 2 to 2000 0.6

Power requireaent free network

in WA 35 360

Overall diaenaiona in n 660 x 560 x 60 2286 x 177 x 1828
Height in kg 8 226

The 320 x 320 II working field contains 256 single coordinate lines located in
directions a: and y and 1.25 - apart from one another. It is produced by the
nethod of photochemical etching of s foil-covered insulator. usually used in
multilayer printed circuitry.

The 2-stage current switch is constructed fron series K155 elenents. The mlitude
of the current pulse in coordinate lines is 60 IA with a duration of 100 ns and
they are formed by type KISSIA7 nicrocircuits.

The presence of zones of sensitivity on the working field of the plotting board
makes it possible to output sound signals to the operator when the coordinate
napper is set between coordinate lines and at the sane tire to elininate errors in
coding digital data. On the other hand, the zones of sensitivity prevent the use
of the working field as a unit for deternining the coordinates of rsndon points.
The paralaeters of a measuring unit with a resolution of 1.25 I- are realized by
lowering the triggering level of the threshold elenent by the nount by which the
zones of sensitivity of neighboring coordinate lines overlap.

The unit is powered from an a.c. line by leans of a built-in trensfornerleas sta-
bilized d.c. source.

The specifications of the unit developed and of the widely used digital coder
fro- the English Quest Automtion firn are presented in table 1.

The snail overall size and low weight and power requirenant take it possible to
use the unit at the ordinary work place of a designer.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Hashinostroyeniye". "Pribory i sistesy upravleniya",
l98l

8831
C80: 1863/80

’09
me omcm. use ONLY
DATA DISPLAY UNIT WITH mum MICATION
Koscow PRIDORY I SISTER MAW in Russian No 12. Dec 81 pp 25-26

[Article by am. Gladkov and ".17. Nagayets. engineers, and V.A. ‘reslenho, candidate
of technical sciences]

[Excerpts] The trend toward inproving the accuracy and resolution of digital
measuring instru-ents has resulted in an ever increasing nunber of digits to be
indicated on a readout unit. Taking into account indication of additional infom-
tion on the sign, units of the quantity neasured and the power, the nusber of
digits to be indicated in modern high-precision measuring instruments can equal

10 or lore.

A display has been proposed for nicroprocessor instrulsnte which consists (fig 1)
of a pulse generator, 6; a binary pulse counter, SI; anode and cathode decoders,
DA and DK, respectively; a m; a code switching circuit, SP1; ‘and e gas-discharge
elenent display panel, 1?. Indication is accolplished in the following nanner.
Pulses iron the generator's output enter the binary pulse counter, iron which a
code is sent to the anode decoder which successively switches the anodes to the
anode voltage source. The counter's output code through the code switching circuit
also enters the address input of the W, where the intonation to be displayed

is recorded. Iron the output of the RAM the intonation is sent to the cathode
decoder. which converts the binary-coded deciml code into 7-segsent code.

swﬁ

1. Display unit

2. Pulse generator

3. Pulse counter

6. Anode decoder

5. Display panel

6. Cathode decoder

7. Code switching circuit
8e W '

9. Hicroprocessor

 

FOROFFIGALUSEONLY
At a specific moment of tile anode voltage is established at one of the anodes

of the display panel. The information for the lamp (digit) in question is read

out iron the RAM. "1th the arrival of a new pulse from the generator the code in
the pulse counter is changed and the next digit of the display panel is connected,
and information of the next line is read out from the RAM. Changing of informa-
tion in the RAM is accomplished as follows. The code of the RAH line (digit)

in which information is to be changed in the code switching circuit enters from the
address output of the microprocessor. Upon the "Write" instruction from the micro-
processor this circuit cuts off the address inputs of the RAM from the pulse count-
er and connects them to the address outputs of the microprocessor. Data from the
information output of the microprocessor are entered into the RAM according to

this address. The entry of information into the following line takes place simi-
larly.

When necessary, specific digits of the display panel are cleared by entering a
forbidden code into the RAM.

Gas-discharge display panels of the GI? 11 or IGP-17 type and a RAM of the K155RUZ

type are used in the display. The maximum number of digits which can be displayed
is 16.

The flowchart of the program for controlling the proposed display by means of a
K58OIK80 microprocessor is presented in fig 2, and a program in the ASSEMBLER
language can he obtained at Kiev Polytechnical Institute, where this unit was
developed.

Key:
1. Start
2. Clear display
3. Hrite "zero integers"
4. Mode decoder
S. No
6. Output of normalized number
7. Yes
8. Determination of number of
digits to be rewritten
9. Unpacking and output of
complete 8-digit normalized
number
10. Exclusion of negative power
11. Determination of position of
highest-order digit on display
12. Unpacking and output of re-
quired number of digits to
display
Figure 2. 13. Return

 

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Hashinostroyeniye“. 'Tribory i sistemy upravleniya". 1981

8831
C80: 1863/80

51
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

GRAPHIC DISPLAY UNITS

000 681.3
'GRAPIT' GRAPHIC DISYLAY
Hoecav m I SISTER ammm in Russian No 12, Dec 81 pp 21-22

[Article by Ina. Areent'yev, V.A. Krupnm, A.P. l'edoeeyev and v.3. III-yachin,
engineere]

[Text] Automated deeim eyeteee have been baeed to an ever greater degree on
eutomted work aite (ARM) conplexee [1, 2]. However, know-hoe gained tron ueing
then hae demonstrated that the technical characterietica of the graphic dieplaye
included in Arm-n and ARE-u coupleue are uneatiafactory for eolving epecific

deeign problene. Therefore at the preeent tine work ie under way on improving end
modernizing then. '

In thie article the reeulte are given of work relating to the creation of the
"Gratit" graphic dieplay deeigled to replace displaye in the Amt-8 (WOO) and
Aim-ll (UPGI-A) conplexee.

It is obvioue fro- table 1 that the "Grafit" considerably eurpaeeee 96-600 and
UPGI-A diaplaye in the eire of the working field of the acreen, the nulber of
addreeeable pointe and the infomtion capacity of the ecreen and ite functional
capabilitiee have eleo been expanded in the area of the etructural organization of
graphic infatuation. input/output and the organization of graphic programing.

Table l. Cooperative Characterization of 90-400, UPGI-A and ”Grafit" Dieplaya

 

Characteriatic 00-600 UPGI-A "Grafit"

Inage elenente Vector, Vector, Vector, point, charac-

for-ed character character, are, ter, arc, circle
circle

Structural organi- - Element, unit, Blenent, unit, array,

ration of graphic array etandard elenent,

information eubrOutine

Input Keyboard, con- Photoelectric Photoelectric reader,

puter reader, conputer, computer, keyboard.

keyboard, "Coneul" coding plotting board,
typevriter "Coneul" typewriter

[Continued on following page]

52
FOR m1. lEE ONLY
Informtion capa-
city of screen:

Time for drawing 30 25 25

a vector 260 III

long, in us

Number of cir- - 160 180

cles .

Number of charac- 2000 800 2000
ters

Size of working 200 x 200 297 x 210 620 x 360
field in I-
Nunber of ad- 1026 x 1026 1026 X 1026 2068 x 2068
dressahle
points

Size of plotting - . - 660 x 380

board in III

The external appearance of the "Grafit" display is shown in fig 1. Its structure
and software are discussed below.

The display is designed according to the principle of a Iultilevel hierarchical
structure (fig 2). Each level is an elensnt functionally and structurally coe-
p1ete in keeping with the hierarchy. The hotton level is s set of function genera-
tors (vectors. circles, characters) and a light pen nodule. The function genera-
tors are designed to convert the digital codes of graphic eleaents into control
voltages of the CRT's deflection systen.

The next level is the display controller level. The display controller is a
special-purpose high-speed processor with a clock rate of 8 ma. It perform the
functions of an electronic switch for display. file for-nets between function gene-
rators, controls the restoration of the display file. and also processes signals
arriving free the light pen module.

53
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Figure 1. External Appearance of "Grafit" Display

The display file is formed at the level of interpretation of the input language.
This level includes an "Elektronika-60" microcomputer, a lGK-byte basic subroutine
RAH (ROM), a coding plotting board and a keyboard.

The last levelnthe graphic programing level——is designed for the compilation of
graphic program and for offering users opportunities to orient the display to
problems of specific classes. In terms of hardware the graphic programing level
consists of an "Elektronika-GO" microcomputer with a ZloK-byte RAH, punched tape
input/output units and a "Consul" typewriter. Coupling between levels is accom-
plished according to the "canon line" standard. Interfacing of the "Grafit"
display with the ARM central processor is provided for in keeping with the sane
standard. The display's software, just as the hardware. is constructed according
to the multilevel hierarchical principle. Each level is defined by its own lan-
guage and functions.

5h

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI OFFICML USE ONLY

.. ._ .—_.—_..-—...

1) 2f 0 5)

EIEE—JI
_

EWEEEHE

 

E-E

 

Figure 2. Structure of "Grant" Graphic Display: Pit—coding plotting board;
Kl—keyboard; Its—interface system; m—mterface nodule; GK”
display controller; W—display tile: “Sh—line interface sys-
tea; Go—circle generator: GV—vector generator; cs—cheracter
generator; 1139—1132:: pen nodule; I—display

Key:
1. "Blehtronika-oo" 13. DK
2. 26! m lb. 8! m, D?
3. Photoelectric reader 15. K88}: .
6. Punch ‘ 16. Display controller line
5. "Consul" typewriter 17. Go '
6. Hicrocouputer line (graphic 18.' CV
programing level) 19. 6
7. 16K BAH (non) 20. HS?
8. PK 21. I

9. K1 22. Display line (button level)
10. Xicroconputer KS -
11. Computer interface nodule

(HS)
12. Hicroconputar line (input

language interpretation
level)

The highest level is represented by the graphic programing language. A cospiler
for this language accoqlishes its conpilation into the "Grant's" input language.
The input language is converted into the formats and array of the display file

at the input language interpretation level. The display tile, in turn, is trans-
lated by neans of nicroprograu of the display controller into the {ornate of
function generators. Let us briefly describe individual groups of input language
statements. -

55
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

node Statements

These statements load the software from punched tape, diagnose the state and

set the operating mode of the display. The "Grafit" can operate in four modes:
automatic. "Keyboard," "Coquter" and "Editing." In the automatic mode the dis-
play functions according to a program written previously at the graphic program-
ing level. Operation with a function keyboard, light pen and coding plotting
board magnetic pen is accomplished in the "Keyboard" mode.

Setting of the "Computer" mode converts the "Grafit" into a computer terminal and
it operates through channel instructions supplied from the computer to which the
display is connected.

Only keys for editing textual information are active in the ”Editing" mode. i.e.,
keys for the replacement, insertion and removal'of characters and for indicating
the sequence for printing out lines of text. In the "Editing" mode the tag can
be moved along lines of text from character to character by means of appropriate
statements.

Graphic statements together with a group of "Attributes" statements are designed
for forming the elements of a sketch, such as points. segments, arcs and charac-
ters with the required types of lines and orientation and height of characters.

Structural Organization Statements

These determine the structural units of graphic information, i.e., units and
standard elements. The latter represent coiainations of elements of the sketch
named which have been entered into a library of standard elements. from which
they can be called for review or for placement at required points on the screen.

Units represent the next structural unit of the dis'lay's input language. They
include standard elements and sketch elements (grep ic statements). Units can be
formed from graphic elements or from units' formed earlier.

Shift, rotation. sylmetry. vector division. measuring and erasure statements form
the group of transformation statements. The arguments of transformation state-
ments are structural units of the input language labeled by means of the group

of identification statements: graphic elements or units of the entire array of
graphic information stored in the display's memory.

Input/Output Statements

These accosplish the input/output onto punched tape and a typewriter of graphic
and textual information. Several formats are provided for the representation of
information on media: display files. symbolic representation of graphic informa-
tion. textual. etc.

Service Statements

This group includes statements which perform auxiliary functions. They include
initial setting and change of keyboard statements and also an "Arittlaetic"

56
non omcul. use ONLY
scum: by new of which it to poutble co mute eritluettc expressions
and eleaentery functions.

Bibliography
1. Preenukhin. VJ. and Yelena. mm. "Auroleted Work Site for e Developer of

Radio Bhotronic Bqutpunt,” om om V WWW, No 12,
1976. .

2. Neurov, VJ. and Pedouyev, AJ. "Hardware couple: and Software of an

Automted Work Site for e Developer of Neckline Building Products." anon I
SISM WWA, No 1, 1979.

COPYRIGHT: Izdetel'etvo "Heehinoetroyeniye"- ”Pribory 1 states-y uprevleniye".
1981

8831
cso: 1863/80

57
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

BBC 68].. 327

CHAIM-MIC mum DISPLAY
Moscow WY I am mm in Russian 30 12. Dec 81 pp 23-26

[Article by am. Shesterltin, Add. Slolysrov. 3.1. Levhoyev. candidates of teemi-
csl sciences, and mu. Sherov and GJ. ‘ryulenev, engineers]

[Excerpts] Intonation displays sake possible the efficient interaction between
a hussn being and autonstic squipaent. The use in then of gas-discharge display
panels (en's) sakes it possible to construct in s nunber of cases quite ideal
displays [1, 2]. Units for. the reproduction of graphic [3-5] and character [6-7]
intonation with 619's are well known. Chsrectsr-grsphic displays are the soot
efficient.

The design principles of these units are well known, but inforsstion on their
developnent is practically absent in the published data. The results of desiping
and studying a character-graphic display executed with an alternating-current 61?
are discussed in this article.

The structural disgren of a character-graphic display developed at the Ryaten'
Radio Engineering Institute is shots: in fig 1.

 

Figure 1.
Key: - .
' 1. Input block
2. Input information block 6. Control block
3. Progras block 7. "I" switch _
lo. Conditionally constsnt in- 8. Gee-discharge display panel
formation reproduction block 9. Control voltage generator

5. Dynsnic infornetion reproduction 10. ”x" svitch

58
I70! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP82-00860R000500040037-2

ma OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 2 .

 

59
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500040037-2

f1
FOR OMCIAL USE ONLY

The sustaining voltage tine is 20 us. A 14-fold repetition oi control pulses is
employed for the purpose or ilproving the reliability of the lighting and en-
tinction of cells. The length of a single cycle tor writing (erasing) information
on the panel is 300 us.

The circuit diagran of the display is executed with series 133, 136 and 556 in-
tegrated elenents. The second stages of the "x" and "Y" switches are constructed
with MZSl and 218622 transistors and 20906 diodes without using transforners,
end the sustaining voltage generator with 2'1'809 and H630 transistors and HIS-3
transforners. The control block (fig 2) has a low power requirement (less than
or equal to 30 W) and guarantees the sustaining and lighting (extinction) of any
cell of the panel with a variation in supply voltage over the range of i 3 percent
and of the anbient temperature Iron 40 to +70 'c.

Individual trams of inges produced by means of the unit developed are shown in
fig 3. The display has been designed by using-a panel with a masher of cells or
128 x 128. The use of panels with a greater nunber of cells will lake it possible
to improve considerably the accuracy and quality of the display of intonation.

Bibliography

1. Kashnikov, 11.0., Pokryvaylo, A.B. and Yablonskiy, PM. "Gas-Discharge
Display Panels. a New Class of Instruments for Displaying Data," WYA
mm. 8811. lo. -mxmovm I GAZORAZRYADNYY! Pmt, No 8. 1976.

2. Ysblonskiy. PM. ”Gerorazryadnyye pribory dlya otobrazheniya informtsii"
[Gas-Discharge Devices for Displaying InforIation], Moscow. Bnergiya, 1979.

3. USSR Patent No 6366“.

lo. Snolysrov, A.M., Borzykh. V.Ye., Voakresanskiy, A.V. et al. "Graph Display
Bnploying a Gas-Discharge Array Panel," PRIBORY I 8181M WRAVLENIYA. No 7,
1977.

S. Berkutov, AM. and Proshin, YeJi. "Matrix Display Panels in Digital Oscillo-
graphy," BLEKTRMNIA TBKBNIKA. 3n. 6. WW! I GAZOMZRYADNYYE

PANELI, No 8, 1976.

6. Lavrent'yev, 8.1., Sviyezov, A.A. end Snolyerov, Add. "Unit for Displaying
Character Intonation on Gas-Discharge Display Panels," P3130“ I srsrm
UPRAVLBNIYA, No 12, 1979.

7. Danilov, v.6. and Helikhov. 6.1. "Reproduction of Character Intonation on
a Flat Screen of the Plasma Type.” WNYA mama. 8m. 3. WOW-
RYADNYYE PRIMRY. No 2. 1970.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Hashinostroyeniye". "Pribory i sisteny upravleniya",
1981

8831
C80: 1863/80

60
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOIOFHGALUSEONLY

unc 621.327.12
mum mmrm nrsmr um u'rruzmc Inc-1 DISPLAY
Moscow person I srsrm 0mm in Russian so 12. Dec 81 pp 24-25

[Article by 8.1; Lavrent'yev. V.K. W, engineers, and AM. Snolyarov.
candidate of technical sciences]

[Excerpts] Units employing direct-current gas-discharge display panels (GlP's)
cone under the heading of praising information displays for individual use.

In this article is discussed a character information display esploying an M1
matrix-type gas-discharge display developed at the Ryasan' Radio Engineering In-
stitute [l] and distinguished by the faniliar one in [2] by a sinler control
circuit and snaller size and lower weight.

Characters are for-ed by scans of a 5 x 7-cell nicroraster, which likes it possible
to obtain the usual representation. Characters of the Russian and Rosan alphabets,
Arabic numerals and special characters are for-ed in the unit. Intonation can be
input into the unit tron an input console. a "Consul" electric typewriter or fro-
the output of a coaputer. The write node has priority over the display node, i.e..
when information is entered the display stops until writing is finished. Series
K133, K565 and K505 integrated nicrocircuits serve as the elenent base of the unit.
The hardware cost for the display of a single character with this elese'nt base

is cosparable to the cost for laws of the m type and is considerably lower than
with light-enitting diode displays of this size. -It should be nentioned that 70
percent of the cost of purchased itens is due to the tin-l display, whose cost

has a tendency to drop. The power supply is designed with a d.c. voltage trans-
former. which makes it possible to operate both Iron a 220 VAC (30 Is) source and
iron e +21. VDC source. The external appearance of the unit is shown in fig 2.

Specifications of Unit

Number of character positions 160
height of character in - 7
Color of light 2 Orange-red
Brightness in MI. 50
Operating tenperature range in 'C Pros -10 to +45
Power requirenent in WA 25
Overall dimensions in u . 145 x 160 x 180
Height in k; - 2.5

61

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
mm 2. m

This unit can find an application in autonstod control, tasting and co-unications

systems. as roll as as a character information display in control couputsrs and
othsr aquiplsnt.

Bibliography

1. Glubokov, 0.6. and Loban. v.1. "liatrix Gas-Discharge Display Utilizing 10‘
Display Elsnsnts, Controllsd by Bipolar Hicrocircuits," mu mm.

$33. «'0. WW I WWW PRIBORY, No 8. 1976.
2. Lavrent'ycv, 8.1., Sviyarov. A.A. and Snolyarov, am. "Unit for Display of

Character Information Esploying Gas-Dischargs Display Panels." PRIDOKY I
SISTER WMIYA. No 12. 1979.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Haohinoatroysniys". ”Pribory i stately upravlcniya",
1981

8831
080: 1863 I80

62
FOR OHIO“. USE ONLY
“OFFICIALUSEONLY

000 681.327
COLOR CHARACTER-GRAPHIC DISPLAY
ﬂoscov Pklm I srsm UPMWA in Russian No 12, Dec 81 p 25
[Article by 1.1. Zhokhov, engineer]

[Text] This display is designed for use under laboratory conditions and for
displaying information in the form of graphs, histograms or an alphanumeric text
on the screen of a color video monitor (VIII). The input infatuation is a digital
code arriving from digital measuring equipment or a coquter. The display makes
possible editing of the informtion displayed, autontic color tolerance testing,
the output of information to a punch for purposes of docusntation, the formation
of information in steps of 10 relative units of the reference scale. and optional
numbering (according to the operator' a wish) of any ordinate of one of six graphs
or histograms.

The video monitor's screen measures 300 x 266 ms. Colors for the display of
graphic information are red, purple, blue, green, yellow and light blue, and

for textual information, green. The maxim number of graphs which can be dis-
played simultaneoualy is six and of histograms one, of graphic information ab-
scissas 66 and of ordinates + 127, and of lines of text 12 of 32 characters each:
Russian and 7 Roman characters, digits and special characters in keeping with
0081‘ [All-Union State Standard] 13052-76.

Key Specifications

Supply voltage in V 220 + 10, -15
percent (50 Hz)

Power requirement in WA 650

Overall dimensions in In - 850 x 1000 x 1300

Height in kg 200

The levels of the display's input and output. simls are consistent with series
155 TTL logic.

Interfacing of the display with external information sources is accoaplished

according to OST [Industry Standard] 25.190-73, "681’ [State Systen of Industrial

Instruments and Automation Equipment]. nodular Complexes of Instruments and
Automation Equipment. Yell Interface.“

63
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The display is connected to information sources having interfaces different
from the one indicated via additional peripheral devices not produced by the

plant. The external appearance of the display is shovn in fig 1.

 

Figure l.

The N712 display is produced in two modifications: with a video monitor and
without one. Information can be gotten by writing to the following address:

357036, Neviunomyssk-é, Stavropol'akogo kraya, ul. Gagarina. 217, Nevinnomyaskiy
zavod elektroizneritel'nykh priborov [Nevinnoayssk Electronic Measuring Instrument

Plant].

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'atvo "Mashinostroyeniye". "Pribory i aistemy upravleniya",
1981

8831
C80: 1863/80

6h
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

80mm

ABSTRACTS FRO)! JOURNAL 'YROGWING' . NOVEMBER-DECEMBER 1981

Moscow PROGRAMROVANIYB in Russian No 6, Nov-Dec 81 pp 94-96

UDC 518.76: 007: 57

LOGIC AND WITIMIC WISH 1’08 PROBLB! OP WRITING CORRECT PROGRAMS

[Abstract of article by Nepeyvoda, 11.8.]

[Text] Pornaliration of proof and semantics in the logic of predicates oriented
to the problem of writing progress is considered. Logic synthesis is illustrated
through examples. -

UDC 681.3.519

PARSING ALGORI‘HH POP. (”NIKKI-DEFENDER cams

[Abstract of article by Vol'dlan. 6.811.]

[Text] A parsing algorithm is suggested for nondegraded gramars; it is a general-
ization of the Early algorithm. The correctness of the slgoritln is proved. The
operation of the algorithm is illustrated using the exaaple of a disseninated

gramar.
unc, 681.3.06

METROD FOR OPTIMIZING LR-ANALYZERS

[Abstract of article by Surkova. L.V.]

[Text] A class of RSA-gramars is introduced whose determination is based on
break-down of the Ks-grsmar alphabet into nonintersecting position classes. A'
method is described for constructing the determinate LII-analyser for the languages

of this class.

65

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

000 68l.3.06.$l
MODEL APPROACR 1‘0 WRITING FAMILIES OF APPLIED mom PACK!”ES

[Abstract of article by Parssyuk. LR. and Sergiyenlw. I.V.]

[Text] An approach based on a developed principle of modularity is proposed for
writing‘fanilies of applied program packages. Basic program components realising
this approach are examined.

UDC 681.3.06

NOTATION FOR WNVBNTIONAL WRESIONS FOR STRUCI’URAI. PRESENTATION 0? DATA AND
PROCEDURES

[Abstract of article by Kulaichev, A.P.]
[Text] In this article a linear-continuous notation is suggested for conventional
expressions as a unified means for brief description of data structures and procedure
structures; the expressions do not use the concept of labels or transfer operator.
UDC 681.3.068

APPLICATION OF PREPROCESSOR FACILITIES IN roman am A1301.
[Abstract of article by Bezborodov. mm. and,strent‘yevs. 1.6.]
[Text] Questions of using preprocessor facilities of PL/l in the operating systen
of the Yes computer when programing problems in mm and ALGOL are considered.
A standard procedure is described for writing programs in these languages.

UDC 681.3.06: 800.92

RELATIONAL LANGUAGE IN PROGRAMMING AND PRINCIPLES FOR RBALIZING IT ON A SERIAL
comm

[Abstract of article by Kleshchev, A.S.]
[Text] (Relyap) parallel programing language is based on a relational cowuting
model. Its syntax and contextual conditions guarantee correctness of computations.
The possibilities of double determination of conputations are discussed.

UDC 681.3.06
usr PROCESSING IN THE Yes mmn
[Abstract of article by Khmel'nik, 8.1.]
[Text] A LISP system is described; it is realized on a Yes counter and is
distinguished by its additional possibilities for describing and processing list

structures, simplification of certain language constructions. and the methods for
realization of the interpreter.

66
F0: CHICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 681.3.06.Sl
ALGORITHM LANGUAGES FOR SPECIALIZ. MINIMUTBRS AND MICMPROCBSSORS
[Abstract of article by Serebrovskiy. L.A. and Lipayev. V.V.]
[Text] An analysis is made of the requirements made of software for small specialized
computers. A system is proposed for languages mutually linked in regard to structure
and display facilities used for programming at various levels. The need is formulated
for language systems for selecting the high level language reference.
UDc 681.142.l
A HETIDD FOR RATIONAL GROUPING OF OPERATIONS
[Abstract of article by Novikov. Ye.s.]
[Text] The problem of breaking down softvare for a computing system into linked
groups of operations is considered with respect to the criterion for minimum time
spent on comprehensive debugging of programs. A method is described for selecting
rational characteristics for these groups of operations. A constructive algorithm
is shown for grouping of operations.
UDC 518.7b: 007: S7
DEDUCTIVB SEHANTIGS FOR THE 'BXBCUTB' OPERATOR IN COBOL
[Abstract of article by.Kasatkina. l.V. and Petrushin, V.A.]
[Text] Semantics of the EXECUTE operator in COBOL are described axiomatically.
Output rules are shovn for operator formats realizing call procedures and formation
of cyclic structures. Using as an example the proof for the correctness of COBOL
programs, the application of the proposed axiomatice is shown for verification
programs for data processing.
UDC 681.3
REALIZATION OF PROGRAM INTERFACE FOR TUB MIR-l and Yes COMPUTERS
[Abstract of article by Vaganov. S.A. and Kolyakin, Yu.D.]
[Text] Characteristics are shown for a MIR-FORTRAN 1V (YeS) converter system which

is a system for translating programs in ALHIR-6S for the MIR-l computer into programs
in FORTRAN IV for the Yes computer disk operating system.

67
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 681.3.00!
COMBINED FORHAI FOR OUTPUTTING NUMERICAL DAIA PO! DESIGN DOCUHBNTS
[Abstract of article by Hotyl'. 0.11.. Sokolinakiy. Yu.A. and Farber. K.S.l
[Text] A contained format is described for presentation of mnerical data that
nakea it possible to output numbers with a given relative error. The for-at
described is realized in a all function procedure in the operating ayaten of the
Yes operating system
(DPYRIGIIT: Irdatel'stvo "Ranks". "Programirovaniye". 1981

9642
080: 1863/ 76

68
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
MOFHCIALIJSEONLY

INTRODUCTIW 1'0 THEORY 0? ANALYSIS AND PARALLEL OPERATION 0? 0mm: nocams
DURING TRANSLATIOI'

Moscow WBDBNIYB V TBOBIYU ANALIZA I MSPMALLBLIVMIYA 9mm m V
PRMSBSSB MSLYATSII in Russian 1981 (signed to press 9 Jul 81) pp 2-1.,
254-255 ‘

[Annotatiom foreword and table of contents from book "Introduction to Theory
of Analysis and Parallel Operation of Computer Prograns During Translation",
by Eduard Anstol'yevich ‘l‘rakhtengerts, ladatel‘stvo "Nauka'!, 3250 copies,

256 pages]

[Text] Annotation

This book is Muted toayntact'ic hilly?“ of input texts and parallel programing
methods for the conputational process. The book examines properties of

various grmars which generate progra-ing languages, sequential and parallel
syntactic analysis algorithms based on these properties and methods for optinising
then. Methods for parallel programing and algorithms for parallel calculation
of arithmetic expressions and systens of equations are examined.

The book is intended for scientific and engineering-technical workers in the
area of progrs-ing and software. '

Foreword

Regardless of the fact that intensive work on programing theory is underway,
there are nsny areas of programing in which no theoretical results have been
obtained which allov the problem of progrsn construction to be formalised and

to use that fornaliaation as ,the basis for developing and substantiating solution
methods.

One of the areas in which theoretical results have been used extensively in
practice is the developnent of translation systems. One of the first probless
to be solved in translation theory was that of sequential syntactic analysis.
Based on the methods of formal description of programing languages, it was
not only possible to create a nathesatical theory of sequential syntactic
analysis, but to use it in practice as well. As a result, the anount of work
involved in developing syntactic analysers has been reduced by factors of ten.
Methods based on the theory of sequential syntactic analysis have already
become traditional in programing practice.

69
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR<0FFKJAI.UBE(M‘LV

In connection with the intensiveddevelopment of multiprocessor computing

systems, programmers have relatively recently been faced with the problem of
parallel programaing which, in turn, has imposed requirements of its own on

the construction of translators. It has been necessary to develop parallel
translation processes, as well as parallel operation of programs obtained

as the result of translation. In this connection, theoretical research has
recently been done on parallel translation; this research has provided the

basis for creating methods of parallel syntactic analysis which are a natural
development of traditional sequential methods. Active work on parallel computing
theory has begun. As a result, methods have been developed for parallel output
programming during the translation process, algorithms have been created for
parallel computation of some types of arithmetic expressions and systems of
equations and some estimate of parallel programming efficiency have been obtained.
However, methods based on results from the theory of parallel computation are
still underutilized in practice.

This monograph is devoted to two problems in translation theory: syntactic
analysis and organisation of parallel computation during the translation
process. The book consists of two parts, with the first investigating
sequential syntactic analysis method and the second examining parallel syntactic
analysis and parallel programming during the translation process.

The book presents the theory of the matter, and where possible also presents
algorithms which have been used in practice.

Table of Contents

Foreword 1
I
SEQUENTIAL SYNTACTIC ANALYSIS

Chapter l
Some Concepts and Definitions 5
i 1.1 Sets 5
I 1.2 Formal granars and languages 7
5 1.3 Problems in syntactic analysis 15
Chapter 2
Precedence Relationship Grammars 20
f 2.1. Informal introduction 20
i 2.2. Context-sensitive relationship and precedence function

grammars 27
S 2.3. Equivalent transformation of context-sensitive grammars

to precedence grammars 36

70
FIHICHWWCJAI.US£4ONLN
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007102109: ClA-RDP02-00850R000500040037-2

MWWONLY

Chapter 3
1300- and LL(k)-Grs-ars

l. Informal introduction

2. Some definitions and algorithm
.3. Optimization of control table
.6. De Remer's algorithm

5 LL(k)-gra-asrs

Chapter ’0
Expansion of LR(k)-Gramaars

$4.1. G(k)-gra-ars
5 lo 2 ERGO-grams“

II
ANALYSIS AND PARALLEL PWMING IN
”113030088803 WIRING SYSTEMS

Chapter 5
Efficiency Estinates of Parallel Computation

. Some definitions

1
.2. Systems with single instruction stream. Mainline
- data processing

5 5.3. Systems with single and multiple instruction stream.
Parallel data processing

Chapter 6
Parallel Syntactic Analysis

5 6.1. Parallel-sequential analysis algorithm using matrices
and precedence functions

5 6.2. Equivalent transformation of context-sensitive granars
to gra-ars with four precedence relationships

5 6.3. Equivalent transformation of context-sensitive gra-ars
to form having precedence functions

5 6.4. “No-way analysis algorithn based on inverse-recursive
parametric gram-are

Chapter 7
Analysis of Programs for Automatic Parallel Programing

Possible stages of parallel progrs-ing

Partitioning programs into weakly-connected sections

Finding parallelisn betveen operators within linear
sections

.0-..
ﬂux;
e o
UNI-t

e

11
I'm omcm. us: on“

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500040037-2
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500040037-2

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Chapter 0

Transformation of Arithmetic Expressions and Equations for
Parallel Computation

. Transformation of arithmetic expression of general type
Polynomial transformation

Transformation of linear recursive expression

. . Transformation of general linear recursive system of

n equations

o

noon
. .
wat—O
. .

@OOO

Chapter 9
Parallel Programing of Cycles During Translation Process

5 9.1. Parallel programing of cycles using hyperplane method
5 9.2. Parallel programing of cycles using coordinate method

Bibliography
OOPYRIGIIT: lsdatel'stvo "Nauka", 1981

6900
(:80: 1863/57

72
roe omcm. use ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500040037-2
00¢ 681.33.519.1‘

USING PARALLEL CALCULATIONS MODEL 10 INVESTIGATE STRUCPURB OF 0311mm
GRAPES

noscow utmnmmn in Rmsian vol 10, no 4, Jul-hug 81 (nannscript received
21 Jan 80) pp 302-307~

[Article by Ya. A. Grundspen'kie. Riga Polytechnical Institute]

[Text] Graph theory. being a simple and descriptive tool for solving a umber or
digital asthmatics problens, has recently found ever-wider application in various
fields of science and technology. The use of methods and algorithms of graph the-
cry has made it possible to ton-alias a nuber or problens o! diagnostics [11.
structural analysis of complex systcs and deternination of typical structural
configurations in unit system [2] and has also ends it possible in principle to
solve such difficult problems as, for example. identification of graph structures
and the “travelling salesman problem” Main attention is devoted in all these
problens to investigating the stmcture of a real eyetel, i.e., to determination
of the direct and indirect relationships between the verticee of the corresponding
graph. All the varieties of the general problel of investigating the structure of
graphs-dialing the set of shortest paths between any pair of vertices. determin-
ing the set or all paths or oriented cycles (orcycles). determination of strongly
related comonents and so on--are laborious and require large erpmditures of ma-
chine tine and ccwuter neeory. therefore, the efforts of developers of the ne-
thods and algorithes used in practice, in which sequential calculation procedures
are eeployed, are directed toward theoretical sdastantiation of the. possibility of
finding algoritins, the nmer of operations of which would be linearly dependent
on the nuber of vertices and arcs of the graph.

11». purpose of the given paper is to consider and evaluate the prospects or util-
izing the parallel calculations nodel to investigate the connectedness of oriented

graphs (orgraphs) .

Following [3] and the terminology of [4], let us consider parallel calculations in
graph theory in two aspects: 1) .when the investigator has at his disposal an in-
finite nudaer of identical parallel processors (the so-called unlinited case) and
2) when the nmber of processors is limited. It is accrued in this case that

each processor can parrot-n binary aritlnetic and comarison operations per unit
ties (during one working step); the input data are entered in the neeory prior to
the beginning or calc.‘ one, each processor takes operands iron the naory and

73

MWWONLY.
enters the result in the nsoory after each step and only one processor can change
the contents of any section or eeeory at each step. Sous deficiencies of this
nodal will be shown below but first let us consider the algorithe ﬂor determining
all the nonrepoating orcyclos using parallel calculations.

The algorithm for tinding orcycles that actually utilizes the idea of parallel
calculations is presented in [5]. The structure of this algorithe clearly shove
that the ”wide search“ procedure is realised in it, i.e., all tho arcs seerging
tron it are considered sieultaneously upon eeergonco to each new vortex. Since
only one processor was used in the given case, a shift of aces set of paths in

the set already found was required so as to write new paths in the coaputer eseory.
This undoubtedly reduced tho advantages of the developed algoritl'. but its practi-
cal application showed that it was slightly interior to algoritbes known at that
tins that realized the ”deep search” procedure [6, 7]. thus sealingly confining
tho potential capabilities of parallel calculations.

 

Figure 1. Parallel Calculations in Orgtaph. The authors denote the order
of passage through arcs and the nuwors 01 processors are in-
dicated in parentheses

let us consider a diagram of parallel calculations for the orgraph presented in
Figure 1. It is obvious that each process builds only a partial list (the n-ratio
in the graph) which contains ”new" (untravorsod) arcs and all the round partial
lists not be ccubined at the end of calculations. The following conclusions
follow tron the eruplo.

1) An algorithm constructed on the considered principle is more effective, the V
ears the orgraph is "filled." i.e., the higher the ratio n/n (where n is the nun-
hor of verticos and a is the number of arcs). We note that a similar conclusion

is ads in [3) with respect to this algorithe that only with an adequately “filled“
graph ero aces parallel procedures close to optinum in the sense that the tine or-
penditures for thee require 8/! + 6 steps (where s is the number or steps of the
best algorithm that utilizes the ”deep search" procedure and t is a snall value).
However, additional orporieental and theoretical confirmations are required for
these conclusions.

2) It a lieited number of. processors participates in the parallel procedure. then
eain attention should be devoted to the “load" of processors. i.e., all processors
should be involved in the search for new arcs. If they are not (the case of rare
graphs), the processors must be set in agreement to the vorticos and thus one oust

POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL [SE ONLY

consider several vertices simultaneously, which is not provided in the Iodel of
[3’s

3) Unlike the ”wide search" procedure [6]. where the concept of a graph in the
forn of a list is more advantageous for couputer entry, the input data for paral-
lel calculations can be represented by a natrix of contiguities. since there is
no need to expend extra steps in this case to establish the fact that a specific
arc exists. Moreover. parallel calculations increase the capability of those al-
goritlns which are based on the use of sequential raising of the matrix of con-
tiguities to a power [7].

‘no estimate the algorithms based on parallel calculations, one nest at least ap-
proxieately find the lower and upper homds of the nuher of required steps. The
theoru of [7) may he used to estimate the lower bound in the case when the graph
is represented by a matrix of oontiquities.

Let there be required I! 1 1 binary arithmetic operations to'calculate the unit
value if a used. The shortest K-caliulation of R then occupies at least {[(r + l) -
-2 °92 l/K} + (1092K) steps if r l 2 092‘. and [1092 (r + 1)] steps in the opposite
case. In both cases the lower bound is equal to Ghana) steps, where O[f(n)l. ac-
cording to [3]. denotes a set of all values g (n) for which there exist the posi-
tive constants c and no that the inequality 9 (n) 1 c.f(n) is fulfilled for all
values of n 1 no. If the orgreph is represented by a eatrix of contiguities, then
the upper bound of the coqlexity of the algorithm has the estimate that at least
0(logzn) steps must be fulfilled in the case of n3 processors. '

In cases when only a limited manner of It parallel processors is available to the
investigator. one can use several procedures. for example, each time when an arc
leading to a new vertex is found in the elgoriths of [a], the search continues
iron the “new“ vertex and the procedure does not return to the ”old" vertex until
all the area of the "new” vertex have been considered. We shall me this so-
quential procedure below to the possible versions of procedures based on parallel
calculations.

Let us assume that the investigator has at his disposal K processors which must he
used to find a set of all the nonrepoating orcycles for the graph presented in the
fern of a list. To analyse the procedures of sequential and parallel calculation,
let us assume that each ”visit“ to the vertex is an active operation and that the
procedures are compared only with respect to active operations. When a vertex is
selected for a search, each processor checks one energing arc and establishes
whether a given arc is included in a new vertex. A partial list of all the new
vertices found is then foraulated. These partial lists are subsequently combined
and added to the list of new vertices and the addition-operations are also re-
garded as active.

It is shown in [3] WV active operations are taken into account. then
the upper bound for any sequential search operation combos Su-2(0«+1)

steps, where 01 is the local power of the surging arcs of the i-verter. It fol-
lows froe these concepts that the optima: algorithm in which K parallel processors
is used requires 81/! steps.

75
POIOFFICIALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Three different procedures [3] are used for unoriented graphs which can he used in
sonewhat modified form to find all the nonrepeating orcycles in the orgraph. The
first of the procedures can be called a “It-deep search.” bearing the following in
mind: what the vertex is selected, It arcs surging from this vertex are analyzed
simultaneously. thus ensuung that all the processes are loaded. me of the just-
found vertices is then selected and the search is continued fro- this vertex. A
deep search is actually conducted but it is performed to the x-width at each step.
Let us consider this procedure on the example presented in Figure 2.

 

Figure 2. "x—Deep Search“ Procedure at K - 2. 'lhe nmbers denote the
order of passage through the arcs

It is obvious that the nmber of steps in this procedure determines the total nus-
ber of "visits“ of all vertioes i - l. ..., n, where the mnber of ”visits“ to the
vertex is calculated by the expression (91 + l)/n and the number that indicates
the nusber of steps required to connect new vertices is (1092!!) t l.

Expressions are given in [3] to determine the nuts: of steps in the sequential
procedure and the 'K-deep search" procedure and it is concluded that the advan-
tages of the latter appear if the inequality 2n/n 1 (1092!!) + 17 is fulfilled and
increases with an increase of the ratio 2n/n.

In the second procedure, when selecting the vertex, one lust consider all the arcs
charging from it and only then turn to a new vertex (the procedure can be condi-
tionally called a “wide and deep search” procedure), as follows frou Figure 3.
This procedure is nore effective than the sequential procedure when the inequality
Zln/n 1 (1092!) 4» 7 is fulfilled.

Finally. the third procedure envisions the following: when the vertex is selected,
all the processors are engaged in a search for the arcs ensrging from it. In this
case the vertex located at distance 1 from the initial vertex x0 is always consid-
ered before the vertex located at distance 1 + 1 from xo (figure 4). the proce-
dure is sore effective than the sequential procedure if the inequality 2n/n ;

1 (109210 + 5 is valid.

Analysis of the procedures using the parallel calculations model to which rather
rigid restrictions are applied. indicates an increase of the effectiveness of
parallel procedures as the complexity of the problem increases. i.e.. as the com-
plexity of the structure of the orgraph being analyzed increases. Let us note in
this regard the more couplex problu of analyzing the connectedness of a so-callsd

16

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
figure 3. I'wide and Deep Search“ Procedure at x - 2

diffuse graph [9]. which is a coeplete weighted orgraph to whose arcs are given
weights in the range [0, ll. be use of parallel calculations in this problem is
the only possibility of finding the result since sequential procedures essentially
cannot be realised even with a conparatively stall (8-10) nun-as: of vertices. The
advantages of parallel procedures are note clearly narked here since. first. the
orgraph is coupletely 'filled,’ i.e., it has all possible arcs, and second, one
met operate with the weights of arcs (comers and calculate the ninisau and maxi-
mal weights of different paths and so on), which causes considerable additional
expenditures of machine time.

One should point out problems which probably cannot be solved in principle by us-
ing the described procedures: graph mlhering problsns. i.e.. operational con-
struction and identification of all topologically different strucmru of orgrephs
[10]. It uses probable that even the net indirect methods of parallel calcula-
tione and the use of a large nuber of parallel processors will help one to solve
this probeln within a practically accsptdale tine for those coupler systems which
nuber several thousand components (vertices of an OW).

 

thus. there is an enormus class of imortsnt problems based on orgraphs which are
ineffectively solved or generally not solved if one uses sequential procedures.
these problns should prinsrily include problsns of identification of orgraphs and
investigation of the connectedness of both orgraphs (determination of the set of
unrepeated paths and orcycles, finding connected coeponants. deter-ining the short-
est paths between any pair of vertioee and so on) and of nonorgraphs and also find-
ing externally and internally stable sets of vertices, determination of the nucle-
us of a graph, calculation of radius and diameter, perforating differen“ operations
on graphs and a nuber of others. Considerable success can be achieved in solving

77
FOIOI’FICIALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

all these problems only if one uses effective methods of parallel calculations. but
to do this, investigators should have at their disposal not only the corresponding
algorithms but suitable computer equipment as wall. of course, the increase in the
speed and value of the memory of computer systems and also the use of nev config-
uration of the latter, for exasple, multiprocessor couputer systems, may expand to
a significant degree the class of problems based on orgraphs which can be solved
with practically acceptable expenditures of resources, but it is sore probable that
the capabilities of coquter systems constructed on the basis of microelectronics
are still limited.

The fact is that parallel calculations in investigation of the structure of or-
graphs generate a large nmber of comparatively short and noninvariant branches,
the nutter and length of which vary as a function of the specific problem. hulti-
processor calculating systems for a load consisting of a large nuﬂaer of small
parallel problems do not ensuro the required increase of effectiveness and more-
ever, have a masher of other disadvantages (complex system programming, difficul-
ties in program correction, the occurrence of conflicts of processors during simul-
taneous access to the same resource and so on). This circumstance is related to
the fact that more significant advantages of parallel calculations can be achieved
with parallel operation when an essentially unlimited processor resource and a
very large memory capacity are acceptable in which the contents of several sec-
tions can be varied simultaneously, while the current results are stored but not
entered in the memory after each step, as in the model of parallel calculations
considered above. This does not actually mean that there must be the capability
of seemingly simultaneous generation of the structure of parallel calculations as
a whole or in other words, that the idea of the isomorphism of the structure of
the calculating system and the facilities analyzed by using it should be realized.

Optoelectronic computer systems, we feel, more fully correspond to these require-
ments since optical processing of information promises fundamental solution of the
problem of developing internal storage devices of far greater capacity and gigan-
tic arohive mesories with rapid access and also input-output devices with large
carrying capacity [11). Moreover. the optoelectronic mediu itself permits one to
construct those computer systuas which realise the idea of invariant contribution
of the model of the facility being analyzed to the computer system [12]. These
systmss not only have high productivity but the logic (functional) capabilities in
them also increase significantly due to parallelling of the basic calculating pro-
gram tc parallel branches. Matrix (parallel) synthesis of the required parallel
structures of calculations of large dimensionality, operational restructuring of
them and generation of a chain of signals (multiple echo) in response to a single
input signal [12] are possible, which is very promising to investigate the struc-
ture of orgraphs since it permits one to reproduce all the information recorded
previously. Thu, the procedures that search the vertices for the “load" of
processors are simplified. Optoelectronic computer systems obviously permit one
to realize more simply so-called 'pattern logic" operations [13], i.e., operations
with entire information files in parallel without semential scanning. This means
that the work to investigate complete graphs represented by a matrix of contigu-
ities is considerably siaplified.

The given concepts with respect to optoelectronic computer systems permit one to
state that one can expect fundamental solution of timely problmns of graph theory,

78
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
among which the problem of inmtigeting the muctm o! omepha occupies a con-

trel

1.

3.
4.
Se

6.

9.

10.

11.

12.

13.

position, only after development and introductim of these system.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

qundspen'kie, Ye. A., 2. P. mkovich and Ya. Ya. 001', KIWI“ I DIAG-
NOSTIKA, No 5, Riga, 21mm, 1972.

Buslenko, N. 9., V. V. hushnihov and I. N. Malonko, "Iakteii po toorii
slozhnykh eistqn" [nectm'eo on the Theory of Couple: suntan] , Hoeoov, Sovet-
skoyo Radio, 1973.

ijoundi, E. and D. G. Corneil, SIAM JOURNAL C9 WING, Vol 7, No 2, 1978.
Hereri, 1., "Teoriye onto!" [Graph Theory], Moscow, "it, 1973.
Grundepen'kie, Ye. 11., RM!” 1 omen-m, No S, Riga, Zinetne, 1972.
who, 11., J. Bopczott and G. mum, ”Postmyeniye i Mi: vychiolitei'nykh
algoritrmv" [Construction and Anelyeie of Calculating Algoritluul, Hoeoow,
Hit, 1979.

Prebheker, 11. end N. boo, SIM JOURNAL O! WING, V01 5, No 1, 1976.
‘l‘erjen, R. 2., SIM! JOURNAL O? WING, Vol 2, No 2, 1973.

Takedn, E. , Womey unlit. i protudury prinyatiye teeheniy" [Problem of
Analysis and Decision-ﬂaking Procedures], Moscow Mir, 1976.

Amtyunov, P. A” "mopoloqicel Analysis of Gain. Using Rando- Nulber Struc-
tures,” HIWBWIKA, V01 4, No 6, 1976.

Svidzinskiy, K. It. and v. P. Invrishchev, “Problem of Constructing Optoelec-
tronic Intonation mooning System,“ urmmn. W1 2, No 1, 1973.

Bykhovekiy, V. K” PROM! WWII, No 2, Moscow, mm. 1973.

Bdel'ehteyn, L. A” 21808828111“ RADIOWIKA, V01 5, 1974.

mPYRIGHT: mar-um» 'Rauka", "Hikzoeiektzonike'. 1981

6521
C90:

1863/54

79
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE OIL!

PROGRAM“? PL/l comm SYBTDJ

Moscow PROGRMROVAIIYB NA PL/l (BIB in Russian 1979 (signed to press 29 Oct 79)
PP 3"“ 266‘269

[Foreword and table..of contents from book "Programing in PL/l 05 YES". by
M. I. Auguston, n. P. Balodis, Ya. H. Barzdin', s. A. Ikauniyeks and
A. A. Kalnin'sh, Isdatel'stvo "saunas", 60.000 copies, 271 pages]

[Text] The algorithmic language PL/l (Programing Language/One) was produced
during the 1963-1966 period by a committee of caputer users and nan representa-
tives. PL/l belongs to the generation of languages‘which followed We,
mm and 03301.. It not only unites the possibilities of these languages, but
it also gives the progrsnner a nuaber of additional possibilities. The language
version for the as was (PL/l 06 no) operational system is fairly rich, and the
caapiler is sufficiently perfected and maintains an optimising mode which produces
operating progress slightly inferior in its qualities to the program composed in
ASSMIBR language.

nevertheless, PL/l language has one important shortcoming—it is very caplex.
Complete docuIentation for PL/l (B YB fills over 2,000 pages. This significantly
complicates the wide use of this language. At the some time. by no means are all
the facilities of the language, as a rule, med for programing separate classes of
tasks. One of the moat important classes of-tasks, where the PL/l application can
be the most effective, are the data processing tasks. A sub-mass of PL/l 08 m,
orientated in particular towards this class of tasks, is described in this book.

We hope that it will be sufficient for practical programing. We included also
in the book information about 08 YES which is necessary for operations with

PL/l 08 m (for an expanded emery of (8 IE see bibliographic references
2, I: and 5).

One of the reasons for the complexity of expounding the PL/l lamuage is that there
is no simple model upon which it would be possible to explain the semantic of the
language. One such model, the so-called idealised computer ("PL/l Computer"), is
proposed in this book for a selected sub-mass of the language. In our View, this
significantly facilitates expounding the material, maintaining mathematical

accuracy.

80

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

This book we written as a practical manual and is intended for proaaners
becoming acquainted with PL/l 08 YRS for the first time. we endeavored to explain
the elements of the language and of the operational system encountered in it in
such a way that it would be sufficient for practical programming. When composing
programs, we recommend avoiding cases in the book which sq "result uncertain" or
"result not explained in more detail". A subject index and a list of Hall
(supplement 6) facilities used are cited at the end of the book for convenience.

Operational documentation of the HS computer was used during the writing of the
book. Vague constructions and examples were checked on the 5.0 (8 YES version.

From other manuals on PL/l one can mention bibliographic references 1, 6, 7. 8,
and 9.

The exposition plan and coordination of final editing of the book were carried out
in the main by Ya. M. Barzdin' with the participation of A. A. Kalnin'sh. General
input-output and organization of data collection were written in the main by

R. P. Balodis. In other respects, all the authors bear equal responsibility for
the contents of the book.

The authors are grateful to the reviewer of the book Professor V. N. Lebedev for
the valuable criticisms, and also to K. H. Podnieks, Yu. V. Borzov, and other
members of the Computer Center of Latvian State University imeni P. Stuchka. the
advice of whom helped substantially to improve the account.

Page

Foreword - 3
Chapter I. Introduction to PL/l 5
l. Progrmn Elements. Recording the Program on a Form 5

2. The Language Alphabet 8

3. Identifiers 8

lo. Idealized Model of a Computer 9

S. Hetadesignatiom 11

Chapter II. Data 12
1. Numbers and Lines. Constants 12

2. Variables. Types of Variables 1h

3. DeCilIal Date. With Fixed Point DECIMAL FIXED 15

It. Binary Data With Fixed Point BINARY 1'1st 16

5. Decmal Data With Floating Point DECIMAL FIDAT 17.

6. Binary Data With Floating Point BINARY FmA'r' 18

7. Line of Symbols Type Data CHARACTER 19

81

FOR OFFICIAL IBE ONLY
8.

90
10.
11.
12.
13.
1h.
15.
16.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

blue or 81 ts 'h'pe Data BIT

Line of Variable Length Synbols Type Data CHARACTER VARXIIG
Line of Variable Length Bit Type Data BIT VARYIIG

Pattern PIONRE

Variable Controls of Program POINTER and LABEL

Masses

Structures and Muses of Structures

Methods of Abbreviating Operator Recording om
Attributes Assigned by Silence

Chapter III. Operations With Variables and Appropriation Operator

Chapter IV.

Chapter V.

Chapter VI .

Conprehending Exceptional Situations

Simplest Case of Appropriation Operator

Operations. Arithmetic Operations

Comparison Operations

Logic Operations

Coupling Operations

Expressions

Cannon Case of Appropriation Operator for Problen Variables

Appropriation Operator for Aggregates of Variables
Attribute III'I'IAL

Built-In Functions

7.

Canprehending Built-In Functions
Arithmetic Built-In Function
Mathematical Built-In Functions
Built-In Functions for Line Processing
Built-In Functions for Mass Processing
Special Built-In Functions
Pseudovariables

Operators of Program Control

1.
2.

3.
1:.

Execution Order of Operators. Indices. Operator 00 TO
Operator IF

Operator DO

Operators END and 8130?

Program Structure. Procedures. Menory Control

1.
2.
3.
h.

General View of Progras
Procedures Call. Main Procedure
Program-Procedure Call
Motion-Procedm-e Call

82

FOR OFFICIAL [BB om

“£88863
FOR OFFICIAL 083 OIL!

h‘X‘l‘BRﬂAL Variablou

Program Execution

Execution of Sub-Progran-Procedure and Function-Procedure
Transmitting Paraneters of Variable Length

Transmitting Parameters of Other Kinds

Conversion to Standard Program

Internal Procedures

Program Examples

Base Variables and Maury Control

Chapter VII. Means of Exceptional Control

1.
2.
3.
1:.
Chapter VIII.

la
20
3.
ha

5.

Chapter IX.

Chapter X.

Input-Output by Recording.

Cunprehending Exceptional Control

(I! Operator

Situations Associated With Conputer Operations.
Situation ERROR

Means of Exceptional Control for Progra- Deferral

Files

Basic Concepts

Types of Files

Work Modes With Files

File Declaration in a Program
SYSIII and SYSPRIIIT

Opening and Closing a File

Standard Files

Input-Output by Flow

General Information. Input-Output in the LIST lbde
Input-Output in the EDIT Mode

General Format of Operators of Input-Output by Flour
Operators GET STRIIIG and PUT STRING

Exceptional Sitmtions Associated

With InputPOutput

la
2.
3.
he
5.
6s
7.

General Intonation on Input-Output by Recording

Input-Output or COISECUTI‘IE Files

Sequential Data Input-Output tron IND- Piles

Direct Access by Recording for INDEED Files

Working with REGIONAL (1) Files

Exceptional Situations Associated With Input-Output

Camunication With the Computer Operator During
Program Execution in ﬁll

83

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
A‘VA\ VKKAUW VI)“ Wm

Chapter XI. (8 YES Operational System and Task Control Language

1.
2.

3.
h

5.
6.
7.

Introduction to 08 m Operational System

Task Control Language. Cataloguing Procedures

Syntax of Operators of Task Control Language

Input and Output Flov

Peculiarities of Executing Tasks in the PCP,
“PT and “VT Modes

JOB Operator

EXEC Operator

unapter XII. Data Set—Ups and DD Operators

1.
2.

3.
I;

5.
6.
7.

8.

9.
10.

1.1.
12.
13.

1h.

15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
a.

External Carriers of Information

Brief Review of DD Operator Paraneters

Data Input Prom Punched Cards

Data Output on Punched Cards

Data Printing

Data Set-Ups on Magnetic Tape

Developing Data Set-Ups on mgnetic Tape. Addition of
Data at the 3nd of a Data Set-Up

Reading Data Rom a Data Set-Up on Magnetic Tape

Structm-e of Magnetic Disks

Developing a Sequential Data Bet-Up on Magnetic Disk.
Addition of Data at the End of a Data Bet-Up

Developing a RBGIOIAL (1) Data Set-Up

'Structure of Sequential-Index Data Set Ups

Developing a Sequential-Index Data Set-Up. Addition by
Recording at the End of a Data Set-Up

Reading Data, Addition and Correction by Recording for
All Kinds of Data Set-Ups on a Disk

Data Set-Ups on Punched Tapes

Data Input From Punched Tapes

Data Output on Punched Tape

Library Data Set-Ups

Developing Libraries and Adding Sections to the Library

Data Input From a Library Section

Additional Possibilities of the DD Operator

Brief Smary of Other Possibilities of the Task

Control Language

Chapter )CIII. PL/l Compiler

1.
2.
3.
h

5.

Data Set-Ups Used by a Canpiler
Transmitting Parameters to the Compiler
Parameters of the Compiling Mode

Compian Listing
Pack Compiling

8h

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Chapter XIV.

mapter XV.

Supplements:
Supplement 1.
Supplement 2.
Supplement 3.

Supplement 10.

Supplement 5.

Supplement 6.

Supplement 7.

Li terature

Subject Index

Cannanication Editor and loader

1. General Intonation. Simple Use of the Conunication
Editor

2. Operating Schem of the Omnication Editor

3. Transmitting Paralleters to the Co-unication Editor

I». Data Set-Ups of the Conunication.3ditor

5. Pomation of Structures With Overlap

6. Exanples of Using the Conunication Editor During

Operations With Libraries
7. The Leader

Program Execution in PL/l

1. Program Execution by Means of Cataloguing Procedures

2. Execution of the Loading Module Fran the Library of
Loading Modules

3. Optimization of Execution Time

1;. Optimization of Henry Capacity lecessary for
Program Execution

Table of Codes DKDI and KPK-la
Table of Codes MI and EDI-7
Exmple of Program Execution on the Computer

Utilized Key Words of PL/l (Permissible Abbreviations
are Indicated in Parentheses)

Utilized Key Horde of OS YET- (Permissible Abbreviation
are Indicated in Parentheses)

Utilized Facilities of PL/l

Brief Reviev of the Possibilities of Complete PL/l Not
Included in the Described Sub-Kass

COPYRIGHT: Indetel'stvo "Statistika", 1979

9889
030 : 1863/75

85
FOR omcm. use on!
unc 681.3.06
SOWWTWIHSOOOWCWWDWMOIHS mm
Moscow PRIBORY I 525mm WM!“ in Russian lo 12. Dec 81 pp 1-3
[Article by VA]. Popkova, engineer]
[Text] Facilities for Autosating Progra-ing

Ihe H5000 008 [dish operating system] places at the disposal of a progra-sr a
large set of facilities making it possible to automate the entire process of
solving a problen on a conuter.

The programs of the 115000 008 operating system are organised into libraries (with
the exception of the initial loading program and the supervisory progra- part)

and are placed on a mgnetic data medium. The library structure of the 16000 DOS
makes it open-ended. The operating structure of the 115000 nos offers the program
programing languages oriented toward various classes of problem: the machine-
oriented assmm language. the procedure-oriented COBOL language and the problem-
oriented RPG [report progran- generator] language. assmm is the most flexible
and universal facility for writing programs and its capabilities are expanded by
macrolanguage facilities. In the assm language the possibility is provided of
implementing auxiliary functions which help the programer to check and document
progress, to control the distribution of addresses, to allocate data and labels.

and to generate and control translation of the program itself. Conditional cospila-

tion and the necrolanguage represent the Assm language portion of the HSOOO
005.

The macrolanguage takes it possible for the progra-sar to input his own statement-
a macroinstruction—which can be used in the program if it has first been repre-
sented in the fort: of a specific sequence of Adam language statements. Thus,
the macrolanguaga simplifies the coding of program, making possible the use of

a standard sequence of statements.

Conditional comilation facilities mke it possible for the prograner to write in
assmm language statements ceQiled aa a function of conpilation conditions con-

puted at the Ito-ant and can be used both within nacrcdefinitions and outside of
thee, i.e., without using nacrolangunge facilities.

The 00301. language is oriented toward descriptions of algorithms for processing
business and economic information. forming its basis are the reconendations of

86
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the American Standards Association and the accumulations of the group tor el-
gorithmic languages tor- processing economic information 0: CW countries. The
COBOL oi the )6000 D08 operating system consists oi a core and lO modules (pro-
cessing of tables; sequential, relative and indexed input/output; sorting-merging;
report generator; segmentation; library. debugging; program interfaces). All
modules are of the second level. The Language utilizes more than I000 key or extra
words.

The RPG language is designed for wiring algorithms tor solving problems relating
to the creation and printout of various reporting forms, such as sun-series, lists.
records, etc. A distinctive reature of problems solved by using the are system

is the fact that in the process of solving them the main share of machine time is
due to the processing of large input files and the ioramtion of corresponding out-
put files. Here the calculation part occupies a relatively mll place in the total
number of problems and the solution results must usually be output in the form of
printed documents. The problem-oriented language of the IBM/360 system is used as
the basis of the RPG language in the H5000 DOS operating system.

It is permissible to write programs in all languages by using both the Russian and
English variants of the language.

The presence of several programing languages and the step-by-step nature of the
preparation of programs used in the HSOOO DOS Inks it possible for the program-er
to divide his task into parts—modules—snd to select for each module the most
appropriate programing language. The H5000 DOS operating system sakes possible the
independent translation of each source module. A program written in any of the
programing languages indicated is translated into a relocatable module which is
obtained in a format which is col-on to all translator routines of the system. The
specific properties of the source language are lost after translation.

Relocatable modules are processed by an interface editor and they become available
to run a program—absolute modules (phases). The unification of relocatable nodules
into phases takes place regardless of when and from which programing language a
specific module has been translated. The interrelationship of phases of a program
at the moment of running is determined for each task.

A program can either be of simple structure, when it is called in its entirety to
the main memory to be run. or have overlapping, when for purposes of reducing the
capacity of the main memory used by the program while it is run the program is
divided into segments which overlap one another in the main memory when the program
is run. Program segments can be independently written and translated into relocat-
able modules. In turn, available subroutines individually prepared in the form of
relocatable modules can be used within segments.

Preparation of a Program for Running

in the HSOOO DOS all programs, depending on which stage of preparation they are in
(source module. relocatabls module, phase). can be stored in a corresponding module
library: source libraries (1213's) with program modules written in the source pro-
graming languages; relocateble libraries (PB’s) with relocatable modules in the
interface editor program language. representing the result of the translation of

87

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
source nodules; and absolute libraries (Al's) with progran phases in machine
language available to run. A disk storage serves as the storage for all libraries.
The sizes of H5000 D05 libraries are selected by the manufacturer as a function of
the number and site of elements which are to be put into the library.

The presence of an absolute library is obligatory for the functioning of the H5000
003 operating system, since in it in the form of phases are contained such com-
ponents of the DOS as nonresident supervisor and executive routines. translators,
service routines. and also user programs available to run. Any program is loaded
into the main memory to be run only free the absolute library.

Each library is in the form of a library file consisting of two partso-the body and
the heading of the library--and is designed for storing elements of the library
(body) and information on these elements. A set of programs under the general name
of the librarian. which come under the heading of service programs and perform the
functions of correction and copying and service functions, has been designed for
working with libraries.

Under the heading of service programs also comes the interface editor, designed for
processing the results of translation for purposes of obtaining programs available
to run. Its functions are as follows: the assembly of a program from a nusber of
relocatable modules; adjustment of the text of an assembled program for working in
a specific region of the main memory; and placement of an edited program into the
absolute library. In the formation of each phase the editor does the following:

Puts together the text of a phase from relocatable modules and individual program
sections of relocatable modules, whereby the set of these and their relative posi-
tion are indicated by the programmer.

Automatically includes in the text of a phase modules from the PB, if the need for
this arises.

Adjusts the text of a phase according to the loading address specified by the pro-
gram-er. -

Introduces changes into the text of a relocatable module through correcting cards.
Forms links between modules when they are joined into a phase.

For-s the address for input into each phase.

The phase formed is placed by the interface editor program into the body of the
absolute library and information on it into the absolute library's heading. The
program obtained as the result of editing has an absolute format and in the simplest
case consists of a single phase. Programs of large size usually include several
phases which can replace one another in the main memory.

Control Program

The following are the characteristic traits of operating systens: enabling the
continuous performance of work; preparation of tasks for execution; reacting to

88
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

software and hardware error situations; enabling the simultaneous operation of
various input/output units and of the processor together with them; and the
presence of a set of facilities for the automation of programming and of program
debugging facilities. These same traits are characteristic of the H5000 DOS,

in which the greater portion of these functions is implemented by control programs,
i.e., the initial loading program, the supervisor, executive and the input/output
control system.

Before starting to work with the computer, the computer itself and the operating
system must he brought into a state of readiness. The initial loading program
performs the initial preparation of the system for operation. It clears the main
memory, receives information on the position of the system, performs several auxili-
ary functions and then enters the core of the supervisory program into the main
memory.

The supervisory program is the central control program, in the form of a set of
routines put into action by means of interrupts originating on the request of
service routines or as the result of a situation formed in the process of the com-
plex's operation. It controls the entire computing process in the computer and
implements the following functions: the processing of software and processor
errors; the performance of input/output operations at the request of a program;
organization of the simultaneous operation of the processor and an input/output
unit; processing of input/output unit errors; organization of communication with
the operator; and the performance of actions by request of the program (a super-
visory program macroinstruction). The supervisory section--the core--implementing
the functions most often used is permanently in the main memory. The other section
of the supervisory program is organised in the form of transit phases stored in the
absolute library and called to the main memory as needed.

The M5000 DOS executive routine prepares the system for performing each individual
task and organizes the package processing of tasks. It accomplishes adjustment of
the system for the needs of a specific program, loading of this program from the
abolute library into the main memory, and the transfer of control to the program
loaded. The executive routine receives the instruction for the performance of these
operations by means of control instructions. The executive routine constantly reads
and executes these instructions once it is started. This organization of the

work of the M5000 DOS executive routine makes it possible to accomplish the package
processing mode.

For the purpose of performing input/output operations it is necessary not only to
program direct accessing of peripheral devices itself, but also to provide for
cases of error and unusual situations even in cases when their origin is of low
probability. In the H5000 DOS there is a strict distribution of duties between
the control program attending to input/output (the supervisory progrsso and the
programmer. The control progran (the core of the supervisory program) takes upon
itself the implementation of such input/output functions as determination of the
state and the assignment of instructions to units, checking the quality of input]
output operations performed, organization of the simultaneous operation of input]
output units, the starting of input/output operations, and the processing of
input/output interrupts, including interrupts caused by the errors of units. And

89
FOR OFFKJA1.USE(NVLY
the progranmer has the duty of preparing the program for the required input]
output operation (placing file entries on external media. describing input/output
operations) and of informing the control program of the need to run it.

This method of input/output programming makes possible flexibility in working with
peripheral devices but has the disadvantage that it forces the programmer to know
in detail the operation of these devices. Therefore, the H5000 008 in addition
offers the programmer a higher level of input/output programming-a logic system
for controlling input/output, in the form of a set of standard procedures for
realizing all input/output functions. which makes it possible for the programmer
not to go into the details of input/output, but to concentrate his attention en-
tirely on the logic functions of the system itself.

The logic system for controlling input/output processes files of data, performing
the unification of entries into a block and their separation from a block; re-
addressing of the input/output region if the file uses two input/output regions;
organization of the simultaneous operation of input/output units with the operation
of the processor; processing of the "End of file" state; and the checking and
recording of information on files. The logical content of the data, their format
and the organization of data into files are important for it.

There are three methods of accessing in the M5000 DOS: sequential, direct and
indexed seduential. Sequential access is applicable to files in all units (mag-
netic tape and disk, punched tape, punched cards, printout) and indexed sequential
and direct access only to disk files.

Standard Facilities

The H5000 DOS operating system has a number of special facilities and programs
which facilitate the work both of the programmer and operator:

PODPA, designed for preparing magnetic disks and tapes for work, checking the state
of these media and labeling them.

KOPMD, for creating copies of disk packs and checking the agreement of copies with
the original.

PEChHDL, for printing out the contents of a region of a magnetic disk and the zone
of a magnetic tape.

ZAHHD, for replacing the contents of one sector of a magnetic disk.

SRHL, for comparing two files located on different tape reels and for establishing
their identity.

The general—purpose RYePS. for copying information on the physical level from some
media onto others.

PPASP, for printing out the labels of files located in packs in one or more disk
storages.

90
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
KARL. for copying a file from punched cards onto magnetic tape.
PBChPK, gor outputing a punched card file to an alphanuaric printer.

K0831, for copying the contents of nagnetic disk packs onto magnetic tape and
vice-verse.

In the H5000 003 there are a number of facilities provided for ordering files of
records, i.e.. for arranging then in relation to the values of some of the quanti-
ties comprising them. so—called control fields. view a sorting-merging program
generator. It consists of two groups of programs: 1) a set of modules in the
relocatable library from which by means of the interface editor program it is
possible to construct independent sorting or merging programs of various structures;
and 2) sorting and merging subroutines in the absolute library. which are accessed
via sorting and merging macroinstructiona.

For the purpose of forming an operating system with the properties east suited to
both the configuration of the complex and the requirements placed on it by the user.
system generation facilities are esployed which make it possible to replsn the

size and distribution of system files in the complex's external storage. as well

as the sire and contents of libraries, and to plan a supervisory program with
assigned functions by assigning to the statements of the supervisory program's
generation mcroinstructions values which differ from the standard.

Copying programs available in the H5000 DOS make it possible to copy sequentially
organized files from some data media onto others. By running copying programs it is
possible to copy, rearrange, reblock, supplement (only for disks) and display
(printout only).

Thus. the H5000 nos, representing a combination of control program (supervisory
program and executive, initial loading program and input/output control system)
and service programs (translators. interface editor, librarian. sorting-merging
program generator. DOS generation system and copy programs and special programs),
makes it possible to automte the process of solving a problea on a computer and

to orient the system toward solving specific problems and satisfies the needs of a
wide range of users.

COPYRIGHT: Irdatel'stvo "Hashinostroyeniye". ”Pribory i sistemy upravleniys", 1981

8831
cso: 1863/80

91
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
srsrm AYPRQACR 10 W DESIGN 0! momma W
ﬁascow rumour I SISTER mum, in Russian no 12, Dec 81 pp 3-4
[Article by V.A. Viahnyskov, candidate of technical sciences]

[Excerpts] The creation of problem programs for realizing the goals stated. i.e.,
cross software, makes it possible to reduce considerably within a given period
the time for developing and introducing microprocessor systens. '

Relatively recently the development of design systen software was based on the
creation of packages of applied programs; however. the experience of developing
these system in the USSR and abroad demonstrated that this form for designing
software does not provide the required universality. The difficulty of working
with individual applied programs, the lack of dialogue facilities for debugging
the software of nicroprocessor systems. the complexity of interacting with the
data base in creating microprocessor system, questions of reliability, and the
organization of nultitask operation in the design process require a comprehensive
approach to designing microprocessor systems, i.e., the creation of an integrated
sm [automated design system]. Such an SAPR should satisfy the requirements of
universality and adaptability and have control over the design process, a developed
data base, facilities for organizing multiprogral operation, and autoutic and
dialogue nodes.

 

I figure 1.
[Key on following page]

92
FOR OFHCIAI. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Key:
1. Control executive routine 11. Information system
2. Dialogue executive routine 12. Source data description and coding
3. Control system system
4. Data base control system 13. Source data file; information file;
5. Compiler working file; archive file
6. Translator 1‘. Reference file; structure file;
7. Processing system service file; dialogue file
8. Hicrotranalator 15. Design results formation system

9. ROM programmer
10. Applied programs

The structure of an SAPR for microprocessor computers has been developed by taking
these requirements into account (fig 1).

This system solves problems in designing hardware and software for computers of
average capacity. Further designing, including the design and testing of proto-
types, preparation of the coding system, checking the logic of the software and
testing the equipnent. is performed on a microcomputer automated design unit.

The control and information sections of the SAPR have been developed at the present
time and there are also problem routines for automating several stages in the
development of microprocessor systems. System modules have been inplemented in

the PL/l and ASSMLER languages.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Hashinostroyeniye". "Pribory i sisteny upravleniya", 1981

8831
cso: 1863/80

93
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
WTION 0? DEVELOPMENT OF PROGRAMS FOR DATA RBCORDBRS .
Koscov PRIMKY I srsm WWA in Russian No 12. Dec 81 pp 4-5

[Article by Adi. Longin, T.A. Hasal'sksys, LA. Yepikhina and ".1. Abesgaur,
engineers]

[Text] Data recorders of the 31-7501 and 31-7502 types, representing progrs-ahle
self-contained units designed for gathering, arithmetic processing and recording
of information. are widespread in ASU's [sutonated control systems]. The functions
of recorders are as follows: the input of informtion fron digital and alphanune-
ric keyboards, a data card, punch badge and conditionally constant control charac-
ter unit; the output of infatuation for printouts (docunents). onto punched tape
and into co-nnication channels; arithmetic processing of input information (addi-
tion, subtraction and nultiplication operations); the storage of data in registers
of the recorder's nenory for the duration of the running of a progran; and the
reception of infornation from a coIIunication channel and the recording of it on
a printer (for the 81-7501). - Infernation recorders nuke it possible to control
input infatuation in terns of forest. by the nodule-10 double input nethod. The
nenory of data recorders consists of three registers with a capacity of 128 bytes
each.

The operating program for 81-7501 and 31-7502 data recorders is the sequence of
operations which the recorder nust perforn for the purpose of forming a docunent,
forming a nesssge on punched tape and transferring it to the cos-unicstion channel,
and also for receiving a nessage fron the co-Iunication channel. The programing
system of data recorders represents a set of eight instructions, two of which have
nodificstions. The sequence of program instructions is entered on s progrsn
punched tape (or on two punched cards if the length of the progran exceeds 80
bytes) in a special code.

Certain difficulties in the process of "manual" programing of the work of data
recorders originate when taking into account the features of the operation of the
input and data processing unit and the 2-register nenory, as well as in writing
progress which economically utilize a snall anount (128 bytes) of the storage
register designed for storing the program. When an 31-7501 works with a conputer
through a co-Iunication channel, an 111-8901 group data recorder is used as the
switch. imposing additional restrictions on the structure of the nesssge which can
be relayed through the col-mication channel. hon vhat has been said it can be
concluded that it is advisable to develop a method of autonted progrs-ing for

9'}
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
the purpose of making possible the machine processing of primary documents of
various forms.

A method suggested by the authors, called the ”Program Generator for Data Record-
ers" (GPRI). which unites in itself the “manual" preparation of formalized source
data with the automatic (in the computer) generation of an operating program for
the data recorder. is described in this article. A diagram of the technological
process of automated programming for a data recorder is shown in fig 1. The text
of the program to be read by a human being is recorded in the output of the alpha—
numeric printer, 10, and codes to be read by the machine in the output of the
punched card output unit, 9. The job of the designer. b, is as follows: a) to
create a form, 5, for formalized source data based on the printed document's form.
2, and a message format, 1, taking into account the instructions, 3; and b) to
analyze errors discovered in the program generated and to correct the formalized
source data or to order the correction of punching errors (can be lacking).

 

figure 1. Diagram of Technological Process of Automated Programming for
Data Recorders: 6-unit for preparation of data on punched cards;
7--computer (processor); 8-—disk storage; ll-dats recorder; (the
remaining designations are given in the text)

The form with the formalized source data is a printed form containing three tables
containing indicators identifying the program, as wall as information on the ope-
rating nodes of the data recorder and the kinds of check employed, and the charac-
teristics of the particulars of the message to be formed. The form with the source
data is at the same time the form for punching. '

The GPRI per se is a program for any Yes [Unified Series) computer having a PL/l
compiler. The GPRI program consists of 20 phases, which makes it possible to

run it on a computer with a RAM capacity of a total of 64K bytes. In the course
of generation of the GPRI program for a data recorder the source data are reviewed
repeatedly. The program generated is also checked several times for the object of
reducing its size by eliminating redundant instructions formed at the first stage
of generation. The generator of programs for data recording realizes all the caps—
bilities of the RI-7501 and Rl-7502 programming system.

The GPRI program makes possible the performance on a computer of a logical check
of source data for purposes of revealing the most widespread errors (more than

20 types) committed both in filling in source data forms and in punching data on
cards. when an error is detected, a hardcopy log containing the following informa—
tion is printed on the alphanumeric printer: description and place of error, re-
port of the violation of apriori known conditions and recommendations on the method
of correcting the error. In the CPI! is provided the function of correcting errors
of certain types, a report on this is output to the alphanumeric printer and the

95
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

program generation process then continues. I! the designer does not agree with
the corrections introduced by the GPRI, then he can correct the source data.

The result of the GPRI's work is the data recorder operation program, output in
the form of a table on the alphanumeric printer, 10, and one (two) program punched
card which is output to the computer punched card output unit, 9.

In addition to the generation program the CPR! includes a standard disk-to-card
copy program. The necessity of using it involves the fact that this program makes
it possible to output data onto punched cards not only in UKOI [m1] code, but
also in any other code. At the same time programs for ill-7501 and III-7502 data
recorders are entered onto punched cards in a special code. The GPRI discussed
records the program for the recorder in the required form in the working tile in
the disk storage, and program punched cards are output by means of the copy pro-
grsm in keeping with the information recorded in the disk storage.

The OP!!! is now at the experimental utilisation stage at TsNIITU [Central Scienti-
fic Research and Planning and Technology Institute of Organization and Control
Equipment] (Minsk). Data recorder operating programs for more than 10 A80?
[automated system for controlling an enterpriseI projects have been created by its
means. Inputs of time in programing the work of type III-7501 and RI-7502 data
recorders, determined on the basis of analyzing the traditional "manual" method

of programing and the experience of using the GPRI, are presented below.

Table 1.
"Manual“ Progra-ing

Thorough study of programing and features of the work of

data recorders, in months 1
Writing and debugging a single program of avorsge complexity,
in hours 16

Programing by Means of the GPRI

Study of fundamentals of. programing and instructions for filling in

a source data form, in months 1
Producing a program of average complexity, in hours 1.27
Including:

Filling in' the tomlized source data form, iv. hours 0.5
Punching source data, taking into account control by the veri-

fication method, in hours 0.25
Generation of a program on the Yes-1022 computer, in hours ' 0.02
Analysis of program produced, correction of source data and

repeated generation of the program when necessary, in hours 0.5

Since in creation of the CPR! all the aspects of programming recorders are provided
for in it. including the source data check function, the programs generated do

not contain logic errors, inevitable in "manual" progra-ing. The program punched
cards obtained from the computer do not have punching errors (within the limits

of the reliability of the operation of the computer csrd output unit).

96

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
At the present time the 6?th is being interfaced with a program debugging terminal
system developed at TsNIITU. With this the designer has gained an opportunity.
omitting the step of punching source data, of inputing source data directly from
a video terminal. Operation of the GPRI by means of a program debugging terminal
system makes it possible to shorten the development cycle for programs for data
registers because of elimination of the task interrupt time in the Waiting" phase
of the job waiting line in the computer, which is inevitable when working in the
package mode.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'atvo "Nashinoatroyeniye". "Pribory i aistemy upravleniya".
1981

8831
080: 1863/80

97
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
APPLICATIWS

UDC 681.325.51621.9-52
APPLICATION 01’ mam HICROPDCBSSOR W IN pmm—oum sums

Kiev my; MW?! in Rmeien no 4, Jul-Aug Bl (nenueotipt received
9 Dec 80) pp dS-SZ

[Artiola by V. a. anlov, D. v. Pusenhov end 6. A. Pettavl

[beat] Desigmtion and Iain choreoterietiae of eiorapzaceeeor equip-mt. During
the put deoede, the cepebilitiee at ueing coyote: technology M) in ell fielde
at ecience end technology m expnded coneiderebly with ugerd to the intensive
development md greet eahieveeente in the field at nimelectzania technology.
developunt at new principlee of awaiting infatuation pxaaeuing system end
develop-ant a! eottweze. 'lhe develqnu at diﬂemt eyeteu on me e geeut at
aaeputer equip-eat. beginning with mini gonenl-pnrpaee mutate end lini-
oowutere to eictapzaoeeeac eete end nictaooqntere.

the eppeerenoo of metapxaoeeeore om ee new none at aoepute: technology thet ere
e cleee a! lezge integreted circuite (BIS) wee detenined on the one hand by the
edvenoee o: Iodern niczaeleotxaniao, which was it poeeible to looete up to 105
meats of e tingle ayetel. end on the other hand by e desire to intelligent;
oaebine the edventegee at mini-eel and epeoielized emote: egnipnent. It ie
known thet epeaieiited aoepute: equip-ent oen pzavide bette: Operetionel and en-
gineering ohereatsrietioo (high speed. :eliebility, ooet. me-eiu peremtere.
oonemd pave: end so on) then miwreel equipeent when solving Deny problem of
eetheneticel pracoming at intonation. Baum. develop-eat at epecielited BIS
ie in oaet oeeee practicelly unteeeible due to the long period- end high aaet at
developing then when converting to eolid-etete equip-eat. The develop-ant at ei-
cmptaoeeeor oaepleanee (m) u e m mount beee of aoepnter equipennt elimin—
eted to e eigniticent degree the aontndiction between mivenel end email/Sized
infatuation praaeeeing devices.

The nict'apzaaeeeor ie e hactionelly aowlete univeteel pragreroontralled device
for logic end erith-tic pxaoeeeing at digitel intonation. A clue of nioxapit-
aeeeox aoeputer egnipnent. to which eiozapzaoeeeot aoepleaee at Its, niazaaouputere
of veriaue deeignetion end enltieicxopzaaeeeoz aoepnter eyeteee It. releted. heve
been developed during the peet'decede on the heeie a! nicmopzoaeeear BIS.

‘lhe high reliability, nnivereelity, enell eize end other e-iventegee of niczapta-

aeeear deviaee provide the aepebility at building then into abjeote, bringing the
mute:- eguipunt ee cloee ee poeeible to en intarnetion wear or naeiver.

MWLUSEONLY
t Microproceseay: ample”:

we: o! 313

in 80:10- ‘l'echnolm
14 p-unp
8 31411)?
5 11-10?
12 121.
a 121.
9 11-51139
7 ”DP
3 IND?
9 rust:
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

However, am: can be used effectively to develop not only nicroconputers out large
coqauters as well.

The characteristics of the Iain Soviet m, oriented toward various applications.
are given in Table 1. he follows from the table. some as: are the base for con-
struction of aicrocoaputers produced in our country. Hanover, in sany cases their
characteristics do not met the requirenents of specific applications: therefore.
it becomes necessary to develop nicrocomuters based on NPR that are adapted to the
saxiaun to the suggested applications with aininun required set of hardware without
any redundancy in calculating capacity. overall dieensions. mass and other charac-
teristics. The ssin effect of m on design of problem-oriented intonation. can-
putsr and control microprocessor systens (H98) also consists in this.

Characteristic features of designing nicroprocessor systens. not only the coupon-
ent base but the approach to design of conputer equipment changed with the appear-
ance of aicroprocessors [1]. Analysis of the experience of developing systems

based on HPK made it possible to determine the following Iain characteristics of
UPS design.

1. uicroprocessors are algorithmically universal nodules whose functional orienta-
ticn is deternined by developoent of the appropriate software. In this case the
interface of the given nodules is organized frost adequately developed recon-lends-
ticns and the periods for developing the hardware part of the systu are consider-
ably reduced. Theme of microprocessors is a jup fro- slsall- and nediurintegra-
tion circuits with a "rigid" structure in the field of programing to structural
circuits of the processor-unory-comutator level.

2. 'the functional orientation of the systen requires large expenditures of time
and funds to develop applied and systems pm for each specific field. This is
aggravated by the fact that microprocessor systems have begun to be used widely in
different fields where couputer equip-ant was previously not used due to the in-
possibility of using it or due to econcsic infeasibility. The practice of develop-
ing RPS shows that the fraction of economic expenditures on developnent of software
is increasing continuously with respect to expenditures on developnent of hardware.
For eruaple. the cost of developing software coeprises an average of 60 to 80 per-
cent of the total cost of an developsents.

3. the trend directed toward realisation of software functions by hardware ap-
peared. An eque of this is develop-ant of BIS oriented toward control of per-
ipheral devices such as disks, displays, printers and interrupt processing 316 and
also development of 315 for math-stical calculations having a special set of in-
structions. The given 315 permit one to expand the field of MP5 application and
to increase their productivity. Thu, the max. Company has developed the micro-
processor nodule 8087 oriented toward rapid arithmetic operations with floating
points \p to 64 digits and calculation of trigoncestric functions. The distin-
guishing feature of auxiliary 318 is their programsbility and also the fact that
their complexity corresponds to or is higher than that of microprocessors. For
erauple, the DIP-8080 contains 5,000 transistors, the 8257 direct awry access con-
troller contains 4,000 transistors while the 318 8275 for connecting displays with
raster scanning to the lip-8080 contains 15,000 transistors. This contributed to
the developusnt of systems design with erpanders.

100
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
momentum»!

 

1. Beginning

2. Syste-s analysis

3. Selection of m configuration

4. Selection of MP:

5. Davelopnsnt of hardware

6. Henry syst.

‘I. Microprocessor nodule

8. 198 interface

9. Manufacture and debugging of IDs hardware
10. Developaent of software
11. Development of algorithns for realization of MP8 fmctions
12. Develop-ant of progress and debugging of th- on cross-devices
13. Development of debugging devices
14. Integration of hardware and software
15. Debugging of m in resident nde
16. Analysis of characteristics
17. and

specific difficulties since the sicroprogran developer sust select the aimin-
struotions toast, thoroughly study the mechanism of formulating subsequent nic-
roinstructims addresses, code transmission channels and possible integration dur-
ing transmissions and sust take into account delays and moreover there are

frequently no nioroprogrss writing. editing and debugging devices.

101
m omen. MONEY
nos OFFICIAL USE ONLY

4. The use of microprocessors in systems design changes the process of debugging
them with transfer of the center of gravity to debugging the software devices.
This requires the presence of such basic software as a translator from Assembler
language or a high-level language and editing, modelling and load programs.

5. The criteria of systems planning changed with the appearance of microprocessor
sets of mdules, the most isportant of which are:

the modular criterion that includes organization of ms with minimum possible
umber of types of different cusponents:

the contact structure between modules should be relatively regular while the
nusber of contacts should be ninisnl, which reduces the requiruents on the mnber
of leads of the 818 module:

require-ants of systems “smport,” testing and diagnosis of which becomes
ever more difficult and important.

Designing the hardware and software of microprocessor systems. 1he main phases of
designing microprocessor systems are presented in figure 1. One of the most im-
portant phases is systems analysis, the purpose of which is to determine the re-
quirements on the system being designed: to determine the set of functions which
should be perforaed by the system, the required productivity, the cost boundaries
in the development, Ianufacture and servicing phases of the system, and also to
refine the critical functions according to the criteria of the system being devel-
oped, the analyse the cosposition of peripheral devices and their operating modes,
to establish the nature of the preceding relationships of individual functions
(subproblas) of the system, for example, series, parallel-series and intermittent
contact and to deternine the structure and “origin" of data and also the require-
ments on output data and the need to store it. .

The requirements on the configuration of the system are determined and the problem
of realizing the allocated functions by the software or hardware method are first

resolved during the second stage according to analysis. The difficulty of solving
the given problem frequently consists in the fact that there is a set of new ap-

plications of microprocessors which require investigations prior to decision-

”1”.

Moreover, it frequently becomes sncessary to investigate problems of nodule syn-
thesis to implement functions by the hardware method due to the absence of the
corresponding 318 in microprocessor coqlemes to realize the required functions.

The next phase of design is selection of the mm. which aust be accomplished on
the basis of three main aspects.

1. Such microprocessor characteristics as the set of instructions and ssthods of
addressing, digit capacity, umber of general-purpose registers used, the presence
and type of stack nemry, the capability of processing interruptions and so on
must be analyzed from the viewpoint of software developent. The set of instruc-
tions must be selected and microprogram for realising th- must be developed if
required for sectional microprocessors with microprogram level, which is related

102

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

2. 0n the basis of systems design, the completeness of the coupler, which should
contain, besides the microprocessor, qu [External storage] and ozu [Internal stor-
age], 815 modules for organization of the interface with peripheral devices, con-
trollers for interact processing, control of direct access to the neeory, bus
shepers, buffer registers, on-off generator and systems controller, oust be
analyzed.

3. Such progrms as a translator from syﬂaolic language to a binary (entity)

code, editing program and a aodelling program without which the time and cost of
MP5 development increase considerably, is required from the viewpoint of software
development and debugging. The given programs are usually developed for other
computers and are called cross-devices for software development of the HES being
designed. wreover, one must have a eonitor, which permits one to control starting
and stopping of the MPS from a terminal, to load the memory, for exaeple. from
papertape, to print the contents of the senory and registers of the microprocessors.
to edit the contents of the memry cells and registers and to perform certain other
functions, to debug programs in the so-called resident soda in the cosputer being
designed. In this case part of the monitor functions can be used not only in de-
bugging but in operating the system for operational 'interfersnce' of man, for ex-
ample. in the control process: changing the parameters of the process, display of
some variables or in other words for interactive operation of man and the control
system.

Tho need to include the resident debugging phase is determined by the following
factors:

the difficulty of modelling time-dependent and asynchronous events on cross-
devices;

the speed of peripheral devices in a general-purpose ooeputer is fixed and
known and the intensities of the input flows are frequently mknovm in.systeme for

real-time applications, the aoments of their arrival are detereined by the control-
led process and so on;

there is usually comler interaction of programs in real-time systems when
using multiprogramming modes to process parallel processes and interruptions!

the increased requirement on systems reliability does not permit error cor-
rection during functioning.

Let us consider in detail the phase of software development of H98, which is car-
ried out in parallel to the phase of development and debugging of HPS hardware.
The software and hardware are integrated and joint debugging of the ass in the
resident node is accoeolished after their cospletion.

Development of function realization algorithms. After determination of the func-
tions which must be fulfilled in the MPS being designed, the individual function

realization algorithms are developed. This requires organization of an interface
to exchange information between individual software modules. The process of func-

tional decoeposition has several iterations existing up to the moment until the
functions are written in tom of the algorithm, i.e., in the form a sequence of

103
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
determimd and resultant effects, while intonation (input and output) for indi-
vidual procedures is represented by a specific stmcturo or data used in allocated
runction realisation procedures.

Software module development. The given phase includes encoding specific functions
in some language selected from the accessible languages: Assesbler or a high-level
language, the use of which has advantages and disadvantages. mlike a high-level
language. the nuaber of lines of the initial program in Assesblsr is usually con-
siderably greater-a single higx-level language operator of the initial program
generates an average of 5-10 machine instructions. Consequently, less time is re-
quired to write programs in this language and the programs are better dootamented
and less complicated. but the value or program usually exceeds that in the nuaber
or instructions written in Assembler and this means that a larger memory and longer
time are required to realise than.

Program translation. ‘Ihe translator translates the program into an entity code.

In this case a syntactical and seeantic check 09! the input program is made and
diagnostic massages and listings of input and entity programs are printed out. The
translator is a couples: program. For example, the cross-assembler program of the
urine r-sso microprocessor language on the Yes-1033, developed at m: (uningrad
Blectrotechnical Institute] imsni v. I. Ol'yanov (Lenin) comprises approximately
1,700 operators of PL/l language, while the required computer storage capacity to
store the cross-assubler cowrises 70 bytes.

Program modelling. me program is designed to debug entity programs of. the aicro-
proosssor system. It coincides in its designation to the resident debugger, but
may sometimes offer the user greater capabilities, tor example:

output to the terminal of the complete route of executed instructions:

- printing the time'roguired to realize individual sections or the entire
98°93“: '

stopping the program at checkpoints to retrieve diagnostic information:

printout of the contents of the microprocessor and memory registers, words of
state or the program and so on.

Thus the program developed for the series x-sao aicroproceesor simulates one on-otf
operating cycle or the microprocessor system during 10 as on the Yes-1033, the re-
quired storage capacity comprises approximately 77 bytes and the volma or the
ndelling progr- comprises on the order or 800 operators of ALGOL language.

The entity code mat be retrieved tor subsequent loading and debugging in the res-
ident node in the HPS after modelling of the entity program has been completed.

Use of aicroprocessor devices to solve some control and modelling problems. Analy-
sis ot control and modelling problems shows that the typical functions required for
solving them are the following: data gathering from analog 83d digital signal sm-
sors, conversion of analog signals to digital signals and vice versa, intonation

10h
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
MWLUSEONLY

processing usually in real time. signal generation by the required law. reproduc-
tion of special functions, display and printout of results and so on.

Table 2. couputer Parameters

Nae of Parameter Value
ungth of words to be processed 16 digits
Volume of addressable field of m-ory 64 K x 16
Dunbar of addressable input-output devices 256
umber of instructions 90
Value of stack 64 x sords
nusber of storage registers 2
Number of index registers 3
“tube: of mucry addressing nodes 12
size of muory pages 256 words
Time required to fulfill instructions (with cycle
of 2 s):
addition with memory 2-3 us
multiplication (lean value) 28 us
division 30 us
transfer 2-3 us
Design version of processor 155 x 225 III card
Power consumed by processor (at maxim clock
frequency 8 v
Huber of integrated circuits in processor 26
Mean cycles between failure for processor (with-
out regard to power supply sources) Approximately 16,000 hr

Investigations conducted at m: imeni V. I. Ul'yanov (lonin) since 1972 showed
that the enumerated functions are typical for any information. control and com-
puter systems, specifically production process. monitoring md measuring, scientif-
ic experiment automation and mications control systens [2-8]. Approaches to
realizing the indicated typical functions are aleo considered briefly on eramles
of the develop-tent.

Measuring information gathering and processing. A block diagram of the systos is
presented in figure 2. he basis of the systen is a l6-digit microooeputer based
on a series R-584 MP! [3]. Input information is entered into the microooQuter
from 1,024 analog sensors and it is first normalized and converted to digital fora
by the analog-digital converter (M‘s?) of the data gathering blocks (380). The
results or processing are fed to recorders, a graph plotter and alphanueric
printer (ATsPU). The blocks are synchronized in the system by means of a control
block (BU). an. parameters of the microcomputer are presented in Table 2.

me software of the microcomputer consists of service programs used in development
and debugging and applied prograas. Systolic coding language, cross-assembler,
cross-interpreter and loader are related to the service software. The cross-de-

vices are oriented toward the use of the Yes rvu [Unified convuter system].

105
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
l. Groupe or analog eeneora S. nicrocouputer

2. Doualirere 6. Interrupt inpute
3. tenancy recorder 7. Graph plotter

4. Operational recorder 8. ooneole

Analog-digital intonation convereion. A block diagram of integrating an lo-aigit
are? baeed on alternate (dual) integration of the tnnafoned and reference voltage
tron the lit-80 r-sao nicroproceeeor ia preeented in rigure 3 [5]. me circuit op-
eratee in the 'etandby loop" mde, which envieione cyclic interrogation of we?
readineea, which playe the role of a peripheral device, and code tranaaieeion. No
mltinode butter regietere BR; and on; with three-etable lit-12 #589 outpute are ,
med an the intertace modules. The regiotere are eelected by the aicroproceeeor
according to eddreeeee Ad; Ind M3 tranaitted tro- the microprooeeeor through the
addreeehm (Shh) atthenonentvhenthedatahueee (ShD) ottheaicnoproceeeorare
tuned to receive intonation fro- the peripheral devices. The no? la triggered
and intonation ie collected actor it ie ready by neane of a eignal fed to the
'Start" input of the we? and by analyzing the valuee of the 'neadineee" eignal
from the output.

Solution of a eyetea of differential egmtione. The etructure oi apparallel pro-
ceeaor (PP) deeigned to eolve eyeteua of ordinary nonlinear differential equaticne
having coupler right aide with large umber of arbitrary functions of a eingle and
greater umber of variables ie preaented in tigure 4. The proceeeor is oriented
to operate in real tine within the complex oonetructed on the haaie of the 814-4

couputer.

‘me oarallel proceeeor is constructed on the newline-nodular principle. It in-
cludee a parallel prooeaaor controller (:99) and calculating nodulee organized on
eynchronoue and/or aeynchronoue principles. The nuaber of nodulee and their types
are deter-lined by the etructure of the realized algorithn. A aynchronoua nodule is
need tor the eequential and etrongly hound parte of the algorithm and aeynchromua
nodulee are uaed for parallel weakly bound parts. Thie etructure of the proceeeor
eneuree by the atep-hy-etep nature of fulfilling program and the proble- orienta-
tion of the proceeaor.

106
P0! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POIOII‘HCIALUSEONLY

(l)
Mvnamw
MCKCOD

K300 “K00

 

1. Multiplexer

2. Block for ealection and storage of analog aiqnale
3. Comparator

4. Roadineaa

S. Synchronizer and digital tine interval meter

6. Output

7. mchronization

8. waters controller

9. Input

The synchronous calculating nodule-(figure 5) includes an interme nodule (nu),
instruction processor (KP) that includes an instruction. noory (PK). nicroproqran
control device (um) and nicroprogran nemry (my. cot of arith-otic-loqic ro-
corder type devices (m) with oupplanantary register etorage (8020), Iatrix nul-
tiplier block (80!!) and Iultiblock data nuaory (PD) with its own controller (no).
Hybrid type integrator: (GI) can aleo be included in the-ooapoeition of. the nodule
if there is a need to accelerate execution of integration oporationo.‘ -

Data communication between the davicaa of. the nodule it provided by two parallel-
operating data buses Shnl and sum. Control ie exercised by control buaeo 8110 and
aignal of state hues 81.3. The eynchronoua module has the tollowinq characterie-
tics in the considered composition: digit capacity of 16-bit word, data noory
capacity of 64! words, instruction atoraqe capabity of 1x worde, 4 Raw, capacity

107
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Key:
1. SUI-d baseline ooeputer 3. 1:» ha

2. Synchronous-Mule d. Asynchronomnodule

orregisternaoryinonemullregisters, capecityotaowmoneuwis“
words, digit capacity of data buses is 16 bits. width of nioroinatruction is 128
bite, capacity of nimprogra unity is 21: nicroinstmotions, length of a cycle is
250 ns. structure is a section based on 25 cards renaming 210 x 170 an. oonsued
power is 300 I and productivity is epprouinately‘ ioo nillion equivalent hriet oper-
ations of the baseline su-d omter.

to productivity of the nodule is evaluated by the standard probl- of modelling a
ﬂying vehicle with 6 degrees of freedo- (systen ot .onlinear differential equa-
tions of 32nd order) with an upper problem frequency of 4 a: and accuracy of colu-
tion not less than 0.01 percent. Productivity is increased «ks-told it an addi-
tional 30 hybrid integrators (two integrators each on a single standard card) are
introduced into the nodule.

me problen orientation or the structure and instruction systen. parallel realiza-
tion of. nathuatical operations end control, the use of high-speed bipolar nicro-

prooeseor sections, natrir multipliers based on 818 and a high-speed seniconductor
usury permit a significant increase of the PP speed coapared to the baseline 811-0

counter.

Signal generation. A block diegran o! the generator of controlled sequences of
voltage pulses with built-in nioroprooessor is presented in Figure 6. Part of. the
generator that produces the output signals is called the generator device. ‘me
aicroprooessor tunee the generator device andoontrols its etarting and stopping.
on Iain function of the nicroprocessor is to process the data and instruction
flow mic): cone tron the keyboard with local control or fro- the micatione

108
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
up§
3
§
§

 

My:
1. Mbusorsu-dcouaonbus

channel with route contxol. m nuorical values of tho patenteto available in
the data flow should be stored, converted and sent in the ﬂora of words of state
to the different blocks of the generator. The niozoprooossor also controls the
display in the dynamic node and realizes the exchange wotocol according to the
zequizenente of the interface.

 

My:
1. Remote control channel 4. Keyboard
2. Generator device 5. Dioplay device
3. Output

'l‘he nabs: of services offend to the operator increasee when a eicroptoceseor lo
uood. Because of special subroutines. it booms possible to check the input val-
ues of paranoters for petalseible values or to: conformity of the value of othe:

109
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
perueters with indication of the type of error on on illueineted displey hoard
end in urgency situstions with the device switched off.

Let us note in conclusion that the nicroprocesoor equipnent has a considerable ef-
fect on the nethods of constructing inforeetion, control and calculeting systems
and the properties of the microprocessor devices per-it then to be med effectively
for the following purposes:

to automte processes with the simlsst algorithm and the use of micropro-

cessor controllers hesed on the produced or provides the highest efficiency in
this case:

to automate control processes with edequete cowluity of the algorittns for
mich smell ccmuters were previously used:

the use of microcomputers or computer systlss is effective in these ceses:

to significantly raise the intellectuel properties of different monitoring

end neesuring and control devices by building the nicroproceesor and nicroconputer
into the hardware:

to crests decentralized infornetion processing systees with structural con-
hinetion of dete processing end gethering devices, which increeses the degree of
parallelisn of the calculsting process;

to construct new highly efficient cceputers nd cysts-s of different clees.

the eein disedventeges that rake ness use of eicroprocessors difficult are the
following:

inedequete developent of software problem and e leg of investigsticns to
develop debugging devices for the softnre:

the precticel absence of nicroperipheral devices;

e leg of research in the field of developing problee-oriented eicrcprocessor
nodules and their software:

the absence of sufficient contect between developers of microprocessors and
developers of systems;

inedsquete training of personnel to develop nicrcprccessor systems.

emzocmn

l. Beleshcv, Ye. P. and G. A. Petrov, microprocessors-a New Caponent Bess of
. Electronics.” 1mm WM. mmnmm, W1 21, No 11, 1978.

2. Beleshov, Ye. P., v. n. smlov, G. A. Petrov end D. V. Pusenkcv, 'lmogofunk-
tsicnel'nyye regulyernyye vychislitel'nyye structury" [Regular Multifunction“
Celouleting muss]. Moscow, Sovetshoye redio, 1978.

110
“WWW!”
3.

4.

5.

6.

Deluxe. A. 1., :4. Yu. nyuhtornyy end s. 1'. namhch, “Oyyt :mebotld epetel-
eliztzovennykh mum-m no oenove nitropzoteeeem ISM nu" [Experience of
Developing amounted Daemon-punts Bead on the m K-584 Microproceuorl.
hunted. MP. 1990.

Behehov, Yo. P., V. a. Sholov, D. V. mm at e1, "Principle. of Designing
Mun-rice). Pxoqm conttol syeteu need on Regulu- Mctopxoceeeor Structures.”
P111303! I arm mm, In 11, 1978

Genet-0v, I. V. end 3. V. mam, “Integration of Annoy-Digital Convert»
end the 11:80 [-580 menswear," Plum 1 81mm mung. No 10, moo.

Behehov, Ye. P.. V. Ye. toehethov and D. V. Puunhov. microprocessor Reelin-
tion of M Stony. antral Dovicoo,‘ m I am WWA.
No 12, 1978.

mum, I. 6.. G. A. Pecan and G. Mkkie, 'About the Iqhnenteuon o!
mica Control of. Machine hole by municxoprooeuor Sven-e." HELSINKI
UNIVERSITY 0? 13cm, suns 3, DD 7, 1979.

Gordonov. A. You G. A. Poem. V. 8. SW 01: e1, ”Specials“ Mouton
in Communication Equipment,“ my momma. SERIYA as. No S. 1975.

copmca'r: Izdetel'etvo 'Neukove duke“,£1ekt:onnoye .3601:th 1981

6521

0802

1863/55

MOMMISEONLY
unc 658.012.011.56:681.518

MENTION 0! INPOII‘IM'ION P30038838 I]! 1WD mm WSW
WIT 8Y8?!“

Moscow AWIZATSIYA WIOMKH PWSSOV V mornovm A80

WSW PRBDPRIYATIYAHI in Russian 1981 (siped to press 21 Jul 81)
pp 2-3, 105-117, 123-121... 132-133, 161 ‘

(Annotation, forevord, aections 7,8,9 (excerpts) and table of contv,-nta from
book ”Automation of Information Processes in Integrated Automated Industrial
Hanagement Systems" by Tofik llamadovich Aliyev, Rafih Arizovich Aliyev and
zinoviy Veniaminovich Khaldey, Bnergosidat, 6500 copies, 162 pages]

[Bxcerptsl I Annotation

This book examines questions of automating intonation processes in integrated
management- infatuation systems used in industrial enterprises involved in
continuous production, as vell as the construction of information models,
development of information-reference systems, selection of complement of hard-
ware and methods of investigating information flows. Special attention is
devoted to experience gained in designing and introducing various infatuation
systems within industry.

The book is intended for engineering-technical workers at scientific-research

and design organisations involved in developing automated intonation processing
and management systems. as well as students in senior courses at higher educational
institutions . ‘ '

Foreword

Increasing attention has recently been devoted to improving management processes,
including those used in industrial enterprises.

The achievements of science and technology make it' possible to improve existing
management information systems (ms), and to raise .the technical and scientific
level of newly created HIS. The greatest development of industrial us is
reflected in systems which are qualitatively new. namely integrated management
information systems. The objective conditions for the creation of such systems
consisted of the domestic production of third-generation computers and widely

varying types of peripheral devices. In addition, technological processes involved
in data acquisition, processing and output have become much more complicated.

POI omen. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

One of the most important stages in creating a management information system is
the actual technological data processing process. Experience has shown that
new management technology is formed on the basis of accumulated experience, and
makes extensive use of that experience. The present book disseminates
experience in developing information systems in the petroleum processing
industry, and devotes attention to the organisation of work in the pre-design
stage, methods of information research and problems of processing data in
integrated management information systems used in petroleum processing
enterprises. Practical results associated with these matters obtained at
various facilities within the branch are described.

Sections 7, 8, 9 [excerpts]

The use of the Small Computer System (808) makes possible a rational combination
of centralisation and decentralization of technological process monitoring
functions, and creates the foundation for using direct digital control and
gradually eliminating the use of specialized automation systems and cumbersome
instrument panels at the bottom level of automated process control systems [70].

The SM-l and sn-z control computer complexes are designed for use in automated
equipment, process and production control systems. These complexes are configured
at the customer's specifications on the basis of the SH-lP and 88-2? processors
using 308 modular assemblies. These can use peripheral devices in the “-6000,
M-7000 ASVT-H nomenclature, and are fully compatible with the latter with

respect to input-output interface. Interfacing is also supported with the

Unified Computer System, KTS LIUS, local information-controlsystem hardware and
other systems [71].

The SH-l and Sh-Z control computers can provide the basis for configuring local
as well as territorially distributed multi-machine computing complexes.

In order to use the Sh-l and Sh-Z control computer~complexes in an automated
process control system, the users are provided with a set of applications
programs which can be used to realise data acquisition, analysis and primary
processing functions. The scope of primary processing for analog transducers
includes calculation of real values, linearization, smoothing, and introducing
temperature and pressure corrections [72].

This hardware makes it possible to synthesise automatic process control system
hardware which implements centralized and decentralised structures allowing for
the functions which are executed. Figure 15 shows automatic process control
system hardware which includes KHZIOI and KH2103 local information-control
system hardware which can be used to implement a centralised structure in which
the KM2103 complex executes the functions of a terminal device for the control
computer complex. Figure 16 shows automated process control system hardware
built on the basis of SOS which implement a decentralised structure.

113
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI OMCIAI. IBE ONLY

(1)

   
   

fez-numeral:
ycmouotan

”3mm
( 2) “Hum

 

Figure 15. Centralized autonated Iigure 16. ‘Decentrelised autonated
procese control systen hardware process control eysten hardvare
structure structure
Key: 1. "-6000 control conputer Key: 1. 868
couple: 2. co-aunication device
7. technological device 3. transducers

4". technological device

The solution of technical anI' econonic problens involved in uneging an
enterprise as a vhole (818 euro) is distinguished by the lack of the
autonatic neesurenent procedures executed vithin the group of autonated
procese control eysten tasks. The other aforenentioned functions (recording,
convereion. acquisition, trensniseion, processing, displaying, accu-ulating
and outputting results) aleo have distinguishing charecterietica: infornation
recording consists of entering infornation in basic docunents having an
established for- and content; data conversion coneiets of traneferring to- eone
nediun for conputer input; dete acquisition. trensnission and proceseing
includee storing the source data transmitted iron renote facilities to nagnetic
tapes or discs. nanipulating the data during the problen solving procese.
correcting and forning a series of data files; the output of results includee
outputting calculation reaulte for users in hard-copy or video display fora.

Data recording and conversion functions are inlet-outed in ms by leans of data
preparation devices. The procedure involved in preparing source docuents and
nachine media includes filling out standard blanks nanually and then transferring
the contents of the source docunent to nachine data nedia using data preparation
devices. Since the procese of transferring data to nachine nedia is labor-
inteneive and involves the poseibility of error, a great deal of attention is
devoted to improving conputer data input techniques. l'hie inprovenent is loving

11‘;

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in two basic directions: creating automatic readers in which the source document
is used for data input; and combining the preparation of the source document and
the input of data to the computer in a single process.

Automatic readers and machine-readable documents are not yet being used in the
petroleum processing industry integrated 1418; their use is a matter for the
future. Implementation of the second direction involves the use of devices
which belong to the nomenclature of data teleprocessing system hardware. The
use of these devices for the purposes indicated above involves executing the
following operations: preparing data for computer input by entering it via
keyboard; recording the entered data; editing the data; inputting the data to
the computer.

Data teleprocessing equipment includes three groups of devices: data transmission
multiplexers, comnications devices and subscriber terminals. Data transmission
multiplexers are used to interface data transmission equipment to Unified

System computers.

There are four types of mltiplexers in the Unified Computer System: the “PD-1A,
which allows 15 different subscriber terminals to operate independently over
cosmunication channels at the same time (the HPD-l is supplied in two modifications
the basic number of co-unications channels which can be connected is 32, and can
be increased to 66); the HPD-Z provides the capability of connecting between 16
and 176 channels in increments of 8 channels; the fourth multiplexer is the four-
channel “PD-3. The comaunications hardware which comprises the data transmission
equipment includes modems, signal converters and error protection devices which
are designed to operate over various types of channels. The following types of
modems have been developed: modems for operation over telephone and wideband
channels at rates of 200-4800 and 48,000 bps. and modems designed to operate

over telegraph channels at rates of 50, 100 and 200 bps. The signal converters
are designed to operate over physical links at rates of up to 9600 bps. These
are produced in several modifications (low-level, telegraph type). Error

protection devices are supplied in versions which support half-duplex and duplex
working.

Various types of subscriber terminals are used in data processing systems based
on the Unified Computer System. The AP-l, AP-Z, AP-3 and AP-a terminals are used
for data acquisition. The AP-6l, AP-62 and Ap-63 display-based terminals are
efficient for inquiries and data processing for inputting and outputting large
data files, as well as interactive data processing; the AP-70 and tP-ll are
designed for remote data processing. The information from the subscriber
terminal is processed by the computer and the results returned to the

subscriber terminal [68].

Figure 17 shows a general diagram or data teleprocessing using Unified Computer
System facilities for a single co-Iunications channel.

115
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 17. General diagran of data teleprocessing for a single co-unications
channel.

Key: 1. integrated computer.center 7. Unified Computer System subscriber
2. computer (multiplexed channel) terminal '
3. data transmission multiplexer 8. controller
4. data transmission equipment 9. data input device
5. communications channel 10. data output device
6 communications network

The nomenclature of equip-ant in the 808 allows them to be used to build data
acquisition and transmission systems. The data transmission devices in the
808 include all of the basic modules inherent in large-computer teleprocessing
systems: data multiplexers, data transmission devices, modems, signal con-
verters, concentraters and automatic signaling devices.

In addition, the data transmission devices include a number of modules which

are aimed especially at 863 use: data transmission adaptors, automatic signaling
adapters. programmable error protection devices. simplified modems, signal
converters with hi-impulse coding, and modems with simple accuracy enhancement.
The use of special-purpose nodules as part of the data transmission equipment
makes it possible to co~locate scs with the controlled entity, to use 808 as
satellites for large computers, to combine several territorially separated

small computers into a multinnachine complex, to simplify procedures for

exchanging data with terminal devices and to use a synchronous data transmission
[68].

The use of typewriters in Unified Computer System teleprocessing systems makes it
possible to combine data input and hard-copy production. However, using type-
writers to input data involves a number of shortcomings, which include low input
speed, impossibility of editing information prior to input and poor typewriter
reliability.

In order to eliminate these shortcomings, displays can be used for data input.
However, most hard-copy information is now being input to integrated management
information systems hy_transferring it to machine media centrally within the

integrated computer center using appropriate input devices. The following are

116
FOI¢OFFKJA1.USB(MVLY
FOI‘OFFHJAI.USE(MVLY

provided for Unified System computers: a 1500 cps punch-card reader and a
1000-1500 cps paper tape reader.

The information processing functions are borne by computers in solving management
information system problems. The technical system complex in the integrated
management information system of the petroleum processing industry uses computers
in the Unified System and ASVT series, specifically the Yes-1022 from the Unified
System series and the h-6030 from the ASVT series.

Host of the output data resulting from solving management information problems
is presented in hard-copy form; therefore, alphanumeric printers are used for
data output.

The alphanumeric printers used in the Unified Computer System have a printing
rate of 650-900 cps. Data files are output to peripheral devices - magnetic
tapes, discs and, much less often, paper tape and punch cards.

Combined functioning of management information systems and automated process
control systems based on using the same basic data poses the problem of creating
multi-machine complexes with a broad network of peripheral hardware interconnected
via communications channels.

 

Figure 18. Hulti-comonter organisation at direct control channel level
Key: 1. processor 1 6 main memory

2. processor 2 7. multiple: channel

3. controller . 8. selector channel 1
a direct control channels 9 selector channel 2
5 [probably arithmetic unit]

A multi-machine complex is formed both by combining high-speed computers used
to solve management information problems with the control computer complexes
making up the automatic process control system hardware, as well as by combining

117
_ FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE(NVLY
FOI‘OFFNJAI.USE(HQLY

two or more computers designed to solve management information problems in

cases in which the computing capabilities of a single computer are insufficient.
The requirement that two computers be used to solve management infatuation
problems may also be dictated by reliability considerations. However. it should
be kept in mind that the use of two computers to increase productivity results
in a mode of distribution of problems between the interconnected computers which
is complicated in terms of its organisation. It is simpler to organize the
functioning of a single powerful ccaputer.

Hulti-computer organisation can thus occur at the computer level as well as the
control computer-computer level in the integrated management information syste-
hsrdware used in the petroleum processing industry.

Hulti-computer organization can be done at four levels [68]: the direct-control

channel level, main memory level, computer channel level and peripheral device
level.

Hulti-computer organisation at the direct-control channel level (Figure 18)
establishes a connection between the central controllers of the computers and
provides highly efficient data exchange between the computers. Hulti-computer
organisation at the main memory level (Figure 19) allows several processors

to use a common memory. which provides expanded memory for each processor.

 

Figure 19. Hulti-computer organization at main memory level

Key: 1. processor 1
2. processor 2
3. controller
6. direct control channels
5. [probably arithmetic unit]

. main memory
multiplex channel
selector channel 1
. selector channel 2

OQVO
a

"hen multi-computer operation is organised at the channel level (Figure 20), a
connection is established between the computer selector channel, which allows
the main memories in the computers to exchange data in a mode in which one of

118
FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE(NVLY
FIHI(HﬂﬂC1A1.USI2(HULY

the computers acts as a peripheral device uith respect to another computer. For
the Unified Computer System. multi-computer organization at the channel level is
done with the help of a "channel-channel adapter". Hulti-computer organization
at the peripheral device level is done by connecting several computers to the
same peripheral device.

(I ) ﬂpsucasp l (2) ”pours-cop 2

 

Figure 20. Hulti-computer organization at computer channel level

Key: 1 processor 1 6. main memory
2. processor 2 7. multiplex channel
3. controller 8. selector channel 1
a direct control channels 9. selector channel 2
5 [probably arithmetic unit] 10. channel-channel adapter

The availability of two inputs to the peripheral devices and Unified System
multiplexers makes multi-computer organisation at this level possible (Figure 21).
Hulti-computer organization at the peripheral device level makes it possible

to connect two computers to the same data transmission multiplexer, which
provides uninterrupted operation over communications channels when one of the
computers malfunctions.

Unified System computers and H-6000 control computers can be combined to create
multi-mechine complexes which are not separated by long distances by using
channels or an external memory field. The machines are connected by means of
an input-output interface matcher and extra program modules which are added to
the standard operating system [69]. The matcher can be connected to either a
program channel or to the “-6000 direct memory access channel (Figure 22).

when connected to a Unified System computer, the matcher is connected to the
selector channel as a high-speed peripheral device. Two interface cards are
used to connect the matcher: a control interface card and data interface card.

Figure 23 shows methods used for remote interfacing of Small System computer
complexes with Unified System computer.

119
FOR OFFKJA1.USIICNVLY
FOH.OFFKJAI.UBEINNLY

( l ) '1,qu I (2) linear» 2

Hynmunluup Myanmar»
neprlau rupture
. “Imus Iowan:

 

Rum clue
( 1 2 ).

Iigure 21. Hulti-computer organisation at peripheral device level (communications
link).

Key: 1. processor 1 . _ 7. multiplex channel
2. processor 2 8. selector channel 1
3. controller 9. selector channel 2
6. direct control channels 10. data transmission multiplexer
5. [probably arithmetic unit] ll. switch
6. main memory 12. to communications links

The first two configurations correspond to the interfacing version in uhich
the Small System processors are co-located with the Unified System complex.
In this case the Snell System computers act as a communications processor

which controls the data transmission channels and does preliminary processing
of the data passing over them.

The third configuration corresponds to the version in which remote complexes
of Small System computers are connected over data transmission channels [73].

The large variety of functional capabilities of broad nomenclature of computer
devices make it possible to use small System computers as measurement-
information elements in a measurement-information system. As part of a complex

management information system, Small System computers have devices for gathering
and processing initial data from different sources; the small computers can also
act as a data source for a higher-level computer. Figure 24 shows a structure

120
FIﬂICNWHCJAI.lEHB(HSLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Run/pop-
nuu

 

Figure 22. Connecting Unified System colputer to H-6000 computer.
a -- with natcher connected to 14-6000 program channel; I: -- with n‘atcher

connected to “-6000 direct memory access channel

Key: 1. Unified Systen computer 5. direct aenory access channel
2. M-6000 - ' 6. data interface card
3. selector channel 7. control interface card
6. program channel 8, latcher

in which a Snail System computer acts as a counnications processor working
together with a Unified System Iain processor. Small System multiplexers and
adapters are used to interface the processor with the comnications channels

[74].

121

FOR OFFIGAI. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Pigure 23. Methods of Small Systems computer interaction with Unified Systen

computers .

Key:

1.

2

3.

ONO

e 0

interface

Unified System computer
ZAIOSh rank co-Iunications
adapter

814-3, SH-lo

asynchronous (synchronous)
data transmission adapter
co-iunications channel
terminal

ZAIZK rank camsunications
adapter

9.
10.

ll.
12.

13.
lb.

15.

122

814-1, SH-Z
asynchronous-synchronous data
transmission adapter

Unified Systen multiplexer
asynchronous/synchronous data
transmission adapter

Small 8’79““ computer
asynchronous-synchronous data
transmission adapter

standard interfaces

FOROFFICIALUSEONLY
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

6. couputer-ueaou
dcvi co

7. trcnoduccr

[probably nodal]

rod object col-unicaci
Ftﬂlflﬂﬂ(1A1.USE|HNLY

CHAPTER 3
EXPERIENCE IN DESIGNING AND INTRODUCING IEFOIHATION SYSTEMS

8. Automation of Information Processes in Integrated Management Information
System at Novo-hakinskiy Petroleum Processing Plant imeni Vladimir ll'ich

The Novo-hakinskiy Order of October Revolution Petroleum Processing Plant imeni
Vladimir Il'ich is one of the most modern petroleum processing enterprises in

this country. It includes over 20 installations such as the combined high-
capacity ELOO-AVT 6 [expansion not given], counterflov-stage catalytic cracking
installation, sulfuric-acid alhylation installation, retarded coking installations
and others. In order to improve the level of organization of manage-cut of the
enterprise, the N332 imeni Vladimir Il'ich began using scientifically founded
mathematical methods to automate management processes at all levels of

management of the enterprise [76].

The system was put into full-scale operation in 1975. Effective management of
an enterprise as large as the IBNZ required the use of a systems approach to
designing the management information system and, consequently, considering it
as a multi-level hierarchical organisation.

The structure of the management information system for the NBNZ was investigated,
and its algorithmic, organizational and functional hierarchies developed. The
nan: HIS is constructed as a full-level hierarchical system: I -- optimal planning,
accounting and analysis of production and management activity; II -- optimal
operational control and operational production accounting; III -- optimisation of
technological installation modes; IV -- regulation of process and equipment
parameters.

At level I, problems are solved on the basis of the directive indicators from
the Ministry of the Petroleum and Chemical Industry of the Azerbaydzhan SSE

and forecasts of material and production resources. Optimal short-term and
annual plans are drawn up. Real time monitoring of the course of product output
is done at this level.

The execution of optimal plans is taken care of at level II. Based on predictions
of the arrival of raw materials, shipment of finished product and the status of
technological equipment, models of operational planning and control and operational
accounting data for the preceding time period are used to calculate short-term
operational production assignments (for a period of 1 day).

Level II is connected to the optimal planning level through a dynamic operational
planning model which provides the basis for detailing the production program.
Operational control and operational planning are interrelated by the formation of

a too-module model of operational production management, where the first module
is a model of the plan for the current operating period, and the second module

is a model for the remaining intervals of the current operational planning stage.

12h
FOI<0FFKJAI.U§E(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Level III provides optimal coordination between equipment and processes in
complex technological systems; it also ensures optimisation of the modes of
processes and equipment based on the accepted quality criterion, mathematical
models of the processes and systems, operational assignments developed at
level II, and current analysis of disturbances.

Equipment parameters are monitored and regulated at level IV. Problems of
optimal current and annual planning, optimal planning for technical
installation repair schedules, operational control of production, automated
accounting of petroleum and petroleum product movement, reserves accounting,
dispatcher monitoring and control of technological installations within the
plant, optimal control of catalytic cracking processes, and optimal control of
the sulfuric acid alkylation installation are now being solved as part of the
K18; other tasks which are being handled include integrated automation ‘
(monitoring and regulation) of all technological installations in the plant
using high-performance automatic regulation systems implemented on the basis
of invariance theory and variable-structure system theory; the cost of goods
production, material and technical supply planning. technological resource
accounting, movement and realisation of finished product accounting, calculations
of actual cost and payroll, supplier accounting, daily plant reporting and
statistical reporting, as well as a number of other problems. A brief
characterisation of some of the main tasks of the “BIZ management information
system is given below.

The functions of business and operational accounting are implemented by the
same devices in accounting for commodity production. The operational
accounting system for commodity production at RBI! imeni Vladimir ll'ich is
part of the automated systea which accounts for petroleum and petroleum product
movement. The operational accounting information-computing system for _
commodity production is a group acquisition and processing system for primary
measurement information, and has a two-stage hierarchical structure (Figure 25).

The first stage of this system is implemented using a ”Radius” information-
measurement system [77].' The second stage includes an H-6000 control computer
system, which bears the functions of computational operations as well as
centralised selection of the appropriate first-stage information-measurement
system. The first-stage information-measurement system includes the monitored
facilities, which are reservoirs in which slit transducers are installed along

with equipment for pierometric measurement of the hydrostatic pressure of the
produce within a group of reservoirs.

125
FOR OFFIGAL USE ONLY
Figure 25. Infomtim-cmutiu systel' for operational co-odity production
accounting ‘ _ .

Key: 1. reservoirs 5. second stage
2. "Redius" infomtion- 5. 3-6000 control couputer syste-
_ neesurenent syste-
3. first stage

9. Operational Infornetion Processing System for Petroleuu Processing
Enterprise Couple:

The information systen within the 'autonstic Ianageosnt systen of the enterprises
of the Ministry of the Petroleua and Chenicel Industry of the Aacrhaydshan 838,

which operates as pert of the unified nenegenent informtion systen of that
Ministry, is designed to reflect in a tinely nanner the execution of the production
progran of the group of petroleum processing plents and enterprises which nekes

up the Ministry of the Petroleul and Chenical Industry of the Azerbsydshan 883.

FOIOFHCIALUSIONLY
The technical base of the system is the junction computer center, which includes
a Yes-1020 computer and data transmission facilities located at Ministry
enterprises. The tasks carried out by the information system include the "Daily
Report of the Azerbaydzhan 88R Ministry of the Petroleum and Chemical Industry
on the course of execution of the production program", "Operational Report on
Functioning of Enterprises of Aaerbaydzhan 88R Ministry of the Petroleum and
Chemical Industries" and "Report on Operation of Petroleum Processing Plant
Group and Enterprises of Aserbaydzhan 88R Ministry of the Petroleum and Chemical
Industries" (monthly cross-section).

The daily report presents a picture of the execution of the plan by enterprises
belonging to the Azerbaydzhan SSR Ministry for the current day and since the
beginning of the month. The operational report on functioning of Azerbaydzhan
SSR Ministry enterprises is formed on the basis of data obtained by solving the
problem of compiling the daily report, and reflects the course of plan
fulfillment for the reporting week and from the beginning of the month. The
report on the work of the petroleum processing plant group and enterprises of
the Azerbsydshan SSR Ministry of the Petroleum and Chemical Industry includes
summary data on the results of operation in terms of the entire nomenclature of
petroleum products produced during the past month. The function of this
information system is thus to obtain reliably timely information by means of
automated data processing.

Table of Contents

Foreword 3
Introduction 4
Chapter 1. DESIGNING INFORMATION SYSTEMS FOR INDUSTRIAL
ENTERPRISES WITH CONTINUOUS PRODUCTION lo

1. Problems of Management and Data Processing at

Enterprises with Continuous Production lo
2. Planning Set'of Problems in Petroleum Processing

Industry Integrated Management Information System 15
3. Information Investigation of Enterprise in Order to

Create Integrated Management Information System 28
4. Investigation of Information-Logical Interconnection

Between Tasks Involved in Managing Enterprises vith

Continuous Production 42
Chapter 2. AUTOMATION OI" DATA PROCESSING
5. Acquisition, Processing and Representation of Data in

Petroleum Processing Industry Integrated Management

Information System 69

_ 127
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007102109: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500040037-2

FOROFFICIALUSEONLY

6. Data Baaa in Integrated Hanaganant Intonation Systn of
Bntarpriaoa with Continuous Production

7. Technical Bouipnant for Autonatin; Infonation Procaaaaa

Chapter 3. avenue: 1! 188m AID mmwcmc INFORMATION
SYSTEMS

'0. Autonation of Intonation Procaaaco in Integrated Hanan-ant ".
Infonation Syntn at Fovo-Bakinakiy Patroloua Procauin;
Plant inani Vladinir Il'ich

9. Operational Intonation Procauing 8yatan for Petrolen
Procauing Bntarpriu Couple:

Bibliography
COPYRIGHT: lnargoitdat, 1981

6900
080': 1863/58

128
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500040037-2
’03 OFFICIAL [Bl our

MMIOUS All) WTIB

000 518.1
IDBCOH MEN'S comm cum

Moscow mm momma wmxm. SBRIYA 15: mmsum'uu m
I am in Russian lo h, Oct-Dec 81 (manuscript received 6 Jul 81) pp 3-8

[Article by Ye. A. Grebenikov and V. I. Dmitriyev: "On the Developent of
Scientific Trends in Moscow University's Computer Center"]

[Text] me Scientific-Research Computer Center (m) was founded at Moscow _
University in 1955 in the Division of Medianics and Mathmtics. Scientific manage-
ment of the cmputer center's work was conducted by the Deperbent of Cuputationel
hthuastics. 'lhe scientific work of the center and of this depot-bent were closely
connected. Theoretical investigations were performed on numerical methods of solv-
ing methaaaticel problem and solutions were found to diverse problem originating
in the departnente of ICU (Moscow State University) and non-university organiza-
tions. The Computer Center was equipped with the first Soviet computer "Strode"

and had a relatively small mates- of workers.

The develop-eat of cowutstioml mathematics and computer technology. the routing
daasnds of the subdivisions of Moscow University for the use of computers for
scientific investigation and in the instructional process and the necessity for
increasing the number of trained specialists in applied msthuatics stimulated the
development of the Computer Center. In 1958. acadmaician A. ll. Tikhonov hecane
heed of the Department of Computatdoml ﬂammtics and the scientific director of
the Computer Center. Under his influence and with his direct participation, the
mJor scientific trends to be followed by the Computer Center took form and the
Center quickly grew into a substantial scientific establishlent. equipped with
contuporery computer technology and uploying a large mates of him qualified
specialists. In 1972. the Comwter Center was reorganized into the Scientific-
Research Cuputer Center of mu, s pert of the Division of Capitational lathe-
mstics and Qrbernetics. the breadth of its range and the profmdity ofthe fund»
mental and applied investigations it ha conducted, make it possible to include
the "Ms in the rents of the leading institutes in our nation in the field of
computational mathematics.

129
P03 OHICIAL [BB ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

me maJor tasks of the IlIVTs at the present time are:

- the development of theoretical probluss and applied questions in contapo-
rary computational mathaatics which are important for the developent of science
and the econw; ~

- participation in training and retraining of scientiﬁc cadres in the area

of cmnputer utilisation, provision of computer management of the imtructional
process and organisation of practical truning for students;

- provision of aid in the incorporation and organization of computer utilisa-
tion for scientific investigations performed by subdivisions of mu.

The scientific investigations performed at the We gradually began to center
around two leading problem. he first is associated with the develoment of
methods of mathematical modeling, numerical analysis and emanated processing of
the results of observations. Relevant to the second problaa. investigations and
development of software and hardware devices are conducted in order to facilitate
the effective use of the computer in automated scientific investigations, the
instructional process and administration. Within the framework of these two prob-
less, developments are being conducted in accordance with mew scientific trends.
The establishment and further development of the majority of these scientific
trends is closely associated with the mme of A. ll. Tikhonov. 0f the seven
doctoral dissertations defended by workers of the RIVTs, six were defended by

A. R. Tikhonov's students. A. N. Tikhonov's work is characterised by the Juxta-
position of basic mathematical problem and work on actual natural science topics.
This has put a distinctive stamp on ﬁne work of the IIV'I‘s as well, where. along
with basic research on cmnputationsl mathematics, work is conducted, along a broad
front, on the construction of mathuatdcal models and the nuerical analysis of
them' for may important econaaic tasks.

In the Scientific—Research Computer Center, in cooperation with the Department of
Computational Mathuatics of the mo Division, they are currently conducting wide
scale investigations to develop principles and methods of mathematical. modeling of
the phenomena and processes involved in various natural sciences and to produce
caplet engineering designs. its goal of this work is an increase in the efficacy
of the use of computers in autaaated scientific investigations, the development of
methods of automated processing and interpretation of experimental data and the
creation of syste- to search for optimal designs in the solution of scientific
engineering problems. within the framework of this problma, thq are conducting
research to create mathemtical models of electranamics, geophysics, pluma
physics and aeromechanics. they are also developing numerical methods for solving
problems in mathematical physics and standard problem in numerical analysis. A
large cycle of work is related to the creation of methods for solving inverse prob-
lem and, based on this, the developent of system of processing and interpreta-
tion of experimental data. Let us briefly consider the develolnent of these
scientific trends,

13)
FOR OFFICIAL IBE ONLY
Computational electrodynamics began to develop in the NIVTs starting in 1958, when,
in response to an initiative by A. II. Tilthonov, a small scientific coup was
created. In this group they developed nunerical methods for the solution of
boundary-value problem in electrohnamics, applied to problems in geoelectricity,
diffraction of electromagnetic waves and the theory of irregular waveguides.
Research in this direction developed very rapidly and was widely acknowledged in
our nation, as well a abroad. At the same time, work was performed on the adop-
tion of computers in the area of construction of antenna feeder devices, synthesis
of new types of antenna and the quantitative description of propagation of radio
waves in non-homogeneous media.

Principles were developed for a new approach to tasks in design of complex radis-
ting systems, based on the general theory of regularisation of solutions to poorly
defined problems in mathematical physics. As a result of the research performed,
a method of solution was developed for the task of synthesizing antenna systems
with given requirements for the radiation direction diagram, taking account of
actual constraints on the arramement of sources of emcitation, such as arise in
practical problans of antenna design. The adoption of the methods developed in the
practice of design of antenna devices made it possible to improve austantially the
parameters involved in the construction of radiating system for various purposes.
For this cycle of work, academician A. N. Tikhonov and professors V. I. Dmitriyev,
A. S. Il'inskiy and A. G. sveshnikov were granted the title of winners of the

USSR State Prise.

Effective methods for performing calculations in solving problems related to the
theory of regular waveguides were developed, based on the general ideas of the
Bubnov-Galerkin method, which reduced problems in the propagation of electro-
magnetic waves in waveguides to the solution of boundary value problems for a
finite system of ordinary differential equation; normal waves in corrugated wave-
guides and open micro-planar transmission lines were also studied and a method for
calculating the continuous propagation of these waves was developed. 0n the basis
of the realization of the algorithm developed, research was performed on specific
directing system.

Very important work was performed on the creation of numerical methrls for solving
problens in diffraction by a local non-homgeneous body and the development of
methods of numerical analysis of periodic antenna grids. Also important is work
investigating problems of diffraction by ideally conductive screens. 'lhis cycle
of work has great significance for the creation of modern antenna systems since it

makes it possible to create mathematical models of radiating systems with variom
structures.

Within the framework of the development of numerical methods in elecu'odynamics,
work was started on geoelectricity. Here, under the direction of A. N. Tikhonov,

research was performed'on mathesatical models for problem arising in the theory
and interpretation of geophysical methods of prospecting for conercial minerals.

131

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL IBB 0151.!

These methods are based on the use of artificially and naturally created electro-

dynamic fields. Later, this work trend split off to become an independent effort
and was expanded significantly.

The maJor goal of all geophysical research is the solution of inverse problem,
i.e., determination of the structure of a medius form measuruents of the char-
acteristics of,a field. An electromagnetic field, measured at the surface of the
Earth, carries information about the electrical structure of the Barth. To
isolate this information, one must solve an inverse problem. his can be done on
the basis of the repeated solution of the direct problem for a selected clue of
models of the structure of the medium. For this reason, the creation of mnerical
methods for solving direct problem involving electrassgnetic soundings of the
medium, in many respects, determines whether it is possible to introduce various
geophysical methods into the actual search for comaercial minerals. Thus,

A. II. Tikhonov's method for calculaung the electraagnetic characteristics of
fields in stratified media made it possible to begin adopting the method of fre-
quency sounding in the econow. This facilitated the technical re-equip-ent of
electro-prospecting for canercial minerals.

A. N. Tikhonov proposed a method of magnetoterrestrisl sounding of the Earth's
crust and upper mantle based on study of simultaneous meastn-ements at the Barth's
surface of the tangential components. of the natural Ingnetic field.

A cycle of work was performed at the lIV'l's involving mnerical modeling of the
magnetoterrestrial sounding of the Earth's crust and upper mantle, based on the
study of simultaneously measured tangential components of the natural magnetic
field at the Earth's surface and of non-halogeneom media. nethoda rere developed
for solving inverse problem related to magnetoterrestrial soundingbased on the
regularization method. -

A cycle of work was performed at the Me on methods of alectroproapecting for
ore. Methods were developed, which were based on numerical calculation of models
of local conductive inclusions in a stratified medium, for the interpretation of
data has electro-proepecting for ore. Important work was performed on mathe-
matical modeling of the tmks of electrical well logging. Methods were also
developed here which make it possible to solve problem of axiosyllwtrical distri-
bution of electrical conductivity, when parueters of the nedium change as a func-

tion of depth, a well as radius. this makes it possible to mmerically study
mathematical models which adequately represent actual geoloncal situations.

A library of program "Electromagnetic fields in geoplvsics" was created
containing programs for solving direct and inverse problems related to electro-
magnetic sounding. The most effective and general method of approximate solu-
tion of differential equations is the method of finite differences. At the
end of the 50's, A. N. Tikhonov and A. A. Ssmarskiy performed some fine-grained
investigations of a broad class of difference diagram for the solution _of

132
FOR OFFICIAL USE “LY
boundary value problems for differential equations with smooth and discontinuom
coefficients (homogeneous difference diagrams). Applying theoretical-functional
methods to the study of difference diaym, they obtained important results on
the convergence and stability of_difference diagrams for the class of equation
with discontinuous coefficients. In the Casputer Center, a group was created
which, under the leadership of Academician A. A. Samarskiy, began work on the
theory of difference diagrns and its applications. In the past few years, this
scientific trend has expanded strongly and has encompassed research in the
development of net approximations of boundary value and initial boundary value
problems for elliptical, parabolic and hyperbolic equations, the study of stabil-
ity and convergence of difference diagrams and the developnent of methods for
solving net equations. Work was conducted in the application of the methods
developed to problem in plasma physics and the theory of elasticity.

A cycle of work was performed in the lIV'I's on the study of difference diagrams
used in the search for visual solutions to differential equations. A class of
diagrams was identified for equations of thermal conductivity, which were most
suited to the solution of problems with discontinuom initial conditions. The
precision of difference diagram was studied for second order elliptical equations
in the presence of a first order discontinuity in the Dirichlet boundary condi-
tions. The convergence of difference diagrams was studied for Laplace equations
at ﬁne angles and modified diagrams with more rapid convergence were constructed.
The features of difference diagram were studied a applied to the crack problu,
the aperture problem and a nulber of other problem.

Effective methods for solving net equations were developed including: a) an
iterative method involving variable directions of a hid: level of accuracy for
solving Poisson equations and the third boundary value problaa for elliptical
equations in a rectangle; b) a modified variable-triangular method which permitted
effective solution of elliptical equations with strongly varying coefficients;

c) a method using hypothetical unknown for solving Dirichlet problus for the
case of a Poisson equation in an irregular region. A substantial contribution was
made to the developnent of the general theory of iterative methods; in particular,
the stability of a two layer Chebyshev iterative method was studied and algorithm
for selecting an iterative parameter were proposed.

'Ihese methods and algorithms formed the basis for the development of a series of
effective progress. A set of program was created to solve linear and quasilinear
equations of thermal conductivity, problem of the Stefan type and equations from
the theory of elastieity. The development of a set of progress to solve boundary
value problans for elliptical equation has been completed. The methods developed
are used actively in the stw of various nonlinear problem in plasma physics.
Research is being conducted on the processes of shaping, focussing and transport-
ing intense electron and ion beams, their interaction with plans and also on the
study of questions related to the stability of a plasma column. Numerical methods

for studying processes of plasma flow in a magneto-plasma compressor are being
developed.

133

FOR OFFICIAL L83 ONLY
A cycle of research is being conducted to develop numerical methods for solving
applied problus in eel-mechanics. This scientific trend was organized in the
Riﬂe by Academician G. I. Petrov. Under his direction fundamental investigations
were carried out on the solution of applied problems in aerodynamics. Methods for
numerical calculation of flow in wind tunnels were developed. These provided the
basis for analysing spatial flows in supersonic wind tunnels, studying the
influence on the structure of flow of spatial effects arising as a result of
irregularities of the stream when it enters the wind tunnel or of disruption of
the symetry of the walls of the wind tunnel. The streamline flow around sharp,
multistage cones was studied numerically, as was streamline flow of an ideal gas
and stream of stable air around the spherical surface of blunted cones and blunted
wedges. A significant cycle of work was performed in calculating the flows of a
viscous thermal conducting gas on the basis of canplete Nader-Stokes equations.

A detailed numerical study was performed of the structure of a viscous shock layer
during super and hypersonic laminar flow around blunted bodies. A package of
applied programs for scientific investigations in the field of aerodynamics has
been created.

Another scientific trend in the HIVTs involves the development of methods for solv-
ing incorrectly stated problems and for automated processing and interpretation of
observation. The establishment and developnent of this scientific trend became
possible in the early 60's, after A. ll. Tikhonov developed the theory of regulari-
zation of incorrectly stated problems. On the basis of a single methodology using
a regularising algorithm for solving inverse problem in asthmatics). physics,
effective numerical methods for processing and interpreting the results of various
experiments in natural science were developed. The theoretical results were
incorporated in the form of a specialized library of program for the processing
and interpretation of the results of various spectrometric experiments, struc-
tural analysis. Mﬂssbauer spectroscopy. and for the solution of inverse problems
in geophysics.

Under the direction of A. I. Tihhonov, work was performed to create a theory for
complete mathematical processing of the results of observations and multipurpose
system for these problans. Algorithms for solving various inverse problems dur-
ing the interpretation stage were created. These were stable with respect to
disturbances in experimental information. Various stochastic mathematical models
were developed in experimental investigations. Methods for statistical processing
and interpretation of experimental results were created and implemented. This
trend was made possible by the fact that the subdivisions of mu had adopted
computer technology and modern methods of information processing for use in
scientific research. The theory and application of mathuatical modeling in pro-
cessing and interpreting experimental data is being developed in cooperation with
new laboratories of mm? (Scientific Research Institute of nuclear Physics), a
number of departments of the Division of Physics and also with certain subdivisions
of the Divisions of Chaistry and Geology of Moscow University. The creation of
the necessary software components and the implementation of a number of automated

13h
FOR omcm. use ONLY
system of data processing and interpretation have made it possible to utilize
computer processing of experimental results in the work of the subdivisiom of the
university. Research was done on the construction of mathematical models of
Mossbauer spectra and methods of processing them. Direct and inverse problems
involving calculation of spectra of hyperfine combined interactions were posed and
solved. Algorithms for figuring out the inﬂuence of apparatus factors on exper-
imental spectra were developed. A cycle of work was performed aimed at construct-
ing mathematical models of physics experiments involving the study of the composi-
tion of substances and the structure of crystals and molecules using methods of
diffractive Roentgen, electronic and neutron analyses. Systems for processing
data fran photonuclear interactions were created.

Based on the work described, it was possible to create a systan for autanating
scientific investigations with the goal of increasing their efficiency and speed-
ing up the processing of experimental data. In recent years at Moscow University,
the automation of scientific research has involved a broad range of activities-
from the contraction of state-of-the-art mathematical models of natural sciences
and of methods of optimal design, control and processing of the results of obser-
vations, to the realisation of specific measm‘enent-computational units and the
creation of problem oriented software. All this necessitated the emotion of. a
collective computer use systes to facilitate user access to computer capacities
and increase the efficiency of use of canputer technology.

The creation of a systen of collective computer use for mu was important not only
for automation of scientific research. It was also essential for improvement of
the instructional process and ministration of Moscow University. At the begin-
ning of the 70's, at the initiative of A. II. Tikhonov, work was begun at NMs to
create an information system for administration of MGU and also to develop and
adopt computer and software aids to permit effective use of the computa- in the
process of instruction. A system of specialized software was created which made it
possible to increase the level of use of the computer in a computer practicum. The
developnent of autanated information systems for various purposes was begun. Work
toward raising the level of computer services offered to users was intensified. A
library of programs on numerical analysis was develOped and the possibilities for
terminal access to the computer were expanded. All this work formed the basis for
creation of a collective use computer system for M60 in the 10th Five-Year Plan.
This work was focussed on the leading problqn of the creation of a central computer
complex for mu based on the NIVTs computer and of developments in automated scien-
tific research, use of the computer in the instructional process and administra-
tion of MGU, the creation of multimachine complexes and a broad terminal net.

The conducting of research and developnent toward the creation of a Computer Center
with a system of collective canputer use will facilitate broader adoption of com-

puters and an increase in efficiency of their use in subdivisions of Moscow
University. .

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo Moskovshogo universiteta. "Vestmk Moskovskogo
universiteta", 1981

9285 135

080: 1863/71
FOR OFFICIAL USE “L!
run-1m BIRTHDAY O? nun: MICE VALIYEV
Moscow mmxn in Rmsian Vol 10, No 4, Jul-Aug 81 p 291
(Bditorial: ”a: the 50th Birthday of K. A. Valiyev]

[Text] Corresponding nssbe: of the 0553 hcadsny of Sciences Kalil' Akhnetovich
Valiyev has celebrated his 50th birthday.

1:. A. Valiysv was born in Vsrkhniy Shander village, Takanyshshiy Rayon. ratarskaya
assn in a collective fern worker's faily. After graduating tron secondary school.
he studied at the Physiconathsnaticsl Faculty. msn' State mirersity insni V. I.
unin, graduated tron the miversity with emoellent marks and was taken into post-
graduate study in the speciality 'theoretical physics." Upon oomleting his grad-
uate study, he was assigned to work at taran' Pedigogical Institute. where he

worked tron 1957 through 1964 in the position of head of the chair of physics.

During this period It. A. Valiyev carried out an extensive cycle of theoretical re-

stale and liquids using nethods of nuclear and electron nsgnetic resonance, infre-

During the past few years Valiyev's nane has been closely related to developnsnt
of eicroelsctronics technology and development of integrated circuits in our
country.

Be now heads a sector of the Physics Institute of the 085)! Academy of Sciences
insni P. N. Dsbedev. His range of scientific instsrests includes scientific probe
lens of cathode-ray, ion been and x-ray methods of lithography and high-speed
nicroelectronic oonponmts.

x. A. Valiyev is a doctor of physiconath-natioal sciences (since l963). a profes-
sor (since 1966) and a corresponding amber of the 0883 headay of Sciences (since
1972 in the specislty “engineering physics“). lie was awarded the win Prize in
.1974 in the field of science and technology and was awarded the state Prize. Azer-
baijan 888 in 1976.

x. A. Valiyev. a professor at the Moscow Institute of Electronic Technology, a
sober of the plenu- snd council on electronics, 0881! high degree oo-ission.

136
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
a number 0: scientific councils and the odiootinl board at umm, 088R

1:. A. Vallyw, a number ot tho CPSU line. 1954. pnrtioiputu “My in oocial
life. a. has reputedly bun olcctod a deputy to the 209101131 council of working
people's deputies, a m of the Plenum ot the CPS!) nylon- and the mucuws
party oonittoo.

It. A. Valiycv'u services haw bun noud by high out. avatar-two Dam of tho
and Banner of labor and modulo.

avian-11 Menuhin SOthbixthday ottomghulthandgmemsucoou
in his fruitful ociontific and scientific organizing nativity.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatol'stvo 'muka', 'Mhooloktmih". 1981

6521
cso: 1863/54 - 3m) -

137
m 0W [5! ONLY