FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10182

14 December 1981

Sub-Saharan Africa Report

FOUO No. 753

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts.. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
(] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. "here no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.8. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION

OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
SUB-SAHARAN AFRICA REPORT

POUO NO. 753

Cwmrs

INTER-AFRICAN AFFAIRS

Summit Meeting Examines France's Role on Continent
(qug Ame, 11 Nov 81) 0.0.0.0....OOQOOCOIOOCICOCOOO...

Hitterrand's Policies for Africa, Jean-Louis Buchet
Socialist Administration, Party Hisunderatandings
Hitterrand Speaks 'African Language'

NOLA

Shortfall in Coffee Production Points to mounting Difficulties
(MARCHES TROPICAUX ET mmms, 6 liov 81) ............

Analysis of Main State Marketing Company
(HARCHES TROPICAUX E‘r HBDITERRANKENS, 30 Oct 81) ...........

Briefs
French Cooperation Prospects
Luanda Master Plan

CAPE VERIE

Briefs
Japanese Rice Donation

CHAD

Article Sens Setting Up Inter-African Force More Urgent Than

Ever
(MARCHES TROPICAUX ET HEDITERRANMS, 6 Nov 81) ............

-a- [III-Mih-IZO

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR‘OFTWCJAl.lEﬂE(NHLY

Background of Withdrawal of Libyan Forces From Chad
(JEUNE AFRIQUB, 11NOV81) 0.0.0.090000.000.000.000000000.00

Reported Libyan Coup, by Francois Soudan
Chad a Burden for Libya, by Mohamed Selhami
Intervention Not Totally Negative, by Amin Haalouf

Defense, Foreign Ministers on Current Situation
(Patrick Forestier, mus MATCH. 27 Nov 81)

COHGO

Ways FranCe Can Aid Nation Face Sudden Oil Health Noted
(Jacques Latremoliere; MARCHES TROPICAHX ET MEDITERRANEINS,

6 NOV 81) a...coo...one...ooooooonooooolootoooo000000000000.

GUINEA

New Agreement Gives Impetus to Iron Ore Project
(MARCHES TROPICAUX ET HEDITERRANEENS, 6 Nov 81) ............

ﬁUINEA-BISSAU

Briefs
ADF Food Assistance

IVORY COAST

Briefs
Fishing Catch Still Insufficient

MADAGASCAR

Briefs
Experts Meet Malagasy Officials

MOZAMBIQUE

Briefs
Swedish “heat, Italian Trucks

SENEGAL

Opposition Leader Plays Down Party Split
(Ginctte Cot; AFRIQUB-ASIE, 9-22 "0' 81) ooeeoeooooeoooeoooe

Briefs
Mauritanian Relations
wade Seeks Diouf's Mediation

SIERRA LEONE

Possibility of Major Government Upheaval Seen
(Brendan Nicholson; THE STAR, 16 Nov 81) oooeeooooooeooooeoe
- b -
F0. OF‘WCIAI.IE§ECHVLY
FOR¢HWWCLALIEiZONlN

INTERPAPRICAN AFFAIRS

SUMMIT MEETING ZXAHINES FRANCB'S ROLE 0N CDNTINENT

Nitterrand's Policies for Africa
Paris JEUNE AFRIQUE in French No 1088, 11 Nov 81 pp 18, 19
[Article by Jean-Louis Buchet: "What Hitterrand Contributes to Africa")

[Text] A certain sensitivity and a political determination to
promote "real" development.

"The French have ideas and they are often good ideas. but when it comes to putting
them into practice, that is an entirely different matter!" The irony of this state-
ment by an American diplomat is not without foundation. Last month, at Cancun,

I saw Francois Mitterrand plead sincerely for the Third World. He made credible
proposals in the matter of North-South solidarity. But without any great results
(JEUNE AFRIQUE, No 1087). Before that, in Hexico, I had heard the French presi-
dent issue an appeal for liberty in Latin America. That was not without importance
either. But, considering France's influence in this region, one may doubt the
effectiveness of such remarks.

In short, in less than a week, the weakness of new French diplomacy came to light.
What good is an innovative policy if the means for iaplementing it are insufficient?
But this skepticism perhaps is out of place when it comes to Africa.

If there is one region where the generous but just the same realistic ideas of
socialist France have a good chance of being translated into action, that is Africa.
History, common language (in a part of Africa), and economic interests, to be sure,
givc French diplomacy here a significance entirely different from what it is else-
wherc. But that is not enough. After all, Giscsrd also had ideas. His 7-year
term nevertheless ended with not much in the way of results.

The thing that strengthens France's position today is a certain African "sensiti-
vity" on the part of the socialist administration. Pierre chssa. a man who had
been rather badly treated by those same socialists, recalled that rather deservedly
in these columns several weeks ago in connection with Gaston Defferre. Claude
Cheysson. and Francois Hitterrand (JEUNE AFRIOUB, No 1086). This sensitivity by
the way was expressed on 3 November at the opening of the Paris conference: "By
identifying a phase of my life with that of your continent, I learned that Africa

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE2CN'LY
FOR OFINC]AL.US£1DNLY

was not really known and understood except by the Africans themselves." It was
not the arrogant Ciscard who said that! Hitterrand himself was talking about the
"great humility" deriving from his interest in Africa. But these are just words.
This time however they strike home because they are true.

Giscard, we remember. was on bad terms with Houphouet. Hitterrsnd himself, hail-
ing those of his peers "who were (his) colleagues in the French parliamentary as-
senblles." paid "friendly homage" to the Ivorian head of state, "your dean, my
friend,(who) is quite familiar with what all of these memories can bring out in
the way of communion of ideas, common struggle, solidarity, and friendship." In
the meantime, while the French president reviewed priority topics, a religion and
a crusade against the "international speculators," was undoubtedly launched upon
the instigation of Houphouet.

It is not by chance that the French Socialists, afier 6 months in power, managed
to restore a climate of confidence with the majori.y of the Africans. Hith these
“progressives" who bothered Giscard so much. with certain "moderates“ whom he had
bothered. with all those, finally. who not without worry were wondering sometime
about the consequences of the victory of the left. From Jean-Pierre Cot to Guy
Penne. numerous French diplomats traveled all over the continent (see the article
by Sennen Andriamirado, below). Hitterrand received many African chiefs of state
at Elysee Palace; Houphouet was the first and Mobutu was the last. Prance was
there when a friendly country seemed threatened. such as Cameroon, by its powerful
Nigerian neighbor. In short. the socialist president reassured everyone. And,
in receiving his guests in Paris. he wanted the conference to reassure those who
were still unsure.

With confidence restored. Hitterrand took the initiative. However. he preferred

a more subtle and cautious approach over the interventionism of Giscard, a kind

of double or nothing which succeeded (Shaba) or failed (Chad). he was more res-
pectful of appearances if not principles, he was more legalistic in any case, and
he relied heavily on the OAU. Regarding the Sahara, for example. France supports
the Nairobi II resolution. Even more so regarding Chad. "as the GAO powerless

to dislodge the Libyans? Hitterrand's action. shielded by the pan-African organi-
zation, today seems capable of putting an end to the designs of Qadhdhafi (see

the article by Sennen Andriamirado and Francois Soudsn, below). At other times,
people would have been shouting "interference." But the way it is done means much
here. And also the fact that the new-look socialists a priori are cleansed of any
suspicion of neocolonialism.

In the beginning, the attitude of Paris, a powerful idea shared by a number of
African capitals, was this: Regional conflicts and local power appetites open the
door to an Bast-Heat confrontation which is not good for the poor countries. The
latter primarily were concerned with pressing problems of development.

On that level, socialist France proposed to act by stepping up its aid most of which
goes to Africa. Commitments were made: The total amount of development aid would
be increased from 0.35 percent to 0.7 percent of the GNP between now and 1988 and
the share reserved for the least advanced countries would be increased to 0.15
percent between now and 1985.

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The Socialists want to promote a certain type of development. Hitterrand was very
clear on that in Paris: "If France commits itself to the job of considerably step-
ping up its aid, it also wants to guide its logic along-these lines. The solution
to the drama of underdevelopment does not involve the establishment of export
crops or industries based on inadequate technologies oriented exclusively toward
the market of the developing countries. To this kind of merchant capitalism we
must prefer a kind of agricultural and industrial development that will utilize
the human and natural resources, seeking to satisfy the essential needs of the
population on a priority basis.” Does this kind of approach indicate a desire to
interfere in affairs of other countries? It is essentially a matter of good com-
mon sense and recalls the spirit of the Lagos plan adopted by the 0A” in 1980.

Does this mean that the daddy-style of cooperation has been buried? One can only
hope so. "I an minister of cooperation and development," Jean-Pierre Cot emphasised
on the eve of the Paris summit in his office on Monsieur Street. "It is the second
term (development) in my demand which justifies my action." "Self-centered" de-
velopment, with priority going to rural areas. plus "integrated" programs. Cot
seems to believe in that, quite happy to be addressing himself to his task "without
so far having received any guidance from Elysee Palace, telling me to do this or
that or the other thing." Of course, for the time being, he must finance aid pro-
jects which fit in rather poorly with his philosophy and he must give emergency

aid. But he intends to go into "real" development soon.

The French are not wrong in emphasizing this point which is essentially in Africa
today. Just as they were not wrong to insist on freedoms in Latin America where
the economy is already more structured. To each his own priority. Having made
this point. the right for democracy is no less urgent in Africa. Now, in spite

of the new reference to the "people," it seems to have been tragically forgotten

in France's African diplomacy. It would be a shame if realism were to prevail over
generosity here. Unless this generosity is preserved for those who can only ex-
pect words from France. Realism is good for the others, that is, the Africans.

Socialist Administration, Party Hisunderstandings
Paris JEUNE APRIQUE in French No 1088, ll Nov 81 pp 20-22
[Article by Sennen Andriamirado: "The Two Sides"]

[Text] The socialist administration has its reasons which the
Socialist Party does not understand.

In Africa, the French administration and the French PS [Socialist Party] have four
categories of "common friends": The leaders of Benin, of the Congo, of Niger. and
of Senegal. And that is all. This at least is what emerges from a comparison
among the guests invited by Mr Francois Hitterrand to the ao-cslled French-African
summit in Paris (3-5 November) and those invited by the party-ofrom which the
French president came--to the Congress of Valence (23-25 October, see JEUNE APRIQUB,
No 1087).

The other invited guests on either side are not the same. It just so happens that
the PS administers its friendships in a manner different from the administration.

FIHICNﬂﬂC}AL.USE(NNLY
FOR 0FF1C1AI.US£1DNLY

In summary, the French are applying a new axiom: "The friends of our friends are
not our friends!" The theorem even works the other way since the"enemies of our

friends are not our enemies." Thus, African leaders ignored by the F8 are among

the guests invited by the government. This is of course the way it had to be for
reasons of state: France maintains relations with states, not with parties.

Comorian president Ahmed Abdallah Abderrahman can consider himself the most for-
tunate: Although his regime is considered "illegal" by the PS, he was the only
African received twice in 2 days by Francois Hitterrand. Other leaders who, among
the party comrades, are told that their methods of government are not appreciated,
came out of Elysee Palace, their heads held high. That is true of the Togolese
Gnassingbe Eyadema, the Zairian Hobuto Sese Seko, and above all the Gabonese Omar
bongo. who even managed to turn the situation around.

It is Omar Bongo who, during 5 months, received the largest number of French per-
sonalities. In particular, Hr Guy Fenne, presidential advisor on African affairs,
in June. August. and October. More than that, the Gsbonese chief of state can
claim credit as conciliator since it was he who, in his own Libreville, organized
the meetings between Guy Fenne and the controversial leaders, such as the Chadian
Goukouni Heddeye and the Central African Gen Andre Kolingba. In French socialist
circles. Guy Penne was discreetly reproached for having manifested a certain pre-
dilection for Omar Bongo, something which Valery Giscard d'Estaing was hardly ever
criticized for. The people at Elysee Palace are content with saying: "Our only
mistake in Gabon was not to have recalled ambassador Haurice Robert soon enough."

In reality, there is a noticeable disparity between the criteria adopted by the

two power centers. The socialist militants would have preferred to enlarge the
Front Line countries to include the "French-African family" inherited from Giscard.
That was undoubtedly too soon. But one must not forget that the African policy
statements by candidate Francois Mitterrand quite correctly labeled unhealthy
"French aid concentrated on a limited number of countries, most of which were our
colonies." This is explained as follows at Elysee Palace today: "Hitterrand could
not suddenly break with tradition."

Another basic assertion from the PS seems to have been forgotten by the adminis-
tration. It was emphasized that French cooperation would not be extended to "the
racist regimes (that is to sa', South Africa) and those in which attacks upon

human rights in some way constitute a principle of government."

After having become minister of cooperation and development, Jean-Pierre Cot kept
saying, in an official brochure ("La France et le Tiers monde," Paris, Diloutre-
mer publishers, 4th quarter, 1981) that "France can no longer be an active or pas-
sive accomplice of crimes which it has tolerated far too long or a slanted concept
of noninterference." This is a logical conclusion; none of the guests invited to
Elysee Palace were ever suspected of attacking human rights.

Beyond the friendship expressed on either side, there is, on principle, a search
for coherence between the professions of faith and action. But that is not always
discovered.

what about French military bases in Africa? Hhile in the opposition, the socialists
condemned them. But, even before Francois Hitterramd was elected, the only phrase

FOR 0FﬁKJ)t.US£INVLY
FOR OFIWC]AI.USE‘0NL¥

taken out of the Socialist Party's African Program concerned the bases in question:
"Their existence can be justified only in terms of extreme necessity and in a tem-
porary fashion." It would thus be necessary to consider that the military support
bases in Central Africa, in the Conoro Islands Oﬂayotte), in Ivory Coast, at Jibuti.
in Gabon, and in Senegal all depend on "dire necessity." The truth is that, while
in the opposition, it was easy to demand that they be dismantled. Once in power,

it is sore difficult to close those bases down. The state has its reasons which
the party has nothing to do with.

A similar finding applies to other fields. Thus, the PS proclaimed noninterference
in the affairs of others and affirms that defense agreements must only be aimed at
the protection of state against foreign threats. This principle was apparently
implemented in Central Africa; French soldiers were withdrawn from the personal
guard of David Dacko and allowed him to be "toppled" by General Kolingba. For
Chad, on the other hand, the party had violently criticized military aid given by
France to the successive regimes of Francois Tombalbaye and Felix Halloum. But
today Paris flies to the aid of Goukouni Heddeye.

Of course, the foreign threat does exist; with respect to Chad, it is already there;
it is the threat from Libya. Of course, the shipment of weapons to Goukouni was
deliberately ordered to prevent any attempt at a coup d'etat; according to all
evidence, however, the coup, which Paris had been afraid of. was not carried out

by Qadhdhafi but rather by a Chadian who was one of his friends. That therefore
would seem to be an internal Chadian affair. And Mitterrand avoided having to
admit that.

Looking at Chad, the French president moreover forgot other principles of his party.
To a certain degree. for example, strict respect which must govern French-African
relations. By sending out a telegram to invite the current president of the CAD,
the Kenyan Daniel Arsp Moi, without delay to send an inter-African force to Chad,
he aroused perceptible ill will in several capitals on the continent. The diplo-
matic formulas, employed here and there, might rather roughly be sumaarized as fol-
lows: "what is Hitterrand sticking his nose into?" In Cameroon, Ahmadou Ahidjo,
and in Gabon, Omar Bongo, continue to maintain that this kind of inter-African
force should be put together with the help of the UN. The meaning behind that is:
”It is not up to France to push us!" The same tune came from Algeria where there
is only friendship for Hitterrand.

As for can secretary-general Edem Kodjo, he felt that French aid to the Pan-African
force for Chad would have to be based on bilateral agreements between France and
the cOuntries to participate in that force. Put less diplomatically, it sounds
like this: "Let those who want to ask for French aid do so individually. The CAD,

which is a continental organization. does not deal with a single country, except
France."

The injunction of Francois Hitterrand thus becomes a flagrant incursion in the af-
fairs of the 0A”. Elysee Palace at least is guilty of lack of discretion. For
having sent his nessage from Cancun (Mexico, see JEUN! AFRIQUE, No 1087). Did he
want in this way to tell the world that he. that is to say, France, can directly
speak to all of Africa? "Valery Giscard d'Estaing would not have done better,"
African diplomats note with irony.

FOR OfﬂéAl. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in summary, nothing has changed fundamentally in France's a:proach to its relations
with Africa. And it is perhaps this issue on which the party and the administra-
tion do not disagree by a single iota. The preaier proclaimed quite sincerely:
"Among the three major portions of the Third world, Africa is the one where. for
historical and geographical reasons, has been most present; this presence today is
essential for our country’s international clout; it is not negligible with respect
to its economy." This is why Francois Hitterrand cannot really drop the idea of
regularly~-and by himself-meeting with half of Africa.

Africa without Tears

The grand prize for doing the moat traveling goes to Guy Penne. In less than 6
days (4-10 August 1981), the French president's advisor for African affairs visited
eight countries: Niger. Benin, Gabon, the Congo, Angola, Mozambique, Zambia, and
Jibuti.

Another award, for the largest number of African countries visited, also goes to
Guy Penne: 17, total, between June and October.

The third award, the award for loyalty, must be given to Guy Penne: In 4 months,
he was received in Gabon by President Omar Bongo on three occasions. That of
course was part of his duty because the successor-~although he does not like the
comparison-~of Jacques Foccart. Rene Journiac, and Martin Kirsch, in Africa, is
both the most mysterious and the most visible French official. Believed to know
everything and to be able to do everything, Guy Penna does not go unnoticed any-
where because his conversation partners are happy to report his presence.

Less mythical. Cooperation and Development Minister Jean-Pierre Cot did not put
in the same performance as his comrade in the Socialist Party. He was only able
to "make" five countries in Africa: Cameroon, Ghana, Senegal (3-16 August), the
Congo, Nigeria (15-22 August). It is also noted that this balance was carefully
worked out between West Africa and Central Africa, between the French-speaking
countries and the English-speaking countries.

This dosage did not inspire Regis Debray, a mission chief at Elysee Palace. Loyal
to his guerrilla past, the companion of Che Guevara in Bolivia above all visited
the "revolutionary" countries in Africa, such as Angola and Mozambique, and his
presence at other airports was only due to necessary stopovers.

French personalities carefully avoided certain countries. That was true of Michel
Jobert, minister of foreign trade, and Gaston Defferre, minister of interior,

who only went to Algiers to settle some very specific issues. Foreign relations
minister Claude Cheysson did better although he did limit his trips to the Haghreb:
Tunis (5-6 July), Algiers and Rabat (8-10 August), and once again Rabat, during

the meeting of the French-African Commission. The chief diplomat however did not
neglect Africa south of the Sahara since he very discreetly dispatched the roving
ambassador Jean-Pierre Campredon to Kenya and to the Sudan and even lore discreetly
to certain hot spots in Central Africa.

This discretion only helped the African trips of the ninth French personality,
Edwige Avice, minister of youth and sports, who, between 17 and 22 October, made a

FOR 0M8“. USE ONLY
IND! OFTﬂCJAl.US£(NULV

"sporting" trip to Senegal, Gabon, Ivory Coast, Upper Volta, and Hali. All the
way to Hopti, Sangha, and Tombouctou, towns where sports activities as we know are
confined to tourist antics. (S.A.)

ﬂow Huch Does Africa Cost

Modesty? Perfidy toward the Giscard regime? The Trench ministers of foreign rela-
tions and of cooperation, on the occasion of the eighth Trench—African summit,
published a nice little booklet of about 30 pages entitled "La France et 1e tiers
monde" (Paris, Diloutrener Publishers, 6th Quarter. 1981). The principal statis-
tics of French aid in 1980 are contained in that publication.

These are statistics of dazzling modesty. Last year, France devoted barely 0.36
percent of its GNP (in other words, 52.358.000.000) for public international aid
to the Third Horld. The portion allocated to the 30 least advanced countries

(the FHA [Least Advanced Countries] which met in Paris between 1 and 14 September)
did not exceed 0.06 percent ($243 million). In terms of the ratio between aid and
GNP, France is thus in ninth place among OECD countries and it is in seventh place
in Europe, far behind Rolland (0.99 percent), Norway (0.82 percent), Sweden (0.76
percent), and Denmark (0.72 percent). In terms of absolute value, the situation
is not as bad with France holding fourth place after the United States ($7,091,000,
000), Rest Germany ($3,518,000.000), and Japan ($3,300,000,000).

"hat is usually called aid to the DON-TON [Overseas Departments and Overseas Ter-
ritories] being excluded here ($1,687,000.000). we distinguish between bilateral
aid ($1,645,000.000 or 70 percent of the total) and multilateral aid ($713,000,000).

The former figure is broken down into $903 million for technical and cultural cooper-
ation (55 percent), $611 million for investments (37 percent), and $131 million in
the economic and financial area.

Concerning the second item. $428 million are channeled through the EEC, especially
the FED (European Development Fund with $268 million). the 331 (European Investment
Bank), food aid, with $167 million for the group of the Horld Bank (A10, 120);

$62 million for the regional banks and $56 million for the institutions of the UN
(UNDP, PAD, etc.).

France's position is better in the matter of technical cooperation. It has 27,000
citizens working in Africa. including 15,000 in the three countries of the Maghreb
and 12,000 in the area south of the Sahara. horeover, two-thirds of then are
teachers and county agents. France also finances about 23,000 scholarships for
study and training courses either in the countries themselves or in the old home
country.

Several delegations to the summit in Paris carefully kept that little pamphlet.
Hho knows? Sole day it night be useful. (A.D.)

7
IN3R 0011C]Al.USE¢0Nl¥
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Hittcrrand Speaks 'African Language'

Paris JEUNE AFRIQUE in French No 1088, 11 Nov 81 p 23
[Letter by Sennen Andriamirado: ”Letter to My Brother"]

[Text] "Did you know that our president was also a socialist?"

I have some big news for you: French president Francois Hitterrand speaks African!
Of course, neither Lingala, nor Bambara, nor even Ivorian French-you know, where
they drop all the articles--but his speech was well understood by our own president.
He passed his final exam the moment he said at the opening of their summit: 'W

have learned that Africa was not really known and understood except by the Africans
themselves."

Hith your usual bad mood, you are going to tell me that this is demagogy. Still.

it works: He, the Africans. are ready to listen to the whites who tell us things
like that.

This is perhaps why so many of our leaders went to Paris to attend this summit
which is no longer called "French-African" but rather "conference of the chiefs of
state of Africa and France." There were almost 20 presidents plus their vice
presidents and ministers.

Overall. about 30 countries were represented, the newspapers tell me. So you know
what that means! Half of Africa gathered around a single non-African: Francois
Mitterrand. That gives me an idea: If you want a taxi license, a scholarship,

or a passport, instead of going to see all those bureaucrats who take your money
(which you do not have anyway). without taking you to the president, all you have
to do is write to this fellow Mitterrand. They say he is very kind because he is
a socialist.

By the way. did you know that our president was also a socialist? I did not know
that. Hitterrand did not know it either! Perhaps you. the young people. you
understand this, but I was astonished to hear our boss say that he always had ideas
like those of the French socialists. th should he say that now? In the old days,
with Giscard, we wenean"advanced liberal" country. With Hitterrand, we became
"socialists.“ Of course, nobody sang the International but the tone of most of the
speeches was socialist. While all of this bothers me in terms of my dignity as

an African (changing opinions like changing a partner is not very glorious), this
conversion of our presidents to socialism is good for us: Perhaps human rights
will now be respected among us. At least Hitterrand will have rendered us a ser-
vice.

You will ask me whether I have seen all of our presidents. No, because that is
difficult and. because to keep up with them, you are not traveling in the forest

or in the prairie. They rode in fancy cars with many cops around and you, in Paris,
can only take the subway. That is normal. And besides, they were not all in the
same place. Houphouet lived in his own place. in a suburb of Paris. Hobutu lived
in his apartment on Foch Avenue. Eyadema stayed in his residence on Harechal-Monory
Avenue. The others stayed at the Crillon. a palace. It cost very much but France
paid the bill.

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

As I know you only too well, you are going to say; “Why did our presidents live
in hotels as luxurious as those?" I will reply to you in advance; Where would
you have them stay instead? Mould you have wanted them to stay in a camp at the
foot of the Eiffel Tower and to get around Paris on foot or on the back of a easel?
I tell you, my dear friends, you have to go along with the trends; let us not be
nasty to our chiefs of state. After all, when other presidents cone to visit us,
to our countries, we do not have then sleep out in the streets. He offer the.
dignified residences. Just like at hone You give the passing stranger the
biggest room and the cleanest bed.

0n the other hand, I want you to note one thing: Send as the text of the statement
of the president upon his return to the country. There will certainly be accents
on the radio or in the newspapers on the Paris suI-it. Send me that. I will tell
you whether he said what really happened here.

With that. I leave you. Take care, my friends. Translate my letter to your mother.
Tell her that France has changed, perhaps. but only for the French. Because between
France and us. there is always the same ocean, the sane desert, the sane forest.
Tell her also that, if all of this is to change, it is not because Hitterrand will
do the job. Our president will do it.

Tell your mother that. for the moment. we are still the hand that is held out and
received. In other words, the hand that is beneath the hand that gives.

As ever yours,
Sennen
PS. Also tell your mother that I will send her a little money order at the end of

the month. But I do not know whether the post office will be able to pay her; they
say that there is no more noney. Is that true?

COPYRIGHT: Jeune Afrique GRUPJIA 1981

5058
C50: 1019/2510

FOR OFT-1&7“. USE ONLY
FOR(lﬂﬂ(]Al.USElMVLY

ANGOLA

SHORTFALL IN COFFEE PRODUCTION POINTS T0 MOUNTING DIFFICULTIES
Paris MARCHES TROPICAUX ET HEDITBRRANEENS in French No 1878, 6 Nov 81 p 2851

[Excerpt] Following independence. the large coffee plantations were seized and
Integrated into national holdings, but the inexperience of those to whom they were
entrusted and the lack of organization caused a vertical drop in production reported
not long ago by the director of the company in charge of the coffee sector, ENCAFE
[National Coffee Company].

The sixth coffee harvest since independence, beginning in June, did not enjoy good
conditions: scarcity of food products for workers since February, delays in the
payment of wages and transport difficulties.

Provincial ENCAFE officials in CUanza-North supervise 609 plantations, spread out
over 11 cantons, whose harvest was far from meeting planned production objectives.
Some 29,000 persons work on these coffee plantations, including 12,000 permanent
laborers and the rest seasonal workers who are not -ployed six days a week. The
rate of absenteeism is high: Poorly nourished and badly paid, workers prefer to
devote their time to their own plots of land that enable then to achieve a subsis-
tence living for themselves and their families.

Workers are taken to their work areas by BNCAF! transportation, but the company's
vehicle pool is only half used because of constant breakdowns. As for the firm's
60 tractors, many have been paralyzed because of the lack of spare parts. Shipping
the coffee out after the harvest was difficult because of the lack of trucks and
the poor condition of access roads, which should have been maintained by the pro-
vincial delegation of the Ministry of Construction (the only organization that has
graders). However, it demanded previous payment for work and ENCAFE did not have
the necessary funds.

After the drying of the coffee berries. it became apparent that there were not

enough shellers, again because of the shortage of spare parts needed to repair
existing equipment. The coffee therefore piled up in the warehouses in August.

In addition to government plantations, there are many small production units in
Cuanza-North belonging to private parties or cooperatives. Poorly organized. this
production sector is no more motivated and tends to give up coffee growing for
other crops, especially because delays in payment are frequent. Coffee from the
1980-1981 harvest did not begin to be marketed domestically until between December

1980 and February 1981. and its shipping required much longer.

10
F0!(Nﬂﬂ(lALl£ﬂi0NlY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

Finally, nature was merciless. Because of inadequate rainfall, coffee trees are

dying out in the cantons of Cazengo, Bolongongo, Golungo—Alto, Gonguenbo and Pango—
Aluqueln. Foreign experts have come to study the situation to see whether it is

possible to remedy it.

COPYRIGHT: Rene Moreux et Cie Paris 1981.

11,464
C50: “19/210

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ANGOLA

ANALYSIS 0? MAIN STATE MARKETING COMPANY
Paris MARCHES TROPICAUX ET HEDITERRANEENS in French No 1877, 30 Oct 81 p 2779

[Text] The Rational Company for the Purchase and Distribution of Agricultural
Products, more widely known as ENCODIPA, marketed nearly 196,000 tons of products
last year and 150 million kwanzas worth of niecellaneoua goods.

Its activity covers all of Angola. The enterprise has branches in the country's
18 provinces. It is established in 143 cantons and 408 communes. It is also in-
volved in traveling sales in rural areas based on a previously set schedule, which

is not without problems because ENCODIPA's visits to rural markets are awaited by
the people, even if it has few or no industrial goods to offer them.

The deliveries of these industrial goods are often aproblemfor enterprise offi-
cials when they do not come at the proper time - that is, harvest tine: June to
October for dry products (corn, beans, and so on) and May to August for vegetables
from the Wako-Kungo and Benguele region. '

Despite its broad decentralization, ENCODIPA's warehouses are located in Luanda:
for cotton, grain (in the facilities of the former Gremio do Hilho) and goods, as
well as for spare parts and accessories needed for the activities of the enterprise.

These activities involve the purchase and distribution of agricultural products

and cover various sectors, one of which is the primary processing of certain pro-
ducts before consumption; rice husking and polishing, milling, baling and classi-
fication of cotton, preparation of tobacco.

Another important activity of ENCODIPA is that linked to seed. One department is
in fact specifically assigned to the task: purchasing of imported seed, selection
of lots marketed that should be grown again, separation and processing of such
lots.

Regarding produce and fruits, ENCODIPA uses the services of firms in the private
sector and a number of government domestic trade establishments. It also handles
marketing, preservation, handling and the distribution of these products and has an
establishment for their direct sale to the people. This is a store located in the
facilities of the old COFA [expansion unknown], open from Thursday to Sunday and
able to serve 1,500 persons a day during the week (including members of the party,
the government and the diplomatic corps accredited in Angola) and 200 persons on
Sunday.

12
FOR 05F1C1Al.llﬂi(ﬂULY
FOR10FHKJALI£§§ONLY

Special attention is given to the cashew sector. This is a crop grown in several
areas of Angola. There are plans for construction of a small plant to produce
juice from the false fruit of the cashew tree, juice that would be kept in barrels
and shipped to a bottling facility. Cashew nuts would be shipped to airport shops

exempt from customs duties.

COPYRIGHT: Rene Moreux et Cie Paris 1981.

11,464
CSO: 4719/211

13
FYIICHHNCJA1.USE1UNLY
INN!(HWN(1AI.U§E(NWLY

ANGOLA

BRIEFS

FRENCH COOPERATION PROSPECTS--The problem that was at the heart of French-Angolan
discussions was the strengthening of relations between Paris and Luanda. These
relations have been improving steadily, Luis de Almeida, Angolan ambassador to
Paris, said recently, while Guy Penna, adviser to Francois Hitterrsnd, stated, on

a visit to Angola in August, that the "French leftist union government wanted to
have even more privileged relations" with Haraist-Leniniat Angola. The French
Government intends to further the cooperation begun several years ago, particularly
in the areas of oil, machinery. coffee and fishing. Economic relations are clearly
better. The French company ELF-Aquitaine [Gasoline and Lubricants Company of
France]. which has been doing exploratory drilling since May off the coast of
northern Angola, last week announced the discovery of oil, adding that the first
tests point to remarkable productivity. Total also began last month to explore for
oil in an offshore sector entrusted to it further south. A contract for over 150
million francs for construction of a textile plant in Luanda should soon be signed
with a consortium headed by Creusot-Loire, which has already built such a complex
in Benguele in southwestern Angola. Finally, the French Electric Company is to
participate in the establishment of an electricity institute near Luanda. Commer-
cial trade between France and Angola, totaling 400 million Preach francs in 1980,
should show an increase in 1981, with contracts for some 1 billion francs signed
last year between Angola and French companies. [Text] [Paris HARCHES TROPICAUX

ET HEDITERRANEENS in French No 1876. 23 Oct 81 p 2711] [COPYRIGHT: Rene Moreux

at Ole Paris 1981] 11,464

LUANDA MASTER PLAN--A long-term master plan for the city of Luanda is going to be
carried out. The matter, which has been studied by the Ministry of Planning, will
be the subject of a project whose drafting will take 3 years because of its complex-
ity and the anarchic growth of the city because of population growth. Various
foreign firms have been asked for bids from the following countries: Portugal,
Yugoslavia, Lebanon, Brazil, the German Democratic Republic, Sweden and Denmark.
[Text] [Paris HARCHES TROPICAUX ET HEDITERRANEENS in French No 1876, 23 Oct 81

p 2711] [COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux et Cie Paris 1981] 11,464

080: 4719/211

INJI'OIWHC1kI.lﬂIE(h‘LN
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CAPEVER]

BRIEFS

JAPANESE RICE MANOR—Japan has given Cape Verde a gift worth 260 million yen
(about 5 million French francs) for the purchase of 1,250 tons of. rice, it was
learned m 15 October. Last year, the Japanese Government gave Cape Verde food
aid for the purchase of 2,600 tons of American wheat. {Text} [Paris "ARMS

TROPICAUX ET HEDITERRANEENS in French No 1377, 30 Oct 81 p 2755] (WRIGHT:
Rene Horeux et Cie Paris 1981] 11.664

CSO: 4719/211

15
m omcw. use ONLY
FOR OliICJAl.USE(NULY

ARTICLE SEES SETTING UP INTER-AFRICAN FORCE MORE URGEhT THAN EVER
Paris HARCHES TROPICADX BT HEDITERRANBENS in French No 1878, 6 Nov 81 p 2797

[Text] The announcement by the Libyans of the withdrawal of their troops from Chad
at a very time when the president of France was meeting in Paris with the represen-
tatives of some 30 African countries, including some 20 chiefs of state. is the

crowning of intense diplomatic activity accompanied by a series of rumors of a

coup d'etat against President Couhouni Oueddei. rumors immediately denied but which
could look like the elements of a maneuver whose purpose seems uncertain, depending
on whether one attributes responsibility for it to elements inside or outside Chad.

The event that set off the tumult was the telegram sent from Cancun by the president
of France to the president of the CAB. asking him to speed up the sending of the
inter-African force to Chad. The presence in Cancun of the President of the United
States and of hundreds of representatives of the world press naturally gave a spe-
cial edge to this initiative, which reminded the international community of the
existence of the Chadian problem and all its projections, in Africa itself as well
as in the Near East, where the situation created by the disappearance of President
Sadat does not leave the great powers indifferent. The telegram was motivated by
information, deemed to be alarming, from Ndjaasna, where President Goukouni Oueddei
was being pressured by Colonel Qadhdhafi to hasten the merger between Libya and
Chad.

Francois Hitterrand's telegram was one more confirmation of the French policy on
Chad: supporting DAD decisions made in Nairobi with all his strength, and conse-
quently, supporting the legitimate government of Chad and helping the establishment
of the inter-African force, which was to make the withdrawal of Libyan troops possi-
ble. The only limitation that the Paris government placed on its assistance was

the sending of French troops.

France's affirmed support and the warning sent to Colonel Qadhdhafi, represented by
the sending of 25 tons of munitions and light weapons to the Chadian Army, strength-
ened the authority of President Coukouni Oueddei and encouraged his in his decision
to call upon Colonel Qadhdhafi, in a message dated 29 October. to immediately with-
draw his troops from Ndjanena and from Chari-Baguirmi Province and from the entire
Chadian territory by 31 December.

President Goukouni Oueddei's personal position was not in fact as assured as it
may have at first appeared. Within the Transitional National Union Government

(CONT). Oueddei's policy was disputed by Minister of Foreign Affairs Ahmat Acyl,
whose ethnic base in northern Chad, far more substantial than that of the head of
CUNT. might cause him to try to take over the leadership of the country.

16
FIIIIDFIIC1A1.IIBIICIWLY
FOIiofFKJAl.USE(HNLY

Oueddei's very legitimacy is questioned by some African chiefs of state. At a

press conference in Paris, the Togolese president, General Eyadema, gave decisions
of the Nairobi OAU summit conference an interpretation different from that of Paris.
According to Eyadema, the OAU's support for the principles of settlement worked out
by Chad's neighbors at the Lagos and Lone conferences, including the establishment
of an inter-African force and the withdrawal of Libyan troops, in no way constitutes
an extension or renewal of Oueddei's mandate. a mandate that expired in February.
Consequently, the latter allegedly has no justification for trying to continue to
remain at the head of GUNT and it should only be up to the can "committee of the

12) to make a ruling on the point.

In requiring that Tripoli withdraw its troops. Oueddei thereby accepted a challenge
on which his political survival depended. Bowever, he seems to have first carefully

weighed all his trump cards.

The inter-African force now seems on the way to being effectively set up. Two coun-
tries have pledged to send contingents: Nigeria, 2,000 men, and Senegal. 500 to
600 men. Others, like Algeria and Egypt. have promised logistical support and the
president of the OAU says he is sure that the replacement of Libyan troops by the
inter-African force throughout the Chadian territory could be assured before the
end of the year.

Furthermore, Oueddei could speculate on Qadhdhafi's desire to have the next 0A0
summit conference in Tripoli and become president. The Libyan colonel, who sees
himself as the successor to Nasser and the liberator of peoples, could hardly allow
his troops to look like an army of occupation on 31 December. or go back on his
word to withdraw them whenever the legitimate government of Chad asked him to do so.
In: presence in Paris of over half of the African nations, including a number of
Arab countries, may have made him fear the consequences of his diplomatic isolation
when he would have to confront the hostility of the United States, which supports
the French position on the question. Moreover, it is likely that Qadhdhafi, who
considers Chad, where he has been able to rally supporters, as a natural extension
of his country, might hope to maintain his influence there, even continue to control
it by means other than military.

Finally, hissein Habre, spontaneously or following pressure put upon him by the
countries that support him -- particularly Sudan, into whose territory he withdraw
his army -- said that he had suspended all military activity until Tripoli‘s re-
sponse were known to the request for the withdrawal of its troops. The essential
condition for the departure of the troops - that is, the maintenance of security
throughout Libyan [sic] territory -- now seems to have been fulfilled.

Qadhdhafi appears to have yielded to all these reasons. The commanding officer of
the Libyan troops in Chad told newsmen in Ndjamena on 3 Rovember that he had re-
ceived a telephone call from Qadhdhafi ordering him to send his contingents home
within 2 or 3 days, without stating that it was a total withdrawal from Chadian
territory or merely from Ndjamena. He used the pretext of military secrecy to re-
fuse to say how many troops were involved - westerners put the number at 10,000,
which would seem to preclude their evacuation with equipment in such a short amount
of time. It did not appear at that time that GUN? had been officially informed of
Qadhdhafi‘s decision.

17
FOR OI'ICIAI.05810NLY
FOI*0FFKJAI.USE(MVLY

If this is not a mere tactical maneuver on the part of Qadhdhafi, an important

step will have been taken toward the normalization of Chad and Oueddei's authority
will emerge considerably strengthened. But serious problems will have to be solved,
the least of which is not the reconciliation of all Chadian fabtions.

Before leaving Ndjamena to joint Oueddai in Paris, Ahmat Acyl confirmed his total
opposition to the withdrawal of Libyan troops, which he views as premature inasmuch
as the composition, date of arrival and mission of the inter-African force have not
been determined. He believes that "the seeds of civil war” are still present in
Chad and that "the domestic situation (there) is sore fragile than generally ad-
mitted."

The pitched battles in Mango and Dourboli in mid October between the troops of
Minister of Interior Mahama Abba and those of the minister of foreign affairs seem

to justify these remarks. Oueddei has understood the danger and his government has
just announced the creation of a special co-ission in charge of determining respon-

sibilities in confrontations between the various Chadian military factions. Those
responsible will be brought before a military court.

If foreign aid for the reconstruction of Chad, especially that of France,

is not arranged, nothing can still be done as long as there is not a national union
of all factions, and the deployment of the inter-African force appears more urgent
than ever if the withdrawal of Libyan troops is effective.

COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux et Cie Paris 1981.

11.664
080: 4719/212

18
FOI‘OFFIJA1.USB(INLV
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

BACKGROUND OF HITHDRAHAL OF LIBYAN FORCES FROM CHAD

Reported Libyan Coup

Paris JEUNE APRIQUE in French No 1088, 11 Nov 81 pp 12-16

[Article by Francois Soudan: "The Story of an Imagined Coup d'Etat"]

[Text] Uhy Paris believed for 26 hours that there had been a
changing of the guard in Ndjamena.

About half a score of lines in a speech covering 13 sheets, barely 40 seconds-that
is rather little for Chad. Even though the speech was delivered slowly by Francois
Hitterrand on ruesday, 3 November, at the opening of the french-African summit in
Paris before a score of attentive heads of state, this was after all nothing but a
rather scholarly presentation. it was about the gravel at Tibesti and the cotton
fields of Logone, about Hissein Babre, about Goukouni Ueddeye, and about Qadhdhafi:
There was hardly any more talk about that on Kleber Avenue. In any case, nothing
lore than the prices of cocoa or the Namibian issue. Officially at least. In the
well-appointed hallways of the Conference Center, even before the announcement of
the Libyan withdrawal. nobody had forgotten that a week ago a crazy rumor was nak-
ing the rounds in Paris, caning fron press agencies and newspaper editorial offices:
A Coup d'Etat in Ndjamena.

This deliberate desire to play the Chadian affair down, to reducing it to the pro-
portions of a simple incident. is an accurate reflection of the atmosphere of

drama which prevailed for a month in a square whose corners are called Konsseri,
Tripoli, Paris, and Cancun. is this the story of e manipulation or is it history?
Both of them, it seems. It all began on 17 and 18 September, during the visit of
Coukouni Ueddeye to Francois Mitterrand. with his puny adolescent voice, his salt-
and-pepper goatee, the Chadian president was complaining of "pressing pressure"
(sic) to which he is exposed from Qadhdhafi.

Coukouni is worried; in a rather funereal position for several months, between the
"southerners" of Kamougue, viscerally anti-Libyan, and the son in his foreign min-
istry, with Acyl Ahmat, very close to Tripoli, not at all sure of his own forces-
the PAP (People's Armed Forces), with their rather relative discipline, he is
simply afraid that it night all collapse. he was listened to and understood at
Elysee Palace; econonic aid would be stepped up and the establishment of an inter-
African force would be encouraged.

l
FOI.0I1N(12[.UBIJDNLN
I‘MRIOFFWC1AI.lh5E.CHULY

Saturday, 17 October: Hhile Goukouni returned to Ndjanena after a month, Francois
Hitterrand went to the United States. as the first stage of a long journey which
is to bring his to Mexico for the Cancun sum-it. Upon his return he undoubtedly
expects once again to take up the Chadian issue. Jean-Pierre Cot, minister of
cooperation, who was in charge of the Chad affair, and Claude Cheysson, minister
of foreign relations, were included in his delegation. That was when quite
abruptly everything went the other way. One telegral and then two more arrived
in Paris, at Quai d'Orsay [foreign office). starting on the next day, Tuesday, 20
October. They were signed by Pierre Ricard, head of the diplomatic mission in
Kousseri. Located opposite Ndjamena, on the Cameroon bank of the Cheri river,
Kousseri-where there are still hundreds of refugees-is marking time, awaiting
the reconstruction of Ndjamena and its telecommunications network fro. the half-
way capital of Chad. And Pierre Ricard, ambassador of France.

”Things are going badly," the chief of missions wrote in his three messages "strict-
ly for office use only." He added in substance: The men of Goukouni are in the
process of being eliminated; Acyl Ahmat wants power; Goukouni himself could be
overthrown before the French-African summit. Big confusion in Paris. As a matter
of fact. in addition to his own personal analysis of the situation, Pierre Ricard

in his telegrans transmitted the proposals of Goukouni Heddeye, whom he met the

day before, on 19 October.

Knowing that his words would be passed on, did the Chadian president push things
and force Paris into clearly supporting him by dramatizing a situation that had
already been defused? Has he "bluffing" when he mentioned to his conversation
partner the imminence of a Libyan coup d'etat?

In the absence of any effective way to check on events in Ndjamena, the alaraist
telegrams from Pierre Ricard were received with much worry. Especially since
Goukouni took care to send a small delegation rather discreetly to Paris to con-
fits the messages of the French ambassador.

Several thousand kilometers away, on the other side of the Atlantic, there was
feverish activity among the French officials who came with President Hitterrand to
Cancun. Forwarded to the shores of the Gulf of Hexico, the telegrams from Kousseri
had the effect of a bomb: It was necessary to act quickly. On Thursday. 22 Octo-
ber, early in the afternoon (in other words, in the evening as far as Paris and
Ndjanena are concerned), Hitterrand published a stateaent as to the "urgency" of
dispatching the inter-African force to Chad (JEUNE AFRIQUB, No 1087). Pressed with
questions, Jean-Pierre Cot wound up saying that the situation was serious. On
Saturday, 24 October, in the morning, Hitterrand, Cheysson, and Cot and the others
returned to Paris.

In Tripoli, what is now called the "Cancun declaration" was received in total
silence: Not a line in the press, not a word on radio, not a picture on television.
As if it had not been a surprise. On 26 October, Hu'ammar al-Qadhdhafi summoned
French ambassador Charles Halo to whom he gave a message of surprising moderation
for Francois Hitterrand: No, he said, we do not want to overthrow Goukouni; yes,
the moment the authorities in Ndjamena ask us, we will leave Chad. In short, he
explained, there had been a misunderstanding.

20
FOR OFHKJAL USE(HVLY
FIN!(HJG(1AL.USE(MNLY

Qadhdhafi already knew since that same morning that French air force aircraft, 06-8
and Hercules C-l30, were taking off from Bordeaux and Ajaccio, with their cargo
compartments full of ammunition. Unloaded at the Garoua airport in Northern Cameroon
the cases were shipped by truck to Ndjamena while light arms, taken from the stocks
of Kalashnikov assault rifles, stored at the French base at Bouar, in Central Africa,
went in the same direction. Objective: To reinforce the Chadian AN! (Integrated
National Army) which needed the items.

A rather motley assortment of diverse factions, the ARI. in 5 months of existence,
as a matter of fact only managed to organize 200 men. Hardly enough to guard the
Chagoua bridge. Tripoli decided to let things go. The decision to withdraw its
troops probably had already been made.

Suddenly there was drama on Hednesday, 28 October. At least there was tragi-comedy.
On Place dc la Bourse. in Paris, at the headquarters taken over from the Preach
Press Agency. somebody introduced a report which was quickly picked up by a jaurna-
list on a video screen and transmitted to the teletype of the newspapers. Quoting
"witnesses coming from the Chadian capital," the message mentioned rumors of a coup
d'etat. an airlift. a pro-Libyan column marching on Ndjanena, the disappearance of
President Goukouni--in short, without saying so. a coup d'etat.

There was some panic among official circles; reading the message from Qadhdhafi to
Nitterrand, it was thought that Libya had resigned itself to a retreat. But here
there was another coup d'etat in progress. Published that same morning a weekly
confidential bulletin, LA LETTRE D'AIRIQUE. also stated that there was a Libyan
plan aimed at "legally replacing Goukouni with Acyl."

ﬂow, the APP [French Press Agency] dispatch to say the least was rather full of
fantasy and on the next day was contradicted by a journalist who had been sent by
that agency to Ndjamena. he never saw any coup d'etat. not even a failed attempt.
But the information had the advantage of being credible and on 29 October several
newspapers came out with their stories on the presumed coup d'etat on the front

page.

Manipulation. intoxication. or disinformation? Yes. It remains for us to figure
out who is behind it all. One can certainly accuse the French authorities of
having orchestrated this campaign to exert pressure on Libya to speed up its
retreat, especially since they themselves were wrong in the beginning regarding a
situation which undoubtedly was less tense than indicated in the telegrams from
Pierre Ricard. One might also think of a fantastic poker game between Paris and
Tripoli with each side trying to bluff and. as the case may be. scare the other.

But there is a third assumption, strengthened by the brief and at least suspect
"alert" of 1,200 paratroopers in Bouar on 28 October; large sectors of the French

intelligence services-partieularly the military ones-are hostile to the socialist

administration who they hesitate to inform (we saw that at the time of the coup
d'etat which overthrew David backs in Central Africa) and there are strong links
in Paris with the Caullist opposition. Their intent might very well have been to
force the French administration to intervene once again directly in Chad in order
to counter an imaginary but after all very imaginable coup d'etat. That would get
Francois Hitterrand bogged down in the Chadian mess.

21
FOR OITIClAl.lEﬂi(HVLY
FOR¢0FFK1AL.USE(NVLY

On Wednesday, 29 October, at the end of a 5-hour cabinet meeting, Goukouni Heddeye
officially demanded the total evacuation of all Libyan troops from Chad "before

31 December." Just 3 days later, Hissein ﬂsbre, the rebel, announced the suspension
of his guerrilla activities. And on 3 November Tripoli announced its retreat.

Like the French in 1980. Has the French-African summit of Paris the summit of the
rebirth of Chad?

Chad a Burden for Libya
Paris JEUHE AFRIQUE in French No 1088, 11 Nov 81 p 15
[Article by Mohamed Selhami: "See Ndjamena and Lesve"]

[Text] "For us, Chad is of vital strategic interest. By helping it become stabi-
lized, we will at the same time assure our own stability." This is how Colonel
Qadhdhafi justified the intervention of the Libyan Army in Chad in December 1980.
And speculations went along rather nicely: Has this a case of privileged coopera-
tion between two neighboring countries or a real occupation? The Libyans always
declared themselves ready to withdraw from Chad "if the government of Ndjamena

so demanded." Coukouni Heddeye wanted that and Qadhdhafi on 3 November decided to
pull his troops back.

People in Tripoli undoubtedly were relieved and that included high officials who,
without saying so. were hoping to divest themselves of the entire Chadian affair,
for several reasons. First of all the economic difficulties caused by the drop
in petroleum sales which the Jamahiriya tried to counteract through austerity
(JEUNE AFRIQUE, No 1082). Certain development projects in the 1981-1985 5-year
plan were suspended or even dropped; Libya floated a loan of $200 million on the
international market through the Libyan Arab Foreign Investment Company.

The Jamahiriya is beginning to be in financial trouble to the point where it is
finding it difficult to pay the salaries of its officials. Chad became a burden
which Libya was having trouble sustaining. Likewise, it can no longer spread its
bounty to the numerous liberation movements in as generous a fashion as so far.

For the Libyans, withdrawing from Chad also means calmly preparing for the 0A0
summit which is to be held in June 1982 in Tripoli. Qadhdhafi knew that certain
heads of African states--Egyptian, Sudanese, and Somali among others-~would not
agree to have him take over the chairmanship of their organization if he kept his

army in Ndjamena.

"The 0A0 summit will take place and our country will be honored to receive it and
to preside over it." The high Libyan official who made this statement to us did
not conceal his worry about the future of Chad which "risks another blowup." The
Libyans do not care for that. For them it is enough that they are no longer chal-
lenged over the issue of Libyan ownership of the Aouzou strip, a region in which
the army is now solidly established, building bases and barracks. with this rank
part, Chad is no longer of any "vital strategic interest." "by then stay there
"except to become bogged down and make trouble for oneself."

22
FIH!(HHN(JAI.IE§E(HULY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Libya cannot allow itself to make war outside its territory. It has neither the
means for it--especially manpower-nor perhaps even the desire. Its soldiers
certainly fought in the eastern part of Chad against the men of liissein liabre,
supported by the Sudan. A score of them died there. The Libyans would have pre-
ferred these "martyrs" to die in Palestine. "There, at least, we have a noble
cause, our cause," we were told by a writer who added: "Since the union between
Libya and Chad could not be accomplished."

Colonel Qadhdhafi felt that a number of his fellow citizens were tired of the
Chadian seas. And, since he is their chief, he followed them! It seem that he
took the first steps by sending Major Jallud to Ndjamena; he has the position of
chief of government. He met president Goukouni on Wednesday, 28 October. lie ex-
pressed the wish that the withdrawal should be made "in a gentle fashion" so as
not to rub Qadhdhafi the wrong way and Goukouni played the game.

In the naming of 3 November, during the opening of the conference of the heads of
state of France and Africa. there was only one watchword: No pressure on Libya,
it will withdraw by itself. In the afternoon of the same day, Qadhdhafi dropped
his political bomb: The announcement of the withdrawal of his troops.

Intervention Not Totally Negative
Paris JEUNE AFRIQUE in French No 1088, ll Nov 81 pp 16, 17
[Article by Amin Maalouf: "Controlled Skid in Chad"]

[Text] Just a few days ago it seemed that the Chadian affair would drag out in-
definitely, like quite a few other crises throughout the world. But then quite
abruptly, with a few dramtic moves, the situation was defused. A brilliant
French-Chadian maneuver, a rapid and wise response from Tripoli, and the solution
was there, before our unbelieving eyes.

At the center of this development above all there was the decision of one man.
Until this sunner, Colonel Qadhdhafi had maneuvered admirably well. The triumphal
entry of his troops in Ndjamena in December 1980 may have irritated certain circles
but was accomplished within the rules, in response to an appeal from the only in-
ternationally recognized Chadian authority.

Moreover. the behavior of the Libyan troops in the field had not given rise to any
massive abuses which are generally connected with foreign armies. Relations with
the "southerners" remained correct and the country's institutions, in spite of their
frailty-—or because of it?-were not too badly shaken. Moreover, the main resource
in this long battle. that is to say, the French-~this was during the administration
of Mr Valery Giscard d'Estaing--seemed to accept their defeat with a serenity

which sometimes bordered on unawareness.

After his victory, the Libyan leader naturally wanted to strengthen his bonds with
his "neighbor-protege" in the south. Essentially, the agreement signed with pre-
sident Goukouni Heddeye called for and still calls for a contribution to solving
Chad's serious economic problems.

23
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In recent weeks however there has been a real turnabout. In the beginning, it was
hardly perceptible. In the beginning, Goukouni gave the impression that he had a
freer hand. He used this opportunity to try to counterbalance his special realtions
with Libya through a reconciliation with France. That was made possible when the
socialists came to power in Paris. Since this troubling situation was known only
in diplomatic circles. Qadhdhafi was able to pick one of the following solutions:

Either he himself could take the initiative and withdraw his troops from Chad, with-
out waiting for anybody to ask him to do so--by encouraging their replacement with
an inter-African force which Libya had never opposed and in which it of course
would also have participated. He did not do that;

Or he cauld intervene even more directly in Chadian affairs and try to put his own
liegeman in place at the time, foreign minister Acyl Ahmat, in order to proclaim
Chadian-Libyan unity. The leader in Tripoli. perhaps not without reason, was sua-
pected of wanting to do that but, in the end, he decided to uphold Chadian legality.

Between these two solutions there was a third one which was neither the wisest nor
the most foolish: Unit for the dust to settle. That is the easiest solution for
any leader and Qadhdhafi adopted it.

The result of this choice--or rather this non-choice-dwas to bring the problem of
the Libyan presence in Chad out into the open. Goukouni went to Paris on 17 Sep-
tetber and asked president Hitterrand for help. Not only in military and logistic
terms. which would change nothing in the balance of forces out in the field, but
also and above all in political and diplomatic terms, as we saw several weeks
later. For the Chadian leader, that was more important because the publicity made
around his semi-rupture with Tripoli is a form of protection. The turning point
was reached in 3 days. And while the observer might use the term "admirable" in
referring to the maneuver that enabled the Libyan troops to enter Ndjamena in
December 1980, the same adjective is not too strong to describe the French-Chadian
maneuver on 28-30 October 1981.

First of all, there was "fool's day," when everybody was made to believe that
Qndhdhafi was trying to overthrow the legitimate government in Ndjamena and that
Goukouni had disappeared, while the Libyan number two nan, Major Jallud, was
talking naively with Goukouni himself. Then, protected by the noise created in
this fashion, the Chadian leader dared take the decisive and almost irreversible
stop: He solemnly dananded the withdrawal of the Libyan troops.

For the sake of completeness we must add that this "controlled skid" took place
behind the smokescreen made up of the debate on the inter-African force. Tripoli
undoubtedly thought that the diplomatic discussion on this subject would drag on
for several weeks, perhaps even until the OAU summit in June 1982, whereas the
big show had been carefully prepared for the end of this October.

The undeniable success of the maneuver, on the eve of the French-African aux-it,
had created an entirely new situation. Before that, a coup d'etat against Goukouni
could have had a semblance of justification. regardless how disastrous the con-
sequences of that may have been in long—range terms. After the "days of October,"
a coup d'etat would have been nothing but a suicidal plunge. The chairmanship of

2h
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the OAU, which Qadhdhafi wants very much, would undoubtedly have eluded him. Even
more seriously, the United States, which does not conceal its militant hostility
toward the Libyan leader, would have had a golden opportunity to get him bogged
down in the sand of Chad once and for all. And the French would have been obli-
gated to participate in such an operation.

Did Tripoli envisage this option? There is little likelihood of that. Libyan
officials at no timeHent beyond the point of no return, even when their actions
had a cover of legitimacy.

Another attitude which had become untenable was the wait-and-see attitude. That
could have been justified before the whole thing came out into the open. After
Coukouni's demand for withdrawal. llbya could no longer stand by and wait because
it had been put in the position at the accused and because the pressure exerted
against it could only grow day after day. The stronger the pressure, the less

conciliatory could Tripoli's decision be because any conciliation would have looked
like a defeat.

The only reasonable development was for the Libyan leader to make the best of a bad
situation and without ambiguity to announce his intention to withdrawb-he never
said that he would not--and that he would take cognizance of the withdrawal re-
quests from the Chadian government and that, like the French a year ago, he would
disengage even faster than Goukouni wanted.

By making the "good choice," Qadhdhafi saved the essential aspects of the whole
situation. While the disengagement took place without any big show, the bottom
line after the Libyan intervention was not entirely negative. There was a certain
stabilization and the civil war did no longer rage in the capital.

But let us forget the past even if it is quite recent because what is even more
important in current developments is the acceleration of events. Day after day,
hour after hour, the Chadian situation is changing and if that solves certain
problems. it also creates others. The inter-African force will nave to be assemp
bled, not in a few weeks. but in a few days. It would be disastrous not to fill
the vacuum left by the departure of the Libyans without delay. And national re-
conciliation must be accomplished briskly if one wishes to keep the specter of
civil war away once and for all. Let no repeat: The Chadian affair was never as
close to a solution, the principal interested parties never proved to be as wise,
the antagonisms never seemed as surmountable. And never before have we seen the
light at the end of the tunnel this close. Is this a mirage?

COPYRIGHT: Jeune Afrique GRUPJIA 1981.

5058
C80: 4719/255

25
FOR OFFICIAL use on“
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

« CHAD

DEFENSE, FOREIGN MINISTERS 0N CURRENT SITUATION
PH271043 Paris PARIS MATCH in French 27 Nov 81 pp 70-71

[Patrick Forestier. Bendit Gyseabergh report: "The Libyans Are Burning Any hing
They Cannot Take Home"]

[Excerpt] Mr Adoum Togoi is now Chad defense minister. This brilliant man, a
skilled tactician, lost a leg during the civil war. He is regarded as President
Coukouni's eminence grise and has been the strong man of Chad since the Libyans'
departure. He still leads the popular forces, which are loyal to the head of state
and have not yet been integrated into the national army. These partisan units were
severely affected by the war, and it is not unusual to see in their ranks youths
aged 16 or 15 armed with kalashnikovs. In the ravaged country it is still the armed
groups which are able to feed their men best. The defense minister also directs

the military police and the integrated national army. which at present only has
three batallions of 1,200 men and one in the process of formation. The rest of

the Chad armed forces (12.000 men under Colonel Kamougue's command) refuse to go and
fight Hissein Habre's supporters in the East. In face of this complex situation in
the lawful armed forces. the number of fighters under the banners of the various
faction leaders is estimated to be 30.000. "He are having difficulties in training
our army." Adoum Togoi explained to me, "mainly because of lack of equipment. If
the inter-African force. which I prefer to describe as a peace-keeping rather than
a neutral force, were willing to give us its equipment, we wOuld be able to put
down nissein Habre's rebellion."

After a few days of calm Hissein Habre's forces have in fact resumed fighting in
Eastern Chad. The cities of Cuereda, Iriba and Adre have apparently fallen into
their hands. "The Libyans' departure is forcing us to rethink our logistics
entirely," Togoi willingly confided.

Foreign Minister Acyl Ahmat. who is regarded as pro-Libyan, is now under the greatest
threat. It is his troops. those of the revolutionary democratic council, which have
been fighting Hissein Habre in the east for almost a year. Now that the Libyans
have gone they aremore exposed than anybody.

After a short visit to Paris Hr Acyl Ahmat chose to return to Ndjamena. He is sick
and rarely leaves his villa on the banks of the Chari, which is guarded by two
Toyotas armed with Stalin organs and positioned in his garden. He received me
wearing a neck support which made it difficult for him to speak. In addition to a

26
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE: ONLY

spinal problem he is suffering from a stomach ulcer. "I an a Chadian. not a Libyan,"
he told no. "I want the Libyans to go. but not so abruptly. I obey the head of
state but I think that we have taken an unwise decision. Before asking the Libyans
to withdraw we should have obtained assurances from Egypt and Sudan that they would
stop helping Hisaein Habte. Since we have no equipment and are waiting for aid

which is a long time in coming, we are now in a difficult situation. as far as France
is concerned, I hope that it will play its role in Chad fully. I have been accused
of being anti-French. This is not true. I was raised by a Frenchman. From 1965 to
1968 I was a student at the Bordeaux Infantry School and the Marseilles Naval School.

At that time there was even some talk of my taking French nationality."

COPYRIGHT: 1981 par Cogedipresse S.A.

C50: 4719/275

27
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOIiOFVWCJAl.llﬂE(MNLY

CONGO

HAYS FRANCE CAN AID NATION FACE SUDDEN OIL HEALTH NOTED

Paris MARCHES TROPICAUX ET HEDITERRANEENS in French No 1878, 6 Nov 81 pp 2800-2802,
2803

[Article by Jacques Latremoliere: "Brazzaville: How To Master an 011 Economy")

[Excerpt] "hat the Congolese president's official visit to Francois Hitterrand in
July 1981 undoubtedly brought about in relations between the two countries was a
total relaxation of tension, whose effects were visible only recently at meetings of
the French-Congolese commission. Jean-Pierre Cot was anxious to participate in the
meetings himself at the head of the French delegation, thereby gaining an opportunity
to better define the scope of the previously mentioned affinities [ideological] con-
cerning the "self-centered" development of the People's Republic of the Congo and

the aid that France can offer in the undertaking. '

One dare not forget, however, that the Congo's cooperation with France on the govern-
mental level was accompanied, well before 10 May, by parallel relations with the
French private sector. At the time of his last visit, President Sassou Nguesao
hinsclt one the guest of French caployers and management. 0n 2‘ September. a Congo-
lese delegation, made up of Pierre Houses, minister of planning, Minister of Indus-
try Itady and Minister of “lace and Energy Adada, was received at the GNP? [National
Council of French Employers] by 250 executives and private meetings with a number of
them were subsequently held.

Several prominent French businessmen then went to Brazzaville and a delegation of
French industrialists, led by the CNPF, will go to Brazzaville in the early months
of 1982. The companies represented have no local base and constitute a new and
receptive milieu for operations that will be proposed to them, operations that are
a part of the 1982-1986 Five-Year Flan, advance notice of which was given to the
CNFF by Housssn in the form of a list of priority projects (see MARCEES TROPICAUX
of 25 September, p 2452, and 2 October, p 2510).

This direct appeal to French capital and technology demonstrates, first of all, the
realism of the Congolese leaders, who have understood that one of the greatest
merits of "official" cooperation is to provide a favorable milieu for private coop-
eration, outside of which it remains formal and incomplete. But the fact that the
move comes at a time of economic recovery for the Congo, giving its leaders real
latitude in the choice of partners, constitutes a pledge of confidence to which they
are all the more sensitive because it promotes their interests.

 

1 Formula familiar to the minister of cooperation and to President Saasou Nguesso.

28
FINICIWHCJAI.1EII(IVLY
FOI1OFFKJALIﬁ§20NLN

Financial Situation

In a world in crisis, only oil could bring about this recovery, just as it is
indirectly responsible for the mess that preceded it. Not only did the overeatina-
tion of national oil prospects in 1972 cause the reduction in invest-cuts under the
1976-1978 Plan, while public spending increased dangerously, but it delayed the
working of deposits that that are now the most productive, at a very tine when

a decline in or disappearance of other ninsral resources such as potash began to
occur.

011 production fortunately began to rise again in 1978, after the low point of 1977
with its total tonnage of 1.8 nillion. For the time being, it is the task of two
companies: ELF-Congo [Gasoline and Lubricants Company of France] and ACIP-Congo
[Italian Petroleum Enterprise], both of which have a 20-percent share of the capital.
Along with the Congolese Government, they carry out research and operations. Divi-
dends - the first will be paid in 1981 - are based on the proportion of invest-
ments after taxes are deducted. Except for the anall land deposit of Pointe-
Indienne, whose 10.000 tons are now only of symbolic value and which is ELF-Congo's
exclusive province, extraction is done in partnership with the two companies (65 per-
cent ELF and 35 percent ACIP). A61? is an operator only for Loango, where the per-
centages are reversed. Everywhere elsewhere, for Emeraude, Likouala, Yanga and,
beginning in 1982, Senji, responsibility for extraction belongs to ELF. Overall
Congolese production rose to 6 million tons in 1981, compared with 2.6 nillion in
1978, 2.7 million in 1979 and 3.5 million in 1980. Progress registered at Kilouala
and Yanga and the entry into production of Senji allow one to figure 5 nillion tons
in 1982 and fro. 8 to 9 million tons in 1985.

Growth of Oil Production in the Congo (in 1,000 tons)

 

 

Year Amount

1965 70.9 Pointe-lndienne deposit only

1970 19 Pointe-Indienne deposit only

1971 16 Pointe-Indienne deposit only

1972 335 15 Pointe—Indienne; 320 Emeraude

1973 2,069 8 Pointe-Indienne; 2,061 Emeraude

1976 2,656 13 Pointe-Indienne; 2,661 Eneraude

1975 1,789 13 Pointe-Indienne; 1,776 Eneraude

1976 2,001 12 Pointe-Indienne; 1,989 Emeraude

1977 1,801 13 Pointe-Indienne; 1,636 Bmeraude;
152 Loango

1978 2,630 11 Pointe-lndienne; 1,627 Emerauds;
992 Loango

1979 2,751 10 Pointe-Indienne; 1,617 Bmeraude;

. 1,326 Loango

1980 3,310 10 Pointe-Indienne; 1,300 Bmeraude;
1,600 Losngo; 600 Likouala

1981 3,910 10 Pointe-Indienne; 1,200 Emeraude;

1,300 Loango: 1,100 Likousla; 300 Yanga

These are figures that are very nearly definitive. An increase in then could result
only from new discoveries, which would still be balanced by the gradual exhaustion
of deposits after several years of working. In the Congo. techniques involving the

29
FOR‘OFFKJAI.USEINULY
FOI10FiICIAI.US£|DNLN

injection of steam: steam drive or puff and roof, have not yet gone beyond the
experimental stage. It is certain that at deposits such as Emeraude, where operat-
ing conditions do not permit the recovery of over 8 percent of the known reserves,
their application would be of the greatest interest.

Another cause for optimism is the development of land and offshore research which,
although there are not yet any positive results, have the aid of American, Canadian,
Brazilian and Swiss companies on the basis of sharing production with the government

Within about two years, oil production will be joined by gas production. Reserves
are now estimated at some 50 billion cubic meters. A company has been set up by
the government and the two operators in order to complete the inventory of re-
sources in this domain. If conclusions are positive, work could lead to the con-
struction, as early as 1982, of a liquefaction plant with an annual capacity of

6 million cubic meters.

Consequently, hydrocarbons represent the backbone of Congolese development, as the
rising dollar solidifies the compensation of oil contracts month after month. Al-
ready helped by the consolidation in 1980 of the Congo's debts, the financial situa-
tion shows a foreign debt of 265 billion CPA francs, service on which represented
some 20 percent of budget receipts in 1981 and 28 percent of all export receipts,
which sets the ratio at a rather high level. Moreover. the internal debt amounts

to 225 billion CPA francs and its payment does pose problems for enterprise trea-
suries.

0n the whole, however, and despite inflation of about 15 percent, linked to a 40-
percent rate of monetary expansion and a l7-percent growth in the volume of short-
term loans, the economic situation is quite satisfactory: a surplus in the trade
balance and balance of payments, a substantial increase in foreign assets; a gross
national product that rose 30 percent between 1977 and 1980. While the share of
all receipts in the overall budget (70 percent in 1981 compared with 41 percent in
1979) does express a structural imbalance common to all economies of this type,
their stability now seems beyond question. At any rate, they enable the government
to redeem substantial public savings (20 percent of the 1981 budget) and to meet
its foreign debt commitments. The Congo will have no difficulty in gaining aid on
the international financial market. The danger would lie in letting itself be
carried too far by such case.

Self-Centered Development

Meeting the prime needs of the people, defined by their nature and volume rather
than value, takes precedence here, as a strategy, over the search for industrial
and commercial profits, for which the climate, soil and geographic features would
supply the means, and constitutes one of the simplest definitions of this type of
development. In fact, the volume of oil extracted turns the terms of the proposi-
tion around in the Congo. Priority needs remain to be defined, but they tend to
be met only by revenue derived from such extraction.

A few years ago, then Minister of Finance Lapes identified these prime needs as
those that would be met by agriculture primarily based on food crops, the goal

being to lead the Congo, thanks to its oil income, to an "after-oil" period charac-
terized by self-sufficiency. Agriculture still holds a place of honor in the

30
FOI!0FFKJA1.USE(IULY
F0.‘0FFKJAI.USEIDNL¥

1982-1986 Plan, although the absence of figures for the projects does not yet

allow one to judge its precise role. It justifies a large percentage of the PAC
[Aid and Cooperation Fund] program, estimates for the fifth EDP [European Develop-
ment Fund] program and a loan of 2.16 billion CPA francs from the African Develop-
ment Bank. However, one observes a certain slippage of projects, from production
to consumption and from primary to construction, transport and services. The govern-
ment is led into this by political considerations. It is a question of making the
equipping of the territory uniform so as to quell regional and ethnic rivalries
that since independence have contributed to the instability of national life. The
entire population must be interested in improving the standard of living, affecting
interest in work, technical training and creative initiative.

As a result, Sassou Nguesso undertook an experiment in May of which few African
chiefs of state can boast: a 26—day survey, village to village, on foot, accom-
panied by the ministers of agriculture, health and social affairs. He returned

from it convinced that meeting prime needs can be obtained only through agriculture,
even if based on food crops, but a true takeoff, including in this production sec-
tor, is linked to what we call quality of life, whence the importance attached to
often neglected accomplishments: housing, naturally, but rural roads as well,
telephone booths, out-patient clinics and ambulances within reach of the peasants.
Opening up the interior and the completion of building materials units will therefore
have a "hoice place among the projects presented to French investors. For example,
1 villu_:—center project was submitted to the French delegation at the meeting of
the join; commission. It did not have the objectives of the Tanzanian ujamaa but
permitted a certain economy of means for the realisation of this basic equipment.

Whether or not this is related to the current underequipment, a certain decline in
private farming is perceptible. in two years, coffee production fell from 4,800
to 2,800 tons and cacao production from 2,600 to 2,100 tons. Niari sugar has ex-
perienced difficulties of which we shall speak later. The deterioration of the
soil because of a lack of fertilizer, the inadequate sanitary treatment and the
aging of the plantations are not enough to explain the phenomenon, while the other
economic sectors, activated by oil production, are expanding. Hood. especially
nkoume. was hard hit by the crisis. From 1979 to 1980, production rose again from
“70,000 to 800,000 cubic meters. The new areas worked in Sangha and Likouala
permit one to anticipate regular growth. Afforestation using eucalyptus and limbs
around Points-Moire (project submitted to the PAC), leading to a 250,000-ton paper
mill, should reinforce this.

Despite management errors compromising the profitability of national companies,
industry since 1978 has experienced a 'boom comparable in volume and turnover:

80 percent for food, 43 percent for metals, 21 percent for textiles and 68 percent
for chemical industries. Transportation also reflects this resumption of activity.
The traffic of the Congo-Ocean Railroad (CPCO) totaled 1.3 million tons of goods
(537 million tons/kilometer) in 1980, compared with 1.1 million tons (663 million

tons/kilometer) in 1979, not including the tonnage of manganese ore hauled for the
Ogooue Mining Company. The railroad's receipts were 15 billion CPA francs in 1980,

compared with 11.8 billion in 1979.

And yet, it is not easy to point out the economic sectors for which ”self-centered"
development has resulted in preferential financial efforts, considering the penchant
of the large credit organizations for certain types of investments, such as

31
FOIiOFFﬂJAI.USE(HNLV
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

transportation infrastructures, and the considerable funds they mobilize. Two
major operations absorbed most of the foreign aid during the last two fiscal years.
French aid itself, which, with 230 million Prench francs in 1980, made up nearly

50 percent of the entire amount, did not escape that failing, whether it be a
question of the PAC or loans from the Central Fund. Realignment of the CPCO track
in the mountainous region of Hayombe, initially estimated to cost 33 billion CPA
francs, will now cost 60 billion, almost all furnished by foreign subsidies or
loans. The PAC share will exceed 5 billion. That of the EDP, which was already
4.9 billion, must be increased in 1982 by 1.6 billion under regional projects.
Continuing an effort begun in 1980, the Central Fund in 1981 granted the Trans-
Congolese Communications Agency (ATC) a loan of 98 million French francs, including
20 million on the second platform barrier, for the purchase of railroad equipment,
training of CFCO personnel and maintenance equipment at the Pointe-Noire port.

Adaptation of the Brazzaville runway, already lengthened in 1950, 1952 and 1961,

to accommodate Boeing 747's, will cost 23 billion CPA francs, including 5.1 billion
to be borne by the Congolese Cavernment, 2.5 billion by BADEA [Arab Bank for African
Economic Development], 2.3 billion by the African Development Bank, 1.23 billion

by the DDEAC [DeveIOpment Bank of the Central African States] and 1.26 billion by
the PAC, which will finance in particular the supervision of work, for which a
notification of prequalification was issued in the spring of 1981. Here again, it
is a question of an operation that is certainly indispensable, but which neverthe-
less diverts available investment funds from basic activities.

Industrial Structures

The nationalized companies in the industrial sector were designed within the dimen-
sional and technical framework of the old AEP [French Equatorial Africa], which the
rate unification measures of the UDEAC [Customs and Economic Union of Central
Africa] have not adequately replaced. The flaws of poor management, plethoric
personnel and the lack of capital have often been added to the morass born of an
unfavorable world situation.

The Congolese authorities are all the more aware of this situation because it has
forced them to make for the rehabilitation of these companies considerable financial
sacrifices which, for the 1976-1979 period, exceed 8 billion CPA francs, not includ-
ing support and participations distributed by virtue of a 11-billion-franc loan from
foreign banks. Discharging the debts of SUCO [expansion unknown], the sugar branch
of the old STAN [Congolese Agro-lndustrial Company] and SOSUNIARI [Niari Sugar
Company], which were nationalized in 1970, amounted to 5 billion francs, without
mentioning the sugar subsidies granted in 1979, 1980 and 1981, for an approximate
total of 4.5 billion.

The SUCO affair is characteristic of the Congolese Government's reaction to a
deterioration that seemed hopeless. At the time of the nationalization of 51A"-

SOSUNIARI, the firm was producing 100,000 tons of sugar with a capacity of 135,000
tons, which remained theoretical only because world prices (1.5c a pound Pointe-

Noire) did not encourage production. This result was obtained under remarkable
technican conditions within a period of about 13 years and for very modest invest-

ments (1.36 billion CPA francs for the SOSUNIARI plant, which could handle 5,000
tons of cane a day), when compared with similar operations in other African coun-

tries. The subsequent recovery of sugar prices, up to $1.00 a kilogram, should

32
FIHICHHNCIAI.USIZ(NULX
INJI‘OF"(JAI.IHHE(M‘LY

have brought the Congolese Government. the new owner of the plants, substantial
profits. Nothing of the sort occurred because sugar production gradually fell from
100,000 to 6,000 tons in 1979, when it approached absolute zero because of a lack
of cane, cutters, trucks and credits.

Since 1979, the technical takeover by SIGAS [expansion unknown], a branch of

SOHDIAA [expansion unknown] and of “VA Holland, should make it possible to rescue
the old SOSUNIARI plant, the refinery, the plantations and normalize production.
Services of SICAS are linked to indemnification of the former shareholders at

66 percent of the face value of the securities, without reappraisal, with the dead-
line set for June 1982. The Congo regularly honors its deadlines. The multina-
tional financing of the operation totals 10.7 billion CPA francs, including 3.6 bil-
lion for the Central Fund and the COPACB [French Insurance Company for Foreign
Trade] cover acquired for 1.2 billion. The plant's share of the total is 6 billion,
while that of the refinery is 266 million. By 1980~l981. production had risen to
18,000 tons. The figure of 70,000 tons will be reached by 1985-1986, barring un-
foreseen difficulties. A new era, that of diversification, will then begin for
Niari, and the city of Nkayi, with 60,000 inhabitants, will have become the coun-
try's third largest.

it is significant of the receptiveness of the Congolese worker to technical compe-
tence that these results were obtained with expatriate personnel linited to five
technicians. At the request of some co-investors, the number will probably be
increased to ten units, which would permit the computerization of the enterprise
and better use of equipment.

Dogma and Facts

In these columns, we have too frequently brought out the apparent contradiction
between the ideological and diplomatic choices of the Haraist-Leninist African na-
tions and their appeal to the liberal West for technical, financial and economic
help for there to be any need to mention it again. Indeed. President Sassou
Nguesso did not fail to emphasize that the aid agreement that he went to Moscow to
sign in the spring involved no military provisions. However, he worried about the
presence of French detachments in the Central African Republic and Gabon (total of
2,200 men) and expressed the wish that "vice” would soon be loosened. It is hoped
that the "change in the political landscape" in France will help make him realise
that that vice is not directed at the Congo or his own regime. As for the other
positions of the Congo: nonalignment, the Sahara, Afghanistan, and so on, they
concern only the Congo. Moreover. it would appear that they obey a logic of which
we often have but an imperfect understanding, whether it be a question of domestic

or foreign policy.

Economically speaking, the attitude of the Congo is affected by two factors:

first of all, the socialist path to development and the difficulties it encounters
in the search for capital and technology; and second, its self-centered nature,
which is sometimes scarcely compatible with the volume of oil revenue.

It may seem surprising that countries with meager financial resources, lacking in
mechanisms for the formation of capital and whose technology is still rudimentary,
would claim to follow a philosophy of history that views socialism as the inevitable
outcome of the supercapitalization and superinduatrialization of Western societies.

33
IND!‘0IIN(]AI.I£SI§(NWLY
technological help that the homeland of socialism does not scorn either! Experi-
ence has shown the Congo that capital and technology are necessary for development,
although neither is adequate alone. Oil wealth cannot do it alone.

Concerning structures permitting the utilization of both elements, the condemnation
by the People's Republic, of a certain number of these national companies responsi-
ble for 60 percent of the public debt. the reconsideration of a second category

and the extension of a third are simply in keeping with good sense and stem from

a state of mind comnon to most African countries. Between the exclusive private
ownership envisaged in the Ivory Coast -- and which is not excluded in the Congo -
and integral socialism, all forms of Joint venture are possible. The origin of
capital, now almost totally from banks, constitutes their cannon measure. Moreover,
it was quite unjust for certain milieus to criticize the so-called selfish and de-
featist preference of the French industrialists in Africa for engineering and man-
agement contracts, at the expense of investment in capital. Among many others, the
example of SUCO shows that the industrialist generally has no choice. Furthermore.
it is perfectly normal and even desirable for its technological contributions to be
remunerated in the same way as its funds.

There remains self-centered capital. It expresses the fairly exigent awareness
that governments have of the deep-lying interests of their people. ”hat is to be
feared in the Congo is that the effects of the oil revenue may be all the more
restrictive as the ratio of production-population rises and that they move in a
direction diametrically opposed to that of its interests. Except in the case of
tyrannical totalitarianism. the growth in national income in our time must be re-
flected in the standard of living. Reserving profits for meeting priority needs
requires long-term planning, in any case. What is to be done with that influx of
money, given the limited local possibilities for its use. other than devote it to

they require. thereby compromising future opportunities? Outside pressures in this
area rarely work in the right direction. If one excludes certain actions by the
PAC. the EDF. the African Development Bank or the UNDP, one notes with regret that

At the time of his Paris trip. President Sassou Nguesso included among the justifi-
cations for his journey his desire to restore balanced commercial trade with France.
France does in fact supply the Congo with 50 percent of its imports, but buys only
about 7 billion CPA francs worth of goods from it. It is only in 19th place among
France's African suppliers. Actually. while France benefits commercially from this
movement, the deficit is made up for the Congo by the sale of oil abroad by a
company that is 80 percent French. Nor can one forget the annual budget of 20 bil~
lion CPA francs that ELF-Congo devotes to research. Investments in the Yanga and
Senji deposits alone represented nearly 250 billion CPA francs.

The real problem in French-Angolan relations lies elsewhere. A restored commercial
balance is definitelv desirable. if the substance for it can be found. but it is

by helping the Congo to break the fatal nature of spiraling consumption and by
concretely encouraging primary activities or secondary activities with a primary

3b
we omaAl. USE onur
ﬂ). OFFIGAI. USE ONLY

bilSL’ such as agriculture for food, forest-:ing a reduction in oil production within
15 to 20 years, that France can best prove its loyalty to the Congo as it faces the
difficult test which a sudden influx of wealth could impose on it.

COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux et Cic Paris 1981

11,56h
cso: «719/212

35
Im>n<0i1ncmAl.t:i:¢nutv
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

GUINEA

NEH AGREEMENT GIVES IHPETUS TO IRON ORE PROJECT
Paris HARCHES TROPICAUX ET MEDITERRANEENS in French No 1878, 6 Nov 81 pp 2819-2820

[Excerpts] Ismael Toure, Guinean minister of mines and geology and chairman of the
board of directors of the Iron-Mining Company of Guinea for Development of the Nimba
Range (HIFERGUI-Nimba), has just announced the conclusion of an agreement with the
United States Steel Corporation, according to whose terms two subsidiaries of the
latter will be entrusted with management and operations tasks, on the one hand, and
with engineering for the MIPERGUI-Nimba project.

The agreement, signed in Paris on 16 October 1981 following a week of negotiations,

also provides for the entry of U. 5. Steel into the ranks of shareholders in the
MIFERGUI-Nimba firm. The agreement governs the basic principles as well as most

of the elements of cooperation between U. S. Steel and MIFBRGUI-Nimba.

"we have just completed a very important phase in the development of our country's
mining industry," the minister said. "The quality of our ore is recognized all
over the world, but the distance from the location of the Nimba Range constitutes

a technical challenge for working of the deposit. Such working requires substantial
financial means amounting to several hundred million dollars and the confidence of
the backers will be complete only if the management of the project is entrusted to
an enterprise with internationally recognized technical capabilities and fame. We
have found that company in U.S. Steel."

The Nimba Range deposit, divided by the border between Liberia and Guinea, was
worked for some 20 years on the Liberian side, where it was a major source of income
for the Liberian Government. Experts from the Guinean Government have evaluated

the deposit of the Guinean side and believe it contains at least 300 million tons
of ore. However, it has never been worked.

"Several years of studies and preparation have brought us to this phase of com-

pleting the project," Minister Toure said. "Guinea wishes to recognize the constant
confidence shown by its partners in HIFERGUI-Nimba."

Along with the Guinean Government, which holds 50 percent of the stock, HIFBRGUI-
Nimba also has shareholders from Nigeria, Libya, Algeria, Spain, Yugoslavia, Roman
Romania. Japan, France and Liberia, and now, with the support of 0.3. Steel,

the United States, all brought together in a syndicate with headquarters in Paris.

6
INJI10FFWC1A1.I£§EZ(MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"Guinea is proud to be able to provide this unique example of international coop-
eration. which brings together countries of all views from four continents," Hin-

ister Isnael Toure said. "Our shareholders are present. our market is there, and
now, our technical capabilities are assured with the intervention of U. S. Steel.

we shall now have confidence of backers that will equal that of our partners, which
will enable us to envisage the completion of this very important project by 1982."

COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux et Cie Paris 1981.

11.464
030: 4719/210

37
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

GUINEA-BI SSAU

BRIEFS

ADP FOOD ASSISTANCE-mime-Bissau is going to begin a livestock raising project

to improve the country’s food situation. The project will be in the Bissau suburb
and the eastern region of the country. Costing $5 million and 87-percent financed
by the African Development Fund and l3-percent by the Guinean Government. the pro-
.)ect involves the establishment of a production center for 32,000 layers and 455,000
dozen eggs 3 year and 37 tons of fryers. It also includes the construction of

three swine-raising units in the eastern region of the country. [Text] [Paris
HARCHES TROPICAUX ET MEDITERRANEENS in French No 1877, 30 Oct 81 p 2755] [COPY-
RIGHT: Rene Horeux et Cie Paris 1981] 11,661.

CSO: 1:719]le

36
l-‘OIOFFK‘IALUSEONLY
l-‘OI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1V0” COAST

BRIEFS

FISHING CATCH STILL INSUPFICIBI’Ie-The Ivory Coast's fishing sector will have a
production of 88,000 tons in 1980, an increase over the preceding year (12.5 billion
CPA francs in total turnover. compared vith 10.6 billion in 1979), according to the
latest bulletin from the Chamber of Industry in Abidjan. Despite this grovth, the
deficit remains large, with an estimated consmption of 180,000 in 1980. Efforts
are therefore underway, mainly the application of a progru to nodernize cottage
fishing and to build modern infrastructures. The French Central Fund for Economic
Cooperation (CCCE) and the UN Development Fund (MD?) are also giving aid to pro-
jects to develop lagoon aquiculture with the creation or expansion of fish hatcher-
ies and the organization of continental fish farming in departments in the central
region of the country. The Ivorian fleet is now nade up of 25 crawlers, 21 sardine
fishing boats and 10 tuna boats. [Text] [Paris means 18.0?wa 31‘ HEBREW?»
in French No 1878, 6 Nov 81 p 2820] (COPYRIGHT: Rene Moreux et Cie Paris 1981]
11.466

CSO: 6719/210
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MADAGASCAR

BRIEFS

EXPERTS MEET MALAGASY OFFICIALS—-Antananarivo, 30 Nov (REUTER)--Malagasy President
Didier Ratsiraka today met a groap of Libyan experts led by Planning Secretary

Musa Ahmad Abu Furaywah to discuss possible Libyan financial aid to the island
republic, informed sources said. The Malagasy leader visited Tripoli two months
ago to sign cooperation agreements running up to November next year. Under the
agreements Libya may take part in an ambitious agricultural project worth 200
million 0.8. dollars, the president said. The accords also provide for the setting
up of a joint Libyan—Malagasy companies in unspecified fields and Libya is to
provide expertise in oil exploration and exploitation. the sources said. The
sources also said a North Korean military mission led by General Balk Mak Rim,
whose arrival here 5 days ago went unannounced, set Malagasy defence and foreign
affairs ministers today. No details were available on the talks. North Korea,
which maintains some 500 military experts here. provided arms to Madagascar. and
helped train the country's presidential guard. The North Koreans last year lent
Madagascar several Russian-built MIG—l7 fighter planes, they added. [Text] [JN302051
London REUTER in English 2024 GMT 30 Nov 81]

630: 5700/335

to
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

WIQUB

BRIEFS

SHEDISH WHEAT, ITALIAN TRUOLS—At the beginning of October, a load of wheat from
Sweden arrived in Maputo. a gift from the govern-ant in Stockholm oiled at mm:-
ing the effects of the drought that has affected part of notabique. For its part,
the Italian Government has offered Mozambique 80 Pint trucks, within the framework
of the program to fight famine in Africa. In addition to this gift. worth $2.5 mil-
lion, in a sun of $850,000 for the purchase of spare parts. [Text] [Paris mains
TROPICAUX ET EDITERRANBENS in French No 1877, 30 Oct 81 p 2779] . [COPYRIGI'R Rene
Horeux et Cie Paris 1981] 11,464

CSO: 6719/21].

FOIOFI’ICIALUSEONLY
I'OR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SENEGAL

OPPOSITION LEADER PLAYS DOWN PARTY SPLIT
PM300941 Paris AFRIQUE-ASIE in French 9-22 Nov 81 pp 28-30

[Cinette Cot report: "Hamadou Dia's Self-management Plan" date and place of bin
interview not specified]

[Excerpt] The [Senegalese] People's Democrat Movement [HDP] of which Hamadou Dia
is temporary national coordinator (pending the party's constituent congress
scheduled for the end of this year or the beginning of next year) saw the resigna-
tion of nine prominent members on 12 August, only 3 months after its foundation.
They included several of the former prime minister's close comrades in arms during
the independence period. such as former Interior Minister Valdiodio Ndiaye, who
was also in prison with Hamadou Dia.

This blow, which immediately aroused much speculation and made people wonder about
the new party's chances of survival, was primarily a sign of the existence of a
general phenomenon of instability, change and regrouping--a phenonmenon which seeks
unlikely to spare any opposition political party--after the change of Senegalese
head of state and of government party (the Socialist Party [PS]) since 1 January.

In any event these defections in no way reduced Mamadou Dia's confidence, courage
and tenacity. Of course, he did not conceal the fact that "it was a harsh blow

from the sentimental viewpoint." But he told me that he considers the incidents
minor in political terms. "of the nine people who resigned," he pointed out, "six
belonged to the National College of Hwadows (elders)-a structure found at all
levels of the party in which the older people make their moral and political contri-
bution and pass on their advice and experiences to the younger people who actually
have the responsibility and are active in the movement's practical life. "Only
three of those who left were members of the national directorate, that is not many,"
Homadou Dia added. "Hhcn you realize that some of our comrades who resigned were
advocating all alliance with Abdou Diouf. you understand that their departure
clarified the party's political situation. The disagreement was too great, and we
will now be able to work in complete security. If the Socialist Party had been able
to take away the HDP‘s real brain trust it would have been a victory for the govern—
ment party. But in the circumstances it is more of a failure."

indeed, according to Hamadou Dia the P8 “is socialist only in name." "And," he
added, "aside from political pluralism, which the new head of state was forced to

h2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL lZSE ONLY

restore and which is a victory for the patriotic forces. He see nothing really
positive in President Abdou Diouf's action. According to our analysis of the
situation, there is nothing which could permit us to give preference to an alliance
with a party which is responsible for our country's disastrous situation."

Hamadou Dia does not think that President Abdou Diouf has the means of implementing
his policy. either through his statements of intent. or measures taken to improve
the running of public affairs or the struggle against the acquisition of illicit
wealth or the democratization of the Socialist Party. "That is why," he said, "the
patriotic opposition must unite more than ever. And despite the problems I am
optimistic in this respect."

For Hamadou DiaI "the doctrine of self-managing socialism is a more elaborate and
truly democratic form of socialism. It corresponds to African traditions. which
are not based on individualist attitudes as in the West but on solidarity and
mutual aid within the country."

Moreover it is the ideas which formed the basis for the first development plan drawn
up in 1960 under then Prime Minister Hamdou Dia--to make the basic rural communities
the levers of economic and social development--which are behind the HDP's doctrine
and approach. "The self-management plan can obviOusly not be implemented overnight."
Mamadou Dia commented. "But in the rural zones it is already possible to make a
start with the development of the cooperative movement-a movement which was first
shelved then started again, but not until it had been emptied of its original con-
tent. The cooperative movement can only succeed if it remains autonomous. As was
seen with the national office of cooperation and assistance for development, if it

is crushed under bureaucratic structures it proves a resounding failure. It is

also possible to consider extending the cooperative movement to other sectors. For
instance, it is possible to form communities of traders or even communities of
tenants to administer accommodations. A phase of joint administration by owners and
workers in some industrial spheres can also be envisaged." But those are preparatory
and transitional measures. Mamadou Dis thinks it quite clear that to promote the
society of which the NDP dreams, in which only the strategic sectors would escape
self-management and be under exclusive state control--"we must start with a grand
clearout, a radical transformation of institutions and structures." That is why, in
the first part of its program. albeit “casting them in its own mould“ and updating
them, the HOP accepts the broad outlines of the United Senegalese Opposition Coordin-
ation Program, of which the self-managing socialists were joint authors and "which
aims at the victory of the democratic and popular national revolution-the precon-
dition for the installation of a democratic and popular state which is its ultimate

objective."

"Attaining real independence on the political, economic and cultural planes and
imposing a new context of real democratic and popular change are essential precon-
ditions for the attainment of our whole plan for self-managing socialism," Hamadou
Dis said. "This therefore determines our alliance strategy. If we want to attain
our objectives we must unite with those who support the program of the democratic
and popular national revolution. Moreover that was the subject of our disagreement
with our comrades who resigned and who wanted to form an alliance with the Socialist

Party on an ideological basis...."
COPYRIGHT: 1981 Afrique-Asie.

C80: 5719/275

1:3
ros OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SENEGAL

BRIEFS

NAURITANIAN RELATIONS-4. long talk was held in Paris by the Senegalese Abdou
Diouf and the Mauritanian Khouna Ould Haidalla. To "ease" the very strained
atmosphere recently. The frontier between the two countries was even closed
21-29 October at the initiative of Nouakchott. [Text] [Paris .131]!!! AFRIQUB in
French No 1088, 11 Nov 81 p 24] [COPYRIGHTz Jeune Afrique GRUPJIA 1981]

WADE SEEKS DIOUF'S HEDIATION--Abdoulaye Hade went to the Hotel Crillon where he
was received by some chiefs of state. Hoping to obtain sou mediation on his
behalf from President Abdou Diouf. it was whispered here and there in the corri-
dors about the secretary general of the Senegalese Democratic Party [PDS]. The
invariable reply of the presidential entourage: the matter is in the hands of

the law. [Text] [Paris JEUNE AFRIQUB in French 2:: 1088. 11 Nov 81 p 26]
lCOPYRIGHT: Jeune Afrique GRUPJIA 1981]

C80: 4719/268

his
FOR OFFICI \I. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

an» moi
POSSIBI' 11'! 0? m0! W mm sun
Jommsbm m STAR an Brunch 16 Nov 81 p 17
[Article by Band» Nicholson: ”thug. again to: sum moor]
[rm1rﬁm'owu— . M m nan-am m». «an; otﬂeouladond'
1-, am an “you!“ Into m0 nests-9:51;? “grammar?
mummy-om Mdﬁfr’” 'Wmm, "" ”Mi; mm a not

WM y Man-Iceman“ anwnzww‘
column to sharp?! :ﬂuumﬁ" 2.1%" m “mun m cu m pm 6-,.
mtumtmn M.M.mummm v1 um":
symbol: 0! Stem pun m am you: "1mm meow can
Lem adamanofs ”“91”me Tum-nam-
Wplmmm "m "‘ mmuhow
cum on. nu Lm m, m pMMIuSMn-n M a w M m
We com "I0 W mm a... ma M‘ﬁ'ui w «and out at
which 9W ma Mam mm“. nhkunbbdout 00ml!!-
fﬂwwﬂ'" mamas“ «WM- Thoma-m
vmmmmﬁ‘mmwgymuwudm ”mummy.
mummy” ,p‘ﬂvwmﬁﬂbww Dyan had "a“
m. W'W”mm “Mdmm 'lth II M
n the man! m n u nanny m " mph
gomwtncouu mum mshbw Pm chum” momma-o
(no unbound 0' use mm awn 9m an Incl at our clvl! can". no
I «mind was-ammo! mum-- to! pro MIN
math: Mm “could the country. maul. mum llvlu ma 10131me coaut-
promo for m unm- 1-... "m. M costs in nun- who you.
um; mauled pm u not $2."? 3" 1:00;":- seonn an In sum
. W m not.
"“ °" “W" 0‘" nee-sum! M to ‘50 nt'ndcd um in. mm u coming.
my an gull m "“3"! “W 0‘ u m that union- 11,. m cm
as mu. Time a cone: Me In an a all" ' 890"“ home!!!» sonnets
'33“: cod-“pkg: in “mm” "r": twig- frequent ".15..-
. um I
Even“ W (M "I” tum-man our sun- mump m m

“In”?! “agar: «Tuféixmti cat-F‘- m In the ‘04.“! "UNIS“ mm

o: a «Wm!- 50 us has Inﬂuence '°‘ -"‘”°°ﬂ We“ no a: the tension
am and bribery 0"" MM' sun 8 m. All m: u
n

WON acorn am can. 5“}9" mud “N“ Mod to m the
Bu? then i, m. a (min businessmen. "b“ M l: a uncanny.
., .1 «mum "encummd" by mm no and um 10 a lutmﬁmum Doe

«I: country's mum. «m It: too much to or {ﬂint-Unusual
ms

The land has molded don mum com! 9., (or ‘ N can: a, hwl

up (mum More and

COPYRIGHT: M908 CO. 1981

a
a

C50: 4700/3133

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY