FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10285
27 January 1982

Near East/North Africa Report

(FOUO 4/82)

FBIS FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JYRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. “here no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.5. Government.

COPYRIGHT LANE AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OHNERSHIP OF
"RTERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION

OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
NEAR EAST/NORTH AFRICA REPORT

(POUO 4/82)

CONTENTS
INTER-ARAB AFFAIRS

Broad Range of Tunisia. Kuwait Cooperation Noted
(MARCH-IS TROPICAUX ET WEDITBRRANEENS. 18 Dec 81) . . . . . . . .

ALGPRIA

Mara Outlines Drought Emergency Plan
(HARCHES TROPICAUX 3T MBDITBRRANEBNS, 18 De: 81) ........

EGYPT

Defects of Regime's Economic, Social Foundations Reviewed
(Amir Isksndsr; AL-HATAN AL-‘ARABI, 6-12 Nov 81) ........

IRAQ
Recent Raids on Iranian Oil Centers Discussed
(AL-"ATM! AL-'ARABI, 30 Oct-5 Nov 81) .. ... .... ..... .. . ..
'AL-THANRAH'Genersl Hanager Discusses Paper's Progress
(Bani uahib Interview; AL-wA-rm AL-‘ARABI, 30 Oct-5 Nov 81)
LIBYA
Prospects of Cooperation With USSR Reviewed
(FOREIGN TRADE. Dec 81) .................................
Bf fect of Oil Production Drop on Economy Underlined
(AL-"ATM AL-‘ARABI, 30 Oct-5 Nov 81)
HOROCOO

Results in Mining Exploration Field Published
(HARCHES TROPICAUX ET MEDITERRANBENS, 18 Dec 81) . . . . . . . .
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SYRIA

Conflict Between Commist Party, Regine Analyzed
(AL-WATAR AL-'ARABI, 27 Nov-3 Dec 81) ....................

Connuniet Party Declaration Condema Regine's Oppreoaive Measures
(AL-WATAN AL-'ARABI, 27 Nov-3 Dec 81) ....................

HBSTERN SAHARA

Defector Says POLISARIO Ru Lost In legitimacy
(Sidahmed Laroai Interview; Pounquoz “$7. 10 Dec 81)
BROAD RANGE OF TUNISIA, KUWAIT COOPERATION NOTED
Paris MARCHES TROPICAUX ET HEDITERRANEENS in French No 1884, 18 Dec 81 pp 3357-3358

[Text] Improved exploitation of phosphates is one of the areas in which Tunisia
and Kuwait cooperate most closely. and as we have mentioned, their cooperation
extends into a broad range of areas (note in particular HTM of 6 March 1981,

p 608; 3 April 1981, p 935; 7 August 1981, p 2043; and 6 November 1981, p 2812).

Early last month, the president and general manager of the Kuwaiti Petrochemical
Industries Company, Mr Abdelbaki Ennouri, came to Tunisia accompanied by a
delegation\to look at possibilities for cooperating in industrial investments.
During his audience 6 November with President Bourguiba--also attended by Mr
Abdelaziz Lasram, the Tunisian minister of national economic affairs, and Mr
Hondher Ben Abdallah, the president and general manager of the Gafsa Phosphates
Conpany--the most important project discussed concerned mining the phosphate
deposit at Sra Ouertane, located some 20 kilometers from the town of Ref.

The first phase of the project--the economic studies which have reached an
advanced stage--will consist of the establishment of a production unit that can
handle 700,000 tons per year and the installation of a washing plant to process
all the production, and the phosphate will be exported via the port of Goulette.
At that stage, the number of new jobs created will be 6,000.

The second phase will raise productitn up to around 2 million tons. By the
year 2000, claims Tunis Afrique Presse, a goveinment agency, there will be a
production capacity of 10 million marketable tons, with the creation of a new
deep-water port at Cap-Negro, in the northwest, and the installation of a rail
link. To grasp the importance of these figures, the press agency says, it is
enough to know that the Gafsa Phosphates Company's total current production is
scarcely more than 6.4 million tons.

Known reserves at the Sra Ouertane deposit are estimated at some 2 billion tons,
more than half of which can be mined in surface pits. While the are does not
have a high percentage of phosphate, what is obtained can be enriched by a
Tunisian "flotation" technique (processing in the washing plant) to yield a
good quality product (65 to 70 percent).

Geological surveys and enrichment research are important programs. Over the
next 5 years, an estimated 3 million dinars (in constant 1980 currency) will

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

be spent on them. These activities will be carried out by the Cafsa Phosphates
Company, by subcontracting for the geological research and increasing the capa-
bilities of the rcsearch center.

Let us also point out that the reopening of the Sra Ouertane mine had been
announced by Mr Mohamed Hzali during his visit to Kef in February. Already,

a joint Tunisian-Kuwaiti company has been established, with 4 million dinars
in capital assets, to carry out the operations. The Official Gazette of 6 No-
vember published a statutory order authorizing the Tunisian Government to sub-
scribe for 1 million dinars of the capital of the Tunisian-Kuwaiti Company

To Research the Sra Ouertane Project.

importance of Arab Investments

Also, in a meeting which took pl1ce on 5 November between the Kuwaiti --iega-
tion and Mr Abdelaziz Lasram, various proposals for Tunisian-Kuwaiti cooperation
in the chemical fertilizer industries sector. The establishment of a company

to produce fertilizer composed partly of phosphoric acid produced in Tunisia

and ammonia produced in Kuwait was also examined. The Tunisian minister for
national economic affairs discussed with the Kuwaiti delegation the possibility
of expanding the activities of the Cabes fertilizer company. Kuwait also agreed
to subscribe to an increase in that company's capital.

In an interview given to the Tunisian daily L'ACTION last October, Mr Ali Boukhris.
president and general manager of the Tunisian-Kuwaiti Development Bank (BTKD)
noted the importance the contribution made by the bank, only a few months after
its establishment. to the realization of new economic projects. After noting

that the board of directors of BTKD, which is capitalized at 100 million dinars,
first met in January 1981 and gave its approval for the financing of 12 projects.
requiring an investment on the order of 23 million dinars, Mr Boukhris said:

"At the present time. six industrial projects financed by BTKD are under way.
Among these, in the first instance. is Gafsa Chemical Industri-s (ICC), coating

55 million dinars. [CC will use phosphates to produce 600,000 tons of fertilizers
destined for export. BTKD contributed 10 million dinars, or 20 percent of the
total cost of the investment, toward the creation of these industries, which

will start producing in 1984."

The problem of financing Tunisian projects by foreign capital was once again
discussed in the house of deputies. in its meeting of 27 November. The members
of parliament were considering a statutory order ratifying the convention pro-
viding for the Kuwaiti Petrochemical Company to own shares in the Gafsa Chemical
Industries Company. One deputy asked why the Tunisian Government would allow

a foreign partner to own more of a joint venture than the Tunisian side.

in response, Hr Abdelaziz Lasram said that the important thing in ventures of
this kind was to be able to pursue the national effort in the field of heavy
industry. Foreign financing, he added, does not constitute a threat, especially
in cases like ICM of Cafes. where Tunisians have full control of the technical
and commercial side of the enterprise. The minister of national economic af-
fairs also touched on the positive developments in Tunisian—Kuwaiti cooperation
in the field of fertilizers. saying among other things that the two sides have
agreed to a joint venture in Turkey and to establish a phosphoric acid plant in
Kuwait.

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Mr Hansour "calls, the minister of planning and finance. also took the floor to
respond to the deputy's remarks. Hoalla said that the favorable terms some

Arab investors received on various ventures were designed ultimately to encourage
them to finance projects in Tunisia. The minister then explained the importance
that Arab-backed investments will have in the financing of the 6th Development
Plan covering 1982-86, saying that the latter called for some 5 billion dinars
in foreign participation, half of which should come from the Arab world.
"Cooperation with our Arab brothers goes beyond the scope of the 6th plan and
is, in fact. an integral part of Arab economic interdependence," Hr Hoalla
added, noting that Tunisia. in that regard, had already begun to establish

joint ventures in the fields of industry, banking, service and agriculture.

The statutory order was finally adopted by unanimous vote.

COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux et Cie Paris 198!

9516
£50: 4519/77

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
HARA OUTLINES DROUGHT EMERGENCY PLAN
Paris HARCHES TROPICAUX ET HBDITERRANEENS in French No 188‘, 18 Dec 81 pp 3356-3357

[Text] In view of the gravity of the prolonged drought which has been ravaging
Algeria, particularly in the western region and on the high plateaus, the Council
of Ministers in a meeting 12 December with President Chadli Bendjedid decreed

a set of measures in the form of a complete plan for action to feed, water and
protect the health of the livestock, as well as safeguard agricultural produc-
tion.

The emergency plan, about which we said a few words last week (HTH of 11 December,
p 3295) and which was prepared by the appropriate agencies within NARA (Ministry
of Agricultura and Agrarian Revolution) and local organs, is designed to respond
rapidly to the disturbing situation, which is being most keenly felt in the
sheep-raising sector, as close to 7 million head of breedable sheep are presently
undernourished.

The emergency plan, according to Algeria Presse Service, calls for the amassing
and distributing of large quantities of barley, straw, bran and feed, so as to
cover the essential needs of the livestock through the .almer of 1982. It also
calls for a program of vaccination and veterinary care for the livestock.

The Algerian Government, to carry out this operation to save the livestock, has
decided to import (through NARA) 52,000 tons of barley each month up to 31 Hay
1982.

If importation itself is not a particular problem, the situation is quite dif-
ferent with respect to transporting and distributing the quantities of barley
required to meet the emergency needs, particularly in the governorates where
the condition of the livestock is critical. To that end, NARA, in association
with several subordinate bodies and entities outside the agricultural sector,
has taken steps to organize the unloading of the imported goods at the eignt
principal ports of the country as well as further shipment by truck and in some
cases rail of these cereals to the livestock raising regions.

The undernourished livestock need some 2,000 tons of grain per day, which will
require daily deliveries to be made by a fleet of 400 trucks adapted for grain
transport, for a period of 5 months starting in January.

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL US'- ONLY

All the necessary steps have been taken. according to NARA for the livestock
producers to get provisioned through CAPS (Service Cooperatives), the exclusive
agent of OAIC (Interoccupational Algerian Grains Office), working with local
authorities in such a way as to accurately assess the needs of each producer.

According to MARA's estimates, the existing capabilities of the ministerial
department make it impossible to provide a ration of more than 250 grams per
head per day. "This ration," we were told. "is intended above all to assure the
survival of the liVestock and safeguard the breeding stock which is a capital
asset worth an estimated 700 billion centimes, until conditions are more favor-
able. This action will only involve a supplemental expenditure of 26 billion
centimes for imports."

The move is of added importance because it protects the incomes of some 150,000

livestock breeders; thus more than a million people earn their living solely
from sheep production.

A similar effort is to be carried out with regard to cattle and horses, and

this will require supplying breeders with 2 kilograms of provender for each head
of cattle and each young animal (cow and horse). Consequently, the volume of
provender to be transported to the regions concerned is equivalent to 350,000
hundredweight, which also implies the mobilization of additional transport means.

COPYRIGHT: Rene Moreux et Cie Paris 1981

9516
C50: 4519/77

5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
DEFECTS 0f REGIME'S ECONOMIC, SOCIAL FOUNDAIIONS REVIEUEO
Paris AL-uArAN AL-'ARABI in Arabic No 2101 6-12 Nov 81 pp 74, 75
[article by Amir Iskandar: ”Words from the Far Shore27

[lext7 No intellectual law has ever been as true, especially in Egypt, as the law
which states that nowadays everything is interconnected and Interacts in influence
and effects aith everything else!

This is because if any serious discussion of ehat has gone on and is non going on in
Egypt tries to rise above the platform of a police report, uhich is ultimately
personal, or the platform of one-sided persons' interpretations, which are simplis-
tic for the most part. it will mentally address itself to an extremely complex,
interconnected picture of events, incidents, tendencies. currents, reasons, motives,
causes and goals of a special and general coloring -- domestic and foreign, Egypt
and Arab, local and international. it is as if what is happening and has happened in
Egypt is similar to the acquired and inherited. fixed and variable processes that go
on in a single cell of a living body and are ultimately a diminutive picture of shat
goes on in the context of the entire human body.

Let us take one aspect of the picture, the intellectual or ideological one. What
are the basic features of this aspect? Uhat are its main currents? What are the
true balance of forces in it and the interrelationship of forces that are supported
by their reservoir of capital within the changing Egyptian social structure? what
are the probabilities for the future? What are the factors that have an effect in

making these probabilities the likely ones and in defining the picture of this
Future?

One can say that the main currents that have influenced Egyptian intellectual and
ideological life since the beginning of its modern history are three in number: the
liberal current, the religious current and the nationalist current. The marxist
current was added to them shortly after World War I. These four currents have
dominated and still dominate the Egyptian mind, under various political, social and

cultural titles and designations, with forces of varying volume and influence accord-
ing to changing historical circumstances.

fhie is not a new picture, in any case. to people who follow the course of Egyptian
thinking in particular and perhaps Arab thinking in general. Therefore, the im-
portant question now is not shether or not the picture exists but what its real
w-rth is, that is. one's actual ability at this instant to form the picture of

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

intellectual life an” to influence political developments now and in the foreseeable
future.

9erhaps it is not greatly offensive to reality to say that among these four the
liberal current is the weakest and the least influential from the broad social
standpoint, if we take it in its traditional historic meaning, that is, its more
genuine mooninn regardless of the foreign economic and political manifestations that
have risen to the surface of Eoyptian society in the context of al-Sedat's regime.
why? ﬂecause the liberal current is in the final analysis the ideological form
throuch which capitalism expresses its interests and through which it engages in its
struggles against the other classes and grOups in society. in order to take politi-
cal power and domina‘e economic. social and cultural decisions within that sooiety.

Some writers and analysts consider that the al-Sadat stage, with the breakup of the
"Nasirist" economic structure 1‘ has witnessed, known as liberalization, and the
return of the system of party pluralism against which Nasirism directed severe

legal place, has been a revival of liberalism. The fact is that the economic forces
that dominated the al-Sadat stage and still dominate it have no relation to the

true essence of capitalism. that is, to the productive essence. pbrhaps to the
contrary. they have made a great contribution to directing painful blows at what in
the prevailing literature t called domestic capitalism or the domestic bourgeoisie.
whose place has been taken by 'comprador' groups that engane in usurpinq great
wealth through activities of brokerage. speculation and the local representation

of foreign monopolies and multinational corporations. Among the economic projects
the stage of "liberalization" has witnessed, we can hardly come upon any real
productive ones. The overwhelming majority of them are service projects -- infla-
tionary consumer projects which do not help the accumulation of domestic capital but
have perhaps in essence been antagonistic to it. Such a socioeconomic situation
does not represent a proper environment for the emergence and growth of real liberal-
ism, although it does have the power to present some of its fraudulent aspects.
Nothing offers better proof of this than the system of repressive lees lhich al-
Sadat issued and through which he controlled the spirits of the citizens and kept
stock of all their actions in a manner that is almost unknown except in fascist
countries.

Can political liberalism he established without economic liberalism? In other words.
can a free political platform find its justification and the ability to continue with-
out the presence of a free capitalist economic platform? The answer to this question
is clear: that is that true political liberalism and true economic liberalism. that
is, productive liberalism. are two sides of the same structure and the existence of
one is a necessary condition for the existence of the other.

{he most important question now is: is it in fact possible. in the current circum-
etances of the world, to establish a true productive capitalism, in the context of
a free platform -- in Egypt at least if not in other Arab countries. and indeed.

more than that, in most of the backward or developing countries of the third world?

Egypt was one of the first countries in the Arab nation, and perhaps one of the
first countries in what was later called the third world, in which capitalism dam-
inated at an early staoe of its history. What however was the nature of this capit-
alism?

Egypt was one of the first countries in the Arab nation. and perhaps one of the first

7
FOR OFFICIIL USE ONLY
countries in what was later called the third uprld, in which capitalism dominated
at an early stage of its history. What houever-uasthe nature of this capitalism?

Regardless of the nature of the production which prevailed in the Egyptian sacial
structure, and the “tab structure in general, before the start of colonialist
infiltration. and regardless of whether it ass feudalistic production or belonged
to a specific type of Asiatic production (which is a problem that has been and still
is the cause of severe disputes among economic thinkers and historians of that
period). the impartant thing is to determine a fact which had great significance
following the process of colonialist infiltration into our social structures, that is
that this infiltration itself is what engendered distinctive new production rela-
tions in the Egyptian social structure and the Arab social structures, according to
the transformation in the process of their historic evolution. and made them subject
in this process to the logic of colonial subordination.

This fact entails teo dimensions: the first is that there is a qualitative differ-
ence by which the bourgeoisie in Arab countries is distinguished from the European
bourgeoisie. and that is a difference which lies in the nature of its historical
formation and the nature of productive relations connected to its social dominance.
The second is that since this Arab bourgeoisie arose through the influence and in
the context of colonialist infiltration, and in a relationship of subordination and
subjugation to it, there is another qualitative difference between it and the

European bourgeoisie in the context of its ideological tendencies and practices, and
its ideological content itself.

The french bourgeoisie. for example, could, by virtue of the fact that it use a
dominant revolutionary class, launch a historic revolution which eliminated the
feudal production relationships that stood as a barrier to its development and pushed
-9
that is, development in a context of capitalist production relations that had been
born within feudalism itself. The notions of the French revolution became crystal-
lized and the concepts of bourgeois ideology and its instruments of dominance be-
came embodied in this radical historic process of antagonism to the feudal system.
so that. through those, it acquired its revolutionary liberationiat nature at that
'-ime. Meanwhile we find that the Arab bourgeois classes, including the Egyptian
one, which arose during and thanks to the colonialist infiltration. were in their
domestic development subjected to the inevitable context of subaervience from the
ﬁaqlnnino of that development. Thus this bourgeois class or classes were not
tanuine revolutionary ones. that is. able to continue the struggle on behalf of

:heir logical goals of development, and it was not in their pouar to produce a
revolutionary ideology either.

This bourgeoisie which was engendered by colonialist infiltration thus did not
carry out a reel bourgeois revolution, as was the case with respect to the European
hnurnnoin rlassnn, because the colonialist infiltration had begun, while they were
still in their cradle and subsequently took form and proceeded pith their specific
limited growth in the structural context that had been created by this colonialist

I“Yiltrat!nn itnnlf in its various forms, by linking local agricultural production
Po the European capital market, with the influential effects that had in the for-

mortqaqe banks. credit and so forth, in generous loans to the colonized country
ankruptcy. as happened in Egypt

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in 'he era of lsma'il, so that. Egypt would fall easily under comprehensive coloni-
alist. dominance), or in other forms besides ‘hese.

1‘ can easily be said, as some interpretations that have been propounded do, that the
bit; enricul aural landowners in Egypt, for example. represented a class of feudalists
directly linked to colonialism, and that because of this position they were in

, lie on .trediction with the "national baurgeoisies" represented by the middle

use". tmt aspired to take pawer and that. consequently were in contradiction with
-.--1I-1rinliem and colonialism. indeed many interpretations or analyses of ideological
lrt'anS occurred under the quidance of that thinkinq. It. was said that obsolete and
ronnez-vative tendencies were the tendencies of ”the feudalists" and that the ten-
-!--ncies of the middle classes, to the contrary, were liberal and liberationist and
r'erivur' their roots f.om french revolutionary thought.

Mr mus: be aware of the difference hetween what is called a growing middle class in
he framework of a subordinate bourgeoisie and an emerging middle class in the
context of capitalist relationships, as was the case in Europe. The difference is
area: and qualitative at the same time. It lies in the difference of origins, and
"m difference in 'hc position wi'.hin the prorees of developmenl itself. The
European middle class is the one that emerqod between the noblemen end the peasants,
'hat is, i'. itself is the rising bourqeois class that hrOunht the system of capitalist
nroduction alone wi'h itself and its revolutionary ideolooy when it emerged and
ﬁdiznr‘ pcr-mr from the class of feudal nobleman. This is not. the case with our
hourouoisies, which nmnrned as: subordinate classes that went through their growth
condemned by the framework of their structural relations of subordination to the
colonialist bourgeoisins and net. throunh their hostile contradictions with feudal
classes that did not exis‘.

Vanetheless, the middle class that is born in the womb of subordinate Arab bourgeois
structures and finds the road blacked toward natural development -- blocked by virtue
of subordination to the very colonialist and imperialis’. baurgeoisies themselves --
refuses to give in to this historic fact, that is, the impossibility of such capital-
ist development in accordance with its classical motions that soch a development is
noesible, that the obstacle that stands in its way lies not in structural subordina-
tion to imperialism but in the class that dominates the local sacial structure at

a statue of its development, that is, the class of large agricultural landowners.
Therefore, this middle class appears to resemble a revolutimary "bourgeoisie"
fighting against "feudalism" and "the aristrocracy," and the false analogy betwaen
these Arab middle classes and the capitalist middle class in the West spreads, in
spite of the radical difference in origins, growth, course and the law of movement
between the two. This middle class which strqules for power with the old class
adopts the ideas of the European middle class in its initial formation within the
-..om'n of European feudalism, and here it forcefully reiterates traditional liberal
ideas in all their ten lencies and forms, the zeal to imdtate its Western models
increased, and indeed "ttm West” becomes, to some groups in it, if not most of them,
Hm model which must be emulated in order to seize power.

t'eqardless of the illusions or hopes, 'he West, as "an optimun model,” cannot be
r-‘Jpro-luced, because the Nest itself no lonoer is as it was during its capitalist
development. during capitalism's first stages. The West has becane mmopolistic and
itself no lonoer allows the emergence of regimes which resemble or seek to resemble
it, except. in the context of their structural subordination to it and within the

9

FOR OFFICIAL USP, ONLY
limits of the international division of labor which it determines and whose course it
dominates, in the context of the international capitalist system by the nature of the
case.

Can the free Arab economic platform find scope for progress and a future in this
current international context? The answer is yes, but within the limits internation-
al impprielinm sets cut for it in the form of a course. growth and ceiling that it
cannot transcend, and, more important than that, within the limits of its structural
subrrdination to this imperialism. In this context it will never be more than a
=ist0rted picture of a Fraudulent bourgeoisie gaverned by fate by its unbreakable
subordination to the world imperialist bourgeoisie. So is it possible to say that
'here is a future for political liberalism? The answer is yes but within the same
limits as those drawn up for the free economic platform itself. and, beyond that.
eithin the limits permitted by the social struggle in poor developing societies. These
are limits which al-Sadat's experiment has pr0ved to be much narrower than they were
in the early part of this century. The most likely possibility is that they will
hecomn narrower and narrower the closer we eat to the and of this century!

EOPYRIGHT: 1981 AL-HATAN AL—'ARABI

11887
C50: k504/86

10

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
RECENT RAIDS 0N IRANIAN OIL CENTERS DISCUSSED
Paris AL-HATAN AL-'ARABI in Arabic No 246, 30 Oct-S Nov 81 p 70
[Article: "Recent Iraqi Raids Prevent Iran Prom Exporting 011"]

[Text] Recent Iraqi raids on Iranian ports in the Arab Gulf have led to the
destruction of Iran's ability to export oil for a period of time ranging from
several months to a year. They have also definitely put most of the industrial
projects in Iran out of commission.

On 20 September, the Iraqis attacked the oil pumping station at al-churah, which
supplies the loading port on al-Kharj island, where the main oil exporting
station is. The Iraqi air force also launched two raids in October on the port
of Bandar Khomeyni.

These raids were in retaliation for Iranian raids which attempted to put the main
electrical generating stations in Iraq out of operation. Informed Iraqi sources
told AL-WAIAN AL-'ARABI that the Iraqi raids, to a large extent, paralyzed the
Khomeyni regime's ability to continue to finance its war against Iraq and to
supply the causes for economic stability at home.

Before the war, Iran was exporting about 5 million barrels of oil a day. After
the revolution, but before the recent raids, this amount had dropped to about

500,000 barrels a day, of which 60 percent was exported from the loading port

on al-Kharj island.

The ground pumping szation at al-Ghurah and ships that were being loaded with oil
in the ports of al-Kuarj and Bandar Khomeyni were hit in the recent Iraqi raids.
The huge petrochemicxl complex in Bandar Khomeyni was also badly damaged.

Right after these raids, the Iranians asked their principal oil clients (India

and countries of Eastern Europe) to switch to a secondary oil port in the southern
Arabian Gulf. However, the loading capacity of these ports is extremely small

and does not exceed 200,000 barrels a day. '

Iran was selling its oil at $37 a barrel, but the collapse of oil prices has
forced it to sell oil for barter or at a lesser price. Before the recent Iraqi
raids, Iran's income from oil was $550 million per month. However, it will lose
most of this amount now, while it is preparing for winter, and is in dire need
of hard currency to import foodstuffs as well as fuel.

11

mn OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Iraqi experts estimated Iran's reserves of hard currency, before the recent
raids, at only $3 billion, and this is subject to rapid reductions after oil
exports were cut off. They do not think it unlikely that Iran will resort to
selling her shares in foreign companies, such as the Rest German Krupp firm
($6 billion), in order to prevent the collapse of the Iranian economy and to
continue to finance the war against Iraq.

Irnql's evidence for the success of their recent raids is the decisions of the
Iranian Central Bank requiring restrictions on imports and limiting them to arms
and very essential foodstuffs. The Iranians are trying to limit the amount of
imports to only about $900 million a month, of which $300 million is to finance
the Iranian war machine.

As for the two Iraqi raids on the Bandar Khomeyni petrochemical complex, any
opportunity to reach an agreement in the long and difficult negotiations between
the Iranians and the Japanese Mitsui Company, which built it, has been destroyed.

The Iraqis anticipated the completion of the complex to be imminent, as well as
the repairs to the damages it suffered as a result of a previous raid last year.
Therefore. they launched their new raids in October.

The Japanese had estimated the costs of the previous damages that the complex
suffered last year alone at $800 million. They are now demanding that the
Iranians pay the installments that are due. Ibreover, they have informed
Teheran that they will not be able to continue the work in light of the recent
raids.

The complex is considered to be the largest Iranian industrial project, and is
also considered the largest industrial project carried out by Japan abroad. Its
cosm amounted to $3.6 billion.

COPYRIGHT: 1981 AL-WATAN AL-‘ARABI

7005
C80: 6604/107

. l2
FOIIOFFKJA1.US£(MVLY
'AL-THAHRAH'GBNERAL MANAGER DISCUSSES PAPER'S PROGRESS
Paris AL-WATAN AL-‘ARABI in Arabic No 266, 30 Oct-3 Nov 81 p 87

IInterview with Mr Hani Wahib, director general of AL-THAHRAH, by Kamal Hasan
Bukhayt: "Rani Wahib, On Culture and Hriting as the Pulse of Life"]

[Text] The Iraqi newspaper AL—THAHRAH recently celebrated its 13th anniversary.
Mr Hani Hahib, the director general and assistant editor of AL-THAHRAH, recounts
the newspaper's progress and the role which it has and will play on the intel-
lectual, enlightenment and news levels.

Hani Hahib said: "On this new anniversary, we celebrate the excellent accomplish—
ments in the media field throughout last year, with respect to excellent issues

of various types, embodied by the daily edition modified to serve our fateful
battle with the Persian enemy and the evening editions, which were published in
the first weeks of the war. In addition, there were excellent special editions
that were actually historic documents. highlighting the most important facts and
dimensions of the Qadasiyah Saddam var. Moreover, they embodied the extraordinary
heroism of the Iraqi army. These issues also highlighted the profound accomplish-
ments of the pan—Arab, socialist 17 July revolution, with serious studies, field
studies and precise information. The most prominent of these issues were the
special edition published by the newspaper on 6 January, the anniversary of the
heroic Iraqi army, the special edition on the anniversary of the 8 February revol-
ution, the edition especially for the anniversary of the founding of the party on
7 April, and finally the special edition for the 13th anniversary of the 17 July
revolution and the second anniversary of President Saddam Husayn's taking over the
foremost positions in the party and state."

The Rifle and the Pen Are One Voice

He added: "On this newspaper's anniversary this year, we also wish to acknowledge
a group of martyrs affiliated with it, who embody that marvelous slogan that our
historic leader Saddam Husayn coined: 'The rifle and the pen are one voice.‘

"The spirit of victory has been personified by our newspaper's workers who have
given twice the effort, since the cadre that remains to do the work is measureably
smaller than that before the war. Despite that, qualitative and quantitative
progress has been made with respect to the paper's editions and publications,

since the comrade workers have been able to make up for the labor of their comrades,

13
FOR 0FFH]A1.USE(N‘LY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

who have gone to the fighting fronts in the people's army or in reserve service in
the army. ALPTHAURAH has fulfilled its media role in the war through firm and
committed media fonts. Moreover it is a lofty media forum for the Qadasiyah
Saddam war."

[Question] It is well known that AL-THAWRAH is the party's paper. What addition-
al things can it offer on the intellectual levels?

[Answer] In fact, the intellectual additions of the Arab Socialist Ba'th Party
always are derived from two basic supports. The first source is the party's pan-
Arab conferences and the theoretical analytical ideas that result. They are
studied from all aspects of the party's intellectual and ideological experience,
and are expanded, within the framework of ideological reports and studies. The
other source is fundamental as well; the contributions made by historic party
leaders in enriching party thinking.

Perhaps the most prominent of the party leaders. who were able to contribute dis-
tinguished additions to party thinking, is our historic, fighting leader Saddam
Husayn, excellent additions which prove maturing concern for truth, through "The
Theory of Revolutionary Labor" which put the party's ideological premises to the
test of practical application, and transformed them into achievable practical
terms.

With regard to myself, as one of the involved writers in Iraq, my participation is
confined to attempts to clarify and explain the ideological additions of President
Saddam Husayn as best I can.

From time to time, I feel that whatever I offer only forms a small part of my
mission. I feel very unimportant about my participation, by virtue of my belief
which our leader taught us. "He who is not at one with experience in the fields
of practical labor for the socialist structure cannot accurately write about

the facts." Our sitting in a closed room sometimes. pursuing the journalist's
daily work, has deprived us, to a great extent, of field experience of the truth
of socialist application in agriculture, industry, commerce and the services.

In my estimation, field experience in these sectors is what enables' the involved
writer to write passionately about reality, free from ideological generalities,
within the special qualities of socialist application and Ba'thist democracy in
these vital fields.

I also believe that culture, in this sense, is not a literal occupation. but
only a fighting task, which can best be fulfilled in light of concern for the
masses and in the field of applied labor, through becoming begrimed with the soil
of this application. Then one is refreshed, and the writing pulsates with life.

[Question] How do you evaluate the Iraqi-Iranian war after one year has passed?
[Answer] Iraq's battle with the Persian enemy is not a tactical, military fight,

but is a comprehensive, cultural battle, into which Iraq has plunged with the
spirit of the Arab Nation against the Persian foe, striking a blow for its deep

14
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
roots in the Arabs' history and their honorable values. Consequently, it ex-
presses the vitality of the Arab Nation in confronting various challenges, and
thereby the ability to defeat them.

The marvelous thing is the cohesiveness of the fighting fronts with the domestic
front, stemming from the fact that the Iraqi army's marvelous heroism on Iraq's
eastern border and deep within Iranian territory is, at the same time, the
heroism of all Iraqis, who are bearing this war with the Hujahedin spirit of
optimism and patience.

Despite month following month, they increase in determination and resolution in
the spirit of victory. This is a decisive result of the historic role of our

leader, Saddam Husayn, in building the unity of the Iraqi people on the firmest of
foundations.

[Question] A year after the democratic experiment, represented by the National
Assembly. how do you evaluate this experiment, especially since you published two
books about the democratic process?

[Answer] I am proud of two books in this field, "Distinguishing Characteristics
of Ba'thist Democracy" and "The Democratic Process and the National Assembly
Elections," in addition to some miscellaneous writings about the revolutionary
democratic experiment in Iraq. In my opinion, under the circumstances in which
I wrote, these offerrings concentrated on the importance of democratic conscious-
ness and the interaction with the democratic process, and the vital dialectical
connection between the two. In other words, democratic consciousness is the
broadest field for a healthy democratic process. Moreover, the steps of demo-

cratic application are an expression of democratic consciousness and the demo-
cratic culture.

I reacted emotionally to the National Assembly elections.

A year after this course of action, I feel that the experiment has gained notable
dimensions. This is because of the way in which the elections of the people's
representatives were conducted, in affording the opportunity to all Iraqis to join
the course of the revolution, to be committed to its programs, and to exercise

the right of nomination and election.

Despite the party's excellent leadership role in building the revolutionary
structure. it did not allow any preference or favaritism for its members in the

elections. whether with respect to election propaganda or complete freedom of
expression.

Therefore, the launching of the National Assembly was a link in the development
of the democratic process. The Assembly has a share, through its legislative
'nnction during the last session, in the debate over and promulgation of several
important laws. The Iraqi people have perceived positive returns from this
process. Arab and world public opinion also perceived the dimensions of this
experiment, through the interaction of the National Assembly with Arab and world
parliamentary assemblies.

COPYRIGHT: 1981 AL-UATAN AL-'ARABI

7005
C50: 4404/107
15

FOI.OFI1C1AI.USE¢DNLN
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02109: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500020064-6

PROSPECTS OF C(XlPERATION HIT“ USSR REVIEWED
Moscow FOREIGN TRADE in English Dec 81 pp 33-35
[Text]

Soviet-Libyan economic and technical coopera-
tion greatly contributes to the strengthening of the
Socialist People's Libyan Arab Jamahiriya (SPLAI)
economic independence. The cooperation follows
from intergovernmental agreements and protocols
signed in l972-l98l creating a sound foundation for
the equal and mutually beneﬁcial cooperation which
has developed rapidly. Today it covers the most
important sectors of Libya's economy such as:
electric power. oil and gas, ferrous metallurgy, and
agriculture. Future prospects of this cooperation
development on a stable and long-term basis have
been defined.

- USSR-Libya economic and technical cooperation
on practically all projects is realized according to
a general contract. This is the form of cooperation
~hest answering the interests of both Soviet and
Libyan organivations.

Soviet assistance is of real signiﬁcance for the
development of the Libyan economy. The atomic
research centre, Tagiura. now being constructed for

' the utilization of atomic energy for peaceful pur-
poses is- the lirst in the country and the largest
research centre of this kind in the Arab countries.
The ﬁrst stage of this centre was put into opera-
tion in December I930.

The scheme [or the development of a high vol-
tage grid system elaborated by Soviet specialists is
very important [or the creation of Libya's uniﬁed
electric energy network by I995. Soviet organim-
tions have completed the construction of 220 ltV
power transmission lines stretching a distance til

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02109: ClA-RDP82-00860R000500020064-6
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02109: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500020054-5

FUR OFFICIAL LS}: ONLY

about 200 kilometres. Pulling the above transmis-

- sion lines into operation in December 1980 extended
the distance of the 220 ‘r\’ power transmission grid
system by 14 per cent. Construction of the 370km
long new Syrte-el Brega 220 kV power transmission
line will soon he started. Possibilities for coopera-
tion in constructing thermal power stations and
other new power transmission lines are under con-
sideration.

The leaders of the Libyan Jamahiriya pay great
attention to the development of the national oil-

extracting industry. Oil is the main wealth of the
country. it plays the decisive role in developing the
national economy. Oil production accounts for mu-
re than 60 per cent of the country's gross national
product. The incomes from the oil industry are the
main source of currency revenue. Soviet oil drilling
teams have been successfully working in the same
conditions of the Libyan desert since I979. Coope-
ration ol the Soviet and Libvan organizations in
drilling for oil has helped Libya increase its exports
and receive considerable additional currency.
Recently the Libyan leaders have been actively
pursuing a course for creating a national gas in-
dustry. Libya possesses a great raw material base
for the comprehensive development of this branch
of industt y and this is where Soviet organizations
. are rendering great assistance. A general develop-
ment scheme [or the Libyan gas industry up to the
year 2000 was prepared for and passed to Libya. in
line with this scheme Soviet organizations are con-
structing the S70-kilometrc-long Marsa-el Brega-Misu-
reta gas pipeline for supplying industrial enterpri-
ses distributed along the Libyan coast. including the
metallurgical complex in Mtsureta. with natural gas.
After completion of this gas line the distance cove-
red by the country's gas pipelines will be greater
by 40 per cent.

USSR-Libya cooperation in agriculture is. pro-
gressing favourably. The development of this most
important branch of economy, employing about
20 per cent of the country's population, is limited
due to the lack of land suitable for cultivation and
water for its irrigation. With the assistance of So
viet specialists soil and ecological researches were
made and a soil map of the country's coastal part
over an area of 3.5 million hectares was drawn for
the first time in Libya's history. Agreement on
further cooperation in conducting soil and gee-bota-
nical researches in other regions of Libya was
reached.

17
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/0sz ClA-RDP82-00850R000500020054-5
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02109: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500020064-5

The USSR-Libyan Jamahiriya economic and tech-
nical cooperation is not limited to the above-men-
tioned ﬁelds of activity. There are good pros-
pects for cooperation in geology. health care and

possibilities for cooperation in constructing rail-
ways in Libya and other fields of endeavour are
under study.

The Intergovernmental Soviet-Libyan Commis-
sion for the development of economic. scientiﬁc
and teclmical cooperation as well as trade, set up
in I974. greatly contributes to the strengthening of
t'nendship and multilateral cooperatiott of the two
countties. The Commission at its sessions constan-
tlt considers practical questions concerning I‘L‘ﬂ-
button of the sitles' commitments according to act-
tne. intergovernmental documents and contracts and
tlt\t‘lt\\'t‘.\' ways for further expanding the mutually
lmnelicial economic and technical cooperation in
close connection with tlte two countries' develop-
ment plans.

Regular meetings ol the leaders ol both countries

- ate of special importance for further strengthening
the ties of friendship and cooperation betWeen the
Smiet Union and the Libyan Jamahiria.

The olticial visit of friendship by Colonel Mouam-
mar Katlhali. leader of the Libyan revolution. to
the Soviet Union in April I‘Nl gave a new impulse
to the consolidation of Sin-iet-l.yliitttt ties and the
tleu-loptnent of favourable u-opeiation between the
two countries. Duting the talks with Li. Brezhnev,
General Secretary of the Central Connuittee of the
CPSli. Chaitntan ol the USSR Supreme Soviet, and
other Soviet leaders. M. Kadhafi discussed a large
number of questions concerning Soviet-Libyan co-
operation in vatious sectors. The main directions
[or the future development and widening of ver-
satile cooperation ol the countries on a bilateral
and long-term foundation were ﬁnalized.

The further icinl'orcement anti widening of eco
_ nomic relations between the USSR and Libya were
assisted by the working visit of A5. Jalloud, a
member of the Libyan revolutionary leadership, to
the Soviet Union in June l98l during which nego-
tiations on the development of economic and tech-
nical cooperation took place.

As a result of the negotiations NA. Tilthonov,
Member of the Political Bureau of the CPSU Cen-
tral Committee, Chairman of the Council of Mi-
nisters of the USSR. and AS. Jalloud. member of

18
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007I02109: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500020064-6
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007I02109: CIA-RDP82-00860R000500020054-5

I-‘Oll OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the SPIJU revolutionary leadership, on June 29
signed a Protocol in the Kremlin envisaging wide
participation of Soviet organizations in the Libyan
industrialization programme, especially for the de-
velopment of such industrial sectors as energy. for
rous metals, oil. gas, the petrochemical and cheo
mical industries as well as the training of Libyan
personnel on the basis of a long-term plan.

The above cooperation is to be accomplished

through a long-term comprehensive programme
which both sides are to draw up.

In particular, an understanding has been reached
on building the second stage of the metallurgical
complex (capacity five million Inns of steel per year)
in the Libyan town of Misurt ta which will help
satisly not only the home requirements of the coun-
try but also will enable it to export a considerable
quantity of its production. Soviet organizations
have already completed and passed the technical-
economic substantiation for the construction of the
complex to Libya.

The construction by Soviet organiutions of a
plant for the production of nitric fertilizers which
will raise soil fertility and increase crop yields will
- assist the intensiﬁcation of agriculture—a paramount

branch of Libya's economy.

A major project in Soviet-Libyan cooperation in
the chemical industry will be the complex for the
production of magnesium and chlorine using the
Marada deposits which are unique in the content
of their components. The manufactured products
(magnesium) will be widely used in different ma-
chine building sectors and also will have great ex-
pot‘l potential.

Agreement has been reached on the building
of an enterprise to produce protein from oil crude.

The products of this enterprise will be of great im-
portance for the intensive development of animal
husbandry. which due to insufﬁcient fodder has
had its growth rate limited. Protein being a source
of valuable substances (albumen. vitamins. micro-
clements) for feeding animals increases the nutri-
tiousncss of fodder, accelerates their growth and
fattening rate.

Soviet-Libyan cooperation will greatly progress
in the oil and gas industry, particularly in the sur-
Vey and drilling for oil and gas. development and

' 19
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00050R000500020054~5
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007I02109: CIA-RDP82-00850R000600020054-5

exploitation of oil and gas ﬁelds, building of under-
ground storage reservoirs and new pipelines. Fol-
lowing this aim Soviet organizations will render
Libya assistance in the elaboration of general and
comprehensive development schemes for the coun-
try's oil-production industry.

During A.$. Jalloud's visit to the Soviet Union the
intention of both Sides to mutually beneﬁcial co-
operation between the USSR and SPLAJ in the
interests of the peoples of both countries and streng-
thening mutual understanding and friendship be.
tween them was conﬁrmed.

Vyachesllv Kuuyev.
Executive Secrclau' u! the Soviet SM:
0] the lutcraorcntmcnln! Swirl-Libra" ('ommiuion
[or m: Drt-clopmcm 0! Economic. Scicmilic
and chlmicai Cooperation. and Trade

3 COPYRIGHT: "Vneshmya torgovlya" 1981

080: 4500/89

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02109: CIA-RDP82-00860R000600020054-5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

LIBYA

smart or on. PRODUCTION DROP on economy unocnuuco
Paris AL-HATAN AL—‘ARABI in Arabic No 246.30 Oct-5 Nov 81 p 69
[ﬂ-rticle: “Libya: The Liquidity Crisis Resulting from Foreign Adventuresj

[Foxt7 Libya has started to feel the negative effects of the tremendous spending on
projects of foreign adventures which the regime of President Mu'ammar al-Oadhdhafi
has carried out in recent years.

These negative effects take tte form of a drain of the country's hard currency
resources. Making matters worse has been the blatant drop in Libya's incone from
oil this year because of the oil glut in the international free market and the drop
in oil prices on the other hand.

“3 long as Libya adheres to the official price ohich it has set for its oil, which is
$60 per barrel, it appears that it will be compelled to reduce the price, now that

a number of countries and companies have canceled their previous contracts to buy
Libyan oil or have reduced their purchases of it to a minimum, as the American
companies have done, for instance.

Libyan oil production in the recent period dropped from 1.5 million barrels a day to
600,000 barrels a day. and half this amount goes for local consumption.

Informed experts here expect that Libya's income from oil this year will not exceed
$10 or 12 billion as compared with its income of $22 billion from oil last year.

In fact. President el-ﬂedhdhefi recently called for the pursuit of a policy of asceti-
cism and belt-tightening. It is not yet known if that will also be applied to foreign
spending or aill only embrace domestic development plans.

To limit the liquidity crisis the Libyan treasury is suffering from, the authorities
have started to put pressure on the Japanese. German, Italian, South Korean and
Indian companies helping to carry out development projects. in an attempt to persuade
them to accept the principle of barter, that is, payment in oil instead of dollars.

These companies are nreetinn this principle hesitantly. 0n the one hand they are
worried about the contracts they are carrying out and on the other hand they reject
the official high price set for the oil. In addition they are not confident that
they will find a consumer market for disposing of the oil, especially since the
free international market is currently suffering from a real glut.

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
It is certain that the plan of” asceticism will be applied to the present ambitious
development plan, whose allocations come to 870 billion, and consequently the exe-
cution of a number of development plans will be delayed.

In addition, supermarkets have started suffering from s shortage of food and supply
commodities as a result of limits on imports. These markets and complexes were
established after the qwernment took Over uholesele and quasi-wholesale trade and
determined to inundare these markets with goods to persuade citizens that it had
been correct in nationalizinq domestic trade.

COPYRIGHT: 1981 AL-WATAN AL-'ARABI

1188?
C50: ASUA/Bﬁ

22

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
RESULTS IN MINING EXPLORATION FIELD PUBLISHED
Paris HARGli-ZS TROPICAUX ET HEDITERRANEENS in French No 1884, 18 Dec 81 p 3359

[Text] Starting with the 1980 activity report of Horocco's BRPM (Mineral Proa-
pecting and Investment Office), we reviewed last week (m No 1883, p 3297)

in broad outline the accomplishments of that organization in the respective
fields of oil and mining operations. 0n the latter subject, we indicated that
there had been a significant upturn during 1980, with BRPH's prospecting activi-
ties continuing to be oriented primarily toward solid energy substances, without
however, neglecting the precious metals. base metals and useful substances. He
will now supplement that information by publishing the results recorded in the
mining exploration field. First, however, we must present in detail the pros-
pecting permits issued last year by BRPH, the one we already published being
obviously incomplete, and further misleading because a line was unfortunately
dropped. Our readers should take note that the 52 prospecting permits were
broken down this way: 1 permit for solid combustibles, 13 for radioactive energy
substances and 38 for metallic substances. This correction now made here by
product, is the principal results recorded last year in the field of mining
exploration:

Uranium-Exploration work continuing in Hsfaga, in the western High Atlas, made
it possible to cross-check the depth of a mineral deposit, and also produced
evidence of a new area of irregularities.

The third phase of the Haute Houlouya project has been completed. An area of
39 square kilometers covering a certain number of irregularities has been the
object of detailed geological investigation and of a series of borings which
traversed decolorized strata showing strong radioactivity.

Oil Shale—-Following decisions made to upgrade the Timahdit oil shale deposit,
additional surveys were made of the Tassemakht plateau, and these confirmed the
continuity and homogeneity of the bituminous section and made it possible to
determine the area in which open-air mining could take place.

Lignite--Exploratory drilling continued for this substance in the Guercif Basin,
and it confirmed the existence of lignite veins with a thickness varying fron
S to 50 cm.

A geological study undertaken in the Haut Aoulai Basin. northwest of Ghafsai,

has discovered a nunber of outcroppings of very good quality lignite justifying
continuation of prospecting activity.

23

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Silvur--The additional mining carried out at the silver deposits of Roc Blane.
in the central Jbilets. at Vein V, has been the most productive. The initial
results of the analysis confirm the presence of deep mineral deposits.

Lead/Zinc--The lead-zinc deposit at Jbel Khitem received new attention this

year with a study of the characteristics of the deep mineral deposits and identi-
fication of the reserves downstream from the old site where the principal vein
was worked. Early results are encouraging.

Tungsten-work on tungsten at Sidi Bou Azzouz yielded a provisional estimate
of the reserves at this deposit, on which experimental processing has begun.

The Azegour tungsten deposit. whose reserves have been assessed, has been the
subject of various tests which led to development of a suitable process for
refining this ore.

Barite--Severa1 veins of barite in the Ougnat region (Errachidia Province) were
the subject of giological study aimed at determining the potential reserves.

Asbestos--A11 of the geological work that has been done in the Anti-Atlas has
made it possible to select several deposits which show indications of exploit-
able asbestos.

Marble-—The size as well as the quality of reserves at the Idchfar marble de-
posits, south of Tiznit, justified planning for their exploitation by a company
named SOGEHAK, in which SODECAT, a subsidiary of BRPH, holds a 25 percent interest.

General Prospecting

I§tudies made as part of the overall prospecting effort covered:

--Prospecting for signs of gold and silver near Iknioun, south of Boulmane, signs
of silver and antimony at Bou Jaada and signs of antimony at Sidi Kacem.

--Survey and update the status of different geological and mineralogical pros-
pecting permits to find out their expiration dates.

--Carrying out geochemical work in several parts of central Morocco.

Also, BRPH affiliates or subsidiaries carried out, either themselves or through
BRPH. various prospecting programs enabling them to increase the reserves of
deposits and thereby to prolong the life of the operation, with the majority

of financing coming from the Deposit Restoration Fund (PRC).

The main accomplishments of those companies in terms of exploration were as
follows:

--Follow-up prospecting by SMI at different depths has disclosed substantial
mineralized surfaces with rather high concentrations.

24

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
-—Mining and geochemical work carried out by BRPH at Zgounder on behalf of
SMS has made it possible to locate new silver-bearing irregularities in the
northern and western parts of this deposit.

-Ihe preparatory and prospecting work performed by BRPM on behalf of SONIHA
[Mining Company of Mauritania], basically in the western part of the copper
deposit at Ouansiei, continues at a good pace.

--The program of supplementary work carried out by BRPH at Asfalou for SODBCAT
should confirm the assessment of copper and silver reserves at this deposit.

--The large copper mine at Bleids being prepared by SOMIFER [Hikamba Iron Hines
Company] has been very active and substantial investments have gone into it.
BRPM teams participated in the developing of the research work carried out at
this deposit in an effort to increase reserves.

--The major prospecting and preparation program carried out at the Aouli lead
deposit has brought to light new reserves with a lead content in the neighbor—
hood of 4 percent, at well IV and Engil II.

--The drilling work carried out by BRPM at the Zeida lead deposit has yielded
positive results which are presently being studied and interpreted by SODIM.

--The major prospecting effort made by SHA for lead-bearing mineralizationa in
its own domain at Jbel Aouam and at Moulay Bou Azza as well as for copper at
Tabaroucht (Deni Hellal) and tungsten in the granite at Zaers, carried out by
BRPH, increased that company's reserves and provided indications of new minerals.

--The major prospecting program which CTT continued built back up the cobalt
reserves at the Bouazzer deposit and revealed new indications of this mineral
in the region.

-—SACEM [Moroccan Mining Studies Corporation] continued with its intensive
manganese prospecting at Imini. SACEM has also done a series of surveys for
uranium in the Zaers region.

--The sample surveys carried out by COHABAR at Jbel Irhoud disclosed major
reserves of barite.

--Exploratory and preparatory work continued at a good pace downstream from the
El Hammam fluorine deposit, and has yielded mineralizations with high ore content.

COPYRIGHT: Rene Moreux et Cie Paris 1981

9516
$30: 4519/77

25

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
CONFLICT BETHEEN COMMUNIST PARTY, REGIME ANALYZED
Paris AL-HATAN AL-‘ARABl in Arabic No 250, 27 Nov - 3 Dec 81 pp hZ-bS

[Articlez "Where Does Moscow Stand on 'the Comrades' Struggle?‘ The Full
Story of the Struggle between al-Asad and the Syrian Communist Party"]

[Text] The secret struggle between Damascus and the communist party in
Syria, one of the most important Arab communist parties, was suddenly out

in the open after the communist party was ousted from the National Progres-
sive Front and the names of communist party members who were candidates in
the recent legislative elections were removed from the ballot. Conse-
quently. the regime's candidates won all the seats in the People's Assembly.

The struggle reached a peak last week after Syrian sources confirmed that
the secretary general of the Syrian Communist party, Khalid Bakdash, and a
large group of the party's members had fled to Bulgaria. Their flight was
an escape from the broad campaign of arrests that was being carried out by
Syrian authorities against party supporters.

The party authority of the Syrian Communist party abroad--in Paris--issued
a harsh statement 2 days ago denouncing the practices of the Syrian regime
and the authority of intelligence agencies.

With regard to the development oi internal conditions in Syria itself the
significance and the gravity of the struggle are due to the close relation—
ship that exists between the Syrian Communist party and Moscow.

Therefore. this development and its sequels are to a large extent tied
to Moscow's posture on confronting "yesterday's comrades."

How did the confrontation begin? what were its causes? What are its domes-
tit and foreign effects with regard to the future of the Syrian regime?
Where does Moscow stand on this confrontation? What will become of the
Soviet-Syrian relationship after this furious struggle?

AL-HATAN AL-‘ARABI answers these and other questions in a special report
from Damascus.

26

FORiOFFNJAl.USEIONlY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

New parliamentary elections held in Syria in the last few days ended with
an announcement that the National Progressive Front had won a sweeping
victory. The National Progressive Front is the front that is led by the
ruling party in Syria. it includes some political parties and organizations
that are allied with the ruling party.

A few weeks before the elections were held. there was a political develop-
ment a small aspect of which was highlighted by the elections. Other
aspects of that development are still being acted upon secretly.

One oi the most remarkable indications of this development was the fact
that Syrian President Hafiz al—Asad decided to oust the Syrian Communist
party. which is led by Mr Khalid Bakdash. from the National Progressive
Front. This decision resulted in the removal of the party's candidates
from the ballots in the various Syrian districts where they had declared
themselves candidates of the National Progressive Front. All communist
candidates automatically lost the election. The new Syrian People's
Assembly has no one representing the communist party, whereas the ruling
party won 60 percent of the seats. The remaining 40 percent were dis-
tributed among the various parties of the National Progressive Front and a
low independent candidates who are basically considered supporters of the
regime.

The Critical Point

President Hafiz al-Asad did not make this decision until relations between
him and his party [on the one hand] and the Syrian Communist party [on the
other] had reached a critical point following a period of political dis-
putes and clashes that went as far as separation and the placement of the
Syrian Communist party leaders and domestic and foreign activities as well
under the close SC! .ny of Syrian intelligence agencies. This led a few
observers in the Sy in capital to anticipate harrassments and arrests in
the ranks of these leaders and organizations if the dispute developed and
turned into open political conirontation or rather open struggle betore
Moscow should stage an llth hour intervention to settle the situation or at
least to put under control the fires [of hostility} between the Syrian
regime and one oi the most important Arab communist parties. the one with
the closest ties to the Soviet Communist party.

At lirst the political opposition between the ruling party in Syria and one
of its strongest and most prominent allies. the Syrian Communist party,
assumed the character oi a disagreement over the government's domestic
policy and its practices in various areas.

The Veiled Women incident

A neutral Syrian figure says that these disagreements began to be vehement
and to create tension in relations between the regime and the party after
the agencies oi the ruling regime lost their temper as a result of [their]
failure to put down and oppose the secret activities of the regime's oppo-
nents. The regime's opponents had expanded their operations from the

27
FOR 0FFKJAI.USE(NVLY
assassination of a few figures who are considered supporters of the regime
to the destruction of a few of its institutions. The most recent of these
was the explosion [that occurred] in the air force command in the heart of
the Syrian capital. The air force command is located in one of the areas
that has had the tightest security measures.

The government's failure so far to put down and contain these violent
actions. which are all attributed to the Muslim Brothers, has created in
the Syrian capital. especially recently. an environment of anxiety and
terror. This is not the result of the fact that the operations and activi-
ties of the opposition forces have been expanded. but it is rather the
result of the reactions which the forces of the regime are beginning to
have. The regime's forces restricted personal liberties; and they raided
[homes] and assassinated [people]. Many divisions that are affiliated with
the Defense Companies. a large armed organization led by Rif'at al-Asad.
the Syrian president's brother, set up road blocks especially at night

and during the day in various parts of the Syrian capital.

Some Lime ago passers-by in the streets of Damascus as well as city resi—
dents were astounded when large numbers oi young women affiliated with

the paratroopers of the Defense Companies were suddenly deployed in the
streets and began using force to remove covers and veils women were wearing
over their heads and faces.

This conduct provoked a wave of strong disapproval in the various ranks
and classes of Damascus society. a society that is still known for its
devotion to religion and its adherence to the principles of the Islamic
faith. Reactions to this conduct also produced numerous clashes and fights
in which a number of persons were killed and wounded. Total chaos almost
prevailed in the Syrian capital, and it would have spread to the various
provinces had not President Hafiz ai-Asad and senior officials rushed to
issue strict orders to remove the members of the Defense Companies from the
streets. Al-Asad had to schedule an appearance on television in which he
made a 5"0‘ statement the? he'hor-d an Apology 0‘ 2' a sort 1nd 1::"'ed
lnr calm and national unity.

At the time the govlrmnenl tried to justify this conduct. especially in
some or the media. by saying that these actions revealed a desire to do
away with backwardness and with old social habits and Customs. It was also
said that removing veils and head covers from the faces and heads of women
was a step toward social liberation from these customs and traditions.

Veiled Men

However. everybody knew that the conduct of one of the regime's forces

was no more than a reaction to a few operations and incidents that had been
carried out by men who masqueraded in women's clothes and wore women's
veils.

The people of the regime were taken back by a statement issued by the
Syrian Communist party condemning this conduct.

28
INJR (Nﬂﬂ(]Al.lEHE(N‘LV
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Reacting to the fact that a few agencies had confiscated the communist
party's statement and prevented its distribution. the newspaper. TARIQ
AL-SHA'B. which speaks for the communist party headlined its front page on
the following day with an article about that subject and inspired by the
statement. The government quickly confiscated copies of the newspaper.

Suspicious Position

The government considered the communist party's position hostile and sus—
picious, and this escalated the dispute between the two parties. Conse-
quently. relations became extremely tense. and this led President al-Asad's
regime to decree that the communist party be ousted from the National Pro-
gressive Front. Accordingly. the candidates of the front in the elections

oi the People's Assembly were reconsidered. and the names of communist
candidates were removed {from the ballotl. Therefore, the official announce-
ment of these ballots was delayed for 3 or b days before the official date
01 these elections.

This delay as well as the statements and rumors that accompanied it con-
tributed to the unrest that appeared among citizens, broad sectors of whom
remained uncertain up to the final hours about who was and who was not a
candidate and who was and who was not in favor.

The Straw and the Camel's Back

To informed observers in the Syrian capital the communist party's posture
on the operation in which women were accosted in the streets and their head
covers removed was tantamount to "the straw that broke the camel's back,“
as the common saying goes. This is because the period that preceded this
incident saw mounting tension in relations between the people of the regime
and their ally. the communist party. Some of those observers came to
believe that the regime's relations with the communist party were on the
verge at a new stage which one had to ponder so as to become familiar with
the nature of these relations and the proportions they will assume. The
looming] days may be full of surprises.

But the more important question is still this: Did the conflicts and dif-
ferences that existed on affairs and matters that were purely domestic
cause the split and separation between the regime of President Hafiz
aI-Asad and the Syrian Communist party. or was the eruption of the dispute

in this manner a reflection from the outset of something that was going on
in Soviet-Syrian relations?

The question almost comes up naturally. but the indications that give it
maximum importance at this stage are confined to two principal points:

First. there are close relations between the Syrian Communist party and the
mother party in Moscow.

Second. new trends in Soviet policy toward the Middle East crisis and in
Soviet dealings with parties concerned with this crisis. especially the
Arab parties. have emerged.

29
FORIOFIWCJAl.lEﬂE(NVLY
Clouds between Moscow and Damascus?

Let us begin with the first point.

Ever since Hafiz al-Asad took over power in Syria almost 10 years ago, his
relations with the Soviets. despite everything. have been subject to his
relations with the Syrian Communist party.

Despite the fact that these relations have sometimes been cool and riddled
with disputes. the Syrian regime's relations with the communist party never
went beyond the dangerous level they are in at present. Relations always
went back to normal or good due to the strong relations that existed
between Moscow and ﬂafiz al-Asad's Syria. Therefore, there has never been a
clash of this kind between Syria's communists and the regime's people and
never have relations between them deteriorated to the point that communists
were ousted from the National Progressive Front and removed in this manner.

Why then did the dispute occur now and not in the past? The answer to that
question is not la: lrom the point of view that states that something is
not quite right in the current climate of Syrian-Soviet relations.

I
Questions and Questions

What is this thing? What is disturbing Syrian-Soviet relations at this
point? Where are relations between Damascus and Syria headed?

The answers to these questions are diverse. Some of them so far are subject
to deduction and individual opinion. Some of them are the subject of dis-
cussion in informed circles and sources where discussions of these subjects
are based on a few incidents and stated factors.

The two explanations that seem closer to reality are:

The first explanation is that for months Eoscow has been looking with dis-
tavor upon some of the directions Syria's foreign policy has taken and the
way Syria has been dealing with the Middle East crisis.

There is inlormntion that a long time alter the Soviet-Syrian treaty was
signed. Moscow began blaming Damascus and expressing its displeasure with
Damascus‘s continued pursuit of a middle of the road policy. a policy that
was somewhat balanced between Americans and Soviets.

The lntormation also states that Soviet displeasure grew in the aftermath

of the Syrian missile crisis with Israel. in the al-Biqa' area of Lebanon.
and with the role played by Philip habib. the 0.8. president's envoy to the
area. After that lepisode) Syrian policy showed more openness toward U.S.
policy in the area. in fact. Syria tried to set up more channels of communi-
cation and deliberation with the U.S. capital.

The same information adds that after the treaty with Moscow was signed
and after the missiles crisis, Damascus showed constant care in assuring

30
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the west in general. the Americans in particular and some Arab countries

as well that Syria has not and will not become a communist country and that
it will not become a second Cuba in the area; it will not at least become
another South Yemen.

To demonstrate that it was not a communist country and that it was not comp-
letely tied to communist policy in the area, Damascus adopted a strict
policy toward the Syrian Communist party. Accordingly, it tried to clip

the communist party's wings and to remove the party gradually from the
Syrian political scene.

The Role of the Israeli Hand

This information. which comes from a communist source. makes other state-
ments besides. it states that this Syrian attention to this matter stems
basically from Syria's fear of an Israeli attack coming from Lebanon whose
purpose would be to overthrow the regime or at least to undermine it fur—
ther and render it incapable of standing up to the growing domestic opposi-
tion that it is facing. Therefore. the Syrian regime thought that a prac-
tical rapprochement with Washington and its allies in the area was the
shortest route whereby Israel might be urged to change its mind about the
Syrian plan. Furthermore. there are those who are saying that Syria's atten-
tion to the Americans is designed to strengthen the presence and the role
of Damascus particularly in Lebanon. In addition. it would keep Syria's
place in the effort to reach a settlement in the Middle East crisis.

Reference must be made here to the fact that the open battle which the
United States of America has waged against the regime of President Mu'ammar
al-Qadhdhafi did show results on the Libyan borders with Egypt and Sudan.
Its results have also appeared regarding the destiny of the Libyan military

presence in Chad. Its results are also appearing now in the business U.S.
oil companies are conducting in Libya, and there's no end in sight.

Hence there is considerable apprehension in Syria of an open U.S. battle
that would first target the Syrian military presence in Lebanon. The United
States would try to remove that presence which so far constitutes one of
the most important safety valves for President Hafiz al-Asad's regime.

It is also the most important hand al-Asad's regime has with regard to its
role in the Middle East crisis.

Moscow Turned its Back?

The new Syrian attention finally stems from Syria's fear of the political
and military consequences of a U.S. attack on the Middle East area. Syria
fears the expansion of U.S. influence that will accompany such an attack
and the decline of Soviet influence in return.

This is the first explanation. The second explanation--and there is a dif-
Ierence of opinion about the relationship between the two explanations--is
inspired by iniormed Syrian sources which turn the tables to say that it

31
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
was Musrow that hogan lall this] by turning its back on Syria, taking
actions in the area and dealing with the Middle East crisis without
involving Damascus.

This Syrian information is accusing Moscow of pursuing its own interests in
its actions and in its'policy in the area without considering the interests
of others who are its allies.

Damascus-—or some ruling factions in Damascus--are also accusing the
Soviets of practicing strange policies on the Arab and Islamic scenes.
These policies were somewhat unusual. and they deliberately ignored some of
these basic given factors.

First. after the events of Lebanon and the role Syria played in those
events. any dealings with the Palestinian problem were to take place

through Damascus because of the guardianship role Damascus has acquired and
because any dealings whatsoever in this area take place through a comprehen-
sive strategy that pertains to the movement of the Arab-israeli struggle

and its sequels.

Second, Moscow began a new attempt to deal with some of the Arab regimes
and conditions without involving Syria. whereas the strategic relationship
or alliance that exists between the two countries makes it incumbent upon
MOSCuw to put Syria "in the picture“ or at least to intorm it.

Hhat disturbed the Syrian capital most and arOused some doubts and fears

in the Syrian regime was the fact that Soviet leaders asked PLO president.

Mr Yasir 'Arafat to intercede in the matter of starting a dialogue between

Moscow and the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia regarding mutual recognition and the
exchange of diplomatic representation. The Palestinian leader succeeded in

a few preliminary steps on that course.

This Soviet initiative came as quite a surprise to the main figures of

the Syrian regime. This was almost the first time that Moscow had gone

to the Palestinian leaders and dealt with them directly on major. substan-
tive matters without involving Damascus. Furthermore. the fact that the
Suviets engaged in negotiations on subjects of that importance behind the
Syrians' back was a blow to Syria's presence and role in the area. par-
ticulatly since the matter had to do with the essence of the struggle in
the area.

Tightening the Brakes

Stemming from Syrian fears the Syrian capital recently applied the brakes
to its position on Prince Fahd's plan. it preferred to wait and adopt the
course of dialogue with Saudi officials lest there be new surprises whose
cost the Syrian regime would have to bear one way or another. The Syrian
capital feared the presence of new plans that were being secretly prepared.

Those who have been following closely all the stages of these developments
aflirm that the Syrian capital has no interest at present in going any

32
FORiOFFﬂJAl.USE(NNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

further than it has done so far in offending and antagonizing the Soviets.

Thelelore. the Syrian capital seems extremely intent now on bringing
matters to a close.

The Fire ls Blazing

Those people admit that there is a fire burning now under the embers of

Soviet-Syrian relations. Accordingly. the mutual dissatisfaction between
Damascus and Syria and the inertia that is dominating relations between

them is making even the blows they are exchanging seem light like lovers'
quarrels.

But the question that is being raised is this: Will these blows continue

to be like lovers' quarrels. or will they turn into quarrels that kill
relations?

COPYRIGHT: 1981 AL-WATAN AL-'ARABI

8592
C50: 6604/]76

33

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
COMMUNIST PARTY DECLARATION CéNDEHNS RECIHE'S OPPRESSIVE MEASURES
Paris AL-VATAN AL-‘ARABI in Arabic No 250, 27 Nov - 3 Dec 81 p 65

lArticlc: 'The Weapon of the Intelligence Nbrk and the Field Tribunals"]

[Text] The party authority of the Syrian Communist party abroad issued

a strongly worded statement that revealed the extent of the danger of the
ongoing struggle between the Syrian regime and the communist party in
Syria. The statement denounced the authority of intelligence [agencies] and
the imposition of a military siege around Syrian cities and villages. The
statement urged all the leaders and forces of the Syrian people to estab-
lish a national democratic government. The text of the statement [follows]:

The Syrian regime set Monday. 9 November 1981 as the date to hold what

it called "elections of the members of the People's Assembly." The regime
shamelessly invited all citizens to perform their duty and participate

in that process either by running for office or voting for the candidates
[of their choice]. The regime is making that request as though democracy
were prevailing normally in political relations between the regime and the
popular masses and as though these masses were not daily experiencing the
gory tragedy and the brutal massacres of the regime. the national fragmen—
tation. the destruction of the economy. the monetary inflation. the plunder
by the regime's figures and enoutourage. the abject poverty and the shame
of national defeat that the regime and its figures have brought upon the
country since I967.

The dangers endured by democracy today in Arab Syria exceed those that are
being endured anywhere else in the Arab homeland. The masses of our people
are intuitively aware of the dialectical relationship that exists between
the bloodthirsty regime's escalating repression of our people and their
national and democratic forces and the capitulatory settlement projects
that are being proposed now on the Arab scene. These proposals have the
tacit approval of the Syrian regime.

Ever since it staged its military coup against its own party on 16 Novem—
ber I970 the present Syrian regime has carried the seeds of destruction

for all democratic life and national unity. Today. the signs of this des-
truction are emerging. The regime has designed a constitution according to

36
ﬁORfHﬂﬂCUU.USE(MNLY
_ FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

its individual standards, and it has created suitable superficial institu-
tions. such as the People's Assembly, the National Front and others. All
citizens in Syria know that the wishes of the masses have been falsified
and forged in all previous People's Assembly elections.

However. the regime suspended its own constitution and retained martial law
and cmergencv law which hang like a sword over the heads of our people.
Therefore, the courts are no longer controlling the courts, and the military
field courts have become the weapon that is being used against our people
all over the country.

Our people rose against the gory Fascist regime early in March 1980. There
were popular demonstrations, and there were strikes in the cities. Everyone
was asking for freedom. dignity and non-sectarian discrimination among
citizens. People were asking that the authority intelligence agencies were
exercising over the capabilities of the people be terminated. that the
state of emergency be suspended, that the military siege around cities and
villages be lifted and that religious rites and authentic social traditions
not be infringed upon. Recently the regime has been engaged in further such
infringements.

The regime became furious; it thought it had closed the door in the face of
our popular masses and their political, democratic struggle. But the crisis
of crushed liberties became part of our people's struggle. They wanted to '
deliver themselves from the gory. tragic situation in which the regime had
escablashed the law of the jungle and wholesale massacres as its means [to
an end . '

Our people still remember the massacres at Tudmur prison. in Aleppo, Hamah,
Jisr al-Shughur and other Syrian cities and villages. The impulse to kill
has become a principal impulse of the regime in our country. Schools have
been turned into detention camps in which thousands of national-

ists and democrats suffer. There they are subjected to the most brutal
kinds of physical torture. Many of them have become disabled, and the lives
ol muny are in danger. Among those nationalist and democratic fighters are
hundreds oi interred communists. Chief among them is Comrade Riyadh al-Turk
who is still in isolation. He has had no contact With the outside world
since the morning of his arrest on 28 October 1980. His life is still in
danger as a result of the continuing brutal torture to which he is being
subjected.

it is under these stifling conditions. when the future and national indepen-
dence ol the country; the unity of the homeland; and the national cohesion,
the freedom. the dignity and the lives of our people are in certain danger
and at the crossroads. that the regime holds this mockery of elections for
the People's Assembly.

Our people and their national, democratic forces who outlined with their
noble blood the blueprint for overthrowing the Fascist regime will not be

satisfied with a mere boycott of the regime's mock elections. Our popular
masses will rather rise with all their leaders and vital forces. with all

35

I!”l(lﬂﬂ(]Al.USliONLY
their national and democratic parties. with all their professional unions
and associations. with all their labor and farm forces, with all the
honorable uffiicns in our army and with all the soldiers of our army, and
they will pave the way to the establishment of the broadest national front
that would save the country from its national and pan-Arab tragedy and
establish a national democratic government. It is then that a truly free
legislative body can be elected. This body would approve a permanent con-
stitution that would guarantee basic freedoms to all citizens without
exception.

Our people then will turn [their attention] to rebuilding their destroyed
national economy. They will raise the standard of living of our popular
masses: they will protect sovereignty and national unity; and they will
oppOse all capitulatory settlement plans.

There is no doubt that a radiant future lies ahead for Arab Syria after
this rotten Fascist regime is overthrown. Arab Syria will then assume its

honorable leading role in all the battles for freedom, liberation and
national unification.

COPYRIGHT: 1981 AL-"ATAN AL-'ARABI

8592
C50: anon/176

36

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
DEFECTOR SAYS POLISMIO HA5 LOST ITS LECITIHACY
Brussels POURQUOI PAS? in French 10 Dec 81 pp 42-15

[interview with Sidahmed Larosi by Jacques Wiame, titled "A Siberia Without
Snow"; date and place not specifieg

ﬂag It was suspected that POLISARIO is an instrument in
the hands of Algeria, and accessorily of Libya. That is
but a deception;

It was also suspected that the refugees under- the tents
at Tindouf are Mauritanians, Malians, South Yemenis, and
nomads from southern Algeria, and that there are but few
true Western Saharans among them. That is but an impos-
ture;

But that POLISARIO, which is supposed to defend the cause
of Western Sahara, should make itself the accomplice of a
regime which makes mass arrests of Western Saharans, im-
prisons them in camps, tortures and liquidates them--

that is called an infamy.

Who makes so grave a charge? Western Saharans. And par-
ticularly Sidahmed Mohamed Larosi, 28, former technical

director of Radio Tindouf.

A native of Layoum, the capital of Western Sahara, and a
founding member of POLISARIO, he is now exiled in Holland.
This man with the mobile afro haircut, lean as a desert
animal--"much too thin to be dishonest," as Jacques Brel
sang-—does not stop at revealing when and how the Algerian
regime infiltrated POLISARIO's political and military man-
agement, and took it over. He accuses the present POLI-
SARIO and Algiers of imprisoning in disciplinary camps,
brainwashing in "re-education schools," and liquidating
Western Saharans not docile enough for their taste.

Sidahmed Larosi replies to questions by Jacques Wiame:

37
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

I declare that POLISARIO no longer represents the Western Saharan people.
The executive committee, the political bureau, the military staff are made
up of foreigners who do not have the slightest genealogical link with West-
ern Sahara. The present secretary general, Mohanned Abdel Asia, is Algtel’i-‘UI.
The president of the SDAR [Saharan Democratic Arab Republig, Hohammed Lamine
is a Moroccan opponent of Tan Tan. Eighty percent of the members of the po-
litical bureau and executive committee are either Mauritanian: or Algerians.
Their presence in positions of command in POLISARIO proves that Western Sa-
harans are no longer masters of their destiny. I declare that; the majority
of refugees in the camps of TindOuf are foreign to Western Sahara. They are

namads originally from southern Algeria, Mali, South Yemen, and especially
Mauritania.

@uestioﬂ Why did you wait so long before denouncing Algerian seizure of
POLISARIO?

[Answeg/ You forget that at Tindouf Western Saharan: have no freedom: nei-
ther freedom of movement nor freedom of action. We were under constant
surveillance by Algerian military security forces. Even to go from one
camp to another we needed Algerian authorimtion. True Western Saharans
did indeed try to regain control of POLISARIO. They formed the "committee
of 20" of which I was a member. They contested the designation by Algiers
of a secretary general who was not a native of Western Sahara. But all
those who dared oppose the political or military choices of the Algerian

government were arrested, tortured, eliminated, or threatened with firing
squads.

@uestioﬂ When did you leave Algeria?

[Answe_r7 In November 1979 I went to Geneva for medical treatment at the ex-
pense of the Algerian government.

Once recovered, I concerned myself with the fate of Western Saharans
held in Algerian camps. I asked the secretary general of POLISARIO to free
them unconditionally, and to determine which of those at Tindouf were true

Western ‘Juhm'mm, and which were foreigners whose presence perverts POLISA-
1(10'5 struggle.

Abdul Aziz demanded that I return to the camps before negotiating. But I
was too familiar with the fate reserved for those who do not bow to Alger-
ian decisions to consent to return to Tindouf. I then applied to Amnesty

International in Holland for action to be initiated on behalf of Western
Saharans hold in Algeria.

POLISARIO merely replied that I was lying. It is Algeria and the present
leadr “‘- of POLISARIO who are engaged in widespread lying and imposture.
But they will not absolve themselves by denying the truth.

38
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ﬂiueetio§7 What has become of Ikhal Ihans and Aini Babahash, the represent-
atives of the Western Saharan Red Crescent? And Saruj Mohammed Jar, the
Western Saharan teacher? And Salim Barks, the Radio Tindouf announcer? And

Abidat Sharif, the refugee camp director?

[Answeé7"We never saw those people," POLISARIO insists. A strange blindness.
For those so-called unknowns nevertheless appear in official photographs pub-
lished a few years ago by POLISARIO. Thus Aini Baba Each is clearly recog-

nizable on a negative taken at the time of the third POLISARIO congress (26-

30 August 1976) and distributed by Algerian propaganda services. And Saruj
Hohammed Jar, who taught in the camps, was filmed in 1976 by the Dutchman

Jan Kees van de Rooi.

All those Western Saharans have disappeared, as have hundreds of others.
Are they still imprisoned and tortured? Or have they met with the fate re-
served by Algerian military security for the Reguibat Salem tribe? That
fraction of Western Saharans in Algeria (6,000 persons), who refused to go
and fight in the western desert for POLISARIO, was quarantined at Tindouf

early in 1977.

Then, one fine day, they vanished from the sight of all, and inquiries about
them were forbidden.

Zﬁucstioﬁ7 Since when have Western Saharans been in opposition to POLISARIO,
and experienced detention in camps, and ill treatment?

ZAnswej? There have always been many contradictions within the POLISARIO
movement, for aid was given under conditions set by Algiers and Tripoli. But
after Louali, the notoriously pro-Libyan secretary general, was killed in
Nouakchott, the Algerinns undertook to control the movement more closely.

That designation, which was contrary to the movement's by-laws requiring
broadly based election, shocked Western Saharans. For Lamine was not even

a native of the region. There was a revolt. The Western Saharans, all
tribes and ideologies mingled, then elected the "committee of 20" charged
with discussing and determining orientations and policy. At that time, in
February 1975, the Algerian authorities formed a Western Saharan military
unit, into which all elements of the Louali branch, totaling over 200 per-
sons, were incorporated. On 12 April 1975 that unit left Tindouf. In mid-
desert, far from prying eyes, it was surrounded and disarmed by Algerian
troops. I shall never forget those 8 months in the desert. We had to dig
fortifications; we were whipped; we got very little food, barely enough to
stay alive. Those who did not obey quickly or work fast enough were tor—
tured. I still bear on my back the marks of those brutalities. In Decem-
ber 1975, Algerian military security organized a "demonstration." A Western
Saharan was picked at random and shot before our eyes. The Algerian officer
then warned: "Those who tell what they have undergone or question our policy

will meet the same fate."

39
FOR OFTICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Huck izn'findOuf, we were permanently controlled and followed by Algerian
military security.

In July 1976 we were arrested a second time. I stayed in prison only 2#
hours, the POLISARIO executive committee having vouched for me, for they
needed me to insure proper operation of the Tindouf radio station. As for
the hundreds of other Western Saharans arrested, their whereabouts are not
known. Are they still compelled to do forced labor in the desert, whipped
and tortured? Are they alive or dead?

In Tindouf no one dares ask questions concerning them. There is dread of
being returned to the 12 October school, a re-education center where Alger-
ian technicians practice brainwashing, torture with e1ectrodes--a Siberia
withOut snow.

ZOuestioé? What can be done for those Western Saharans?

ZZhsweé? World opinion, people who love justice and freedom, must be alerted.
Humanitarian organizations must feel for the fate of those thousands of West-
ern Saharans who are playthings and victims of a scenario which in no way
accords with their true aspirations. There are still in Algeria about 12,000
Western Saharans whose birthplaces can be verified from the Spanish census.
They must be free to express themselves under international guarantees, to
determine their own destiny free from all constraints. It is for them to

say under what legal or political system they wish to live. But the most
urgent and important issue, in our view, is the fate of Western Saharans

held in Algeria. The international community must bring pressure on the Al-
giers government to free Western Saharan prisoners and improve the local sit-
uation-vthat is, separate the natives of Western Sahara from the Algerians,
Horoccan opponents, Malians, and Mauritanians. Once those conditions are
met, international recommendations in accordance with the interests of West-
ern Saharans can be carried out.

It was thought in Europe that with the OAU decisions and the referendum
planned for 1982 the Saharan question was on the point of resolution.

in my view, and in that or many Western Saharans, the decision by the king
of Morocco to accept the referendum is a good thing. But it does not serve
the interests of POLISARIO and Algeria. That is why the attack was launched
against Gueltat Zemmour with dozens of T-Sk tanks and SAM 6 or 8 missiles.
Never had such sophisticated weapons been used in the Saharan theater of
operations. Those tanks and ground to air missiles were provided by Libya
and transited through Algeria. The latter accepts continued financing of
the war by Qadhdhafi, but does not allow him political influence within the
POLISARIO leadership. Since the death of secretary general Louali and the
arrest of "comMittee of 20" members there are no longer any pro-Libyans
within the Saharan liberation movement. Abdel Aziz, the new secretary gen-
eral, was completely unknown before he was imposed by Algiers. True West-
ern Saharans in Tindouf consider him an Algerian puppet, and are suspicious

40
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
concerning his predecessor's death. Clashes between Algiers and Louali had
been growing in recent days. In whose interest was it to liquidate hinﬁ

Zﬁuestioﬁ? The Dutch section of Amnesty International has started a campaign
for the freeing of Western Saharans held in Algerian camps. Is that an iso-
lated initiative?

[Ensweg7 I am convinced that Amnesty's action in the Netherlands will lead
to others elsewhere in Europe. At the UN the Commission on Human Rights
will take up the question. We, the Western Saharan dissidents in POLISARIO,
will not let silence fall on the fate of our brothers who are imprisoned and
maltreated in Algeria. For my part, and if I obtain the needed guarantees,
I am prepared to accompany any international mission of jurists to Tindouf.
I am ready to go into the camps and point out the true Western Saharans and
the foreigners, and to unmask the usurpers.

Zﬁucstio§7 Are the Western Saharans who have broken with POLISARIO many?

[Answeg7 In a few days we shall establish an authentic Western Saharan front.
For POLISARIO, which has become a docile tool of Algiers' diplomacy and army,
has lost its legitimacy and its representative character. This popular and
revolutionary Western Saharan front will gather men of all tribes and ideol-
ogies in the western Sahara, and defend the true interests and aspirations
of our people.

In the face of POLISARIO's breakup and rapid discrediting, I cannot but think
of those European parliamentarians who, out of ideological affinity or kind-
ness, have defended that movement, thinking they were defending the cause of
the Western Saharan people.

Did they act on an ideological group reflex, or in a spirit of demagogy, or
did they allow themselves to be deluded by an Algerian-Libyan propaganda
surreitcd with petrodollurs?

.t bottom, that interests me but little. Above all, I bear in mind that
FOLISAHIO has made itself the accomplice of those who oppress Western Saha-
rans. And my compassion I reserve for the old men, the women, and the chil-
dreu of Western Sahara who have paid the price of a policy of hegemony.

COPYRIGHT: 1981 POURQUOI PAS?

61’“;
(:30: 1519/63 END

61
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY