FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10497

6 May 1982

USSR Report

ECONOMIC AFFAIRS
(FOUO 3/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
m

JPRS publications contain infomtion primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those froa English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original informtion was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was simmarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Hords or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 11.3. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGIMTIONS GOVERNING WNBRSRIP 0F
lWl'BRIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BB RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS 1

Gray

USSR REPORT
ECONOMIC AFFAIRS

03000 3/82)

CONTENTS
INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT AND PERFORMANCE

Effectiveness of Use of Production Potential
(V. annetsov; VOPROSY BKONOHIKI, Oct 81) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Normative Net Output in Increased Production Efficiency
(1.. Rozenovs; VOPROSY EKONOHIKI, Jan 82) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

- s - [III - USSR
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

INDUSTRIAL EVELOPMT AND PERFORMANCE

EFFECTIVENESS 01" USE OF PRODUCTION POTENTIAL
.‘ioscow VOPROSY BRUNOMIKI in Russian No 10, Oct 81 pp 120-130
[Article by V. Kuznetsov!

[Text] For the party's economic policy in the period of developed socialism,
determination of long-term tasks, consideration of the conditions of economic
construction, scientific validation of ways of speeding up economic progress
are characteristic features. The highest aim of the party's economic strategy
for the '80s, as pointed out at the 26th CPSU Congress, is a steady rise of
the material and cultural level of the life of the people, creation of the best
conditions for the individual's all-rOund development on the basis of a contin-
uing rise of efficiency of public production, growth of labor productivity and
urowth of the social and labor activity of the Soviet people. Its practical
achievement will require tremendous resources. The national income used for
consumption and accumulation should be increased 1.6-fold by 1990.

the country's economic development over the long term, which means mobilization
of resources, will be associated with a whole series of complicating factors.
We refer to significant curtailment of growth of labor resources, rise of out-
leys in connection with the development of the East and the North, growth of
expenditures on prorection of the environment. There will be required radical
rebuilding of old enterprises, construction of roads and accelerated develop-
ment of transport and comnications.

During the 11th Five-Year Plan, it is planned to increase national income by
18-20 percent, output of nanufactured productso-by 26-28 percent and of agri-
cultural ones—by 12—11. percent. Total volume of capital investment for the
five-year plan has been set at 711-730 billion rubles.

Our country has entered the new decade while possessing a mighty scientific-
technical and production potential. TremendOus resources are involved in the
national economy. National wealth (without land, mineral resources and forests)
during 1970-1980 grew from 1.6 to more than 2.7 trillion rubles. The relative
share of fixed capital amounted to 62 percent, including producer goods-4.2
percent, material working capital—l7 percent, property of the population—19
percent. During the 10th Five-Year Plan fixed production capital grew by 3“
billion rubles. During 1976-1980, it was renewed 38 percent, including 36
percent in industry and 47 percent in agriculture. The capital-labor ratio

1
mo nmnu USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of a person engaged in the sphere of material production, which in 1970 amount-
ed to 5,500 rubles, had almost doubled by 1980, amunting to 10,700 rubles. In
industry it grew from 7,100 to 13,400 rubles (87 percent), in agriculture—from
3,400 to 8,500 rubles (142 percent) and .-n construction—from 2,000 to 4,400
rubles (118 percent).

Compared to thr. '60s, electric-power production doubled, steel production in-
creased by 460 million tons and production of the chemical and petrochemical
industry better than doubled. In 10 years. machine-building production grew
2.7-fold, output of instruments—3.3-fold, computer-technology equipmentuten-
fold. During 1971-1980, there were produced in the country more than 5 billion

tons of petroleum (including gas condensate), that is as such as in the preced-
ing century; 1.10 billion tons of steel were snelted.

Profound changes occurred in the distribution of productive forces. The natural
resources of the eastern and northern regions of the cowtry are being actively
involved in national-economic turnover. As a result of the inpact of the
scientific-technical revolution on the economy, the face of my production op-
erations and entire sector:- is rapidly changing. Modernization is proceeding
at an accelerated pace in industry. During 1971-1980, new and modernized
enterprises provided four-fifths of the growth of industrial production. At
those enterprises which have been built, expanded or modernized, production out-
put per worker is almost double to what it was previously.

As a result of the systematic realization of the agrarian policy of the CPSU, a
modern material—technical base has been created for agriculture. Fined agri-
cultural production capital amounts to 212 billion rubles. The capital-labor
ratio per worker in agriculture reached 8,400 rubles in 1980; the capital-labor
ratio per 100 hectares of agricultural land is 39,000 rubles of worth of fixed
capital. Thanks to strengthening of the technical base of agricultural produc-
tion, even with s curtailed number of workers, the volume of production per
hectare grew 1.3-fold in the last 10 years.

The USSR has rich natural resources. Agricultural land alounts to 609 mil-
lion hectares. Forested area anounts to 792 million hectares (first place in
the world); the total stocks of tree plantings amount to 810 billion cubic
meters (one-foarth of the world stocks). Our country occupies first place in
the world with respect to proved reserves of iron and manganese ores, apatites
and natural gas.

The country's production potential is determined by the quantitative and quali-
tnt lve features of existing production fixed capital, material working capital
and labor resources. At the sane tine, account is taken of availability to
the state of natural resources that are necessary for the normal functioning
of public production. To ensure fuller and more effective utilization of the
production potential means to realize in the complex the nest important factors
for boosting the productivity of social labor and reducing production labor
intensiveness, to utilize with the highest yield fixed production capital (re-
duction of capital requirements per ruble of output) and to increase the pro-
duction output of existing raw and other materials while reducing naterial
intensiveness of production.

FOR OFFIéAl. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

‘me Soviet people are rightly proud of the production potential created in our
country. But pride ," L.I. Brezhnev said at the 26th CPSU Congress, "must always
be accompanied by a sense of high responsibility. Responsibility for the

fact that the tremendous potential created by the Soviet People is to be used
efficiently, with full return."

Leading collectives of associations and enterprises have accumulated much ex-
perience in the struggle for economy of resources and reduction of material
intensiveness of production. During 1976-1980 economies of raw and other ma-
terials, fuel, power and other objects of labor amounted to 11.1: billion ru-
bles. At the same time, unfortunately, more raw materials and electric power
are being expended per unit of national income than would be possible if the
best world indicators were considered. Hany kinds of machinery and equipment
have high material intensiveness, and expenditures of materials on the fabri-
cation of a number of products are great. The existence of large reserves for
the econOmizing and increasing of production of finished products from re-
sources existing in the national economy is shown by cases of inadequate use
of resource-saving. production processes, incomplete removal of minerals from
the bowels of the earth, poor utilization of production wastes and secondary
resources, significant losses of metal, fuel, timber, cennent, mineral fertili-
zers and agricultural products in the course of production or storage and slow
reduction of production cost and transport expenditures.

The adopted decree of the CPsU Central Committee and the USSR Council of Minis-
ters (30 June 1981) "On Intensifying Hork on Economy and Rational Utilization
of lau-Ilateriai, Fuel-Power and Other Material Resources" notes that the ful-
fillment of a broad program of economic and social development of the country
designated for the llth Five-Year Plan and the '805 would require the involve-
ment in production of tremendous raw-material, fuel-power and other material
resources. But the acquisition of raw materials and fuel is increasingly more
expensive, while reserves of minerals are irreplaceable. The most economically
and efficiently possible use of all the types of material resources under

these conditions acquires special national-economic importance.

The 26th CPSU Congress set a task of ensuring economy of material resources,
introducing progressive norms of expenditure per manufactured product unit,
using on a wide scale integrated processing of raw materials, resource saving
equipment and low-waste, wastefree and power-saving technology and involving
in every possible way local raw and other materials into the cycle of opera-
tion and utilizing secondary resources; maximally curtailing the use of food
raw materials and other agricultural products for industrial purposes. Thrifty
expenditure of raw and other materials, reduction of waste and elimination of
losses simify economy of the labor of millions of people and of capital in-
vestment, better production results with lower outlays for it and conservation
of the natural environment. In the final analysis, all this contributes to the
improved well-being of the people. The reduction of solely by half of losses
and wastes in metalworking is the equivalent of an increase in the production
of finished rolled ferrous metals of 10 percent. Replacement of metal cutting
with stamping, pressing and fitting on [nasadka] would make it possible to
significantly reduce its expenditure. In machine building, wastes in the course
of a year amount on the average to alnost 19 million tons, which is the

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

equivalent of several billion rubles. Inefficient outlays of metal because of
excessive weight of machinery and equipment, unjustifiably high metal inten-
sivoness of products and insufficient use of progressive technology of metal
working add up to approximately 15 million tons. Reliable protection of metal
against corrosion (for this reason alone losses amount to annually approximately
10-13 million tone, which costs the state 35-60 billion rubles) would permit
tremendous economic savings.

Capital investment for the collection and processing of one ton of scrap metal
is twenty-fivefold less than the amount of natural raw material needed for the
smelting of one ton of cast iron. The use of scrap and wastes of ferrous metals
at ferrous-metallurgy plants is the equivalent of the release on an annual

basis of 670,000 persons for the national economy as a whole. It was noted at
the 26th CPSU Congress that the main directions for the development of ferrous
metallurgy involve the radical improvement of the quality and increased produc-
tion of effective types of metal products. There will be a 1.5-2.5-Eold in-
crease in the production of cold-rolled metal plate, tolled products from low—
nlloy steel, sheet metal and tinplate with protective coatings, cold-rolled
strip metal and dynamic steel, shaped and highly precise shapes of rolled metal.
The production of economical and special types of steel pipe, metallic powder
for the manufacture of items with high resistance to wear, long life and resist-
ance to corrosion is being developed at an accelerated pace. Pouring of steel
on continues-casting machines for the production of billets will reach 35-37
nnllion tons. Together with overcoming shortage of metal, another way-the
rationalization of production use-will be introduced. For example, in Che-
lyabinskaya Oblast, economy of metals at enterprises and construction projects
is being achieved on the basis of promising comprehensive programs. At metal-
lurgical enterprises,reequipment is being done for this end of production and
propressive production processes are being introduced. As a result, output is
being increased and quality is improved of metal products and economical types
of rolled products. At user-enterprises, production metal intensiveness is
being systematically reduced on the basis of improved design of manufactured
items, improvement of their quality and wide-scale use of metalworking pro-
;rossive technology.

Jurinu the current five-year plan, it is planned in machine building and metal-
working to reduce the expenditure of rolled ferrous metals by an average of no
less than 18-20 percent, steel pipe-—lO-12 percent, rolled nonferrous metals-

v-ll percent and savings of rolled ferrous metals in construction-7-9 percent.

Nl innurtant direction in more effective use of the production potential lies in
ciiicient employment of energy carriers. The USSR produces annually 2 billion
tons of conventional fuel, which is one-fifth of world consumption. A signif-
icant portion of fixed production capital is concentrated in sectors of the
loci and power complex. For their development, there are allocated roughly
one-third of all state capital investment and significant material and
tccnnlcal resources. During 1965-1979, petroleum production (including gas
condensate) increased from 262,888,000 tons to 585,571,000 tons, gar-from
127,666 million cubic meters to 405,597 cubic meters, coal-from $77,731,000
to 718,664,000 tons, and electric-power production—~from 507 billion kilowatt-
huurs to 1,238 billion kilowatt-hours.

1.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

during the 11th Five-Year Plan, the further development and strengthening of
the country's fuel and power base is planned. The production of electric power
by 1985 is expected to reach l,SSO-l,600 billion kilowatt-hours, including
220-225 billion kilowatt hours at atomic electric power stations and 230-235
billion kilowatt-hours at hydroelectric power stations and the production of
petroleum (with gas condensate)-620-645 million tons, gas-600-660 billion
cubic meters and coal-770-880 million tons. The achievements of the Soviet
economy are large determined by the increased efficiency of the extractive
industry. The main direction for this lies in accelerated scientific-technical
progress, ensuring of thorough and comprehensive processing of minerals, the
use of resource-saving equipment and technology and broader use of secondary
resources and local raw materials. Greater economy of petroleum, for example,
is promised by its improved extraction, conversion of motor transport to diesel
and gas fuel and of thermal electric power stations-from coal to gas. The use
of energy-saving technologies has made it possible to reduce the expenditure of
fuel in the production of electric power by 20 percent, cast iron and steel-
12 percent and cement-7 percent. At the sane time, losses of fuel, heat and
power are still great. Hany possibilities exist for economy of electric power
in the nonproduction sphere. For consumer needs, 15 percent is expendedof the
total outputotelectric power, which is released to the population at the lowest
price in the world per kilowatt-hour. A one-percent reduction of electric-power
consumption on everyday needs would make it possible to save annually 0.5 bil-
lion kilowatt-hours, which is the equivalent of 100 train loads of coal.

Tne use of secondary energy resources is 2-2.5-fold less expensive than the
construction of enterprises which can ensure the production of such a quan-
tity of energy. Secondary resources suitable for use for the national economy
as a whole are estimated at 260 million gigacalories. In actuality, only 105
million tone, or 46 percent, are utilized.

In this connection, the experience of enterprises of Kemerovskaya Oblast is of
interest. The idea here is the development and consistent realization of con-
crete programs of reduction of expenditure of fuel, electric and thermal power,
reduction of the time for reaching projected norms of reducing outlays of re-
sources and wide-scale introduction of personal economy accounts. During the
current five-year plan, provision has been made on the scale of the entire na-
tional economy to ensure economy of fuel and power resources in the amount of
160-170 million tons of conventional fuel, including 70—80 million tone from
tue reduction of expenditure norms.

in the course of realization of the decree of the CPSU Central Committee and
the USSR Council of Hinisters "0n Intensifying Work on the Economy and Rational
Use of Rawbuaterial, Fuel-Power and Other Material Resources" an entire system
is being implemented of organizational, scientific-technical, economic and
political educational measures, ensuring the launching of a mass movement of
workers for all-out economy in industry, agriculture, transport, construction,
the nonproduction sphere and in management. At enterprises and construction
projects, on kolkhozes and sovkhozes and at institutions and organizations,
concrete guidelines are being determined for reducing during the current five-
year plan outlays of raw and other materials, fuel and power, curtailing waste,
making maximum use of secondary resources and eliminating different kinds of

5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

losses and the responsibility of specific performers and heads of services
and subdivisions is increased for the practical realization of the developed
measures.

For the purpose of increasing proved reserves of mineral and raw-material re-
sources, particularly fuel and power resources, work on geological study of
the territory of the country will proceed at an accelerated pace. The search
for and prospecting of deposits of petroleum and gas in Western and Eastern
Siberia, the European part of the USSR, Central Asia and Kazakh SSR is being
intensified. The same is true of deposits and easily concentrated ores of
ferrous and nonferrous metals, bauxites, phosphorites, coal, fuel shale and
raw materials for atomic power engineering and for the production of construc-
tion materials and mineral fertilizers as well as the search for and prospect-
ing of subterranean water.

Together with expansion of prospecting for reserves of mineral and raw-material
resources, measures have been provided for increasing the efficiency of the
estractive industry. He refer to de wider use of petroleum production of new
nethods of acting on petroleum beds, introduction of gas-lift operation of
wells, high-output immersed electric pumps and improvement of the technology

of extracting highly viscous and bituminous petroleum. By 1985, up to,85-90
percent of petroleum will be produced at integrated automated fields. At the
same tine, labor outlays on the servicing of a well will be reduced 15-18 per-
cent. Upen-method production of coal will develop at an advancing rate on the
basis of wide-scale use of progressive technology and mining transport equip-
ment with greater unit capacity. Subterranean procurement of coal performed
hydraulically with its transportation via pipeline will be further developed.
The raw-material base of ferrous and nonferrous metallurgy will be strengthened
by more complete extraction of components of extracted ores, increased content
of iron, nanganese and chromium in concentrates, improved technology of extrac-
tion and processing of ores and concentrates, accelerated introduction of auto-
genous, hydrometaliurgic, microbiological and other effective production pro-
cesses as well as the use of machines of large unit capacity.

Accelerated development of the chemical and petrochemical industry will make it
possible to have the production of synthetic resins and plastics reach 6-6.25
million tons, and synthetic iibers and thread-l.6 million tons, to increase
the production of synthetic rubber, high-quality polymers with given technical
Characteristics and to more fully satisfy the needs of the national economy for
catalysts, preservatives, synthetic fibers, thread and dyes, auxiliary textile
substances, detergents, varnishes, paints and packing materials, fat and oil
substitutes for industrial purposes, chemical additives for polymer materials
and synthesis oi pharmaceutical agents.

The rational, economic use of material resources presupposes intensification of
tne struggle against losses. Developed measures for increasing economic stimu-
lation of those who are able to save public property shOuld meet the require-
ments of covering all channels of losses.

Special attention is being paid during this five-year plan to the development
and production of equipment possessing high efficiency, lower outlays of metal

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and other materials and lower energy intensiveness. In the motorbvehicle in-
dustry, it is planned to speed up the development of production of trucks with
diesel engines and to increase fuel economy of internal-combustion engines
through improvement of their design. The collective of the Moscow Motor-Vehicle
Plant imeni I.A. Likhachev has decided on the basis of expansion and deepening
of creative cooperation with scientific-research institutes of the country to
introduce during the current five-year plan 46 joint developments and to in-
crease the operational life of motor vehicles by 16 percent and that of engines
by 20 percent.

The accomplishment of the complex of measures relating to the introduction of
low-waste technology will make it possible by the end of the five-year plan to
reduce expenditure of rolled ferrous-metal products by 120,000 tons compared
to prescribed norms calculated on the basis of annual production output. The
fulfillment of adopted commdtments for the five-year plan on introduction of
the achievements of science and technology will make it possible to produce an
economic effect in the national economy of more than 320 million rubles and to
save about 500,000 tons of gasoline and 45,000 tons of furnace and boiler fuel.

The USSR State Committee for Science and Technology the USSR Academy of Sci-
ences, USSR ministries and departments and councils of ministers of union re-
publics have been instructed to stimulate research on urgent problems of sci-
entific and technical progress for the purpose of reducing material intensive-
ness and energy intensiveness of production. Expansion of production of new
types of machinery and equiprent with continuous operation, large unit capacity
and productivity making it possible to use resources economically, which is
characteristic of heavy, transport and power machine building, the electrical
equipment industry and other machine-building sectors.

Hide-scale use of resource-saving production processes emerges as one of the
most effective methods of reducing material intensiveness of production. In
metallurgy, this means tne replacement of metal cutting with economical methods
of shaping parts, introduction of electric furnaces into casting production

and of the method of nonoxidizing heating of metal into forging production

and wide-scale use of part rolling mills making it possible to use rolled metal
uitn minimal waste; in machine building-~accelerated development of production
of complexes of metalworking equipment equipped with automatic manipulators;

in light and food industry-the use of highly efficient systems of machines
ensuring comprehensive use of agricultural raw materials, reduction of losses
in their processing, storage and presentation to the consumer, in the construc-
tion materials industry-the introduction of energy-saving technologies in pro-
duction of cement, glass, line, economical methods of heat treatment of rein-
forced concrete, kllning of ceramic articles and effective methods of insulat-
lnr heat units and using secondary heat. During the current five-year plan,
fuller utilization of timber resources will contribute to raising the level of
integration of their processing. With an increase in the volume of production
output in the sector amounting to 17-19 percent, the production of progressive
forms of wood and paper products is developing at an advancing rate. In
particular, production of chipboard during the five-year plan will increase

approximately 1.5-fold, wood-fiber board and cartons--1.3-l.5 fold, paper pulp-—
l.3-l.6--fold and paper—-20-25 percent.

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

An important direction of economic management is the collection and utilization
of secondary raw materials. Processing of secondary resources makes it possible
to reduce five-tenfold the capital intensiveness and energy intensiveness of
products. In 1978, one-fifth of the paper and almost one-half of the cardboard
were produced from waste paper (of which 1.9 million tons were used). As a re-
sult about 7 million cubic meters of timber we: saved, the production of which
would have required felling of trees over an area in excess of 100,000 hectares.
Such a volume of timber would have been provided by 70 new large timber indus-
try enterprises whose creation would have required one-time capital investment
in the amount of 1 billion rubles. Each year thousands of hectares of land are
set aside for the burying of solid everyday wastes from cities (60 million
tons). At the same time, their contents includes 30-45 percent of paper and
cardboard, 5—9 percent of glass, 4-6 percent of textile fabrics, 3-5 percent

of metal and 1-3 percent of wood. The utilization of these wastes provides an
important ecological and economic effect. For this reason, beginning in 1981,
plans of economic and social development for enterprises and associations in-
clude a section on assignments of use of secondary raw materials.

Efficient utilization of raw materials and energy carriers acquires even a more
pressing importance because many of them are irreplaceable. Major possibilities
for more effective use of the available production potential are opened up by
intensive use of production capacities, machines, equipment and means of trans-
port. Inning 1970-1979, the growth rate of the capital-labor ratio in industry
amounted to 182 percent, while the growth rate of labor productivity was 152
percent; in agriculture these indicators were 231 percent and 117 percent,
respectively.

The lag of the growth rate of labor productivity behind the growth rate of the
capital-labor ratio is borne out by insufficiently efficient use of machinery
and equipment, workers and power machines, measuring and regulative instruments
and devices and means of transport. At many enterprises, machinery and equip-
ment operate only one shift and significant intrashift interruptions are per-
mitted. The 26th CPSU Congress set a task of improving the use of production
capacities and fixed capital, raising the shift coefficient of operation of
machinery and equipment and creating, while taking into consideration the spe-
cial features of individual sectors and production operations and using pro-
gressive systems of organization of maintenance and modernization of equipment.
At the end of 1980, the value of fixed production capital of the national econ-
omy amounted to more than 1.1 trillion rubles. With today's scale of produc-
tion, a growth of output capital in industry of 1 percent is the equivalent of
ndditional production output amounting to roughly 6 billion rubles.

For better utilization of fixed production capital, passports of production
associations and enterprises are compiled in accordance with the decree of the
CPSU Central Committee and the USSR Council of Punisters on improving the econ-
omic mechanism. They show the presence and use of production capacities, the
technical organizational level and specialization of production, the quality

of manufactured products and also other technical-economic indicators. Pass-
ports of production associations and enterprises provide the possibility of
significantly raising the level of control over the use of production capac-
ities. This is borne out by the Sumy Machine-Building Association imeni

FOR OFFICIAL8IJSE ONLY
FOR OFFK‘IAI. lISl-I ONLY

u.V. Frunze, where a control system of production capacities has been develop-
ed. An audit was made at the association of the machine-tool park, and it was
established that it would be possible with twobshift work to fulfill a more
intensive program. During the 10th Five-Year Plan , 39S various machine tools
were found to be unneessary at the association's head plant. The freed area
was used for the placement of 109 new ones, including those with programmed
operation. The chief evaluative criterion is the actual level of use of norm-
ative production capacity.

Motivation of collectives of sections and shops is determined on the basis of
two criteria: fulfillment of plan targets gives the right to a reward, while
its size is computed according to the level of actual utilization of production
capacity (compared to the norm). Hith distribution of economic-stimulation
funds, provision is made for redistribution of funds in favor :' those collec-
tivus of sections and shops which, in fulfilling the plan, make better use of
production capacities. Effective use of the production potential just at the
Sumy association resulted in a saving of 11.5 million rubles of capital
investment.

Growth of labor production because of acceleration of the rate of integrated
mechanization and automation of production, introduction of scientific labor
organization, improvement of training and upgrading of qualifications of cad-
res and strengtheninc of labor discipline constitute the decisive condition
for raising of the efficiency of public production. Over the course of the
last 10 years, productivity of social labor, computed as a ratio of national
income to the number of employed in sectors of material production, increased
by a factor of 1.5. This was responsible for a greater than 30 percent growth
of the national income and ensured an economy of labor of almost 36 million
persons. The rise of labor productivity in industry by only 1 percent in
1980 provided with the same number of workers additional production output in
excess of 6 billion rubles. During the current five-year plan, it is intended
to provide a l7-20~percent growth of labor productivity. In all sectors, it
is important to achieve growth of production output at existing enterprises
with a stable or even smaller number of employees. It is planned to increase
labor productivity of workers in industry by 23~25 percent, in agriculture-by
22-26 percent, in construCtion-by 15-17 percent and in railroad transport--
by 10-12 percent. The fulfillment of intensive targets for growth of labor
productivity is dictated by the special features of the country's economic
development in the '803, particularly the sharp reduction of influx of new
labor resources with an exceptionally high level of employment of the popula-
tion (94 percent).

Induction of production labor intensiveness can be done on the basis of all-
possible acceleration of scientific-technical progress in all sectors of the
economy. During the current five-year plan, a transition will be systematic-
ally carried out of creation and introduction of individual machines and pro-
duction process for the development, production and mass use of highly effi-
cient systems of machines and equipment for the mechanization of the whole
complex of operations--both basic and auxiliary.

9
mn 0mm." USP. ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USF. ONLY

Improvement of the organization, norm setting and stimulation of labor,
strengthening of labor discipline and the continued rise in the level of
vocational-technical training of cadres are of major importance. Although

the sphere of use of qualified, mechanized labor is constantly expanding, at
the present tine, more than 40 million people are engaged in manual labor in
sectors of material production alone, excluding repair work. This results in
extensive use of labor resources, creates difficulties in filling work places
in connection with an undeviating growth of the level of general-educational
and vocational-technical training of workers, especially of young people. The
mechanization of manual work rapidly pays for itself and provides a significant
social effect. Expenditures on the release of one worker engaged in auxiliary
production are on the average one-third less than on the release of a worker
from basic production, while one-fifth to one-sixth less of funds are required
for the release<£ an auxiliary worker employed in loading-unloading work.

At the present time, a special-purpose complex program is being developed for
reducing the use of manual labor. Enterprises and sectors are assigned special
targets in plans of economic and social development. Raising the level of mech-
anization of materials-handling, loading and unloading and warehousing work
will make it possible to save the labor of 1.5-2 million people in 1985. Per-
sonnel of Moscow industry have pledged to provide for all production growth
during the current five-year plan through higher labor productivity without an
increase in the number of workers. As a reSult of the introduction of mechan-
ization and automation equipment for production at city enterprises, it is
planned to reduce the number of workers engaged in manual operation by 20,000
persons in the first year of the five-year plan. Significant labor resources,
especially in rural areas, are to be found in the republics of Central Asia

and the TranscaucaSus.

Full use of the labor potential is also largerly determined on how worktime is
spent. in order to compensate on the scale of the whole country the loss of
only one vdnute per shift by each worker, it is necessary to bring into the na-
tional economy on additional 250,000 persons. in the decree of the CPSU Centtal
Committee, the Presidium of the USSR Supreme Soviet, the USSR Council of Minis-
ters and the AUCCFU "0n Further Strengthening of Labor Discipline and Reduction
of Cadre Turnover in the National Economy" (1979), it is emphasized that an in-
crease in the scale of production, complication of economic ties and accelera-
tion of scientific-technical progress increase the importance of every hour,
every minute of uorktiue, strict observance of rules of internal order and the
creation 0( Stable cadres in each sector of production. The struggle for ef-
fective utilization oi uorhtiue is a most accessible form of participation of
everyone in providing more efficient utilization of the production potential.

Fuller and more cificieat utilization of the production potential requires
eructural changes in the national economy, advancing development of sectors
determining scientific-technical progress, balanced development of extractive
and processing sectors and improvement of distribution of productive forces on
the basis of continued specialization and proportional development of the econ-
omies of the union republics and economic regions into a single national-
natinnal economic cemplex for the country. It was pointed out at the 26th CPSU
Congress that it is necessary to improve and strengthen in every possible way

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the "upper stories" of the pertinent sectors that largely determine the qual-
ity and frequently the quantity of production output. The development of so-
called fourth reduction in metallurgy frees millions of tons of metal from the
need of mechanical treatment. wide-scale reequipment of ferrous-metallurgy
enterprises provides for intensive development of production of high-precision
profiles of sheet metal and tinplate (including the thinnest kind) with durable
protective coatings, precision alloys, multilayered pipe and the like. In con-
struction, the importance of finishing work is growing; to a large degree it
determines the esthetic appearance and quality of the end construction product;
in linht industry, final production operations and continuous production pro-
cesses relating to fabric and knitwear finish will be developed at an accele-
rated pace.

The efficient utilization of all available resources-labor, fixed capital,
fuel and raw materials, products of fields and animal-husbandry farms-is con-
stantly being put by the CPSU at the center of all operational activity. The
materials of the 24th, 25th and 26th party congresses and the decisions of a
number of plenuma of the CPSU Central Committee emphasize that the core of the
party's economic policy at the stage of developed socialism is a solicitous,
communist attitude on the part of all participants of public production toward
the people's property and the ability to utilize the production potential re-
tionally and with high yield. Measures for improving planning and increasing
the effect of the economic mechanism on boosting efficiency of production and
quality of work being implemented in the cauntry are subordinated to this aim.

The Soviet economy has to be economica1-this requirement was recorded by the
26th party congress as one of the fundamental principles of the economic strat-
egy of the CPSU for the '80s. The practical realization of this principle pre—
supposes the development of the initiative of all labor collectives and im-
provement of the organization of socialist competition. The decree of the

CPSU Central Committee, the USSR Council of Ministers, the AUCCTU and the Rom-
sonol Central Committee "On the All-Union Socialist Competition for the Suc-
cessful Fulfillment and Overfulfillment of the Targets of the 11th Five-Year
Plan" emphasizes the need to concentrate the efforts of those competing on
speeding up growth of labor productivity, improving quality of production,
economy of raw and other materials, fuel and electric power, better use of
fixed capital and unconditional fulfillment of plans for deliveries of products
in prescribed periods and in the product list. The motto of the competition

of the current five-year plan is "To work efficiently and qualitatively!" di-
rects millions of the participants of nationwide cooperation of labor to better
anu fuller use of the production potential.

it is important to launch, it states in the decree of the CPSU Central Commit-
tee and the USSR Council of Ministers "0n Intensifying Work on Economy and Ra-
tional Use of Raw-Material, Fuel-Power and Other Material Resources," a mass
movement of workers for all-put economy in industry, agriculture, transport,
construction, the nonproduction sphere and management.

In the current five-year plan, the system of mass economic education enters a
qualitatively new stage of development. It is characterized by bringing to the
forefront problems of rational use of the production potential and acceleraticm

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USI-Z ONLY

of scientific-technical progress. Full use of the production potential is the
basis of raising efficiency of production and producing better results with
lower outlays and growth of the well-being of workers. Aimed at this today
are the scientific-technical and structural policy, management methods, the
policy of capital investments, the system of management, planning and stimula-
tion and the initiative of labor collectives.

2.

3.

lo.

5.

LIST OF RECOMDED LITERATURE

"Materialy XXVI s"yezda KPSS" [Materials of the 26th CPSU Congress].
Izdatel'stvo politicheskoy literatury, 1981.

"Sovershcnstvovaniye khozyaystvennogo mekhsnizma (sbornik dokumentov)"
[Perfecting of the Economic Mechanism (Collection of Documents)]. Izdate1'-
stvo "Pravda", 1980.

Decree of the CPSU Central Committee and the USSR Council of Ministers of
30 June 1981 "On Increasing Hark on Economy and Rational Use of Raw-Material,
Fuel-Power and Other Material Resources" (PRAVDA, 4 July 1981).

Academician T.S. Khachaturov, "New Perspectives of Economic and Social De-
velopment of the USSR" (vapnosr sxouomm, No 1, 1981).

V.P. Krasovskiy, "The Economic Potential: Reserves and Yield" (VOPROSY
EKONOI-IIKI, N0 2, 1961).

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Pravda", "Voprosy ekonomiki", 1981

76‘) 7

050:

1 820/ 109

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT AND PERFORMANCE

NORMATIVE REE OUTPUT IN INCREASED PRODUCTION EFFICIENCY
Moscow VOPROSY EKONOMIKI in Russian No 1, Jan 82 pp 23-32

[Article by L. Rozenova: "Normative Net Output and Increasing Efficiency of
Production"]

[Text] Increasing production efficiency and in all ways economizing on material,
labor and financial resources are important directions for steadily advancing the
national economy that were earmarked by the 26th CPSU Congress. Economizing on all
kinds of rescurces is a complex task whose solution involves the development of
science and technology. improvement of price setting, standardization and forms of
stimulation and other economic factors that influence economic conditions. In the
decree adopted by the CPSU Central Committee and the USSR Council of Ministers con-
cerning economizing on material resources it is noted that the system of administra-
tion, planning and incentives should be directed toward economy and efficient utili-
zation of all material resources.

In order to create conditions that contribute to economizing on resources it is

very important to apply the appropriate economic indicators in planning. particular-
ly the indicator of normative net output (NChP). As of 1 January 1982. 33 ministrieﬁ
are changing over to the application of the indicator of normative net output in
planning industrial production, including all machine building ministries. In the
four ninistries--the USSR Ministry of Power and Electrification, Ministry of the
Petroleum Industry. Ministry of the Gas Industry and the Ministry of Nonferrous
Metallurgy--this indicator will be used only at enterprises of the processing in-
dustry for the time being. In a number of ministries. particularly the USSR Minis—
try of Ferrous Metallurgy, the Ministry of the Petroleum Refining and Petrochemical
Industry and the Ministry of the Chemical Industry. experimental testing of the in-
dicator of normative net output is being continued. The normatives will be develop-
ed in these branches after the results of the experiment have been generalized.

The utilization of the indicator of normative net output and also other measures
that have been taken to improve planning make it possible to evaluate with better
Justification and more objectively the results of the activity of the enterprises
and organizations for increasing production efficiency. increasing the productivity
or live labor and economizing on labor resources. This is shown by an economic ex-
periment in applying the normative net output in planning that was conducted on a
large scale in the branches. associations and enterprises. Measuring labor produc-
tivity on the basis of gross output does not adequately reflect the enterprise's

l3
INJR 0Nﬁﬂ€1Al.lEﬂE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

contribution to increasing its own labor productivity since it includes the results
of "outside" labor. The press has extensively elucidated the shortcomings of the

traditional “gross" method of planning and accounting for labor productivity at en—
terprises and associations.

0n of the main directions for economizing on labor rescurces is increasing labor
productivity. What with the shortage of labor force. an objective evaluation of
labor productivity becomes especially important. The distribution and utilization
of labor resources. the development of ways of economizing on them and, consequent-
ly, increasing the efficiency of public production depend largely on this.

The normative net Output is assigned an essential role in the objective evaluation
of labor productivity since expenditures of past labor do not influence its level.
In the five-year plans for the economic and social development of industrial minis-
tries. associations and enterprises (with a breakdown for the various years) the
new indicator is the basis for establishing indicators for increased net output
(normative) and labor productivity. The NChP is also used for calculating capital-
output ratio. Normatives for determining the wage fund and controlling its utili-
zation are established in terms of one ruble of NChP.

CI
The main measures of labor productivity. as we know. are the output of products per
unit of working time or expenditures of working time on the production of each unit
or output. These indicators are calculated in physical units. The quantity of vari-
ous kinds of products that are produced is measured in value form (in constant prices
of the enterprises). Labor productivity in value terms including both past labor
that is embodied in raw material, processed materials, semimanufactured products and
batching items, and in newly created value essentially characterizes the productivi-
ty of public labor. 0n the basis of the normative net output it is possible to mea-
sure only the productivity of live labor. But the growth of the latter in all
branches of the national economy, in the final analysis, determines the growth of
the productivity of public labor.

The increased role of the normative net output in evaluating labor productivity has
brought about the structure of the new indicator and the methodology for determining
it. wages comprised more than half of the structure of the normative net output,
and the remainder is profit. The table below gives data concerning the structure of
normative net output in the various branches of machine building:

 

Proportion of Normative Net Output
Output _______ waggg to t
l __ z 3 ___
Total for machine building ' 60.0 60.0
including in branches:
heavy machine building 52,7 37.3
power machine building 50,1 49.9
electrical equipment industry 59.2 40.3
chemical and petroleum machine building 50,3 39,7
instrument making, automation equipment
and control systems 59.3 60.7
machine tool and tool building 65.2 34.8
14'

FOR 0FFK]Al.USEiDNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Proportion of Normative Net Output

 

 

Output wages Profit
.— 1 2 ___.3____

construction. road and municipal

machine building 63.2 34.8
automotive industry 55.0 45.0
tractor and agricultural machine

building 54.7 45.3
machine building for animal husbandry

and fodder production 54.2 45 8
machine building for light and food

industry and household appliances 65.5 34.5

On an average for machine building wages comprise 60 percent of the volume of the
NChP and profit, 40 percent. The deviations from this average level in the various
branches is explained by the different structures of expenditures and the formation
of profit, taking into account the branch capital-output ratio.

The normative net output is a part of the wholesale price of the item, including
wages. deductions for social security and profit. The existing "Methodological In-
structions Concerning the Policy for the Development and Application of the Indica-
tor of Net Output (Normative) in Planning"* stipulates that the normative of net
output for a specific item is determined by the total of wages and normative profit.
in general form, the formula for calculation can be written as follows:

an=3w+3o+nm U)

where3np --uorkers' wages (basic and additional), including deductions for
social security in the projected (planned) calculation of the production cost of
the item; 30 --the wages of the remaining industrial production personnel for ser-
vice and administration of production per unit of item; [1' --normative profit per
unit of the item.

Net output normatives and wholesale prices are established on the basis of unified
calculation and progressive technical-economic norms, and they are of a branch na-
ture. The branch net output normatives. which have the same calculation base as
prices. include not just any labor expenditures of a particular enterprise, but the
Socially necessary normative expenditures on the production of the products that are
used in the formation of wholesale prices and provide the greatest economic effect
from the production and application of the products. At the Pavlodar Tractor Plant
imeni V. I. Lenin, for example, expenditures on the production of tractors with a
capacity of 90 horsepower exceed the maximum price level calculated taking into ac-
count their technical and economic parameters and efficiency. Therefore the new
wholesale prices that went into effect on 1 January 1982 were reduced by more than
10 percent below the level projected by the enterprise and the net output normatives
were reduced by 30 percent. Labor expenditures in excess of the necessary norms

 

ZEEb "Methodological Instructions Concerning the Policy for the Development and Ap-
plication of the Indicator of Net Output (Normative) in Planning" (in the collec—
tion “Improving the Economic Mechanism" Izdatel'stvo "Pravda". 1980, pp 69-79.)

FOR OFFNJA3.USB(NNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

are not reimbursed either through the price or through the normatives, which makes
it possible to economically "punish" the enterprises for wasting labor.

When calculating the normativea. the wages of the production workers ( 3np) are ap—
plied at the level that was taken into account in determining the prices in the cor-
responding article of the calculation per unit of output. As for the wages of wor-
kers for service and administration of production ( 3o ), in the calculation per
unit of output it is determined with a special coefficient (_K:) which is the same
for the enterprise or branch. This coefficient characterizes the ratio between the
sum of wages of industrial production personnel for administration and service of
production and the wages of production workers. The level of this coefficient de-
pends on a number of factors, among which one should mention the number of workers
in the design and technological services, the ratio between the number of auxiliary
and basic production workers. and so forth. On an average for machine building it
amounts to 1.5.

1he established normatives (from formula 1) remain stable throughout the five-year
plan. An increase in labor productivity with stable normatives (and, as a rule,
with the same number of workers) can be achieved on the basis of economizing on ls-
bor resources per unit of output both through reducing the labor-intensiveness of
the products that are produced and through reducing losses and utilizing working
time better. The reduction of the labor—intensiveness of the products depends on
many factors. including improvement of production organization and increasing its
technical support, that is, on factors that are related to the concrete activity of
the enterprises which is directed toward increasing production efficiency.

The significance of the indicator of net output increases especially when determin-
ing the labor productivity of enterprises that manufacture products that use less
expensive materials and substitutes. The existing policy for price setting stipu-
lates that when materials that are less expensive than the present ones are used
and the product quality remains at the previous level, wholesale prices remain un-
changed until the end of the five-year plan.

The utilization of less expensive materials requires, as a rule, additional proces-
sing of them, which leads to an increase in the labor-intensiveness of the produc-
tion of products. For example, the replacement of the lead casing of a long dis-
t.nce cable with a corrugated steel one (while retaining the main technical and
economic parameters of the cable) led to a reduction of the weight of one kilometer
of cable by 28.5 percent (from 1,105 to 790 kilograms) with a reduction of the pro-
duction cost by 28 percent (from 948 to 682 rubles). But the labor-intensiveness
of the manufacture of the cable in corrugated steel casing increased 1.4-fold as a
result of the additional operations for cutting the sheets, welding the casings and
applying the polyethylene hose.

In such cases, with the "gross" method of calculation of labor productivity. re-
tniuing the existing prices for the cable in lead easing does not fully solve the
problem of increasing the motivation of the manufacturer to assimilate a new pro-
duct using less expensive raw material since labor productivity decreases at the
manufacturing enterprise even through the mass of profit increases. Replacing the
cable casing with a less expensive one and one that is in greater supply provided

16
INJR 0F1ﬂC]Al.USEZ(MNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

an annual savings of more than 500,000 rubles for the national economy. But with
the "gross" method of calculating labor productivity the interests of the manufac-
turing enterprise end up in opposition to national economic ones.

But when labor productivity is calculated according to the normative net output it
is advantageous for the manufacturing enterprise to produce cable with relatively

less expensive materials since the net output normative increases. It reflects the
economically justifiable increase in labor expenditures which provides for an eco—
nomic effect in the production of the cable. It is known that one of the main
principles of price setting is the principle of identity of prices for identical
products. Therefore the price of the cable remains unchanged since its consumer
qualities do not change. And thus the new indicator more objectively takes into
account both the savings of labor expenditures on the production of products and
the economically justified increase in labor-intensiveness related to savings on
material expenditures when materials are replaced with less expensive ones or to

the increased technical and economic parameters and effectiveness of the new pro-
ducts.

The changeover from experimental (test) verification of the indicator of normative
net output to its planned introduction into economic practice requires that a number
of problems be solved. particularly the problem of whether when calculating the

NChP for a new product the stable coefficient K1 taken from the basic price list
should be used or whether it should be calculated annually. According to the
"Methodological Instructions Concerning the Policy for the Development and Applica-
tion of the indicator of Net Output (Normative) in Planning." the coefficient K is
used for the same accounting periods in which materials are presented for the sub-
stantiation of wholesale prices and normatives, that is, it changes from year to

year. which is brought about by the dynamic nature of overhead expenditures in the
production of products.

As was already noted. the amount of the coefficient depends on the number of
workers in design and technological services, the rat 0 between the numbers of aux-
iliary and basic production workers and on other factors. Would it be correct to
increase (or reduce) the volume of net output if, for example, the design bureau
were transferred to the books of the enterprise (or transferred to independent
books)? Would not the change in the coefficient K3 lead to unjustified changes in
the rates of growth of production and labor productivity? After all the influence
of this coefficient on the level of the normative net output is great since the
proportion of wages of workers in service and administration comprises more than

40 percent of the NChP.

Further. with mechanization of auxiliary loading-unloading and repair work and a
reduction in the number of workers employed in these operations, the wage fund for
service for production in the enterprise as a whole can be decreased, which leads
to a reduction of the coefficient K3. Its reduction can also be brought about by
an absolute or relative reduction of expenditures (wages) for administration. In
all of these cases, with an economically justified increase in labor-intensiveness
during the assimilation of new, more complex and effective items, the normatives
[or the new products, as a result of the reduction of the coefficient K3, can be
unjustifiably lower than those for previously assimilated, less labor~intensive

17
ms OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

products, but with a greater K3. Therefore it is expedient to keep this coefficient
stable throughout the entire period of the five-year plan. 0n the whole. in our

With the application of the indicator of NChP in planning, it becomes especially im-
portant to have Scientifically substantiated planning of labor. The basis for the
development of normatives of net output should be the normative labor-intensiveness

quality of the norms, their objectivity and precision. Increased norms lead to ad-
ditional expenditure of labor resources and the wage fund, and they distort indica-
tors that are calculated on their basis. This is why the changeover to the NChP in
planning requires introducing a strict policy in norm setting for labor.

cooperation with other enterprises. Moreover the conditions for cooperation at en-
terprises that manufacture the same kinds of products can differ significantly,
which brings about different levels of labor-intensiveness for the same products.
Thus manufactured products. for example, fabrics, can be manufactured from one's
own yarn and gray cloth, from others' (purchased) yarn and one's own gray cloth.

or from others' gray cloth. In all of these cases labor expenditures on the manu-
facture of the fabric of the same article differ essentially.

In machine building the normstives are determined for the prepared items and take
into account conditions of cooperation as of 1 January 1981. The Methodological
Instructions stipulate that with a change in conditions of cooperation as compared

proposals for changing the existing normatives. Then, as a rule, no changes should
he made in the planning indicators since when the manufacture of components and
parts is transferred "outside" instead of being produced internally, the resulting
released labor should be provided for in the planned volume of NChP with an in-

with complex kinds of products such changes take place almost continually. When
there is a shortage of working personnel. especially machine tool operators, many

18
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FORGDFFKJAI.USE20NLY

the new indicator in planning shows that the actual expenditures under the article
"purchased items and semimanufactured products" for many kinds of items increases
as compared to the one used when establishing the normatives 1.5-fold and more, but
no changes are made in the volume of the NChP. -

No adjustments are made to the normatives for calculating the wage fund either. de-
spite the considerable expansion of cooperation (on the basis of transferring the
manufacture of coIPonents and parts to other enterprises) and the reduction of in-
ternal labor expenditures. The experiment showed that in the stage of development
and assimilation of a new item, when the level of normatives is determined, the en-
terprise was motivated to limit the volume of cooperation in order to plan a high
normative. But after the establishment of the normative cooperation was expanded,
as a result of which labor expenditures decreased at this enterprise. If changes
are not made in the normative, there is an artificial increase in labor productivity
and the volume of production which, in turn, causes an overexpenditure of the wage
fund since a reduction in the labor-intensiveness of products at the enterprise. in
this case. will take place not as a result of an actual reduction of labor expen-
ditures on the basis of improvement of technology or reduction of losses of working
time. but as a result of transferring the manufacture of components and parts to
other enterprises.

With a change in the conditions of cooperation it is necessary to make adjustments
to the normatives of net output. Along with the change in the conditions for co-
operation the corresponding additional payments (rebates) should be established for
the set normatives. If the transfer of the manufacture of components and parts

from one enterprise to another takes place within a single ministry, the additional
payments (rebates) can be established by this ministry. But if multibranch coopera-
tion is expanded or the change in the conditions of cooperation is brought abOut by
an increase (reduction) of imported parts, adjustments to the net output normatives
should be made by the agencies responsible for questions of price setting.

In order to stimulate economically justified cooperation or the organization of in-
ternal production of components and parts, the normative of net output for the fi-
nal item should be decreased (increased) by the normative established for the cor-
responding parts, component or batching item that is manufactured at specialized
associations and enterprises. Thus, based on labor expenditures at specialized en-
terprises of the Ministry of the Electrical Equipment Industry, for an asynchronous
engine for pumps with a capacity of 32 kilowatts the normative of net output was
set in the amount of 112 rubles. Despite the fact that at other enterprises, for
example. for pump machine building, the expenditures were 1.2-1.3 times higher.
when calculating the normative of net output (additional payment) for the pump with
an engine that was produced within the enterprise, the already established norma-
tive is taken into account. This avoids excess expenditures that are not economical—
ly justified since they are not reimbursed for the manufacturer either in the price
or in the nor-ative. This measure is necessary since in a number of cases when the
manufacture of components and parts is transferred to other enterprises, expendi-
tures at these enterprises. including labor expenditures. are unjustifiably in-
creased.

Although prices and net output normatives play an important role in the development
of specialization and cooperation, the problem cannot be solved through them alone.

19
INJR OFTWCJAI.USEZ(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

With the transfer of the manufacture of batching items, components and parts to
other enterprises and the concentration of production of homogeneous items. it is
presumed that the enterprises have more productive special equipment, better organi-
zation of labor and production (with an increase in series manufacture of items)
and, as a result, reduced production cost.

The application of net output normatives contributes to economizing on material ex-
penditures. As was already noted, the NChP is the indicator that is free of the in-
fluence of past labor. It is precisely the neutrality of the new indicator with
respect to the material-intensiveness of products that exerts a positive influence
on reducing the weight of item (both absolute and relative) per unit of the main
parameter in the planning of new items. It is known that the proportion of material
expenditures is fraught with significant fluctuations even for the same kinds of
products. Thus the proportion of material expenditures in the production cost of
computer equipment ranges from 10 to 85 percent. In order for material expenditures
not to exert even an indirect influence on the NChP (through profit) greater demands
are placed on substantiation in the formation of wholesale prices and normatives of
net output. In order act to allow unjustified utilization of costly batching items
and parts in the production of machines and equipment or uneconomical replacement

of materials, the normative of profitability is calculated as the ratio between pro-
fit and production costs minus material expenditures. With this method an increased
proportion of "outside" labor does not influence the amount of profit.

For machine building products the normatives of profitability that are used for
calculating wholesale prices and normatives of net output have been established on
the basis of the normative of profitability (ratio between profit and production
capital). whose amount on an average for machine building is 15 percent and provides
for obtaining the profit necessary for autonomous financing. The normative of pro-
fitability (ratio between profit and production cost minus material expenditures)
that is used for determining wholesale prices and normatives of net output ranges
from 40 percent (machine building for light and the food industry) to 60 percent
(power machine building) with an average amount for machine building of 50 percent.

it should be noted that in a number of branches (instrument building, machine build-
ing for light and the food industry and household appliances), in order to ensure
equally advantageous production. unified normatives of profitability have been es-
tzolished for all products for production and technical purposes with the exception
of spare parts for which the normative has been established that is 1.5-2 times
higher than for the other products of the branch (in order to stimulate an expansion
of their output). in other branches the normatives of profitability are differen-
tiated for the various groups of profit in order to stimulate a progressive struc-
ture of equipment that is produced. Thus the average normative of profitability
(ratio between profit and profitability minus the cost of material expenditures) for
metal processing equipment is 47 percent, for metal cutting machine tools with nu-
morical programmed control-~53 percent, and for automatic forge-presses--60 percent.

Thus if a higher normative of profitability is used for the formation of prices,

the same normative is used for determining the NChP. Economic stimulation through
the eStablishment of higher norms of profit included in prices is also carried out
through the system of normatives of net output. For example. an increase in the
output of spare parts will be advantageous both for the enterprise, since it provides

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

a greater profit and a larger volume of normative net output per one ruble of in-

ternal expenditures than it does for other products. and for the national economy,
since a basis will be created for eliminating the shortage of spare parts.

The policy that has been adopted for determining the profitability in the prices and
the NChP of specific items--the ratio between profit and production cost minus the
value of utilized materials. raw materials, fuel. energy, semimanufactured products
and batching items-neutralizea the motivation of the enterprises to produce pro-
ducts with high material-intensiveness since the economic stimulation of enterprises
that are operating with the NChP does not depend on the material-intensiveness of
the products or on the "gross." Therefore the enterprises are not motivated to use
costly materials and batching items or to produce material-intensive products. Eco-
nomizing on material expenditures makes it possible to produce above-plan produuta

and, as a result of this, to obtain additional deductions into the economic incen-
tive funds.

From an analysis of the results of an experiment in the Ministry of Heavy Machine
Building and the Ministry of Power Machine Building it follows (see table) that in
these branches during the years of the Tenth Five-Year Plan expenditures of raw
materials, processed materials, semimanufactured products and batching items per
one ruble of commercial output decreased. Among the other factors influencing this
reduction, in the evaluation of specialists, was the changeover of the branches to
planning normative net output.

Material expenditures per 1 ruble
Commercial output Production cost

Kopecks 1 Kopecks 1
Ministry of Heavy
Machine Building
1975 55.2 100.0 66.6 100.0
1980 51.2 92.8 57.6 89.1
Ministry of Power
Machine Building
1975 51.0 100.0 60.9 100.0
1980 48.5 95.1 55.7 91.4

The work experience under the Tenth Five-Year Plan of the Soyuzpoligrafmash all-
union industrial association which planned normative net output showed, for example,
that the material being assimilated at the Khar'kov Poligrafmash plant has a lower
material-intensiveness (not onlv relative, but also absolute) than do previously
assimilated items. At this plant direct material expenditures decreased by more
than 10 percent per one ruble of commercial output.

It should be noted that the application of normatives of net output in no way re-
duces the significance of the wholesale price in the utilization of the economic
mechanism since autonomous financing relations can be based only on the wholesale
price, which envisions complete reimbursement for economically justified expendi-
tures on the production of products. The stimulating role of prices has increased
especially in economizing on material and labor resources. The existing policy for
price setting envisions preferential stimulation for the Output of new products

21
FOR Ol-‘l-TCIAI. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

whose economic effect is provided for through a reduction of expenditures on their
manufacture.

In the formation of wholesale prices and normatives of net output for new items for
production and technical purposes which, in terms of their technical and economic
parameters and quality, are equal to or surpass previously produced (replace) items
and whose production provides for economizing on material and labor expenditures.
one retains the amount of profit obtained from the sale of the previously assimila-
ted products. Moreover, as a result of the economy from the reduction of material-
intensiveness of these products and their labor-intensiveness during utilization
with more productive methods of processing, the wholesale price for the products of
the highest quality category are increased by a higher incentive increment; for pro-
ducts of the first quality category (for which incentive increments, as we know.
are not established in addition to the wholesale prices) 50 percent of the savings
obtained from reducing material and labor expenditures are included in the whole-
sale price of the new item.

The system of additional payments (rebates) for changes in the qualitative charac-
teristics of the items, including their material-intensiveness, has become wide-
spread in the practice of price setting. Additional payments and rebates to the
normatives of net output have also been developed, depending on the change in the
quality of the items and taking into account changes in the expenditures of labor.
Thus in order to stimulate the production of high precision billets and to economize
on metal, payments in addition to the wholesale prices and normatives of net output
have been established for smeltings with this class of precision and thinness. At
the same time the list of wholesale prices for smeltings, forged pieces and hot
stamped pieces envision punitiva rebates from the wholesale prices and normatives

of net output for making the billets heavier than they were theoretical to be ac-
cording to the blueprint.

The NChP is also playing a greater role in increasing the economic motivation of the
enterprises to comprehensively process and completely utilize secondary raw materi-
al. Motivation for comprehensive utilization of raw material is provided through
the establishment of relatively higher normatives for sold wastes, secondary re-
sources and byproducts than for the main product. For example, for sugar the norma-
tive of ne“ output is from 8 to 17 percent of the wholesale prices, and for by-
products ot the sugar industry (pulp)--30 percent, for vegetable oils--50 percent
and for wastes (cakes and oil-seed mea1)-—50 percent. Additional labor expenditures
for the preparation of byproducts for utilization are taken into account by calcu-
lating the normatives of net output for these byproducts. The new indicator is
having a greater influence on the production of the final products from byproducts
of production (purchased and internal). As we know, a single price is established
for the production of the final product of equal quality, regardless of whether the
given item is obtained from full-value raw material or from byproducts. At the same
time, with these byproducts labor-intensiveness is greater than it is than when full-
vslue raw material is used, which entails an incouuensurability of procurements and
the need for additional processing and other operations.

The existing policy stipulates that the normatives of net output for items manufac-
tured from byproducts be established taking into account their labor-intensiveness
as compared to the production of these products from full—value raw material. Con-
sequently. with the changeover to the application of the NChP in planning there is

22
FOR 0F?1CJA1.USE2(NVLY
an increase in the economic incentives of the enterprises to retain and better uti-
lize wastes and byproducts since their proportion in the volume of output calcula-
ted in terms of the new indicator increases. All this contributes to economizing
on resources, which is especially important with the modern scale of production.
Estimating the significance of a thrifty attitude toward the national wealth, L. I.
Brezhnev noted at the 26th CPSU Congress: ". . . the pivotal point of the economic
policy will be something that would seem to be simple and very ordinary--an economi-
cal attitude toward the public good, the ability to utilize everything we have com-
pletely and efficiently. The initiative of labor collectives and mass party work

should be directed toward this. The technical policy, the policy for capital in-

vestments and the system of planning and accounting indicators must be aimed toward
this."

The new evaluative indicator that is being used in planning is an important economic
indicator. The application of normative net output along with other measures for
improving planning and increasing the influence of the economic mechanism on the
efficiency and quality of work will make it possible to resolve the problems for

the development of production comprehensively and to evaluate the results of the
concrete activity of enterprises and organizations with better justification.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Pravda", "Voprosy ekonomiki", 1982

11772
CSO: 1820/107 END

23
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY