FOR OFFICIAL USF. ONLY

JPRS L/10569
7 June 1982

South and East Asia Report

(FOUO 3/82]

FBI.S FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where on processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation Has summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.8. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAHS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
SOUTH AND EAST ASIA REPORT

(P000 3/82)
CONTENTS
INDIA
Cuban News Agency on CIA Activities in axbcontinent
(Ilsa Bodﬂguez; m, 19 Feb 82) ....................
PAKISTAN

W011 Khan Interviewed
(FAR EASTER mom REVIEW, 2 Apr 82) ...\............

-a- [III-ASIA-

FOI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ma omcm. Us: onu

IIDIA

CUBA“ ms ABM on CIA ACTIVITIES IN saloon-um
PA192300 Havana mm in English 1902 car 19 Feb 82
[Article by Ilsa Rodriguez]

[Text] Na! Delhi, 20 Feb (PL)--A Iyaterious virus in the plantations, out-
breaks of unknown sicknesses and the fear that India night be affected by
chenical weapons, are considered here as consequences of the activities of
the CIA agath that Asiatic nation.

The facts of the last few nonths nake suspicious that the Central Intelli-
gence Agency (CIA) of the United States is increasing its pressures against
India and that they operate in this country without any restriction of the
11.8. Govern-ant.

While the CIA is charged of openly using the war of gems against Latin
Anerican nations, anong then, Cuba, India seens to have also becone victi-
of these plans.

In the niddle of 1981, the inhabitants of different regions of this southern
African [as received] country began to suffer sudden liver sicknesses and
appeared a breakout of conjunctivitis, neuingitis and encephalitis.

The agriculture sector has been the mostly affected by the strange appear-
ance of the "green evil", which provokes in the workers of the tobacco
plantations a strange sickness which brings respiratory proble-s, vonits
and other effects which are being analyzed by local scientists.

The destruction of great extensions of cultivations of fruits and vegetables
in the state of ﬂaryans, north of this capital, also surprised the experts.
At the beginning of last Dace-bet it was reported that the outbreak of this
virus, called "ea-all leaves" could only be controlled by renoving and
destroying the affected plants.

Under these circustances, the observers gave great inortance to the recent
expulsion fro. Pakistan of Professor David Nalin, who is being charged of

using the Pakistani-v.8. research center of nalsria to produce infected
mosquitoes which would be used, in the first place, against its neighbor,
Afghanistan.

FOR OFFICIAL [SB ONLY
I'm UI'I'ILIAI. 08!. URL!

That center, located in the Pakistani city of Lahore, is considered among
the greatest of the world and the expulsion of Nalin—who was. also told to
abandon Pakistan i-ediately—confirns that his work is linked to the
bacteriological war carried out by the CIA, although this is being offi-
cially denied by the United States.

A sinilar institution was closed in India in 1972. for the existence of
evidences on its participation in the plans of bacteriological war carried
out by the CIA.

Meanwhile, sectors cf the Indian press have just denounced that this country,
together with other ones with coasts to the Indian Ocean, could become
guinea-pigs, for the eaperinsnt of new 0.8. chesical ares, which are being
transported in war ships which are operating in this ocean.

Article published on last honday by the daily NATIONAL HERALD warns on the
dangers of the chenicsl war carried out by the United States and stressed
that the reach of the chenicsl arna and nuclear area in the Diego Garcia
Island is of up to four thousand siles and that India is only 1,200 niles
away.

These facts, accusations and rmors are linked here with the recent announc-
nent on that the goverusnt of Prise hinister Indira Gandhi, is analyzing
the creation of a legal emission which would be responsible of investi-
gating the activities of the CIA in India.

According to an article which appeared in the Iegaaine IEDIAN 038m
nunerous intellectuals. politicians, journalists and businessnen of India
are working for this 0.8. espionage agency.

Local experts. for their part, favourably received the declarations of the
ninister of the interior [hone affairs], Zail Singh, on the prohibition of
the activities of foreign aissionaries in tribal tones and border line
regions of this nation.

During last year, nearly 10 of these 'so-called religious missionaries were
”expelled free India for being linked to espionage and intelligence activities.

050: l3220/7893

5'0! OFFIGAI. USE ONLY
ma omcm. use on!

9mm

“ALI KHAN MISSED
Hong Kong PAR EASTERN ECONOMIC REVIEW in English 2 Apr 82 pp 28, 29

[Text] Veteran political leader Hali Khan gives his critical views on Paki-
stan's domestic situation and foreign policy

(:harsada, Pakistan: In accordance with traditional hospitality, the tall,
65-year-old politician with thick white hair and dressed in a crumpled shalwar
kaneez offered the casual visitor a pot of tea and plates of cakes and bis-
cuits. With a disarming smile he apologised for the fact that his roses were
not yet in bloom. It had, he regretted, been a late spring on Pakistan's
northwest frontier,

“Prison," he said, "clears the mind.“ Abdul wali Khan, eminence grise of the
banned National Democratic Party (mP),sshould know. Of his 40 years' polit-
ical activity, 14 have been spent behind bars and last month he merged from
yet another, albeit brief, spell in the cells. He was detained at a condolence
meeting held to mark the murder of a fellow NDP leader and former North west
Frontier Province governor, Arbab sikander Khan, on March 7.

He said: "It was sheer sadness. I cannot imagine why the authorities arrested
us." He is convinced, however, that Arbab Sikander's death was a political con-
spiracy. That is a view widespread among people here and the rmnour that the
killer was inspired by religious fundamentalism has done nothing to improve
relations between secular-minded people and their Islamic rivals in the

count ry .

On the widespread speculation over possible elections in Pakistan, Wali Khan
remained sceptical: "Thos who really know keep silent. Others go in for
familiar kite-flying." In his view the massacre of the newly created federal
Advisrory Council, due to start its second session on April 3, were at best
advisers and at worst sycophants. Fran the authorities' point of view the
council's creation had already proved counter-productive. “It has raised po-
litical expectations, not dissipated them.“

Commenting on President Zia-ul Haq's military government he said: "duvious-
ly, we don't live according to policies. we live on the basis of contingen-
cies, stumbling from one crisis to the next, improvising as we god...Running
a country is a full-time job. Responding to popular opinion is a full-time
job. Defending a country is a full-time job. The military is trying to do
all three."

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Blaning the governIent for Barely exploiting the fragmented opposition, he
added: “In effect, for the 35 years since independence we have been denied
our fundamental political rights in this country. It is fashionable for the
authorities to nalign politics and politicians...We had more rights--the
rights of association, mvenent and expression--under colonial rule.“

The Pathen leader's views on foreign policy also reflect his stand on domes-
tic politics. “Today the No. l enemy is the Soviet Union because it is con--
nunist. Yet China is now a close ally, and it is co-unist. flow do you rec-
oncile that?" He was critical. also. of Alerican support for Pakistan. "There
are basically two ideological camps in the world. The totalitarian camp offers
a guarantee of material welfare while sacrificing basic rights. The free world
offers husan rights, but cannot guarantee material welfare. Therefore Third
World countries can expect one or the other. But in this situation. what can
we expect?“

Reflecting on another dilemma for his country. he asked rhetoricallyx Pakistan
wanted Afghan refugees to return hose to elect their own government and to be
free to choose their own ideology. but did lslanabad offer that choice to its
own people? 'Scne Afghan refugee groups in Pakistan are encouraged to enter
the political life of the nation. They can go to meetings. We cannot."
Welling on the presence of Afghan refugees he said: "You are creating a prob-
lem here. In the settled areas of the province there are 3 million people.
There are 2.5 million refugees from Afghanistan and most of then are in North
west Frontier Province.“

Wali Khan is presently engaged in a lively debate with Attorney-General Shari-
fuddin Pirzada over the forner's recent allegationsubased, he says, on offi-
cial British correspondence between New Delhi and Londonuto the effect that
the concept of Pakistan as a separate state for Muslins was a colonial ploy,
engineered by Britain and to which the nation's founder. Mohamed Ali Jinnah,
was a conscious accessory. The ferocious response to what is otherwise an ac-
ademic controversy demonstrates how the issue strikes at the root of Zia's Is-
lanisation policy.

Asked if the state of Pakistan was viable today and if integration of four
provinces comprising four language groups was effective, he responded: "Sov-
ereignty depends on the state's institutions: its parlianent, its judiciary,
its executive and its press. . .Integration is only possible through deno-
cratic processes.”

Soon after Bali Khan was released from jail last month, authorities gave him
permission on humanitarian grounds to visit Afghanistan. His 92-year-old
father Abdul Ghefar Khannthe grand old men of Pakhtoon politics who is in
self-exile in Kabuluhas been hospitalised with a broken hip.

Would not such a visit lend itself to speculation that Kabul and its Soviet
sponsors are using the founders of the NDP-—a banned political party striving
for provincial autonomy--for their own ends? Hali Khan dismissed the ques-
tion. saying such allegations were not new. he said he had been accused of
treachery before by the late premier Zulfikar Ali Bhutto.

Copyright: FAR BAS‘I’ERN ECONOMIC REVIEW, Ltd., Bong Kong, 1982

C8): 4220/502 BID

1;
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY