FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10512

12 May 1982

West Europe Report

(FOUO 30/8 2)

SPAIN AND NATO: THE PRICE OF AN ALLIANCE

by

A.G. Garcia

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFIGAL USE ONLY
nor:

Jess publications contain informtion primarily fro. foreign
neVspapers, periodicals and books, but also fron news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials fro. foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and naterial enclosed in brackets
[) are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
ntion was sun-arised or extracted.

Unfamiliar nanes rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Hords or nanes preceded by a ques-
tion nsrk and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
itee originate with the source. ‘i‘ines within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the u.s. Goveruaent.

COPYRIGlT W8 AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING WHERSHIP OF
“TERMS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
NEST EUROPE REPORT

(2000 30/82)

SPAIN AND NATO: THE PRICE OF AN ALLIANCE
Madrid in Spanish May 1981 pp 1-184

[Second edition (Septalber 1981) of the hook 'O'I'AN y Espana: 31 Precio
de una alianza" by Angel Lobo Garcia, a career officer in the Calvary,
a Command and Staff graduate from the United States Army, a Ph.D. in
economic sciences and a professor of econometrics at the Autonomous
University of Madrid; it is based on his doctoral thesis ("Economic
Consequences of NATO Henbership,‘ July 1980). which was deemed
”outstanding cum laude']

 

~—

 

l‘l‘extl Table of Contents

Introduction 2
Purpose of This Study 2
Giapter I: Direct Impact of Membership in NATO on Defense Spending 12
1. Operating Expenditures of the NATO Structure . 12
1.1 Description of the NATO Structure 12
1.2 Financing of the NATO Structure 11,
1.2.1 The Civil Budget 15

1.2.2 The Military Budget 17
1.3 Spain's Potential Share in the Event It Joins NATO 22
2. Financing of the Cannon Infrastructure 25
2.1 Coat-Sharing. Criteria for the Determination of Percentages 2g
2.2 Total Cost of the Cannon Infrastructure 31
2.3 Process of Developing and Building the Cannon Infrastructure 33
2.1. Spain's Potential Contribution 35

Chapter 11: Potential Indirect Impact on Defense Spending (.3
3. Possible Influence of NATO Membership on National Defense Budgets (.3
3.1 NATO Planning of the "Force Goal" 43 _
3.2 5-Year Planning 1.6
3.3 The Long-Term Defense Progral 51
3.4 NATO Data Base 52
3.5 Consequences of Joint Planning 55
4. Analysis of Spain's Defense Effort Within the Context-of NATO '60
4.1 Defense Spending. Problem of Quantification and Comparison with .
Other Countries 51
4.2 Analysis of Defense Spending . 52
4.2.1 A Sampling 63
5.2.2 Econometric Analysis of 31-Country Sampling 64
- 1 - [III - WE - 150 P000]

FOR OWNA! HQ? ON! V
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

4.2.3 Econometric Analysis Based on NATO Countries 70
--Defen1e Spending According to NAIO's Definition 71
--0ther Variables Included in the Analysis 73
--Data for Spain 7?

--Estimate of Spain's Defense Spending According to the -
two Definition 79
--Principal Components Analysis 85
4.2.0 Regression of Defense Spending on GDP 90
4.2.5 Time Series Analysis of Defense Spending 96
S. Military Aid and Assistance Obtainable in NATO 99
5.l Hhat He Can Expect from NATO 99
5.2 Possibility of Spain's Obtaining Military Aid in NATO 102
Chapter Iii: Economic Consequences of NATO Logistics 107
6.Extent and Significance of NATO logistics 107
7. NATO’s Logistics System 110
7.1 Current institutional situation 115
7.2 0.5. Policy Towards the Alliance in the Area of Armaments 122
7.3 The European Sphere of Cooperation 126
--Burogroup 126
--The European Independent Programs Group (BIPG) 123
--The Western European Union 132
--FINABEL 136
--European Economic Community 137
8. Consequences of NATO membership in the Area of Logistic Cooperation 139
Chapter iV: Final Conclusions 151
Direct Repercussions' 151
Indirect Economic‘Impact 154
Possibility of Receiving Aid . 157
Consequences in the Area of Logistic Cooperation 159
Overall Conclusion 162

[The nine annexes included in the original have not been translated]
Introduction: Purpose of This Study

"The gauging of force is determined by the government, and military action
begins with this determination, because it is an essential and completely
strategic matter." (Von Clausewitz, "0n War," 1831)

Spain finds itself at a crucial juncture in the determination of its future
. security system, a system that must be commensurate with the direct and
\indirect threats to national security, with its geostrategic location in

the context of international security and with the interests of a foreign

policy that is in keeping with the political role that Spain would like

to play in the world. In light of this situation, the various security

models that we could consider can be summarised in three distinct options:

Spain could choose to continue its bilateral seturity relations with the

United States, based on the l9 July 1974 Hiapano-American Declaration of

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Principles and on the 20 January I976 Friendship and Cooperation Treaty
between the United States and Spain; or it could decline to renew this treaty
and pursue a policy of neutrality, or finally, it could decide to join a
multilateral collective security alliance.

The appropriate national authorities must analyze the advantages and disadvantages
of each option and choose the one that insures the highest level of security
compatible with national sovereignty and the country's economic potential.

Therefore, economic considerations are additional factors to be analyzed
in the decision-making process.

The European security balance, or perhaps more accurately the security balance
between the United States and the Soviet Union, in an alliance with certain
European nations that benefit from it, rests on the existence of two blocs,
the Atlantic Alliance and the Warsaw Pact. Inserted physically between

the two blocs is a belt of neutral nations, which running from north to

south are Finland and Sweden, Austria and Switzerland and Yugoslavia and
Albania. This does not mean, however, that there is no border contact between
thcblocs: Russia with Norway in the north, East Germany and Czechoslovakia
with West Germany in the central zone and Russia and Bulgaria with Turkey

and Greece in the south.

Spain lies to the west of this belt or hinge and, therefore, on the side

of the Western bloc and in the rear guard of the zone that this bloc forms

in Europe. Therefore, both because of its geographic location and its political
and economic system, it stands to reason that in looking at the option of
joining a multilateral collective security alliance, Spain should consider

the possibility, among others, of becoming part of the Atlantic Alliance.

By keeping Spain within the framework of the “eat, this would enable it

to maintain security relations in a much broader and more heterogeneous
context than the current exclusive bilateral relations with the United States,
which are imbalanced because of Spain's clear-cut military inferiority to

the American superpower.

The Democratic Center Union (UCD), the party now in power, has advocated
joining the Atlantic Alliance as the best option for national security.

It has stated this officislly at its two national congresses, in October

I978 and February I981, and in its government program submitted to the Congress
of Deputies by its presidential candidate, Adolfo Suarez, before he took
office.

We feel, ‘herefore, that it is of interest to analyze the economic component
that this option would entail.

Sanchez-Gijon, a Spanish specialist in security matters, refers to this
economic factor in his book "Spain in NATO" and states: "An alliance ought

to be joined, above all, to serve the interests of the State. What this
entails is defining Spain's membership in terms of enhancing national security
at the lowest possible cost, albeit as a contribution to enhancing stability,
which Spain is also interested in."

3

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Gen Manuel Dies-Alegria, who is today the president of the Institute of
International Issues, has also referred to the economic component involved
in joining the Atlantic Alliance. In statements to DIARIO l6 in connection
with Spain's potential entry into NATO, he said, among other things: "it
has an economic facet, inasmuch as membership is going to cost money."

How much would it cost to join the Atlantic Alliance? The issue is worth
considering, and we hear widely diverging opinions on it. According to
newsman Felix Ortega, "authorized spokesmen, such as the minister of foreign
affairs in I970, Gregorio Lopez Bravo, have pointed out that joining NATO
would mean doubling Spain's budget,"3 and the same journalist, after a brief
analysis, reaches the conclusion that joining NATO would require "more-
than a doubling of military spending." In his analysis he notes that Ruth
Leger Silvard pointed out in "World Military and Social Expenditures? in
I976 that NATO military spending averaged about three times higher than
Spain's military expenditures.

Moreover, in his book "Spain in NATO?" Alvarez de Castro“ asserts: "If Spain
were to join NATO, in addition to having to double its general budgeting

for defense, it would be forced to make an initial and immediate outlay

of $600 million in order to place its status on a comparable footing with
the rest of the allies. I do not have to stress how burdensome it would

be in the current economic crisis to make investments that would not enhance
our defensive system, not be channeled at all towards our real national
defense needs and represent further overseas borrowing and indebtedness

to add to our existing dependency."

The magazine LA CALLS, whose ideology is well-known, has written that "Spain
would have to spend 750 billion pesetas to get itssdefense spending up to
the level of the other organization member states, adding later that
"contributing to the NATO infrastructure and to maintaining Spanish units
stationed in northern and central Europe would be a terribly onerous burden
for the national economy."6

TWO well-known Spanish Socialists have gone on record as follows: Felipe
Gonzalez asserts that Spain's membership in NATO would entail "too onerous

an economic burden,"7 and Mugica Heraog has written that membership "would
entail an increase in spending that, given the current economic crisis and
the many needs to be met with scant resources, we would be unable to manage."

GRIP, a Belgian group of mainly Socialist students and newsmen, contends

that if Spain were to join NATO, it would have to modify its Armed Forces
organiationally and technically and spend some $800 milliongto transform

its infrastructure, plus $00 million a year on maintenance.

Nevertheless, Sanchez-Gijon says: "Contrary to what is being said and believed,

Spain's incorporation into NATO does not necessarily entail any increase
in defense spending,“0 and former Foreign Affairs Minister Marcelino Oreja,

in a speech on the administration's foreign policy, told the Senate on
9Marchl978: "A country does not necessarily have to make an economic contribution

4

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
to the (Atlantic) Alliance; in the event that Spain should join NATO, it

would not necessarily have to make an economic contribution nor, in general,

any expenditure not for its own national defense system. There is a great

deal of talk about how much it would coat Spain to join the Atlantic Alliance.
This is something that we would have to take an eccurate look at, because

there has been some degree of flippancy in comments, statements and approaches."

These examples clearly illustrate the differences of opinion on the issue,
reaffirming why it is important to delve carefully into it and analyze in
depth the economic component actually entailed in joining the Atlantic Alliance.

This economic component is usually approached from the standpoint of the
economic obligations that Spain would contract, in other words, the rise

in spending that would result from membership in the Atlantic Alliance.

How much does NATO "cost"? often seems to be the sole economic concern related
to membership. But the economic factor involved in membership does not
necessarily have to be considered solely and a priori from the standpoint

of increased spending, because there could be economic implications of a
different kind. The title of this book could thus be "Economic Consequences
of Joining NATO," because it seeks to analyse, in addition to the expenditures
that joining the alliance would entail, the other economic consequences,

both advantageous and disadvantageous, although we will try to circumscribe
them mainly to the defense sector, which is preponderant in NATO.

There are consequences in other fields, and in theory they could be major
ones, if we are to go by Article 2 of the North Atlantic Treaty, which says:
"(The parties) will seek. to eliminate conflict in their international
economic policies and willencourageeconomic collaboration between any or

all of them." The reality has been quite a bit different, however, as

was made obvious at the outset of the oil crisis in the 1970's, when the
attempts at coordination in developing a joint policy failed, and each country
pursued a policy towards the OPEC countries that was to its own individual
advantage and that it felt best safeguarded its own economic interests.

There is a desire to settle economic differences that might have political
or strategic repercussions that are damaging to the alliance. A clear example
of this was the outcome of the dispute between Great Britain and Iceland,
the so-called "Cod War," in which the Atlantic Council exerted pressures

in favor of Iceland, the weaker party. Participation in the various NATO
forums undoubtedly facilitates an understanding in all spheres of diplomacy
and, therefore, in economic matters, as can be seen in the desire of Greece,
Portugal and Spain to join the EEC, all of whose member states belong to
NATO, except Ireland. Greece has already joined the BBC, and Portugal could
get in before Spain, according to the forecasts of the European Commission
as outlined in the publication EUROPE (February l98l).

Moreover, the Atlantic Alliance is definitely interested in seeing its economi-
cally backward members progress, although attempts are not made, accordingly,

to organize economic development assistance programs within NATO. Rather,
the Alliance's interest is reflected in a desire for information on the

5

FOR OFFICIAL U§B ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

development programs that each c0untry is pursuing, programs that NATO analyzes
from the standpoint of their compatibility with the Alliance's common interests.

There are also economic consequences from the scientific and technical cooperation
organized within the Alliance. NATO has a scientific committee whose function
is to promote programs of cooperation in the areas of high scientific priority.
To this end it makes use of fellowships for research cooperation, meetings

and conferences of experts, visits, etc. He can get an idea of the extent

of these activities from the estimate that some l00,000 persons have taken

part in the so-called NATO Science Program, which has an approximate

annual budget of $9 million, broken down into science fellowships, research
grants and programs at institutes of advanced studies. But despite the
general interst of these activities, their economic consequences for each
individual country are of very limited scope, and we consider them insignificant
in comparison to the consequences of the defense sector, the main facet

of NATO.

This book does not, furthermore, seek to address the most remote consequences
for the country's general economy. Such consequences, which are predominantly
political, can hardly be treated in a study that is primarily economic in

its approach. General Haig has stated in connection with the possibility

of Spain's joining NATO that there is a correlation between military security
and economic development, and therefore Spain's membership in the Atlantic
Alliance would have a favorable impact on Spanish stability and be an incentive
for foreign investors. This judgment involves a different sphere, outside

the aims of the present work.

He will try to analyze here the economic obligations that Spain could contract
by joining NATO and the consequences that membership could entail in terms
of defense spending and military logistics.

We are now going to analyze the available Atlantic Alliance membership "statuses"
so that we can thus employ one of them as a working hypothesis for Spain.

The North Atlantic Treaty or the Treaty of Washington, which established
the Atlantic Alliance, was signed in 1949 by Belgium, Canada, Denmark,
France, Great Britain, Holland, Iceland, Luxembourg, Norway, Portugal and
the United States of America. Greece and Turkey joined in I952, and West
Germany in I955. The IS nations have signed the same treaty, the essence
of which can be summarized as their pledge to consult each other if the
security of one of the parties is threatened and to consider an armed attack
against one of the member countries as an attack on them all, in which case
each one would undertake the action that "it deems necessary, including

the use of armed force. to restore and maintain the security of the North
Atlantic area," according to Article 5 of the treaty.

Not all of the countries are members of the Alliance under the same conditions,
however. There are different situations within the framework of the joint
pledge, because certain countries maintain a peculiar status that differentiates
them from the others. In principle, the economic commitments that would

")R OFFICIAL USE ONLY
stem from signing the North Atlantic Treaty depend on the manner in which
membership is proposed.

France is the most unusual case, ever since it decided in I966 that its
Armed Forces would withdraw from the Alliance's integrated military command.
We often hear that France belongs to the Atlantic Alliance today but not

to NATO, which is not true, though even authorized spokesmen are heard to
say it. Nevertheless, this is at times merely a simplified, imprecise way
of referring to France's peculiar "status."

It bears clarifying that the IS member countries belong to the Atlantic
Alliance and to NATO. The "Atlantic Alliance," or more precisely the North
Atlantic Alliance, is an "alliance" or "entente" among 15 countries that
have set forth their commitment to an alliance in a written pact called

the North Atlantic Treaty. Article 9 of this treaty provided for the creation
of a council and the subsidiary bodies needed to establish and develop the
agreed upon alliance. The group of bodies that were set up make up the
"North Atlantic Treaty Organization" (OTANandeTO being the French and
English acronyms). Hence, NATO is merely the organizational structure of
the alliance. The IS countries have ambassadors and permanent missions

to the organization and are full-fledged members of NATO at its highest
level, the Atlantic Council.

France's peculiar status is that it participates only as an observer within
the organization of the integrated military command, which is subordinate
to NATO's highest body, the Atlantic Council, which is civilian.

Therefore, France's Armed Forces do not in any way come under the NATO military
command in peacetime, nor are any of its units scheduled to take orders

from this command in the event of an emergency, as is the case with other
nations. Moreover, French territory is excluded from any permanent assignment
of areas of responsibility in NATO preparations and planning. But France

is present in almost all civilian bodies (though conspicuously absent from the
Defense Planning Committee), is subject to all of the provisions of the

North Atlantic Treaty, continues to take part in numerous agencies financed
under the so-called NATO Military Budget and maintains observers and liaisons
in the organizations of the joint military command.

In the wake of its armed combat with Turkey on the island of Cyprus, Greece
withdrew also from the DefensthmIﬁng60mmittee in I974 and rescinded its

Armed Forces commitments to NATO in peacetime, although it kept its representative
to the military command organization and still contributed to the so-called
"Military Budget." After heavy pressure, mainly from the United States,

it has fully rejoined NATO. Because it has no Armed Forces, Iceland is

not part of the military organization.

Germany differs from the other countries in that all its maneuvers troops

are forces “assigned"ll to NATO, while other countries merely place a given
number of units at the disposal of the Alliance command. Norway and Denmark
have a special arrangement whereby they do not allow the permanent stationing
of foreign troops or the deployment of nuclear weapons on their territory.

7

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of foreign troops or the deployment of nuclear weapons on their territories.
Great Britain, the United States and Canada have placed the responsibility
for planning the defense of their territories outside NATO.

Thus, each country individually and sovereignly determines its status of
membership in the Alliance, a status that can be reviewed depending on the
circumstances, as was the case with France and Greece. Logically. NATO

can in theory decide whether or not to accept the status that each country
wants, but in practice the general principle of an alliance against a con-on
threat prevails, and therefore this is great flexibility and pragmatism

in accepting a wide range of approaches.

Hence, one of NATO's hallmarks is complexity, a complexity that stems from

a joint effort to bring together 15 sovereign and independent nations without
a supranational authority to impose general rules. This complexity translates
into a wide range of agencies and exceptions that are a source of frequent
ambiguities and that lend themselves to all sorts of variations and nuances
that are hardly suited to simplification. Therefore, signing the North
Atlantic Treaty will always be compatible with certain special arrangements
for participation in its various bodies.

As far as the economic thrust of this book is concerned, if we leave aside
the atypical case of Iceland, only France's status, in fact, entails economic
consequences that are to an extent different from the ones that apply to

the other countries that belong to NATO.

In this study, therefore, we will build on the hypothesis that Spain would

join NATO with a status similar to the general arrangement and we will analyze
its economic consequences without delving into the potential nuances that

could arise if certain special membership arrangements were agreed upon.

Such arrangements would, in any case, entail an in-depth familiarity of

the general arrangement, based on which we would deduce the poﬂential differences
that could result from the special arrangements, which would be of no great
economic consequence.

We will systematize this study by grouping the economic consequences of
NATO membership into three major categories, which are:

--Direct repercussions on defense spending;
--lndirect repercussions on defense spending;
--Economic consequences of NATO logistics.

Based on these three distinguishable categories, we will reach certain overall
conclusions.

With regard to direct repercussions we will look into the obligations that
Spain would contract in the form of a two-pronged annual contribution. The
first contribution is to the annual NATO budget for the operations of the
Alliance's agencies. The other is the financing of the so-cslled common
NATO infrastructure, which consists of installations for use in the event

8

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
of war, that are of joint interest to the member countries and whose construction
and financing are mutually agreed upon by the potential users as part of
the general planning of NATO infrastructure.

with regard to indirect impact on defense spending, we will analyze the

joint planning system for overall Alliance force levels, which could give
rise to commitments relating to the structure of our national forces, and

the repercussions that this would have on military spending. This will

lead us to compare the economic cost of Spain’s defense efforts with other
Alliance countries', inasmuch as a significant gap could lead to pressures
from other countries to put our defense effort on a comparable footing with
theirs. This chapter will also take up the possibility of receiving military
assistance or aid to meet the force goals agreed upon in joint NATO

planning.

Finally, a separate chapter will be devoted to an analysis of the Atlantic
Alliance's logistics and of its consequences for the economies of the member
countries, focusing examination of this important aspect on NAIO's attempts
to rationalize the military hardware of the member country forces and the
potential impact of this on their national military industries.

The sought-after quantification is not always possible in an economic study
like this. In some cases it is hindered by the confidentiality accorded
these kinds of numbers in NATO circles, which precludes access to all of
the data we need to conduct a thorough analysis of the magnitudes under
study. In other instances, a priori quantification is impossible because

it depends on the specific commitments that a nation would contract and

on the projects and programs that it would take part in. Nevertheless,
there is enough of a data base in some spheres to deduce figures that can
serve as reference points for ascertaining the approximate amount of the
nation's funds that might have to be allocated. In other areas in which
quantification is not possible, we can describe and analyze the characteristics
and pecularities of the issue at handandthus get an idea of its economic
significance or at least forestall potential unsound interpretations that

at times lead to distortions in assessing more or less well-founded economic
consequences. In any case, we have sought out all of the available figures
in these various matters, which will be set forth herein, even if just to

indicate the amount of money involved.

In surmounting these difficulties, which at times seem to invalidate the
purposes of this book, we have been encouraged by our own perception of

the usefulness of delving into this controversial and superficially addressed
topic and by the existence of an extensive team of Spanish experts who are
well-versed and well-trained in European Community issues, in stark contrast
to the lack of economists who are experts in the complexities and problems

of NATO and in the consequences of membership in it. This is the time to
mention the facilities that Spain's ambassador in Brussels, Aguirre de Carcer,
provided the author of this study, thus enabling him to conduct interviews
and work sessions at the headquarters of the NATO International Secretariat
with Organization officials who are experts in the various topics that will

9

FOR OFFICIAL USB OKLY
WK OFr’ICIAL USE ONLY

be broached herein. It is to these experts' credit that they honored our
requests for information and were at all times cooperative and understanding
in light of the difficulties involved in providing access to the inner
workings of NATO to a person who does not belong to the Organization and

is a citizen of a country that is not a member country of the Alliance.

In conclusion, before delving into the study proper, we would like to briefly
clarify certain questions of language. NATO documents often refer to the
European member countries of the Alliance under the generic term Western

Europe or simply Europe, even though this leaves out countries that are

not members of the Alliance, such as Sweden or Spain, but that are European

and that have economic and political systems which are characteristic of

the Western world. For the sake of brevity, this book will use the same
generic term whenever the context offers no doubts as to the countries referred
to in this abbreviated, incomplete description.

We would also like to note in advance that we will often, for simplicity's
sake, use the expression "Alliance" to mean the Atlantic Alliance and the
acronym NATO to refer to the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, which we
also at times simply call the "Organization," as it is officially referred
to in the Alliance, as set forth in the provisions of the “Accord on the
Status of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, National Representations
and International Secretariat," dated 20 September I951, which states in
Article i, Section "a": "The Organization means the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization, composed of the Council and its subsidiary bodies."

As far as the terms Atlantic Alliance and NATO are concerned, they will

be used as synonymous because they are. Some people at times wish to make

the subtle distinction that the Atlantic Alliance could be regarded as the
political side or the political act, the signing of the North Atlantic Treaty,
whereby a country takes on the commitment of an alliance with the rest of

the member countries within the context of adherence to common ideals as

set forth in the preamble to the treaty, whereas NATO is the military side

or the embodiment of the alliance's defensive aim. This misconception has
caused Giscard d'Estaing himself to say: "He are not part of the joint peacetime
organization, in other words, NATO,“ when France is a full-fledged member

of NATO, as has been previously explained.

We are stressing this because, as has been stated, the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization is merely the organizational structure of the Atlantic Alliance
and as such encompasses all of the Alliance's civilian and military bodies,
including the Atlantic Council, the number one political organ and the supreme
embodiment of the political commitment that the member countries have made.
Therefore, the preponderantly defensive purpose of the Atlantic Pact is
applicable both to the Atlantic Alliance and to NATO. They are, hence,
synonymous expressions and will be used as such in this text.

with respect to the quantitative facets of the study, we have attempted

to work with confirmed data, not with estimates, and therefore we will employ
primarily statistics from the latter half of the 1970's. Whenever possible,
we have expressed numerical conclusions in percentages, so that they can

be compared to the present.

10

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOOTNOTES
I. "Spain in RATO," Antonio Sanchez-Gijon. I978, Ediciones Defensa.
2. DIARIO 16, 30 Hay I979.
3. ARRIBA (daily paper), 3 May I978.

5. "Spain in NATO?" written by a group from the Spanish Labor Party under
the pseudonym Alvarez de Castro, I978, Hanifiesto Editorial.

5. LA CALLS, Issue II8, 24 June I980.

6. LA CALLE, Issue I32, 30 September I980

7. EL SOCIALISTA, Issue I83, December I980.

8. SISTEHA 38-39, RBI/[STA DE CIENOIAS SOCIALES, October I980.

9. L'Bspagne face a l'OTAN," Cesar Garcia, Dossier No 28, 27 November I980.
l0. EL mus, I2 Hay I976.

II. A concept expanded upon in Chapter II.

11

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Chapter 1: Direct Impact of Membership in NATO on Defense Spending

Cooperation within NATO, which involves mainly security and to a lesser

extent covers the political, economic and scientific fields, as well as

others of minor importance, necessitates an administrative organization

to prepare for and subsequently implement the decisions made by NATO's policy-
making body, the Atlantic Council, which is a multinational. collective
entity. This, in turn, requires subordinate bodies with thousands of officials,
who are civilian or military depending on their missions. There are, in
addition, other kinds of joint installations that NATO regards as necessary

to accomplish its defense goals, such as airports, oil pipelines, means

of communication, etc, as well as a group of agencies that handle specific,
specialized tasks.

This conglomeration of human and material resources requires financing,

and the funds come from contributions of varying percentages from the various
countries that belong to the Alliance. There is no "membership fee," nor

is any initial contribution required to balance the outlays made previously
by other member nations. Neither was required of any of the three countries,
Greece, Turkey and Germany, that joined the Alliance after it was formed.

NATO member countries pledge to make economic contributions that can be
classified as follows:

--0perating expenditures for the NATO structure
--Punds to finance NATO's common infrastructure

Let us now look in detail at how the needs stemming from each of these categories
are financed.

1. Operating Expenditures of the NATO Structure
1.1 Description of the NATO Structure

The Alliance's supreme body is the Council of the North Atlantic, which
is composed of ministers from all member countries, usually the foreign
affairs and defense ministers, although ministers from other branches of
the administration can sit on it also. It normally meets twice a year.
The Council has its permanent headquarters in Bvere (Brussels), where the
IS allied nations keep permanent representative ambassadors, who meet two
or three times a week.

Each ambassador has at his disposal a mission from his country as an auxiliary
working group.

Ever since France withdrew from the joint military organization in I966,
the Council has not normally dealt with specifically defense-related matters.

As a result, the DefensePharﬁngCommittee (DPC is the English acronym) was
formed; it is made up of the defense ministers of the remaining nations

12

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Etta
50.1““.

Poii:i:al
Altai!-

£¢onooxc
Afflits

Defense
Invnov

Nuclear
Defentc

Iatraot:uctut
Arlancncs
Directors

felon-ami-
cncxons

Suégc:

iczcnct

Clvtl {Int-
gooey ?lannxu

(h4;l41¢¢s :i
‘cdd:1 Soct4:

I Aglaazic Caunctl

ﬂR‘ﬁ‘df“ ‘IK‘K‘EWI‘E? MILITAR
II

   
     

CCI‘SEJO AILAJHIUD

: “4 “Mm coun'e o:
| flouuia.
I Coouuc PLANESMM'ENSA
:PRINCIPMES
‘COMITES: I
“mm"? sscnmno I,’
3 Inﬂation“ m [Il’
..'”"n Sc.rc:nr£a: I,
j “om-<03 I”
I
1 I,
II
l '1
E I!
l ., U Q
I ~
. $5175?
‘§"_ II :55
I1 5
I Q L
i ‘31" g:
-5; ’3
U -. I o 3
i ~313/3 a '
o e-'
I :7I’I:;.:
l I ‘~
I "
II
. I]
l I;
l ”
’l
5 II
: It
i H
I II
E "
. II
| I”
: I"
. I,
I I,
i ’I
’I
’1
II

FOIOFFICIALUSEONLY

II

Internaci
Hilizory
Stat!

O
i
:3

p
n
0‘
O
Q
d—LIJ—‘nbh ._ h'mim‘mH—d—u-.

I!
I3
‘3
a
..

 

._—_-A_A_dll——-Ll—..-—I—I——h «hm-aud—

@EEE

Canodc.€.5.
Iggional 7lanning-
croup '

#—

.—
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and convenes at the same level as the Council and generally with the same
frequency. As we have already mentioned, in l97h Greece also expressed

its desire to withdraw from the joint military organization, as a result

of its dispute with Turkey, but its absence was never as clear-cut as France's,
and it reassumed full-fledged participation after almost 6 years in the

former status.

The Military and Civil Structures come under the Council and the Defense
Planning Conittee (See Figure I). ‘

The Civil Structure is composed of the International Secretariat, 15

main committees and a series of task forces. Four of the 15 main committees
deal with financial matters, which is what concerns us in this chapter.

They are: the Civil Budget Committee, the Military budget Committee, the
Infrastructure Committee and the Infrastructure Payments and Progress Committee.
In all, the Civilian Infrastructure comprises some 1,200 employees.

The Military Structure is composed of the Military Committee, which brings
together the chiefs of staff of the member countries, the International
Military Staff, the headquarters of the supreme commanders (SACEUR or the
European Command. SACLANT or the Atlantic Command and CINCHAN or the Channel
Command), the North American Regional Planning Group committee (Canada and

the United States) and the headquarters of the Subordinate Commands. The
Military Structure employs some 0,000 civilian workers, in addition to military
personnel from each nation.

The Military Committee is the supreme military authority in NATO and has

a permanent military representative from each country (Iceland and France

are not normally represented, although the latter maintains a large liaison
staff). The chiefs of staff of the various countries usually meet twice

a year, but the committee functions continuously at the level of the permanent
representatives at the International Secretariat's facilities in Bvere (Brussels).

"Eurogroup" was organized in I968 and it included the defense ministers

of the European countries in the alliance, except those of France, Iceland

and Portugal. Portugal joined later. It is an unofficial consulting body

that usually meets informally at the same time as the Defense Planning Committee
to analyse, bolster and coordinate Europe's military contributions to the
alliance.

NATb's supreme commanders are responsible to the Military Committee but
can have direct access to the Council and the national government presidents.

l.2 Financing NATO's Structure

The above bodies, which make up MATO's structure, need funds for their continued
operations.

16

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
As we have mentioned previously, these funds come from contributions by
the various member countries. These international funds must be managed,
monitored and allocated, and the organization has the appropriate tools
to do so.

The highest authority in this sphere, as in the rest of NATO's areas of
resposibility, is the Council. The determination of the necessary funding

is done in budgets submitted to the Council for its approval by the corresponding
Budget Committees. There are two Budget Committees, the Civil Budget Committee
and the Military Budget Committee. The financial controls over the NATO
structure's operating expenses are complemented by the Board of Auditors

and auditing by financial supervisors.

1.2.2 The Civil Budget

The Civil Budget takes care of funding needs for the operations, furnishings,
equipment, upkeep and other activities connected with the International
Secretariat in Brussels. The secretariat makes annual estimates of its
funding needs and presents them to the Civil Budget Committee, which is

made up of representatives from all the countries. The committee examines

the budget, revises it . necessary and submits it to the Council for approval.

Each country contributes a percentage of the total funds. The percentages
are determined by agreement among all the countries involved, as we will
describe later.

The Civil Budget is drafted in Belgian francs, and each country converts
its percentage or share into its currency at the going exchange rate. The
agreed annual amounts are delivered to the Central Treasury in the national
currency of each country in three installments during the year.

The cost-sharing for each country is determined by percentages that were
initially agreed upon in 1951 and later revised twice, first in 1952 when
Greece and Turkey joined and then in 1955 when West Germany joined.

The following is the list of current percentage shares:

 

1. United States 26.20
2. United Kingdom 19.50
3. France 17.10
a. Germany 16.10
5. Italy 5.96
6. Canada 5.80
7. Belgium 2.86
8. Holland 2.85
9. Denmark 1.65
10. Turkey 1.65
11. Norway 1.15
12. Portugal 0.65
13. Greece 0.39
14. Luxembourg 0.09
15. Iceland 0.05

Total 100.00

15

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

These percentages were not obtained by means of a mathematical formula.

They werearrived at in the aforementioned years after tough negotiations

in which thecapacityand willingness of each country to contribute were

taken into account. In determining the respective capacities they must

have unquestionably taken into account the various macroeconomic aggregates

for each country (GNP, population, balance of payments situation, etc),

as well as various other factors indicative of their potential, among which
consideration was doubtless given to the military capabilities of each country.

The determination of these percentages was so unscientific that Lord Ismay,
the secretary general of NATO in I953, described the decision-making process
as follows:

"They suddenly dropped the problem into my lap. I called in the three adjunct
secretary generals, and each of us drew up his own list and estimated what

the various cost-sharing percentages ought to be. Then we figured out the
average of all of them. I could not say on what exactly I based my conclusions,
except that I tried to take all sorts of factors into account, such as the
capacity of each country and the benefits that would derive from constructions
erected and the money invested. He then brought it to the Council meeting

in April I953, and everyone around the table'thought it was a magnificent
apportionment except for their own country, which they considered too high

an amount. In any case, we worked around the table and finally arrived

at an agreement to accept what we had proposed, with a spread of 1.8 percent
of the total. This is the explanation of these strange percentile cost-
sharing amounts."

This paragraph clearly shows how the agreement was more a result of logical
considerations than mathematical techniques, but obviously the economic
indicators of each country, as well as other political considerations, were
major factors in determining the percentages.

Deciding on these percentages was such an arduous job that they have gone
unchanged so as not to shatter the agreement that was reached. In fact,

the experts regard them today as almost axiomatic numbers and are surprised

when someone asks whether they think that they ought to be updated, inasmuch

as the relative economic situation and military capabilities of England, Germany
and France, for example, have changed so much since l955.'2

Someone might ask why we have included the Alliance's Civil Budget in the
chapter "Direct Impact on Defense Spending." This chapter is the proper
place to broach this inasmuch as according to the NATO definition of defense
spending, which we will analyze later, it includes all of the expenses of
participating in the lliance, even if they are accounted for in the foreign
affairs budget. The Civil Budget is a small fraction of the total expenses
of membership. It represents less than one-fifth of the total civil and
military budgets, and these budgets are small in comparison to what normally
has to be contributed for infrastructure, as we will now see.

16

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
l.2.2 The Military Budget
The Military Budget covers the expenses of:

--The International Staff

--The three headquarters of the Supreme Communds (BACEUR, SACLANT and CIBCBAR)
--The Headquarters of the two levels of Subordinate Commands

--The specialised agencies

--Certain aspects of NATO military exercises and maneuvers

These expenses are classified in two categories: operating expenditures
and capital expenditures.

The operating expenditures comprise expenditures for the salaries of civilian
employees in the components of the military structure, telecommunications,
transportation and travel expenses, exercises and maneuvers expenditures

and expenses for representatives and relations. They also include expenses
for everything used in connection with operations, such as office supplies,
electricity, spare parts, etc. The salaries of military personnel assigned
to NATO posts are not included in the Military Budget. Instead, each country
directly pays its own military personnel, though there are some, albeit

few, exceptions in which NATO's Military Budget is charged.

The capital expenditures are expenditures for construction, furnishings

and equipment. We have to make an important clarification, however, regarding
what is constructed under the Military Budget. This is one ofthesuny complex
issues that make NATO an organization whose inner workings are somewhat
confusing to the uninitiated because of the variety of situations and nuances
that have to be diffentiated in its structure. There is, in fact, another
fund for constructions. As we will see later on, this fund is for the so-
called "NATO Infrastructure" or wartime facilities, such as an airport,

a telecommunications center or a oil pipeline network. All of this is financed
under the infrastructure budget, which we will look at later, whereas what

is constructed under the Military Budget is not specifically for wartime
(peacetime facilities), such as troop quarters, housing for the families

of the personnel that take care of a wartime facility, general warehouses,
etc.

In addition, the aforementioned operating expenditures under the Military
Budget encompass the everyday needs of all military facilities in general,
regardless of whether they are war- or peacetime facilities.

Another of the complexities of the Military Budget is that it is actually
made up of two separate budgets: the lS-Mation Budget, which includes France,
and the lh-Nation Budget, which excludes France.

In general, the lh-Nation Budget is slightly larger than the IS-Nation
Budget. The former is about 60 percent of the total Military Budget, and
the latter, therefore, about 40 percent.

17

FOR OFFICIAL USE OIL!
EASILAN‘

 

WESIlANI

"Juan 4. tin»

 

ZSACLAQI

I SACEUR u-t .- nun
ICINCCHAN no .- uouu

 
 
 
   

4p

u.”

\ m...
The budgeting procedure is as follows. Around May the various bodies financed
under the Military Budget (more than 60) send the Military Budget Committee

the estimates of their funding needs for the following year, in their respective
national currencies. He should point out that the Military Budget Committee

is part of NATO's civilian structure and has representatives from all countries
ennpt Iceland. The committee studies each individual budget, coordinates

them all, makes the necessary revisions and submits two separate budgets,

the IS-Nation Budget (to the Council) and the lA-Mation Budget (to the
Defense Planning Cmmnittee). noting in both cases what each of the bo-odd
organizations requesting funding proposed and what the committee is proposing
after its review. The Council and the DPC approve the budgets at their
year-end meeting.

Unlike the Civil Budget and, hence, as one more complexity of the system,

a NATO-established monetary unit, the accounting unit, is used for the centralized
Military Budget accounting. This unit was created as a result of the multiplicity
of currencies that were employed in the budget. Thus, each country does

its budget accounting locally in its own currency, and NATO does so centrally
in accounting units.

The independent agencies have their own particular financing procedure,
which is another of the organization’s peculiarities. Here we have to distinguish
between civilian and military agencies.

Civilian Agencies:

--Central Europe Pipeline System (CEPS)

--NATO Air Defense Ground Environment System (BADGE)

--NATO Hawk Production and Logistics Organization (“HPLO)

--NATO Maintenance and Supply Organization (NAMSO)

—-NATO Multi-Role Combat Aircraft Development and Production Management
Organization (NAMMO)

--NATO Integrated Communications System Organization (NICSO)

--Agency handling the Airborne Early Harning Program (NAPMA), in the process
of being organized to develop the AHACS system.

Military Agencies:

--Allied Communications Security Agency (ACSA)

--Allied Long Lines Agency (ALLA)

--Allicd Naval Communications Agency (ANCA)

--Allied Tactical Communications Agency (ATCA)

--Allied Radio Frequency Agency (AREA)

--Advisory Group for Aerospace Research and Development (AGARD)
--Military Agency for Standardization (MAS)

~-The NATO Defense College (NDC)

--SACLANT Anti-Submarine Warfare Research Center (SACLATCEN)

--SHAPE [Supreme Headquarters Allied Powers Europe] Technical Center

19

IOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

France is a member of some of these agencies but not of others, this being
the reason for the difference between the 14 and 15 nation budgets.

with regard to agency financing, the development phase of each agency is
supported by the various countries that participate in it, and it is viewed
as a multinational organization, not as an organization of the Alliance

as a whole. The agencies thus develop under contract with the participating
countries, but when the development of the agencies stops and their service
phase begins, they are then financed under the Military Budget.

There are exceptions, however, such as the Central Europe Pipeline System,
which is headquartered in Paris and functions as an autonomous organisation.

The Hilitary Budget also helps to finance part of the cost of NATO military
exercises and maneuvers conducted jointly with the armies of member countries.

The expenditures connected with the military forces and personnel involved
in the exercises and maneuvers can be classified as:

--National expenditures: the ones that each country makes to support its
own national forces.

--Bilatera1 expenditures: the ones connected with the military forces and
personnel of each country for the services and supplies received from another
country.

--COmmon expenditures: the ones stemming from the international implications
of integrated forces and that are charged to NATO international funds,

for example, the temporary assignment of civilian personnel to exercises,
computer services. joint facilities and telecommunications and the renting
of supplementary civilian transport facilities.

The expenditures in each category are determined in accordance with NATO
financial directives.

Cost-sharing in the Military Budget, as in the Civil Budget, is determined

on the basis of percentages that were initially agreed upon after arduous
negotiations in I95! and revised when Greece and Turkey and, later, Germany,
joined the Alliance. Adjustments were later made between the costs of the
Infrastructure Program and the Military Budget, because the decision was

made that expenditures would be charged to the Military Budget up to a certain
ceiling, beyond which they would become infrastructure expenses. We will

take a look at this later on.

The current percentages are the ones agreed upon in I966, the year that
France withdrew from the joint military organisation. At this point, the
budgets were divided into the la-Nation Budget for the bodies that France
withdrew from and the IS-Nation Budget for the others financed under the
Military Budget, in which France, in spite of its new status, continued
to participate and which accOunt for about 60 percent of the total budget.

20

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
To adjust the percentages in the 14-Nation Budget, each nation agreed to

add to its previous percentage a portion of the 17.1 percent that France

was no longer contributing. As we have already stated, Greece continued
under the lb-Nation Budget during the 6 years that it made good its decision
not to sit on the Defense Planning Committee and to cease "assigning" its
forces to the integrated military command.

Budget expenditures are apportioned among the countries according to the
percentages listed below, in a system similar to the weighted contributions
to the Civil Budget.

The following are the agreed upon percentages:

lS-Nation Budget

 

United States 25.00
United Kingdom 18.22
France 17.10
Germany . 16.10
Italy 6.12
Canada 5.80
Belgium 2.95
Holland 2.94
Denmark 1.74
Turkey 1.65
Norway 1.20
Portugal 0.65
Greece 0.39
Luxembourg 0.09
Iceland 0.05
IN
14-Nation Budget
United States ' 30.16
United Kingdom 21.98
Germany 19.42
Italy 7.38
Canada 6.99
Belgium 3.56
Holland 3.55
Denmark 2.10
Turkey 1.99
Norway 1.45
Portugal 0.78
Greece 0.47
Luxembourg 0.11
Iceland 0.06
100.00
21

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"hat was said previously about the percentages of the Civil Budget also
applies to this apportionment. It did not result from scientific studies,

but rather from complex negotiations in I953 that took a wide range of factors
into account. This agreement had to be upheld subsequently as the basis

for any revision. In fact, when France withdrew from the integrated military
organization in I966, thus giving rise to the Ib-Nation Budget, the organisation
did not take advantage of the opponmadty to adjust the percentages to the
economic situation of each country at the time. For example, Germany had

a stronger economy than Great Britain and could therefore make a larger
military contribution to NATO. Instead, France's 17.1 percent annual share
was simply divided up among the lb remaining nations in proportion to the
percentages hammered out in I953.

Each country makes its contributions to the Military Budget in three approximately
equal installments during the year. Each country makes the necessary conversion
from its own currency to accounting units at the Central Treasury.

1.3 Spain's Potential Share in the Event It Joins NATO

In the event that Spain were to join the Atlantic Alliance with a normal
participation status in both the civil and the military structure of the
organization, it would have to help defray the costs of the common bodies,
which the corresponding Spanish personnel would be joining.

In April I978 in Ditchley Park (at Enstone, near Oxford, Great Britain),

the Ditchley Foundation, in conjunction with the Washington-based Institute
for the Study of Conflicts, organized a conference on "Spain, NATO and the
Defense of the Heat." At this conference, U.S. Secretary of State General
Haig, who was then supreme commander of the Allied Forces in Europe, said
that Spain's share in the oeprating expenditures of the NATO structure could
be estimated at some $l0 million a year for the Military Budget, plus another
$2 million for the Civil Budget, and that Spain would have to spend about

$40 million on common NATO infrastructure (we will analyze these expenses
later).

The UCD's position paper "Defense and Military Policy" at its Madrid congress
in October I978 put Spain's total contribution to structure and infrastructure
expenditures at 5 billion pesetas a year. The figure that General Naig
mentioned converts to 4.94 billion pesetas at the prevailing exchange rate

at the time. The similarity of the two estimates suggests that the UCD
calculation was NATO-inspired, given the close relations between NATO circles
and Ambassador Javier Ruperez, UCD's secretary of international relations.

In ascertaining Spain's share, NATO would look at its GNP, defense spending and
population as the main indicators of its economic and defense capabilities
and then compare them to the figures for the Alliance members.

a

The figures for the NATO countries in I977, which were apparently the ones
used for the above estimates, are as follows:

22
Country (I) EBEKZ) Egﬂ3) Populatiou(6)

1. United States 1,883.6 106.250 216.817
2. Great Britain 266.5 12.103 55.919
3. France 380.7 13.666 53.086
6. Germany 513.9 17.130 61.600
5. Italy 196.0 6.730 56.666
6. Canada 197.2 3.368 23.331
7. Belgium 79.6 2.676 9.830
8. Holland 106.6 3.716 13.853
9. Denmark 63.2 1.085 5.059
10. Turkey 66.8 2.652 62.135
11. Norway 35.6 1.130 6.063
12. Portugal 17.0 .565 9.773
13. Greece 25.8 1.328 9.268
16. Luxembourg 2.6 .029 .357
15. Iceland 1.9 -- .221

(1) Countries in order of their percentage share, from largest to smallest.

(2) GDP in billions of dollars. Source: OBCD Economic Report, 1979. The GDP
is used instead of the GNP because this is the aggregate that NATO usually
employs, as we will see later.

(3) Defense spending in billions of dollars. Source: 1978-79 Military Balance
Sheet from the London Institute of Strategic Studies.

(6) Population in millions of inhabitants. Source: 0300 Economic Report, 1979.

He can see at first glance that the GDP and us ranking, in absolute values,
is similar to the order of percentage shares listed in Section 1.2. Any
differences are due, in general, to the economic development of countries
after the percentages were determined in 1955 and up to 1977, the year to
which the above numbers refer.

In Spain, these aggregates show the following numbers in 1977:

92: 2§(5) Population
Spain 115.6 2.156 36.672

(5) Estimate in the General State Budget. There are certain differences
in the NATO definition of defense spending that we will be analysing
later on. This estimate can be regarded as sufficiently representative
for the purposes that concern us.

We can see from these figures that Spain is seventh place in GDP, between
Italy and Holland; in 10th place in defense spending, behind Belgium, and

also in seventh place in population,.between Turkey and Canada. This places
Spain in an intermediate position in terms of economic strength and a lover
position in terms of defense spending. Based on these statistics, we can
deduce that NATO would assign Spain an averaged percentage of the intermediate
region consisting of Italy, Canada, Belgium and Holland, which contribute

the following percentages of each budget:

23

POI OFFICIAL USE OILY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Councrz Civil Budget 15-Mation lb-Nation
Military Budget Military Budget
Italy 5.96 6.12 7.38
Canada 5.80 5.80 6.99
Belgium 2 86 2.95 ' 3 56
Holland 2 85 2.94 3 55

The NATO estimates at the aforementioned Ditchley Park seminar would, therefore,
presumably approximate 3.5 percent for the 15-Nation Civil and Military

Budgets and 4.5 percent for the lb-Nation Military Budget. Indeed, if we
'apply these percentages to NATO's 1978 Civil and Military Budgets, we obtain
approximately the figures given at Ditchley Park.

In order to advance well—founded arguments in the negotiations that Spain
would have to engage in, should the opportunity arise, in connection with
its specific percentage shares, we could conduct a more rigorous analysis
to lend solid support to a Spanish negotiating position. Annex IV outlines
a study based on statistical techniques. We can deduce from it that Spain
can argue for the following approximate shares:

Civil Budget 2.63 percent
15-Nation Military Budget 2.68
14-Nation Military Budget 3.20

As we can see, we have arrived at percentages for Spain that are slightly
lower than Belgium's.

The 1981 MATO structure financing budget looks approximately like this:

--Civil Budget: $75 million
--Military Budget: $350 million

The Military Budget can be split in practice into 40 percent for the lS-Nation
Budget, $140 million, and the rest, $210 million, for the lb-Nation Budget.

The contribution percentages arrived at here for Spain would yield the following
shares, assuming that Spain joined NATO this year:

Budget Percent Share Sin
millions of dollars)
Civil Budget 2.63 1.972
15-Nation Military Budget 2.68 3.752
lb-Nation Military Budget 3.20 6.720

Adding up these amounts, we get 512.444 million that Spain would have to
contribute to defray the expenditures of the RATO structure. This is somewhat
less than the $12 million mentioned at the Ditchlet Park seminar as the

share for I978, inasmuch as the NATO budget has risen 25 percent from 1978

to 1981.

25

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
At an average exchange rate of 8S pesetas to the dollar, the $l2.444 million
are equivalent to 1.05774 billion pesetss, which comes to 0.3l percent of
Spain's defense budget for I981.

l

The inclusion of Spain's share would necessitate a revision of the shares

of the other member countries. This could be done as it was when France
withdrew from the_integrsted military structure, in other words, by simply
altering the percentages as a result of Spain's inclusion. This opportunity
could also perhaps be taken to update the percentages, which, as we have
mentioned, are far out-of—step with the current economic situation of various
countries. As we have seen, however, so far it has been NATO's policy not

to alter the basic apportionment initially hammered out, given the difficulties
of arriving at an agreement on the shares and inasmuch as the amounts involved
are minor.

2. Financing of the Common Infrastructure

According to the Alliance's official publication "NATO, Facts and Figures,"

in the organization's lexicon, NATO "common infrastructure" or "infrastructure"
for short is defined as those fixed installations needed for the deployment

and operations of the NATO Armed Forces in wartime ("wartime facilities")

and for their instruction in peacetime, examples of which are headquarters,
airfielda, transmission facilities, pipelines, radar stations, missile launching
sites, etc. To these we must add certain mobile facilities, such as the

mobile elements connected with missile launching systems, telecommunications
satellites, the mobile command units of the headquarters, etc.

We already mentioned in the section on the Military Budget that the concept

of infrastructure does not include the general facilities not intended for
wartime use, in other words, the ones that are not specifically designed

to support NATO forces during war operations. These are called "peacetime
facilities," for example, troop quarters, housing for the families of personnel
in charge of the facilities, general warehouses, etc.

The definition of NATO infrastructure is not inflexible, however. It allows
for a broad interpretation, albeit in the realm of exceptions. Thus, when

many NATO facilities located in France had to be transferred to other countries
as a result of France's withdrawal from the integrated military structure,

the new quarters for 0.5. troops that were previously in French territory

were paid for, as an exceptional case, with infrastructure funds.

If the facilities are for the exclusive use of domestic forces, then they
belong to the "national infrastructure" and are financed under the respective
national budgets.

"Common infrastructure" is constructed at the request of NATO's international
commands if it is going to be used by two or more member countries

or if, even though it is to be used by only one country, it is of major
common interest. The facilities that are part of the "common infrastructure"
are the ones that we will be dealing with in this book.

25

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI OF?ICIAL USE ONLY

The need for a common infrastructure arose for the first time in I950, when
as a result of the Treaty of Brussels, the Western European Union, which
consisted of Belgium, France, Rolland, England and Luxembourg, was created.
These nations decided to build, mainly in France and Holland, a series of
airfields and telecommunications systems for their shared use, apportioning
the cost of this project among the allied countries. This project was later
called the "first slice" in the organization's lexicon.

NATO later adopted the same system of common infrastructure, taking charge

of the infrastructure that had already been initiated by the Western European
Union. The following project, now being developed by NATO, was thus called
the "second slice."

Thirty successive slices had been programmed as of I979, slices that were
gradually tailored to the times and to circumstances. The initial phases
or slices aimed at establishing an infrastructure to serve as a foundation
and support for the military aid that Europe was receiving from the United
States under the Military Defense Assistance Program. Later, the common
infrastructure system helped to build the facilities that extended past
the borders of a single country, such as the oil pipeline network.

when Western Europe began its economic recovery, the Unietd States gradually
included in the NATO infrastructure programs many of the projects of American
forces based in the European zone of the Organisation.

In I9Sl, NATO had only a few airfields at its disposal, and thus the initial
infrastructure efforts were mainly directed towards the construction of
such airfields. There are currently 220 of them, and they can be used by
all of NATO's Air Forces. All of the airfields were built according to
common standards.

Work also began very quickly on the construction of a complex pipeline system
to obviate the difficulties involved in supplying fuels by traditional means
of transport (tank cars, tank trucks, etc). Networks of pipelines allow

for the mass transport of fuels from ports on the Atlantic and Mediterranean
to a great many airfields and to the depots from which combat vehicles are
supplied. There are now l0,000 kilometers of pipelines, with a capacity

of close to 2 million cubic meters.

The networks of pipelines were built according to regional criteria, the

most complex being located in Central Europe, with smaller ones in Norway,
Denamrk, Italy, Greece and Turkey, which have not been linked up for geographic
and financial reasons.

The need for a coamnn telecommunications network also arose at the outset.
A complex integrated system of telecommunications has been set up, but it
is still regarded as very inadequate today.

26

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
When France announced in August I966 that it intended to withdraw from the
integrated military organization, NATO had to construct new facilities to
replace the ones located on French territory. This included the transfer

of the headquarters of the Council and the International Secretariat to
Bvere (Brussels); the Supreme Headquarters Allied Powers Europe (SHAPE)

to Casteau near Hons (Belgium), and the Defense School to Home. Nevertheless,

France continued to participate in some of the infrastructure programs,
for example, the NADGE.

In I970, the European nations set up Eurogroup, which we will analyze later,
and agreed on a "European Defense Improvement Program" (301?), committing
themselves to expenditures totaling $l billion over 5 years.

Some of these expenditures would go for expanding and improving materiel,

but $400 million were earmarked for the enhancement of the common infrastructure,
especially the construction of additional underground shelters for tactical
aircraft and to continue the development of the aforementioned NATO Integrated
Communication System (NICS).

The above is a historical outline of how the common infrastructure was developed
in accordance with the needs that arose.

The NATO common infrastructure system is unique among alliances in the world
today and is regarded in Organization circles as one of the best examples
of how the Atlantic Alliance has met its commitment to defense cooperation.

The facilities that can be included in the NATO common infrastructure projects
are grouped into the following categories:

a) Headquarters: stationary and mobile.

b) Airfields: airfields and shelters for tactical aircraft.

c) Telecommunications: military networks; links with the governments of
member countries; satellite communications.

d) Fuels: pipelines and depots for 30-day aircraft fuel supply.
e) Naval bases: depots for fuel, munitions, etc; shops and piers.
f) Navigation aids: joint-use air and naval aids.

g) Radar installations: air and naval detection.

h) Instruction: firing ranges for tanks, aircraft and missiles.
i) Surface-to-Air Missiles: Nike and Hawk sites.

5) Surface-to-Surface Hissiles: Hace and Pershing sites.

k) NADGE: integrated land-based detection system for air defense.
1) Others: In order for other kinds of facilities to be included, they have

to be considered on a case-by-case basis and agreed upon specifically as
exceptions to the rule.

The infrastructure that had been constructed as of I979 can be outlined
as follows:

--The main and subordinate allied headquarters (See Annex II).
--220 modern airfields, many of them with underground shelters for tactical

aircraft.

27

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

--3l,000 miles of land-based and underwater cables.

--NATO satellite communications system.

--6,300 miles of pipeline.

--Depots with a total capacity of 2 million cubic meters.

--lOé Nike sites.

--lO8 Hawk sites.

--NADGE.

--In the planning or development process: the modernization and automation
of the integrated telecommunications system (R168).

2.! Cost-Sharing. Criteria for the Determination
of the Percentages

Thirteen countries are involved in financing all of the Alliance's common
infrastructure, inasmuch as France cooperates only in specific projects,
and Iceland is not part of this system.

The common infrastructure facilities can be used jointly by the forces of
several countries. 0n the other hand, because of their geographic location,
some countries have to have more facilities on their soil than others.

For these two reasons the principle was established that the host country,
the country in which the facilities are being built, should not bear the
total cost of the project, which should instead be shared among all the
potential users.

It was the Western European Union, in what was later called the First Slice,
that agreed on the principle of cost-sharing. This system was later
adopted by NATO for the subsequent phase, which although it was the first
slice that was financed collectively by the Organization's countries, was
called the Second Slice.

The shared financing is based on a system of percentages that are decided

on by common agreement among the member countries. Hhat was said in connection
with the apportionment for the civil and Military Budgets also applies

here, in that the shares of infrastructure financing-are not determined
according to scientific formulas but are instead worked out in difficult
negotiations in which each country can put forth a wide range of criteria,
political criteria included.

There are, however, certain fundamental criteria on which the negotiations
can be based and which can be outlined as follows:

--The capacity of each country to contribute
--The benefits that potential user countries might gain from the facilities
--The economic benefits accruing to the host country

The capacity of each country to contribute is estimated mainly as a function
of its Gross National Product.

28

FOR OFFICIAL USE 0N1!
The benefits that user countries might gain from the facilities depend on

the extent to which their forces will utilize them, should the opportunity
arise, with each country having to contribute in proportion to this potential
use.

The economic beenfits accruing to the host country could be significant,

such as the use of local manpower in the construction work, foreign exchange
inflows, the expansion or enhancement of the communications network, the
enhancement of the national system of pipelines or telecommunications, etc,

but these benefits have to be compared with the increased costs for the

host country, which, as we have said, has to defray the costs of acquiring

the land and take care of arranging for access roads and providing electricity,
water and other necessary public utilities.

In the beginning NATO's military authorities would submit each year for

the approval of the Council the annual infrastructure program, accompanied

by the agreed upon percentages for the shared financing. Thus, the percentages
had to be negotiated annually.

Precisely to avoid such ongoing negotiations, the Atlantic Council decided

that the programming would cover several years and include a rough estimate

of the total cost, plus the share percentages for this period. Thus, in

l95h the first overall estimate for a 3-year period was made, along with

the agreed upon percentages for the period. However, the military authorities
had to continue submitting the programs and detailed cost estimates for

each annual phase to the Council. There was a shift later to 6-year estimates,
and in I966 5-year programming was established.

The percentages set for the successive stages are given in the following
table:

29

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Il-VII VIII-XI XII-XV XVI-XXV xva—xxx"’ xxxr-xxxv

 

 

o 1960(2) 1957(3) 1961 1966 1966 1975 1975 1979 19
- (with (withoutivithoutzwith (without IE

France) France; France; France) France; 3
8 5.662 6.39 4.24 4.61 5.30 5.5520 6.8215 5.5912 4.
- 6.021 6.15 5.51 5.48 6.31 6.3132 5.4825 6.3578 5.
- 2.767 2.63 2.87 3.07 3.54 3.7012 3.2162 3.7273 3.
6 15.041 11.87 12.00 13.16 -- - 13.1580 -- 13.
‘- -- 13.72 20.00 21.86 25.18 26.3585 22.8902 26.5446 21.
- 0.750 0.87 0.67 0.65 0.76 0.7932 0.6888 0.7932 0.
- 5.681 5.61 5.97 6.58 7.58 9.9313 6.8877 7.9873 6.
,5 0.155 0.17 0.17 0.18 0.20 0.2115 0.1837 0.2130 0.
6 3.889 3.51 3.83 6.23 6.87 5.1026 6.6312 5.1386 6.
-- 2.280 2.19 2.37 2.59 2.98 3.1197 2.7092 3.1417 2.
- 0.166 0.28 0.28 0.30 0.35 0.3701 0.3216 0.2011 0.
’- 1.371 1.75 1.10 1.10 1.26 1.3238 1.1691 J.8045 0.
[7 12.758 9.88 10.50 10.62 12.00 11.9950 11.9950 12.0797 10.
'- 63.679 36.98 30.85 25.77 29.67 27.2279 23.6652 27.6200 25.

If a special program during these slices reduced the ".8. share to'21.5|

Iin European nations agreed to undertake the supplementary program call!
1e Improvement Program (301?), which was mainly concerned with the NATO
System (“108).

[es replaced after the fact the ones that had been agreed upon every ye1

19

Ilice of Slice VII for facilities on German soil that were 50 percent

tabetical order
The United States' share in the infrastructure budget for the l975-79 period,
which had previously been almost 30 percent, dropped to 21.56 percent, as
mentioned in footnote (I), if we do not take into consideration the special
expenditures generated by the American forces in Germany which had previously
been financed under the u.s. defense budget and which during this 5-year
period were included in the common infrastructure budget. If these special
expenditures are figured in, the 0.5. share comes to 27.2279 percent, as
listed in the table for the programs without French participation. Similar
considerations apply to the slice that began in I979.

In general, NATO neither maintains nor manages the infrastructure funds.
Rather, it employs a special system that operates like a clearing bank or
clearinghouse in which all countries participate in accordance with the

agreed upon percentages. The Organization audits the system and authorizes
payments, as we will see later in the project drafting and development process.

France's withdrawal necessitated a refiguring of the percentages approved
in I966, and the share that it no longer contributed was divided up and a new
apportionment agreed upon, as can be seen in the table of percentages.

In addition, in order to compensate the other countries for their having

to replace the cosmon infrastructure on French soil. France was obliged to
gradually pay off what the other countries spent on these projects. This

is a result of the clearinghouse system that governs the common infrastructure,
under which if a country retires officially committed facilities, it must

pay out what the other countries would have contributed. Thus, the common
infrastructure does not entail a permanent mortgage, because each country

can exercise its sovereignty and recover, if it so desires, ownership of

the common facilities built within its borders.

2.2 Total Cost of Common Infrastructure

Infrastructure expenditures were initially stated in pounds sterling. As
of the l970-76 5-year program, which encompassed the slices XXI to XXV,
expenses began to be quoted in Infrastructure Accounting Units (IAU). An
IAU is equivalent to a pound sterling before the I967 devaluation. At the
beginning of I979, an IAU was worth about $6.50.

The following was the total cost of the various "classes" for the I95I-I980
period (in millions of dollars):

 

 

Classes Programmed Authorized Difference
Airfields 2,889 l,693 I,l96
Telecommunications I,535 I,b6l 74
Fuels I,|32 902 230
Naval Bases 666 553 93
Warning facilities 993 hIS S78
Instruction I37 IIS 22
Headquarters 929 322 607
31

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Surface-to-Air Hissile Sites 601 296 105

Surface-to-Surface Missile Sites 83 50 33

Munitions Depots 977 206 773

NADGE 320 320 0

Others 525 622 103
Total 10,567 6,753

We can deduce from the column of differences the programs that have been
conpleted or almost completed and the others that are fully under way.

The following is the total cost of the in-place infrastructure in each country
during the 1951-1980 period (in millions of dollars):

 

 

Country Programmed Authorised Difference
Belgium 307 197 110
Canada 37 36 3
Denmark 276 180 96
France 766 763 , I
Germany 3,236 1,608 1,826
Greece 691 386 307
Italy 909 658 251
Luxembourg 13 13 0
Holland 192 167 25
Norway 587 625 ‘ - 162
Portugal 116 95 19
Turkey 1,226 783 661
United Kingdom 1,151 666 707
Common and others 1,396 1,170 226

About $5 billion has been budgeted for the 1980-86 5-year period, which
is about 85 percent more than for the 1975-79 slice.

One of the new features of the 1980-86 program is the start of the Long-
Term Defense Program (LTDP), which was agreed upon in 1978. Its aim is

to develop common defense efforts throughout the 1980's, including more

than 120 separate improvements of NATO's defense capabilities. In view

of this, and because of today'shighinflation rate and the bid by the United
States to hasten the programs for recovering the financing funds that

it contributes, the Americans have pressed for a sizable enlargement of

the joint fund for the 1980-86 period, the goal being some 1.5 billion IAU's,
which is equivalent to some $6.7 billion. Due to the high inflation rate,
the current budget might have to be increased by one-half.

On top of the program for 1980-86, NATO will have to tackle the suacs program
(Airborne Early Harning and Control System). This is a complex system of
radar detection on board 0.8. Boeing aircraft, and it was approved by the
Defense Planning Com-ittee in December 1978. It will cost $1.8 billion,

to be apportioned in accordance with percentages that have nothing to do

with the infrastructure programs. These percentages are as follows:

32

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Country Percentage

United States 6]
Germany 28
Canada 9
Italy 7
Rolland 3
Belgium (reluctant to take part) 3
Other nations 7

o
a
o
a
a
a

uquu-oo

This apportionment is based on complementary, but not yet definitive commitments
for the multinational coproduction of the necessary hardware and for other
matching war materiel.

The program has not arisen within the normal process of common infrastructure
preparation nor as a result of forces planning. Instead, it has been pushed
marginally by the United States under the category of "new programs." Neither
Great Britain (which has opted for its own domestically produced Nimrods)

nor Portugal is involved in the program, which is another example of the

many exceptions to the already complex system for the general planning of
infrastructure needs. It was the United States that persistently advocated
the need for this costly program. seeking in participation by NATO and Iran
the economies of scale that would cut the cost of production. The withdrawal
of Iran's orders in the wake of the change of regime there will boost the
scheduled $1.8 billion cost for NATO, and thus it will presumably be necessary
tc revise it or try to find other purchasers, such as, for example, Saudi
Arabia. During the German defense minister's visit to ﬂashington in October
I979, he made Germany's contribution conditional on the United States' honoring
the cmmnitment to have part of the hardware manufactured in the Federal
Republic. The 18 airborne radar units will begin arriving in Europe in

I982. The deliveries will conclude in I985 at the latest.

2.3 Process of Developing and Building the Common Infrastructure

The estimates in the 5-year programs, which are the basis for the apportionment
of fund contributions, are drafted in detail for each slice throughout an
l8-month long cycle, which lasts from the time that Supreme Command issues

the initial directive in the fall until approval by the Defense Planning
Committee (or the Council if France is involved) two springs later. The
timetable for this cycle is currently being revised to adapt it to national
cyclical planning, but even if the length of the process is altered, the
current sequence will be maintained.

The cycle begins in the fall (See Figure 2), with a directive from the Supreme
Allied Command consistent with the NATO forces planning that we will look

into later on and directed to the host country, which at the same time receives
the project request from the potential user country. The host country drafts
its own project ("Type A Estimate," in NATO terminology), in conjunction

with the project submitted by the users. NATO standards for the development

of projects vary widely. Thus, there are established standards that must

33

303 OFIICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFPICIAL USE ONLY

be adhered to for air base projects or projects to improve an existing base,
whereas there are no established standards for incorporating a naval base
into NATO's infrastructure inventory.

Once the project has been drawn up, it is submitted to the corresponding
Allied Subordinate Command, which after reviewing it sends it to the Supreme
Command with a description of the needs, a justification and the estimated
budget .

The NATO supreme commanders, each in his own jurisdiction, analyze the common
interst of the proposals, as well as priority in relation to other proposals,
and then decide what will be included in the development phase. They then
send the proposed program to the defense ministers of the countries involved
for their review. The defense ministers, through their representatives,
contact the Supreme Allied Command in question to discuss the modifications
stemming from the national-level review.

This part of the process requires about a year. Thus, by the following
autumn the supreme commanders have the accepted proposals in front of them
and draft the annual program for constructions and the priorities thereof,
which they send in duplicate to the Military Committee and to the Council's
Infrastructure Committee.

Within the Military Committee, the Standing Group studies the projects

and their priorities from the military standpoint in general and from the
standpoint of how they fit in with the joint strategic plan in particular.
It then submits the projects to the higher level of the Military Committee
for its consideration. In addition, the Infrastructure Committee looks

into the technical and financial aspects of the projects and their potential
for joint use.

The studies by the two committees, which reflect the military and civilian
viewpoints, are conducted in the spring. The nations involved are represented
on the committees, and they have the opportunity to make their views known.

Once the observations and recommendations of the corresponding committee

have been included, the projects are submitted to the Defense Planning Committee
(or to the Council), which normally approves them.

The approved projects constitute a new slice of the infrastructure; then

begins the implementation cycle, which becomes the responsibility of the

host country, which must prepare the plans and estimates for the development

of the project (type 3 estimate, in the NATO terminology). The host country
must determine, in conjunction with NATO authorities, the precise sites

- of the facilities. It then proceeds to purchase, at its own cost, the necessary
pieces of land and to contract out the projects to be built. The bidding can

be national or international, depending on the financialscopeof the project.

Once the work contract has been arranged, it is submitted, with a detailed
budget, to the "Infrastructure Payments and Progress Committee," which must

approve the necessary funds. The host country then begins to withdraw funds
from NATO and starts the project.

34

OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The supreme commanders and the international secretary, along with the host
country, monitor work on the project. Once it is completed, the host country
conducts a final inspection for the Organization, after which the Payments
and Progress Committee includes the facilities in the NATO inventory. At

the same time, the Board of Auditors starts its audit to determine whether
the funds have been used properly.

As we can see, this is a slow process in which all the interested parties
take part. Although it seems to be a complex process, it is, nevertheless,
simple in its approach and purpose, and it has turned out to be an effective
system that enables the principle of national sovereignty to be reconciled
with common interests.

2.6 Spain's Potential Contribution .

The shares in the financing of NATO's structures (Civil and Military Budgets)
are subject to negotiation, as we said in addressing this issue, but logically,
a greater or lesser contribution is unavoidable, inasmuch as we are dealing

here with the financing of common bodies in which all of the nations participate.
Moreover, these shares are very small in relation to national budgets.

The financing of common infrastructure, however, which involves much higher
amounts of money, allows for a much more flexible approach to the member
countries' share. The principle of cooperation in a joint effort undoubtedly
prevails, however, and thus Canada, which has on its soil only 0.01 percent
of the total value of common facilities and which limits its forces in Europe
to a 2,800-man brigade and an Air Group of 60 fighters, normally pledges

to contribute S to 6 percent in the apportionment of the financing of the
common infrastructure. in comparison, the facilities in the region of Greece
and Turkey amount to about 20 percent of all projects, despite which Greece's
share is only about 0.7 percent and Turkey's 1.2 percent. In other words,
all countries must cooperate to a greater or lesser extent in accordance

with their very diverse circumstances. '

As we mentioned before, General Haig. speaking at the seminar in April 1978
on Spain's possible participation in NATO, estimated Spain's contribution
to infrastructure expenditures at some $50 million a year. Let us assume
that this amount pertains to the infrastructure slice planned for the 1980-84
5-year period, during which time, as we said previously, $5 billion will

be spent, in other words, $1 billion a year. Thus, the $50 million a year
that General Haig estimated for Spain comes to 5 percent of the total. This
is about the same percentage contributed during the previous 5-year period
by Belgium and Holland, below the shares of Canada and Italy and higher
than those of Denmark, Norway, Portugal, Greece, Turkey and Luxembourg,

as we can see in the Table of Percentages by Nation several pages ago.

There are several basic criteria, as we mentioned before (each country's
capacity to contribute, the advantages for the user countries, the economic
benefits for the host country), for determining the respective shares, but

these criteria could be outweighed by a wide range of others, including
those of a political nature.

35

FOR OPPICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

An econometric study of Spain's potential share cannot be undertaken a priori
on the basis of the percentages assigned to other countries, as was done

in our analysis of the financing of NATO's infrastructure, because we cannot
restrict an estimate of the percentages to their relationship to certain
macroeconomic aggregates. As we have already pointed out, the

cost—sharing depends very much on each specific facility under consideration,
on how interested certain countries are in using it and on the advantages
that could accrue to the host country, plus political considerations.

If it were to join NATO, Spain would have to devote particular attention

to its potential conmﬁtments to the financing of the common infrastructure
projects that are on the drawing board. It would have to analyse in detail
not only the aforementioned basic criteria but also a wide range of factors
involved in each project, especially the benefits that would accrue to it

from the infrastructure projects to be built in other countries and how
interested the Organization would be in putting certain facilities in our
country, weighing all this in conjunction with the national interest in

the facilities and thus determining Spain's share in the cmuuniinfrastructure
program.

Therefore, we will begin by taking a look at the potential facilities on
Spanish soil that could represent its contribution to the NATO infrastructure.
We should clearly state in advance, however, that there is no obligation

to construct certain facilities. Even if the NATO common strategic plan

were to recommend certain facilities, the principle of national sovereignty
would clearly prevail over any other consideration. Thus, for example,

in the hypothetical case that there were powerful strategic reasons for

NATO to have bases in the Canaries archipelago, if Spain, for obvious political
reasons, wanted to exclude the islands from such a camaitment, signing the
North Atlantic Treaty would entail no obligation restricting sovereign decision-
naking in this regard.

The mere geographic contribution that Spain would make by joining NATO w0uld
already be a major factor in assessing its share, but the Organization's
plans would unquestionably later propose taking advantage of the peninsula,
and thus negotiations would ensue on preparing, adapting or improving our
national infrastructure in accordance with NATO‘s plans.

Spanish territory is an important complement to Portugal and to the strategic
base on Gibraltar in the creation of a naval air platform, a base of operations
for antisubmarine surveillance and the protection of traffic in the Atlantic
and the western Mediterranean by means of peninsula-based sea and air patrols.

At present, NATO has the following commands bordering on Spain's territorial
waters (See Figure 3): a naval command headquartered in Lisbon with jurisdiction
in the IBERLANT [Iberian Atlantic Area] zone, which surrounds the Canary
Islands; another lower-level command in the BISCLANT zone, which includes

the Bay of Biscay; a command in the Mediterranean zone, HEDOC, which surrounds
the Balearic Islands (this command's status was left up in the air when

France withdrew from NATO's military command, and it had to be transferred

36

FOR 0F?ICIAL USE ONLY
to Naples, and, finally, a smaller command in the Strait of Gibraltar zone,
resulting from the unusual circumstance of the British base on the strait.

If Spain joined NATO, it would probably necessitate the overhauling of this
command structure. The HBDOG Command, which used to be in France, might

be installed in Spain; the IBBRLANT jurisdiction would, logically, be reassessed,
and the CIBHED zone would probably be modified because the base at Gibraltar
would no longer play the leading role that it does today. Gibraltar as
NATO's only support point on the strait is not the same as Gibraltar with

the entire Spanish coastline available to the Alliance. The British base
itself would probably be affected. THE DAILY TELEGRAPH has already mentioned
the possibility that if Spain joined NATO, Great Britain would agree to

a joint British-Spanish command at the Gibraltar base, which would make

it a NATO base, and then try to transfer to the Alliance the heavy costs
entailed in its much-needed modernization.

From the standpoint of NATO infrastructure, which is what concerns us in
here, all of this would mean setting up certain headquarters on Spanish
soil and incorporating them into the Organization's telecommunications systems.

But in addition to the restructuring of commands consistent with Spain's
potential membership in the Alliance, NATO has to appreciably bolster its
reinforcement capacity. The not too distant experience of the I973 Arab-Israeli
conflict made it quite clear that in modern warfare, nuclear weapons aside,
the rate at which costly and complex conventional war materiel is destroyed
is very high, and hence the importance of rapid and safe supply lines by

sea and, especially, by air. The Iberian Peninsula offers almost unique
opportunities for the reinforcement and replacement of human and material
resources in the European theater. The much-talked-about theory that Belgian
Gen R. Close set forth in his book "L'Burope sans defense," a controlled
surprise attack by the Soviet Union in Central Europe that would reach the
Rhine in #8 hours, confirms the importance of the Iberian platform. The
logistic importance of the Iberian Peninsula is even greater, if that is
possible, if we do not take as pessimistic a view as General close's.

Spanish security affairs expert Sanchez-Gijon asserts in his book "Spain

in NATO" that: "The platform of the peninsula could make an inestimable
contribution in this regard. Because of the need to monitor, bring in and
send off this traffic, the idea of Spain as an aircraft base would have

to be complemented by the idea of the peninsula as a servicing station."

He backs up this view by citing the data furnished by 0.8 Defense Secretary
Narold Brown in his annual report on the Department of Defense budget for
fiscal year I979, which states: "By the close of fiscal year I983, our plans
and programs will have considerably increased the speed with which ".8.
Army and Air Force reinforcements can reach Europe. At present, we could
expand our in-place land forces by one or two divisions in 10 days after

a decision to reinforce. By the end of fiscal year I982, we plan to be
able to deploy five reinforcement divisions in the same period of time.

At present, we could perhaps send 60 air.squadrons from the United States

37

F0! OFIICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

to Europe in a week; by the end of fiscal year I982, we plan to be able
to transfer 60 squadrons in those 7 days."

As we will see later, NATO's Long-Term Defense Program (LTD?) aims precisely

at bolstering the potential for rapid reserve reinforcements and for safeguarding
logistics deliveries to the theater of operations. The Iberian Peninsula

is in a special position in this regard, and thus in this respect as well

Spain, should it join NATO, would come under study from the standpoint of

the infrastructure needed for these plans.

The Friendship and Cooperation Treaty between Spain and the United States,
signed in I976, grants the United States the right to use certain bases

and facilities on Spanish soil for military purposes and specifies how they
are to be used "in the event of an outside threat against or attack on the

security of the "eat."

We can assume, therefore, that in carrying out the aforementioned reinforcement
plans, the United States will have at its disposal the series of installations
(bases, telecommunications centers, pipeline systems, depots, etc) that

it has built in Spain under the successive agreements signed by the two
countries and to which the United States has certain rights under the treaty.

We thus have the paradox that Spain, which is outside the NATO planning

and decision-making forums, nevertheless contributes by way of its geography
to the Alliance's plans. Thus, should Spain join the Organisation, from
Spain's standpoint nothing would be better suited to incorporation into
NATO's infrastructure than the series of facilities that the United States
has the right to use.

Under the Spanish-American Treaty, as published by the Foreign Affairs Ministry,
these facilities are:

--The Rota Naval Base

--The Torrejon Air Base

--The Zaragoza Air Base

--The Moron Air Base

--The Bardenas Reales Firing Range

--The Cadiz-Zsrsgoza pipeline, with pumping stations and depots for the
four bases above .

--Other facilities designated as "minor," mainly warehouses and communications
stations, some as important as the troposcatter communications network
around Spain. Annex V contains a complete listing of these "minor" facilities.

Taking as our source of information the transcript of the U.S. Senate Foreign
Relations Committee hearings (the Subcommittee on Foreign Agreements and
Commitments), which deals with the agreements and commitments with Spain

in Part II (II Hay I969), we can see that the construction cost of the above
facilities in I967 dollars, according to Senator Fulbright's statement,

was $1.008 billion.

38

OFFICIAL USE ONLY
If we compare this amount with the current estimate of the total value of

the "common infrastructure" facilities in the countries bordering the Mediterra-
nean (Greece, $384 million; Italy, $658 million, and Turkey, $783 million),

we can see that'the series of facilities designated "for joint Spanish-American
use" constitute a significant part of NATO's conunn infrastructure in these
countries.

Another way to assess the relative importance of infrastructure projects
constructed under the Spaniah-U.S. agreements is to compare the Spanish
pipeline system with others that the Alliance has built in Europe. NATO's
complex Central Europe Pipeline System, which runs through five countries
(Germany, Belgium, France, Holland and Luxembourg) and takes care of the
military and civilian needs of eight countries (the above five plus Canada,
the United States and England), is a network of 5,800 kilometers. Spain's
Cadiz-Zaragoza pipeline is 800 kilometers long, in other words, more than

l2 percent of the pipeline length laid in Central Europe for eight countries.
Although the Central Europe pipeline is a complex system with more than

IOO pumping stations and depots, we can still see that the Spanish pipeline
is a major infrastructure component. Planned to serve the U.s.-built bases,
it could serve as the hub for future feeder lines that would round out its
potential for the role that Spain would play if it were to join NATO.

we have mentioned these facilities as potential Spanish contributions to
the common infrastructure because, first of all, they are facilities to
which a foreign power, the United States, already has major use rights,
stemming from a Friendship and Cooperation Treaty, not a defensive alliance
such as NATO. Thus, these rights do not entail a joint defense commitment
between Spain and the Unietd States, which is the case with NATO, under
Article 5 of the treaty.

Since the treaty with the United States is fundamentally political, because

as we will see later on, the economic component could be described as negligible,
when the time comes to renegotiate the treaty before its expiration in 1981,

we can assume that Spain will take an objective look at its options and

evaluate whether the mortgage involved in ceding the use of these facilities
does not offer greater advantages under NATO than under the bilateral treaty
with the Unietd States.

without delving into this kind of political decision, which goes beyond
the scope of this book, we would, however, point to the assessed value of
the aforementioned facilities and note the possibility that if Spain joins
the Alliance, they will be considered for inclusion into the NATO common
infrastructure, instead of being kept exclusively under American mortgage.

Consideration of Spain's potential contribution to the NATO infrastructure
would not, of course, be limited to these facilities. Rather, it could
extend to other exclusively Spanish facilities, in which case we would have
to analyze expanding their capacity and enhancing their operating procedures,
increasing the potential for the use of containers, building fuel, munitions

39

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and war materiel depots, overhauling access roads and communications, pipeline
linkups, etc.

The facilities that could be incorporated into NATO's common infrastructure
would undoubtedly include the semiautomatic air defense system (SADS), which
was developed under the so-called "Grand Combat" program. It was initially
budgeted at $70 million, with the possibility of an additional $50 million.
Its final cost might have exceeded the sum of these two. The hub of this
system is at Torrejon, and it stretches through much of Spain with a series
of operations centers, radar sites, telecommunications centers and microwave
networks to transmit the radar-detected data to the operations centers.

If Spain were to join NATO, it could lead to the total automation of the
Spanish system and its inclusion in the NADGE system, possibly through France's
STRIDA system; such coordination is already provided for in the current
situation. The NADGE system, which extends in a wide arc from northern
Norway through Germany, Italy and Greece to the eastern tip of Turkey, was
built at a total cost of $320 million. Thus, the incorporation of the SADS
system, the cost of which we cited above, has to be considered relatively
important in terms of the infrastructure's economic value, even if we take
into account that $l00 in I976, the year that the SADS project was built,

are equivalent to $68.50 constant dollars in I970, when the NADGE system

was completed.

Another sector that Spain could not remain outside of is the joint NATO
telecommunications system. NATO has an integrated communications system
(NICS) that takes care of most of its telecoammnications, including the
Satellite Communications System. One of the main efforts in the common
infrastructure program is to improve the NICS system at a scheduled cost
of $500 million, plus other telecommunications projects that are not part
of NICS, such as the mobile radio links between headquarters and tactical
forces, which are expected to cost another $500 million. This bespeaks
NATO's great interest in enhancing the efficiency and operability of its
telecommunications. After Spain joins the NATO integrated telecommunications
system, it could contribute the Spanish Army's Telecommunications Network.
This up-to-date system would then have to be taken into consideration as
another major economic contribution to the NATO infrastructure.

How much would it cost Spain and the other countries to carry out these

projects? "hat would Spain's contribution be to the general NATO infrastructure
programs? An a priori quantification is not possible. In the event that

Spain joins the Organization, we would have to take a look at the plans

and projects that would be gotten under way and the priorities thereof,

and once Spain's representatives were part of the team drafting the infrastructure
programs, with the previously analyzed criteria as the basis for determining
shares, Spain could then negotiate the respective percentages with the rest

of the member countries.

In order to develop a bargaining position in the negotiations, we should
construct a simple model of NATO infrastructure financing, similar to what
we did with the percentage shares in the Alliance's civil and military structures.

40

FOR OFFICIAL USS ONLY
The variables that we would try to introduce into this model would be the
capacity of each country to contribute, the advantages for the potential

user countries and the economic benefits that would accrue to the host country.
These have been considered the basic criteria for determining the retpective
contributions.

But in order to do this, as we have stated, we would first need to know

which specific Spanish facilities NATO plans to include in its infrastructure,
the programming and priorities in building or handing over these facilities,
and the NATO infrastructure in other countries of which Spain would be regarded
as a potential user. Therefore, under current circumstances, we cannot

proceed any further with this, but we would make note here of the econometric
analysis that could be doneuhenthe time comes.

The figure of $50 million a year that General Haig quoted for Spain and

that, as we have seen, is equivalent to 5 percent of the total, must have
been calculated on the basis of Spain's GDP and defense spending in comparison
to those of the other NATO countries.

Let us take a look at these figures:

 

Percenta e(1) GDP(2) 08(3)
(Hith France) (Without France)
1. United States 23.65 27.23 1,883.6 107.770
2. Germany 22.89 26.36 ' 513.9 13.760
3. France 13.16 -- 380.7 11.720
4. Great Britain 10.42 11.99 244.5 10.880
5. ltaly 6.89 7.93 196.0 4.640
6. Canada 5.48 6.31 197.2 3,610
7. Belgium 4.82 5.55 79.4 1.820
8. Holland 4.43 5.10 106.4 3.360
9. Denmark 3.21 3.70 43.2 1.080
10. Norway 2.71 3.12 35.6 1.120
11. Turkey 1.15 1.32 44.8 2.650
12. Greece 0.69 0.79 25.8 1.100
13. Luxembourg 0.18 0.21 2.6 0.025

(11 Percentages for slices XXVI-XXX, rounded off to the second decimal point.

(2) ln billions of dollars. According to the 1979 0800 Economic Report.
(3) Defense spending in 1977 in billions of dollars. According to the 1978-79
Military Balance Sheet.

As we can see, there is a correlation between a nation's share and its GDP and
defense spending. Spain had a GDP of $115.6 billion and spent $2.154 billion
on defense in 1977, and thus according to these figures, its share would

be between Canada's (5.48 percent) and Denmark's (3.21 percent). He could
estimate it initially at around four percent, since Spain is closer to the

Belgian than to the Canadian magnitudes.

41

FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

If we use "per capita" amounts, however, as we did in our estimate of NATO
structure financing, Spain is in 13th place in per capita GDP, between Italy
and Greece, and in lhth place in per capita defense spending, between Turkey
and Portugal.

In the infrasructure slice in question these four countries have the following
per capita percentages (in the normal case, with France participating):

Country Per Capita Percentage
Italy 0.12
Turkey 0.03
Greece 0.07
Portugal 0.03

The average per capita percentage of these four countries, weighted in accordance
with their populations, is 0.076, which when applied to Spain's population
of 36.672 million, is equivalent to an absolute percentage of 2.29.

We feel that the per capita values are more representative of each country's
economic realities. Rounding out the 2.79 percent to a rough reference

number, we could thus conclude that Spain's share ought to be around 3 percent.
This would mean that of the SI billion in annual expenditures for the l980-86
period, Spain would contribute about $30 million a year to the financing

of NATO's common infrastructure. At the average exchange rate of 85 pesetas
to the dollars, this would come to 2.55 oillion pesetas in 198], which is
equivalent to 0.76 percent of Spain's Defense Budget in I981.

This 0.76 percent estimate would, we emphasize, be dependent on whatever
specific programs were undertaken and on Spain's involvement in them. Moreover,
any initial evaluations would have to give serious consideration to the
potential infrastructure contributions that Spain would make upon joining

NATO and that we have examined previously, especially the facilities that

are available today to the United States Armed Forces and whose relative
economic value we have outlined above.

FOOTNOTES

I2. ln "Burden Sharing in NATO" (Holmes and Heier Publishers, Inc, New York,
I979), Gavin Kennedy analyzes the problem of balanced participation
and proposes theoretical methods for achieving it, which as far as we
know, NATO has not incorporated.

I3. Our main source in connection with the problems inherent in financing
the common infrastructure has been the "General Accounting Report to

the Congress: How the U.S. Finances Its Share of Contribution to NATO,"
23 February I973.

42

FOR OFVICIAL USE ONLY
Chapter II: Potential Indirect Impact on Defense Spending

In the previous chapter we analyzed the economic commitments that a country
could contract by joining NATO, commitments consistent with the need to
finance the Alliance's organizational structure and shared infrastructure.

Now then, the attempt to resolve the national security problem by joining
the Atlantic Alliance could also have an indirect impact on defense spending.

A hypothetical membership in NATO, with a status similar to that of most
member countries, entails participation in a "commnn planning" of forces.

Such planning takes into account what each country can contribute to the

joint effort; recommendations are made to the various countries in a bid

to achieve several common goals, and at times certain types of aid or economic
assistance might be given to some members, if deemed opportune, all of this
subordinate to the principle of national sovereignty that applies to any
commitment contracted with this multinational organization.

He will therefore study in detail the common planning process within the
NATO agencies and the influence that it might have on the amount and pattern
of defense spending of a memebr country.

Since such common planning requries an analysis and comparison not only

of the funds that each country contributes but also of the overall corresponding
defense expenditures, we will later conduct an econometric analysis of national
defense spending in relation to the defense spending of the NATO countries.

3. Possible Influence of NATO Membership on National Defense Budgets

He will begin by stating clearly that membership in the Atlantic Alliance
does not entail any commitment to achieve a given level of budgeted defense
spending nor to earmark such funds in one way or another.

There are two basic principles in NATO planning, and to a certain extent

they are contradictory or at least liable to cause differences of opinion.

0n the one hand, the Organization's higher authorities determine the necessary
levels of common forces with which it must counter the combat potential

that threatens its security. 0n the other, each nation has absolute sovereignty
over and responsibility for its contribution to the common defense.

It is not easy to reconcile the NATO-determined needs and the capabilities
of each country. As we will see later on, the Organization undertakes a
process of jointly analyzing these needs and capabilities, thus giving rise
to recommendations to the member countries, recommendations that have in
the past taken into consideration the potential of each country; thus, they
have been, in general, very realistic.

3.! NATO Planning of the "Force Goal"

The Division of Defense Planning and Policy of the International Secretariat,
the International Military Staff and the Superior NATO Commands cooperate

43

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
.1

{2m Myroniutc do. to plan . proud-

2
4
E"
O
.2
0
'0
d
E
E
H
d
B
t.
2
III
8
z .
O
H
O
4:
o
H
5.
~
2
4
.1
a.
'8
2
o

r a touch: "min c cl.

  

 

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

  
 
     

nan-o:
Sum!“

an)”

 

VERA-VERA”

”113-03

Pill!

I
V
«I
O.-
a.
0
II
‘-

        
 
   

h
is Mon )0
‘ Luau”:
g uuopq
.:
a U
1 3
6
n ! POI-93
1‘ am
am
“mm: fo‘a’ﬁﬁ'ﬁﬁ “" ‘ “
g 0.93
‘5 a "mum:
32 cm
a )
8
-
O
i wanna

 
    
   

1°]
“.2 I
30- }: pct-o:
"' - on"
O: i. .
l ‘.... 01"!
3;
"ecu .- :5,
b ‘l
3-.

Mo
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
closely in planning for the forces that are deemed necessary, and this
translates into a force goal or level to be achieved. The planning
is based on the threat to the Alliance's security posed by the arsenal of
the Warsaw Pact in comparison to the potential of the RAID forces.

The joint force level to be achieved must be reconciled with the capacity
of member countries to furnish the required funds. Over time, NATO tries
to minimise the gap that usually arises between the force needs and the

the capacity of the member countries, so that the Alliance's actual defense

capability squares with the military potential deemed necessary to meet
the hypothetical threat.

The first time that an attempt was made to reconcile these two factors (needs
and capacities) was in I9SI. A committee of I2 members (representing the

l2 countries that made up the Organization at the time), plus 3 secretaries,
Averell Harriman, Edwin Plowden and Jean Honnet (they came to be called

"the IZ Apostles" and "the 3 Wise Men") drafted a report to be submitted

at the ministerial meeting in Lisbon in I952. The report set forth the
principle that "joint defense must rest on a firm, solid economic and social
base of the members, and none of them must be called upon to bear a military
burden that exceeds its capacity." It thus established a defense program

in accordance with the economic capabilities of the Alliance's components.

As a result of this report, the Atlantic Council decided at its session
in Lisbon in I952 that each year there would be a "determination of needs"
to keep NATO's essential defense capabilities up-to-date.

Thus arose the so-called "annual review," whose procedures are similar to
those that an individual nation has to follow in determining its own defense
budget. For the first time in history, however, this was being done at

a multinational level, which entailed a much more complex process than for
an individual country and that required a detailed exchange of confidential

information on military arsenals and budgets, as well as the economic capabilities
of each country.

This process also required the establishment of common definitions in NATO

for the various categories and classes of forces, as well as some degree

of harmonization of defense budgets to enable spending in the various national
programs to be compared.

Given the complexity of the process and in order to enhance the effectiveness
of the annual review, a triennial review was instituted in I96I. since

every defense program requires a relatively long period of lead time, the
feeling was that the planning period had to be lengthened. Nevertheless,
since no democratic government can make a firm commitment for a period of

time that exceeds the established duration of its national legislature,

it was decided that the review would analyze the objectives to be achieved
during the ensuing 3 years but that the governments would be asked only

to make firm commitments for the first year. Thus, the plans for the following
2 years would only be tentative.

65

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The objectives to be achieved were thus classified into three categories:

--"Firm" objectives, to be achieved the year following the review.
-"Scheduled" objectives, intended to be achieved in the second year.
--"Possible” objectives, presented as desirable for the third year.

The Annual Review thus became an ongoing process. The "scheduled" objectives
that had been established during the previous Annual Review were modified

in the following review as a function of experience and the developments

of events. The "possible" objectives were confirmed or adjusted during

this second year so as to constitute "scheduled" objectives for the current
year, and new "possible” objectives arose for the third year.

This provided ongoing guidelines for the defense effort that enabled NATO
authorities to undertake their planning flexibly and consistently.

3.2 5-Year Planning

For reasons similar to those that made the 3-year review advisable, the
ministerial session in Ottawa in I963 adopted 5-year planning based on the
procedure instituted in the United States by Robert MCNamara and which

had been adopted subsequently by several NATO member countries with modifications
in keeping with their own particular situations.

Under this procedure, force planning is analyzed periodically to determine
the joint force level to be achieved, which is called the "Force Goal"
within the framework of a 5-year plan.

This procedure enables future force plans to be modified in accordance with
a more complete and farsighted assessment of the situation than the previous
3-year system. Moreover, it provides the member countries with a solid
basis for estimating their contributions.

The planning process has to reconcile the military strategy that has been
worked out for the Organisation, the force requirements and the resources
available to meet these requirements, resources that ultimately pose an
economic problem. Therefore, force goal planning must theoretically

take an economic approach to see to it that the available resources are
sufficient to carry out the approved defense programs, through the most
rational possible use of these resources, based on a criterion of profitability
or cost-effectiveness and, moreover, see to it that the apportionment of
financial burdens among the various countries is as equitable as possible.

The process begins (See Figure a) with the “Situation Assessment" that the
Military Committee does of potential threats during the 7 ensuing years.
It analyzes the Warsaw Pact's arsenal and deployment in comparison to the
Atlantic Allaince's and tries to introduce into its analysis all elements
that might affect this situation: available weaponry, level of training,
technological developments, demography, etc.

66

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
IEN‘IO aumaueun 0: warns or

“time.
Planing Allied
_ (tn-(Que Count I’ Be.

 
 
  

  

‘0’.“0

I”?!
.00....
FOR OFFICIAL USE OMLY

The Defense Review Committee then enters the picture; it is chaired by the
assistant secretary general of Defense Planning and Policy and comprises
representatives of each member country and of the various NATO supreme commanders.

The studies to be conducted are based on the assessment of the military
situation done by the Military Committee, plus the economic and political
factors that could affect the capacity of each country to contribute to

the defense effort. A wide range of indicators are taken into account,

such as GNP, per capita income, the balance of payments, demographic factors
(especially available manpower), the percentage of industrial capacity use,
investment needs, the tax burden and any other economic indicators that
might serve as terms of reference for an equitable apportionment of the
defense effort burden and for the best utilisation of the funds available

for defense.

Taking all these elements into account, the Defense Review Committee drafts
the proposed "Ministerial Guidance" on the force levels to be achieved.
The "Ministerial Guidance" is submitted to the Defense Planning Committee
(DPC) for its consideration; the committee promulgates it at its spring
session of ministers and sends it to NATO's highest military authorities.

The supreme military commanders submit the Ministerial Guidance to the
various countries, along with the "Force Proposal" stating the level of
forces that they feel each country ought to contribute during the period
under consideration.

In the event that the force levels advocated by NATO are at odds with the
defense plans of a country, the international civil and military authorities,
the representatives of the supreme military commanders and the authorities

of the countries involved hold trilateral talks in a bid to coordinate their
plans. The conclusions of these talks are again sent to the Defense Review
Committee, which proceeds to assess them along with the representatives

of all countries and of the supreme commanders. At the same time, the Military
Committee examines whether the new approach to force planning can continue

to meet military needs in accordance with NATO's strategy.

The results of these reviews and further coordination are submitted as definitive
proposals to the Defense Planning Committee. The ministers of each country
analyze these proposals and determine whether they are consistent with the
military needs determined by the Military Committee, with the overall balance
being sought and with the feasibility of their being carried out by each
country. The 5-year plan is approved at the ministerial session in the
spring after the one in which the first Ministerial Guidance was issued.
This 5-year force plan becomes the "Porce.Goal" to be achieved during

the ensuing 5 years. The "Force Goal" is broken down and submitted

as "recommendations" to the ministers of the countries represented on the
Defense Planning Committee. It must be adopted as the basis for national
defense planning for the ensuing 5 years and as firm commitments by each
country for the first of those 5 years.

48

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
: Defense Countries '

0.-.-.."

cu of: Plsnning Responses
ls sQPestionnsire to D
muons

; 5'0 “ 1 :sumsu :

: Dunn-g : “ 3

I :susmo . . nuts» I

i '“ " g I DPQ I
o ' '
. \.

tense

 

ﬁestas-nus

Mons.

Pro- Defense

I

I

n

I

l

I

: so ﬂoss. so
I

I

: Plsnning Co-ittee
I

Annus‘
Form

(cocci

: IIAII
: must
0 ousw

I
:‘O '0‘!
I
I

Han-.01
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Thus, what began with a Ninisterial Guidance issued in the spring of a
given year does not become a "Force Goal" for a 5-year period until

the spring of the following year. Hence, the process for a 5-year plan
requires 6 years. A new Ninisterial Guidance is not issued until 2 years
after the previous one, thus beginning a new 6-year cycle for another 5-year
plan (See Figure 5).

In addition, at the beginning of each year the countries receive a Defense
Planning Questionnaire (DPQ), containing questions about their annual defense
budgets and longer-range financial projects and plans. The nations fill

out the questionnaire before autumn. since the "Force Goal" is determined
every 2 years, there are two DPQ's for each "Force Goal."

Furthermore, every autumn the Review Committee conducts a Defense Review.
It analyzes nation by nation the force goals that have been achieved

and those that have not been and prepares a draft annual report for the
Defense Planning Connittee .

Under the forces commitments that a country makes to the Organization, these
forces' tie-in with or subordination to the NATO command can be placed in the
following categories or classes:

a) Forces under the command of NATO:

These are the forces that are under the supreme commanders of NATO in peacetime.
This applies specifically to the antiaircrsft defense based in Europe, which
is under SACEUR, in view of the immediate reaction required of these forces

in the event of an alert. Also uzder the NATO cmmmand is a group of forces
from various countries that is called the Allied Mobile Force. Though small
and mainly symbolic, its mission is to transfer rapidly by air to one of

the deployment flanks in the event of an imminent threat. Other forces

under the NATO command are the Atlantic Naval Forces, which come under SACLANT
(Supreme Allied Commander Atlantic), which are practically all from the

United States, except for a small group of vessels from other nations that
symbolize their participation. The use of these forces in any instance

must be authorized by the corresponding national authority.

b) Forces "assigned" to NATO:

These are forces that remain under national command in peacetime but that

would come under the NATO command in the event of an alert, on the dates

and for the periods agreed upon. This status applies, for example, to the
units that other countries (except France, which is under a different system)
have stationed in Germany, as well as other major units that although located
on national soil, have been previously committed to this "status" of "assigned"

forces.
c) Forces "reserved" for NATO:

These are forces that are under domestic command in peacetime and that in
the event of war are scheduled to be placed under NATO command, but without

50

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
any time periods having been stipulated in advance for this change of command.
Naval forces usually have this status.

d) National forces:

These forces are not involved in NATO's joint strategic plans because their
mission is to defend national territory and because they are under the exclusive
orders or the corresponding domestic military command.

The commitment status of each of these units to the NATO command can be
confirmed or changed in an annual reconsideration.

The units under NATO command and the units assigned to NATO normally have
to maintain the preparedness levels advocated by the NATO command and must

take part in maneuvers with other allied armies, which entails certain expendi-
tures that could be avoided by not belonging to the Alliance.

As we have pointed out, NATO planning begins in the spring. Thus, the countries
whose fiscal years begin in July. as is the case with the United States

[sic], feel that it would be a good idea to change the planning timetable

so that domestic budget planning is done before common forces planning.

There is disagreement over this, however, because others feel that it is

more advantageous for NATO force planning to precede each country's budget
process.

Another weak point in 5-year planning of forces is that weaponry planning,
especially for complex weapons systems such as aircraft, missiles, etc,
normally require longer periods (from 10 to l5 years), and thus the two
are hard to reconcile. This is one of the reasons for the current trend
towards longer-range planning, as we will now see.

3.3 The Long-Term Defense Program

At the summit meeting of heads of state or government in 1977, President
Carter submitted to the Organization a long-range planning program that

would go beyond 5-year planning and that would allow for a better coordination
of national defense plans by having the Organization's sights set on long-
term planning that would facilitate a suitable response to the ever-increasing
offensive might of the Warsaw Pact.

As a result of the 0.5. initiative, the Washington summit meeting in May I978
approved the startup of the so-called "Long-Term Defense Program" (LTDP).

This program examines the weaknesses in the Alliance's arsenal in relation

to the Harsaw Pact, especially the latter's superiority in so-called conventional
forces (in other words, nonnuclear weapons) and the general improvements

that NATO ought to make in its military capability over IO to l5 years to make

up this gap.

The LTDP focuses on a series of specific issues to boost operational capacity
in certain priority areas (task forces).

51

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The areas initially selected for the 1980's are:

1. Level of preparedness

2. Reinforcement capacity

3. Mobilization of reserves

a. Naval capability

5. Air defense

6. Command, control and communications
7. Electronic warfare

8. Rationalization

9. Logistics

lO.Theaternuclesr forces

This long-range planning project is still in its initial phase of development,
inasmuch as the agencies that will carry it out are just now being organized.
They will conduct detailed studies of the levels to be achieved, develop
timetables for the subprograms and their phases, dt.ernine their cost and
define priorities and procedures for the execution and monitoring of ministerial
decisions.

The LTDP sets concrete objectives in each of the above areas, which under

the current LTDP are broken down into 120 specific measures. The long-term
program sets intermediate objectives that coincide with NATO's 5-year planning,
which is reviewed every 2 years; thus, the 5-year plan is coordinated with

the LTDP. Long-range planning is regarded as more political than 5-year
planning because it better identifies the intentions and trends of the various

member countries.

In the words of 0.8. Defense Secretary hsrold Brown in his I979 report to
Congress: "We are working with our allies to move forward together in this
regard. One of the main accomplishments in the LTD? process has been the
growing feeling of solidarity in the Alliance and the pride in each particular
nation's effort to revitalize and strengthen the Alliance...He recognize

that the biggest effort must be made during the startup phase of the LTDP..."
This project is thus in its infancy, but it is a clear sign of the intention
to work towards increasingly long-range common objectives. The annual planning
begun in l951'gave way to 3-year planning and then to 5-year planning. Now

the goal is 10-15 year planning, an ambitious aim, though it is limited

to very specific fields, mainly logistics, infrastructure or the utilization
of forces and is not designed to replace the 5-year planning of force goals.
No doubt, however, it will influence such planning by setting longer-range
objectives.

3.4 NATO Data Bank

Long-term planning has made it even more obvious that NATO needs to have
duly systematized and processed information at its disposal.

52

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

:33 nag—03600.. as: com unuoaooo «0:93....0832 x 5.33380 ‘I I. | I: .'

uuuoaun van :3 any 142—00 258.: o 23353.3( I

 

com :5 .3095 gee-Sugam

‘11
.mw20.0<aw¢ > <0.2(U¢O Z0.0<.. OZ.)

accuse—o.— vco .0: ~53. awn—ca no

         

                                  

  

 
 

 
 

coduuvm
22:23
.(zou. 'l'|lllll""l'ql' “3-09th
3:2: 3 3.: -
3.5 ouuom 3 32:13:. . - 320.. can
.332: .o «u: - 9:53:
. .
.. ”“5””... u. 5 .. . .4.”.”.......u...uu 5......
u m x a. - s
.1 103.20 .0 Gomwm>mn A
R
m 3
330.32.... E S
oouwwﬂwo 0. 3 8.8:-
. ~— os 2.13
02.0qu
322323....
.amuououuom
90‘.I‘-IU-O —Q€°m UQCHUu—uﬂ
. .3223
,nomuucsoo vum3< 304.: 3:: wouumaeou 0&0
3.. Ho OUMHUme—m: c0. 0‘ ‘nx-uua “Canaan—m 0‘ a.“«.
i 02.0qu .v 3.33.2.1: 3:83 3 3.13

    

   

ch222<uzwam .5 53.. man:— an cozcmi
l‘ﬂaﬂﬂﬂ new; 3.5

 

 

FOR OWCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The Systems Analysis Section (SAS), a branch of the NATO International Secretariat,
took charge of meeting this need. The section has organized the NATO Force
Planning Data Base (NPPDD),which is in the final testing stage and could

soon be fully operational.'4

The Systems Analysis Section began its work in the early 1970's with the
objective of preparing accurate information for NATO talks with the Warsaw
Pact on the possible reduction of forces by both blocs (Mutual and Balanced _
Force Reductions or HBFR, in NATO terminology). The Defense Review Committee
found this computerized information file very useful and asked the SAS to
develop the system further. Thus, in 1975 the Task Force for the Processing
of Force Data (FDNA) was set up; it is made up of representatives from the
International Secretariat, the International Military Staff, the NATO supreme
commanders and the member countries.

The FDHA's goal is to set up "the main automated storehouse of data on NATO
forces" in order to:

--Develop mathematical models to analyze armed forces

--Conduct comparative studies on military capabilities

--Compare weapgnry systems to facilitate their standardization and inter-
operability,

--Support the drafting of documents for NATO planning.

To this end, the FDHA coordinates the definitions used by various countries,
thus avoiding different interpretations of the same word (which, like head-
quarters, combat unit, support unit, etc, can vary according to the nation

and branch [army, navy or air forcel), and catalogues and updates the data

on NATO and Warsaw Pact troops and unit status. The FDHA Task Force's organi-
zational links are shown in Figure 6. It meets twice a year for I week.

Data are updated at least annually and in some cases up to four times a

year. The NFPDB's key file is the catalogue of military units according

to their "primary function,“ independently of the branch to which they belong.
Contained here is the available information on the name, nationality, status
and garrison location of each unit, its troops, weaponry, equipment and
hierarchy, as well as all sorts of technical specifications as to the performance
and cost of its weaponry and equipment, all of this in accordance with the
following outline:

Unit:

-- Identification

Name
Number
Nationality

--0rgsnizational linkage:
Army, navy or air force

Degree of coordination
Subordination

54

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
--Status:
NATO Subordination
Force level
Level of preparedness

--Location:
Name
Nation
Geographic coordinates

--Troops:
Class
Number

Neaponry:

--Equipment stores
Class
Number

--Characteristics:
Technical data
Performance parameters

--Programs:
Research and development
Production

--Costs:
Research and development
Procurement
Maintenance

The following could be users of this data bank:

--The Defense Review Committee

--The Military Committee

--The NATO supreme commanders

--The Conference of NationalArmamentsDirectors
--The Defense Ministries of the member countries

To obtain access to the information, the users go to the NPPDB through the

"data bank administrator," who belongs to the Systems Analysis Section and

is responsible for safeguarding the security of the stored data, in accordance
with previously stipulated criteria. Respect for national sovereignty is
guaranteed because each country has control over the information concerning

it and over the use that can be made of it. The approval of the Defense

Review Committee is required to obtain combined information on several countries.

He should stress that the NPPDB is an automatic intelligence processing
system, not an information system for the tactical command. Its purpose
is to systematize data that might be of interest for planning, not to process

55

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

operational data for command purposes. The various NATO commands have more
or less complex systems of technical and command information, but none is
as sophisticated or automated as the NFPDB.

3.5 Consequences of Joint Planning

There is obviously no relationship between the number of units committed

to the NATO command and a country's economic and military capabilities. The
fact is that each nation has a different commitment, for quite different
reasons. Germany has all of the land units of its maneuvers army "assigned"
. to the NATO command, with only its territorial defense units under national
command. At theotherextreme, during Salazar's regime Portugal had only
one brigade"assisned"to NATO, and this was more theoretical than real,
inasmuch as it ignored its commitment to NATO when colonial wars required
the bulk of its Armed Forces. Portugal has now again agreed to assign one
brigade. The remaining European countries have committed varying levels
of forces, but not in relation to their total respective capabilities.

The Task Force at the Georgetown University Transatlantic Policy Center

has published a study called "Allied Interdependence" in which it emphasizes
that: "Europe provides most (of the forces available to NATO)...contributing
90 percent of the land forces, 80 percent of the naval forces and 75 percent
of the tactical air forces," even though the United States has an overall
military machine that is much larger than all of Europe's.

If there were any explanation for the level of forces that a country assigns
to NATO, it would be the greater or lesser extent to which it is in the
forefront of the European theater, plus its economic and military strength.
In any case, each nation is a case apart, and a wide range of economic and
political considerations, as well as location in a potential theater of
operations, influence these commitments. Ultimately, however, this is a
national decision.

Something similar could be said about the overall makeup of a nation's Armed
Forces. The organization of the Armed Forces into three branches (land,

sea and air) and a further breakdown into the various specialties (sections
and services) are the exclusive jurisdiction of each nation. Economics

are the main conditioning factor, though tradition and inherited situations,
which take time to adapt to the needs of the moment, also carry great weight.
Now then, if the organization, equipment and makeup of a nation's Armed
Forces are dependent on domestic defense policy, when a nation decides to
resolve its security problem not through isolation or neutrality but by
joining an alliance, the structure of its Armed Forces will unquestionably
tend to sccomodate itself to the missions that are assigned to them within
the alliance, and they will thus be able to devote less attention to tasks
that other members of the alliance handle for the group as a whole.

NATO has advocated and pushed for the specialization of defense efforts

in accordance with the tasks that are assigned to each nation in the joint
planning, and although there has been little progress in this regard, the

56
fact is that the Alliance, by its very existence, influences the security
decisions of each country. For example, the nuclear and naval arsenal of

the United States enables Germany to focus its defense resources on its

land army and on air support for these land forces, which does not mean

that each nation does not have to be concerned about potential threats to
national security other than a collective threat to the Alliance. A clear-cut
example of this was the fighting between Greece and Turkey, when the two

countries earmafied their defense efforts to respond to the threat posed
byeachother, though they are neighbors and allies.

With regard to the economic consequences of joint planning on the total
expenditures that each country allocates to defense, since national governments
and parliaments are ultimately the ones that decide on defense spending,

there is no reason to think that NATO tries to impose specific criteria

for defense spending percentages on the various member countries.

Let's take a look at the following list, which shows defense spending as

a percentage of the GNP. This percentage can be taken as_a simple and valid
indicator of a nation's defense effort, although we will later see that

when considered in isolation this indicator has major limitations:

Countrz(l) Defense Spending as a Percentage of GNP(2)
United States 6.0
Germany 3.4
France 3.6
Great Britain 5.0
Canada l.8
ltaly 2.4
Holland 3.6
Belgium 3.4
Turkey 5.7
Denmark 2.5
Norway 3.)
Greece 5.0
Portugal 3.5
Luxembourg 1.1
Iceland 0.0

(I) In order of largest to smallest GNP
(2) According to l978-79 Military Balance Sheet of the London Institute
of Strategic Studies

The above figures clearly show the differences in defense spending among NATO
nations, due to each allied nation's independence in determining its own
defense effort. Nevertheless, although NATO cannot try to impose criteria
for this effort, membership does require some degree of accomodation or at
least attention to NATO criteria in determining national defense budgets.

Thus, the countries that have tended to reduce their defense spending as
a percentage of the GNP have been pressured by NATO authorities not to.
In its "Defense Nhite Book" of 1977 Great Britain announced a 200 million

57

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

cut because of its economic situation. This prompted a letter from the
NATO secretary general, Luns, to the British defense minister, in which

he stated that the latest indicators pointed to a recovery of the British
economy, adding: "Therefore, it is essential not only to bring the defense
sector up to the levels set for Great Britain in the (NATO-conducted) defense
review, but also to reallocate the funds of which it has been deprived,
excessively in our judgment, for economic purposes. The United Kingdom,
which has cut its defense spending in real terms year after year, should
again undertake the positive policy that it pursued in the past to take
part in the effort required by the allies, in View of the activities of
the Varsaw Pact."

Although the British Defense Ministry's response argued that the country still
earmarked almost five percent of its GNP to defense, which was "clearly
higher than the average of the European members of the Alliance," in 1978

the British Government announced that defense budgets for the 1979-80 and
l980-8I fiscal years would be increased three percent in real terms. Hr Luns
then stated that this move "was regarded by the allies as a positive reaction
to the appeal issued in the 1977 NATO Ministerial Directive calling for

such increases."

As of 1975 Italy also informed NATO of its plans to reduce its troop strength
for economic reasons, albeit under a modernization program in which the

cut in troops would make possible better equipment for the units. This
prompted the Organization to express its concern over the Italian plan,
inasmuch as its 2.6 percent of the GNP earmarked for defense was already

one of the lowest in the Alliance. Italy later stated that in order to

meet its commitments to NATO, it had requested special credits totaling
more than 3 billion liras and that. in addition, starting with the 1976
budget, the benefits paid to veterans, which were being raised by an average
of 500 million liras, had been transferred to the Treasury, which would

make extra funds available for the national defense budget.

Denmark, which by law has a h-year budget planning system, set its defense
budget at the equivalent of 2.6 percent of its GNP for the 1976-1980 period.
Three days after the budget had been passed, Nr Luna wrote to Denmark's
defense minister that the budget was not "what NATO had hoped for nor what
it judged necessary." He also referred to the goals set forth in the NATO
defense review, according to which "in order for Denmark to achieve these
goals, it had to boost its defense spending by about three percent a year

in real terms."

In addition, Canada has begun an ambitious program to reoutfit and modernize
its forces, and according to the defense director in the Foreign Affairs
Department, this initiative is in response to the pressures by the European
members of NATO, although he concedes that at the same time it is an attempt
to ease the mounting discontent in Canadian military circles.

58

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Therefore, we can state that in spite of the wide range of percentage defense
spending and the autonomy of each country to determine it, the environment

in NATO is one in which nations justify their spending and respond to criticism
by NATO authorities when their defense effort is not in keeping with the

goals set forth in the NATO review.

NATO countries recently agreed for the first time to boost annual defense
budgets by about three percent in real terms during the I979-l986 period.
This kind of agreement was proposed in I977 and adopted in I978, although
there is an additional provision that states that "economic circumstances
will influence the chances of reaching the agreed upon three percent." We
should emphasize that the various members were not being asked to boost

their defense spending in a bid to achieve equilibrium in their respective
defense burdens; they were simply being asked to approve a percentage increase
in the spending level that they had freely decided on. According to official
NATO sources, the defense budgets submitted in early I979 for analysis by
NATO showed that six countries were meeting the three percent goal; they

were West Germany, Belgium, Norway, Luxembourg, Great Britain and the United
States.

In I980, only two countries kept up the agreed upon three percent boost.
Germany, which was planning an increase of just I.5 percent, had to listen

to the complaints not of NATO authorities but of the 0.8. Government, given
Germany's leading role in the Alliance. This prompted a trip to Washington

by the German defense minister, Hans Apel, to explain to his American counter-
part, Harold Brown, Germany's reasons for not meeting the goal. The Reagan
Administration has been quick to point out that in view of the prevailing
economic crisis, it would not be a good idea to pressure countries into

agreed upon three percent boost, but at the Hay I98l meeting of the Defense
Planning Committee it managed to have the commitment maintained.

Based on statistics from the 0.8. Arms Control and Disarmament Agency (ACDA),

the aforementioned study by the University of Georgetown, entitled "Allied
Interdependence," has analyzed the NATO defense effort. The following paragraphs
from the study are of interest to us: "The ratio of the CNP's of the two

regions, North America (United States and Canada) on the one hand, and Europe

on the other, is 56 to 64 percent." With this ratio in mind, the study

goes on to say: "The ACDA data also show the proportion of European and

North American defense spending in I976, in constant I975 dollars:

North America, $89 billion (6] percent of NATO)
Europe, $56.5 billion (39 percent of NATO)

"Although it has been thought that Europe does not contribute its share

in allied defense spending, the fact is that it has increased its share
considerably over the past decade, from 7I/29 in I968-69 to 61/39 in I976.
Today, military spending in Europe is just 5 percentage points below the
Sb/Ab ratio that reflects the respective GNP's."

59

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

We have cited these paragraphs because they clearly show how, even though

the contributions to the common defense are nationally determined and vary
widely among the member countries, the United States is moving more and

more towards economic grounds in the search for an equitable apportionment

of the burdens, at least in the above regional aspect. Also, although the
principle of national sovereignty that prevails in commitments to the Alliance
prevents it from imposing common criteria or a specific proportionality

in contributions, there is increasing talk in the Alliance of an equitable
apportionment of cost burdens, and in justifying the apportionment, economic
arguments are advanced.

in conclusion, the complex procedure for joint NATO planning, which is designed
to determine the forces needed to assure the defense of the Alliance and

to channel national defense efforts towards the interests of common defense,
manages at least to closely coordinate the Alliance's military authorities

and International Secretariat with the representatives of the countries
involved. As we mentioned previously, this gives rise to frequent exchanges
and multilateral consultation, in which the defense efforts of the various
member countries are compared, taking into consideration their different
characteristics and economic situations and any other political and structural
factors that would be pertinent in seeking an equitable apportionment of
contributions. One of the main accomplishments of common defense planning

has been to make it obvious over the years what is desirable and what is
feasible. Moreover, it has promoted the systematic exchange of specific,
detailed information on the military programs of the various countries,

thus clarifying their economic potential and facilitating an understanding

of common problems and difficulties and a critical examination of their
respective programs.

There is no lack of those who criticize the system for not having achieved
actual results commensurate with its complexity. He must recognize, however,
that for the first time in history a group of free and sovereign nations

have agreed to submit their defense programs to a critical examination by
their allies. This multinational review at the very least brings strong
moral pressure on them to cooperate in the common defense effort, even though
the ultimate decision to follow the recommendationsthat stem from the joint
planning is up to the appropriate authorities (governments and parliaments)

in the countries that have chosen on their own to participate in the Alliance.

4. Analysis of Spain's Defense Effort Within the Context of NATO

There are many valid indicators in assessing a country's military might,

such as statistics on troop strength, available ordnance (number of guns,
tanks, aircraft, warships, nuclear weapons and their delivery vehicles,

etc), facilities and military bases, active and reserve troops, the industrial
capacity to produce combat materiel, etc. To these can be added other,
nonquantifiable factors, such as the quality of the ordnance, geographic

and strategic factors,.the level of unit training and even the moral values
and motivations of a combatant, which a military command values so highly

in assessing a unit's capacity.

60
But if we wish to analyze a nation's defense effort so as to compare it
with that of others or to determine the combined defense effort of allied
countries so dbﬂto compare it with the offensive might of another bloc,
then we have to find sufficiently representative numbers that can Iucidly
summarize an overall defense capability.

How can a country's financial effort towards defense be gauged? Defense
spending is unquestionably the basic macroeconomic magnitude in analyzing
such an effort. We will therefore devote special attention to this magnitude.

a.l Defense Spending. Problems of Quantification and Comparison with Other
Countries

A country's level of defense spending is reflected mainly in its defense
budget, but because different criteria are used in drafting defense budgets,
the numbers for different nations are hard to compare. The amount of defense
spending varies depending on whether or not certain categories are included
in it. Among the categories that are apt to be interpreted in various ways,
we will mention the cost of paramilitary forces, the pensions of Armed Forces
retirees and of civilian employees of the Armed Forces, military research

and development costs, military aid and assistance to other countries. civil
defense budget, etc.

In addition, an international comparison of defense expenditures quoted

in different currencies requires coversion to a common currency, which introduces
further difficulties, especially when dealing with countries with very different
economic systems.

A clear-cut example of the wide range in estimates of defense spending are
the marked differences in calculations of Soviet defense spending by various
sources. In I975, for example, they included:

Institution Billions of dollars

——

Stockholm International Peace

Research Institute 16 6|
"Soviet Defense Spending" 97 to I33
ACDA I19
CIA ‘20
International Institute of Strategic

Studies, London 124

In the case of the USSR and of the other countries of the Harsaw Pact, which
have centrally planned economies, an assessment is, of course, complicated
by its being based on prices and wages that are not determined freely in

the marketplace and because the official exchange rate of the ruble is not
valid for comparison purposes. Thus, for example, the CIA has estimated
Soviet defense spending at U.S. market prices, in order to obtain a basis
for comparison to American spending for defense.

61

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In studying the NATO countries and, in general, most of the OECD nations,
the problem is less complex because they have free market economies, and
most of them belong to the Hestern Horld, which means that the statistics
and estimates are more readily comparable.

5.2 Econometric Analysis of Defense Spending

As we mentioned previously, defense spending is usually accepted as the

main indicator of a country's defense effort, but the trend is not to consider
this figure as an absolute value but rather in relation to other economic
magnitudes. If we take the Gross National Product (or the Gross Domestic
Product) as the number that best represents a country's economic strength,
defense spending as a percentage of the GNP (or GDP) will be the relative
indicator we use. If we take the national budget as an indicator of the.
public sector's economic strength, then we use defense spending as a percentage
of this budget. Per capita defense spending is also used to indicate a
country's relative defense effort.

None of these indicators can be regarded as more representative than the
others, and looking at one in isolation can lead to different conclusions.
The following examples of the relative figures for Great Britain and Germany

in I976 should suffice:

Indicator Great Britain Germany
Defense spending as a percentage of

GNP 5.] 6.2
Defense spending as a percentage of

government spending ll.0 20.6
Per capita defense spending (in 0.5.

dollars) l90.0 242.0

Which of these figures is the best gauge of a defense effort? Each undoubtedly
reflects one facet of this effort. If the GNP is the best reflection of

a country's economic strength, then the percentage of it earmarked for defense
will be an accurate measure of the defense effort. But isn't the percentage

of its spending that a government allocates to defense a good indicator

too, and what about the average contribution to defense by each citizen?

The ratio of defense spending to the government's budget entails an addiitonal
difficulty that we must point out. As we know, a government's budget does
not include all public sector spending, and thus the conclusions that can

be drawn from this ratio might be of little meaning since the content of

a government's budget varies from one country to another. Spain is a good
example. Social Security funds are not part of the General State Budgets.
Nevertheless, these funds now exceed Ii trillion pesetaa, approaching the
amount of the overall State Budget. There are, moreover, autonomous agencies
that work with figures much higher than in the State Budget. For example,

the Spanish Agriculture Ministry had a budget in 1978 of 63 billion pesetaa,
whereas the autonomous agencies in the field of agriculture worked with

356.8 billion. Hence, the General State Budget for I978, which totaled

62

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
l.633 trillion pesetas, amounted to just “9.3 percent of the consolidated
budget of the Public Administrations, which came to 2.906 trillion pesetas.

This is the reason why experts come up with widely varying conclusions when
they use one or another relative figure as an indicator of a country's defense
effort. Econometric techniques enable us to analyze defense spending in

terms of several magnitudes simultaneously. This further enables us to

get around the limitations to which the above indicators are subject, in

that they merely state the relationship between defense spending and one

of the macroeconomic magnitudes.

The attempt todoa regression analysisofdefense spending as a function

of the main magnitudes that indicate a nation's economic strength and public
sector spending suffers from the major drawback that the variables in general
are closely correlated. This clear-cut problem of multicollinearity has

led some people who have tried to create a defense spending model based

on regression techniques to reduce the model to simple relations between
spending and a single potential variable.'7 Thus, they do not succeed in
comparing the defense effort of various countries by taking into consideration
different macroeconomic magnitudes simultaneously as variables in the defense
spending level. Moreover, if we wish to analyse quitea few variables together,
the size of the sample can be relatively small, which leaves few degreesof freedom
for econometric treatment.

One way to avoid the drawbacks of multicollinearity among variables and few de-
grees of fnndnmisto resort to a factor analysis of principal components.‘

We will employ this technique in our initial comparative study of various
countries because without prior consideration of the linear dependence of

the variables, it enables us to move on to orthogonal factors and at the

same time reduces the dimensionality of the reference space, thus increasing
the degrees of freedom.

0.2.1 A Sampling

Although this study concerns Spain'sprospective membership in NATO, our
attempts to compare Spain with the Organization's member countries have
indicated that very few of these countries offer macroeconomic characteristics
comparable, on the whole, to Spain's. It was thus advisable to initially
broaden the sample so that by bringing together a larger number of countries
with certain characteristics, we can, through factor analysis, determine
subgroups of related countries. He will thus be able to place Spain in

the proper group within a broader context than the NATO members.

Our initial analysis, therefore, is of all the OECD countries and the Harsaw
Pact nations, 3| in all. Once we have placed Spain within this grouping

of 3| countries, we will focus our econometric study on a limited sampling
of NATO member countries so as to compare Spain's defense effort with theirs
exclusively.

63

FOR OFIICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

6.2.2 Econometric Analysis of 3l-Country Sampling

The 3l-country sample of 0360 and Warsav Pact nations is as follows, in
alphabetical order:

. Australia

. Austria

. Belgium

. Bulgaria

. Canada

. Czechoslovakia

. Den-ark

. Finland

. France

IO. German Democratic Republic
II. Federal Republic of Germany

OQNOM§UN—

12. Greece

13. Hungary

Ia. Ireland

I5. Italy

l6. Japan

17. Luxenbourg
18. Holland

l9. New Zealand
20. Norway

2|. Poland

22. Portugal
23. Romania

2“. Soviet Union
25. Spain

26. Sweden

27. Switzerland
28. Turkey

29. United Kingdom
30. United States of America
3|. Yugoslavia

We have selected the following variables for our comparative study of these
countries:

xl- Per capita defense spending (PCDS)
X . Per capita GNP (PCGNP)
X - Per capita government spending (PCGS)

N

. Trade balance/population (TB/P)
- Labor force/population (LP/P)
X

oqu‘u

- Armed Forces strength/population (AF/P)

64

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
As we can see, in addition to the variable of defense spending as a measure

of the defense effort, we have included the GNP, which reflects a country's
economic strength and potential, as well as government spending, because

since the funds for defense come from the coffers of the Treasury, government
spending is another major variable in determining the capacity for a defense
effort. He have added "trade balance/population" because it illustrates
economic activity in a country and its strength in competition with others.
With regard to human factors, we will consider the labor force, which represents
a nation's potentially productive human resources (this being of unquestionable
economic significance), and overall Armed Forces strength as a complementary
indicator of the defense effort. All of these magnitudes are expressed

in relation to the total population, which is thus also included as a relative
factor in our econometric analysis.

As sources of data for this initial sample of 31 countries, we have used

the statistics from "World Military Expenditures and Arms Transfers l967-l976"

(a publication we have already mentioned by the 0.8. ACDA, dated July I978),

the OECD's "Labor Force Statistics 1965-1976" (dated I978) and the I978

"Yearbook of Labor Statistics" from the International Office of the International
Labor Organization. All of these statistics are recognised as reliable.

The year I976 has been taken as the period under study because all of our
data pertaining to it have been confirmed; the figures for the monetary
magnitudes are "current" for that year.

The figures for the aforementioned categories of statistics are from the
following sources. The defense spending of Atlantic Alliance countries is
based on the NATO definition; the estimates of the Soviet Union's military
spending are based on the studies by the 0.8. Congress and the CIA, which
calculate the detailed cost of Soviet forces, weapons programs and military
activities in U.S. market prices, which, as we mentioned before, can give
rise to not insignificant but hard to avoid errors; for the other members
of the Warsaw Pact we have used the studies of Thad P. Alton in "Defense
Expenditures in Eastern EurOpe I965-l976" as our main source, and for the
remaining countries what each has stated as its official defense budget
has been taken as its military spending.

The GNP rcpresentswhat citizens of the country have produced, regardless

of the country in which it is produced, and the value of the output of goods

and services is stated in the market price paid by the ultimate consumer.

The GNP‘s ofthecountries that do not belong to the Warsaw Pact come from

the (BRO. The GNP's of the Warsaw Pact nations come from the estimates in

the CIA publication "Handbook of Economic Statistics" and from the aforementioned
study by Thad P. Alton.

Government spending consists of the expenditures of the central government

of each country, including both overall capital and current expenditures

and not borrowing. Our main source in this regard is the Agency for International
Development (AID), complemented by data from the "UN Statistical Yearbook,

I976" and from the "Economic Reports of the OECD," in addition to Thad P.

Alton's study on the Warsaw Pact countries.

65

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The :rade balance represents the difference between exports and imports
of goods and services. For the noncommunist countries we have used the
statistics of the National Accounting System of the United Nations, as
published by the International Monetary Fund in "International Financial
Statistics. " The numbers for communist countries come from the "Handbook
of Economic Statistics," published by the CIA, which broaches the problem
of evaluating these balances in dollars.

Armed Forces strength comprises military personnel in active service

and the personnel of paramilitary forces whose organization, equipment,
training or mission are similar to those of military forces. Reservists
are not included.

The figures on total population and the labor force have been taken

from the aforementioned "Labor Force Statistics l965-l976" (0860) for

its member countries and from the ILO's "Yearbook of Labor Statistics"

for the Warsaw Pact nations. The labor force does not include, in

general, students, women engaged solely in homemaking activities, pensioners,
those who live on income from investments and persons who are completely
dependent on others. It does, however, include persons who are unemployed
but seeking gainful employment.

Based on these statistics, but without initially introducing variable X“
we have analyzed the main components of the sample and come up with

the results contained in Annex VI (first part), results that enable

us to draw the following conclusions:

Figure 7, from Annex V1, is a graph of axes F-l and P-2, which represent two
so-called " synthetic" variables, because each of them is a combination

of several of the variables that represent the various macroeconomic
magnitudes and the military strength under consideration (these magnitudes
are placed within rectangles in Figure 7 to differentiate them more

easily from the symbols of the countries).

We can deduce from this figure that the projections of the variables

xz-PCGNP and X3-PCGS are grouped very close to the extreme right of

the F-l axis near the circle drawn on Figure 7 with a radius equal

to unity. This enables us to say that the F-l axis represents the
synthetic variable "Gross National Product-Per Capita Government Spending."
hence, this factor can be regarded as representative of the' 'economic
strength" of a nation because it simultaneously reflects the influences
of national productivity and of the economic resources utilized by

the government.

In addition, straddling the F-2 axis and in its upper portion, though
not as close to the axis but near the circle with radius equal to unity, are

the projections of the variables X,8 PCDS and Xs-LF/P. He can thus assume

that this factor represents the synthetic variable "per capita defense
effort," inasmuch as it reflects the influence of a country's defense
spending and troop strength.

66

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02109: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500060025-3

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In. at maul“ 0" to Null I" “I an I I! I

u...nos-"u”.......--.....o....u.-...-.~~..-.—...uun.——..-W ......

m l noun-nu ul I nnuu.

-
n
I
I.
'-
I.
O.
O
O
0
O
O
l
O
O
I
O
O
O
‘-
I.
O-
D.
0.
I.
0.
'o
C.
O
I.
‘.

o
Odo-o.

 

"6'34 9

67
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/00: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500080025-3

The projection of the variable X I LF/P near the intersection of the
two axes indicates that there is little correlation between the labor
force and the above two factors.

We can see in Figure 7 how the countries with strong economies are
situated astride the right tip of the horizontal axis (synthetic variable
F-l). The countries with a larger "defense effort" are located more
towards the upper part of the graph (represented by the synthetic variable
F-Z or vertical axis), while the countries marked by a smaller defense
effort are more towards the lower part. Towards the left tip of the
horizontal axis are the countries with lessstrongeconomies, in their
relative positions; the significance of this with respect to the synthetic
variable "defense effort" is similar to what we stated for the P-Z axis.

in interpreting the graph, we must bear in mind that the variable "economic
strength" is influenced by the PCCNP and the P065 and that the variable
"defense effort" reflects the influence not only of "per capita defense
spending" but also the influence of total troop strength in relation

to total population. He should also remember that the projections

on the multidimensional graph of the points that represent the variables

and countries are more reliable the closer they are to the circumference with
rsdiusequsltounity’while the farther away the projections are. the

more distorted they are.

One of the interesting possibilities in this analysis is to group together
the countries under study by virtue of their affinity in terms of the
variables under consideration. We have employed the following procedure.
First we make a random selection of four countries. Then, within the
multidimensional space we proceed to calculate the distances of each

of these four with respect to the others, grouping together the countries
that are the least far removed from the four initially chosen at random.
Once these four groups have been determined, we calculate the center

of gravity of each group and then establish four new groups consisting

of the countries that are at the smallest distance from each center

of gravity. We then once again find the centers of gravity of the

four new groups and once more form groups using the same criterion

of minimum distance from these other centers of gravity (each of these
three phases is enhanced with three successive repeats). Thus, we have
grouped 3| countries in "classes" and determined the "class" of countries
that have, on the whole, the characteristics that are most comparable

to Spain's. This group consists of the following nine countries:

--Bulgaria
--Grooce
--Czechoslovakia
--Poland
--ﬂungsry
--Romania
--Yuguslavia
--Spain

--Turkcy

69

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0F?ICIAL USE ONLY

Figure 8 shows these nine countries plotted around axes F-l and F-2. Appearing
1n Annex VI (part two), it was derived from the computer printout called
"Division of 3| Individuals characterized by Six Cartesian Coordinates.

He should point out that of these nine countries, the four that belong

to the 0800, Greece, Yugoslavia, Spain and Turkey, are precisely the

ones excluded from the category "developed" according to the classification
of the OECD’s EconomicAidCommittee, which includes these four in the
"developing” class.

He thus see that when we analyze Spain's defense effort in relation

to its economic capabilities and in comparison to other countries,

it has to be compared, within the context of NATO, mainly to Greece

and Turkey, the only countries that belong to NATO among the nine nations
that we have found to have similar overall characteristics. The rest

of the NATO countries are in a different realm of capabilities, and

not even Italy ought to be used as primary reference term in the event
that in its joint forces planning NATO tries to compare Spain’ s defense
spending with that of the other member countries of the Alliance.

4.2.3 Econometric Analysis Based on NATO Countries

We have excluded the United States and Canada from the analysis of

just the NATO countries. The United States is a superpower with worldwide
responsibilities, which forces it to maintain a level of military strength
that far exceeds the rest of the allied nations of NATO. Canada has

also been excluded from this sample because it takes a highly individual
approach to its security problem, an approach largely derived from

its unusual situation on the North American continent, and this has
resulted in a unique kind of Armed Forces. The advantage of excluding
Canada and the United States is that the remaining countries of the
Atlantic Alliance are all European; thus, the study on this second

sample will be genuinely European. Since Iceland does not maintain

Armed Forces, the sample will be of l2 NATO countries, plus Spain when
deemed appropriate for comparison purposes.

The l2 countries are:

I. Hest Germany 7. Holland

2. Belgium 8. Italy

3. Denmark 9. Luxembourg
4. France 10. Norway

5. Great Britain ll. Portugal
6. Greece 12. Turkey

Our previous analysis was of a 3l-country sample, and it served as
an initial general approach for orientation purposes. This sample
of 12 countries, limited to the members of NATO for comparison with
Spain as a prospective member, will be analyzed more deeply than the
previous one. Thus, we will examine in detail the variables to be
included in the study and, based on the previous variables, further

70

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
describe the ones that we have chosen and the reasons why, our reference
being the economic indicators used by the NATO Defense Review Committee
for its 5-year force planning.

Defense Spending According to NATO's Definition

To allow for a comparative analysis of the military or defense expenditures
of the NATO member countries, the Organization has adopted a common
definition of "defense spending" to obviate the aforementioned drawback

of discrepancies in the content of each country's defense budget.

NATO's specific definition and classification of defense spending could

not be furnished to the author of this study because they are confidential

and access to then is authorized only for those who belong to the Organisation.
He can, however, ascertain the main principles of this definition.

The "General Report on Economic Aspects of Atlantic Security," published ‘9

in November I978 by the Economic Committee of the North Atlantic Assembly,
contains the following standard definition of "defense spending" for

the NATO countries:

"National military expenditures are the current and capital expenditures

to meet Armed Forces needs. They include military aid to other countries
and the military components of nuclear, space, and research and development
programs." The report adds: "In traditional accounting systems, national
military budgets customarily exclude expenditures in the form of veterans
benefits, interest on war debts, civil defense and industrial stockpiling
for strategic purposes. The addition of these categories to regular

defense budgets would greatly increase total annual government spending

of a military nature, but sufficient information is not currently available
to accurately determine to what extent these costs have an impact on

the spending of various countries and their worldwide total. There

are also sizable off-budget social expenditures; thus, personnel expenditures
are undervalued because of the existence of a national service, and

military hardware enjoys tax exemptions. Since the military budget
accounting systems of different countries are not the same, adjustments

must be made to adapt national figures to the standard concept." This
paragraph does not attempt a precise classification, and we have transcribed
it because it illustrates the difficulty of applying a general definition

to the vnriOus member countries.

According to the report "World Military Expenditures and Arms Transfers
l967-l976" by the Arms Control and Disarmament Agency, the NATO definition
of "defense spending“ is governed by the following criteria:

--It includes military expenditures contained in the budgets of other
ministries.

--lt excludes civil expenditures contained in the budget of the Defense
Ministry.

--It includes military aid grants, which are added to the defense spending
of the country that awards them.

71

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0F?ICIAL USE ONLY

--Credit purchases of military hardware are entered in the books in
the year in which the debt is contracted, not in which payment will
be made.

In light of these criteria and of the additional information that the
author has obtained, we should specify regarding NATO accounting of
defense spending that:

--The following items should be added to defense budgets, even though
they are contained in the budgets of other ministries:

-Budgets of paramilitary forces, as long as they are not exclusively
police forces and if by their organization, equipment, training and status
they are designed for, in addition to peacetime police missions, tactical
use in the event of war in a manner similar to military units.

-Pcnsions of retirees, both retired military personnel and civilian employees
of the military. There are countries in which a percentage of these

pensions come from employee contributions, which are deducted from

their wages and salaries. This percentage is not included in total

defense spending. In the United States, for example, employees contribute

30 percent of the pension fund, and therefore only the remaining 70

percent can be included as defense spending.

-Expenditures for research in a specific field of military hardware
that are included in other budgets.

-Expenditures for military services that were regularly rendered by
civilian groups or agencies.

-Bxpenditures for participation in NATO. These expenditures involve

mainly the net outlays for contributions to the common infrgstructure

and the contributions to finance NATO's military structure. There
isnouniform yardstick for gauging each country's contribution to the
operations of the civil portion of NATO's structure, but such contributions
are but a small percentage of the two previous items. In the United

States the civil portion is not explicitly included in the assessment

of defense spending, according to the NATO definition. In Belgium

on the other hand, the item that appears in the Foreign Affairs budget

as “expenses of participation in NATO" is added to defense spending.

--Tho following items should be excluded if they appear in defense
budgets:

-0utlays for civil defense and other civil services regularly rendered
by groups and agencies included in a Defense Department, as well
as the cost of public works constructed with military equipment.

-Pensions for former combatants and war veterans and war indemnities.

72

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
In any case, defense spending in NATO is calculated on the basis of
actual expenditures, not budgeted or programmed allocations.

In accordance with the above criteria, major differences arise between
the national budget of a Defense Department and the NATO estimate of
defense spending. In Belgium, for example, the Defense Ministry's
I976 budget was 59.2!5 million Belgian francs, whereas NATO's estimate
of its defense spending totaled 79.445 million. In other words, its
defense budget was just 74.5 percent of its defense spending according
to the NATO definition. It is 96 percent in the United States.

We should not assume. however, that because there is a NATO definition
of "defense spending" countries tend to channel their defense budgets
according to that definition. Nothing could be further from the truth.
Each country determines its defense budget according to its own criteria;
for example, as we mentioned before, Italy recently transferred veterans
pensions from the defense budget to the Treasury budget, contrary to
NATO's defense spending criterion, because this was in the interest

of its budget policy.

Other Variables Included in the Analysis
In addition to defense spending, we will consider the following variables:
Gross Domestic Product (GDP)

The statistics of international organizations often use the Gross Domestic
Product instead of the Gross National Product. The GNP measures what
citizens of the country in question produce, regardless of where it

is produced. The GDP measures what those living in the country produce,
independent of their nationality. In general, the GDP is a more accurate
gauge of economic activity than the GNP in the countries in which there

is major foreign investment and dependency. There are extreme cases

in which the GNP of a country is more than 30 percent higher than its

GDP, and vice-versa. This is not the case with the economies of Western
Europe. in which, in general, the remittances of multinational corporations
to their home offices are limited; thus, a major percentage of their
profits remains in the country of residence. As far as the specific
countries in our sample are concerned, the differencesbetweenthe GNP

and GDP are very slight, as we can see from the following list:

Country GNP(|) GDP(I) GNP/GDP
Germany 467.7 445.9 |.05
Belgium 68.3 65.9 l.09
Denmark 38.9 38.5 I.OI
France 37l.0 346.8 l.O7
Great Britain 242.6 2l9.2 l.ll
Greece 23.7 22.0 1.08
Holland 96.3 89.5 l.08
Italy l83.6 170.8 l.07
73

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

LuXembourg 2.3 2.2 |.05
Norway 30.8 31.3 0.98
Portugal 17.0 15.7 1.08
Turkey “1.5 41.] 1.01

(1) Figures for I976 in billions of dollars at current prices and exchange
rates.

In this study, which is limited to the NATO countries and Spain, we
will use the GDP, because this is the usual magnitude in OBCD statistics
and, therefore, in NATO statistics.

Although the GDP is regarded as a very representative gauge of general
economic activity, there are drawbacks to using it as the main magnitude
in comparing defense spending. In the first place, the GDP is a much
larger figure than defense spending. For example, in NATO defense
spending averages 3.3 percent of GDP. He can thus deduce that a major
shift in military spending in absolute terms would have very little
impact in relation to the much larger GDP. Moreover, much of the GDP
comes from sectors that have little or no involvement with defense
spending, inasmuch as a sizable portion of the GDP goes to providing
subsistence for the population or, in general, to private consumption
and has practically nothing to do with defense spending. Therefore,

we feel that it is appropriate to break down the GDP into its component
magnitudes and select the ones that could be of specific interest for
our study, such as, for example, gross capital formation or government
spending, which are more directly related either to boosting a nation's
economic strength or to defense spending. Hence, these variables will
be considered separately and introduced simultaneously with the GDP
into the model so that their influence is specifically felt in the
analysis of the principal components.

There is no drawback to simultaneously considering variables that could
turn out to be "redundant," because as Dr Miguel Sanchez Garcia says

in his book "Statistical Models Applied to Data Processing," "Hhenever

we wish to obtain information on a subject and we do not know the variables
that we must observe to obtain the information and we wish to eliminate
the redundant variables, we can apply the mathematical model of principal
components to help us." A factor analysis of principal components enables
us to include a series of variables thatweknow might be redundant,
inasmuch as the main components will contain the synthetic variables

that carry the greatest weight in the phenomenon under study, when

we plot the main right-angle axes in the multidimensional space formed

by all the variables under consideration, regardless of the relationship
between these variables.

Gross Capital Formation

In our breakdown of GDP variables we will first mention gross capital
formation (60?), which can be included separately as a variable with
particular significance for a nation's economic strength.

76

FOR OFPICIAL USE ONLY
He should point out that GCF does not include the outlays

by governments for durable goods essentially earmarked for military
purposes. Defense in general is classified as a consumption expenditure
for the purposes of national accounting, as funds taken out of public
savings and, therefore, outof GGP financing. It is for this reason

that these funds are included in the purchases of goods and services

by government. This principle is common to the 0300's National Accounting
System, the EEC's European Integrated Accounts System (SEC) and Spain's
National Accounting System. This principle does not take into consideration,
however, that heavy defense spending could be an engine of economic

growth and a technological stimulus, not to mention the security umbrella
that it provides for the normal pursuit of national activities. 0

Government Revenue

Another variable we will consider is government revenue, which makes

up part of the economic resources available to the public sector in

the form of direct and indirect taxes and Social Security contributions.
We will include only current, not capital revenues.

Current Government Expenditures on Goods and Services

with government funds already included in the variable "government
revenue," we will define that part of government spending that has
the most direct impact on defense spending. Hence, we will subdivide
government spending into:

--Current expenditures
--Capital expenditures

Since "direct public investment" is a major component of capital expenditures
(up to three-fourths of the total) and since it is included in gross

capital formation, which is treated separately as a variable, in our
breakdown of government spending we can leave out public sector capital
outlays and include only current expenditures.

Furthermore, we can break down current government expenditures into:

--Current outlays for goods and services
--Current transfers

"Current outlays for goods and services" include the remunerations
ofcivil servants and the purchases of goods and services, which as

we said in discussing gross capital formation, comprise the acquisition

of durable goods for military purposes. Under the OBCD's National
AccOunting System, government "current transfers" include current transfer
payments proper and social benefits, such as the major item of Social
Security benefits.

75

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of these two main components (current expenditures for goods and services"
and "current transfers"), the latter has less to do with defense spending,
except for military pensions. He will thus use current expenditures

for goods and services as our specific variable, because as we have
explained, this heading comprises the pay of military personnel and
investments for military purposes.

Trade Balance and Arms Transfer Balance

He are including the balance of trade (or the difference between exports
and imports of goods and services) as another variable reflecting a
country's economic activity and its competitiveness with the other
c0untries under study. We are also considering the arms transfer balance
(the difference between exports and imports of weaponry and military
hardware in general). This variable shows another facet of a military
industry's strength by indicating its potential to export military
hardware after meeting domestic needs or, on the contrary, the need

to import arms to meet the military's demand. since imports and exports
of weapons in a single year might be far from representative, inasmuch
as isolated shipments in a given year could generate major distortions
in relation to the normal trend in the arms transfer balance, we will
use a 5-year average stated in constant 1976 prices.

Labor Force, Military Troop Strength and Total Population

As in the 3I-country study, the human factor will be introduced in

two facets, economic strength as a function of the labor force and

military strength (our variable here being total Armed Forces troop
strength). The total population is taken into account because all

of these variables are expressed in relation to it.

Therefore, the following variables will be subjected simultaneously
to a factor analysis of principal components:

Xl- Per capita defense spending (PCDS)

x - Per capita cop (scoop)
x

xi.
y

- Per capita gross capital formation (PCCCF)

I'l’er capita government revenue (PCGR)

- Per capita government current expenditures on goods and services
(PCGCE)

x . Trade balance/population (TB/P)

X

X

X

2
3
5

. Arms transfer balance/population (ATE/P)
3 Labor force/population (LP/P)
- Armed Forces strength/population (AF/P)

\DQNO‘

76
These economic indicators are similar to the ones that we discussed

in outlining NATO's "5-year planning" in Section 3.2. He said then

that they were taken into account by the Defense Review Comittee in
drafting the proposed "Ministerial Guidance? basedonwhich the Defense
Planning Committee sets its "Force Goal" in the form of "recommendations"
to the governments of the allied countries for developing their national
defense plans over the 5 ensuing years and as firm commitments by each

country for the lat of the 5 years in question.
Statistics

Our source of data for the defense spending of the NATO countries is

the Military Balance Sheet of the London Institute of Strategic Studies,
which lists the figures according to the NATO definition of defense

spending. The statistics in the Military Balance Sheet have been challenged
at times because this publication has often subordinated accuracy to

the primary goal of furnishing up-to-date information, even if it has

to be based on estimates and approximations. Nevertheless, the amounts

of the I976 NATO-defined defense spending under study herearebased

on data furnished by the NATO countries, which corroborates their statistical
validity.

For the GDP, GOP and "government current expenditures for goods and
services," we will use the statistics in theOBCD Economic Reports for
I978 and I979, which provide confirmed figures for I976, whereas some
of the amounts for I977 are still estimates or extrapolations. He will
thus use I976 as our reference period. At present, the countries of

the EECemploythe European System of Integrated Current Accounts (SEC),
which differs in some respects from the OBCD's National Accounts System.
Greece has begun using the SEC system for its national accounting,

as have Spain and Portugal, but as of I976, the year under study, there
were not included in the pertinent publications.

In any case, the magnitudes that we will be handling here are not affected
to any great extent by whatever system we apply. If there are any
differences, which would be mainly in the public sector, they are of
little consequence for the purposes of this study.

The trade balance numbers have been obtained from the United Nations

National Accounting System, as published in the IMF's "International

Financial Statistics.“ Arms transfers refer to the exports and imports

of so-called conventional weaponry and other hardware produced by defense
industries. They do not include nuclear, chemical and biological weapons.
The figures cited here are estimates by the U.S. Arms Control and Disarmament
Agency, based on official 0.8. Government sources.

For the figures on labor force and total population we have also turned
to the aforementioned Economic Reports of the OECD. The military troop
strength numbers are from the I978-79 Military Balance Sheet and comprise
regular troops, volunteers and draftees; they do not include reservists
or paramilitary forces. The latter are regarded as forces that by

77

FOR 0F?ICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE OIL!

virtue of their equipment and training go beyond what is required for
civil police tasks and possess an organization, command and control
that indicate that they could be employed in support or instead of
regular forces.

The institutions from which these statistics have been obtained are
acknowledged as reliable, but their sources of information are often

the governments of the countries in question. Hence, the usefulness

of the numbers we are using depends a great deal on the credibility

of the respective national statistics. 0f the 12 countries in our
sample, 9 are members of the BBC and are subject to the requirements

of the Statistics Office of the European Communities (Burostat). Eight
of them, Greece excepted, have experience-with the SEC accounting system,
to which they adapted their national systems years ago. Thus, their
statistics should be quite dependable. 0f the three remaining countries
(Norway, Portugal and Turkey), Norway can also be considered as keeping
reliable statistics. Therefore, only 3 of the 12 countries, Greece,
Portugal and Turkey, must be regarded as having as yet insufficiently
developed and, hence, only partially valid statistics. Consequently,
adequate statistical information predominates, which on the whole is
acceptable for an econometric analysis.

Data on Spain

Our sample is composed entirely of NATO countries. Data on Spain have

not been included in ascertaining the main components for the 12 NATO
countries so that the findings of this factor analysis pertain exclusively
to magnitudes for the countries that currently belong to the Alliance.

In order to conduct the study comparing Spain with these countries,
however, we have included data on Spain in the analysis section as
supplementary observations. For the purposes of this direct comparison

of Spain's magnitudes and those of the NATO countries, we have looked

up the data on Spain in direct statistical sources and through confirmed
observations.

Host of the information on the variables under study for the year I976
has been obtained from "National Accounting of Spain base 1970, Years
I96A-l976," published by the National Statistics Institute, complemented
by the reports of the OECD. He have sought out other appropriate sources
for the military data. The figures on total Armed Forces troop strength
are from the work entitled "Economic Analysis of Defense Spending,"
contained in the atvxs-ra anemones of October I979.21 Given the
difficulty of securing direct Spanish sources, the figures on arms
transfer balance and military hardware have been obtained, as for the

l2 countries in our sample, from the publication "ﬂorid Military Expenditures
and Arms Transfers I967-l976," which we have already cited and which
offers statistics that are acknowledged to be reliable. Knowledgeable
Spanish sources have told the author that the figures for Spain are
sufficiently valid.

78

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
We have devoted special attention to estimating Spain's defense spending,
as outlined below.

Estimate of Spain's Defense Spending According to the NATO Definition

This magnitude for 1976, the year that concerns us in this analysis,
can be estimated quite accurately as follows:

Our base figure is the Spanish Defense Budget in I976, which is the
sum of the budgets of the three branches.

 

 

Branch Billions of Pesetas
Army 66.977
Navy 26.686
Air Force 3|.07l
Total l2b.SBb

(This tally of the three branches’ budgets has been included since

I978 in Section Ia, which pertains to the new Defense Ministry and

contains the budgets for each branch and an allocation for the central agency
of the ministry.)

In accordance with the NATO definition, the following adjustments
have to be made on this base figure:

a) Necessary additions:

I. Money for military pensions, budgeted in the Pensioners Section.

This totaled 24.563 billion pesetas in I976, less the amount of pension
taxes, which we have estimated at about 750 million, taking into account
that the veterans of the last civil war are exempt from these taxes.
Thus, 23.813 billion pesetas should be added in.

To this amount we should subtract the pensions of paramilitary forces,
which according to Section 2 below should not be entered in the books
asdefensespending. The current Spanish budget, however, does not
permit a breakdown of pensions for the Civil Guard and the National
Police. since we do not have sufficient data and since it is a much
smaller figure anyway, we are not adding in the pensions of retired
civilians who served in the military; we would also have to subtract
from it the payments of pension taxes.

2. The paramilitary forces whose budgets should be included in defense
spending according to the NATO definition are, as we mentioned before,
the forces whose organization, equipment, training and subordination
are geared towards their tactical use as military units in the event
of war.

79

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Are there such forces in Spain?

The NATO country whose security forces are most like Spain's is Italy.
There are, however, substantial differences, which we will now look
into because they are key elements in deciding which Spanish security
forces ought to be regarded as components of defense spending.

Italy's security forces consist mainly of the following armed institutions:

--"Carabinieri" (troop strength-84,000)
--"Guardia di Pubblica Sicuressa” [Public Security Guard] (troop strength-70,000)
--"Guardia di Finansa"[FinanceGuard] (troop strength-62,000)

We do not feel that it is correct to simply equate the Civil Guard
with the Carabinieri and the National Police with the Public Security
Guard, as has often been done. In both instances, the Italian forces
show a higher degree of "militarization" than the supposedly equivalent
Spanish forces.

The Carabinieri are much more closely linked to the Italian Defense
Hinistry than the Civil Guard Corps is to the Spanish Armed Forces.

The Carabinieri are budgeted as an organization under the Italian Defense
Ministry, and their forces constitute a formal "branch," officially
regarded as the first among the "branches" of the Armed Forces.

For use in the event of wartime operations, the Carabinieri have hardware
such as a mechanized brigade (with armored vehicles, including the

type of tanks that the Spanish Army has, and with some of their troops
consisting of reinforcements) and a battalion of paratroopers from

the Army Paratroopers Brigade. It has a "staff." composed of its commanders,
most of them holding diplomas from the Italian Armed Forces War School,

and it has commands and units attached to the commanders in chief of

the military and air regions and of the maritime departments, as well

as to the various NATO headquarters.

The Civil Guard possesses none of these features. It is regarded in
the Armed Forces as a corps, not a combat branch, and it has only light
weapons and vehicles. No unit of the Spanish Armed Forces has a combat
unit of the Civil Guard as one of its components. This corps lacks

its own staff; the one that it has is made up of army commanders and
officers. Members of the Civil Guard cannot even take specific army
courses in working towards a staff diploma or other higher Armed Forces
degrees. The Civil Guard is never attached to a headquarters as a
military unit, solely in a police or security role.

The Civil Guard and the Carabinieri are similar in that their academy-
graduated officers begin their careers with 2 years in the General
Military Academy and then continue in the academy of their specialty.

The Carabinieri branch has the following civil missions:

80

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
--Enforcing the laws of the State (regions, provinces and municipalities)
pertaining to the security, morality and health of the individual and

of society.

--Haintaining the public order

--Judicial police functions

--Aid to towns and individuals in the event of natural disasters or
accidents of any kind

Under current Italian law, however, its military functions take precedence:

--The exclusive military police within the Armed Forces
--Judicial police within the jurisdiction of the military
--Involvement in Armed Forces mobilization operations
--lnvolvement in wartime military operations
--lntelligence service

--ﬂonor and security guards

--Garrison and courier services

The Civil Guard can be considered a corps that is less integrated into
the Armed Forces than the Carabinieri and that has an organization
less geared towards the use of tactical units in wartime.

Royal Decree 2,723 of November I977, which established the organization
and functions of the new Spanish Defense Hiniatry, stipulates that

the Civil Guard Corps is organizationally subordinate to the defense
minister but still comes under the interior minister (presumably in
connection with security services in peacetime). Although the Civil
Guard's military functions are not specified, as are the Carabinieri's,
the spirit of the civil Guard's Military Regulations is that in the
event of war it would be utilized in a military campaign to perform
police or security services commensurate with its particular mission,
whereas its involvement in combat action against the enemy would be
regarded as an exception.22

As far as the Italian Public Security Guard is concerned, it must also

be considered a more militarized body than the National Police. In

a way it is closer to the Civil Guard than to the successive stages of
Spain's government police (Assault Guard, Armed Police and national Police).
Initially. the Public Security Guard, like the Civil Guard, came under

the Interior Ministry, but its organization, discipline, uniformity

and ranks were military, and it even used some draftees to fill its

ranks.

It has heavy ordnance such as aircraft, helicopters, automatic machine
guns, mortars and military engineering equipment. Its officers are
trained at a special academy in a program similar to the Armed Forces'
(though they do not attend the General Military Academy), and they

have access to the Italian Har School. Its units receive periods of
instruction at camps designed mainly to train them for potential action
in "nonconventional" war, which differentiates them from Spain's National

81

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Police, whose involvement in war operations or for military purposes
as a tactical unit is not envisaged in any official legal provision
or code of use.

In addition to its regular police and public order functions, the Italian
Public Security Guard has transit, railway and border police missions,
which in Spain are performed by the Civil Guard.

There is currently a definite trend, similar in a way to with the National
Police, towards emphasizing the police nature of the Public Security
Guard and downplaying its military status.

We will point out, in conclusion, that although the Finance Guard is a branch
of the Finance Ministry, it is under the command of an army lieutenant
general. ln addition to its primary mission of preventing, seeking

out and reporting violations of fiscal laws, it cooperates in maintaining

law and order, takes part in military missions to monitor and safeguard

the country's borders, participates in military operations with organized
units incorporated into the army in the event of an emergency and cooperates
with the navy (in addition to ground equipment and helicopters, this

corps has 33 oceangoing units, SI coastal units and almost 400 smaller
units).

Now that we have described the characteristics of Italy's paramilitary
forces, we should point out that NATO regards the entire Carabinieri

corps but only 20 percent of the other security forces as Italian military
forces (Public Security and Finance Guards), in spite of their hardware
and their stated mission of collaborating with these forces in military
operations. Thus, the entire Carabinieri budget but just 20 percent

of the Public Security and Finance Guards' budgets are included in

the Italian defense budget according to NATO.

From what we have said about Italy's security forces we can conclude
that in Spain's case it would be proper to regard a major portion

of civil Guard forces as military forces according to the NATO definition.
Nevertheless, we would have to leave out a somewhat significant segment:
the troops that control traffic, are assigned to customshouaes and
perform other purely civilian activities. In contrast, as far as the
National Police is concerned, if we take the Italian counterpart as

our reference point, we could, at the most, consider a small percentage
of its troops as military forces according to the NATO definition,

which for budgetary purposes would unquestionably entail a smaller
amount than what we feel ought to be subtracted from the Civil Guard
budget. Given the information available to the author, we have been
unable to determine accurately what percentages should be used for

the Civil Guard and the National Police and we have, therefore, adopted
the simple and perhaps extreme solution of including the entire Civil
Guard budget and, to compensate, completely excluding the National
Police budget.

82

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Therefore, we will add to Spain's defense spending the budget of the
General Directorate of the Civil Guard, which in 1976 totaled 27.537
billion pesetas.

3. We also have to add in the budget of the Superior Staff, given the
military nature of the functions that this body performs. In I976 its
budget amounted to #9! million pesetss. This is a relatively small
sum, because the salaries of its personnel were budgeted under the
branch that they served in and because it was a relatively small body
in comparison to the rest of our military institutions.

(The funds earmarked for the Superior Staff are currently included
in the unified budget of the Defense Ministry.)

4. lf Spain had belonged to NATO in 1976, we would have to add to its

defense spending the funds that it would have had to contribute as

a member of the Organization. As we saw in Chapter 1, these funds

are of little consequence as a percentage of the total military budget
and, therefore, would have been easily incorporated into the initially
budgeted defense spending.

We also have to include funds earmarked for military equipment research
and development in the civil sector. The accounting for such funds

is problematic in any country, as they are spent in various industrial
research activities in which it is difficult to separate civil and
military aspects. Nevertheless, in Spain we can assume without much

risk of error that most of these activities are financed under Chapter VI

of the Defense Budget, "actual investments," which finances in advance

a high percentage of the contracted defense hardware programs and provides
research funds for the main state-run companies (Santa Barbara, Bazan,
CASA [Aeronautical Constructions, S.A.]. etc) that meet these needs.

b) We should then subtract the following items from Spain's defense
spending, in accordance with the NATO definition:

I. The funds for Civil Aviation, which is budgeted today under the
Transportation Hinistry and in l976 was included in the Air Force Ministry
budget for:

--'The Undersecretariat of Civil Aviation
--The General Directorate of Airports

--The General Directorate of infrastructure
--The National Heteorological Service

The total here is 6.6JI billion pesetas.

2. From the air force budget we shOuld also remove much of the funding
for the Esteban Tcrradas National Institute for Aerospace Research
(INTA). which totaled |.l55 billion in I976; a high percentage of this

is for civilian purposes. (The mainly civilian Airbus program started
in I977 and entails annual outlays of 620 million under the defense budget.)

83

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

3. In accordance with the RATO definition of defense spending, we should
not include payments to former combatants and war veterans in the form
of military pensions. The section of the Spanish budget that largely
corresponds to this item is payments to disabled servicemen, which
totaled 3.59] billion pesetas in I976.

We also have to determine which activities of autonomous defense-related
agencies are civilian and which are military, which entails certain
difficulties. Whatever military total we came up with would not be
definitive, and this uncertainty also applies to the NATO countries
under analysis.

In a nutshell, the following is a rough estimate of Spain's defense
spending in 1976 according to the NATO definition:

Military Budgets

Army 66.977 billion pesetas
Navy 26.686
Air Force 31.071
Subtotal 125.536 l26.534
Additions
Military pensions 28.8!3
Paramilitary forces 27.573
Superior Staff .691
Subtotal SI.877 SI.877
Subtractions
Civil Aviation 6.63I
Air Force funding for INTA I.ISS
Disabled servicemen 3.59l
Subtotal ll.377 -ll.377

Grand total l65.034
Therefore, Spain's defense spending in I976, according to the NATO definition,
was roughly l65.034 pesetas (possibly somewhat high), which at the
average exchange rate that year ($l366.903 pesetas) equals $2.467 billion.
The NATO definition places defense spending at 2.28 percent of the
GDP, which differs from the percentage that other scholars who have
written on this topic have obtained. 3

The 165.034 billion pesetas in defense spending represent per capita
outlays of 4,599.6I pesetas, or $68.75.

84

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Spain's military budget in I976 totaled l24.534 billion pesetas, which
was roughly 75.5 percent of the defense spending figure that we have
arrived at by the NATO definition.

Analysis of Principal Components

Based on the above statistics, we have done a factor analysis of principal
components on l2 European NATO countries in relation to the 9 aforementioned
variables, which once more are:

Xl- Per capita defense spending (PODS)
Per capita GDP (PCGDP)
Per capita gross capital formation (PCGCF)

U N
I

Per capita government revenue (POOR)

Per capita government current expenditures for goods and services (PCGCB)

Trade balance/population (TB/P)

Arms transfer balance/population (ATE/P)

Labor force/population (LP/P)

Armed Forces strength/population (AF/P)

omuou‘b

The data on Spain have been included but not accorded any weight, so
that they serve only as a supplement and do not affect the determination
of the main component values for the NATO members. Ne have, however,
described Spain's position relative to these countries, which will
enable us to compare them.

Annex VII contains the findings of this analysis. Figure 9 from this
annex shows the graph of the synthetic variables F-l and F-2 as the
horizontal and vertical axes, respectively, and plotted around these
axes is the simultaneous projection of:

--The 13 countries under consideration

--The 9 variables representing macroeconomic magnitudes and defense
capabilities (So that they are more readily identifiable, the variables
have been placed in boxes on the graphs)?“

Grouped at the far right of axis F-I and near the circumference of

the radius are the projections of the variables PCGDP, POOR (whose
projection coincides with the former's), PCGCB and PCGCF. Thus, axis
F-l can be interpreted as the synthetic variable that represents
"economic strength," just as we concluded in our 3l-country analysis.
In this analysis of European NATO countries, however, defense spending
per capita, PCDS, shows up close to the group of variables indicating
economic strength. This enables us to assert that among the NATO
countries defense spending correlates closely with economic strength,
which was not the case in our 3l-country analysis, when we obtained

85

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

0' ”I." I0. I. “Q. I I. I

mum...“ umuuu.—u.m~«.—u~n«u~

All I INCH.“

 

5-2 Mag

 

 

 

   

Mu. - mt . - MI 0
II. c m ' o - M. O
. loo-unoctooooocouuoounoo I. 00.0.0.0...
'a I»... . mm - . «nnu .
. Ono...IUUOOOOODIOOOOOOOOII IO..‘C...l............'.'

86
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
a factor representing defense effort that was perpendicular to economic
strength. As we could see from Figure 7, this was because several

Warsaw Pact nations, such as the USSR. above all, and the GDR, Czechoslovakia
and Bulgaria, are engaged in a defense effort that, compared to other
countries, is not in keeping with their economic strength.

Because of this correlation between defense spending and economic strength
among NATO countries, the economically strongest countries appear on

the right of the graph in Figure 9, while the countries with smaller
economies and, hence, lower defense spending are on the left side.

Axis F-2 in Figure 9 shows from top to bottom the influence of a positive
trade balance, both in terms of general trade and in arms transfers,

while the same axis from bottom to top represents simultaneously the
existence of greater or lesser troop strength. Thus, Great Britain,
Luxembourg, France, Germany, Holland and Belgium show a greater export
capacity (general merchandise and weaponry combined), while Greece

and Turkey are characterised by their poor foreign trade competitiveness

and a higher ratio of Armed Forces troop strength to their respective
populations. We should bear in mind in interpreting the relative positions
of the various countries around these two axes that the nine variables under
study influence these positions and that the representation in the

F-I, F-2 plane depicts only the two-dimensional projection of the vectors

in the corresponding hyperspace; thus, a projection becomes more representative
the closer it gets to the circumference resulting from the intersection

of the hypersphere with the F-l, F-2 plane of projection, a circumference
that is partially represented in Figure 9.

We will now analyze two other factors or synthetic variables, F-3 and
F-a, because the latter allows an interpretation of interest to our
study. Figure l0, which has also been taken from Annex VII, shows

the graphic representation of the factors F-3 and r-a. Axis F-3 allows
for no apparent econometric interpretation, but the upper part of axis
F-h contains the projected variables PCDS, AF/P and ATB/P, that is

to say, the three variables most directly related to military matters.
Thus, the synthetic variable F-h can be regarded as representative

of a "defense effort."

We will recall that Figure 7 showed the results of our principal components
analysis of 3| countries and that its F-2 axis also represented "defense
effort." There are, however, a number of differences between the projection
of the l2 European NATO countries in Figure 7 and in Figure l0. These
differences are due less to the slight discrepancies in statistics

stemming from our search for more accurate and reliable sources for

the factor analysis at hand, which is limited to the European members

of NATO, than to the fact that in this second factor analysis we have

taken into consideration a greater number of variables relating to

these countries. With specific regard to the synthetic variable "defense
effort" that we are commenting on, the reason for the differences is

87

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

that axis 5-4 in Figure IO includes the influence of the arms transfer
balance, which was not taken into account in the JI-country analysis
illustrated in Figure 7. Because of this new factor, the countries
with a sizable military industry now appear closer to the upper part
of axis F-h.

we should stress that although the F-6 factor comprises the three above-
mentioned military aspects (defense spending, Armed Forces troop strength
and the arms transfer balance. all of them in values relative to the

total population), the first two, which are more representative of

a defense effort, have their projections in the second quadrant (in

the upper left). Therefore, we will conclude that the countries whose
projections are towards the second quadrant are engaged in a larger
defense effort. The F-b axis is less representative of defense effort
than axis F-2 in Figure 7, because as we can see in Figure lo, the
projections of the variables PODS, AF]? and ATS/P are farther away from the
radius equaltounity (see the gauge in the margins of the graph). Without
doubt, however, the graph in Figure IO shows the position of the countries
in relation to the military factor. The countries that spend the most

on defense and maintain a higher troop strength than others are located
in the second quadrant, and the nations whose military industries register
a positive export balance are towards the upper part of the graph.

Spain is in the third quadrant, near the fourth, a position that is

the diametric opposite of the one that reflects the greatest weight

of the military factor.

For the purposes of this study we can conclude, therefore, that as

in our factor analysis of 3| countries (Figure 7), Spain shows a small
defense effort in comparison with the 12 European members of NATO (Figures
9 and 10).

Consequently, our country should try to boost its military effort if

its overall policies and its defense policy so dictate. However, we

can assert that if Spain were to join NATO and if, as a result of the
Alliance's joint planning. attempts were made to force Spain to boost

its defense effort in relation to that of the other NATO members and

if such a boost ran counter to national political interests, Spain

could advance sound countering arguments. For example, with the exception
of Luxembourg, whose unusual characteristics preclude its use as a
reference point, the NATO countries with the strongest economies do

not make a proportionally greater defense effort, as we can see in

Figures 7 and IO. Spain's arguments would be particularly telling

it it is compared with Italy. This line of reasoning is even more advantageous
to us if we recall that. as we stated in our analysis of the 3l-country
sample, Spain belongs to the following group of countries with comparable
general characteristics (See Figure 8):

--Bulgaria
--Greece

89

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

--Czechoslovakia
--Poland
--Hungary
--Romania
--Yugoslavia
--Turkey

Italy, for example, is not in this group and, nonetheless, does not
put forth a greater defense effort than Spain, when we consider the
latter in relative terms and in light of an overview of the variables
that we have said are reflected in the F-2 and F-k factors in Figures
7 and IO, respectively.

Greece and Turkey, which are in the same group as Spain, are engaged
in a particularly large military effort in relation to their economies,
due to the dispute that they are involved in.

We should point out that both Annex VI and Annex VII contain lists
described as "aids to the interpretation oftbe axes," which give the
order in which the projections of the "variables" (to the left of the
list) and of the "countries" (to the right of the list) appear around
a given axis. This complements our interpretation of the graphs here.

4.2.6 Regression of Defense Spending on the GDP

We have already outlined the difficulties that would be involved in
attempting a regression analysis on several variables simultaneously

when, as in this case, they are marked by a high degree of multicollinearity;
it is for this reason that we have resorted to a factor analysis.

In spite of its limitations, however, it is illustrative to do at least
a regression analysis of defense spending on the main economic indicator
of a country, the GDP, because this magnitude is often used in isolation,
especially as a variable in the level of defense spending.

He will initially measure both variables, defense spending and GDP,

in absolute values, because this is usually how a comparative study

of the magnitudes in question is conducted. Figure 11 shows the graph

of these two variables for the 12 European NAIO countries?5 He can

see here the possibility of making a linear adjustment and we have

thus proceeded to do a regression of defense spending on the GDP. Annex Vlll
contains the results of this regression:

The regression line we obtained is:

Y1 - 87.07422 9 35.60076 Y2

with:

Y' . Defense spending

Y2 I GDP

90

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
awaswaaa
r' ' gagm we

 

§ﬂaﬁmﬁﬂﬁ mléér - '

 

£39. aﬁﬁﬁk #15me f—'
3531.1? *SEEEQ‘E.‘ “ wkgﬁﬁﬂﬁéﬂiﬁﬁﬁgm

 

ﬁaﬁﬂamﬁﬂﬁﬂﬂﬂEEﬁ—c --'

:23 mﬂégﬂwmmr‘

 

91
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Pl.

uncut“ o! 00(qu Win. an cor

Invasi- lo 600 who '0.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

As was made obvious by the two above principal components analyses,

in certain cases the 12 European NATO countries present very different
characteristics. hence, a regression analysis on all of them, in a
bid to relate their disparate levels of defense spending and GDP, must
be considered with serious reservations.

Although the graph in Figure 11 and the adjusted regression line (which
has been plotted on the graph) seem to suggest that a country's level
of defense spending can be explaiend by the size of its GDP, we should
stress that these two magnitudes are subject to the typical statistical
relationship that arises when an analysis is done on two simultaneous
factors that are somewhat interrelated. In other words, if Germany,
for example, has a much higher GDP than Belgium, then all of the macro-
economic magnitudes into which the German GDP can be broken down will,
in general, be larger than Belgium's. This interrelationship among the
various macromagnitudes gives rise to a certain statistical tie-in

that does not necessarily entail a sufficiently explanatory causal
relationship.

Nevertheless, we could claim that the defense spending-GDP ratio suggested
by the regression line is the theoretical ideal that the countries

of the Alliance should aim for so that their efforts are proportional.
There is, in fact, a tendency to argue in this manner in comparing

the defense spending of various countries as a percentage of their

GDP .

According to this line of reasoning, the regression line (Y'- 87.07622 +
35.60078 Y2) indicates that in 1976 Spain, with a GDP of 8108.135 billion,

should have spent 33.93676 billion on defense (87.07622 + [35.60078 x 108.1351)
instead of the $2.667 billion that we concluded Spain did spend that year
according to the NATO definition of defense spending, a difference of

51.69676 billion.

According to this approach (the regression line), the theoretical estimates
of defense spending for the European countries of NATO are as follows:

Country Actual Defense Regression-Estimated Difference
Spending Defense Spending
1. Germany 15.220 15.96182 -.76182
2. Belgium 2.013 2.63352 -.62052
3. Denmark .861 1.65877 ' -.59777
6. France 12.857 12.63200 .62500
5. Great Britain 10.736 7.89005 2.86395
6. Greece 1.269 .87172 .37728
7. Holland 2.825 3.27606 -.66906
8. Italy 3.821 6.16662 -2.36562
9. Luxembourg .023 .16682 -.16382
10. Norway .902 1.20138 -.29938
11. Portugal .768 .66763 .10057
12. Turkey 2.800 1.56886 1.25116
92

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
This list is consistent with the wide variations in defense spending

as a percentage of the GDP, as we mentioned in Section 3.5. If we
accept the validity of the theoretical findings of this regression,

that is to say, the gaps between actual defense spending and regression-
estimated spending, we must conclude that a greater defense effort

in relation to their GDP's is required not only of Spain, as we deduced
previously, but also of Germany, Belgium, Denmark, Rolland, Italy and
Norway, especially Italy, which according to the estimates, ought to
boost its defense spending by 82.36562 billion. The remaining countries
on the list should theoretically cut their defense spending, with the
biggest reduction going to Great Britain, 32.86395 billion.

The above is based on absolute values. Throughout this work, however,
we have used per capita magnitudes as the most representative values;
hence, if we want to tie defense spending exclusively to GDP, we feel
that the argument should use per capita values.

This is the criterion that we have used in plotting the points on the
graph in Figure 12, in which we can see two distinct groups. One consists
of Germany, France, Norway, Holland, Belgium and Denmark, countries

with high per capita GDP's, and the other is made up of Greece, Portugal,
Turkey and Italy, with Great Britain and Luxembourg in between the

two. Great Britain is characterized by its high level of per capita
defense spending in relation to its per capita GDP; Luxembourg, on

the other hand, stands out for its very low per capita defense spending
in relation to its high per capita GDP.

If in spite of this subgroup of the cluster of points shown in Figure
I2 we test the usefulness of plotting a least-squares line for the
entire gr0up of countries, excluding solely Luxembourg as a clearly
atypical case, we derive the results outlined in Annex IX.

The regression line that we obtain is

 

XI '51.86301 + 0.02327 X2
With:

X' I PCDS

X2 I PCGDP
From this we can deduce the following per capita findings:
Country Actual PCDS Regression-Estimated Differs

PCDS
I. Germany 267.63 220.57 26.!
2. Belgium 205.03 208.10 -3.(
3. Denmark 166.66 225.21 -58.7
6. France 262.95 206.36 38.5
5. Great Britain 191.68 162.95 68.1
6. Greece 136.28 107.83 28.6
93

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

94
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
7. Rolland 205.]6 203.16 1.99

8. Italy 68.06 122.63 -54.59
9. Norway 223.99 232.75 -8.77
lo. Portugal 77.00 89.77 -l2.37
ll. Turkey 68.02 75.08 -7.05

From the differences column we can see that Germany, France, Great
Britain and Greece spend substantiall/ more on defense per capita than
they should according to the regression line, whereas Denmark and Italy
(as well as Luxembourg, which was excluded from the regression) spend
much less per capita on defense than they theoretically should. The

rest of the NATO countries are quite close in reality to the theoretical
amount indicated by the regression line. This is a good time to highlight
the different conclusions that we can draw from absolute amounts and

per capita amounts. We feel that the numbers obtained from the per
capita regression are more realistic.

According to this second regression, Spain's per capita defense spending
should theoretically be:

X' =5l.8630| + [0.02327 x 3,0!3.80] 'IZI.99 dollars

Since we have estimated that Spain's per capita defense spending, according
to the NATO definition, was $68.75, the gap is thus $53.2A; multiplied

by 35.88 million Spaniards, this means that according to the regression
Spain should have spent $l.9l025 billion more on defense than it did

in I976, which is equivalent to 77 percent of actually budgeted spending.
This figure cannot be accorded much econometric validity, because although
the regression in Figure l2 indicates the situation of the various
countries in relation to an overall tendency, as we said before, the
countries under consideration can be classified into two separate subgroups,
which detracts from the significance of a regression done on all of

them.

If we merely consider each subgroup in isolation, by virtue of the
magnitude of its GDP Spain would be in the subgroup composed of Greece,
Italy. Portugal and Turkey; this is not a sufficient number of countries
to do a regression analysis, inasmuch as we would have only two degrees
of freedom.

Furthermore, we have seen previously that only two of these four countries,
Greece and Turkey, belong to the same group as Spain in the similar
characteristics classification that we obtained in Figure 8, and it

is precisely these two countries that are engaged in a heightened defense
effort because of the tension between them. It is for this reason

that we do not consider this group useful as a basis for analyzing the
comparative amount that Spain should be spending on defense; moreover,

such a comparison would be based solely on the GDP, which limits its
econometric significance.

95

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR.0FFICIAL USE ONLY

To sum up, the regression analysis, both in absolute'and relative numbers,
indicates that Spain's defense spending is low in comparison to its

GDP, but we do not regard these results as econometrically valuable.

Thus, we would refer back to our principal components analyses, which
although they do not lead to a quantitative estimate, do enable us

to conclnde, based on all of the countries in question and taking into
consideration several simultaneous variables for each country, that

Spain is among the countries that are making a small defense effort

in comparison to the whole group. -

4.2.5 Time Series Analysis of Defense Spending

Up to now our analyses of defense spending have focused on a single

year, I976. We are now going to round out our study somewhat by_analysing
per capita defense spending over a period of time in order to assess

the representativeness of 1976 compared to the previous and subsequent
years and to compare the evolution of Spain's defense spending with

respect to that of the other countries over a given span of time.

We will analyze the changes in defense spending per capita over a period

of 8 years, centering around 1976, which has been taken as the reference
point and which was a key year in the beginnings of the major international
economic crisis, stemming mainly from the energy crisis, in which national
economies are currently immersed.

Beginning our series in I972 is significant as far as Spain is concerned
because it was in this year that Law 32/7] on Budget Allocations for
National Defense took effect (extended and amended by Decree Law 5/77);
this law brought a sharp change in defense spending in relation to
previous years.

Inasmuch as the data furnished in the reports and documentation from
NATO systematically exclude Greece and Turkey, the numbers we will

be using here for the NATO countries are from the Military Balance

Sheet of the International Institute of Strategic Studies.in London.

As we have seen, the sources of data employed throughout this work
logically reflect certain statistical discrepancies that do not, however,
invalidate the general conclusions that we have drawn based on these
data, which confirms the usefulness of using various sources.

Since we found previously that Spain's defense budget in I976 amounted

to 75.5 percent of its defense spending as calculated according to

the NATO definition, we have accordingly adjusted the figures for Spain
from I972 to I979 so that we can compare them with the numbers for

the Alliance countries, which have been calculated in accordance with the
NATO measurement of defense spending 0

Based on this approach, per capita defense spendihg from I972 to 1979
was as follows:

96

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Pct Capita Defeat. Speadtn‘

«so».

 

Your
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Per Capita Defense Spending

Country I972 I973 I974 I975 I976 I977 I978 I979 I979
Germany I46 2I5 226 260 242 274 347 396
Belgium I04 I39 I53 I85 204 246 3I5 363
Denmark 97 I25 I43 I84 I68 2I3 258 303
France I42 I89 I75 233 24I 224 285 349
Great Britain I4I I6I I76 I84 I90 2I0 252 3I4
Greece 65 74 90 I44 I38 II9 I63 --
Holland II7 I57 I79 2I5 205 269 309 338
Italy 68 75 75 76 68 90 109 I24
Luxembourg 34 49 50 6| 68 80 I02 II6
Norway I27 I69 I87 223 223 280 308 347
Portugal 65 80 9| 95 85 48 55 60
Turkey I9 23 30 55 70 58 47 58
Spain 32 no ‘51 62 69 79 85 121.

Figure I3 shows a graphic representation of the time series for the I3
countries in question.

As we can see from the above table and from the graph in Figure I3,
Spain is always amoung the five countries that spend the least per
capita on defense; they are: Spain, Italy, Luxembourg, Portugal and Turkey.

Spain's per capita defense spending is most often second or third to
last in the series and only in I979 did it equal Italy's, ahead of
three others.

Spain's time series looks a great deal like Luxembourg's, and only
Turkey comes in consistently below Spain. The figures for Portugal

are significantly lower than for Spain as of I976, and the numbers

for Italy approximate Spain's as of that same year too. In I976 the
numbers for the various countries are in an intermediate range of their
changes over time, which makes this year particularly well-suited to
the cross-section analyses that we conducted previously.

If we find the indices for per capita defense spending in I979 with

I972 as a base and if we arrange the countries in order by this index,
we will see that Spain is in first place as far as a percentage increase
from I972 to I979 is concerned, as this table shows:2

Ranking Country Index in I979
I Spain 387.5
2 Belgium 349.0
3 Luxembourg 34I.2
4 Denmark 3I2.4
5 Turkey 305.3
6 Holland 288.9
7 Norway 273.2
98

FOR OFVICIAL USE ONLY
8 Germany 271.2

9 Greece - 250.8 (I)
I0 France 255.8
II Great'Britain 222.7
12 Italy Isz.3
13 Portugal 92.3

(I) Index for I976

§

Spain's number one ranking in percentage increase in per capita defense
spending confirms the previously expressed conclusion that although
Spain might have domestic political reasons for continuing to boost

its relatively low defense effort, if it were to join NATO it would

also have arguments that it could advance if the Alliance hypothetically
were to pressure it into increasing its defense effort more than it
ought to or could. Therefore, the somewhat widespread view that membership
in NATO would force Spain to substantially boost its defense spending '
(we often hear groundless mention of a doubling of the defense budget)
is not justified.

S. Military Aid and Assistance obtainable from NATO
S.I What He Can Expect from NATO

Article 2 of the North Atlantic Treaty says: "The Parties will contribute
toward the further development of peaceful and friendly international
relations by strengthening their free institutions, by bringing about

a better understanding of the principles upon which these institutions
are founded, and by promoting conditions of stability and well-being.
They will seek to eliminate conflict in their international economic
policies and will encourage economic collaboration between any or all

of them." ~

We can see the principle of economic collaboration set forth in this
article, and if this principle is observed in practice, it must include
assistance to the countries most in need, thus enhancing stability,
which is of benefit to the Alliance as a whole.

This principle has not been applied lavishly, but there are precedents.
NATO Secretary General Luns brought up the critical economic situation
in Portugal and Turkey at a meeting of the Atlantic Council in I978,

and as a result a major financial aid project was started up for Turkey,
whose economic crisis continued to intensify, in contrast to Portugal,
whose balance of payments began to improve somewhat.

Since NATO does not have an organisation nor a fund for economic aid,
such aid is arranged through other suitable international organisations,
such as the World Bank, the INF, the European Investment Bank or the
OECD. By April I980 Turkey had received around $I.I6 billion, and

the finance minister cf the PRC was negotiating $3 billion in special
aid for Turkey through various financing agencies.

99
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

As far as military aid is concerned, Article 3 of the North Atlantic
Treaty stipulates: "In order more effectively to achieve the objectives

of this Treaty. the Parties, separately and jointly, by means of continuous
and effective self-help and mutual aid, will maintain and develop

their individual and collective capacity to resist armed attack." The
principle of mutual aid to achieve the required defense capability

is thus established.

In accordance with this principle, in I950 the United States and France '
_signed a "Mutual Defense Assistance Accord," which stipulated in summary
that: "The Government of the French Republic and the Government of

the United States of America, signatories of the North Atlantic Treaty...taking
into consideration...the 1969 Mutual Defense Assistance Law, which
provides for the granting of military aid to countries linked to the
United States under collective security agreements...will place or
continue to place at each other's disposal or at the disposal of another
government with which agreement might be reached, the equipment, materials,
services or any other military aid that the governments lending such

aid might authorize under the terms and conditions agreed upon...in
accordance... with the obligations of the parties as defined in Article 3
of the North Atlantic Treaty..." This accord is a reflection of an

era that now belongs to the past. This was the period of the Marshall
Plan, during which the United States poured millions into the allied
nations of Europe to hasten their economic recovery and strengthen their
defenses.

The situation is quite different today. Aid programs are, in general

much more limited, and of course we cannot say that there is any correlation
in joint forces planning between the force goals and aid for the countries
that cannot achieve them. when a country cannot meet its commitments
relating to planned forces plateaus, it has the option of deferring

the commitments. A country can, of course, request aid based on the
argument that its economic problems are preventing it from achieving

the desired defense capability.

This is what Portugal and Turkey did in 1976. submitting to the Defense
Planning Committee their request for outside aid to implement the proposal
for boosting NATO' a defense capabilities. In a 1977 joint communique,

the committee accepted the request from Turkey, stating that' 'it is

of vital importance...that the military cooperation agreements connected
with the southeast flank be executed immediately." Subsequently, the
Defense Planning Committee stressed in the communique from its I978
Brussels meeting that: "The ministers noted Portugal's and Turkey's
urgent need for further assistance from their allies to enable them

to enhance their forces in accordance with NATO's goals. The ministers
agree that special efforts should be made to achieve a more positive
response with the broadest possible participation of the allied countries.
They noted with satisfaction that in addition to these efforts, the
Alliance hasconsideredactions, following up on the initiative of

the Hashington summit, to promote economic assistance for its less
prosperous members."

100

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Until I976, military aid was negotiated exclusively as bilateral between
the granting and receiving countries. In order to coordinate potential
aid for Portugal and Turkey, the Ad Hoc Group for Military Aid to these
two countries was set up in I976, a group in which, for different reasons,
neither France nor Greece participated.

The Ad Hoc Group tries to make the allied countries with more prosperous
economies realize that military aid is needed, but it lacks the authority
to arrange such aid on its own and has no funds for this purpose.

This is a major shortcoming, especially in times of crisis, which demand

a streamlined aid channel. In any event, the Ad Hoc Group can be regarded
as relatively effective.

Prom I950 to I980, the United States granted Turkey $5.I5 billion in
military assistance, and aid from Germany totaled u billion marks,
starting in I964. In order to surmount the problems that the U.8.
annsembargofrom February I975 to October I978 caused for Turkey's
defense capability, a 5-year Defense and Economic Cooperation Agreement
has now been established between the two countries. Under the agreement
more than $2 billion in aid will be granted to Turkey.27 The main

goal of the agreement is to develop Turkey's defense industry and to
modernize its military installations. ‘

Germany and Turkey have also negotiated an increase in military aid,
with an initial pledge of I30 million marks up to mid-I98I, plus technical
assistance in setting up military logistic installrtions. Subsequently,
in July I980, the German Parliament approved an additional 600 million,
earmarked especially for the modernization of the Turkish Armed Forces'
armored and antitank weaponry.

As far as Portugal is concerned, as a result of joint NAT 0 planning,
Germany and the United States started up a multilateral military assistance
program under which the brigade that Portugal pledged to put at NATO's
disposal would be outfitted through aid faom these two countries.

We should stress that this does not entail a major amount of aid, although
for Portugal, in relative terms, it is, because it has enabled the

country to meet its commitment to NATO without removing funds from

its shaky economy.

Portugal and the United States later (autumn I980) signed an _agreement
on the Lajes air base under which Portugal will receive $280 million,
$60 million in defense aid for I980 and I98I. The agreement expires
in February I983.

Aid to Greece has been much less. In submitting the United States
military aid program for fiscal year I979, the undersecretary of state
for military aid stated that with regard to Europe, the administration
in Washington leaned particularly towards Turkey, Greece and Cyprus,
specifying that almost $I60 million was being earmarked for Greece,

of which $I.8 million was "to indicate our support for Greece's return
to full participation in the integrated military structure of the

NATO command." The Rogers Plan has possibly offered greater aid,

as a result of Greece's return to full participation in the Alliance.

101

POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPTICIAL USE ONLY

To sum up, although the joint NATO force goal planning does not entail
obligatory assistance for meeting these goals, it is a suitable framework
for looking at the needs of certain countries and the joint benefits
that would be derived from the Alliance's major economic powers cooperating
with the weaker allies in boosting their defense capabilities, in

the knowledge that any potential aid must ultimately be negotiated
bilaterally and that, therefore, the NATO force goals are not what
determine the aid to be received. Any assistance would be arranged

under bilateral pacts based on political and economic considerations

and which would unquestionably entail some sort of quid pro quo for

the country granting the aid.

Aid is also obtained indirectly from the NATO infrastructure projects
involving the construction of military installations and facilities

in a given country with funds provided jointly by the member countries.
For example, there are $1.2 billion worth of infrastructure projects

in Greece and Turkey, 20 percent of all the SHAPE infrastructure projects;
since Greece and TUrkey have contributed little to common infrastructure
cost-sharing, we can thus assert that they have received much more

in the form of infrastructure than they have contributed.

5.2 Possibility of Spain's Obtaining Nilitary Aid in NATO

From the above we can conclude that the chances of obtaining major
amounts of military aid by joining NATO are slight, except in very
extreme cases such as Turkey, which with a foreign debt of slbO billion
and a I30 percent inflation rate, was dismantling its defense and was
even threatened by dangerous political instability (these circumstances
led to the I980 military coup).

Portugal's situation, though critical, has not been as worrisome as
Turkey's, and thus it has not received as much aid as it would have
liked from the allies.

If Spain joins NATO and is :ligible for aid, it will not receive much,
nor will any such aid not entail some sort of quid pro quo for the
allied nation with which bilateral assistance might be arranged, even
if it originated within the framework of NATO.

He might thus conclude that in deciding between bilateral security
relations with the United States and multilateral ties with NATO,

Spain would find it more profitable, in an economic sense, to maintain
a treaty with the United States under which Spain's compensation would
be some degree of economic aid.

Let us analyze the aid Spain gets under the existing Spanish-American
Friendship and Cooperation Treaty, as stipulated in the text published
by the Foreign Affairs Ministry.

102

FOR 0F?ICIAL USE ONLY
The total military aid granted under this treaty can be summarized
as follows:

--$600 milli n in the form of loans

--$85 million in the form of grants

--$50 million, maximum, to improve the Warning and Control Network,
which serves American air units -
--The planned leasing of 42 aircraft, which never came about, and
sales of some small vessels -

The above forms of aid are granted over the 5 years that the treaty

is in effect. The $600 million is in the form of loans ($120 million

a year, subject to approval by the Congress). which must be used specifically
to purchase military hardware in the United States and which carry

a normal market interest rate. Spain could secure these terms from

other NATO countries interested in selling their weaponry and perhaps

at lower interest rates, without having to grant use rights for military
bases and installations.

Therefore, only grants can be regarded as actual military aid. Adding
up the $85 million in grants and the maximum of $50 million for the
Warning and Control Network, we get a total of $135 million over the
5-year life of the treaty.

Spain's defense budgets over this 5-year span were:

 

Year Billions of Pesetas
1976 119.222
1977 169.396
1978 ' 188.715
1979 - 235.319
1980 286.268

which at the average exchange rate for each year of:

Pesetas to the Dollar

1976 66.90
1977 68.60
1978 79.84
1979 67.18
1980 70.75

gives dollar-denominated Spanish defense budgets of:

1976 _ 81.78209 billion
1977 82.17778
1978 32.36366
1979 33.50281
1980 $6.06591

which comes to 513.87225 billion for the 5-year period.

103
80! OFFICIAL US! OIL!
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Thus, the $135 million in military aid under the Spanish-American
Treaty over these 5 years was just 0.97 percent of Spain's defense
budget for the period; this could be termed scant and inconsequential.

The treaty also provides for nonmilitary aid, in the form of access

to a $450 million Eximbank credit line for Spanish companies at market
interest rates and about $30 million for cultural and scientific cooperation.
Such aid can be considered as a normal part of a "friendship and cooperation"
treaty, but it does not necessitate nor is it the main reason for

a security treaty under which bases and other military installations

are transferred.

Given the current economic situation in the United States, there is
no reason to believe that substantially more aid would be forthcoming
under a future agreement with the United States.

Therefore, our conclusion is that it is not the economic component

that justifies a bilateral security relationship with the United States
and that perhaps within the framework of NATO, although there is no
reason to think that we could secure more aid, we can, however, assert
that we could negotiate with the United States and with other members
of the Alliance in seeking aid at least comparable to and perhaps
somewhat greater than we would obtain from a simple bilateral treaty
with the United States.

Within NATO we would also obtain the portion of what other countries
would contribute to the installation projects and infrastructure improve-
ments that would be negotiated when Spanish territory becomes part

of the European theater of NATO planning, if what we receive in this

form is more than Spain would have to contribute to the overall common
infrastructure. This could thus be regarded as economic aid resulting
from membership in NATO, as we said was the case with Greece and Turkey.

FOOTNOTES

lb. Information from the German magazine SOLDAT UND TBGNNIK; translation by
Lt Col Fernandez lojo in the "Information Bulletin" of the highest
National Defense Studies Center (CBSBDBN), Nay I979.

15. The concepts of standardization and interoperability are dealt
with in Chapter III.

16. By H.T. Lee, Schneider and Noeber Publishers.

l7. See Dr Hartinez-Bcheverria's doctoral thesis, "Loo Gastos dc Defensa,"
submitted to the Economics Departnent of Barcelona University

in 1970.

104
See "Econometrics" by Dhrymes, p 53, Harper and Row Publishers,
U.8.A., I970.

I9. The North‘Atlantic Assembly is an interparliamentary assembly

20.

2|.

22.

23.

of the Atlantic Alliance’s member countries in which representatives of
the countries' parliaments meet regularly to examine problems

of cosmon,interest. Its main goal is to promote and help accomplish
the AllianCe's objectives. It has I72 members representing their
respective parliaments, with representation proportional to the
population of each country (from 36 seats for the United States

to 3 for Iceland). It has five committees: Economic, Education,
Cultural Affairs and Information, Military, Political and Scientific
and Technical.

The assembly is independent of NATO but maintains close ties with
the Organization, whose secretary general outlines the Alliance's
main problems at the assembly's annual plenary session.

This issue is outlined in the article entitled "Analisis economico
de los gastos de defensa," published in the REVISTA AERONAUTICA

of October I979. It is not relevant to our present study to delve
into the matter, but we vault like to call attention to it, inasmuch
as in Chapter III we will analyze the economic repercussions of
defense logistics. "

An aforementioned study by Commanders Coll Quetglas and Valverde
Ruiz and Lieutenants GonzalesIbanand Campusano Caballero, using
highly reliable data.

Article I33 of the Civil Guard's Military Regulations reads: "Even
though the Civil Guard is supposed to render in a campaign the
services inherent to its particular organization and mission,

if the generals of the Major Units to which it is attached deem

it opportune to use the Guard for service assignments or in combat
action against the enemy, the Corps will consider it a singular
honor."

In his article "Spain and the Atlantic Alliance" in the English
publication SURVIVAL (November-December I976), Sanchez-Gijon obtains
3.7 percent of the GNP for I975. In "El dinero de las Puerzas
Armadaa" from ACTUALI“AD BCONOHICA (27 December I977), Claudio
Aguirre assigns Spain a 3.8 percent military spending/GNP ratio

in I975. The article "La Defensa Nacional necesita mas dinero"
from the weekly ABC supplement (I2 Hay I978) puts defense spending
at 2.II percent of the GNPin I977. In his article "Gastos defensivos
y politics de armsmentos" from the magazine DEPENSA (December

I978), Taibo puts this figure for Spain at 3.8 percent of its

GNP. The book "El poder militar en Espana“ by Vicente Pisas places
defense spending at between 2.9 and 3.2 percent of GNP over the
past 9 years (Lais Publishers/Paperback, I979).

105

FOR OFFICIAL USE ORLY
2k.

25.

26.

27.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In Figure 9 we have inverted the for-at of the program shown in

Annex VII, so that the higher values of the variables under consideration
appear with positive coordinates and, therefore, to the right

of or above the graph, depending on the axis involved, similar

to how Figure 7 is presented.

Abbreviations used in Figures II and 12: PKG-Germany, B-Belgiuu, .
D-Dennark, F-Prance, c-Greece, GB-Great Britain, ﬂ-Bollsnd, It-Italy,
L-Luxenbourg, ﬂ-Norway, P-Portugal, T-Turkey.

The aforementioned Belgian group GRIP has conducted a study like
this on.just the NATO countries; it was published in February
I980 in the dossier "Notes et Documents,” Brussels.

According to the nagszine NATO'S FIFTBEN NATIONS (Defense-related
econonic cooperation and assistance within the Alliance), June-July
I980.

106

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Chapter 111: Economic Consequences of NATO Logistics

6. Extent and significance of NATO Logistics

The great British strategist Montgomery said that war was, "grosso modo,”
20 percent strategy and 80 percent logistics. The increasing complexity
of Armed Forces from the last world war to the present confirms this

assertion and, if possible, even accentuates the importance of logistics.

In its broadest military meaning, logistics can be defined as those military
activities involved in the procurement, storage, distribution and maintenance
of supplies, equipment, ordnance and munitions, the transport of troops

and materiel by land, air or sea, the construction and maintenance of
infrastructure and cmunications, and the recruitment of troops. This
definition covers the demand for all of the goods and services that the
Armed Forces require, a demand that is large enough to constitute a major
portion of national demand.

Military demand can be broken down into demand for regular or general

goods and services, which is a small fraction of a country's total demand,
and demand for specifically military goods and services, which involves

the procurement and maintenance of specific combat materiel (equipment,
weapons and munitions) and the military's own infrastructure. This specifi-
cally military demand is the logistics that concerns us in this work

and to which we will refer under the general heading of logistics. Ne

are excluding troop recruitment, which is not germane to the aims of

our study.

A work whose goal is to analyze the economic consequences of NATO membership
would not be complete if it omitted the complex field of logistics. Although
logistics is part of the military forces planning that we analyzed previously,
it covers an even wider area, because procurement of the elements needed

for the logistic support of these forces necessarily involves the realm

of a nation's economic capabilities and resources and particularly its
industrial and transportation capacity. Strategic transportation capabilities
depend mainly on the existing infrastructure. In connection with the

thesis of our study, this issue has already been dealt with in our analysis
of the common NATO infrastructure. With regard to industrial capacity,

the industrial output that has a direct impact on defense is the output

of military industries, which will be the main topic of this chapter.

To give the reader an idea of the amount of money spent to develop and
procure military materiel, suffice it to say that in I976 the countries
of the Alliance earmarked about $l20 billion for the defense sector,
with the United States spending $77 billion.28 A sizable percentage
of this goes for the procurement of combat materiel, as we can see in
the following table published by NATO:

107

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0P?ICIAL USE ONLY

Percentages of Defense Spending Earmarked for Equipment Expenditures
(Main Materiel, Excluding Investment in Buildings)

Country 1965-1970 1973 1976 1975 1976 1977 1978
(Average;
Belgium 11.0 8.6 8.8 9.1 11.0 11.9 12.3
Canada 11.6 7.3 5.9 6.3 8.0 8.5 10.8
Denmark 13.6 17.2 19.3 19.0 19.6 21.8 15.7
Germany 16.1 12.1 11.9 11.8 13.2 12.5 16.2
Italy 13.0 15.2 15.2 13.9 13.1 15.3 17.2
Luxembourg 2.6 1.3 2.6 1.0 3.6 2.0 2.3
Holland 16.5 11.3 13.2 15.7 15.2 20.6 18.5
Norway 16.8 11.7 11.6 11.6 11.6 16.2 17.0
Portugal 16.9 6.5 3.1 1.9 1.9 2.1 2.6
Turkey 3.1 5.0 3.0 -- -- -- -
Great Britain 15.9 19.3 17.2 19.3 20.6 22.0 25.0
United States 27.8 18.9 18.1 17.5 17.6 17.0 17.7

As we can see from this table, in 1978 all of the countries except Luxem-
bourg earmarked from 10 to 25 percent, and this does not include outlays
for construction, which would boost the percentages appreciably.

These figures give us an idea of the size of the market that supplies

this powerful consumer. Thus, the logistic facet of defense deserves a
separate chapter, especially in connection with the procurement of military
equipment and its maintenance and replacement.

what we are particularly interested in are the implications of NATO member-
ship for domestic industry, because membership would entail involvement

in its logistics system and adherence to the industrial cooperation agree-
ments signed within the Organization.

The Atlantic Alliance, let us recall once again, is an association of
independent and preponderantly democratic States. Along with their competitive.
free-market economic systems, this gives rise to a logical diversification

in the research, development and manufacture of military equipment models.

Such diversification is not at all desirable from an overall operational
military standpoint and is disadvantageous in comparison to the uniformity

of the Warsaw Pact’s standardcombat materiel and logistics system. It

is true, however, that competition makes industry dynamic and leads to
desirable technological developments that somewhat offset the disadvantages

of model diversification.

Since NATO's infancy its military command has been concerned with the
Alliance's logistic rationalization, seeking mainly the standardization

of weaponry and military equipment in general. ﬂow can a group of free

and sovereign nations achieve this? A recent report on "European Cooperation
in Weaponry Supplies," submitted by Klepsch to the European Parliament,29

108

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
considered the various ways of achieving standardization, saying: "There
are a number of ways of achieving standardization. First, by deciding

to procure a given weapons system, in other words, direct purchase. This
approach saves on research and development costs and on production base
costs, as well as guaranteeing both economies of scale and standardization.
It means, however, that there will be only one winner (from an economic
standpoint) in a given weaponry sector and that the other countries and
producers come out losing. From a political standpoint, this is manifestly
unacceptable. Secondly, there is production under license, which resolves
some, but not all of the economic problems, particularly the absence

of a research and development base, and it entails the risks of higher
costs. There is also the option of research and development concurrent
with coproduction under license. This method eliminates the aforementioned
economic drawbacks but inevitably entails higher costs...There is also

the alternative of cooperative research and development, which is ideal

in principle, but considerable difficulties arise when nations attempt

to reach agreement on requirements and programs. since we are talking
about research and development that will probably take 8 to 12 years,

quick results are impossible. This poses a political problem in particular,
inasmuch as such periods of time are much longer than the foreseeable

term of an elected administration or parliament...Pinally, there is the
possibility of proposing short- and long-term goals and of pursuing them
concurrently; this would create a widespread group of winners that could
absorb occasional losses (given that the Alliance's present-day outlays

for the development and production of conventional weapons are around

$35 billion a year, it should not be at all impossible to create a group

of winners)." This is the range of possibilities for cooperation. Superposed
on and further complicating these possibilities are the interests of
nations in protecting and promoting their own industries, interests that
run counter to a multinational rationalization.

The difficulties of attaining standardization, together with the desire

to protect national industries, gave rise to a new concept, interoperability,
in rationalization policy. Since we will be referring frequently to the
terms standardization and interoperability, before moving on we will

look into how they are defined in NATO, according to NATO publication
"AAP—6-NATO Glossary of Terms and Definitions for Military Use."

Standardization is defined as "the process by which member nations achieve
the closest practicable cooperation among forces, the most efficient

use of research, development and production resources, and agree to

adopt on the broadest possible basis the use of: a) common or compatible
operational, administrative and logistic procedures; b) common or compatible
technical procedures and criteria; c) cor-son, compatible or interchangeable
supplies, components, weapons, or equipment; and d) common or compatible
tactical doctrine with corresponding organizational compatibility."
Interoperability, in turn, is defined as "the ability of systems, units

or forces to provide services to and accept services from other systems,
units or forces and to use the services so exchanged to enable them to
operate effectively together."

109

ran orrrcm usr ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Hence, standardization has a broad meaning that ranges from the adoption
of identical weapons systems or procedures to the compatibility of different
systems or procedures.

Interoperability aims solely at a minimum level of coordination through
intercommunication, mutual support and the joint use of consumable parts,
such as the use of the same fuel, munitions of the same caliber or inter-
changeable spare parts. A typical example of interoperability is when

a fighter aircraft landing at an airfield in an allied country is subject
to the same base use procedures as in its home country, can take on the
same fuel and munitions, can undergo the same repairs and can employ

the same telecommunications. Interoperability thus greatly enhances

the ability to operate together without possessing identical equipment.

As we will discuss later on, France emphasises interoperability because
it feels that this is sufficient to attain joint operational military
effectiveness while respecting each country's industrial capabilities.
In contrast, other countries, led by the United States, feel that inter-
operability is merely a means of achieving maximum standardization, the
ultimate goal that guarantees rationalized cooperation, g:eater common
economic benefits and greater joint operational effectiveness.

We will now analyse the slow and laborious process that NATO follows
in its search for logistic cooperation. This wouldbethe situation that
a country joining the Alliance at this time would face. We will thus
be able to deduce the defense-related economic and industrial advantages
and disadvantages of joining or remaining outside the Atlantic Alliance.

7, NATO's Logistics System

The only reference in the North Atlantic Treaty to the need for cannon
defense machinery is Article 3, which reads: "In order more effectively
to achieve the objectives of this Treaty, the Parties, separately and
jointly, by means of continuous and effective self-help and mutual aid,
will maintain and develop their individual and collective capacity to
resist armed attack."

since NATO is a multinational organisation of sovereign States without
supranational authority and without its own economic capacity and centralized
production, a unified logistics organization cannot be created. In spite

of the importance of logistic coordination and interdependence, which

all members recognize, the principle of "logistics is a national responsi-
bility" prevails. This phrase is repeated over and over again by NATO
authorities when this topic is discussed with them, as if by sheer repetition
they were trying to overcome their realisation of the major drawbacks

that this principle entails for the effectiveness of a logistic system

in support of a multinational joint defense mission in a single theater _

of operations. Nevertheless, there is a widespread feeling that standard-
ization of weaponry is the basis for potential logistic integration.

110

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
As British specialist Geoffrey Ashcrofft asserts: "There is no way to
promote logistic cooperation in KAIO without a greater degree of standard-
ization of military equipment."30

The official NATO publication "NATO Facts and Figures" explains how the
Organization's approach to logistics evolved and gives examples of the
difficulties it has encountered in this regard. Since NATO was founded

in I949, its military command has been concerned about the lack of a
centralized logistic system, mainly in connection with the outfitting

of Armed Forces. During this initial period there was a great diversity

of combat materiel, differing in specifications from one country to another
and some of it needing replacement. Other equipment had some degree

of operational value, though it too required prompt replacement. Faced

with the prospect of a complete revamping, NATO tackled the problem

of standardizing future equipment, which would greatly simplify logistic
support and the replacement of parts. The task turned out to be a difficult
one, as governments tried to shore up and help out their domestic industries,
each country tended to advocate equipment specifications commensurate

with its geographv and climate, while the industries in the member countries
were also marked by differences in production.

The Organization tried to alleviate these problems and achieve some degree
of standardization through coordination in the field of military output.
The Military Production Board was set up as early as l9h9; it was
succeeded in 1950 by the Defense Production Board, and in I952 the
Production and Logistics Division was created. Its aim is not to draw
up a general plan for outfitting all of NATO's forces, which would be
desirable from a cost-effectiveness standpoint but is deemed unfeasible.
The International Secretariat merely wants the Division of Production
and Logistics to draft coordinated programs for the production of major
combat materiel, such as aircraft, ships, vehicles, artillery, light
weapons, munitions, communications equipment and radar systems.

The results were poor, and the standardization that was achieved was

due mainly to the fact that large amounts of hardware were furnished
by'asingle source, the Unietd States, in the form of aid. The logistic
support for this hardware and the need for spare parts led to the creation
of groups of experts from various countries to cooperate in these fields.
Concrete results were obtained under joint standardisation agreements

for certain types of explosives and munitions (especially 7.62 caliber,
which all NATO forces adopted), through the standardization of electronic
equipment and other features of combat vehicles and the adoption of standard-
ized ballistic criteria. Noteworthy results were achieved in programming
the joint production of munitions and and electronic equipment, and some
degree of coordination was gradually schieved in procedures. There has
been a major exchange of technical information (accompanied by a pact

to safeguard the secrecy of inventions and patent rights), and what is
particularly important, groups of experts have been formed to work

together in these fields at the international level.

111

FOR OFIICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFVICIAL US! ONLY

The first multinational venture did not take place until 195b, when NATO
prepared the specifications of a light jet fighter, and several countries
decided to join together to produce it. The FIAT 6-9] was finally built

under a joint program in Italy and Germany. Shortly thereafter, in I957,

the NATO Defense Production Board decided on the specifications of a

maritime patrol aircraft, the "Atlantic," construction of which was undertaken
jointly by Germany, Belgium, France and Holland, on the one hand, and

the United States, on the other.

The appearance throughout this decade of increasingly complex weapons
system, mainly missiles and aircraft, necessitated the adoption of new
manufacturing procedures in new installations, which significantly boosted
their cost.

A second stage of NATO logistic cooperation thus began, during which

the previous policy of general coordinated combat materiel production
programs gradually gave way to cooperation in specific projects for building
these new and complex weapons systems that present such difficult technical
and financing problems. In this connection, the United States proposed

to its European allies that they jointly produce certain weapons already
developed in the United States, pursuant to negotiations in NATO and
government-level agreement. Thus, five European firms (from Germany
Belgium, France, Holland and Italy) combined to form a multinational
consortium, SBTEL, to manufacture the "Hawk" ground-to-air missile. The
governments of the five countries supervised the project within NATO
through the Hawk Production organization, known as NNPLO. The program
achieved its initial goal of manufacturing 5,000 missiles in IO years.
Subsequently, Germany, Belgium, Denmark, Greece, Holland and Portugal‘
undertook production in Europe of the U.8.-developed air-to-air Sidewinder
missile, a program that called for the manufacture of l0,000 missiles

in 6 years. At almost the same time, France and Italy, together with

the United States, drafted a program to produce several hundred American
Hark a4 antisubmarine torpedoes, which had previously been manufactured

in Canada and Great Britain.

A major development in the sphere of standardization was the multinational
project to manufacture the American F nos-c Starfighter aircraft. An
organization with representatives from Germany, Belgium, Holland and

Italy was set up in I960 to supervise the coordinated production program
for th’- aircraft, and a year later it was made a NATO "agency." It

has often happened that a joint production agreement is reached outside
NATO and later declared a coordinated NATO program. without doubt, however,
deliberations within NATO provide guidance for and are somehow linked to
any such programs decided on outside NATO. Joint production was undertaken
throughout the 1960's on weapons systems such as surfsce-to-air and anti-
tank nissiles, antisubmsrine torpedoes and others. Because of the need

for some degree of'coordination before the startup of production, the
province of NATO bodies was extended to research. As a result of this
reorganisation, the Defense Production Board became the Armaments Committee,
to which the Committee of Defense Research Directors was later added.

112

VON OFFICIAL USE ONLY
In order to maintain a certain level of standardization in the multinational
projects that were beginning to proliferate, NATO's military authorities
decided to establish Basic Military Requirements (NBNR). These documents
were to be used as guides for the execution of research and production
programs stemming from the need for new equipment in the judgment of

these authorities. A total of 50 NBHR's were eventually established.

but only 7 were actually put into practice, wholly or partially. The

NBMR system had a major drawback. NATO's military authorities were
approving the “basic requirements" but did not subsequently have any

power over the governments, not to mention control over the production

firms, which meant that there was often a gap between NATO theory and

the subsequent practice by the firms. In addition, there was some overlapping
between the activities of the Armaments Comittee and the Research Cousittee.
Furthermore, the chances for a consensus were greatly reduced by the
projects having to be adopted unanimously by I5 nations with very diverse
characteristics. Nevertheless, the NBHR's managed to establish exchanges

of information and gradually laid the groundwork for a harmonisation

of certain tactical concepts, which was a prerequisite for the adoption

of common doctrines that would subsequently make weaponry standardization
possible.

The NATO authorities obviously cannot impose rigid standards on governments
or companies, because the fact of the matter is that individual interests
take precedence over the Alliance's attempts at coordination, which are,
moreover. somewhat subordinated to the desires of the main powers, especially
to U.S. hegemony.

As a result of the unsuccessful attempt at standardization based on the
NBHR's, the Atlantic Council decided to set up an exploratory group to
seek a more realistic approach. Thus. in I966 (the year in which France
adopted its particular status in the Alliance, and the upper-level bodies
were transferred from Paris to Brussels, which was conducive to a re-
organization) a new approach to cooperation in arms production was undertaken
in a third phase. The NATO Basic Military Requirements and unanimously
approved programs were abolished. The basis of the new approach was

that two or more countries, at the proposal of one of them or pursuant

to a suggestion by NATO authorities, could decide on their own to plan

a joint project, which other interested member countries could then get
involved in.

The project is then submitted to NATO for approval but is executed with
complete autonomy by the countries involved, which set up a "Steering
Committee" of whatever form they choose. Their sole obligation to NATO

is to submit an annual report on the progress of the project to its authorities.

The Defense Support Division was then created; it is part of the International
Secretariat and comes directly under the Council. The Conference of

National Armaments Directors (CNAD) was also organized to promote joint
research and production projects through the exchange of information

on operational concepts and national equipment programs.

113

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPTICIAL USE ONLY

In order to maintain close ties with business, the NATO Industrial Advisory
Group (NIAG) was also established; it brings together the appropriate
government authorities and representatives of defense industries to discuss
the common problems of government and industry.

A trend toward shared production began, and there were a great many bilateral
projects, plus some involving more than two countries. It was during

this period that the following projects were started up: the Jaguar tactical
aircraft; the Lynx, Puma and Gazelle helicopters; the Seasparrow ship
missile system, the Milan anti-armor system and the NATO frigate for

the 1970's, as well as many others. The goal of standardization was

still far off, however.

when German General Steinhoff resigned as chairman of the NATO Military
Committee in I974, in his farewell speech he described the Alliance's
arsenal as a veritable "military museum," stressing the proliferation

of weapons that had similar but different specifications, as well as the
overlapping of research and production efforts, which ran counter to
NATO's bid for standardization.

In addition, in a report to Congress in 1975. entitled "Research and
Development Program, Fiscal Year I976," the 0.8. Defense Department under-
scored that NATO forces had:

--23 different types of fighter aircraft

--7 different kinds of heavy tanks

--8 different kinds of armored personnel carriers
--22 different types of antitank weapons

--36 different radar systems

--8 different surface-to-air missile systems

--6 different surface-to-surface missile systems
--More than 20 types of over 30-millimeter guns
--Hore than 100 different tactical missile systems

It must be acknowledged, however, that there has been some progress in
the field of joint production.

The most important joint production project during this period was the
Multi-Role Combat Aircraft (NRCA) Project or "Tornado," for which there

was a demand for more than 800 units. The project began in 1968, when

the European members of NATO had to replace their F-lOb's by the late

l970's. An intergovernmental organization called NANMO (NATO HRCA Development
and Production Management Organization) was set up to carry out the project,
in which Germany, Great Britain and Italy were involved (Belgium, Canada

and the Netherlands withdrew during the first stage of the talks).

The governments of these countries hammered out an agreement with the British
Aircraft Corporation, Nesserschmitt-Bolkow-Blohm and Fiat to form an
international company called Panavia to design and manufacture the fuselage,
and with Rolls-Royce, NTU and Fiat to set up Turbo-Union to produce the
engine.

114
NAHHA (the NATO MRCA Management Agency) was then set up as a branch of
NAMHO. It was the framework for the international industrial complex

that had been formed and was supervised by the representatives of the
governments sitting on a NAM Steering Cousittee. Panavia is currently

an international company with strong financial backing and is : position
to undertake other programs. This pioneering project in genui; :, European
cooperation has not been without problems, however. It has been in existence
for ID years now, and the manufacturing program deadlines have not been
met; the Rolls-Royce crisis has caused further delays, which will mean

that the aircraft will not be available in quantity until 1982 and at

a much higher cost (the initial target cost of $10 million a unit will
exceed $30 million), along with the financing problems that such delays
cause. Saudi Arabia has already taken steps to purchase 200 of the planes
from Great Britain; a contract would require the approval of Germany

and Italy.

Joint production projects have not been solely in the field of complex
weapons systesw such as aircraft or missiles. In 1968 Germany and Britain
agreed to jointly produce a towed howitzer, the 155 millimeter ra-7o.
Italy joined the project in I970. It has been a success, and the first
shipment of howitzers was delivered to the Germany Army in October 1978.

Other projects, such a the attempt to manufacture a single tank model
in several NATO countiieo, have not been as successful, although the
goal has not been ruled out.

7.! Current Institutional Situation

we have outlined the slow and difficult evolution-of NATO's policy of
cooperation because it is very illustrative of the difficulties and accom-
plishments that prompted the successive reorganizations up to the present.

The Conference of National Armaments Directors is a civil body that facilitates
cooperation by guaranteeing exchanges of technical information and the
*ﬂwlqﬂtﬂt of projects. It is a high-level body directly under the North
Atlantic Council. All of the member countries except France participate

in it. Six main groups. in which the governments of the various countries

are represented, work under its supervision. Three of the groups specialize

in weaponry, one per branch (army, navy and air force), and the other

three are the Defense Research Group. the Inter-Army Air Defense Group

and the Inter-Army Telecommunications and Electronic Equipment Group,

the latter set up in I977.

The first three groups exchange information on national doctrines and
programs and seek suitable areas for cooperation. "hen a certain number

of countries have shown an interest in participating in a project, the
appropriate working group submits the project to the CHAD for designation

as a "NATO Project." After this, a Project Steering Committee is established
to monitor the progress of the venture on NATO's behalf. The Defense
Research Group exchanges research and technology information and identifies

115

P03 0P?ICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and: ﬂuid—u Gin-ace: l is 65.338.“ I ._.—.§— cadence

.2. 3. at .132» a. 2.1 25.0 Saw-.5 I. :8 3u35§=82 at ova—3:3 3.82; l. 63.320 3ng
425:: 2:5 235 8.32.3.— 2-8—5— | 652.38 5.5-: 3 25b 53¢ .l 683
6545 .88 no. 3 ova-39938:- ngo .l .xtauﬁ. Sass—ahaoﬁa no > 8:03 c3>< | .35 33335 > 8:32.33 on
..8<zo& .55 > 3:56 <3: 8.3821: I 855-883.- » 8.2.2:.
9:338 av .33 c 25:30 :29..— .2. E .55 on. «30 I .o no .335»: cc 3:229:00 I
.393 on 333 .2. .838 on 3:303 I :3... Dam}: 323.3: on. 25.65 | .3219 on. 33.30 I
dent-Ba... .605: 3:35 83 6298530 I
32.30- 8uoB-035E803 ov 3.8.6 I .338.“ 95:» 30:30. «2.233.358 I . .1532: 3.8.3.:— |
340333 oven—o... I .ES—S 53¢ an. at o? 8:32. 2333.— I .886958? 832.858 I
9300:; 09.80.883.838 on33 net-=0

 

=8§3 e .8825 : 33.5.3 3 .8335; .3

8...: on 3.96... _§.2&83== 73.8% 3.53
.652. 255 333m > .55. 2

.393325 :3

_§E§m 2.
38:

        
        

3.23.5 8.

.8520... 8.352

 

auto-:— 3225 332:.
258.5300 conic-258328. oﬂm< 9::— ou on on
.2526:— ov 3.5.2 35qu 3.03382: 85:38.2 3:03-62 SSE-E;
onﬁo 8 ﬂame 8 ﬂﬁo 8 4&0 8 2.2a 8 83o 8 8.5

A3 A3 any

 
 

3an
. : soc—SF; on

8.2.2an 33823
2.. 20:93:50 A _ v

116

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Key:

NOVIU‘UN—

‘0“

I0.

. Conference of ﬂational Armaments Directors

. Naval forces Armaments Group (35 subgroups)

. Air Portes Armaments Group (II subgroups)

. Ground Forces Armaments Group (31 subgroups)

. Defense Research Group (61 subgroups)

. Air Defense Group (Inter-Army) (2 subgroups)

. Telecommunications and Electronic Equipment Group (pending review)

(Inter-Army) (I subgroup)

. unto Industrial Advisory Group. Planning Committee (6 subgroups)
. Special Groups:

--Electronic components

--Industrial property

--Codification

--Quality control

--Security in the transport and storage of military ammunition
and explosives

--Blectrica1 energy

Project Steering Committees:

--Azores Fixed Acoustic Range

--Acoustic Communications Between Mobile Platforms

~-U$D-50l Surveillance System

--FR-7O 155 millimeter Howitzer

--Puma, Gazelle and Lynx Helicopters

--Jagusr Tactical and Training Aircraft

--NATO Maritime Patrol Aircraft

--Gombat Vehicle Reconnaissance (Tracked)

--Mark 20 RHZOZ Rapid-tire Gun and Anti-Aircraft Field Mount
HS 669"

--Mara 44 Torpedo

--System of Acoustic Communication with Submarines

--Naval Forces Sensor and weapon Accuracy Check Sites in Europe
(FORACS)

--SP70 155 millimeter Self-Propelled Howitzer

--MATO Patrol Boat Hydrofoil (Guided Missile)

--MATO Frigate for the 1970's

--NATO Conventional Submarine for European Haters

~-Tornado Multi-Role Fighter Aircraft

--F-l6 Fighter Aircraft

117

FOR OFFICIAL USB OMLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

areas of cooperation. The other two groups seek areas of cooperation
in the fields that their names indicate.

Also under the CNAD's authority is the NATO Industrial Advisory Group
(NIAG), which, as we mentioned before, brings together representatives
of the industries in the various member countries.

These groups, in turn, are broken down into more than 120 subgroups and
committees of experts in the various areas. This body's work sessions
represent a total of 8 000 man-days a year, which gives us an idea of
its level of activity.5'

A country interested in taking part in a combat materiel or weapons system
project observes the following procedure. The military requirements

of the materiel are determined in the CNAD, and the interested governments
draft a memorandum of understanding (N00) to simplify the international
legal and procedural red tape. The NIAC can become involved later by
furnishing an initial study on the technical feasibility of the program

in question. In any event, the industries from the participating countries
come up with their own technical report on its feasibility.

In accordance with NATO's operational provisions, the participating governments
draft a new HOD that outlines the stages of the project. This “00 is

informal and nonbinding as far as executing the project is concerned

(rarely does a cooperation agreement take the shape of a treaty between
countries, as happened, for example, with the development of the Concorde).

The CNAD then organizes a committee to oversee the project for NATO.

If two or more countries wish to purchase the same weapon from a third
NATO country, arrangements can also be made through the CNAD.

In any event, the process is not, of course, free from industrial and
even governmental pressures, because of the logical tendency of countries
to protect their own military industrial complexes, which can even lead
to the personal intervention of the highest national authorities. An
example of all such pressures was the so-called "contract of the century,"
under which four countries, Belgium, Denmark, the Netherlands and Norway,
agreed to replace their 9-104 Starfighters with a single model for the
1980's. The transaction entailed outlays of more than $2 billion for

the purchase of 348 aircraft; more than $60 billion was involved in

the joint production market, in which tens of millions of work hours
would go towards their manufacture.

The bidding competitors were the American YF-lé (General Dynamics) and

F-l7 Cobra (Northrop) aircraft, the French Mirage F-l H-53 (Marcel Dassault)
and the Swedish Viggens Eurofighter (Saab). The battle for the contract

was marked by all sorts of pressures, especially from France and the

United States, including their defense ministers, and the political infighting
led to the personal intervention of Giscard d'Bstaing and then President

Ford. The press underscored that while this struggle was going on, the

118

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
group known as the "Bilderberg Club" held a meeting that was attended

by such well-known figures as General Goodpaster, the supreme commander

of the allied forces in Europe; Joseph Luna, NATO secretary general;
Nelson Rockefeller; Helmut Schmidt, the German economy minister at the
time, and other prominent figures from the world of politics and finance.
There are those who connect the so-called "contract of the century" with
the accidental death of French General Sthelin, the former chief of Air
Force Staff. An advocate of American industry, to which he was an adviser
in his retirement, he was forced to resign from the french National Assembly
as a result of the publication of his report to.Giscard d'Bstaing that
spoke favorably of American industry and unfavorably of French industry.

These outside pressures notwithstanding, NATO drafted a detailed report
comparing the four bids and focusing on the technical specifications
and capabilities of each model, procurement, maintenance and operating
costs, and the economic compensations being offered.

The contract was awarded to the F-l6, at a price then of $4.5 million

a unit, and a joint program to manufacture 1,500 aircraft was organised
(Il6 for Belgium, 58 for Denmark, l02 for Rolland, 73 for Norway, 650
for the United States and the rest for export). A new feature of this
joint production program was that each European country would manufacture
certain components: Belgium, the fuselages and engines; Denmark, the
ground equipment and electronic assembly; Holland, the aircraft assembly
and telecommunications; Norway, the fuel tanks and advanced electronic
technology equipment. When production hits 1,000 aircraft, each country
will obtain 66 percent economic compensation, 88 percent if output rises
to I,500 units. This contract is regarded today as a model for joint
production, the only negative point being that the European countries
were not involved in the development of the prototype.

0n the military side, another NATO body that facilitates the exchange

of technical information is the Advisory Group for Aerospace Research

and Development (AGARD), which is headquartered in Paris and under the
Hilitary Committee, which it advises in aerospace research matters. It

has the following panels: aeronautical and space medicine, avionics,
electromagnetic wave propagation, flight mechanics, fluid dynamics, guidance
and control, propulsion and energetics, structures and materials, and
techxical information. In addition, AGARD brings together prominent
aerospace experts from the member countries, promotes the incorporation

of aerospace technology for shared use, organises conferences and publishes
reports that are widely read in NATO.

Another branch of the Military Committee is the Military Agency for Standard-
ization (MAS), which has been headquartered in Brussels since I970, when

it transferred there from London. Its task is to promote standardisation
agreements (STANAG for short32) for procedures, doctrines and the main
specifications of a wide range of equipment. For example, it has established
a catalogue of common ammunition for artillery, tanks or mortars; has

119

FOR OFFICIAL "8! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

standardised bomb deactivation procedures; has consolidated analytical
naval warfare models; has standardized aircraft maintenance procedures
and search and rescue techniques and has standardized the definitions
of common military terms, among other accomplishments in this field.

MAS also puts out the Inter-Army Publications (AP), which are NATO manuals
that various countries have agreed to follow and that deal with use tactics
and unit doctrine. There are almost 100 AP's and more than 900 Standard-
ization Agreements, around half of which are concered with equipment.

Many of them are becoming obsolete, however, along with the equipment

they refer to, even though attempts are made to keep them up-to-date.

There is no systematic approach for formulating and updating them, and

not all have been agreed to by all of NATO's members.

A STANAG is not always promulgated in the MAS; some, albeit not many,
come from the CHAD.

Other bodies have been created more recently to work towards coordination
in defense materiel. In I975, in response to France's desire to emphasise
interoperability, the Ad Hoc Committee on Materials Interoperability

was set up. A civilian branch of the International Secretariat and with
representatives from all member countries, it seeks to resolve inter-
operability problems in specific fields, such as telecommunications,
fuels, munitions for tank guns, mutual logistic aircraft support and

the application of standardization agreements. In 1976, the Division

of Armaments Standardization and Interoperability was created on a pilot
basis under the International Staff. He should also mention the civilian
Science Committee, which does not deal specifically with defense matters.
Rather, it is concerned with the fields of science and technology in
general; thus, it holds colloquiums, puts out publications and grants
subsidies for advanced technology research, which is financed by the
Alliance as a whole and contributes to technological exchanges among
member countries.

There are two other highly specialized centers that we can mention in

the field of logistic cooperation. One is the Antisubmarine Warfare

Research Center, a branch of SACLANT and located in La Spezia (Italy);

it was set up in I962 to do research on oceanographic and submarine detection
problems. The other is the SHAPE Technical Center (STC), headquartered

in The Hague; it was created in I960 to provide scientific and technical
assistance to SHAPE and is especially qualified in air defense matters.

Moving on to another sphere of logistic activities, we will now analyse

the NATO Maintenance and Supply Organization (NAMSO), which was established
in I957 to meet the need for spare parts for North American-made equipment

in Europe. A branch of the Atlantic Council, it has its headquarters

in Luxembourg, with two main operational centers elsewhere, one in Koblens

(FRO), which specializes in the r-Ioa, and the other in Taranto (Italy)

to provide logistic support for NATO's southern flank.

120

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NAHSO has a Board of Directors, several subsidiary committees and an
operating element known as the NATO Maintenance and Supply Agency (NANSA).
The Board of Directors, whihc is composed of one member from all member
countries except Iceland, establishes the general policy of logistic
support to be pursued by NAHSO and decides on financial iatters.

The mission of NANSO is mainly to facilitate logistic support (supplies

of spare parts and the provision of maintenance and repair facilities)

for various ueapona systems that are in joint use in NATO; it also identifies,
classifies and codifies parts. In addition to supplying spare parts

from stocks, NAHSO also fills spare parts requisitions in the country

that ordered them, both on an emergency and a routine basis. It can

also provide testing, repair and technical assistance equipment "in situ"

and arrange for long-term contractual maintenance services to be performed

by the appropriate industry.

The weapons and materiel currently receiving logistic support from NAHSO
are: the Nike, Honest John, Sidewinder, Bull Pup, hawk, Lance and Tow
missile systems; the P-lOb aircraft, the satellite communications stations,
the NADGB air defense system, the NATO Nissile Firing Installation (NAHPI).
the Mark 37/44 torpedoes and miscellaneous conventional equipment. NAHSA
does not perform all of the logistic support tasks for the aforementioned
materiel; rather, it comes to an agreement with the user countries on

the tasks that are deemed cost-effective. The United States does not

have the legal capacity to contract NANBA support but is working on legislation
so that its forces in Europe can benefitfrom this support. NAHSA is

also scheduled to provide logistic assistance for the future NATO AHACS.

In general, centralized logistic support is furnished to all of the weapons
systems that are held in common by several nations. NAHSO stocks 8|,000

line items worth $60 million.33

The most recent NATO logistics body is the Senior NATO Logisticians Conference
(SNLC), which met for the first time in I978. It holds civil and military
sessions, and its mission is to provide assistance in consumption logistics,
in contrast to the CNAD, which is concerned with production logistics.

Study began in 1977 on the LongPTerm Defense Program, which we referred

to previously in discussing NATO force planning. This program comprises

IO task forces of particular interest to NATO in the l980's. Task Force

8 is concerned with rationalization, in other words, the effective use

of NATO resources through the standardization and interoperability of

materiel in order to save money and at the same time boost military efficiency.

This issue was analyzed by the CNAD in the fall of I978. It subnitted
recommendations to the member countries on how they could further develop
and enhance the STANAG or at least see to it that they are observed;

to this end, it set up a sort of high-level conmittee to coordinate national
armaments planning. Moreover, the Periodic Arms Planning System (PAPS)

121

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0F?ICIAL USE ONLY

is now in the planning stage; its objective is to establish a systematic
procedure for identifying the Alliance's needs, which the CNAD would

then seek to meet by promoting jointly developed materiel. In order to
start this system up, study has begun on the links that should be established
between it and NATO force planning. The so-called NATO Arms Planning
Review (NAPR), which was approved in October I979, is essentially an
analysis of national timetables for materiel and a comparison of them
with NATO standardisation requirements, with a view towards maximum inter-
operability. This project could make the CHAD more effective, but

it is still on its first legs, and we will have to wait and see how it
develops before evaluating it.

7.2 U.S. Policy Towards the Alliance in the Area of Armaments

The predominance of the United States after the Second World War and

its status as a superpower that becomes involved in conflicts from which
Europe is somewhat far-removed (Korea and Vietnam) have led it to pursue
a practically autsrkic policy in the area of weaponry, which it is able
to do because of the enormity of its domestic market. This policy is
backed by the so-called "Buy American Act," under which the prices of
foreign military hardware that competes with domestic materiel are subject
to a 50 percent surcharge. when Western Europe experienced its economic _
boom in the l960's, industry there flourished. and their armies were

able to purchase weapons outside the United States. In any event, the
United States still remained practically self-sufficient, and even in

the isolated cases in which the Pentagon dxxmesEuropean prototypes, such
as the Harrier vertical takeoff aircraft or the Roland guided missile,
they are manufactured in the United States under license.

After the Vietnam war, however, the United States began reassessing its
armaments policy, especially in relation to its NATO allies. In this
connection, the U.S. State Department financed a study by Thomas Callaghan,
an armaments expert, which was later published by the Georgetown University
International Center for Strategic Studies under the title of "U.S./European
Economic Cooperation in Military and Civil technology." He advocated

the creation of a European agency for the procurement of military hardware
that would coordinate European requirements and introduced the concept

of the "two-way street" in the arms market in a bid to promote sales

of European-made weapons to the United States to balance out U.S. sales

to allied Europe. Callaghan defended his theory before the Senate, stating:
“If we manage to establish this 'two-way street' between Europe and the '
United States, America will benefit as much economically as Europe,

in terms of both trade and jobs."

This philosophy of mutually beneficial cooperation gave rise to a political
debate in the United States that was marked by opposition and misgivings
on the part of some lawmakers. Nonetheless, for the first time in its
history, the Senate Armed Forces Committee held a session on "Allied
Cooperation and Standardization" on 3! March I976.

122

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
IIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIllllllllllllllllllllllll
TOR OFFICIAL USE OULY

As a result of these developments, amendments were introduced into U.S.
legislation to encourage standardization and joint production within

the Alliance. He should make special mention of the Culver-Nunn Amendment,
which was passed unanimously by the Senate and eventually passed also

by the House, which for 2 years had stymied approval of the original
version, which reads:34 "It is the policy of the United States that
equipment acquired for the use of U.8. Armed Forces personnel stationed

in Europe, under the agreements of the North Atlantic Treaty, should be
standardized or at least interoperable with the equipment of other meabers
of NATO. In the pursuit of this policy, the secretary of defense should,
whenever possible, initiate and execute procurement procedures that will
make possible the purchase of equipment that is standardised or interoperable
with that of other aenbers of NATO...8uch procedures shall take into
consideration the cost, functions, quality and availability of the equipment
to be purchased." it further states that:35 "it is the sense of Congress
that the weapons aystens that are developed entirely or mainly for use

in the NATO thecter of operations should be consistent with NATO's require-
ments, in order to move towards a common doctrine and procedures and

to facilitate to the utmost the standardization and interoperability

of nilitary equipment..." This piece of legislation enables the secretary
of defense to rescind the preference that the Buy American Act accorded

to American equipment in order to promote standardised NATO hardware,

the only requirement being to so inform Congress.

This amendment officially established the "two-way street" concept, adding,
however, that this will be feasible only "if the European countries act

on a united and collective basis"; therefore, the U.S. Congress "encourages
the governments of Europe to hasten their current efforts to achieve
collaboration in European armaments among the European members of the
Alliance."

As a result of the Culver-Nunn Amendment, the U.8. defense secretary
is obliged to submit an annual report to Congress on the specific issue
of “Rationalization/Standsrdization Within NATO."

Espousing a similar philosophy in the sphere of NATO cooperation, a private
institution. a task force from the Georgetown University Center for Trans-
Atlantic Policy, published in I977, under the title "Allied Partnership,"
the findings of work sessions designed to take a business-oriented look

at how the economic pressures of military spending were distributed among
the allied nations. The report asserts: "Fifteen sovereign nations cannot
efficiently forge a suitable military structure without a collective
military-industrial effort," concluding that "the establishment of a
North Atlantic Defense Market would constitute the largest political

and economic cooperation effort that the Free Horld has ever proposed

in its own defense."

Pursuant to this policy of proaoting Atlantic cooperation, by the (.11
of I975 the United States had already signed a Memorandum of Understanding
with Great Britain on reciprocal purchases in an attempt to achieve an

123

!OR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
EUR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

equitable balance between the two nations in their defense purchases

by means of the mutual reduction of potential legal barriers and by taking

a comprehensive approach to exchanges instead of having to hammer out
specific agreements for each weapon. Thus, for example, Great Britain
forwent manufacture of two weapons systems that were already under development
for the sake of two standardizable systems: the American Harpoon surface-
to-surface missile and the French-German Milan antitank missile. In
exchange, the British Government expected the allied countries to adopt

the helicopter-borne Sea-Skua air-to-sea weapons system that England

had developed. The United States subsequently signed other similar memoranda
of understanding with Germany, France, the Betherlands, Italy and Norway,

and others are pending with Belgium, Canada and Denmark. They are designed
to lessen the imbalance in military hardware sales between the United

States and the other members of NATO, an imbalance that the following

table clearly illustrates.36

A) Sales to Hestern Europe of Military Equipment Produced in the United
States (in millions of U.S. dollars; U.S. fiscal year)

Country 1967 1968 1222 1970 1971 1972 As a Percentage

of Total Hilitar
Purchases (1972)

 

Belgium 9.3 6.4 0.6 7.9 6.2 7.4 5
France 15.7 12.6 25.1 12.4 15.8 3.7 1.5
Italy 29.3 50.1 50.4 50.4 50.2 41.6 6
Holland 5.7 18.2 12.6 6.4 10.2 7.5 2
Germany 309.1 156.3 207.5 226.2 333.3 430.8 27
Great Britain 156.9 270.5 369.5 221.5 118.6 79.9 3

Europe total,

except Greece
and Turkey 573.3 561.6 750.2 639.4 610.5 650.1 6

As a percentage
of total U.S.
sales 62.7 55.1 57.1 44.5 41.9 43.5

Source: U.S. Defense Department, Security Assistance Agency, Hay 1973.
B) Sales to North America of European Military Equipment

The only producing country that has been able to export sizable amounts
of equipment (directly or under production license) to North America

has been Great Britain, as we can see from the following:

--British sales from 1972 to 1974 (in millions of U.S. dollars):

To Canada (the Blowpipe tactical missile) 28.0

To the United States (the Harrier V/STOL aircraft) 111.8

Total to North America 139.8
124

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The “two-way street" policy has run into problems even in Congress, which
was supposed to be promoting it. The Special Subcommittee on NATO Standard-
ization, Interoperability and Readiness (which is under the house Armed
Services Committee) published a report in early I979 that stated the
following: "There are two very different ways of looking at the current
'two-way street' trade balance. One approach limits the estimate to

the commercial arms flows between the United States and the European
members of NATO, which yields a balance that is heavily in the United
States' favor. This is the approach that Europe takes...But there is
another, completely different view of the 'twocway street' if we look

at the overall trade balance in military or defense-related goods and
services. If we consider all defense transactions, including arms trade,
then the two-way street in trade is heavily in Europe's favor, with an
average 0.5. deficit of more than 8| billion a year." If this approach
were to prevail in Congress, it would greatly hamper Europe's efforts

to export arms to the United States.

A factor working in favor of materiel trade is that the Long-Term Defense
Program that the 0.5. Government has proposed to NATO is expected to
yield major benefits in rationalizing the joint defense effort through
the international acceptance of jointly determined weapons specifications.
The 0.8. undersecretary of defense said as much at the Conference of
National Armaments Directors in the fall of I979.

The 0.5. move towards more balanced cooperation in NATO could facilitate
other mutually acceptable pacts such as the aforementioned P-l6 joint
production project, which has unquestionably been more advantageous than
other previous joint production programs between European industries

and the powerful U.s. industry. Under the P-l6 joint production contract,
the firms from the European countries (Belgium, Denmark, Holland and
Norway) will receive compensation practically equivalent to the total

cost of the scheduled F-lG's and will have access to the latest aeronautical
technology; moreover, the contract makes economies of scale possible

by apportioning the production so that each country will manufacture
certain components for the program as a whole. This contrasts with the
approach to the manufacture of the F-lOb's in I960, when each country
produced its own aircraft entirely on its own.

The good intentions of the United States have been questioned, however.
For example, under the F-l6 joint production contract, in addition to

the economic compensation for the European countries for manufacturing
certain components, the U.S. Government, pursuing the "two-way street"
policy, pledged to purchase l6,000 HAG machine guns, worth $30 million,
from Belgium, a matching item that European NATO circles have regarded
as inadequate and far from encouraging for the "two-way street" theory.

Bonn has also registered complaints with Washington, which had promised

at the Atlantic summit conference in the spring of I978 to purchase 9,000
German military vehicles as one of the matching items for the cost-sharing
of the AHACS program. By the fall of I979, the United States had purchased
only 300 of the vehicles.

125

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFPICIAL USE ONLY

These European reservations notwithstanding, the current course of U.8.
policy holds out the prospect of mutual benefits for the NATO allies,

in the pursuit of a common goal: the standardization of the Alliance's
military hardware. In August I980, the president of the United States
signed the NATO Mutual Support Act of I979, which removes many of the
restrictions in the Defense Acquisition Regulation and Arms Control Act.
This I979 act has resolved many of the logistics problems of the 0.8.
troops in Europe.

If the 0.3. policy described here is eventually put into practice and
does not remain mere rhetoric or undergo paring back, from a domestic
industrial standpoint it will entail some degree of sacrifice for u.s.
industry, which will have to renounce its predominance; the reasons for
such a stand would be basically political, and Europe's heterogeneous
and diversified industry would then have to respond appropriately.

' 7.3 The European Sphere of Cooperation

The steady economic and industrial recovery of the European NATO countries
after the critical phase of the postwar period further highlighted the
inadequacy of their individual efforts in the field of defense in comparison
with the overwhelming superiority of the United States. In order to

join efforts as much as possible in a bid for efficiency and in order

to show Washington a united stand, the European countries undertook a

series of initiatives that were successful to a greater or lesser degree

in achieving coordination in defense matters. We will now examine these
initiatives, the organizations that sponsored them and their practical
consequences.

The Eurogroup

Eurogroup is an informal group consisting of the defense ministers of

the European members of the Alliance, except France and Iceland. It

was created in I968 (Portugal did not join until I976) to achieve a greater
coordination of their interests in defense questions. It bears noting

that during the time that Greece remained outside the NATO Military Command,
it continued within the Eurogroup.

The defense ministers of the Eurogroup meet informally twice a year,
coinciding with the sessions of the Atlantic Council; the chairmanship
rotates on an annual basis among the representatives.

Its work is conducted by groups of experts from the national delegations
to NATO, because the Eurogroup lacks an administrative organisation.
except for a small secretariat. A Staff Group supervises any studies
that are undervaythrough subgroups that specialise in various fields.
The following subgroups are currently in operation:

--EURONAD: Composed of the national armaments directors of the Burogroup
countries, it is concerned with armaments coordination and has been one
of the most active subgroups.

126

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
--EUR000H: Promotes the coordination and interoperability of communications
systems. '

--BUROLOG: Tries to enhance logistic cooperation.

--BUROLONGTBRM: Studies the harmonization of tactical doctrines as a
basic step towards a subsequent standardization of armaments, given the
obligatory subordination of armaments to doctrine.

--BUROHBD: Coordinates health care services.

--BUROSTRUCTUR£: Studies the various national Armed Forces organisations
and their recruitment and mobilisation systems for the exchange and comparison
of information.

--EUROTRAINING: Tries to expand bilateral and multilateral training pacts.

Its studies are aimed mainly at promoting rationalization and standard-
isation in the field of defense and also at harmonizing viewpoints on the
political and strategic facets of Europe's defense within the Alliance.

The first four subgroups deal with questions that concern us in this
chapter.

One of the Burogroup's first accomplishments was the BDIP [European Defense
Improvement Program] in 1970, which called for the investment of $1 billion
over 5 years, broken down into three main items: $420 million for NATO
infrastructure, mainly underground aircraft shelters and the development

of the integrated telecommunications system ("108), $450 million for
weapons systems purchases and $80 million in transport aircraft that
Germany provided Turkey. The BDIP was mainly an attempt to clearly show
the United States the joint defense efforts that the countries of Europe
were making and to make these efforts a matter of public record. In

this connection, starting in I97] the Eurogroup has published at the

end of every year a document called BUROPACKAGE, which outlines the improve-
ments made in the defense capabilities of the member countries so as

to make public opinion aware of their joint contribution to Atlantic
defense.

In I975, the Eurogroup was particularly active in pushing for armaments
standardization and publicly requested that the United States take specific
steps in this direction. Furthermore, it called attention to the major
limitations that were being imposed on the Eurogroup's standardisation
policy by the absence of France, one of Europe's powers in the arms industry.

The fact is that as far as major military hardware is concerned, Furogroup's
only two significant accomplishments have been coordinating the purchase

of the 0.8. Lance surfaceﬁto-surface missile by Germany., Belgium. Great
Britain and the Netherlands, and some degree of involvement in the agreement

127

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

between the United States and four European countries (Belgium, Denmark,

the Netherlands and Norway) for the joint production of the F-l6. In

both cases, in other words, the Eurogroup was helping to establish an
American project in Europe, and in the second instance to the detriment

of a genuinely European industry, Dassault. which was offering the Mirage.
The fact of the matter was that the American products were the obvious
choices, because the diversified and atomized European industry was in

a position of commercial inferiority, even though it could compete technolog-
ically with u.s. industry.

The Eurogroup has at least helped to encourage a spirit of European cooperation,
but its practical accomplishments have been few. Four years after 0.8.

arms specialist Callaghan introduced the concept of the "two-way street"

in inter-Atlantic weapons deals, the trade imbalance between Europe and

the United States, which was 10 to l in 1976,37 is still heavily in favor

of American industry.

The Independent European Program Group (IEFG)

Seeking a solution to France's absence from European armaments cooperation
efforts, the Eurogroup invited France to a special meeting devoted exclusively
to such cooperation. France accepted on the condition that it be held

outside NATO and the Eurogroup.

In a bid to reconcile the competitive drive of industries, especially
France's, and the need to promote greater European technological and
industrial cooperation, on an invitation from the Italian Government

and under the chairmanship of the Italian undersecretary of foreign affairs,
the undersecretaries of defense of the ID memebrs of the Eurogroup (Portugal
was still not a member) and of France met in Rome in February I976. Also
attending the meeting were the armaments directors of these countries

and other officials from their Foreign Ministries. The upshot was the
creation of the European Program Group as an "independent" entity; it is
regarded today as the most important European institution in the field

of armaments. It is a "conference" or "forum" rather than a "body" and

has no legal charter. It meets periodically at two different levels:

a general political level and a technical level. At the political level,
the undersecretaries of state of the member countries normally meet once

a year. Italy has chaired the political level since the establishment

of the IEPG, but there is move now to make the chair a rotating post.

The technical meetings are run by the national armaments directors and
bring together experts in various fields.

The IEPG has no secretariat or bureaucratic structure and assigns specific
tasks to subgroups of experts under the chairmanship of one of the member
countries.

In general, it endeavors to promote the efficient use of funds earmarked

for military hardware research, development and procurement, to further
the standardization and interoperability of such hardware, to consolidate

128

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
a European industrial and technological base and to strengthen Europe's
position in its relations with the United States and Canada.

Three panels have initially been set up to carry out these tasks:

--Panel 1, under the chairmanship of Great Britain, is concerned with
military materiel planning, beginning with the drafting of lists of the
equipment in bee and replacement projects; these lists are kept up—to-

date so as to ascertain the future arms requirements of the member countries
until about I990.

--Panel 11, under the chairmanship of Belgium, coordinates the work of

the 12 subgroups that look into the possibilities for cooperation in

I2 specific spheres, several of which emerged from the work done by Panel 1.
Four of these subgroups have made significant gains in 105 millimeter
ammunition for tanks, tactical support aircraft, nonremote-controlled
antitank weapons and mine detectors. The other eight subgroups are still

at an early stage of research into high-speed launches, light and heavy
torpedoes, military helicopters, antitank weapons, surface-to-air guided
weaponry, mines systems, mines for naval exercises and naval patrol aircraft.

--Panel 111, under Germany's chairmanship, is concerned with the economic
and procedural aspects of defense. As of now it has been broken down
into five subpanels with the following tasks:

-Subpanel I: Project design procedures; attempts to establish common
procedures for new weapons systems.

-Subpanel 2: Compensation among projects; examines the problems of balanced
cooperation to make sure that not only the highly industrialised countries
benefit from such cooperation.

-Subpanel 3: Competition and technology transfer; examines the different
national legislations pertaining to competition, technology transfers
and sales.

—Subgroup 4: Industrial cooperation; tries to determine national arms
production capabilities and how to rationalise this production; the chairman-
ship of this important subpanel has been given to France.

-Subpsnel S: Arms exports; examines the different national legislations
relating to the export of arms to non-IEPG countries and to arms embargoes,
noting legislative common ground in this regard.

Reports on the work done by the experts in these subpanels are submitted
to the meetings of the armaments directors, who in turn inform the under-
secretaries of state.

Although no specific cooperation project has yet been approved, there

has been progress in the preliminary phase of administrative and procedural
matters with a view towards identifying potential cooperative undertakings.

129

FOR 0F?ICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Hork is still at a very early stage, but expectations are running high

about the potential of this new forum, and the members of the IEPG are
convinced that it can become the body that will achieve the sought-after
level of European cooperation to which so many approaches have been attempted,
all with very meager results.

It is for this reason that we are devoting special attention to the IIPG
in this study.

The use of the term "independent" warrants thorough analysis. In his

study "The European Program Group"38 British arms expert David lay Hoe
explains the introduction of the adjective "independent" as follows:

"The name change between February and March I976 from Independent Program
Group (IPG) to European Program Group (EPG) illustrates the Alice in
Wonderland nature of the procedure. The second title has the advantage

of sidestepping the question as to what the new organization is independent
of and in what sense."

The annual reports of the U.S. defense secretary to Congress on
“Rationalization and Standardization in NATO" refer to it simply as the
European Program Group, whereas European organizations tend to emphasise

the word independent and prefer to use the French title of "Groupe independent
europeen de programmes" (GIEP). NATO usually says IEPG (the English
initials), maintaining the “independent," however.

_The report on "A European Armaments Policy" that Dankert presented to

the western European Union39 contains the following quote from French
engineer and General Cauchie: ”...in this group we can meet as Europeans,
independent of the official structures that we are familiar With. whether
they are part of NATO or of the western European Union."

The Klepsch Report, a well documented and widely publicized-study on
"European Cooperation in Armaments Supply," 0 says: "The word 'independent'
means that the IEPG is independent of the Eurogroupi" Expanding on this,
the publication NOUVBLLES ATLANTIQURS wrote later: "The IEPG, which

is independent of NATO.../was created in 1976, totally independent of

NATO, in order to include France, which does not participate in the Alliance's
military structurefy [in boldface]

No government authority has officially proclaimed that the group is independent
of NATO, but it has been careful not to officially acknowledge organizational
ties to or dependence with respect to the Atlantic Alliance.

After Portugal joined in November I976, the IEPG conprised all of the
European members of NATO, except Iceland, which does not maintain armed
forces, and the Alliance has promoted the group because it expects that

it will pursue its activities in keeping with the general interests of

the Alliance as a whole. Admiral Nsinini, when he was the assistant

chief of the Italian Defense Staff and chairman of the IBPG at the national
armaments directors level, stressed this when he stated that the member

130

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
countries will also take into consideration "relations with the countries
on the other side of the Atlantic, mainly the growing and tangible American
trend towards tackling standardisation as an objective that can be achieved
through more balanced exchanges between the two components of the Alliance
(Europe and North America)."

The country that happens to be chairman of the IEPG maintains the liaison
with the Alliance through its representative to the NATO CHAD. Thus,

the IEPG's Panel I has submitted to NATO the national timetables for
equipment replacement and has received the corresponding timetables of

the United States and Canada. furthermore, the IEPC has organised an

ad hoc task force among the three panels and the national armaments directors;
it is headquartered in Brussels and looks into the transatlantic dialog

on the following points:

--The drafting and presentation of a list of hardware that, according
to the Europeans, the United States and Canada should consider acquiring
for their forces in Europe.

--A list of supplies and provisions earmarked for U.S. and Canadian forces
in Europe.

--ldentifying technical and legal impediments to exports of European
materiel to the North American market.

--Exchange of information.

An agreement has also been reached to create a joint U.8.-IEPG task force
to look into the obstacles hampering their relations. The United States
and Canada also want to set up two other task forces, one to study the
possibilities for rationaliring arms research, development and production,
and another to look into industrial cooperation; the IEPC has not yet
responded to these proposals.

The major European defense industries have set up an organization called
the European Defense Industries Group (EDIG) to conduct their relations
with the IEPG.

The creation of the IEPC has jeopardized the existence of the EURONAD

subgroup of the Eurogroup, which brings together the national armaments
directors of the European countries of RAID, except France. It has been

one of the most active Eurogroup subgroups in matters of armaments cooperation,
but its work now overlaps with and has been surpassed by the IEPG, and
therefore consideration is being given to its possible dissolution. The

only reason to keep it going would be to maintain ties with NATO, but

the feeling is that this can be accomplished through the CHAD, which

because it is part of NATO's civil organization, comprises all member
countries, including France.

131

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Thomas A. Callaghan spoke on "The Macroeconomics of the Allied Countries'
Arms Development and Production" at the Hans Risaen Conference in hamburg
in February 1978. He stated the following: "In the years preceding the
First World war, the nations with more than 25 Iillion inhabitants were

in a position to provide what was essential for their own defense. During
the Second ﬂorid War and in the immediate postwar period, only the nations
with 50 million inhabitants had the necessary resources to develop and
produce their own materiel. But in the 1960‘s, nations like Greet Britain,
France, Germany and Italy were unable to assume the burden of developing
and producing their own weapons systems...A national policy cannot aim

at independence (or more precisely, nondependence) unless the country

in question is willing to pay the price. The countries of the Harsaw

Pact have paid the price; they have neglected civil technology, and their
economies have begun to weaken. The Soviet Union has pooled its defense
resources with those of the other Warsaw Pact countries. But some of
these countries (the Soviet Union among then) have not had the necessary
resources available to furnish themselves with solid civil technology.

The USSR has been able to land a reacted-controlled vehicle on the moon
but has had to turn to the Rest for the technology to put cars and trucks
on its roads."

In order for the western countries to conserve the resources that they
are today lavishing on competing national defense programs, Callaghan
advocates cooperation within the framework of an "Atlantic market" that
would include North America and Europe, the latter to be represented
by an international body, for example, a "European agency for defense
materiel procurement," formed out of the Independent European Program
Group.

The existence of the IEPG, which has currently raised such great hopes

in Europe, does, however, cause a certain amount of tension in Atlantic
cooperation. This is a logical upshot of the contradiction between the

desire to rationalize military hardware within NATO and the fear of competition
that the potential emergence of a powerful European industry has created

on the other side of the Atlantic.

Thus, the IEPG is somewhat ambiguous about its description of "independent"

and attempts to maintain a difficult balance between its pursuit of European
teamwork and rationalization in defense, on the one hand, and cooperation

in transatlantic relations that fall withinthe framework of NATO's overall

defense interests, on the other.

The western European Union

In discussing defense cooperation within the Atlantic Alliance, we cannot
avoid referring to the Hestern European Union (HEU).

Initially there was a western Union; it was formed in I968, 1 year before

the creation of NATO, pursuant to the signing of the Treaty of Mutual
Assistance in Brussels by France, Great Britain and the Benelux countries.

132

‘ ' :IAL USE ONLY
This was an attempt to create a European Defense Community. This plan
fell through, and in 195‘ the western Union merely brought Germany and
Italy under the treaty and changed its name to the Western European Union.
All of the "EU countries belong to NATO.

The Treaty of Brussels is still in effect (it has a duration of 50 years,
in other words, up to I998), and its members' pledge to mutual defense,
according to Article 5, is much more binding than the North Atlantic
Treaty.“

The western European Union is organised as follows: a Council of hinisters,
a Consultative Assembly, a Secretariat, a Standing Armaments Committee
and an Arms Control Agency.

The Assembly is deliberative and has no executive powers. Nonetheless,
the numerous studies on contemporary European problems that it debates
and publishes are of great interest (witness the frequent references
to them in this book), and the recommendations that it formulates both
reflect and form public opinion.

The Standing Armaments Committee is not of constitutional origin because

it was not set up under the treaty, but later in I955. Its headquarters

is located in Paris, where it maintains a Permanent Secretariat. It

meets quarterly and promotes cooperation agreements voluntarily suggested

by member countries by organizing "groups" on which they are represented.

It initially achieved some results in establishing the specifications

of military vehicles, and we should mention in its favor that the production
of the Eundeswehr's vehicles was based on a study by this committee.

In this chapter we will see what its current direction and interests are.

The Arms Control Agency's mission was to oversee Germany’s rearmament,
and thus its present-day role has diminished greatly.

The cost of running the various "EU bodies is apportioned among the member
countries in accordance with coefficients expressed in l/600ths of the
budget.

The table below shows these coefficients and the 1978 budget in two currencies,
pounds and French francs, inasmuch as the "EU has some of its.bodies

in London (the permanent representatives to the Council and the Secretariat
General) and some in Paris (the Assembly and the Standing Armaments Committee).
In all, there are 150 officials in the 2 countries.

Contribution of the Member Countries of the "EU in I978

 

 

Country x/600ths Pounds Francs

Germany 120 l33,3al.00 2,991,056.00

Belgium 59 65,559.33 l,b70,602.53

France IZO 133,341.00 2,991,056.00
133

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Italy 120 133,341.00 2,991,056.00
Luxembourg 2 2,222.34 49,850.94
Netherlands 59 65,559.33 1,470,602.53
United Kingdom 120 133,341.00 2,991,056.00
Totals 600 666,705.00 14,955,280.00

As we can see, these figures are very small in comparison to the amounts
that the members of NATO have to contribute to finance its administrative
-structure.

The "EU has very pragmaticslly subordinated itself to NATO, a much more
consequential organization, and for this reason included the following
clause in the protocol under which Germany and Italy were incorporated:
"In executing the Treaty, the high contracting parties and all of the
bodies created by them under the Treaty will cooperate closely with the
North Atlantic Treaty Organization," adding that: "In order to avoid
any overlapping with the NATO Staffs, the Council and the (Arms Control)
Agency will defer to the appropriate military authorities of NATO for
any information and opinion on military matters."

Article 10 of the "830 Council Decision Establishing a Standing Armaments
Committee" (7 Hay 1955) stipulates that this committee" will, in close
association with NATO, seek to enhance consultation and cooperation in

the field of armaments..." and later adds: "It will strive to promote...
agreements or compromises on problems such as armaments studies, standard-
ization, production and supplies. Such agreements or compromises can

be concluded among all the countries of the Western European Union or
among any number of them. They will remain open to participation by

other countries of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization." This last
sentence illustrates the “30's desire to maintain very close collaboration
with the other NATO components."

The members of the Secretariat of the Standing Armaments Conittee are
elected from among the representatives of the respective NATO countries,
attend the meetings of the NATO Conference of National Armaments Directors
as observers and also maintain links with the Alliance's Military Agency
for Standardisation (HAS); thus, as we might suppose, they are thoroughly
familiar with the work being done on weapons standardisation.

In its search for a stronger, less NATO-subordinated European identity

and in its eagerness to remove arms production questions from the Organisa-
tion's scope, France attempted in the early 1970's to revitalize the

"EU as a genuinely European defense body that would complement the political
and economic activities of the EEC. A HEU draft recommendation on European
unity reminds "the member countries of the EEC that have not yet acceded,

as well as all [European countries with democratic regimes/ [in boldface]
that would like to join in a common defense policy, that they can accede

to the Treaty of Brussels.“3

134
These initiatives by France have not succeeded in curbing NATO's influence
in the attempts to coordinate the defense efforts of the Western European
countries.

The Hestern European Union has adapted to this fact and tries to engage
in activities that complement NATO's.

In Hay 1975, shortly before the IEPG emerged, the HBO instructed the
Standing Armaments Committee, which has done authoritative reports on
the issues within its jurisdiction but has not succeeded in hammering
out any specific cooperation project, to work in the future, "in close
association with NATO, in a bid to enhance consultation and cooperation
in the field of weaponry, in order to seek common solutions that will
enable the governments of the member countries to meet their materiel
requirements. To this end, it will strive, whenever the opportunity
presents itself, to promote agreements or compromises on problems such
as armaments studies, standardisation, production and supplies."44

Later, in June I976, even though the IEPC had already been set up, the

"EU Council instructed the Standing Armaments Committee, "as a task for

the immediate future, to draft a detailed blueprint for a study that

will take the form of a descriptive analysis of the situation in the

weapons industries in the member countries and thus help to give a clearer
view of the industrial and economic implications of arms standardization.”5

In connection with this study, the "EU Assembly resolved in November 1976
to recommend to the Council: "To invite the countries that are signatories
of the North Atlantic Treaty and members of the EEC or that are associated
with the Community under Article 238 of the Treaty of Rome, to take part
in the study that the Standing Armaments Committee is supposed to undertake.‘
He can see that this is an attempt to broaden the Committee's field of
action, but this time there is no mention of "all the European countries
with democratic regimes"; only the countries that belong to NATO and

to the EEC or are associated with the Community are included. Thus,
efforts were undertaken to get Norway and Denmark to join in, but they
were unsuccessful. Greece and Turkey, however, have shown a willingness
to cooperate in this sphere, although such cooperation has not yet,become
a reality.

The work done by the Standing Armaments Committee on defense industries
has given the IEPG further proof of the 930's pragmatism, in that it

is trying to coexist with the IEPC and, in particular, maintain close
ties with Subpsnel A of its Panel 3, which, as we mentioned previously,
is concerned with industrial cooperation and the rationalization of the
European defense industry (it is chaired by France).

Once the Standing Armaments Committee had completed the "detailed blueprint"
that it had been charged with drafting in 1976, the Council asked IEPC

to apprise it of the studies that it had been conducting, mainly Subpsnel
4, in order to avoid any overlapping.

135

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI OPPICIAL USE OILY

The Standing Armaments Committee has already received draft definitions
on armaments and the industries that produce them from the IBPG, and
thus the two bodies will be working with this common base.

In light of the work that the IEPG is already doing, the Standing Council
of the RED has charged the Standing Armaments Committee with complementary
tasks‘!6 Thus, while the IBPG conducts an economic survey on defense
industries, the Standing Armaments Committee will look into legal statutes
rand national legislation on the matter and wait for the IBPG to provide

it with the economic findings of its survey so that they can work with

the same base. This is an example of how close ties are maintained between
the two bodies.

PINABEL

Another organization that has an impact on arms cooperation is FINABBL,
which was created in I953 as the first attempt at military coordination

in EUIOPQ. It consists of the chiefs of staff of Germany, Belgium, France,
Great Britain, the Netherlands, Italy and\Luxembourg.“7 Germany joined

in I956, and Great Britain in 1972 after it became part of the European
Community. All of the countries in this organization belong to NATO

and to the BBC.

FINABBL's function is to promote cooperation in ground weapons among

Its members by establishing common military qualitative specifications

for this materiel, by joint experiments with weapons and procedures,

by conducting tactical and logistic studies and by exchanging information.
It does not attempt to get involved in the specific field of joint military
production because this is not the province of the chiefs of staff. However,
the work that PINABBL does is indispensable for subsequent cooperation

in arms manufacture.

The chiefs of staff meet once a year in one of the capitals of the member
countries. It has a Permanent Secretariat in the Belgian Defense Ministry
and a Main Committee of Military Experts, whose function is to oversee

and control its IS tasks forces. It also has a Logistics Committee.

NATO recognizes FINABBL as practically a regional group in its sphere
of competence, and the CNAD's Ground Armaments Agency makes frequent
use of FINABBL's studies. In addition, it has official ties with the
EUROLONGTERH Subgroup of the Eurogroup, which is concerned with tactical
doctrine. The HEU's Standing Armaments Committee maintains close ties
with FINABEL, and the IEPC is in contact with it too, although a formal

relationship has not been established.

FINABEL has already formulated more than 200 agreements on a wide range
of ground weapons, especially in connection with their military specifications.

Also of interest in the area of land-based military equipment are the
joint experiments with prototypes and a wideranging exchange of information,

136
both in connection with combat materiel and the procedures for using it.
All of this is a valuable contribution to the preparations for weapons
standardization.

The European Economic Community

Eight of the nine member countries of the EEC belong to NATO; Ireland

is the exception. In order to examine Europe's military industrial cooperation
within NATO, we feel that we must view it within the framework of the

EEC, which comprises the leading European members of NATO insofar as

weapons production and procurement are concerned.

Although the Treaty of Rome does not broach the issue of common defense,48
the EEC cannot remain divorced from industrial cooperation in armaments,
given the economic implications for its members.

The Political Committee of the European Parliament instructed Lord Gladwyn

to draft a report on the effects of a European foreign policy on defense.

In his I974 report, Gladwyn addresses the issue of European defense cooperation
and, among other things, the possible creation of a joint arms supply

agency.

In his 1975 Report on the European Union, Tindemans also proposed the
creation of a "European arms supply agency." Spinelli made a more specific
proposal for the establishment of an agency for European aeronautics,

a sector in which the military component is an important one. All of

these reports predate the establishment of the IEPG in I976.

The 8 May I978 Klepsch Report to the European Parliament on "European
Cooperation in Armaments Supply" is a key document in this area. The

report states that the aeronautical, shipbuilding and electronic industries
cannot survive unless the military and civilian sectors are dealt with
together and that the military or political institutions that are concerned
with this field do not possess the Community's capabilities for a-ganizing
the industrial aspect of armaments supplies. It reaches the central
conclusion that "a single, structured Community market for military hardware
must be created."

The Klepsch Report came out after the creation of the Independent European
Program Group, to which it attaches such importance that it proposes

that the IEPG be given a permanent secretariattofunction as "the main
institutional component of a European armaments supply agency" and that
the EEC Commission be represented at the meetings of the IEPC. He should
point out here that all of the members of the Community, except Ireland,
belong to the IEPG and that while Norway, Portugal and Turkey are part

of the group without belonging to the EEC, the latter two are in the
process of joining, with Turkey having an association agreement.

137

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFEICIAL USE ONLY

The Klepsch Report proposed that this agency, which would represent the IEPG and
the Europesn Committee. be the spokesman of Europe's interests in negotiations
with the United States and Canada, negotiations whose hallmark would

be the "two-way street" concept in arms trade.

On lb June I978 the European Parliament adopted the proposals in the
Klepsch Report and invited the European Community to promptly submit

to the Council "a program of European action for the design and production
of conventional weapons" as another facet of the EEC's common industrial

policy. The lEPG also examined the report at its October I978 meeting
and deemed the proposals bearing on it “interesting.“

The EEC and the "EU cooperate closely in the field of military industry,

as we can see from the broad common ground in the studies and reports
conducted on this sector. Nevertheless, the Tindemans Report proposes

that ”the (European) Parliament be able to deliberate henceforth on all the
issues that are within the province of the (Western European) Union." In

a footnote the same report states that "the extension of the jurisdiction
of the European Parliament to the issues that have hitherto been discussed
in the "EU Assembly raises the question of whether the "esters European
Union's parliamentary body ought to be kept functioning." Now then,

the EEC's jurisdiction in matters involving security and defense has

not yet been provided for statutorily or legally and is merely a goal
proposed in the reports we have Quoted. In contrast, the "EU is backed

up by a formal defense treaty, by a more than 30-year history and by

an organization that has studied and deliberated on European defense
problems at great length. Thus, as long as there is no other European
group that has jurisdiction in security matters, there will be European
countries interested in seeing the "EU, which will coordinate its activities
with NATO and the ECC, survive.

The new European Parliament, elected by universal vote in May I979, held

a debate in September of this year on European armaments cooperation.

This debate steamed from the question that parliament members Pergusson
(British Tory) and Von Hassel (German Christian Democrat) posed to the
European Commission as to whether the Commission "intended to contact

the North Atlantic Treaty Organization and the appropriate services of

the member states (of the EEC) with a view towards establishing joint
armaments supply programs within the framework of the Community's industrial
policy."

Strong opposition was voiced during the debate, particularly from the
representatives of the UDR [Union of Democrats for the Republic] and

the French Communists. The majority felt that the topic was in order

and addressed its industrial facets. The well-known Europeanist Davignon
emphasized his oft-expressed opinion that the Commission has a duty to
monitor the development of industry and technology, which are fields

on which military programs have major repercussions at the civilian level,
adding that "the scope of military programs... is up to governments;

it is up to us (the European Parliament) to assess them in the industrial
sphere.“

138

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
As a result of this parliamentary debate, the Comission is supposed

to undertake two studies, one "to determine precisely what the impact

of public sector orders is on the development of a given number of tech-
nologies that are useful and necessary to industry in a broad sense,"
and the other "to ascertain how, once the programs have been decided

on sovereignly and under the jurisdictions of the various States, we can
see to it that industrial development proceeds in the most effective
manner for industry, while guaranteeing jobs and competition as best

we can."

Hence, this is another possible channel for European Communities cooperation
in the armaments industry, and it can certainly fit within the broader
framework of Atlantic cooperation.

8. Consequences of NATO Hembership in the Area of Logistic Cooperation

The long and difficult process involved in NAIO's defense logistics ration-
alization policy has gradually given rise to a network of links and exchanges
in the defense industry that, while not yet as extensive as it would

like, must nevertheless be judged as a positive, albeit limited, achievement.
A Hestern country that does not belong to NATO does not have access to

the potential industrial cooperation stemming from this web of defense
relations among NATO nations.

We have seen how although initially, in the 1950's, the standardization

of major military hardware and equip-ent was achieved through the hegemony
of the United States, which supplied the other Atlantic Alliance countries,
there had already been a notable exchange of technical information in
NATO, as well as major progress in the common classification of materiel
and in the standardization of procedures:

Later, in the 1960's, although the "NATO Basic Military Requirements"
policy, a bid to coordinate the flourishing and diversified European
industry, failed, there were two isolated cooperation arrangements that

we ought to again emphasize. In the production sector there was the

NAHSO, which coproduced the Tornado aircraft through the Panavia and
Turbo-Union consortiums (this system could serve as a model for other

joint production projects), and in the sphere of multinational logistic
support there was NAHSA, which has been consolidating and expanding

its capabilities as a logistics agency for the maintenance and supply

of spare parts for the equipment that is in common use in the Alliance.
Along with these two main accomplishments in the 1960's, there were various
other cooperation programs of varying scope in the l960's that created

a series of multinational consortiums: SETBL, Euromissile, etc that provided
valuable experience in joint production. At the same time. the institutibnal
sphere saw the further development of NATO's logistic cooperation agencies,
such as the CNAD, the HAS and NIAG, with which the "30's Standing Armaments
Committee and the FINABBL organization worked in close cooperation.

Despite the strongly independent stand that French industry took as a
result of President De Gaulle's policy of autarky, all of this generated

139

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

within NATO a series of links among arms experts and decision-makers,

both in the military and industrial spheres, that gave rise to studies

and reports in this field as well as to a climate of opinion that enabled
major initiatives to be taken in the I970's towards industrial and defense
logistics cooperation.

A country that has remained outside NATO for the more than 30 years it

has been in existence has already mi;sed the chance to take part in its
valuable coproduction experiences and to become involved in the exchange
of technical information, in the standardization of procedures and equipment
and in the close ties that have developed among qualified experts in

the various organizations and forums that are concerned with these fields.

It is now, however, that remaining outside NATO could have the biggest
impact on the military industry of a Western European country. The estab-
lishment of the NATO Long-Term Defense Program, the possible expansion

of the NATO Maintenance and Supply Organization, the possibilities offered
by the Periodic Armaments Planning System (PAPS), complemented by the

NATO Armaments Planning Review (NAPR), all of this, along with the current
course of U.S. policy in standardization and, above all, with the emergence
of the Independent European Program Group, is highly favorable to the
establishment of real and effective cooperation, within Europe, on the

one hand, and within NATO, on the other. It is now that the above groups
and programs are submitting to each other lists of the arsenals that

each country has, along with lists of what needs to be replaced, so that
they can together plan cooperation in future arms supply programs for

the short-, medium- and long-term, and they are looking into the exchange
of technological information (even confidential technology) as a necessary
basis for cooperation. Hence, expectations are running high. Up to

now progress has been slow and difficult, and there is no assurance that
this will not be the case in the future, but the circumstances are more
pressing now than before, and thus hopes are also higher.

From an economic standpoint, if Spain does not join NATO, if will remain
outside this process. Even in the event that it joins, if it does so
too late, it runs the risk of being left out of the multinational military
industrial cooperation programs that are now under way, to the detriment
of this sector of domestic industry. Estimates are that it takes l0
years from the time that the military requirements for a given modern
weapons system are established until the system becomes available. The
replacement programs that begin in the early 1980's will yield their
first results the following decade. A few years delay in joining these
programs could mean a lag of more than a decade in benefiting from their
results.

It is not possible to quantify the consequences for domestic industry

of involvement in NATO arms supply cooperation. He could do a domestic
input-output table that would show military industry as a separate sector
and highlight the direct and indirect dependencies and influences of

this sector with respect to the other domestic and foreign sectors that

150
affect our domestic economy. But this would not enable us to draw conclusions
pertinent to the purposes of our study. It would be a valuable working

base in the hypothetical event of future cooperation, but we cannot quantify
in advance the results of the many potential cooperation agreements that

could arise from multinational cooperation.

The Alliance has done general quantitative estimates of overall investments
in arms research, development and supplies, as well as partial estimates

of the potential savings that would be derived from cooperation in specific
instances. There is,however, no comprehensive survey in which we could
include the numbers for Spain's domestic industry.

Anerican specialist Callaghan has conducted a study containing figures
on the losses or waste within NATO due to duplication of outlays by the
allied countries, as shown in the following table:59

Estimate of Waste in the Atlantic Alliance (in billions of dollars)

 

Outlays (except for nuclear forces) United States Europe Haste
Research and development 5.0 2.6 2.60 (a)
Materiel procurement 12.0 7.0 2.95 (b)
Support activities for the European zone 7 T 5.65 (c)
Total: More than 17.0 9.6 11.2 (d)

(a) The waste estimate equals 100 percent of European outlays for research and
development (which overlap).

(b) The waste estimate is the sum of IO percent of 0.8. purchases ($1.2
billion) and 25 percent of the purchases by the European allies ($1.75
billion).

(c) The waste estimate comes to 10 percent of direct American defense
expenditures connected with the stationing of u.s. troops in Europe,
which are in the range of $4 billion ($400 million, in other words).
plus 15 percent of allied European outlays on their Armed Forces, which
are in the order of $35 billion (in other words, $5.25 billion).

(d) The waste according to this report is "more than $10 billion."

Callaghan's 1975 estimate of "more than $10 billion" in waste due to
overlapping arms supply activities in NATO is $3 to Sb billion higher
than the 0.8. Defense Department's estimate at the time.

There are also some specific figures on the advantages of joint production
in the Dankert Report, which says: "It is difficult to evaluate the costs
incurred because of collaboration. It appears, however, that doubling

the size of a market as a result of collaboration means savings of about
20 percent of the average unit cost for a major military aircraft program.
In the case of less important projects the savings could be in the range

141

FOR OPTICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of IO percent. These figures are based on estimates of bilateral national
programs, for which the total cost of joint development is one and a

half times the 'unilateral' cost; thus, each government has to contribute
only two-thirds of what it would have to spend if it were undertaking

the work alone. Concurrently, production costs are boosted five percent
becauseoftlifficulties relating to geographic distance, language differences,
etc." The aforementioned Klepsch Report also makes something of an attempt
to quantify the savings and extra outlays stemming from cooperation.

It states: "The estimates of the extra costs involved in collaboration

in a project vary. Thedevelopmentcosts could be 20 percent higher if

the project is divided along traditional lines or 50 percent higher if
different models are produced to meet different needs. The production

cost will probably also be higher if one of the parties has demanded

that the equipment possess certain specifications which other parties

do not deem necessary. A simple mathematical calculation shows, however,
that the joint development of a weapon is the least expensive solution

for a country, unless its overall needs are enormous. For example, a
modern fighter aircraft that costs a single country SI billion to develop
and that costs $5 million a unit to produce,5' could be manufactured

more advantageously in a partnership, assuming a 20 percent 'collaboration
premium' both for development and production costs, as long as production
did not exceed 400 planes. There are other financial advantages. The
required investment is cut practically in half during the initial stages

of design and production tooling. The higher costs show up later. There
is greater flexibility, particularly when it is not known initially how
many units are going to be purchased. Collaboration offers the advantage
of distributing human and financial resources for research and development
over a greater number of projects. The risks of failure are shared.
technology is spread among the participants without entailing a corresponding
rise in outlays for science and industry. In short, the cost of developing
sophisticated weapons systems is so high today, in comparison to the

number of units that European countries need, that collaboration is essential
unless a country is willing to risk all in large enough export markets."

As we can see from these quotes, the advantages of cooperation are

more easily expressed qualitatively than quantitatively but are acknowledged
by all experts in the field. At the Western European Union's colloquium
on "a European armaments policy,"52 Kulilo, the director of the Dynamics
Division of Hesserschmitt bolkow-Blohm, described thus the advantages

and disadvantages of multinational industrial cooperation: as advantages,
"the distribution of prototype development costs; the spreading arOund

of development risks; the broadening of bases: experience and capacity;
cutting supply costs by increasing the number of production lines, and
finally, advantages in logistics (maintenance and repairs) and in avail-
ability"; as disadvantages, only "the need to harmonise differing national
legislations, standards and procedures, and the only partial involvement
of existing industries."

Aside from purely military reasons for standardization and interoperability
to team effectively with armies from other countries, there are clear-

cut economic reasons for multinational cooperation in defense industries

if a country wishes to keep up an appropriate rate of materiel replacement,

1A2
materiel that has often necessitated sizable investments and that will
become obsolete, making such investments unproductive, if not subject
to a replacement timetable.

A modern army has to have today's complex weapons systems: aircraft,
guided missiles, electronic detection systems, etc. The research and
development of these systems require sizable outlays that are difficult
for a country to cope with alone, even in the case of the most highly
developed Western European countries.

If these weapons systems are purchased from another country, this cost

is compounded by the price of the maintenance contract over its useful
life, which at times can come to I} or 2 times the initial price tag.

Add to this the fact that the life of these weapons systems ranges from
15 to 25 years, at which time they must be replaced by more sophisticated
and, hence, more costly systems.

Under current circumstances, marked by tight budget restrictions stemming

from the simultaneous inflation and recession in western economies, the

NATO countries, and the European members in particular, have an obvious

and pressing need for multinational cooperation as the financial solution

to their military hardware supply problem. The expressive coolant by

Mr Critchley, the chairman of the HlU's Defense and Armaments Affairs

Committee, to the effect that we are in danger of "being disarmed by

inflation" has been given widespread publicity in Western defense organisations.
NATO is endeavoring to avert this danger through savings in both the

research and development and in the production of weapons systems.

It is trying to save on research and development by seeking to avoid

the overlapping involved in several countries working on the same project.
It aims for agreements on the apportionment of the efforts devoted to
this phase of research and development by the various parties, so that
they can work together with each earmarking its own resources for the
research and development of the project component assigned to it. The
prototypes of the Roland missile and of the Jaguar, Alpha Jet and Tornado
aircraft were developed this way, for example.

In addition, it is also looking for economies of scale in the production

of the developed prototypes, such as in the F-l6 or Tornado joint production
projects. Boosting the number of units to be manufactured has made them
affordable, and these economies of scale are heightened when each joint
producing country takes charge of manufacturing an entire line of components
for the overall program.

Equally large savings are also sought by organizing a joint maintenance
logistic support. This cuts the cost of contracts for the acquisition
of sizable shipments of spare parts, for periodic checkups and for repairs.

143

FOR OPTICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE OILY

The goal of economizing through cooperation does present difficulties,
however. The very difficulty of resolving the problem of logistic ration-
alisation and standardization of materiel has given rise in NATO to the
wide range of groups that we have described in this chapter. As we have
surely have seen throughout this work, this complexity seems to be inherent
to all spheres of NATO, a logical consequence of its being a voluntary
organisation of sovereign, independent and predominantly democratic States
that seeks to reconcile transatlantic interests with the regional interests
of its European members and, in turn, the individual interests of these
countries with the overall interest of the European zone; all of them
share a common interest in cooperation, however.

Now then, if NATO and, especially, the European members of IATO must
resort to collaboration for the economies needed to acquire up-to-date
weapons systems, it is obvious that Spain's absence from the various
arms cooperation forums leaves it quite isolated. Thus, regardless of
how much money it invests in materiel supplies, the domestic defense
industry must necessarily limit itself to the production of elementary
ordnance, from which it seeks profits through exports, mainly to Third
World nations, exports that might carry certain political overtones.

As far as complex, modern weapons systems are concerned, Spain is in

the position of a tributary country vis-a-vis the economic powers producing
these kinds of weapons, with their future maintenance subject to foreign
decision-making.

It could be argued that the solution is production under license, as

has been done in Spain with the manufacture of the American P-S supersonic
aircraft, the aux-30 tank and the Daphne and Acosta submarines, which

are of French origin. This is not, however, a comprehensive solution

for meeting a modern army's needs in terms of numerous, complex weapons
systems. Production under license is normally limited to supplying the
domestic market, and therefore output cannot be boosted in pursuit of

an export policy that would make the manufacture of these costly weapons
systems profitable. More importantly, meeting weapons supply needs through
an extensive policy of production under license leaves domestic industry
at the mercy of outside "research and development" capabilities, thus
crippling domestic initiative in this key phase of industrial development.
It is commonplace by now to discuss the repercussions of the defense
industry on the progress of other domestic industries in terms of state-
of-the-art or pacesetting technologies, but it is obvious that in aero-
nautics, information science and electronics in general, to mention but

a few fields, there is a close correlation between the funds initially
earmarked for research and development in the military and the subsequent
civil gains in these key sectors of industrial development. Hanufacture
under license greatly limits the potential for progress in advanced tech-
nologies and makes domestic industries subcontractors, at the expense

of sizable royalities, which indirectly finance the technology of the
licensing country. We need only mention that Spain invests in research
only half of what it spends for technology imports.

144
An article by Miguel Buesa and Javier Brana53 states that 70 percent

of the contracts for foreign technology transfers in the I976-78 period
were signed by the main military hardware manufacturing companies. The
authors add that "the core of the defense industry's dependence is its

need to acquire overseas the know-how required to produce not only the

end products but also and above all the product components. This means
that during a conflict some weaponry production could be shut down because"
of a cut-off bf the foreign technology utilized in the manufacture of
parts." Taking a similar approach, Jose 8eijas, director of CETHB. asserts:
"We could say that there are fields of military technology in which we

are independent and even competitive. For example, we export traditional
and conventional infantry weapons (rifles and machine guns, mortars and
antitank grenades, short-range air defense weaponry, antitank guns and
ammunition, etc), while in other fields we are totally dependent on other
countries, at least for weaponry planning and design." He could also

cite General Gutierrez de Benito, who as director general of Armaments

and Materiel of the Defense Ministry, told the magazine BBCONQOISTA (April
I979) that there are "fields of defense in which we'are practically totally
dependent on other countries today."

we are dependent mainly on the major industrialized NATO countries. Thus,
we once again have the paradox that Spain's military industrial complex

is heavily dependent on the major production centers in the NATO countries
while not belonging to any of the Alliance groups that promote cooperation
and, hence, not benefiting from the network of links and ties that enable
the allied countries to take maximum advantage of joint production planning.
The situation is similar in the sphere of military strategy; because

of itsindirect involvement in Hestern defense under its agreement with

the United States, Spain is part of the Western security system but cannot
participate in the NATO groups that do the security planning and remains
outside the centers that coordinate this comprehensive defense, which

has a major bearing on Spain.

Although the advantages of multinational cooperation are not great in

the case of countries with low rates of industrial development because

of their limited capacity for involvement in cooperative efforts, within
RATO and in particular within the Independent European Program Group,
because countries have an equal voice, if not equal capacities, attempts

are made to mitigate the disadvantages of this imbalance through a political
commitment to the common defense. Also, as we mentioned before, the

IEPG has a subpanel that has been charged with studying how cooperation

can be balanced out so that not only the highly industrialized countries
benefit from it.

Furthermore, however, Spain's case is different from that of the more
backward countries in NATO. Spain is sufficiently industrialized to
reap greater benefits from participation than from noninvolvement. Its '
industrial development has enabled it to collaborate on multinational
civilian projects, such as the Airbus or the Ariane rocket, while its
absence from Western politicomilitary organizations has prevented it

145

IOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

from getting involved in all of the military hardware cooperation groups
and programs that have arisen within NATO. Spain has signed several

joint production contracts with various Western European countries, but
they are all bilateral and do not offer the advantages of coproduction
within the multilateral framework of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization.

If Spain joined the Alliance, it would have access to all of the NATO
technical bodies that we have been discussing in this chapter and would

be able to take part in the current cooperation projects aimed at establishing
a cannon technological and industrial base, and as we have said, the

present moment could turn out to be a key phase in attaining this aim.

At the aforementioned seminar in Ditchley Park (Great Britain) in l978

on Spain and NATO, General Naig, listing the advantages to Spain of membership
in the Alliance, specifically said that "it would be entitled to the

statutory acquisition of military technology."

civen Spain's current foreign policy of integrating into Western Europe,
we do not have to wait until the lengthy process of formalising NATO
membership is completed to secure Spain a seat in the European forums
that are pursuing the policy of cooperation in arms supply.

He can gather from this chapter that the main European organisation in
this area might well be the Independent European Program Group, to which
both NATO and the EEC ascribe a leading role in furthering European

arms cooperation. Ne should once again stress that the IEPG does not

have an official charter governing it nor an institutionalised bureaucracy.
Therefore, there is no clause formally linking the IEPG to either NATO

or the EEC, and although it maintains close relations with the two organi-
zations, it also likes to underscore its "independent" and "European"
character. Hence, the IEPG is still in its formative process and,
since it has neither a statutory nor an organizational base, enjoys great
flexibility in its makeup.

high-level European NATO officials have told this author that they know
of no reason why Spain cannot discuss bilaterally with the IEPG member
countries the possibility of its participation in the group.

I
This possibility would presumably be scuttled by a Spanish stand against
NATO and even by a public declaration of neutrality, inasmuch as every
lEPG country today belongs to NATO. In contrast, Spain's membership
in the group would be facilitated by the possibility of future entry
into NATO and by the current negotiations for Spanish membership in the
EEC .

The enormous advantage ofpromptSpanish membership in the IEPG would

be the opportunity to get involved in a European arms collaboration and
programming process that is still in its formative years, which are,
hence, decisive for future cooperation. And although because this is
precisely its initial phase, favorable results cannot be guaranteed,
losing the opportunity to get involved at this point could have major
consequences for domestic industry.

146

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Spain's desire to take part in European armaments cooperation programs
could perhaps be complemented by closer ties to the western European
Union. We have mentioned how at one point in 1975 the REC proposed that
the Brussels Treaty could be signed by "any European country with a democratic
regime" that wanted to join in a common defense policy, even though sub-
sequently, in 1976, participation in the work of the Standing Armaments
Committee was offered only to "NATO member countries that belong to or

are associated with the EEC." These positions have varied according

to circumstances and are evidence of the difficulties encountered by
European countries in finding a suitable forum for furthering defense
cooperation in the absence of a common political power and a joint foreign
policy.

On 20 June I977, 5 days after the Spanish parliamentary elections, the
General Affairs Committee of the "EU Assembly drafted a "Follow-Up Report"
recommending that the Council "look into the possibilities of close cooperation
between Spain and the “EU member countries." The Council responded in
March 197855 that "it looked favorably upon the furtherance of close
cooperation between Spain and the member countries of the Hestern European
Union." We should point out that neither of the two quotes talks about
direct cooperation with the NED, only with "the member countries of the
HEU." Since other multinational European organizations are now tending to dis-
place the HBU, the political advantages of signing the Brussels Treaty

are debatable, because its future is in doubt. Nevertheless, for the

time being the treaty is the only formal defense cooperation commitment
among exclusively European countries and is, therefore, valuable until

such time as another, more up-to-date option emerges to replace it. Can
Spain and is it in Spain's interest to sign the Brussels Treaty as another
step along the road to integration in Europe? It is not within the scope
of this work to analyse the possibility or the political advantages of
closer Spanish ties with the HBO. However, from the standpoint of economic
consequences, we should make the point here that ilthough the activities

of the "EU are mainly deliberative and analytical today, it is a major
forum with a wideranging audience in the field of European arms cooperation;
its reports make opinion; it develops valuable multinational links and

ties among arms experts, and it maintains close ties with NATO and the

IEPG. The “EU membership fees are inconsequential; based on its 1978
budget, which we outlined above, the sevencountries that belong to it

pay an average of about 50 million pesetas a year. Participation in

the "EU could complement membership in NATO in matters of arms cooperation.

In short, we feel that from a strictly economic perspective, access to

the cluster of organizations and ties in the field of logistics that

would stem from NATO membership, is advantageous to Spain's domestic
military industry and in terms of weaponry supplies for our Armed Forces.
Given the length of the membership process and as long as this is not

ruled out as an ultimate goal, taking the first steps towards collaboration
with the IEPG would be a way of gaining time so that our domestic military
industry could participate in international cooperation programs. The
possibility of closer ties with the "EU, and specifically, a seat on

the Standing Armaments Committee, would be a complementary albeit a much

147

ms orncm. ass out!
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

less important move, assuming that the IEPG does not fall short of the
expectations that it has created at this point.

Therefore, we feel that from an industrial standpoint, it is in Spain's
interest to promptly join these two European forums, the IEPG and the
“EU, so that we can get a head start on coordination with the policy

of multinational cooperation in arms supplies. This kind of cooperation
is developing slowly and laboriously within NATO and during this decade
could give rise to a major framework for common military logistics.

FOOTNOTES

28. According to the publication "world Armaments and Disarmaments. I977
Yearbook."

29. "Report to the European Parliament on European Cooperation in the
Field of Armaments Supply," by Egon Klepsch, 8 Hay I978.

30. "Military Logistic Systems in NATO," Adelphi Papers, No 62, I969.

3|. According to the "Colloquium on a European Arms Policy," western
European Union, Paris, 3 March I977.

32. NATO defines the STANAG or "Standardization Agreement" as "The record
of an agreement among several or all the member nations to adopt
like or similar military equipment, ammunition, supplies, and stores;
and operational, logistic, and administrative procedures. National
acceptance of a NATO allied publication issued by the Military Agency
for Standardization may be recorded as a Standardization Agreement.
Also known as "STANAG."

33. According to the official NATO publication "NATO Facts and Figures."

34. Section 8la (a), Department of Defense, Appropriation and Authorization
Act of I976, Public Law 94-361, In July I976.

35. Section 803 (c), Department of Defense, Appropriation and Authorization
Act of I976, Public Law 96-36l, l4 July 1976.

36. Document 689 of the Western European Union on "European and Atlantic
Armaments Cooperation," I December I975.

37. According to Document 738, "A European Arms Policy," western European
Union, I0 Hay I977.

38. Published by the International Institute of Strategic Studies in
Adelphi Paper No 129.

39. Document 738 of the Western European Union, l0 Hay I977.

148
40.

4I.

42.

43.

45.

46.

47.

48.

49.

50.

SI.

Presented to the European Parliament as a report to the European
Communities, 8 May I978.

Issue I,I02, 28 February I979. NOUVELLES AILANTIQUES is published
in Brussels and is close to NATO circles, which makes it something
of a semiofficial organ. It is usually the mouthpiece for European
and at times preponderantly French views, however. The boldface is
from the original.

Article 4 of the “EU stipulates: "In the event that one of the high
contracting parties is the target of armed aggression in Europe,
the others shall, pursuant to the provisions of Article SI of the
UN Charter, lend aid and assistance by every means in their power,
military and otherwise."

According to NOUVELLES ATLANTIQUES, 28 March I975. The boldface is
the author's.

. Recommendation No 269 of the "EU Assembly to the Council, 28 May I975.

Response of the Council to Recommendation 28I of the "EU Assembly,
I4 June I976.

Document 769 of the WEB on "Distribution of Tasks Between the Standing

Armaments Coemdttee and the Independent European Program Group,"
28 February I978.

FINAREL is the initials of France, Italy, the Netherlands, Germany
[Allemagne], Belgium and Luxembourg.

The only allusion to defense matters is in Article 224 of the treaty,
which says: "The member States shall consult with each other with

a view towards jointly taking the necessary steps to prevent the
operations of the Common Market from being impaired by the measures
that a member State might be obliged to take in the event of serious
internal difficulties that adversely affect the public order, in

the event of war or serious international tensions that constitute
threat of war, or to meet the commitments contracted by said State,
with a view towards maintaining peace and international security."
As we can see, this article aims solely at keeping the Common Market
in operation and does not address potential defense cooperation.

From the report "U.S.lEuropean Economic Cooperation in Military and
Civil Technology," February I975.

Document 738 of the "EU, 7 May I977.

The unit price of the Tornado was estimated I0 years ago at $7 million;
current guessesarethat because of the delays it could be close to
$30 million.

149

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
52.
53.

55.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Document 738 of the "EU, IO Hay 1978.

”‘recnologia y dependencia: El caao de la. industria militar," mmmcron
COHBRCIAL BSPANOLA [magazine], Iaaue 55, August 1979.

. Docunent 746 of the W0. The report vaa approved by a vote of 16

for, 2 against and 3 abstention.

Doculent 765 of the “EU, 28 Hatch 1978.

150

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Chapter VI: Final Conclusions

As we said in the introduction to this work, Spain finds itself at a
crucial juncture in selecting its future security system or defense model.
Such a system must guarantee the highest level of security compatible
with national sovereignty and economic capabilities.

As we have seen, one of its security model options is membership in the
Atlantic Alliance. Membership entails economic consequences that our
appropriate national authorities will have to take into account as one
more factor in their decision-making process.

Consequently, throughout this work we have analysed those aspects of
NATO that involve an economic component, in order to infer the potential
repercussions on Spain sr.uld it decide to join the Atlantic Alliance.

The economic consequences of NATO membership hinge first of all on the
membership status in the Alliance ans on the greater or lesser presence
in the bodies that make up the NATO structure.

These factors are negotiable and, in the final accounting, are accepted
freely and scvereignly by each country. Ihroretically, a country's status
can range from merely being a signatory of the Washington or North Atlantic
Treaty to full-fledged participation in all of the bodies and agencies

in the Alliance's complex organizational structure.

Naturally, a mere signing of the Nashington Treaty means at least permanent
representation on the Atlantic Council, with the resulting benefits of
joint political consultation. The IS current members have an ambassador
and a permanent mission to the Council and can be represented as full-
fledged members in the subsidiary civil bodies. within the military
organization only France and Iceland have their own highly individual
statuses.

A freely agreed status can be revised over time, in accordance with
prevailing circumstances, because the principle of national sovereignty
takes piecedence over the commitments that have been contracted. France
and Greece are clear-cut examples of this. Hence, a given status can
never force a country to fulfill future economic commitments that it does
not freely and sovereignly agree to.

Now that we have made these preparatory remarks, let us take a look at
the economic repercussions of Spain's membership in NATO.

Direct Repercussions

a) Under no circumstances would Spain have to make an initial economic

contribution in the form of a membership fee or as compensation for the
outlays that the previous members have made.

151

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

b) It would, however, be obliged to make an annual contribution to finance
the NATO bodies in which it would be represented or from which it would
benefit directly as a member, in accordance with the membership status

it adopts.

In the event that Spain joined with the normal or most common NATO status,
in other words, participating in all of the Organization's civil and
military agencies, the percentages of its annual contributions to the
financing of these agencies would be subject to negotiation.

The percentages are based mainly on anation's economic and military capabi-
litiea, the basic indicators being GDP, defense spending (measured according
to the standard NATO definition) and population. NATO usually works with
absolute values for these indicators.

At the seminar "Spain, NATO and Western Defense" in Ditchley Park, England
in I978, General ﬂaig, the then supreme commander of Allied Forces in
Europe, estimated, based on these indicators, that Spain's contribution

to NATO financing would be some $12 million.

In our study we have advanced an argument based on per capita values
and come to the conclusion that the following percentages could be used
in the negotiations on Spain's contribution to cost-sharing:

Budget Percentage
civil Budget 2.63
lS-Nation Military Budget 2.68
l4-Nation Military Budget 3.20

If these percentages are applied to the I981 NATO budget, they give a
total of 512.444 million. At an exchange rate of 85 pesetas to the dollar

(the average in l98l), this is equivalent to 1.05774 billion pesetas,
or 0.31 percent of Spain's I98l defense budget.

c) Contributions are also required periodically to finance the new programs
in NATO's so-called "common infrastructure," in other words, the jointly
used installations that are needed for NATO Armed Forces deployment and
operations during maneuvers or in the event of an alert or a war.

The Alliance takes the approach that the host country (the country in
which a given common infrastructure installation is planned) should not
have to bear the total cost of the project, which is, instead, shared
among the nations that might make use of it. The following are the basic
considerations in negotiating the percentages of cost-sharing:

--The contributive capacity of each potential user country
--The advantage to the user countries
--The economic benefits accruing to the host country.

152

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Nonetheless, the negotiations relating to common infrastructure cost-
sharing are more complex than the ones connected with defraying the operating
expenses of NATO's structures. They permit a much more flexible approach,

in which all sorts of considerations, even strategic and political, have

a place. For example, a country with a sizable amount of infrastructure

on its soil might be assigned a low cost-share, as is the case with Turkey.

The host country must at least purchase the land for the installations
and provide the necessary public utilities(access roads, power, water,
etc). In exchange, the host country could secure major economic benefits,
such as jobs for local manpower, influx of foreign exchange, expansion
and improvement of transportation, pipeline or telecommunications networks.

At the Ditchley Park conference General Naig estimated Spain's contribution
to these outlays at around $50 million. Such an estimate does not mean
very much, however, because we do not know what specific installations
Spain would contribute to the common infrastructure and, furthermore,

what facilities in allied countries Spain could make potential use of.

"hat installations night Spain contribute to the Atlantic Alliance's
infrastructure inventory? The following, among others, merit consideration:

--The possible establishment of one or more NATO headquarters on Spanish
soil

--The extension of the Organization's telecommunications system to our
territory

--Nsny of the bases and other installations to which the United States
today has use rights under the existing U.8.-8pain Friendship and Cooperation
Treaty. According to an official 0.8. estimate, the entire group of
installations is valued at $l.088 billion, in I967 prices, which is a
sizable sum if we consider the value of NATO‘s infrastructure installations
in the other Mediterranean countries: $658 million in Italy, $384 million
in Greece and $783 million in Turkey (current NATO estimates).

To the above we might add:

--The Seniautomatic Air Defense System (SADA), valued at more than $120

million '

--The Spanish Army's expensive, modern telecommunications network, which

is on the verge of completion

--Various Spanish ports, air bases and road networks, which would be

of inestimable logistic value to the Organization and would undergo improvements
to enhance their potential and utilization.

An a priori determination and quantification of these potential contributions
is practically impossible. As a ballpark figure (subject, in any event,

to whatever specific programs are undertaken and to Spain's involvement

in each of them), we estimated (through calculations based once again on

per capita values) that Spain would be contributing about $30 million

a year to the common infrastructure. At the I98] exchange rate of 85

pesetas to the dollar, this is equivalent to 2.55 billion pesetas, or

0.76 percent of Spain's I98] defense budget.

153

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

We feel it bears mentioning that as far as infrastructure investments

are concerned, NATO employs the clearing system. For example, if a country
withdraws installations that it had previously committed to the common
infrastructure, it has to make up for what the other countries would

have contributed to these installations. This insures the principle

of sovereignty that enables a country to regain exclusive national ownership
of common installations in its own territory. Consequently, this system
could generate future economic obligations if a country were to decide

to reassess its membership status or simply to withdraw certain installations
from comon use.

d) To sum up the above conclusions: In the event that Spain joined NATO

and had a normal status of participation in its military and civil structures,
it would entail the following direct repercuaisons on Spanish defense
spending:

--An unavoidable annual quota to defray the operating expenditures of
the Alliance's common bodies; this could be estimated at about 0.3] percent
of Spain's defense budget

--A potential share in common infrastructure expenditures, a share that
might even be subject to political considerations. The reference figure
we calculated was 0.76 percent of Spain's defense budget.

The sum of these two figures comes to about l.07 percent of Spain's defense
budget, but this should only be taken as a rough indication of the economic
commitment that Spain would be making. We can conclude, in any event,

that the coat of our membership in NATO is inconsequential in relation

to our overall defense spending.

Indirect Economic Impact

e) Spain' a membership in the Atlantic Alliance could also have an indirect
impact on defense spending, as a result of NATO' s system of' 'common defense
planning.“

The complex process of "common planning" attempts to determine the combat
capabilities needed to assure joint defense against a common enemy.

To this end, the International Secretariat and NATO' a military authorities,
in close collaboration with the representatives of the member countries,
analyze the potential of each country to contribute to the defense effort.
From this analysis stem "recommendations" to each member country, so

that together they can achieve the common Force Goal.

These recommendations, which are formulated with such circumspection,

do involve at least a certain amount of moral and political pressure

to fulfill commitments. Thus, if a country is having problems meeting
them, it must give its NATO allies an explanation, inasmuch as the overall
security of the Alliance is affected.
f) In determining the contributions to the Force Goal, NAJO makes broad

use of the concept of burden sharing. In this regard, we frequently come
across scholars who argue that countries ought to devote a similar percentage
of their GDP to defense spending. -

NATO, however, does not push the allies towards uniformity of defense
spending as a percentage of GDP. clear-cut proof of this is the broad
range of such spending among members. In 1980, for example, the United
States' defense spending came to 5.5 percent of its GDP; Germany's was

3.3 percent; Italy's, 2.3; Luxembourg's l.l, and as an extreme case,
Iceland's was zero. We should underscore, therefore, that these percentages
are a function of national policies and capabilities, not common planning.

The farthest that NATO has gone under the con-mu planning system is

to "recommend" (we would stress the term) a uniform increase in defense
spending (3 percent a year in real terms for the 1979-83 5-year period).

but this applies to the defense spending that each country has independently
decided on, and there is even a contingency clause stating that "economic
conditions will affect the chances of achieving the agreed three percent
boost." In point of fact, most of the member countries are not carrying

out the "recommendation" to boost defense spending by three percent.

g) In addition, membership in the Alliance could mean that certain
military units will be "assigned" to the NATO command. These units
normally:

--Hust maintain NATO-prescribed and -supervised training levels.
-—Nust conduct maneuvers with the other allied countries.

Such activities entail expenditures, which are easier to avoid in the
case of independent training if a country does not belong to the Alliance.

There are no general criteria for determining the level of forces to
be assigned to NATO. Each nation is an individual case, the factors
being its military capability, political and economic conditions and
relative location in a potential theater of operations. In short,
this is a domestic decision.

Therefore, there is no reason why economic consequences that go beyond
a nation's own plans should stem from the potential assignment of units
to the NATO military command.

h) Somethingsimilar could be said about the division of the Armed Forces
into their three traditional components (army, navy and air force)

and their further breakdown into branches and specialties. Logically,
if Spain decides to take care of its security by joining NATO instead

of adopting a neutral stand, membership in the Alliance does affect

the individual security options of each country, and the structure

of Spain's Armed Forces would have to adapt to the missions that would
be assigned itin the Alliance and they could thus devote less attention
to the missions being undertaken by others.

155

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE OﬂLY

This could entail a reorganization, but there is no reason why it would

have to exceed the country's.overall defense effort capabilities, inasmuch
as, in the final accounting, as with everything pertaining to the obligations
stemming from NATO membership, the organization of a country's Armed

Forces comes under its exclusive jurisdiction and is contingent on

its economic capabilities.

i) With the above facts in mind, we should also acknowledge that the
philosophy of defense effort burden sharing carries increasing weight

in common Force Goal planning, for which frequent multilateral consultations
are held, during which defense efforts are constantly compared and
justified.

These consultations promote a systematic exchange of specific, detailed
information on the military programs of the various allied countries

and their individual economic strength. This facilitates an understanding
of cannon problems and difficulties, as well as a critical assessment

of the respective efforts.

In order to participate responsibly in joint planning, a nation must

have well-founded arguments to justify its stands. Resorting to isolated
indicators of a defense effort (defense spending as a percentage of

the GDP, defense spending as a percentage of governcent spending, per

capita defense spending, etc) is erroneous and leads to differing conclusions,
depending on which indicator is used.

It is for this reason that we have done an econometric study of Spain's
defense effort in comparison to that of the other RATO nations.

Such an analysis enables us to simultaneously consider the main magnitudes
influencing defense spending, even though they are redundant variables,‘
inasmuch as the "principal components" synopsise the synthetic variables
that have the greatest impact on the phenomenon under study, regardless

of the relationship that might exist among these variables.

5) In examining the relative level of Spain's defense effort, we initially
did a principal components analysis of a Sl-country sample (the NATO
nations, the other members of the 0360 and the Warsaw Pact countries)

and then of a IZ-country sample (the European members of NATO, excluding
Iceland, which has no Armed Forces).

Our first analysis showed that based on a greater affinity within the
explanatory variables of a defense effort, Spain belongs to a subset
or "class" of nine countries (Bulgaria, Greece, Czechoslovakia, Poland,
Hungary, Romania, Yugolsavia, Spain and Turkey), only two of which,
Greece and Turkey, belong to NATO. These two countries, like Spain
and Yugoslavia, are classified by the 0300's Economic Aid Committee

as "developing," not "developed." hence, these countries should serve
as our references in a comparative analysis of Spain's defense effort.

156

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
He should also keep in mind that the conflict between Greece and Turkey
has forced them to engage in an above-normal defense effort.

k) Our analysis of l2 European NATO countries and Spain began by calculating
Spain's defense spending in accordance with the standardized NATO definition.
For I976, our reference year, we arrived at a figure of about 165 billion
pesetas, which might be slightly high. The military budget that year,

126.5 billion pesetas, came to just 75 percent of total defense spending
according to the NATO definition. The 75 percent figure can be used

as an approximation for subsequent years.

Spain's total defense spending can thus be estimated at 2.28 percent
of its GDP. This is quite different from the figures often computed
by commentators who do not make proper use of the NATO definition of
defense spending.

l) The factor analyses of 3| countries and of the l2 European NATO countries
show Spain as being engaged in a small defense effort, albeit relatively
larger than certain NATO countries with stronger economies, such as

Italy and Denmark.

m) When we analyzed the trends in per capita defense effort from I972
to 1979, we found that Spain recorded a higher percentage increase
than the '2 European NATO countries.

n) We can conclude, hence, that if Spain were to join NATO and if pursuant
to its joint planning the Alliance were to recommend that Spain boost

its defense spending in relation to the other members, and if such

an increase ran counter to national political interests and exceeded

our financial capabilities, Spain would have sufficient countering
arguments.

Therefore, there are no grounds for the somewhat widespread opinion
among certain groups in this country that if Spain joined NATO, it

would have to substantially boost its defense spending (we often see

the baseless calculation that it would have to double the current level).

Possibility of Receiving Aid

0) As far as obtaining military aid within NATO is concerned, The Atlantic
Treaty sets forth the general principle of mutual assistance to maintain
and develop the "individual and collective capacity to resist an armed
attack." However, this principle gave rise to substantial military

aid only during the initial years of the Alliance, when the United

States tried to hasten the economic recovery and strengthen the defense
capacity of its European allies.

157

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFYICIAL USE ONLY

Aid programs are limited nowadays, and naturally the common planning
of Force Objectives does entail obligatory aid for the countries that
are having problems fulfilling their commitments.

Now then, the common planning process is an appropriate vehicle for
pointing out the needs of a given country, as well as the mutual benefits
that derive from the Alliance's major economic powers helping the weaker
members to boost their defense capabilities. Prospective aid must

be negotiated bilaterally between governments and, of course, entails
compensation for the country granting it. Greece, Portugal and Turkey
have received economic and military assistance in recent times, but

in general the amounts have been far smaller than at NATO's outset.

Only Turkey, which is in dire straits, is receiving sizable amounts

of aid.

Our conclusion, hence, is that if 8pain decides to join NATO, it should
not do so because of the prospect of obtaining appreciable amounts
of military aid.

In this connection, we have analysed the aid Spain has received under
the existing Spanish-American Treaty and concluded that it can only
be described as scant and inconsequential. Therefore, faced with the
choice of renegotiating a pact with the United States (which is in
the midst of an economic crisis) or joining the Atlantic Alliance,
Spain should not conclude that the economic compensation it receives
justifies the continuation of its exclusive bilateral security pact
with the United States. The fact is that membership in the Alliance
is compatible with a new agreement with the United States.

Although there is no reason to believe that Spain would secure substantially
more aid in NATO, we can assert that Spain could negotiate with the

United States and the other members of the Alliance to receive aid

at least comparable to, if not greater than what it would under just

a bilateral treaty with the United States. NATO membership offers

the basic advantage of participation in the Alliance's political, diplomatic
and military forums and, therefore, in the planning for the use of

the military bases and other facilities that Spain would be transferring

to NATO for the common defense. This would enable Spain to negotiate
prospective aid with more facts and arguments at its disposal.

p) As a member of NATO Spain could also derive economic benefits from

the contributions that the other members would make to the infrastructure
construction and improvement projects in Spain, as long as what Spain
received in this connection exceeded what it would have to contribute

to the common infrastructure as a whole. This could be considered
indirect economic aid stemming from NATO membership, as has been the

case for Greece and Turkey.

q) In short, if we weigh the potential aid from NATO countries and
the economic obligations arising from membership in the Alliance, the

138

FOR OFPICIAL USE ONLY
bottom line for Spain could turn out to be positive, although under
the current circumstances any aid that it might receive from NATO is
not likely to be appreciable.

Consequences in the Area of Logistic Cooperation

r) The principle that applies in the Atlantic Alliance is that "logistics
is a national responsibility," in other words, each country takes care

of its own needs. However, the NATO military command is concerned

about the lack of a centralized logistic system, mainly in connection
with the outfitting of its Armed Forces and the subsequent maintenance

of this equipment. Furthermore, the increasing cost of weapons systems

poses serious financial problems for individual nations wishing to
acquire them.

NATO has attempted to mitigate these difficulties by:

--Creating bodies for logistic coordination and standardization in

which all member countries are represented.

--Pursuing a policy of materiel standardization and interoperability,

made possible by the joint production of principal weapons systems.
--Haking multinational logistic support available through an international
logistic agency for maintenance and spare parts supply (NAHSO).

The long and difficult process involved in NATO's defense logistics
rationalization policy has gradually given rise to a network of links
and exchanges in the defense industry that, while not yet as extensive
as it would like, must nevertheless be judged as a positive, albeit
limited, achievement.

A western country that does not belong to NATO does not have access
to the potential industrial cooperation stemming from this web of defense
relations among NATO nations.

9) As American expert Thomas A. Callaghan said at the Hans Rissen Conference
in Hamburg in February I978: "In the years preceding the First World

Hsr, the nations with more than 25 million inhabitants were in a position
to provide what was essential for their own defense. During the Second
World War and in the immediate postwar period, only the nations with

50 million inhabitants had the necessary resources to develop and produce
their own materiel. But in the l960's, nations like Great Britain,
France, Germany and Italy were unable to assume the burden of developing
and producing their own weapons systems...A national policy cannot

aim at independence (or more precisely, nondependence) unless the country
in question is willing to pay the price." And this price must either

be overall economic development, as has been the case with the Warsaw
Pact countries, or international cooperation.

The research and development of today's complex weapons systems require
advanced technology and huge investments, and this combination outstrips the

159

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

technological and economic capabilities of even the most advanced European
countries if they act alone. Collaboration in this field enables countries
to pool the necessary human and financial resources, to share the

risks and to disseminate technology among themselves.

An isolated country's problems in the research and development process
are compounded by the need to "produce" a sufficiently large number

of units. It must seek these economies of scale in prototype production'
either by aiming for a sizable export market or by undertaking joint
production with several other countries, thus cutting supply costs

by upping the production run.

Moreover, a policy of cooperation permits no less important savings
through subsequent joint logistic support in maintenance and replacement
parts. '

Statistics show that even in the most highly developed Western countries
the development of prototype weapons systems through multinational
cooperation is the most inexpensive solution, unless s single country's
demand is heavy enough.

In contrast, if modern weapons systems are purchased from the producer,
as Spain often does, the high price tag is compounded by the cost of

a maintenance contract for the system's scheduled life, which is

often I} or 2 times the purchase price, with the additional drawback
of the restrictions that it generally entails on the freedom to use
these weapons systems.

Production under license, which entails sizable royalities, normally
limits output to domestic market demand and leaves national industry
at the mercy of another country's research and development capacity.

Under the present circumstances of tight budgets and simultaneous inflation
andrecession, countries much stronger than Spain are in danger of "being
disarmed by inflation" and are fighting back by seeking the necessary
savings through cooperation, both in research and development

and in the production and maintenance phase.

t) We find, thus, that as far as the manufacture of high-technology
military equipment is concerned, Spain's industry is almost entirely
dependent on the main production centers in the NATO countries, while

Spain itself remains outside the complex system of Alliance agencies

that promote cooperation and, therefore, does not enjoy the major advantages
that accrue to the allied nations from joint production planning.

Among the benefits that Spain would reap from joining NATO, the Ditchley
Park seminar specifically mentioned that "it would be entitled to the
statutory acquisition of military technology."

160

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Spain is sufficiently industrialized to reap greater benefits from
participation than from noninvolvement. Joining the Atlantic Alliance
would give it access to all of the NATO technical bodies that we have
been discussing throughout this work.

u) Current conditions are propitious to the further development of
logistic cooperation, within Europe, on the one hand, and within NATO,
on the other.

Special mention should be made of the Independent European Program

Group, which first got organised in 1976 and began in 1979 to pursue
specific preparatory measures for joint production projects. Concurrently,
the new European Parliament, elected by universal suffrage in Nay I979,
began debate on European arms cooperation, because of its impact on

the Community’s industrial development.

The IEGP is now drawing up lists of each member country's materiel
and of their respective replacement requirements, so that they can
then jointly plan cooperation in future arms supply programs (short
and long term) and the exchange of advanced (including confidential)
technology.

If Spain does not join NATO, it will remain outside this process.
A delay in joining would mean being excluded from the joint programming
that is now under way.

He do not feel that membership in NATO is essential to begin efforts
towards collaboration with the IEPG. The IEPG does not have a charter
or an institutionalised bureaucracy and enjoys great flexibility in

its makeup. There is no clause officially linking the IEPG with either
NATO or the EEC, though it does maintain close relations with the two
while at the same time underscoring its "independent" and "European"
character.

In our study of the IEPG, we found no obstacle to Spain's membership

in it. However, every IEPG country is also a member of NATO, and we
could thus assume that prospective membership would be ruled out by

a Spanish decision not to join NATO or a declaration of neutrality.

We feel, therefore, that Spain should join the IEPG with an eye towards
the ultimate goal of membership in NATO and the EEC.

The major advantage of taking the first steps towards IEPG membership
would be that it would open the doors for Spain to joint European arms
collaboration and programming, which is still in its infancy. Precisely
because this is its initial phase, results cannot be guaranteed, but

if they turn out to be favorable, losing the opportunity to join at

this early stage could have major consequences for domestic industry,
assuming that the IEPC does not fall short of the expectations it has
created.

161

103 OFPICIAL 088 ONE?
FOR OFYICIAL USE ONLY

Joining the Western European Union would be a complementary, albeit
much less important move.

To summarize, we feel that Spain does not have to join NATO first but
that this should not be ruled out as a prospective goal. In the meantime,
by joining these two European forums, the IEPG and the “EU, Spain could
get something of an indirect head start on coordination with the policy
of Western cooperation in ornaments supply, which is developing slowly
and laboriously with the general context of the Atlantic Alliance and
which could give rise to a major framework for conmnn military logistics
in the 1980's.

Overall Conclusion
We will summarize the conclusions of this study as follows:

The only unavoidable economic obligations entailed in normal-status
membership in the Atlantic Alliance are the periodic contributions

to the financing of its organizational structure and common infrastructure.
These contributions are negotiable, and in any case Spain's shat: could

be described as inconsequential in relation to its total defense budget.

The remaining economic obligations, stemming from NATO's joint planning
of Force Goals, take the form of "recommendations" and will under no
circumstances cause a substantial rise in the level of national defense
spending, neither above what is necessary for our own security nor

in excess of what the nation can afford.

Certain economic benefits could be derived from the construction of

NATO infrastructure installations on Spanish soil and from the enhancement
of existing facilities. Some military and economic assistance is also
obtainable in NATO; under the current circumstances, such compensation

is not likely to be of much consequence, though neither would it be
smaller than in an exclusively bilateral relationship with the United
States.

The main economic advantages of NATO membership are in the field of

defense logistics. Economic advantages could be forthcoming in the

defense industry sector in particular, because of the chance to take

part in multinational joint production projects. This would give Spain
access to advanced technology and have a favorable impact on the development
of its defense industry, both in terms of prototype research and development,
profitable production runs and logistic maintenance support.

In this connection, Spain does not have to wait until it becomes a
formal member of the Atlantic Alliance, which would be the ultimate
goal. It could gain the advantages of arms cooperation by first joining
the European organizations (IEPG, “EU and the EEC) that are also working
in this area.

162
Our overall conclusion is that while the economic consequences of NATO
membership could be positive for the nation's economy, they are not
inportant enough to be considered a conditioning factor in the political
decision of whether or not to join. In any event, such a decision
involves value judgments, strategic and political ones in particular,
which go beyond the stated purposes of this work.

Purthermore,.this study, which is merely one individual’s effort, high-
lights the many complex peculiarities and facets of NATO's intricate
structure and workings. Thus, a group of trained economists should

be formed to focus on this issue. They should gather together and
analyze the necessary background infornation for a subsequent decision
by the appropriate authorities. If the decision is to join the Atlantic
Alliance, then this group would be able to provide well-documented
economic advice on what status Spain ought to adopt and could later
negotiate the economic commitments arising from this status on the

most advantageous terns possible.

COPYRIGHT: Angel Lobo Garcia, Sabado Grafico, S.A., Madrid, Hay I98!

$743
cso: 3Il0/IO3 END

163

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY