FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10043
9 October 1981

Worldwide Report

NARCOTICS AND DANGEROUS DRUGS

(FOUO 47/81)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics rezained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the v.3. Government.

V

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
INDIA

India Becoming a Major Tranait Country in Drug Trade
(Dilip Gangulay; BUSINESS TIMES, 5 Aug 81) .........

Briefa
Opium Prom Pakistan

MALAYSIA

Police Report July 1981 Drug Arrests, Seizurea
(NEW STRAITS TIMES, 19 Aug 8i) .....................

Twenty-Nine Pounda of Drugs Seized, Tho Suspects Arrested
(new STRAITS TIMES. 19 Aug 81) .....................

PAKISTAN

Record Narcotics Haul Made by CuatOIa
(BALUCHISTAN, 22 Sep 81) ...........................

Heroin Worth 2 Million Ra Seized at Airport
(DAW’ZO $09 81) OOIODOOIOOIOOOOOOOOOIOIOOOO.5......

Narcotic Dena Peraiat in Violation of Ialanic Law
(Haqaud Yousfi; JASARAT, 8 Aug 81) .................
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Briefs
Heroin Haul on Border
_ Islamabad Heroin Seizure
Opium, Hashish Seizure

PHILIPPINES

Campaign To Check Drug Abuse Ordered
(BULLETIN TODAY, 3 Sep 81) ................................

Briefs
Harihuana Plantation Destroyed
Increased Drug Traffic

SRI LANKA

Briefs
Ganja, Hashish Record Haul

THAILAND

Deputy Prime Minister Outlines Opium Suppression
(Bangkok Domestic Service, 23 Sep 81) .....................

Border Patrol Police Raid Heroin Refinery
(Subin Khunkaeo; POST, 14 Aug 81) .........................

Paper Blasts u.s. Envoy Remarks on Drugs
(Editorial; NATION REVIEW, 3 Sep 81) ......................

ONCB Poppy Destruction Drive
(Voice of Free Asia, 15 Sep 81) ...........................

Khun SA Offers To Halt Opium Trade
(POST. 17 Sep 81) Ill.00....00‘.0..IIOOOOIOOOOCOO000.00....

OHCB Read Comments on Reward for Khun SA
(POST, 20 Sep 81) .........................................

Briefs
New Program To Start

CANADA

Editorial Cites Plight of Customs Service in Drug Fight
(Edited-1:111}: "INDSOR STAR, 21 Sep 81) oasssscsoascaossss

Briefs
Hashish Seized

- b -
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
BOLIVIA

Antidrus Lav To Be Amended
(La Paz Radio Illinani, 18 Sep 81) ..........

Briefs
Antidrug-Trsfficking Crusade

CHILE

Briefs
Hashiah Traffickers Arrested

COLOMBIA

Complications in 'Cocaine Queen' Trial
(EL TIEHPO, 21 Aug 81) .....................

Trafficking in 'El Hodelo' Prison Described
(German Navarrete; EL TIEHPO, 7 Aug 81) ....

Cocaine Seized at Eldorado Airport
(EL ESPECTADOR, 18 Aug 81) soIsOalOoooalaale

Hethaqualone Raids Described
(BL ESPECTADOR, 25 Aug 81) .................

Cocaine 'War' in Cauca Described
(Carlos Mauricio Vega; CROHOS. 25 Aug 81) .

JAMAICA

Health Minister Discusses Island's Drug Problem
(THE DAILY CLEANER, 7 Sep 81) ............u

TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO

Briefs
Drug Abuse Centers
VENEZUELA

Drug Traffic Alleged To Figure in Caribbean Politics
(Francisco Chso Hermids; ZETA, 30 Aug 81) ................

NEAR EAST AND NORTH AFRICA

UNITED ARAB EMIRATES

Drug Crimes Increase, Laws Said To Be Insufficient
(Ahmad Huhsin; AL-BAYAN, 11 Aug 81)

NEST EUROPE

AUSTRIA

Drug Consumption Increasing, Deaths Decreasing
(DIE PRESSE, 26 Aug 81) ..................................

Briefs
Hashish Plantation in Klagenfurt

DENMARK

Physician Expert Discusses widening Drugs Problem
(Peter Bge Interview; BBRLINGSKE TIDENDE, 16 Sep 81) .....

Conference Examines Situation of Older Addicts
(Hanne Selnses; BERLINGSKE TIDENDE, 19 Sep 81) ...........

Police Claim South America Is New Cocaine Source
(Anders wiig; Bsnuucsxz name, 15 Sep 81)

UN Official: Eighty Percent of Country's Drugs From Asia
(BERLINGSKE TIDENDE, 28 Sep 81) ..,.......................

ITALY
Briefs
Milan Police Seize Hashish
NETHERLANDS
Psychiatrist on Dangers of Free Distribution of Heroin, Methadone
(Jaap Calaco Belmonte; NRC HANDELSBIAD, 10 Sep 81) .......
NORWAY

Government Increases Funds for Fighting Narcotics
(Torleif Andreassen; AFTENPOSTBN, b Sep 81) ..............

- d -
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Book on Oslo Drug Scene Details Youth Addiction
(ARBEIDERBLADET, 26 Aug 81) ......................

Briefs
Sorlsndet Narcotics Enforcement Increased
Narcotics Police Stationed Abroad

TURKEY

Briefs
Heroin Seizure
Heroin Snugglers Csught
Antalys Reroin Seized

UNITED KINGDOM

'LPA' Reports on Largest UK Cannabis Seizure in History
(LONDON PRESS ASSOCIATION, 28 Sep 81) ............

Drugs Ban; on Trial for Smuggling Cannabis
(Ian Henry; THE DAILY TELEGRAPH, 16 Sep 81) ......

Briefs
Cannabis Snuggler Jailed
BRIEFS

TAUNGCYI HEROIN SEIZUR£--0n 15 September, a combined party of the Taunggyi
township customs department and the city people's police force searched a
Datsun minibus, registration No NYA/3345. leaving Taunggyi for Mandalay.

The party recovered from two passengers 1.3 kilograms of No 4 heroin worth
about 100,000 kyat. The herion carriers-Aik Kyauk of Namyin Hard, Mogaung;
and Ha Shut of Ywathit Hard. Hogaung--were arrested and the city people's
police force has filed charges against them under sections 6.3 and 7.3 of the
narcotics drugs law. [8K021037 Rangoon LOKTHA PYEITHU NEZIN in Burmese

24 Sep 81 p 7 BK]

HUNDWIN HEROIN RAIDS-0n 6 September, Hundwin police camp commander U Yin Kyi
and a squad, together with No 1 ward councillors of Hundwin, raided the
residences of U Than Aung and his wife He San. and U Nyunt Khin and his wife

Ma San Kyi, and recovered from the former couple six packets of heroin each
worth 25 kyat, and from the latter couple a penicillin bottle containing heroin.
The four have been charged under sections 6.8, 10.8 and 11/14.D of the narcotics
drugs law. [Rangoon HYANHA ALIN in Burmese 20 Sep 81 p 6 BK]
INDIA BECOMING A MAJOR TRANSIT COUNTRY IN DRUG TRADE

Kuala Lumpur BUSINESS TIMES in English 5 Aug 81 p 17

[Article by 0111p Gangulay in New Delhi]

[Text]

CSO:

PLACED between the
"Golden Triangle" oi
Burma. Thailand and
Laos and the “Golden
Crescent" oi Afghanis-
tan. Pakistan and Iran.

'India ls iast burgeoning

intoa major transit coun-
try ior narcotics and
cven .1 possible source oi
opium-based narcotics to
the drug-dazed Western
world. ,

From a modest tran-
slt country In the early
70's and a harmless iun
time destination ior soit
drug addicts. India has
now iound a place In In-
terpol's eoniidential ”In-
telligence Bulletin". a
nnjor source oi in-
telligence on world drug-
running.

The bulletin says;
“Even India is said to be
.1 major ca ortcr oi
opium-based rugs. It Is
believed by many that
considerable amount oi
Indian and Pakistani
heroin. through Nepal.
nrc rcachln Australia
and New Zea and.”

This Is the iirst time
that Interpol has said
that india might be mak-
ing its marlt.though In Its
own humble way. In the
world's estimated US$100
billion narcotics busi-
nose

The Indian entry into
the international drug
world Is ver recent. In
the United aliens In-
ternational Narcotics
Control Board reports oi

 

i979 and tom. India was.

not mentioned at all.

The Indian connection 7

started uniolding at the
beginning oi this year.
when government
sleuths were tipped oil
that .t large consignment

5300/8301

oi cocaine was due to
pass through.

Agents in the western
port city oi Bombay
stumbled on a consign-
ment oi Bolivian handi-
craits shipped from u
PAL 1.215 kilogrammes
oi cocaine valued at six
million ru es (about
088150.00 ) was re-
covcrcdﬂ‘heselsure was
the biggest in Asia —
almost three times the
annual cocaine haul In
any single year.

in It ril. an alert cin-
toms o ilcial in Bombay
seized 2.00 itgs oi heroin
irom a Bangkok passen-
ger.

In the Hindu holy city
oi Bcnaras tVeranasI).
anti-narcotics sleuths
seized two titles oi
morphlncanddiseovered
.-i morphine lab

Prime Minister Indira
Gandhi's government ls
worried over the increas-
ing involvement oi India
in the International drug
ratchet. To streamline
unto-narcotics agencies.
the government recently
organised a two-ween
scmnnar-cum-trainlng
course here.

Mrs Gandhi Is In-
inducing. a new antl-
narcotics ill in the com-
lng session oi the Par-
llnment to increase the
maximum prison term to
It years against the es-
lsting three years.

The bill aims at end-
ing the contusion that ex-
ists in the present stat-
utes in which opium ls
dealt with separately
irom morphine. heroin
and cocaine with nothing
to cover synthetic
narcotics.

The government also

2

to Increase the
50 million rupees
tum million) annual
budget allocation ior the
anti-narcotics operation
which is considered in.
adequate.

What lures the smug-
Icrs to operate through
ndia is the laxity oi laws

here. While Iran shoots
drug oiienders and South
Asian countries achieve
the same result by court
room death sentence. in
India they are let oii with
just sis months or three
years oi im nment
and a paltry oi 1.000

(about US$120).
Over and above that the
Indian judges let oii
smuggm’ 1;!" and
persons . it many
cases they just jump the
bail.

"What worries en-
iorcement agencies even
more are several poten-
tially explosive trends
noticed in recent years ..
there is an Increasing tilt
towards more harder and
reilned drugs .. the big
catches in 1071-10 were
hashish this year's
scisures are oi diiierent
dimension: itecord
breaking hauls oi heroin
and cocaine. which iigure
at the top oi the hiller
lists ol narcotics". a re-
cent study by the popular
Indian news magazine.
India Today. said.

Oiiicial data ceniirms
the trend. In ms and
Im. the agencies seized
sec and no grammes oi
heroin Ively. But
the catc suddenly
jumped to 1.5 kgs in me
and the last April haul in
Bombay bad tossed the
score Into an altogether

new dimeiulon. the mag-
asine said.

Only two it s oi
morphine were so sed In
ten. but selsuros jumped
dramatically to almost
i.) iigs In I!" bsiore settl-
Ing down to sin In ms
and is”. .

The total seizures.
however. represent only 2
to 18 per cent oi the total
trainc in narcotics. an
eniorcement oiiieial said.

"There are indeed
signs that the Indian eon-
neetion can only grow In
time. though India has a
near monopoly in the
world opium trade
marginally sharing with
Turkey. there is trouble
ahead". he said.

From a high 872
tonnes in ms. India‘s es-
port oi so per cent prooi
opium have come down
to 130 tonnes in 1000 as

reduction. which oi-

ctals claim is regulated
by export demand. was
brought down.

But Independent In-
vestigation by Indian
newspapers have estab-
lished that over 300
tonnes oi tum is smug-
gled out root govern-
ment-su£rvtsed planta-
tion ilel

"Totally unrealistic
procurement prices. in-
suiiiclent manpower to
monitor production
spread over 12.000 hec-
tares and a highly or-
ganised system oi grail
among police and excise
personnel are iacton in-
strumental In the ﬂow oi
the blacit gold to the
smugglers." the national
daily. Indian Express.
said. - A"
BRIEFS

OPIUM FROM PAKISTAN-Neu Delhi, 18 Sep (APP)--An Indian Border Security Force (35?)
patrol seized 460 kg (1,012 pounds) of opium last night being snuggled in from
Pakistan through the international border along the Indian Punjab state. The
B.S.F. headquarters here today said the patrol party ran into the smugglers but

the latter escaped under cover of darkness. The contraband was estimated to be

worth 500,000 rupees or over u.s.$55.ooo. [Text] [Hong Kong APP in English
1105 cm 18 Sep 81 BK]

CSO: 5300/2005-A
IUALA LUMPUI.
hes. - 'l'llnecn lor-
olpm nu mg?“
people "routed to:
you: ulna 0! (up last
month. CID Dlncur
M Abdul mu
but]! a“ My.

Thy Included slx
This. s m and
m Filipino. ‘I'bc mu
an alumnus.

OI m m pcopk u-
vcucd. 9|: no su-
peckd to h. dag-w-
lichen.

Police the seized
I‘M Ibo u ru- opal-n.
2:! lb 0! p.13. 8.2 lb.

boron. m an 0! pn~
pond opium .34 u an
at morpuoc. u: wont
about m.

In Poul. pc-
000 l W. sacks d
an). IcI‘NIg About

lb dumped In no
but” u K.II’III‘
MI 8. at on July 21.

In I “3 police
"Mod t suspected
in; «mm; con.

3:. In 3m! Koo on
July :0 and ”Ind
0000 «0 3n 0‘ horde.
A mph vu «km
to:

Another :upoctod
mum mm m
“covered In In. M
In on July 23 during a
n“ on a bone In hm
KIIIII‘. when polls;
and 30 [II cl hull.
nudging mica put
0‘ M I. empty
“run. 5| undies 3M
men! puuc packets.
and Mt bound to
he proceeds [no no
ale 0! WI.

he Incl Inn “-
wood (or questioning.

In I.“ We on
July ll. 3 In. In M-
nued sad 100 gm 0‘
boul- m I. IN a nu
cpl- “bed.

0. July 21. police 3:-
m“! a suspected an;
"uncle! on Palm:
Luann nu mud
:30 ‘- ot Inch.
KUALA LUMPUR.
Tues. — Police ar-
rested two suspected
drug traffickers
before they could dis-
tribute about 898.000
worth of hard drugs to
local pusher: here.

The suspects were
picked up by ASP Toh
ChinSeong inanamhush
at apetrol ltioelt at the eth
mile Juan Klang Lama
here last Friday.

CID director Datuk
Abduiiahl'tahinan Ismail
said today: ”We found
five packets of raw
opium weighing ”lbs.
three of heroin
and a four-pound slab of
morphine in a hag in the
bootoftheeuspects' car.‘

Police believe the
drugs had been recently
,snuggled across the
Waysia’l’hai border. _

The aeinm tolloved a
tip-off from the public.

Oneofthesupects

was horn Kamm Pan

in'Areu. Perils; while the
other was from Bullii
in Gurun.

“We believe the drugs
were meant for local con-
sumption.‘.‘ Datuh
Rah-tan said.

Police believe drug
traffickers are “feeling
the heat' end are con-
untly changing tactics
to node arrests

Headway

“But Ire are making
headway in our battle
agaiut the when and
matches-e.

“We are getting more
tip-om and intelligence
reports on drug activities
throughout the country.“

Police feel that the
beat my to detect drugs
is through the use of spe-
cially trained docs.

' 0n cocaine. Datuk
Behinan said: "We heve
no evidence that this
drug is being used here.”
RECORD NARCOTICS RAUL MADE BY CUSTOMS

Quetta eatucazsnu rmas in English 22 Sep 81 pp 1. 6

[Text]

GUEHA Sept. 21.
Customs ruthless or}

ve against 'Drug Peddi

lers' in Baluchistan
continues un-abated.
After many months of
efforts,the first br-

eak thOugh was achieur

ed when 731-“9.cpium
and 13.2 Kg.heroine
worth Rs. 21 crore we
seized on 26.6.81 ne-
ar mslim Bagh'é.I his
was followed by anotf»
er major-seizure of
620 Kg. Charas worth

Rs.2 crores near Rab- 3

at on 9.9.1981.And no».
the biggest ever sei-
zure of heroine in Pa
kistan and Asia and
one of the biggest se-
izure in the recorded
world history of Nar-
cotics has been effe-
cted near Rabat by so
izing 02 Kg.heroine.
the New! brk street
price of this is ap-
pr0ximately $ 63 milk
ions i.e.Rs.63 crores
Brief details of this.
seizure are as follo-
ws:-

Skillfully acting on

the basis of an info-'
rmation, a new'Mobile
Squad' specifically '
constituted by Colle-
ctor of Custom at Tan
tan worked with great
enthusiasm. The info-
rmation was further
processed and sifted
carefully so as to ca
tch the smugglers red
handed. As a result of
their laborous effors
finally.on 21.9.81 Cu-
stoms Mobile Squad
apprehended one Toyou

.9899._h9_a.91n9 901's!“

Rabat about 70 miles
from Iaftan in the CL
ose proximity of Pak-
Afghan B rdcr on one
side and Pak-Iran bo-
rder on the other 5}
de. 0n seeing the Cus
toms staff after them.
the smugglers resorte
to intense firing wL
the automatic weapons
The Customs officials
undetered by this f}
ring ,however ,continuad
their chase and were
ultimately successful
in bursting the tyres
of the vehicle.1he Sm

..‘o~...

ugglers.under the co-
ver of their rapid fi-
ring,aisappeared into
the near by hills wh—
ereas the jeep was ta-
ken into custody..lt
was then thoroughly

searched and 42 Kg.of

heroine valued at Rs
63 crores approximat-

ely in terms of inter-
national market value
was found concealed

in a specially constr-

r‘ﬁE-‘E’e’d' caVity in the"

floor of this vehicle
Further investigatio-
ns are in progress He
results of which would
be brought to light in
due course of time.
However judging from
the past trends, it
appears that drug ped-
dlers of N.W.E.P. in
collusion with their
counterparts in Balu-
chistan and Iran are
at work. Using.great
ingenuity they trans-
port narcotics from .
tribal territory of
N.H.F.P. to Baluchisb
an for onward dispatdw
to Iran wherefrom it
is delivered to other
international drug tr~
affickers.

For their extra ord-
inary cwrage,will.de-
termination and devot-
ion to duty,all Custo
ms officials who have
been instrumental in
effecting this seizun:
are being suitably re~
voided.
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP02-00850R000400060020-9

HEROIN WORTH 2 MILLION R5 55125!) AT AIRPORT

[Text]

CSO:

Karachi DAWN 20 Sep 81 p 10

D'screet mmmnoe on n
Putnam neuonol serving in
Saudi 1mm: led to the recovery
at two kilogram: oi tine heroin
worth about R; 1 million II the
c“! “no" Mutiny. minute
betote his proposed deperture to
Gemny.

sneem Sutton. en electrics! en-
uneer. mused o! “tempting no
music out heroin in: inter pro-
duced betore n tout court. He
no remnded in Custom one-
todny up to Sept. 29.

Her e briefing on the elrport
counter. the Dru; Moment
Cell omen intercepted Suitnn
who had been am my
times. He no unrated but nom-
xn‘ no found on his person.
Honour. his me yielded two
kilos of heroin conceded in the
ma bottom of n suitcue.

Saleem Sultan wu proceeding
to_P.mnziurtl on nanny to the
USA by n Lather.“ mm. tie
and three postpone - two were

5300/4503

in with enu‘u
employed '
Company in
end is ill-dame 0:
tion'. In punuonc
the Customs aid.

(menu, uniting

EEE

estnhlimed contact:

"drug smugglers" :-
n; Latino the e

the em time. can
b." remled.

“SANA

Mann-bile. K:
netted mnriiuenn
mar - no kilos
from 3mm Poise
iron: one mm
ores. Hun inlet
neutered 260 ml
Mon-mined Mei
mm: tron: one
Shmhad. All tn:
been backed undel
mace. ,

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007I02109: CIA-RDP82-00850R000400080020-9
NARCOTIC DENS PBRSIST IN VIOLATION OF ISLAMIC LAN
Karachi JASARAT in Urdu 8 Aug 81 p 2

[Report by Haqsud Yousfi: "Narcotic Dena Are Turning Younger Generation into a
Blight on Society; Eighty Crime Dena Are Operating in Areas of Liaqat Abad, Nazim
Abad and Liari; Owners of These Narcotic Dens Pay Regular Compensation to Police"]

[Text] The local sub—divisional magistrate recently raided the dens of the city's
two notorious narcotic dealers, Saif—ur-Bahman and Hashim Khan and seized hundreds
of thousands of rupees worth of liquor. mandrake, pathetdine, opium and other
narcotics. A still was also seized from one of the dens. There were drums of
alcohol mixed with coloring and called liquor. It has been noticed, however, that
after only a few days' break, these dens start operating with much more activity

and momentum. We do not wish to mention the under—cover involvement here. However,
it is usual with every crime center which the the police or any other agency has
raided, the ring-leader or owner of the den is never arrested. As a matter of fact,
after the introduction of Islamic law in the country, by President Zia-ul-qu's
order, all criminal cutiritus were banned. However, after an elapse of only a
month, these restrictions gradually diminished for some influential people. As a
result, many more dens are operating now. Besides gssbling, prostitution, exhibi-
tion of Indian and nude films, liquor, mandrake, pathetdine, narcotics, alcoholic
drinks and opium are openly sold. The owners of these centers claim that they pay
regular compensation for the operation of their dens.

According to a short survey, the areas of Liaqat Abad. Nazis Abad and Liari alone
have eighty notorious dens. Their owners earn hundreds of thousands of rupees

daily from these centers. The notorious drug dealers in Liaqat Abad are Saif-ur-
Rahman, Nazir Tedi and Hanif K. In Nazim Abad, there are Haji Saifullah, Miro,
Alanah, Muhammad Hussein, Haider and Adam Khan. In Liari, there are Newer, Ramsan,
Halik Niazi Rizal. Hassi Dad, Yaqub, Ismail, Agha Ahmad Bakhsh and Badshah Khan.

In Banaras, there are notorious dens of Babu Langhra, Baitullah alias Baitak, Jailer,
Dil Murad, Dawoud. Rashid alias Shida, Zulaikha, Captain Sadho, Shah Newer, Sabrak,
Vaila, Ibrahim Langhra. Kadu Hakrani, Ali alias Geeem and Haula Bakhsh alias Haulu.
All these areas operate this condemned business.

Due to close contacts or under-cover influences of the den owners, the police takes
no action against them. whenever, due to numerous protests by the inhabitants of
the affected area, a customary raid is conducted, the owners of the dens are never
arrested. The dens too, commence their activities after a day or two or else start
operating in a different place. Regrettably, a large number of youths are seen at
these narcotic centers. Thus, becoming drug addicts at such a young age, they end
up as the future blight on society.

9779 9
C50: 5300/4653
BRIEFS

HEROIN HAUL 0N BORDER—Hr Ghulam Ashraf Jehangir, master custom central board of
revenue, has said that Karachi customs house is being given additional logistic
support to intensify its antismuggling efforts with the acquisition of five fast
motorboats, a helicopter, latest arms and anunition and modern means of commi-
cations. He said the conventional thinking that narcotics were being snuggled out
by air route only had been negated by the recent seizures of heroin on land and
sea routes. and particularly the seizure of 1.2 kg of heroin worth over Rs. 600
million in the international market near Taftan on Pelt-Iran border. [GPOll 818
Karachi DAWN in English 29 Sep 81 p lo GP]

ISLAMBAD “mom SEIZURB--The custom mobile squad hauled at a car in lslmabad
on 28 September and recovered four kilogram of heroin powder of fine «slag.

One person was arrested. [Text] [Karachi Domestic Service in Engliuh 1700
28 Sep 81 BK]

OPIUM. HASHISH sum-«ports, Sept. 8~-1n a big haul Preventive Staff of the col-
lectorate of customs has seized 620 tgs of opiu, 7S kgs of hashish and the pickup
without number plate at Rule million near Rabat and Kartaka. 60 ailes away from

mttan between Pakistan, Afghanistan and Iran borders. According to a handout is-
sued by the Collectorate of mstoa' in Quetta this atternoon the seizure was made

after exchange of fire from both sides last evening. The hiding party was led by
Assistant Collector Preventive Services it. Sher lavas Khan. The snagglers escaped

under cover of tire. Further investigations are in progress. [Text] [Outta
BALOCHIS‘rAN TIMES in English 9 Sep Bl p 4]

C50: 5300/4504

10
an: :uﬁ (Giana EEG:
33.8653 8 8837
can 9.5 3328.

v0 333 88 E:
9... 2.2.. on 85.33
2.552 ~35 253.
:8“ .833 5 22.5.
«a. C53. mania 28..
2:83 ma? qua-n.
gas—8. Ex— 8:;

team 3 vac—San».
56223» 32% a?
BRIEFS

MARIHUANA PLANTATION DESTROYBD-—Agents of the National Bureau of Investigation [“81]
uprooted recently some 10 million peso worth of marijuana plants in a S-hectare
plantation in a remote village in Benguet. “BI director Jolly Bugarin, who
described the plantation as the biggest ever found in the country, said it was

the source of marijuana being sold in metro Manila, Subic Naval Base and Clark

Air Base. The discovery of the plantation was made possible by the arrest of

2 cauriers in Manila while in possession of 3 kilos of dried marijuana. The
suspects led Operatives to the plantation last Saturday. [Tent] [HKDBOOAS

Manila FEBC in English 2330 GMT 7 Sep 81]

INCREASED DRUG TRAFFIC-—The Philippine Government use alerted yesterday by Thai
authorities of a possible increase of international drug traffic through Manila.
The alert came from Thai customs officials who are in Manila for the 20—nation
customs conference. Thai officials confirmed that Manila is being used as a transit-
point by an [word indistinct] smaller traffic drug syndicate which has 0.5. and
Australian connections. The drug shipments are from the notorious Golden Triangle
along the border of Burma, Thailand and Laos. The transports are being usually
done by planes and not ships as before. They said, an increase in drug smuggling
is expected due to a report that opium farmers in the Golden Triangle are stepping
up production to make up for the drop in production in the past fev years. [Text]
[HK180333 Manila FEBC in English 2330 GMT 17 Sep 81]

C80: 5300/0505

12
- BRIEFS

GANJA.HASHISH RECORD HAUL--A record haul of compressed ganja and hashish was
discovered at Colombo airport. The narcotics were concealed in 12 cartons of
tea and found in the personal luggage of a Sri Lankan who was proceeding to Paris.
The cartons contained 22 kilos of compressed cannabia—-found to be of Lankan
origin-~and 7.5 kilos of hashish-—claimed by customs to have been smuggled from
Pakistau--vaiued at Rs. 800,000. Documents recovered from the Lanksn courier-~a
former engineer—-indicate that the smuggling attempt was linked to a massive
international drug trafficking network. A fine of Rs. 2ao,ooo was imposed.
Inquiries are being conducted by the police narcotics bureau to uncover the

Sri Lankan connection in what has not emerged as heavy trafficking in narcotics
from Sri Lanka. [Colombo SUN in English 21 Sep 81 pp 1. 2 BK]

C80: 5300/4505

13
DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER OUTLINES OPIUH SUPPRESSIOR
81(230606 Bangkok Domestic Service in Thai 0000 GMT 23 Sep 81

[Text] Deputy Prime Minister Gen Prachuap Suntharangknn, who is one of the
officials to accompany the prime minister during the forthcoming visit to the
United States, told newsmen that there would be discussion of narcotics suppression
cooperation between Thailand and the United States during the visit to that country.

He said that the Office of the Narcotics Control Board is now implementing the
project to replace opium with other crops.

Asked if the United States had forced Thailand to stop growing opitn, the deputy
prime minister replied: To wipe out opium plantations and initiate the crop
substitution program is our policy. We have selected 52 villages to launch the
program. The hilltribe villages were chosen for the cultivation of other crops.
Five villages finally passed the screening at the last month's meeting in which
opium plantations will completely be wiped out. These five villages are considered
to be economically well-off. The program for these villages will start in November.

The deputy prime minister revealed that the opium output in the golden triangle
this year is estimated at between 500 to 600 tons, close to that of last year.
Some 50 tons were produced in Thai territory. The Thai Government is trying to
minimize the area of opium cultivation for the 1982 season. which will start
between October and Nov-bar.

Last week, the deputy prime minister said, a seminar was opened for court judges
from all over the country on narcotics problems and the necessity for an intensive
suppression campaign. He noted that it is a difficult task to arrest producers
because they are financially strong. Meanwhile, the United States has been
rendering Thailand its good cooperation to tackle this problem.

The deputy prime minister said that the Burmese Government was very helpful in
hunting down Khun Sa. He expected continuing good cooperation from the Burmese

Government. He told newsmen that he would later meet with the new Burmese ambassador
to disCuss this matter.

650: 5300/6506

11;
BORDER PATROL POLICE RAID HEROIN REFINBRY

BKlloO7l3 Bangkok POST in English 16 Aug 81 p 1

[Story and pictures by Subin Khunkaeo]

[Text] Chiang Rai--Helicopter-borns border patrol policemen and 0.8. Drug Enforce-
ment Administration agents have raided a heroin factory, believed to be one of the
biggest captured in the last 10 years, and seized 3.6 tons of cooked opium after

a fierce gunbattle with Chinese Haw guards.

Police sources told the POST yesterday that the factory was capable of producing
about 600 kilogrannes of heroin a month. An unspecified mount of heroin from this
year's opium crop had alreaiy beemmoved out of the factory to dealers.

The factory was built on a hill in Doi Buai Halt, about 1 kilometre from the Burmese
border and about 10 kilometres west of Ban Bin Take in Mae Chan District.

The sources said that on Wednesday about 100 BPP men stormed the factory which was

reportedly guarded by 30 Chinese Haw guards armed with H-72 antitank rockets and
M-60 machineguns.

A raid on the heroin refinery was originally ordered by Pol Haj-Gen Hichai
Wichaithanaphat, comander of the third region border patrol police on Tuesday.
but it was called off shortly after the forces were airborne because of bad
weather.

When the weather improved on Wednesday, a unit of 50 crack 8?? men from the second
company in Mae Chan and DEA agents were airlifted in two police helicopters for
an assault on the refinery reportedly operated by an opium kingpin with Yunnaneee
connec t ions .

Police sources said that as soon as the heliborne officials landed in Doi Huey Malt,
they ran into volleys of rocket and gunfire from the factory's guards. Realising
they were outgunned they called for reinforcements and another batch of 50 border
patrol policemen from Ban “in Task was inediately dispatched to Doi Huey ﬂak in

the two helicopters. But they could not land because of heavy fighting on the ground
and poor visibility.
The two choppers turned back and returned later after weather conditions improved.
but had to circle overhead while 3?? men hastily made a new landing zone by chopping
down trees. The sources said that when the helicopters finally did land, the
Chinese Haw guards opened fire on them with H—60 machineguns but missed.

Now outnumbered the guards retreated into the jungle, taking some casualties.
All the DP? and DEA men were unharmed.

When officials raided the refinery, they discovered six ZOO-litre oil drums filled
with prepared opium. one AX rifle and an “-72 rocket launcher, three stoves, two
huge pans, eight 20-litre plastic cans and large quantities of ether and chloroform
for making heroin.

The refinery measured 10m x 50m and was built with timber under a cluster of trees
to avoid detection from the air. Next to it was a kitchen and a pen with five
mules.

Officials said heroin refineries are usually located near streams or other water
sources. But the Do] Huai ﬂak factory was sited on a hill and obtained its water
from a waterfall through a crude distribution system.

The refinery. chemicals and opium could not be transported by helicopter to the BF?
garrison and was set on fire.

A helicopter pilot reported seeing several mules carrying heavy packs being hastily
herded out of the factory compound during the fighting which lasted from about

8 am to 2 pm. He estimated that as many as 50-60 kilogramnes of heroin were moved
out by the mule caravan.

Officials estimated the drug haul, factory and equipment were worth about 40 million
baht .

cso: 5300/4506

16
PAPER BLASTS U.S. ENVOY REMARKS 0N DRUGS
BK030513 Bangkok NATION REVIEH in English 3 Sep 81 p 6
(Editorial: "Excuses Hustn't Lower Our Guard Against Drugs")

[Text] The Thai Government'should take drastic action against the cultivation of
poppy, prevent the opium produced by being refined into heroin and arrest the
kingpins of the narcotics trade. These are monotonous and unimaginative variations
of an outworn theme that have cropped up for the umpteenth time in the regional
narcotics conference being held here and attended by representatives of U.S.
diplomatic missions in the East Asian and Pacific regions. It is not that U.S.
Charge D'affaires Burton Levin does not know this but since all angles have been
repeated ad nauseum, he was forced to fall back on an old formula.

But he has also completely whitewashed the charges he levelled against Thailand

by saying that the control of the heroin refineries are located in the no-man's
land of the Thai-Burmese border controlled by the Shan United Army of Burma led

by drug kingpin Chang Chifu and abetted by deals with the Burmese Communist Party.
However, the fact remains according to him, and we concede the point, that poppy
is being grown in the northern hills of Thailand by tribal folk. But he appears
to minimise the problem and possibly believes that poppy-growing can be halted
overnight by waving the magic wand to crop substitution. From the highest authority
in the land to the lowest ranked bureaucrat, all have tried and are trying to
substitute cash crops for popply but it will take time to eliminate the centuries-
old means of livelihood for the hill tribes.

This is no apology for poppy-growing, opium-refining, or for heroin trafficking

since we have condemned and will continue to condemn in the strongest terms

possible this pandering to human misery. But at the same time we strongly object

to Thailand being forced to carry the stigma alone for the international narcotics
trade. Further, Levin has also resorted to juggling statistics when he says that
Thailand has half a million drug addicts while the United States has less than
600,000 because addicts in Thailand then reach an astronomical proportion considering
Thailand's population is roughly only one-fifth of the population of the United
States.

These figures may be true if only marijuana and heroin are taken into account but

in the United States such drugs as cocaine and LSD are also very popular, not to
mention 'uppers' and 'downers'. Also, a whole culture-comlonly called the 'yellow

17
culture'--has sprung in the United States and is based on the use of drugs,

something that has not and will not happen in Thailand. A little over 20 years

ago, opium smoking was legal in Thailand and although it definitely had a detrimental
effect on the human potential in this country. it certainly did not produce a
drug-based 'culture'.

Thailand has tough anti-narcotic laws although Singapore's mandatory death sentence
for drug trafficking is tougher. However, Thailand has executed certain key men
who have been found to be guilty of large-scale distribution of drugs. But as
Levin himself has said. the problem of completely suppressing the refining of opium
is one that has been defying solution for a long time because of the fluid situation
along the Thaiunurma border.

while the primary blame should be placed on the so-called drug kingpins who refine
opium and trade wholesale in heroin, there have also been several "Westerners who
have been caught trying to smuggle heroin out of Thailand." No doubt they have
faced harsh sentences and, in Thai prisons, there is no molly-coddling of prisoners
as is the case in the United States and Western Europe. Often pressure is brought
on the Thai Government to show leniency toward these convicted drug traffickers.
Prime Minister Prem Tinsulanon has just faced such a problem in Australia.

But, when all is said and done, the Thai Government should move with greater
alacrity in tackling the problem of poppy growing and suppressing heroin trafficking.
Both of these efforts may prove extremely difficult but that should be no excuse.

let us take to heart the positive elements which this conference has brought out

and concentrate on them. There has been a bumper crop of opium this year. It

is time for the authorities to gird up their loins and put their best feet forward
to prevent refined drugs reaching addicts in Thailand and abroad.

650: 5300/4506

18
ONCB POPPY DESTRUCTION DRIVE
BKlSl352 Bangkok Voice of Free Asia in English 1100 GMT 15 Sep 81

[Text] The Office of the Narcotics Control Board will launch a campaign in
November to race out poppy fields in 10 villages in Chiang Mai.

Secretary General of the Office of Narcotics Control Board Pol Maj Gen Phao Sarasin
told a press conference yesterday that a crop replacement program had been introduced
in these villages, and it would not be necessary for the hilltribes people there

to continue growing poppy. A combined force of civilians and border patrol police
will be employed in the mission.

Meanwhile. the secretary general of the Office of the Narcotics Control Board
denied the report that the United States Government is mounting pressures on
Thailand to destroy the opium cultivation in the northern part of the country,
saying that the Thai Government has always had the policy to eradicate opium
culture.

General Paho said the Thai Government during the past years successfully encouraged
hilltribesmen in 38 villages in the north to grow other cash crops as substitute
for opium. He said the hilltribesmen in the areas have earned enough income and
do not have to resort to growing opium for a living anymore.

The chief of the antinarcotics organization said it was agreed during a recent
meeting of the authorities to expand the areas in which the opium substitute project
will be carried out from 38 villages to 52. He said the government also planned

to destroy opium cultivation in 10 other villages in the north in which villagers
are able to earn their living through other means.

When asked about narcotics suppression being launched by the government on sea

coast drug smuggling route, General Phao said Thailand has received good cooperation
from Hong Kong and Malaysia. He said the Malaysian Government is to promulgate

a law to control the use of chemicals which are used in producing heroin. General
Phao said these chemicals are very difficult to obtain in Thailand, so smugglers,
traffickers have taken to shipping morphine into Malaysia.

CSO: 5300/4506

19
KHUN SA OFFERS TO HAL'I' OPIUH TRADE
BK170102 Bangkok POST in English 17 Sep 81 p 3

[Text] Khun Sa, said to be a narcotics kingpin of the "golden triangle," has
again offered his cooperation in ending opium cultivation and drug trafficking in
the region. He said he was determined to see opium wiped out. "The important
point is that the Thai Government must give me powers." he said and proposed that
the government acts as an intermediary between him and the United States for
discussion on ways and means of stamping out opium and its derivatives.

In a typed statement issued. at his Ban Hin Taek stronghold near the Burmese border,
Khun Sa, leader of the Shan United Army, said that if his overture was positively
accepted he believed he would be able to stamp out the opium busines.

He recalled that he once offered similar help and cooperation "but it was rejected
outright and, moreover, I was accused of being a narcotics trafficker." That was
in April 1978, when Khun Sa proposed a 6-year plan to phase out opium cultivation
in Shan State to Mr Joseph Nellis, a representative of U.S. Senator [as published]
Lester h'olff.

The project envisions a gradual phase—out of opium cultivation, with the United
States buying up opium crops during the 6-year period, and the introduction of
crop substitution. "But instead the United States borrowed the hands of Ne "in
who used his troops to destroy the opium crops and ban the people from growing
opium. That was driving the people to starvation and for the sake of their own
survival they continue to grow opium.

"In the U.S.. if the farmers do not grow barley, they will have no bread to eat,"
Khun Sa said.

"Opium cultivation has been practised in Shan State for almost 200 years, but I
am only a bit more than 60 years old. Why mst it be me? Why should I be accused
of being a drugs producer? That's very unfair." he complained.

Khun So, alias Chang Shi-fu, said that even if he were dead, opium would not simply
disappear from Shan State. He recalled that when Lo “sing-hen, another drug king-
pin, and himself were imprisoned by the Burmese Government several years ago,
narcotics still managed to get out of the golden triangle to markets in Europe,

the United States and Australia. Khun Sa said the Burmese Covermnent was pleased

that the Thai Goverment had put up a price for his capture "as that means opening
a door [or the Burmese socialist and coumunists to arrive at Thailand's doorstep."

CSO: 5300/4506

20
ONCB HEAD COMMENTS ON REWARD FOR KHUN SA
BK210616 Bangkok POST in English 20 Sep 81 p 3

[Text] The Office of the Narcotics Control Board (ONCE) will renew and possibly
increase the reward for the arrest of alleged drugs kingpin Khun Sa after it

expires in September next year. ONCB Chairman Gen Pracbnap Suntharangkun said
yesterday.

Narcotics agents on Friday expressed puzzlement as to why the reward for the capture.
dead or alive, of the suspected golden triangle drugs smuggler was valid only
until 30 September next year.

Gen Prachuap said yesterday that ONCB realised that with the current reward offer
of 500.000 baht, it would not be easy to arrest Khun Sa, also known as Chang Chi-fu.

He said the ONCB would consider increasing the reward. The time limit on the
reward offer was set in order to allow the ONCB to consider its renewal in the future,
he explained.

"Khun Se is the most influential drugs kingpin of the golden triangle," General
Prachuap said. "When the reward for his capture was announced, Khun Se and his
men became very cautious and they moved beyond the Burmese border."

Khun Sa has reportedly moved from his former stronghold in Ban Nin Taek near Mae
Chan District of Chiang Rai and is now based inside Burma, about 7 kilometers from
the border.

Asked how the Thai Government would react to Khun Sa's recent offer to cooperate
in ending opium cultivation and drugs trafficking in the region. General Prachuap
said, "The man can do whatever he likes, but we are not going to make any deals
with him."

He said the Thai Government would work only with the Burmese Government as far as
suppression of opium cultivation and drugs trafficking were concerned.

Thailand and Burma have a good diplomatic relationship and have been cooperating
on drugs suppression for years, he said. He added that it would be good if Khun
Sa could stop drugs trafficking and acts of sedition against Burma and Thailand.

CSO: 5300/4506

21
BRIEFS

NEH PROGRAM TO START-—Pol Maj Gen Phao Sarasin, secretary general of the Narcotics
Control Board Office [NCBO], has disclosed that the N030 has mapped out a new
program to wipe out opium growing in hilltribes villages. Despite the successful
implementation of the crop substitution program in the northern provinces,
particularly in Chiang Mai Province, and the consequent in increase in hilltribes
people's income, many hilltribes villages still grow opium. Moreover. the Thai
lowlanders reportedly have hired hilltribes to grow opium or used their villages
as places to hide their opium. The NCBO therefore has decided to launch this new
program. Besides, the hilltribes people whose villages have been developed should
stop growing opium, otherwise, they will face punishment. Pol Maj Gen Phao Sarssin
said that suppression will be initially launched in Chiang Mai Province. where
most of the hilltribes V1118888 have been developed. The suppression and develop-
ment units.will be working separately. [Text] [BK271238 Bangkok Domestic Service
in Thai 0000 GMT 27 Sep 81]
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000400060020-9

EDITORIAL CITES FLIGHT OF CUSTOMS SERVICE IN DRUG FIGHT

uindaor THE WINDSOR STAR in English 21. Sep 81 p 6

(Editorial:

{Text}

while .cus'tomsqoiﬁcers “in 'Wii'idsor
and other centres along the Canada-

U.S. border worry about their safety

from "weirdos" crossin . customs

ofﬁcers‘ in Vancouver an other sea-'

ports worry over their inability to
check cargoes unloaded in their ports.

in Vancouver. Canada‘s biggest
seaport. demoralized customs ofﬁcers

recently admitted they‘ve lost control .

of the situation and'the‘ port is now a

smuggler‘s par'adise._ ' '
Drugs. jewelry. and other contra-

band are pouring into Canada

through the Vancouver customs sieve. .

Part of the problem is the move to
large metal containers for shipping
freight. '

Sometimes as many as [0.000 con-

tainers are stacked on the Vancouver
docks. far too many for customs ofﬁ-
cers to inspect.

At one time 40 per cent of all cargo
going through Vancouver was
checked for contraband but now only
l0 per cent is examined.

Customs ofﬁcers say they‘ve been
reduced to clerks rubberstamping the
movement of goods.

Nobody knows how much contra-
band is being smuggled into Canada
via Vancouver but some importers are

23

"Cato-«Victims of Ottawa's Apathy“]

apparently taking
situation.

"The importers re
and are willing to I
do a hit of smugglit
have a 90 per cent
away with it.“ expl
Vancouver customs

Manpower shortal
tor in this crisis. _

In the Vancouver
ofﬁcials are trying

with 2.300 deepacz

other commercial
dreds of thousands
riving by ship. plan
the US. ‘ -
Movement of ca
oouver has grown
ﬁve years but thet
crease in customs s
The federal gov:
guilty of ne ligem
situation to eterio
ly.
It‘s an all too ra
Ottawa pinch pen:
stance the thrift)
little sense.
. Vancouver is the
for much of Cat

 

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000400060020-9
£===m 5 333 u «2.85. maﬁa? 5
x03 gain :63 2.81.6 =5 8.5.
3.... .

:5 32.852. 3.83 33 a8 :0
usonmmmsaa o: m 3:»; ea n38
can? .

393 23:... 26 2—83: 52—02%...
in :5 noon... 2.3 ~33... 8 955
83.6 E: 95.

is...” 32.3 £32. 3:5 an 39:.
En .58 25 33.2.8.8; «and— :8.
25 2a $.32. 8:8 26. 3.. 25 on
:3 8m. a. :13 9352.». 2.4.8:;
228: 8 9an is». 838 .58 So
855‘. .. .

0.6:» 3.9.5 338 an 5 3:5.

mm}: 331% w: «2323 05.88“
BRIEFS

HASHISH SEIZKD—«ontreal (CP)--Pour people have been charged after ROI? narcotics
agents discovered 650 kilogram of powdered hashish worth $6-nillion along a ship-
not of Lebanese candies. Insp. Alphonse Drault said yesterday the suspects were
arrested this week during raids in Montreal and nearby Valleyfield. He said the
heshish was shipped from Beirut via a 0.5. port, where suspicious customs officers
tipped their Canadian colleagues. [Text] [Toronto m GLOBE AND HAIL, NATIONAL

tumor: in English 27 Aug 81 p 5]

C80: 5320/002

25
BRIEFS

QUAALUDE CLASSIFICATION--The Minister of Health and National Insurance, Perry
Christie, today made an order under the Dangerous Drug Act declaring methaqua-
lone, commonly known as quaaludes, "a dangerous drug." The effect of the Min-
ister's order will render possession of the drug without lawful authority an
offence under the Dangerous Drug Act. Every person guilty of an offence against
the Dangerous Drug Act shall in respect of each offence, be liable on conviction
on information. to a fine of $5,000 or to imprisonment for ten years, or to both
such fine and imprisonment. 0n summary conviction, the guilty person is liable
to a fine of $1.500, or to imprisonment for two years. or to both such fine

and imprisonment. [Text] [Nassau THE TRIBUNE in English 28 Aug 81 p l]

DRUG SHIP SEIZURES--Two 'mother' drug ships were apprehended by the Bahamas
Defence Force near Ragged Island Monday with up to 1,100 bags of marijuana on
board. Five Cuban-Americans and eight Colombians have been taken into custody.
The Defence Force vessel Inaugua,under the command of Lieutenant Jackson Ritchie.
accosted the drug ships while on a routine patrol in the southern Bahamas. The
alleged drug runners did not put up any resistance, but once tried to ram the
Inaugua, according to Ritchie. On board the fifty-foot vessel Star Pagus was
approximately 200 to 300 bags of marijuana and five Cuban-Americans. The other
ship the 80-foot Hary Gloria. was stacked with 700 to 800 bags of marijuana.
There were eight Columbians aboard. Both ships were brought to New Providence
yesterday afternoon. The Cuban-Americans and Colombians are presently being
processed before being charged with illegal possession of marijuana. [Text]
[Nassau THE TRIBUNE in English 2 Sep 81 p l]

S-VESSEL INCIDENT--HHBS Exuma under the command of Lieutenant Commander Bache-
lette Lafleur yesterday seized five boats and apprehended ll foreigners in the
area of Cay Sal Bank in the western Bahamas.’ Bxuma was reportedly on routine
patrol when the foreign craft were spotted. The vessels were escorted to Nassau
late Wednesday by Exuma, assisted by another Defence Force vessel "Fort Montagu."
The nationality of the men arrested is believed to be American and Cuban Ameri-
can. The suspects are presently being processed by the drug and serious crime
sections of the Criminal Investigation Department. Approximately 100 bags of
marijuana were said to have been discovered aboard the vessels. [Text] [Nassau
THE TRIBUNE in English 27 Aug 81 p 1]

C50: 5300/7501

26
BRIEFS

JAIL FOR COCAINE--A Page: man who was found with 1.09 grammes of cocaine in his
possession, was sentenced to six months ilprisonnent. Terry Wayne Battersbee,

of 0rd Road, Paget, was arrested on Front Street on February 17 under suspicion
of possessing illegal drugs. A subsequent search revealed the cocaine. [Excerpt]
[Hamilton THE ROYAL GAZETTE in English 29 Aug 81 p 2]

C80: 5300/7501 0

27
ANTIDRUG LAW 1'0 BE AMENDE

”181736 La Paz Radio Illinani Network in Spanish 1130 Qﬂ' 18 Sep 81

[Text]

[Text] The national ant idrux law approved in June 1979 has been iwlealanted by the govern-
Ilenr an as to carry out a frontal attack on drug trafficking and to women severe
international prnbleas. This inforsation has been disclosed by Justice Under Secretary
Rolando Sisbron during a press conference held yesterday.

[Begin Siobron Recordingl The administration of Gen Celso Torrelio Villa will carry
out the hard task of eradicating drug trafficking. [and recording]

Sinbron also announced that the govern-en: has issued precise instructions within the
fraaewnrk of its antidrug struggle. To this effect it has sent notes to the nation's
atrornev general. to the chairman of the Suprese Court of Justice of La Par. to the

director general of the Dangerous Drug Department and to the chairman of the Supra-e Court
of Surre.

 

[Begin Sisbron recording] Pursuant to the notes exchanged between the 0.8. Babassy and
the Bolivian foreign sinister. and the verbal note of our Foreign Ministry. the national
antidrug law will be amended in those articles which jeopardize the egalitarian ispleaaen-
tatlon of the law in order to do away with discriainations due to nationality or place
of birth. The Bolivian Government feels that the elisination of certain articles of the
antidrug law. which have led to nonegalitarian treatment of boliviana and foreigners.

in order to enforce the principle that everybody is equal before the law. would be a
positive step forward toward ovarcouing whatever obstacles there my be for the swift
normalization of diploeatic relations with the United States. [end recording]

The justice under secretary also announced that he had given instructions to the director
of the National Dangerous Drugs Depart-eat. Capt (Javier Guerrero).

[Begin Sinbron recording] ...l have instructed the public prosecutors to discontinue
the application of Decree Law 18,251. date 5 May 1981. which will be abrogated by sssns
of n decree law that will be issued as soon as possible.

I would like to tell you. gentle-en of the press and the public at large. that ay under-
secretariat is working on a decree law whose only resolution states: -

Pursuant to appropriate considerations. Decree Law 18,256 dated 5 Hay 1981 is hereby
suspended and Decree Law 16,562 dated 13 June 1979 is put into effect until new decree
laws cn dangerOus drugs control can be issued.

i trust also report that a emission charged with studying the decree law. which has
been suspended. will be appointed. [end recording]

The under secretary reiterated that the main purpose of the new legal fruework is to
ensure that everxbody will be equal before the law.

cso: 5300/2005-A
28
BRIEFS

ANTIDRUG-TRAPPICKING CRUSADE-Minister Secretary of Information Jaime humerez Seleme
has asserted that the government will take all due legal actions against any

persons who has been involved in drug trafficking, without any kind of considerations
whatever. The decision was made during the Cabinet meeting held at Government
Palace, after Foreign Minister Gonzalo Romero gave a detailed report on the basic
problems related to the image of the country abroad. Humerez Selene announced

that a national crusade had been ordered to fight the illegal drug trafficking

in the country with the participation not only of the specific law enforcement
organizations and the courts, but of all the people. The information minister

said that persons involved in drug trafficking will be punished with all the force
of the law. The government spokesman spoke with newsman shortly after the Cabinet
meeting which was presided over by Gen Celso Torrelio Villa. He said that a big
information meeting had been ordered regarding the repression of drug trafficking.
Humerez stressed that it is the government's intention to effectively show its firm
determination to eradicate and combat this evil uhich affects the image of the

country. [Excerpts] [PY170250 La Paz Radio Illimani Network in Spanish 0100 GMT
17 Sep 81]

C50: 5300/2005'A

29
BRIEFS

HASHISH TRAFFICKERS ARRESTED—The police have arrested (Douglas Bobndilla Soto),
30, who ran a clandatine laboratory for haehiah production. (Guillermo Vargas),
(Oscar Saravia Tapigueiro) and (Andrea Ariana), who were in charge of selling

the drug, were also arrested. [“261725 Santiago Chile Domestic Service
in Spanish 0000 M 26 Sep 81 FY]

CSO: 5300/2005
COMPLICATIONS IN ‘COCAINE QUEEN' TRIAL
Bogota BL TIEHPO in Spanish 21 Aug 8| p ll-A

[Text] The much-tslked-about trial of the "cocaine queen" has been unable

to proceed because of recent developments. and the delay will reportedly
enable the defendant to remain free until it is learned whether the Bogota
Superior Court upholds her indictment or orders a temporary or permanent stay.

Because of the new setbacks, her case will now go before the Supreme Court
for the second time.

The Facts

The incidents occurred st the culmination of a routine narcotics squad
operation by the Attorney General's Office. Rector Rodriguez Bspinosa was
intercepted by secret agents as he was driving sway from the house of Mrs
Harleni Orejuela Sanchez; they found a package continaining several kilograms
of cocaine in the vehicle. Rodriguez Bspinoss was taken back to her house,
where they arrested the woman and searched the house but uncovered no drugs.

An investigation was begun, and Harleni Orejuels was described as "the
cocaine queen," because she had been confused with Veronica Rivera; never-
theless, the nickname stuck in the press. Both she and Rodriguez Espinoss
were placed under arrest.

First Incident

The first incident led to the intervention of the Superior Council of the
Judicature. The trial judge, Leonor Izquierdo de Pava, after questioning
Harleni, released her, arguing that the deadline for issuing an arrest
warrant had passed and that the court still lacked the evidence for it.

The episode concluded, at least partially, when the Superior Council
dismissed the judge, although she later issued the arrest warrant, and the
accused was taken into custody in the western part of the country and brought
to Buen Pastor Prison. At the same tine, an order was issued for a criminal
investigation of the judge, which was conducted by the Superior Court.

31
Two Technical Investigations

The trial documents included a declaration made by Rodriguez Espinosa at
Harleni's house on the same day that he was captured with the drug.
According to the statement, Rodriguez Bspinosa admitted that the woman had
given him the drug.

However, during the course of the investigation Rodriguez Bapinosa denied
that he had ever made such a statement and said that the signature on the
document was not his.

A forensic medicine investigation was then ordered, and the graphology
exper;s decided that the signature on the document was not Rodriguez
Espinosa's.

The court called for another investigation and sent the matter to the DAB
[Administrative Department of Security] whose experts concluded that the
signature was Rodriguez Espinosa's. The court thus had before it two
diametrically opposed findings.

Around that time, some rather mysterious incidents took place at Buen Pastor
Prison that culminated with the dismissal of the warden, who was allegedly
collaborating with the ”cocaine queen."

When the case came before the court to hear the appeal filed by the two
defendants, judicial surveillance had to be instituted in assigning it
because a certain judge was said to have already been chosen. This and
other subsequent incidents gave rise to a series of death threats against
a high-level official.

The case was heard by Judge Joselyn Gomez Medina, who conducted the pertinent
proceedings to rule on the appeal motion along with his colleagues Augusto
Lozano and Pantaleon Mejia Carson.

The judge declared himself disqualified in the wake of absurd rumors that
were going around. His argument was that Hrs Orejuela Ssnchez's attorney
was former Judge Jose Maria Velasco Guerrero, with whom he was close friends.

The other two court judges rejected his disqualification. and the matter was
brought before the Supreme Court, which ruled that there were no grounds for
Cones Hedina's disqualification and that he should continue to hear the case.

A few weeks ago, another division of the court, headed by Judge Augusto
Lozano and of which Judge Mejia Carson was also part, concluded the case
against former Judge Leonor lzquierdo de Pava, whom it suspended permanently.

This was how things stood when the judge hearing the main case, Joselyn Comes

Medina, submitted to his colleagues, Mejia Carson and Lorene, a provisional
decision on the appeal of the indictment.

32
Judge Mejia Garcon proceeded to disqualify himself. contending that when he,
along with his fellow judges Louno and Jorge Ortiz Rubia. had decided to
suspend Leonor Izquierdo de Peva, their ruling had set forth grounds that
were related to the substance of the case against Hrs Harleni Orejuela
Sanchez and that he therefore felt that he should be disqualified.

The other two judges, Gone: Medina and Louno. rejected his disqualification,
and the matter will thus go before the Supreme Court once again.

8743
C80: 5300/2467

33
TRAFFICKING IN '51. MDELO' PRISON DESCRIBED
Bogota BL TIEMPO in Spanish 7 Aug 8| p 8-!
[Article by German Navarrete]

[Text] Even though the inmates at Hodelo Prison are fed good meals in a clean
dining hell, they prefer to take their breakfast, lunch and dinner in dirty,
foul-smelling wooden huts.

The reason? In the huts, which are called "cespetes" [chow], they can buy whet
the dining hell does not sell: sandwiches with marihuane and soft drinks with
Handrax.

This was one of the reasons why hundreds of inmates rioted when the prison
warden began moving against the huts and other goings-on.

The prison nnegement changed the dining system when it discovered
irregularities in the preparation of the meals by the inmates who had been
entrusted with this work. This job is handled today by s specialized
private firm run by a retired colonel, to insure that the food is of good
quality and provided in equal amounts to the inmates.

BL TIBHPO toured the blocks where on Tuesday several inmates armed with knives,
sticks, spikes, clubs and pieces of glass attacked whomever they could.

"We were aftaid...real afraid...Soms people started crying hysterically when
they saw guys beside them being knifed, because they knew that they would be
next even though they didn' t do anything..." several of the' 'special prisoners"
from cellblock 5 said.

Many of then agreed on this significant detail: "If it were not for Colonel
Rojas, we wouldn't be here to tell the tale." They were referring to the
action taken by the warden general of prisons, Salomon Rojas Orjuela, who
ordered hundreds of the men from cellblock 5 transferred to a corridor 1u8t
as the "grass smokers" from cellblock 6 began attacking the unsuspecting
inmates with knives and spikes.

In their tour through the cellblocks the reporters spoke with numerous inmates
in an attempt to establish the cause of the riot.

3h
Emaciated faces, bitter looks and a sign of appreciation here and there for
the interest in their state of health, were the hallmarks of conversations
with individuals who just a few hours before had experienced fear and terror
and who were today seeing how the "caspetes” had been destroyed.

Our talks with the inmates took place beside huts where the stench was
unbearable and food blended with grime. From one of the "caspetes" was taken
a pound of coffee containing a spike that was never used.

Continual Nightmare

Two hours of conversation with inmates in various cellblocks, corridors and
the infirmary led us to the startling conclusion that over its 28-year
historyhodehoPrison has become a "hell" for some and a den of iniquity for
others.

"Along each corridor #4 of us inmates live in separate cells. The doors to
the cells have been destroyed to make knives, and that's why you're awakened
every night by other people's shouting or with a blade by your neck or chest,
held there by the guys who rob and rape you," several inmates claimed.

The warden explained that 1,000 individual cells lack doors, which cost
20,000 pesos each. New ones are not being ordered because there is no money

for them. Robbery and rape take place all the time.' The inmates, especially
the peaceful ones, are living a continual nightmare.

Oranges with Harihuana and Liquor

As many as 5,000 people are crowded together in these degrading surroundings,
where all of the cellblocks smell of urine, and their needs were being met

by peddlers, stall vendors and owners of "caspetes." The latter proliferated
to the point that they formed rows similar to the stands along Iou Avenue and
llw Street or in San Vitorino.

Items were distributed by 700 registered peddlers within the prison,

who could enter and leave the cellblocks without being checked and who at
night had permission to bring their wares into their cells. The items were
supplied as in a normal business, and the owners of some "caspetes" ordered
from markets that supplied them weekly.

The inmates are allowed visits from their wives, and some of them, under this
pretext, have gotten a girlfriend or other contact to bring them drugs hidden
in oranges.

The guards would conmnnly see inmates devouring oranges with gusto, savoring
every last piece.

One of them was curious about the oranges in one of the cellblocks and got quite

a surprise when he discovered that part of the inside had bssn removed and
replaced with marihuana, hard liquor or some other substance.

35
within this smoothly run, apparently harmless business a veritable network
of middlemen had developed over time to provide any inmate with whatever he
needed, either through the peddlers, the stalls or the "caspetes."

A Lucrative Business from Waiting on Lines

but if the drug business was flourishing inside the jail, the possibilities
outside were no less lucrative.

The residents of the Puente Aranda district had become used to seeing enormous
lines of men and women start forming around the jail at midnight before
visiting days, lines that always lasted until 1300 hours the following afternoon.

Hhat they did not know at first but what gradually became common knowledge was
that the lines outsideHodehaPrison had turned into an excellent business
because of the excellent prices that people arriving at 0800 hours and wanting-
to get in to see their sons or husbands would pay for spots on line.

The situation was completely beyond the controlofthe prison because the lines
were on a public thoroughfare, and the only way to break up these dealings was
to monitor access by order of arrival on line.

Today, the lines begin at 0800 hours. When you arrive, you show a visitor's-
pass issued by a court and you are given a number on line. Conjugal visits
are for wives only, and children under 12 cannot enter.

This new control measure was another cause of the riot.
Knives From Hater Pipes 'm

To the occasional visitor, the fetid odor in all the cellblocks is evidence
of a poorly run jail and the reason why the huts are so filthy.

Nevertheless, the inmates admit that many of them use all sorts of instruments
to loosen the inside water pipes in bathrooms, in corridors and even in the
kitchen.

When the pipes are loose, they rip them out when the guards are not looking,
return to their cells, find a way to break them open and carve knives that
can gradually be sharpened and hidden anywhere.

The officials who put down the riot said that this was where the dozens of
knives, spikes and up to l-meter long bars came from.

Water began flowing again yesterday, although there is not enough money to
repair all of the damage that the pipe system has suffered.
The yard of cellblock 4 at Idodel Prison in Bogota, where the riot that
left 2 dead and 48 wounded began on Tuesday. To the right and on the far
left are the huts where sales of marihuann, drugs, liquor and knives were
recently stopped, which was one of the reasons for the disturbance. Up above

15 one of the holes through which the most dangerous 1nmates got into cell-
block 5 to waylay and knife the "special p:isoners." ,

8743
C50: 5300/2447

37
COCAINB SEIZED NT ELDORADO AIRPORT
Bogota EL BSPECTADOR in Spaniah 18 Aug 8] p 23-A

[Text] Personnel from the Narcotice Squad of the Attorney General'e Office
seized 24 kilograms of top quality cocaine valued at lore than 20 million
on the black market at Bldorado International Airyort yeaterday.

The drug was hidden in a travel bag that arrived on Viaea flight 92l-l6.

It was not learned whether anyone woe arreeted. The only report war that
investigations were under way to determine the whereabouta of the individuals

who were supposed to pick up the drug.

The only dietinguiehing mark on the bag in which the cocaine waa hidden wee
the number 67.

8743
C30: 5300/2447

38
HETHAQUALONE anus nascusto
Bogota EL rspamnon in Spanish 25 Aug Bl p ll-A

[Text] The Narcotics Squad of the Attorney Genaral's Office seized 2,900
kilograms of methsqualone in four major raids this June at Bldorado
International Airport. The methaqualone wee destroyed last weekend.

The dangerous substance, which drug traffickers have been using to make
hallucinogenic pills sold under the names "Jumbo," "Roger" and Handrax," was
destroyed at the aforementioned airport with help from the Bogota Fire

Department, whose units proceeded to dissolve the powder in water and dump
it down a sewer.

Germany

The methaqualone arrived in four large shipments from Germany that were
addressed to laboratories that investigations proved did not exist. They
were most likely going to be claimed by individuals with aliases, but
Attorney General’s Office officials fortunately uncovered them in time and
confiscated them before they fell into the hands of the traffickers.

Since the shipments came from Germany, a commission from the Attorney General's
Office was sent there to try and uncover the branches of the gangs involved

in the importation of the drug, but the investigations did not yield satis-
factory results because methaquslone can be sold legally there and it is
therefore very difficult to establish the identity of the individuals who
purchase it.

The Investigation

In spite of this setback, the investigation is continuing in Bogota under
the direction of 20& criminal court judge Dr Julio Gilberto Lancheros. Be
apparently has evidence that might lead to the identification of the
individuals who brought in the dangerous raw material to be converted into
hallucinogenic tablets and marketed not only in Colombia but in the United
States as well, where each pill sells for between {S and $10.

Stemming the Trafficking

We should add that the seizure of the methaqualone was a serious blow to the
organizations involved in drug trafficking and that since the raids by the

Attorney General's Office, the underground sales of these items have fallen
sharply in the country.

8743
080: 5300/2657
39
COCAINE 'WAR' IN CAUCA DESCRIBED
Bogota CROHOS in Spanish 25 Aug 81 pp 45-52
[Article by Carlos Mauricio Vega: "Cocaine: The "hit; War”)

[Text] A sordid battle for cocaine dollars has been going on for 2 years

now. It began when Colombia stopped growing marihuana and became the number
one producer of pure cocaine, supplying 70 percent of the world market. The
country has large enough crops today to atop importing the "base paste" from
Bolivia and Peru. The new bonanza has had a social and economic impact on

the southern part of the country that is even greater than the impact of the
jump in coffee prices in l976. CROHOS reporters visited the growing area, felt
and chewed the coca leaves.. This issue contains an exclusive report that
covers all the way from trafficking on the streets of New York to how the
cocaine travels along the roads in the Cauca Valley.

At nightfall on 16 December 1980, Dionisia Alvarez, an elderly Cauca Indian
woman whom time had forgotten came down from the odd sugar-loaf mountain on
which she lived to exchange some coca leaves for food in the nearby village.
It was the first time that she had done this, and she would never again use
money. The same night, more than 1,000 kilometers away, in a Bogota tavern,
a solitary, wealthy advertising man stood at the bar. He soon struck up a
conversation with three penniless students who were out for a night‘s
adventure. Ten minutes later, they locked themselves in the small restroom
amid beer cartons and rolls of tissue paper. The upper part of the
advertising man's moustache gradually turned white with what was left of his
last gram of cocaine, which the four of them were going to share that night.
Placing it on a fingernail, on a tiny silver spoon, on the blade of a pipe-
cleaner and on a razor blade, they snorted the powder, sounding as if they
had colds and were not carrying handkerchiefs.

Lying Against the wheel

The advertising man put away the small contact lens case with the powder in
the inside pocket of his jacket. His eyes glistening and his nose moist,

he paid the bill and got in his orange BMW with his new-found friends. he
immediately began driving like a madman, heading south, always bearing left
and always avoiding a collision at the last moment. he felt that his reflexes
and driving ability were as sharp as they could be. The man was enjoying

(or suffering?) the same effects that thousands of people get every day

hO
all over the world from a gram of cocaine: a sudden constiction of the blood
vessels that shoots blood throughout the organism and makes it feel like a
racing engine.

Fifteen minutes later, outside the house where his office was located, the
advertising man was lying against the steering wheel, sweating and unable

to move a single finger. One of the students began carefully searching through
his inside pocket.

That same day, at an office in the U.S. Embassy in Bogota, Mr T. Frank
Crigler was drafting a reply to the president of the Colombian Senate in
connection with a series of concerned comments about the promotion of the
drug traffic from the United States.

Crigler's letter said that Colombian domestic consumption had risen sharply.
A short time later, in a Washington office a strategic document was being
drawn up on actions to be taken against drug trafficking from 1981 to 1985.
The primary objective set forth in this terse paper was the "destruction of
the illegal plants in the countryside" and every effort to apprehend the
traffickers.

Exactly 6 months later, on 27 July, a Monday, coca plants in a Cauca village

2 hours from Popayan were destroyed in a routine operation. The participants:
60 Colombian policemen and hundreds of Indians. Bach machete-cut plant would
sprout up again in 6 months. Nevertheless, the small detachment, which was
supposed to return that night to Popayan, almost got stranded in the mountains;
the Indians tried to close off the road and attack them.

Juan Valdes Vs Hr Coca

These are the main incidents in the sordid war that is being waged in the
swamps of the Caqueta, in the Cauca mountains, on highways, in five-star
hotels, in planes, in airports and on the streets of the United States: the
cocaine war. It has been going on for 2 years, ever since Colombia stopped
growing marihuana en masse and became the world's leading producer of refined
cocaine, supplying 70 percent of the international market with coca leaf
crops that are large enough so that it no longer has to import "base paste"
from Bolivia and Peru.

why is the Drug Enforcement Administration aiming its guns outside the
United States, going after production, not consumption? Because it is almost
impossible to control cocaine trafficking inside the United States. The
legal penalties for possession of cocaine are very light; sales are not being
cracked down on, and a legal battle is being waged to make cocaine legal.

Cocaine was made illegal in the United States in 1906, when it was classified
as a narcotic. It came out of the recipe for Coca-Cola (to be replaced by
caffeine), from neighborhood drugstores, from Freud's experiments and from
the coca teas that ladies used to drink. Nevertheless, it was classified as
a narcotic by mistake; cocaine does not produce a physical addiction (a
psychological one, yes) and does not have narcotic effects; quite to the
contrary, it is a stimulant.

bl
If the lawyers who advocate legalization of marihuana and cocaine on the basis
of these arguments are ever successful, the governments of the countries
cracking down on their sale will be in serious trouble, but not Peru and
Bolivia, where coca can be grown legally.

Now, the White Bonanza

At this very moment, large plantations in the eastern plains, in the Caqueta
jungles, in the impenetrable Huila mountains and in the Cauca jungles by the
sea are giving rise to an unprecedented economic and social phenomenon in
the country. The weak economy there is receiving a flood of dollars from
the coca boom, and the effects are as striking as when coffee prices soared
in 1976.

Pendulum clocks, famous singers and medicine salesman have begun to take to
the winding paths leading to the coca towns; peasant farmers who have never
had electricity are buying refrigerators in which to store their old clothes;
the mud tiles are gradually being replaced with rustproof Bternit; beside
old adobe huts, at the foot of roads, large garages are being built for the
same picturesque buses that have altars to the Virgin of the Carmen painted
on them, but this time with the latest-model chassis and engine. Arriving
each Sunday in the towns are trucks loaded with motorcycles, which are
immediately bought up with cash in the same market where oranges used to be
sold.

Dagoberto, the Shoeless Millionaire

Up in the mountains, beyond the famous town of Bolivar, Cauca, lives Dagoberto,
an elderly Indian whose family suddenly became rich when he discovered the
difference between selling a banana leaf and a coca leaf. Dagoberto, his

sons, his grandchildren, his parents and his wives had chewed coca all their
lives. They grew a few plants out of tradition and for their own small

supply. Mixed with a special lime called ”mambe," the coca leaf brings
lasting well-being and energy. Dagoberto Corrales was furnished the means

to convert his banana and coffee fields into a large coca plantation, the
largest yet discovered. he had more than 100,000 plants. 0n the morning

that Dagoberto Corrales saw the green-uniformed police arrive, he threw
himself to the ground in front of his house and began foaming at the mouth.
When he had calmed down, he was able to speak with the lieutenant who commanded
the small detachment. His children, meanwhile, positioned themselves around
around the crop, armed with old carbines and rusty machetes, chewing away with
their green-stained mouths. Dagoberto argued with the policeman for a half
hour. Finally, he tried to buy him off. He offered him 100,000 pesos in cash.
Before the lieutenant had time to think it over, the 100,000 pesos were

there, wrapped in newspaper, at the feet of the old man, who was waiting for
an answer, shoeless and pleading. Some minutes later, when Dagoberto saw the
cloud of smoke rising from his coca field. he threw himself at the lieutenant

and asked him to kill him.

h?
Moved, the officer returned a few days later with coffee seeds for the old
man. Dagoberto spoke with him and even had a photograph taken with the new
Kodak that one of his children had brought from Popayan. he agreed to plant
the coffee, but he explained to the lieutenant that the coca plants would
be growing among the coffee bushes and that he would have to come back all
the time to destroy them because they would sprout again.

with a Gun at Their Necks

Dagoberto Corrales, like many other peasant farmers in the coca zone,
completely changed the concept of coca trafficking. No longer did clandestine
laboratories near capital cities process the imported paste. The farmers
themselves work with the leaves, 100 meters from the crops, producing the
initial paste in rudimentary laboratories called "kitchens." The leaves are
dried, ground up and heated there. The resulting product, coca paste, is
processed once again in the same area, either in a house in a nearby town or
in a makeshift laboratory in the mountains. This yields cocaine base, a
substance that is occasionally employed directly by mixing it in marihuana
cigarettes to make the famous "basooka," which can take addicts on unexpected
trips.

The cocaine base can be transported to traditional laboratories but is
generally processed again in the same place near the crop. Very well-paid
laboratory workers, who never see their bosses' faces and who work with a
machine gun at their necks, convert the cocaine base into cocaine hydro-
chloride in labs that are dismantled after they have served their purpose.

The traffic is out of the hands of the Indians after the first step, in

other words, as soon as they have produced the coca paste. A ton of coca
leaves brings the grower.about 120,000 pesos. The trafficker gets about 2
kilograms of pure cocaine from the same ton, which in Bogota is worth about
$50,000, a bit more than 2 million pesos. When these 2 kilograms of cocaine
are cut with novocaine or simply blended with talcum in a Miami hotel and then
sold by the gram on the streets of New York, Miami or Los Angeles, they are
worth a million dollars. Such cocaine is only 12 percent pure and has been
multiplied almost 10-fold.

Pure cocaine, the hydrochloride in the form of pulverized crystal, leaves
the Cauca mountains along several routes: on foot, by rail, in the arms of
Indians, who earn undreamed-of tune of money for a hike. concealed in a
false battery, on board a regularly scheduled bus, in the double exhaust of a
taxi or in the personal helicopter of a trafficker.

Ninety Percent Purity, Ninety Percent Profits

Once in Bogota, the pure cocaine can be sold to a foreign trafficker, who
takes it with him, or transported by Colombians to the shores of the United
States. This traffic is completely different from marihuana. No longer will
we see the attractive and dangerous scene of a caravan of trucks moving
through the Guajiro wilderness in the middle of the night. If an operation

h3
begins in the Cauca with 3 tons of coca leaves, approximately 6 kilograms of
cocaine come out of it. One kilo is mailed out in a three-level box whose
center divider has been removed and replaced with the precious powder. The
box is full of handicrafts or ponchos and is addressed to an air mail post
office box. Another kilo travels in the stomach of a "mule." Another travels
in a double-bottomed suitcase, and the rest can be sent out in the form of
little Indian statues covered by a thin layer of white cement, in the arms of
a tourist. ‘

If the “mule" dies of indigestion, if the box breaks or if the customshouse
dogs sniff out the suitcase but the handicrafts get through, the operation is
more than handsomely profitable. Traffickers no longer run the risk of
flying old DC-3's, loaded with marihuana, close to the ground, and they can
quit after one operation.

Many of them come to Colombia for a few days, hoping to return with lots of
money, but they wind up in jail. Nevertheless, the proportion of cocaine
and traffickersseized is minimal: less than 1 percent of the total traffic.

In spite of this, the vaults at the Bank of the Republic must hold at least
300 kilograms of pure cocaine, a sea of white powder worth a fortune. The
more traffic is curtailed and the more coca growing is combated, the more
profits traffickers will make, because these problems boost the price. The
demand for cocaine is always greater than the supply, and the supply is
shrinking all the time.

Little by little, Colombia is being confronted with another problem: the shift
of consumption to the streets of its cities. Increasing numbers of foreigners
come to Colombia to buy a gram of pure cocaine for the fabulous price of

1,500 pesos, the same amount that the advertising man on 97¢ Street paid.

Some travel in throngs to Popayan with threadbare knapsacks, looking for the
700-peso gram, $12, dirt cheap.

There are no data on the number of consumers in Colombia, but the impression
is that the figure is constantly rising, especially among the middle class.
Cocaine leaves no marks, has no odor, does not stain fingers or redden the
eyes. It does not have countercultural implications like msrihuana and is
therefore used by a painter and an accountant alike. It does not cause a
physical addiction or leave injection marks on the arms. It only destroys
the interior of the nose, slowly, so that a long-time cocaine user cannot
bear to have his nose touched and snivels constantly. A subculture, almost
a religion, has formed around cocaine. Consumers get together to snort it as
if it were a rite. There are specialised stores ("snow shops") that sell
tiny inhalers, gold blades to separate the portions and chemical reagents to
check the purity. The classical way of snorting cocaine, however, is with a
rolled-up $100 bill, with the portions placed on a mirror. The cocaine
culture has even gotten into the movies. In one of his love stories Woody
Allen clumsily sneeses on his friends’ cocaine, sending thousands of dollars
up in a powdery cloud.
ar Lerms, Cauca, is completely unaware

)ionisis Alvarez,
on throughout the world because of small coca leaf fields

3f what is going
like hers. While she eats her cocaine-line mixture, one of her sons goes into
another son stands guard

town to exchange coca leaves for the evening's meal;
and her youngest daughter,

at the coca field at nightfall with an old carbine,
unshod and with a thick watch on her left wrist, gets ready for the long

hike that night, wit

back in her field ne

h a kilogram of cocaine.
couuw.u£waa_uzh

 

hmcovuwm vu

{‘1

  

maxuaa :« 3ouw mo>aa

.

.wucaan uooo ozu mun mvun» ecu ca wozouaa
H mooo ouoz3 a30u ogu "aosmu .coahog

..
The house of Dionisia Alvarez, the elderly woman who sold her coca leaves
one of Dionisia Alvarez's sons, harvests the leaves and has his
When he gathers 1,000 kilograms, he will collect

Above: Juan,
"mambe" at the same time.

120,000 pesos.

A coca field can be hidden among banana plants and coffee bushes. Two

Below:
ted, but the biggest crops have not been hit yet.

million plants have been uproo

ha
Durw'sia Alvarez no uh:
quc w cocal u pang

60 u" ggimsco mama]:
qua n mud" on todoel
mundo. Ella

wluu um plmu lam-luv,

 

Dionisia Alvarez does not know that her coca field is part of an enormous
network that operates around the world. She cultivates a family plot.
mily gets
negar and

is pemn

HEALTH MINISTER DISCUSSES ISLAND'S DRUG PROBLEM

Kingston THE DAILY CLEANER in English 7 Sep 81 p 1

[Excerpt]

The 30': industéy attracts people
who dea iii-lb!“ drop end we have to
he veey.viplapt to ensue that as tee
eeeh otlnmtattoq the den; tohletnt ol
the I»; met an etttu not tnlilo
tute us. Heath Mtonmﬁt; Kenneth
laugh aid on Satotday ntght.

Dr. Ian h tut addmtin; the Mon-
texo Ba; igh School Put Stodentt
Atoneiatton annual tit-net at the Mae.
Mee Rages: 'SzaAgdmaon the
«meat v a me area.
to 1"th the society «Jed to addten

One of the min ptohlente. he said.
um the malt-than _dnlt. elm tpn.
touonnt to a hm- dntn. vhteh
named been the bet that the :tntddle
income toeioeeononue statute ol the
mall totm um too lintted to ocean-

tnodue the-'you high school leavetj.
The eountty ad not patd wlftetene
attention to the development ol

industeiet in thete totem. he laid. He

C50: 5300/ 7502

said.- the Government's polity ol devel-
optnlthejeoooeeet' ol the nml amt
etpeetall was "very veleotne as it
thould h p to_tetnin the you; people
to these treat.

The growth ol ap topeiate

‘indutttiet would :enepte eveloptnent.

leading to uthuiutton ol the meal

'eteu. hot. De. huh said. it w

inpomnt to ‘mliee t t the advances
ol‘ the)" dye: of the _USA and other
eoontnet uhteh we «lasted vete ohen
aeeootpanied hypave ptohlem. Pollu-
ttoognd dttt; mp were olten a eon-
eolmant ol aha-tum. ”Ate we ply-
toe enough nttentton to the htlity
thuveeoolddevelooin'th nyat
“ﬁ‘tﬁ 15'“ '~ -~
- t to to
the ISA? he avid the m?«mu3.a
genpjn Inhale: nude a vulnerable.
u that laetoe would tend to atmet
nople who dealt in heed dnt "and we
ve

-to he vi lent thet t tob-
le-s... do minlt‘t'tnte 05.7. -. ‘p ‘. .
BRIEFS

DRUG ABUSE CENTERS-The Trinidad and Tobago Government has made no provisions to
set up drug abuse centres even in the light of many young Trinidadians having
become drug addicts. This comment was made by Dr Hugh Spicer former chairman

of the Blood Bank, at a public meeting of the Organisation for National Recon-
struction (OHR) at Hermitage Village, near San Fernando, on Thursday night.

Dr Spicer said that the drug abuse problem in Trinidad and Tobago has reached

a stage where people have moved from the use of marijuana to the "hard" drug
cocaine and would soon be going to heroin. "Children are smoking marijuana"
said Dr Spicer. He said that all progressive countries were aware of the increas-
ing seriousness of the drug problem and had made provisions for combating it by
methods such as drug abuse centres. Dr Spicer charged that Trinidad and Tobago
was the only country without such provisions. An ONR government would set up
drug abuse centres for helping drug users and addicts, he said. [Excerpt]
[Port-of-Spain SUNDAY GUARDIAN in English 6 Sep 81 p 12]

650: 5300/7501

53
DRUG TRAFFIC ALLEGED TO FIGURE IN CARIBBEAN POLITICS
Caracas ZBTA in Spanish 30 Aug 81 p not given
{Article by Pancisco Chao Hermida: "Drugs in Caribbean Politics"!

[Text] The reaction of authorities in all countries to prevent the drug traffic

has been almost identical. When control mechanisms have been reestablished in ports
of entry, the traffickers have had to approach governments to get permission to

use diplomatic pouches. The most notable and most widely publicized case is that

of the North Korean emissaries. who have been caught repeatedly in this crime in
several countries.

This has attracted the attention of the totalitarian powers. who are very interested
in the social and moraldecay of the democratic nations. He shall illustrate this
story with a casewhichis taking place at present in Caracas. A Colombian national,
Jesus (Chucho) Antonio Amaya Bspinel was wandering through the streets of our capital
city looking for shelter. For a long time he had been the right hand man of Juan
(Johny) Lozano Crump Perez. leader of a gang of traffickers based in Miami which
was broken up by police when Crump was arrested. The gang leader was booked and

set free on bail. To get the money, Crump wrote to Amaya. who was living in Bogota
with a girlfriend named Piedad. Amaya, who enjoyed a certain respectability because
of his position as president of the Colombian-Cuban Priendship House, had a public
relations firm which allowed him to make contacts in high places and to justify

his lavish personal expenses. When Amaya received Crump's request. he found him-
self in a fix. He had spent his boss's money and was in debt to other traffickers,
such as Carlos Uribe and Jaime Leiva. his companions in revelry at Las Piramides

bar in Bogota; and Jaime Caceres. Cesar (Cachitas) Corte and Cesar Bchevarria, these
last three from the interior of the country.

Seeking to increase his income so that he might comply with Crump's request. Amaya
decided to call on Fernando Ravelo, the Cuban ambassador in Bogota. with whom he

met one day in February of this year in Las Piramides. A third party. Rene Rodriguez.
president of the Cuban Institute for Friendship with Peoples was present at the
luncheon. They also had a meeting there later on. attended by Alberto Cabrera,

a Cuban diplomat assigned to Bogota, and a man known in Cartagena by the nickname

”El Pardino" [The Godfather].

The plan of action was to maintain the flow of a vast traffic of marihuana harvested
in Colombia and distributed in several countries of the Caribbean basin andin southern
United States. The Cuban diplomats had received information about an imminent rupture

5h
of relations between Fidel Castro and Colombia. and they wanted to guarantee the
supply of drugs after that tine.

The direct participation of the Cuban Government in the drug business had been
arranged at the Hotel Orion in Mariel between officials of the regime and members
of the so-called "Cuban Mafia" in Florida, who had come to that port in Pinar del
Rio Province during the mass exodus in 1980. Castro authorities gave the "green
light" to the traffickers based in Florida to transfer drugs across Cuban territory
in exchange for the carrying out in the United States by the traffickers of certain
tasks. the character of which it has not been possible to establish. Anaya. who
knew all this. saw the doors open to reconstruct his finances. pay his debts and
send Crump's money to him.

As part of the plan they decided to go to Barranquilla to establish contact with

a known Hafioso named Jaime Guillot Lara. He, in turn, later went to Bogota to
meet, at his hotel, with Chucho Amaya. Ambassador Ravelo and Alberto Cabrera. Since
at that time it was already foreseen that the Cuban diplomats whould have to leave
Colombia, they decided to leave an active agent in that country. and that job fell
to Gonzalo Bassols Suarez, a reputed expert in the organization of guerrillas and
subversive groups. Bassols is one of the contacts of H-l9 [19 April Movement].

But the Cuban officials looked at the drug traffic as part of their duties as officials
of their government and not as a means of enriching the traffickers associated with
them, and so Chucho Anaya never managed to amass enough money to pay his debts and

to send Crunp, his former boss. his bail money. Fearful of being'murdered. he decamped
to Caracas. as we said at the beginning, in search of a safe refuge and hoping to
rebuild in our country another network of drug traffickers.

8735
C80: 8048/1759

55
DRUG CRIMES INCREASE, LABS SAID TO BE INSUPTICIINT
Dubai AL—BAYAN in Arabic 11 Aug 81 p 5

[Article by Ahmad Huhsin: "Public Prosecutors and Judges in a Confrontation With
Drug Crimes; Crimes on the Rise, Anti-Drug Laws Are Inadequate and in Need of Re-
vision"]

[Text] One of the most serious challenges to the cohesiveness of modern society is
the problem of the spread of all varieties of drugs among youths and juveniles. in-
cluding women.

Because of the spread of this epidemic, society is gradually beginning to be eroded
starting with the Iain point of support and ending with the other underpinnings of

society. This situation has led psychologists to describe drugs as more dangerous

to human societies than war.

Unfortunately, we in the UAE are now facing this same problem. Statistics indicate
that the rate of drug crimes is mounting significantly. Hardly a week goes by with-
out the uncovering of another attempt to bring in drugs through the ports and air-
ports for the purpose of selling them to young people, both citizens and immigrants
alike. And not many days go by without the detection of a ring involved in the

use or sale of drugs within the country.

The unfortunate fact is that the efforts that have been exerted in this area have
been limited to the effective drug-fighting efforts of Department of Investigation
agents and the police. we have not aided these efforts by formulating the appropri-
ate solutions necessary to eliminate these poisons and prevent them from ultimately
entering the country, despite the fact that we have a definite knowledge of the
sources of these drugs, who is selling them, and who is bringing them in.

This unfortunate fact prompts us to ask, Are the sentences issued by the criminal
courts sufficient to deter drug criminals?

AL-BAYAN touched on all these problems in an interview with criminal court justices
and public prosecutors in Abu Dhabi.

The Drug Crime

Muhammad Sharabi, member of the public prosecutor's office, said: “The drug of-
fender can either be a dealer or a drug user. A dealer, of course, is an individual

56
"who buys and sells goods. The dealer in drugs does the same thing but his goods—
narcotics—are illegal and he sells them to obtain exorbitant profits. The drug
user is an individual who takes drugs. If he takes enough drugs, the drug user may
reach the point of addiction, after which it is very difficult for him to relinquish
drug use except through physical and spiritual treatment. If this is impossible,
then the alternative is suppression and punishment."

Regarding the varieties of illegal drugs, Huhamad Sharabi said: "there is an ob-
jective standard incorporated in the definition of a narcotic. A narcotic is any
substance which causes an individual to lose consciousness or disturbs his personal
equilibrium. These apply both from a psychological standpoint. in which an un-
natural state of pleasure or depression is induced in the individual, or from a
physical standpoint, in which the individual becomes imobile or is unable to move
about in a normal manner. On this basis, certain substances are classified as
criminal narcotics in all the Arab states, including the UAB. These substances are
hashish, opium, qat, morphine, and all soporific and tranquilizing medications in
an unaccepted form. All of these cause loss of consciousness and disturbe the
equilibrium.

Preventive Measure
But why were these types of narcotics declared illegal?

Chief Prosecutor Salim Kabishi answered this question: "It has been proved medi-
cally based on information collected by medical men throughout the world that
narcotics lead to loss of memory and the destruction of willpower. This causes the
drug user to commit sins and crimes. It has also been proved that addiction harms
the addict in that it causes weakening of the arteries which leads in turn to
clotting in the coronary artery or to heart failure. This is the understanding I
have derived from studying medical books about the harmful effects of narcotics.
':'or these reasons, the illegalization of narcotic substances was undertaken as a
preventive measure to prevent the cot-lesion of crimes and protect the individual,
who is the nucleus of society, frmn his own wickedness."

With regard to the methods required to treat the addict, Salim Kabishi added:
"Breaking addiction demands that the psychological state of the addict be studied.
This is because withdrawal from addiction is only possible if the addict turns to
what he himself really desires and likes. He can do this only by pursuing one of
his legitimate interests in a sanstorium. Here a suitable environment is pre-
pared for this interest to grow again until the addict can devote his energy to it
completely free of addiction. This can only happen gradually, because addiction is
a mental illness and the addict can free himself frm it only through counseling
and by paying attention to the evil consequences."

Salim Kabishi continued: "More importantly, one should realize that the addict is
not a believer in the true sense. Therefore, he can be treated spiritually by being
restored to Islam through an appeal to its teachings in a form he personally can
feel comfortable with. His heart yearns for direct contact with his religion, and
when he achieves this contact he turns to God and applies His teachirgs. Ilis
spirit is then uplifted and he purifies himself and becomes a new person."
Host Canon Crime

Concerning the nest canon drug-related crime in the 0A! with respect to the type
of drug involved, Chief Prosecutor 'Ahd-al-Hahhsb 'Abdul said: "Hithout a doubt,
hashish is the drug involved in tin largest part of these crimes, followed in order
by qat, sleeping pills, and opium."

He added: "As you well know, it is quite clear that the suspected dealer who brings
the drugs into the country is, in the vast majority of the cases, a native of a cer-
tain Islamic country in East Asia. It has been noted that about 90 percent of the
dealers who were arrested during 1980 and the first half of 1981 were, unfortunate-
ly, natives of the country alluded to."

Arabs Take Drugs

Assistant public prosecutor Yusuf al-Husni broke into the conversation with this
cement: "Unfortunately, the individuals who are using the drugs are mostly na-
tives of Arab states. ‘Ihis situation indicates that these individuals are unfor-
tunately under the control of the narcotics importer. Actually, the activity of
investigations department personnel and the police has been effective in preventing
the distribution and use of drugs within the country. This has been indicated by
the arrest of a number of dealers carrying several kilogrmas of narcotic sub-

stances. In many cases, more than 10 kilograms has been found in the possession
of the importer."

He added: "A number of investigations have also shown that there is a handful of
foreign immigrants in the country who take advantage of an inigrant individual's
state of need by inducing him to become a tool in the importation of drugs. They
send him abroad at their expense and specify the places and localities where drugs
can be obtained and the cost of the drugs. He then brings the drugs back and turns
them over in return for a large sum of money. In this way the individual in need

slips into a crime with which he ends his life with a sentence that calls for his
deportation."

Deportat ion

But what is the punishment for drug dealers and drug addicts?

Muhammad Sharabi, member of the public prosecutor's office, replied to this ques-
tion: "We men of the law say frankly that the penalty stipulated in the dangerous
drug law applies equally to the person who brings the drugs in, the importer, the
person caught in possession of drugs, and the drug user, and this is not easy to
accept rationally or logically. This places the individual who imports drugs to
satisfy the needs of deviants and addicts on an equal footing with the drug user in
terms of the penalty imposed.

"Moreover, there is another criticism that should be pointed out, namely, that the
maximum penalty as stipulated in this law shOuld be raised. It should not be pos-
sible to say that the penalty here in Abu Dhabi is five years for the drug dealer
and the drug importer while in all the other Arab states the penalty extends all
the way to execution and life at hard labor."

58
Integrity of Society

Naturally, the criminal court Justices. as the individuals who interpret the laws
and issue sentences, also have their opinion about drug crimes and the danger they
represent.

Justice Pathi Lashin, chief of the Second Criminal Department, said: "Drug crimes
are among the most dangerous crimes and have a harmful and serious effect on the
integrity of society. First of all, they work to undermine the cohesiveness of the
family and cause the family to disintegrate. This is because one of the particular
Characteristics of hashish smoking, for example, is that it usually takes place in
a group and the group takes up a large amount of time. This leads to addiction fol-
lowed by complete imersion in this atmosphere.

"It is a medically proven fact that narcotics also have harmful effects on an in-
dividual's general health. Moreover, there is a widespread belief contrary to the
facts that drugs have sexual effects and this induces many people to take them.
Thus they spread extensively in society."

Justice Lashin added: "The use of opium is more dangerous to the general health
than hashish because its effects on health are more severe and lore serious. There-
fore, the fight against this crime must be intensified through deterrent punish-
ments. More importantly, we must close the channels through which this harmful
substance is smuggled into the country from abroad, because naturally it is not
grown within the country."

Justice Fathi Lashin supported the public prosecutors' statements to the effect that
the dangerous drugs and substances law does not differentiate between possession for
personal consumption and possession with the intent to sell or import a drug from
abroad. However, he said that the judge, who holds the scales of Justice, takes the
welfare of society into account in his sentences. This means that he varies the
punishment from moderate to severe according to the size of the offense with re-
spect to the quantity seized.

The judge also varies the punisment based on the suspect's intent in possessing a
drug. It is evident that possession with the intent to sell the drugs is the most
dangerous to society because it is a means of spreading these harmful substances
among people and glamorizing them to weal: individuals. Likewise, bringing drugs
into the country is of a higher order of seriousness because closing the door to
importation from abroad is the key to the elimination of this dangerous phenomenon.
DRUG CONSUMPTION INCREASING, DEATHS DECREASING
Vienna DIE PRESSE in German 26 Aug 81 p 12
[Article by st.: "More Drug Addicts. But Fewer Deaths")

[Text] Vienna-~00mpetent drug hunters describe as premature assertions by some of
their colleagues, according to which the Austrian drug market is suffering from
"supply difficulties" due to stringent prosecution. Consumption of hard drugs such
as heroin is still increasing; there is fear that a new nod wave may reach in from
Germany--cocaine consumption there is increasing by leaps and bounds. The officials,
however, saw an encouraging sign in the decrease of drug-related deaths. By the end
of the month the number of dead should be about one half of that of last year.
"Unfortuantely there is no trend toward the softer drugs such as hashish and marijuana,"
states Dr. wolfgang Neugebauer of the Vienna Security Office. The police, to be sure,
are prosecuting more drug-related felonies than before, but there is still more than
enough drug in Vienna. Already 30 kilograms of heroin have been confiscated this
year, this presupposes the existence of a large "black amount." In Germany it is
estimated that only about one tenth of the drugs on the market can be confiscated.

The pop drug cocaine is imported by way of Frankfurt and Zurich. A new social class
functions as the user. namely persons who have more money than heroin addicts. for
example. To have an effect cocaine must be taken more frequently than heroin. but
has about the same price tag.

Hagister Werner Keuth of the Interpol Drug control office in Vienna is of the opinion
that stepped-up prosecution will have a long-term effect on the drug trade. But for
the time being he sees no indications of a decline in drug abuse. Only the number

of deaths has declined this year. Last year 33 persons died in Vienna of an overdose,
this year their number was only 7. compared to 18 drug-related deaths at this time
last year. Dr. Holfgang Neugebauer thinks that an exact analysis of the causes is
too difficult. but he assumes that at this time the heroin traded is not so pure,

and that the addicts have become more cautious.

9240
650: 5300/2448
BRIEFS

HASHISH PLANTATION IN KLACENFURT--Various hemp plantations have been discovered
in Klagenfurt, from which about 100 cannabis plants had already been harvested.
The Klagenfurt Drug Bureau officers found out that Richard and Ulrich Bauer and
Robert Petersmann had harvested the heap plants. Peteramann was detained, and the

two brothers are still at large. [AUZOleO Vienna HIENER ZEITUNG in German
17 Sep 81 p 5]

C80: 5300/2010

61
PHYSICIAN EXPERT DISCUSSES “DENIM DRUGS PROBLEM
Copenhagen BERLINGSKE TIDENDE in Danish 16 Sep 81 pt II p h

[Interview with Peter Ege by "Planing Pederaon, date and plane not given]

[Text] Narcotics. once the whim of the upper class has become the
vice of the lower class, says Dr. Peter Ege in an interview on

the present narcotics situation in Denmark prior to the conference
on the role of the counties in connection with the treatment of
addicts.

There are approximately 10,000 drug addicts in Denmark today. In a few
years. 1,500 to 2,000 of these 10.000 addicts will have died as a result
of their drug abuse.

This year alone, approximately 200 addicts are expected to be included

in the mortality statistics. which practically each year have shown that

an increasing number of people in this country die in consequence of drug
abuse. During the last few years. the increase has actually been very sharp.
and. consequently, it would not be surprising if the figure for 1981 will
exceed 200 deaths.

The above somber picture of today's narcotics situation in Denmark was given
by Dr. Peter Ege, a research secretary and a member of the secretariat
for the government’s liaison committee on alcohol and drug issues.

"And out of these 10.000 addicts. approximately 5,000 live in the metropolitan
area alone. while the rest are distributed fairly evenly according to the
sizes of the other cities. the second largest number of addicts living at
lrhus. but. on the basis of the size of the city. Elsinore. incidentally,

has a very large number of addicts. And practically all cities above a
certain size, approximately 2.000 inhabitants. have their groups of addicts."

"Approximately 50 million kroner are spent on treatment." says Peter Ege.
"but this figure is in glaring contrast to the amount of money which drug

addicts otherwise cost all of us. The costs of medical bills. hospital
treatment. social services. police and courts may only be estimated. The
same thing applies to the costs of insurance companies. businesses, and
private persons, where. to the extent that this has been possible. the
basis has been the abusers' own statements regarding the financing of
their drug addiction. However. it may be established that each addict
taking drugs by injection costs the society an average of between
100,000 and 200.000 kroner annually. On a national basis. it is thus a
question of an amount that is probably between 1.5 and 2 billion kroner.

Flemming Pedersen: Which youth groups are particularly hit?

Peter Ege: They are young people who have got social problems, little
schooling. and no further education-young people who have had problems
during their adolescence.

Flemming Pedersen: Previously, also young people from the upper middle
class were involved with drugs.

Unemployment as Cause

Peter Ege: That is true. but drug addition has penetrated increasingly
deeper down through the social strata of the society. The whims of the
upper class have become the vices of the lower class.

Flemming Pedersen: To what extent does unemployment among young people
influence the narcotics situation in this country?

Peter Ege: It plays a large role in the work of treatment which is

rendered difficult because it is not possible to channel the young people into
meaningful jobs. And it probably is also a contributory cause why an
increasing number become drug abusers.

Flemming Pedersen: You have mentioned that approximately 1,500 to 2.000 of
the present addicts will die within a few years. What about the rest?

Peter Ege: A large part of them--somewhere between 30 and 50 percent-will
recover and resume normal lives, and others will continue their miserable
lives and will become alcohol and pill abusers and will end up in correctional
facilities or at the Kofoed School.

Flemming Pedersen: Is there no chance of improvement or a solution to the
problem?

Peter Ege: Not in the present situation. He may only fear that we shall have
an increasing number of abusers if the unemployment rate among young people
keeps increasing.

If we do not increase our efforts and do not coordinate the treatment work
in a somewhat better manner, the development will probably continue in the
same adverse manner, and the mortality rate among drug addicts will increase.
We shall then never get rid of the heavy drug addiction which we have today.
Next: Friday. Dr. Peter Ege will speak at a conference, the subject of which
will be "the role of the Society of County Councillors in the future treat-
ment of drug addicts." But asked the question: "What should be done in the

first instance. to combat the increasing drug addiction in this country,"
he answers:

"We must, first and foremost, have more and better possibilities of treating
older addicts, thus those who have been addicts for some years. Drug addicts
who are from 24 to 30 years old. Better cooperation is also needed between
general practitioners and treatment centers.

We must have more treatment openings and more individualized treatment
possibilities, enabling us,to a higher degrea to meet the drug abusers' edn
wishes regarding treatment.” Peter Ege concluded.

NARKO
DEDSFALD

(hele Iandet)

 

Narcotics Mortality Rate (entire country)

7262
C50: 5300/2L6h

6h
CONFERERCE EXAMINES SITUATION OF OLDER ADDICTS
Copenhagen BERLINESKE TIDDIDE in Mich 19 Sep 81 p 5
[Article by ﬁanne Selnss]

[Text] The group of drug addicts between the ages of 25 and 31 is steadily
growing. but nobody knows where the responsibility rests for treatment of
this group. Irrespective of age. this. however. is a task resting with the
counties. And at the conference held yesterday of the Society of County
Councillors on the future treatment of drug addicts. the responsibility for
treatment of older addicts was one of the subjects that was being discussed
and debated, without any clarification being reached.

The typical drug addict is 26-27 years old, has been reared by unskilled
parents, has 7-9 years of schooling. is himself unskilled and unemployed.
lives in his own apartment on public subsidy. has been addicted to morphine
for 6-? years, feels isolated in the society. has a few times tried slow
withdrawal treatment under the supervision of his own physician but is
without any current treatment. This is how Bent Normann Olsen from the
Storstrom county describes the average addict.

Dr. Peter Ege of the liaison committee on alcohol and narcotics problems said
that older addicts represent the group with the highest mortality rate.

They are in charge of the major part of all traffic and circulation of drugs.
commit most crimes. and their influence in the environment of addicts
obstructs the younger and less addicted abusers from seeking treatment.

That is why it is important to treat them. Their attitude to the offers

of assistance from county youth centers is negative. and they are mostly
interested in methadone treatment. Nevertheless. Elsa Schmidt, psychologist.
Roskilde County. said that it is possible to treat older addicts individually
within the system existing today. but that it requires more resources.

The correctional facilities also have problems treating older addicts. When
released. they are seldom channeled elsewhere and. therefore. quickly end
up in prisons again. The correctional facilities have decided to set up
special sections for addicts in the maximum security correctional facilities

to increase the efforts of treatment.

7262
cs0: 5500/2h6h

65
POLICE CLAIM SOUTH AMERICA IS NW MAINE SOURCE
Copenhagen BERIJI‘KiSKE TIM in Danish 15 Sep 81 p 16
[Article by Anders Hiig]

[Text] The route of cocaine from illegal South American laboratories to the
Italian mafia goes via Copenhagen. The Danish police have taken part in the
conviction of Italian mafia chiefs who are imprisoned in their home country.
he other side of the Danish cocaine problem is the more national one. Not
all quantities are forwarded to southern parts of Europe. Part of the
cocaine remains in this country for the Danish market which the gangsters are
in the process of developing. And which the expanded narcotics police will
now proceed to unravel.

Lima-Kastrup

A typical cocaine case unravelled this year by the narcotics police and
customs authorities of Denmark and other countries is "the case of the suit-
case." One day last winter, the authorities called from the Iondon airport
of Heathrow to Copenhagen to tell the Danish authorities about a suitcase
which. by mistake. had been sent to London from Lima. the capital of Peru.
The suitcase belonged to an Italian citizen who. via other European airports.
had arrived at Kastrup. 0n the way, the thing happened which many airplane
passengers have experienced both before and afterwards: the luggage was sent
by a wrong plane. In this case. not to Kastrup but to Heathrow. the
passenger from Lima did. of course. report the loss of his suitcase to 8A8
at Kastrup. and the suitcase soon emerged in London—traced via the inter-
national EDP search system of the airline companies.

However. at Beathrow the customs officers were so officious as to open the
suitcase. And in the suitcase were 3 kilograls of cocaine, the white South
American intoxicating poison which has started flooding hiropean narcotics
markets. Through SAS. the police found the passenger at a Copenhagen hotel.
Before being told that the suitcase had been found. he was made to describe
its legal contents. Then he would not have a chance of denying his acquaint-
ance with the suitcase when told that the cocaine had been found.

Without reservations. he did. indeed. admit having attempted to smuggle
cocaine. and he was sentenced last July to 3 1/2 years of imprisoment.
On the consumer level, 3 kilograms of cocaine is worth at least a couple of
million kroner, representing enormous profits to the principals. In this
case as in many corresponding cases, these people belong to the Italian
mafia.

It was established in the case of the suitcase that the cocaine was to have
been sent on to Southern Europe, the chief of the Copenhagen narcotics police,
Bent Ejlerskov Petersen, assistant commissioner of the criminal police,stated.
He has just returned from a meeting of Nordic narcotics chiefs held in
Reykjavik. Here, Frank Gyldenlove Msdsen, detective superintendent from the
headquarters of Interpol in Paris, stated. "So far in 1981, 19“ kilograms of
cocaine have been seized in Europe. In all of 1980, the quantity amounted

to 2&0 kilograms. In the course of 8 months. this year, they seized in
France 80 kilograms, in Italy 27 kilograms, in Spain and Great Britain 13
kilograms and in Denmark 9.6 kilograms, in addition to the 3 kilograms which
emerged at Heathrow.

Bent leerskov says, "It seems like a huge amount for a small country such

as Denmark, and we all believe that Denmark is located on a transit route
crossing Northern Europe. When, last July, at a few days' interval, we

arrested two South American women with 2 and 5 kilograms of cocaine, respective-
ly, we did not believe that the cocaine was intended for the Danish market.

We are still investigating this case in an attempt to find out for which

country the cocaine was intended. In other cases originating in Copenhagen,
Italian mafia leaders have been imprisoned."

"The cocaine is produced in the Andes but comes from various places in South
America to Europe. Mafia-type organizations smuggle it from, for example,

Lima in Peru, Santiago in Chile, 1a Pas in Bolivia and from Colombia via
couriers in transit across Northern Europe, in which connection Denmark

enters into the picture. And we take it that the Italian mafia—-which, of
course, also is composed of several groups--then enters into an exchange.

Pure morphine and heroin are exchanged for the cocaine. This has been con-
firmed by the fact that cocaine now also emerges to a major extent in Arab
countries, for example in Lebanon, which is the place of unloading for heroin,"
Bent leerskov says.

He says that 3-“ years ago, cocaine was not known in Denmark. In 1980, in
one single case, 1 kilo of cocaine was seized, and, so far, this year,
more than 9 kilos have been seized. Purt of the cocaine is meant for the
Danish market, and the police have found small quantities of cocaine among
Danish drug abusers. That is why the narcotics police is now launching an
offensive against an apparently commencing cocaine abuse.

Police Warns
Bent leerskov says, "We shall now, after the expansion of our force and the

allocation of more technical equipment, to a larger extent make investigations
in environments where cocaine occurs."

Anders Viig: What kind of environments are they?
Bent Ejlerskov: Actually. they are the environments in which hashish and
heroin occurred to begin with. It was among the upper middle class that
people began experimenting with hashish and heroin. but heroin addicts
have now sunk into the really addicted environments.

Anders Hiig: Does the ordinary. respectable citizen sniff cocaine?

Bent Ejlerskov: No, I do not indicate that. But in certain places which
he frequents, cocaine may occur. These may be a somewhat different type of
pub and restaurant from those that we know from Isted Street and dark
Norrebro.

Anders Viig: Discotheques have been mentioned in this connection?
Bent Ejlerskov: Well, that is possible.
Anders Hiig: We have thus now been warned that the police will intervene?

Bent leerskov: That does not matter. As long as you will also warn against
the use of cocaine. This is a very dangerous drug. I cannot warn people
strongly enough against using themselves as guinea pigs, even if it seems to
be a respectable and clean drug to use. They do not. for instance. use dirty
disposable syringesas in the case of heroin addiction.

Cocaine is a refined narcotic product from the coca plant, the intoxicating
effects of which have been known since the times of the Incas. Uhen chewing
the leaves, one becomes resistant to hunger, thirst and other burdens. A
refined product made from the plant has beenoused medically. especially

for the treatment of nose and ear diseases.

However. dangerous and harmful effects haVe been ascertained from misuse. such
as overtaxing of the heart and wear of the mucous membranes in connection

with sniffing. The drug has now been prohibited throughout the world. One
of the dangers of the intoxicating poison is the creation of a psychological
need for repetition of the stimulating effects of the drug.

Abusers may. says Bent Ejlerskov, come to consider what we regard as a normal
state as something that is abnormal. Abuse may result in mental disorders,
and death occurs as a result of suspended heart action. A particular element

of danger is the fact that one does not get withdrawal symptoms of a physical
nature as is the case after heroin abuse.

7262
050: 5300/26.

68
UN OFFICIAL: EIGHT? PERCENT OF COUNTRY'S DRUGS FROM ASIA
Copenhagen BERLINGSKE TIDENDE in Danish 28 Sep 81 p 5

[Text] Approximately 80 percent of the drugs smuggled into Denmark and
other Nordic countries comes from the Middle East, Pakistan. Iran, and
Southeast Asia, says Bror Rexed, chief of the UN Narcotics Control Fund

in Vienna. Bror Rexed, a former chief of the National Swedish Social
Welfare Board. has been to Denmark for negotiations with DANIDA [Danish
International Development Authority] concerning Danish contribution to the
work done by the UN fund. with a budget of 9 million kroner, in a number of
developing countries. where the cultivation of opium is practically the only
means of survival for a poor peasant population.

An amount of 500.000 dollars granted by the Danish government for the fund's
preventive work in Afghanistan has not been spent. The Soviet invasion in
the country stopped the project. The UN fund now hopes to have the Danish
contribution to Afghanistan released for a new project in Pakistan, Burma
or Thailand. In Thailand alone, approximately 300,000 inhabitants.
distributed over 1,000 villages in the mountains, subsist on the cultiva-
tion of opium, Bror Rexed added.

The annual Danish contribution to the preventive work among opium cultivating
peasants in developing countries amounts to 20-25.000 dollars, which are
included in the total budget of 9 million dollars. The Danish money goes to
special projects chosen by DANIDA on the basis of directives given by the
Danish government.

The result so far of the work of the UN fund is a reduction in the cultiva-
tion of opium and narcotics by approximately 10 percent in the Far and Middle
East.

"A still better result may be achieved if our grants are trebled." says

Bror Rexed. In Turkey, where approximately 10 years ago the cultivation

of opium was legal in the Afyon province, they have now succeeded in stopping
nearly all of the illegal production by giving the peasant population another
possibility of making a living.

7262
cs0: 5300/2008
BRIEFS

MILAN POLICE $2128 HASHIsﬂnHilan, 28 Sep (”ISM-One ton of hashiah heap and oil
with a wholesale value in the neighborhood of three million dollars has been seized
by police in Milan in a raid on a body and fender shop. a police spokesman reported
here today. Bight people, all Italian nationals. were taken into cmtody at the

tile and jailed on charges of criminal association and drug trafficking. The hashieh
heap and oil were packed in plastic containers bearing the labels, in Arabic, of a
"cattle feed center, a cooperative of the Middle East Peed Company S.R.L. of Beirut,
produced in Beirut for the Aloia Conpany for International Trade." [Text] [A0282029
Rome ANSA in English 1923 GMT 28 Sep 81]
PSYCHIATRIST 0N DANCERS OF FREE DISTRIBUTION OF HEROIN, HBTHADONB
Rotterdam NRC HANDBLSBLAD in Dutch 10 Sep 81 p 7

[Article by Jaap Colaco Belmonte, psychiatrist in The Hague and Leyden: "How Free Is
User of Heroin and Methadone?"]

[Text] The problem surrounding opium based drugs remains controversial. Free issuance,
forced withdrawal treatments, many find the uncommonly precise government instruc-
tions to physicians concerning methadone controversial. Every aspect seems to be
subject to controversy.

Force

There are many who urge that addicts be detained against their will and forced to
undergo a withdrawal cure without asking their opinion. It is only natural that
people are questioning the admissibility of this policy on humanitarian grounds.

No matter what the answer to this question may be. itappearsdifficult to find a
legally acceptable format.

It should be done under the rules of forced admission on the basis of insanity but
it flagrantly violates reality to call the average addict insane.

In addition to ethical objections there are--one is almost inclined to say: fortu-
nately--technica1 obstacles. Even in cases of motivated attempts to kick the habit
the percentage of success is low. Reviews point at a rate of 10 percent permanent
cures. This gloomy figure is for addicts who tried because they wanted it themselves.

What then can be expected from groups who do not want to be cured at all? It is
absolutely not true that if heroin use is prevented for some weeks addicts are cured.
Physiological detoxification by itself takes a long time. the real process of kick-
ing the habit is of long duration; persons who are often psychically and socially
off the right track are gradually adjusting to a life without the drug: All over
again they have to learn to get used to the old rhythm. rediscover activities they

found significant. fight frustration without flights into euphoria, disengagement
from the scene. and orientation towards a new, or reorientation towards the old,
long abandoned circle of friends and relatives.

71
Hany Months

This takes many months. If one wants to iorce a person to break the habit, some

success can only be expected if the addict is detained for as long as it takes. We
wonder if the officials who advocate this treatment realize these points. Probably
not, they would hardly have come up with such plans if they had realized that they

would have to admit hundreds. if not thousands of addicts to institutes which do
not yet exist at all...

Besides that, even if such an operation were possible the ultimate rate of cured
addicts would be far below expectations. As long as heroin is easily available on
the market the danger of renewed addiction is always lurking in the shadows. This

is even probable because guarantees for decent living conditions-employment, housing.
social acceptability--are missing.

A forced cure is senseless and has the extra disadvantage of distracting attention

from a really effective policy: A vigorous attack on the wholesale trade and the
creation of a closed circuit of assistance with enough capacity to take care of addicts
who remain free to come and go as they want.

Children

However. it makes sense to treat minors as exceptions. Young persons are still develop-
ing in every respect and the chances are good that intervention will have a beneficial
and lasting effect. also because their addiction cannot have been of too long a dura-
tion.

Ethical considerations differ here also. It is society's duty to protect minors,

who are so flagrantly ruining themselves, against themselves. There are no difficult
legal hurdles to take. A minor should in principle live where parents or guardians
deem that necessary and there is Sufficient legality for a closed institute to cure

drug addiction. Artificial legal constructions as an insanity clause are therefore
superfluous.

He can also support this idea when the addicted person himself is asking for approval
from the courts. On this basis he can be held ina psychiatric institute for a num-
ber of months. This could help him in weak moments which he will experience no matter
how motivated he may be.

This approach has a (literary) historical precedent. On his way home Odysseus had
to sail by the island of the Sirenes whose voices were as seductive as they were
fatal. In spite of themselves all voyagers listened to them and died miserably on
the island. Odysseus was eager to hear them! He knew that he would at the critical
moment not be able to resist and he took therefore care that he would not be free

to act. He ordered his friends to put wax in their ears and to tie him to the mast
in such a way that he would be unable to free himself. As best he could he impressed
upon them to keep rowing and pay no attention to his pleas or commands or to untie
him. That is how it went and for Odysseus all was well that ended well. Addicts,
who want to protect themselves in a comparable manner against temptations they know
they are sometimes unable to resist. should be helped.

72
Methadon

A completely different chapter is introduced by a long letter sent in March of this
year to all physicians in the Netherlands by the Chief Medical Inspectors of Public
health, Mental Health, and Public Health and Medicines.

The doctors are told in explicit detail what to do when they want to presecribe the
replacement drug methadone to addicts. They are unhesitatingly urged not to do this

as a general rule and to leave the responsibility to specialized institutes as Consult-
ing Bureaus for Alcohol and Drugs and municipal health departments. If they do pre-
scribe it. for instance if there is no such bureau in the area or it cannot cope

with the number of addicts, they should apply stricter rules.

Methadone may no longer be given in the form of pills but should be distributed on
a daily basis in liquid form; addicts should drink it on the spot. The physicians
are furthermore obligated to take part in a registration program (with guarantees
for the privacy of the addicts).

The letter also contains meticulous instructions on what to do and not to do if an
addict asks a doctor for methadone in the area where he is vacationing. Another
stern lecture forms the conclusion of the letter. The chief inspectors let them

know that theirinspectors will carefully see to it that these instructions are carried
out.

No small matter, in some places doubt has been expressed about the possibility of

overkill which puts superfluous obstacles in the path of a physician's initiative
to help addicts.

Some time ago this publication criticized the above mentioned letter in a leading

article, from our liberal viewpoint an understandable reaction. However, here we
must distinguish between unnecessary meddling and putting a stop to an attitude of
laxness which had reached serious proportions.

The department's initiative falls undoubtedly under the last category. We had a
heroin problem, for many years we have also been having a methadone problem. This
opium based drug is just as poisonous and addictive as heroin. only because of its
practical advantages it is used to replace heroin; after a while it became abundantly
and inexpensively available on the black market.

Resale

The cause? A great many doctors prescribed methadone at their own discretion, some
to enormous numbers of addicts. Many wrote perscriptions with high daily doses for

a week or longer. Addicts were thus in a position to resell an important part. The
profits were often used to buy heroin. This enormous leak became even bigger because
participation by physicians in maintaining a control register--to prevent double
delivery to one and the same person-~was absolutely voluntary.

73
The results were bad. Well intentioned individual assistance thus became a threat

to public health. Although the need to eliminate this abuse was regularly brought

to the attention nothing was done about it. The departmental instruction should

be seen against this background. Stringent instructions for medical operations are
also not unusual. There is perhaps an impression that doctors are free entrepreneurs.
in every respect responsible only to their own insights; this impression is incorrect.

The SCience of medicine has its rules and regulations too; definitely in those areas
where individual actions can have further repercussions.

Heroin

For years perscribing heroin has been under discussion and requests to permit it
are still coming in. Contrary to methadone. heroin has the disadvantage that it
cannot be swallowed but that it must be injected (or sniffed. or smoked) and. also
contrary to methadone. it cannot be given in doses of one per day but needs to be
administered 3 times a day. It loses its effect much quicker. Heroin is therefore
unsuitable for perscription programs: It is simply impossible to organize programs
in such a manner that resale on the black market would be impossible.

Voices have regularly been heard saying: th so narrow minded? They can still be
heard even now. Let everybody be free to use heroin if he wants to. Let us then
immediately begin to distribute it legally; nobody will have to steal for it and
everybody will obtain pure material. Again a liberal point of view which looks good
at first sight. Unfortunately it is not so simple.

Heroin itself does not follow the liberal rules of the game. One is free to begin

with it but not to stop. I am still impressed by what a colleague of mine told me

a few years ago. To find out how it felt he decided to smoke heroin just once. A

state of unprecedented bliss came over him which lasted several hours. But here

is the catch: He expected to take a nice nap after the stuff had lost its effect--
he felt so at ease--but just the opposite happened.

Awful Feeling

A feeling of restlessness and physical distress came over him. The first try with-
drawal symptoms already showed up! Only to a small degree, but, nevertheless. he
felt them. After repeated use these complaints become more serious in a very short
time and persons who have injected themselves or smoked heroin feel afterwards awful.
a feeling which can only be relieved by a fresh dose of the poison. A full-blown
withdrawal syndrome of a long time addict is horrible to behold. There are aymtoms
of agitation and sleeplessness. The pupils of the eyes are as big as the irises.
The nasal passages are blocked and dripping mucus. the eyes are watery. There is
diarrhea. often also vomitting. However. more than anything elsetbere are violent
pains in every bone and muscle forcing the addict to writhe with misery.

One who has regularly witnessed this becomes sceptical about statements as: Do not
worry. let everybody who wants to, use heroin.

10319
CSO: 5300/2452

71:
GOV/WENT INCREASES FUNDS FOR FIGHTIM NARCOTICS

Oslo AFTENPOS‘IEN in Norwegian 6 Sep 81 p 9

[Article by Torleif Andreassen: "22 Million Kroner Extra for Narcotics Struggle"]

[Text] with an extra appropriation of 22 million kroner the government will
initiate a more effective struggle against the narcotics evil. The money will,
among other things. be used for the following measures this year: increased
police efforts and investigative activities. more narcotics dogs, and new tech-

nical equipment to prevent smuggling.

At a press conference in Oslo yesterday Justice Minister Bjorn Skau said he hoped
for good results from a holding campaign against narcotics. Por 1981, 5 million
kroner has been appropriated for the campaign, which, however, will continue next
year. "The intent of the campaign is primarily that of combating the tendency
toward acceptance of using sci-called lighter drugs," said Stan, going on to say
that efforts would be increased to prevent .uggling drugs into prisons. "In
addition to working hard to prevent drug abuse in the prisons, we shall increase
emphasis on rehabilitation work for convicts." said the justice minister. Attempts
to offer aid to parents with children with dm probleas are included in the

goverment' a plan .

Social Minister Arne Nilsen pointed out that it was very inortant that parents
have a place to turn at any time of day or night to seek aid. He thought that
such arrangements could be made through mnicipal social aid offices without
great problems. Minister Nilsen further stated that various efforts will be made
to activate counties and municipalities in the fight on drugs. In this connec-
tion the social minister stressed the importance of strengthening cooperation
among social authorities, the police. and school and health institutions.

Further, the minister stressed the necessity of starting preventive efforts,
early treaunent efforts. and a broader spectrum of offers to addicts who desire
treatment. In res pose to a question about how counties and municipalities would
be able to handle this financially, the social minister replied that it should be
possible to adjust fair measures in their budgets. He indicated that in connec—
tion with the distribution of the aid to counties and municipalities for 1982 it
might be possible to earmark a sum for treatment in this sector.

75
It is not clear whether the government is willing to use forced treatment more
often than is the case today, but existing legislation on this matter is being
examined. Here, authority to retain patients being cured of drug addiction will
be particularly stressed.

In response to a question of whether it is not a shame in our welfare society that
drug addicts who ask for treatment must be turned away, Skau replied that there
was not enough knowledge and personnel available to meet new problems. The minis~
ter characterized drug addiction as a new "illness of the people" which must be
fought by a broad spectrum of measures.

One of these measures is using advanced technical equipment to prevent smuggling
of narcotics into Norway. In addition, the customs authorities will increasingly
make use of narcotics dogs. In cooperation with the other Nordic countries
policemen will be stationed in seven countries to investigate attempts to smuggle
narcotics to Scandinavia and to map connecting lines to the international trade in

narcotics. Further, a computerized sptem will be developed as an aid to revealing
narcotics crimes.

[Question] Minister skau, isn't this offensive too late in coming? The narcotics
problem is becoming unsolvable is it not?

[Answer] Much has already been done to combat drug sales. It is only recently
that we have had advanced, professional snuggling into Norway. It is in order to
fight this develonment that we are proposing additional appropriations for the
struggle against narcotics.

11,256
050: 5300/2445
BOOK 0N OSLO DRUG SCENE DETAILS YOUTH ADDICTION
Oslo ARBEIDERBLADET in Norwegian 26 Aug 81 p 10
(Article: "Shock Book on Narcotics Oslo")

[Text] Between 500 and 1000 youths aged 11 to 20 live
their daily lives in Oslo in a hell of drugs, prostitution,
crime, and violence.

The social authorities place 14 to 15-year-olds in Oslo's least expensive hostels.
In some of these. conditions are so horrible that one lives there only if one has
to.

in several of the hostels there is extensive abuse of alcohol; drugs are sold and
used. There is crime. prostitution, and violence. Both boys and girls are

exposed to rape or are threatened with it. So writes Hakon Porno Berntsen, former
leader of the Oslo vagrancy section, in his book "Drug Abuse-Hyths and Reality."
The book was presented on Aschehoug Publisher's fall list yesterday and will
shortly be in bookstores. The book is an unvarnished and unusually severe
criticism of society's way of dealing with young drug addicts. In the foreword
Berntsen writes that the book is intended as a subjective contribution, written

at a time of harrassment and rejection of thousands of youths set adrift. "The
victims of the worst distortions of social development have become society's
scapegoats. Young addicts are seen and dealt with as the lepers of our times,
writes Berntsen, going on to say that the development in Oslo is at the pace of a
gallop. Since 1977 the development has been explosive, and the extent of the
problem is increasing,as is the number of deaths. The miserable health condition
among addicts make them easy victims of cynical pushers. Heroin of purity degrees
of from 30 to 70 percent cause addicts to lose control of what they ingest, result—
ing in an overdose. Those who die are those who take in the most drugs, but
Berntsen notes a dramatic worsening of the situation in Oslo's drug millieu. A
very large proportion of the youths with whom the vagrancy section has been in

long contact were. in 1980, described as in danger of their lives.

"It is impossible to accept that no money is available when the situation is so
precarious. The money can be found. The authorities and the politicians know

this, and therefore it is unacceptable that young people--even though they are

addicts--die or are miserable. Especially when we know that they can be helped
out of addiction and when so many of then express willingness and desire to be

helped," writes Berntsen.

11,256
C50: 5300/2465

77
BRIEPS

SORLAHDET NARCOTICS ENFORCDIENT INCREASED-421mm!“ surveillance in the south coast
area will be significantly improved in a reorganization to take place 1 September.
As of that date up to 18 customs men will handle customs tasks. The nest signi-

ficant improvenent will be found in th. control of narcotics, according to custons

district chief Pcr H. Hasler. [Text] [Oslo ARBEIDERBLADET in Horwegian 26 Aug 81
p 3] 11,256

NARCOTICS POLICE STATIONED ABROAD-Experta of the Norwegian narcotics police will
soon be permanently stationed abroad. For several years the Swedish police have
had narcotics detectives stationed in, among other places, Thailand and the
Netherlands. and Swedish experience has been so good that the other Nordic coun-
tries have decided to station policemen abroad. Norway is planning to station two
narcotics detectives abroad. Office chief Herman Berger of the justice ministry
informs SUNNHORSPOSTEN that the two most likely stations are England and

Pakistan. [Text] [0810 NURSES HANDELS OG SJOFARTSTIDENDE in Norwegian 26 Aug 81
p 12) 11,256

C80: 5300/24é5

78
a.
Q

BRIEFS

HEROIN SEIZURE-~Narcotics units of the Istanbul security directorate have seized
3 kg of heroin. Following a tip that a narcotics smuggling gang is smuggling
heroin from Middle Eastern countries via Turkey. Istanbul narcotics units
cooperated with the PRC police and caught two female members of the gang at
Frankfurt Airport. The investigation was expanded and the other members of

the gang were caught in an Istanbul hotel with 3 kg of heroin. Four persons.
one of them Greek, were detained in connection with the incident. [TA211829
Ankara Domestic Service in Turkish 1600 GMT 21 Sep 81 TA]

HEROIN SHUGGLERS CAUCHT--A joint operation carried out by the Turkish narcotics
branch and the West German police has resulted in the capture of two women

in Frankfurt and four men in Istanbul possessing a total of 3 kilos of heroin
worth 100 million lira. The detectives of the narcotics branch had obtained
information that an international network was preparing to dispatch narcotics
from the Middle East to Europe. The two women, named Hazel and Jasmin. were
caught at Frankfurt airport, hiding 170 grams and 360 grams of heroin, respec-
tively, in their private parts. The four men were caught at a luxurious hotel
in Istanbul in possession of 2 kilos and 400 grams of heroin. Investigations
MWrwuudmuawmumshhmnhmacnusWﬁu,Wowwmnud

in determining the quality of the heroin and in dispatching it. has also been
caught. Orhan Gokyayla. who was discovered to be the financier of the adventure,
is now under arrest in Istanbul. [N6251364 Istanbul TERCUHAN in Turkish

22 Sep 81 [no page given] NC]

ANTALYA HERDIN SEIZED--A statement by the Antalya security directorate general
says that a total of 43 kg of heroin were seized in two parts of the province.
Two persons were detained in connection with the incidents. [TA291624 Ankara
Domestic Service in Turkish 1000 GMT 29 Sep 81 TA)

CSO: 5300/2006

79
'LPA' REPORTS ON LARGEST UK CANNABIS SEIZURE IN HISTORY
LD282104 London LONDON PRESS ASSOCIATION in English 1920 GMT 28 Sep 31

[Text] A slick gang or university graduates used a remote Scottish island to
smuggle into the United Kingdom the biggest haul of cannabis ever seized in the
nation's history, an Old Baily court heard today.

The "extremely intelligent" group landed 15 tons of high quality Colombian cannabis
--uhich had a street value of more than 20 million pounds.

Hasterninding the UK end of the operation-codenamed Bagle--was Oxford graduate
Dennis Reward Marks, 36, said Mr John Rogers, prosecuting.

With military precision, Marks and hi1 team were dealing in "mind boggling quanti-
ties oi "annabis and money."

"It was crime on the grand scale.
"It was the largest-ever seizure of cannabis made in the United Kingdom.
"It was larger than all seizures in any previous year in our history," said Hr Rogers.

But the gang panicked when they susnected customs men were on their trail-and
threw more than three tons of cannabis into the sea off the small and sparsely
populated Scottish island of Kerrera.

Outlining the "very slick, very smooth and very carefully planned" international
operation. Mr Rogers said it began when the ocean going tug Karob set sail from
Bergen in Norway in the late summer of 1979.

It was bound "for a tiny island in the South Caribbean, Aruba, close to the Colum-
bian coast."

En route it hove-to in mid-Atlantic and was completely repainted.

The crew also built a false cabin on the aft deck to disguise it as it passed
through a 0.8. Coastguard blockade.

Fran Aruba the Karon sailed for the West coast of Scotland and at midnight on Decen-
ber 29, 1979, unloaded her nulti-million pound cargo onto smaller boats.

80
The spot chosen was "one of the most beautiful and deserted corners of Scotland.“
Barr-nak-boc Bay on the Atlantic side of Kerrera.

It was so isolated that 210 bales of cannabis were left stacked, undetected, on the
beach for several days.

In dOck with Marks of Hans Road, Chelsea, London, were American yacht broker
Morgan Stewart Prentiss, 61, of no fixed address, and former undergraduate Hadley
Morgan, 36, of Oakland Avenue, Potters Bar, Berta.

All three deny smuggling and dealing in cannabis and possessing it with intent to
supply. -

Mr Rogers said that five others--including two other Oxford graduates, an artist
and a farner with an agricultural degree-had already admitted their parts in the
organisation.

Marks was not the top was in the whole organisation. "That somewhat dubious accolade
must necessarily go to a group of Americans on the other side of the Atlantic and
therefore outside our jurisdiction."

"But Marks is the most important figure inside the UK concerned with the marketing
and sales of cannabis.

He was close enough to the top to be likely to get 10 percent of the total receipts
of ssles,'in the order of 1 million pounds.

Mr Rogers said Marks "had so many identities one wonders how on earth he remembered
who he was at any given point of time."

"It is of no surprise that a man of his background and intelligence set up the UK
side of the organisation just like a high-powered business."

Mr Rogers said Prentiss was a Californian university graduate who had lived in Scot-
land on and off over a number of years.

"He controlled the actual landing and storage of 15 tons of cannabis on its arri-
val in his country."

"He gave orders when he believed the operation had been detected for more than three
tons of cannabis to be destroyed and thrown out to sea.9

The third defendant, Morgan, was a 'Mell-paid employee but not concerned in the
operation's management. His job was to count the mountains of cash which came in

and pay it into the bank."

By the time customs officers swooped, over three tons of the drug had been dumped

at sea and about four tons had been sold. The remaining seven-and-a-half tons was
recovered from dumps in Laindon, Essex, Pytchley, Northamptonshire and in the roof
of a remote Scottish farmhouse. The trial was adjourned to Wednesday.

CSO: 5300/2003

81
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000400060020-9

DRUGS GANG 0N TRIAL FOR SHUGGLING CANNABIS

London THE DAILY TELEGRAPH in English 16 Sep 81 p 3

[Article by Ian llenry)

[Text]

A SECLUDED Cornish cove was used as the

— drop-off point bp a multi-million pound
drugs gang to smuggle in huge consignments
of cannabis, the Old Bailey was told,
yesterday. .

Over four years the gang landed drugs by the ton

from North Afrieaat Talland Bay between Looe and

Polperro. it was allege-d.

The gang used a Rolls-
Ro'ce to deliver weeicly
£1 .000 deposits to a City
bang account. Mr Bonner
Hiatus. QC, prosecuting
said.

But in a combined oseration
codenamed Operation _ yril in
September. l979. police _and
Customs oth'ers lay in wait on
the lonely beach and made a
moonlight ambush to catch the
gana redhanded.

They seized two tonnes o!
cannabis resin just landed from
Gibraltar and worth millions of
pounds. in a simultaneous raid
on a store in Penge. a siioilar
consignment was found. Mr
Hannah said.

Eight men including two
from Gibraltar _on trial. all
pleaded not guilty to_ con-
spiracy to evade the prohibition
on the import oi drugs and to
supplyina. Six other gang mem-
bers have leaded guilty.
another has appeared and
another is ill. ‘

Mr llarman sad the .alleced
mastermind of the gangs Eng-
llsh connection. Roan? Mitts.
43. a bookmaker. of Otto Street.
Walworth. was arrested in a

Leeds hotel where he was wait-
in Ifor a conﬁrmation telephone
ca .

The gang's capture — a
Customs cutter overtook their
convened ﬁshing trawler—was
the ﬁnal chapter in the long
story of drug-running which
had begun in 191$ The police
and Customs men had swooped
alter a long complicated and

rsistent Investigation. Mr

annan said.

The scene of the Cornish
ambus was as
“exactly the sort oi plaee
chosen by smugglers for cen-
turies a _being eal for their
purposes:

Secretatore

A Land-Rover could be driven
up to_the water's edge to pick
up shipments ferried ashore in
rubber boat and a beach cafe
with a secret basement store
was used.

The shipment was only one
in a series of live that year
which was landed by the
trawler. Guiding Lights. 1'ae
trawler was convened and lit-
ted mth radio. radar. automatic
pilot and hidden compartments.

82

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007102109: ClA-RDP82-00850R000400060020-9
Others on'trial are: Tuvon
Conn. 40. ﬁnancial conmlum.
of Aysgarlh Road. Dulwnch:
Wraum Moon. 41. a roofer. of
Canonbie Road. Forest Hill;
Tums bum 37. unemployed.
of Brena House. Abbey Street.
Southwark; Duns Ram. 29.
a builder. of Chestnut Avenue.
Lauley. Bucks. and Room
Homou. 33. a salesman. of
Caliban]! Grove. Camber-
we

The two fran Gibraltar who
are char ed are Anus:
Vmu. . a bank manager.
and 59mm Vrcroar. 57. a
businessman.

The trial was adjourned
unul today.
BRIEFS

CANNABIS SHUGGLER JAILBD--An unenployed mechanic who rented three houses in India
and employed a butler, paid for by his drug-running activities. was jailed for
five years at Holverhsqton Crown Court yesterday. In Bullsnd. of Holland
Grove, Erdington, Birmingham, admitted snuggling four hundredweight of cannabis
with a street value of nearly 600,000 pounds into Britain. The drug was hidden
inside concealed conpsrtnents in pecking crates of furniture destined for s fir-

at Wolverhampton. the court was told. [Text] [London was DAILY TELEGRAPH in
English 12 Sep 81 p 3]

C80: 5320/001 DID

8b