FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10135
23 November 1981

China Report

POLITICAL, SOCIOLOGICAL AND MlllTARY AFFAIRS

(FOUO 19/81)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers. periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the U.S. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
INDR 0F1ﬁCJAL USEZ(HNLY

JPRS L/ll

23 Novem

CHINA REPORT
POLITICAL, SOCIOLOGICAL AND MILITARY AFFAIRS

(POUO 19/81)

CONTENTS

PBOPLB'S REPUBLIC OF CRINA

MILITARY AND PUBLIC SECURITY

Methods of Studying Combat Tactics Discussed
(JIEFANGJUN BAD, 26 Sep 81) ..............................

Readers' Exchange of Ideas
Tactical Problem, by He Xingvcn. Liang Tongzhan
Bridging Gap in Training Combat, by Yin Li

PLA Units Find Hays To Improve Training
(JIEPANCJUN MO. 30 Nov 81) .00....DOOOOOOOOOOOIIOOOOOOOOO

Drilling According to Needs. by Liu Qingyan,
Shi Renting
Flexibility in Training, by Jiang Yong, Zheng Jinn

Combined Arms Battalion Conducts Trial Training
(Yang Songlin; JIBPANGJUN BAG, 6 Sep 81) .................

Status of Conbined Arms Training Program Discussed
(Hang Yuzhen, Li Qike; JIzrchuu M0, 8 Dec 81)

Demobilized Soldiers Receive Security Briefing
(Sun Xuanquan; JIBFANGJUN BAD, 7 Dec 81) .................

Guided Missile Unit Conpiles New Training Material
(Xu Bin, Ouysng Shigso; JIEFANCJUN 3A0, 8 Dec 81) ........

~ a - [III - CC - 80 P0
FOR‘0511C1AL.USE‘DNLJ

MILITARY AND PUBLIC SECURITY

METHODS OF STUDYING COMBAT TACTICS DISCUSSED

Readers' Exchange of Ideas
Beijing JIEFANGJUN BAD in Chinese 26 Sep 80 p 3

[Article by the editorial group of "Studying Military Affairs: "Everyone Talks About
Combat Methods")

[Text] In response to readers' demands, with this issue we have started to publish
a broad exchange of academic thought and research achievements according to the
guideline of "a hundred schools contend" and using the method of letting the masses
think of plans and letting everyone talk about conbat uathods aimed at problems in
tactical training of the troops and in the military schools that are debated in order
to enliven academic research, improve the level of tactical thinking and adapt better
to the needs of war against aggression under modern conditions.

The concrete method is: l) to selectively publish articles on combat methods which
represent several different opinions on a situation which has been thought out,

2) to publish a representative article giving a brief summary of the trends after a
definiate period of discussion; 3) to invite the broad number of readers to evaluate
and select the best plan for each situation thought out and to give encouragement.

We sincerely welcome all readers to reveal their thoughts on each situation and to
participate in the discussion. The situations brought up should reflect a relatively
important and concrete problem that is being debated in the tactical realm; they
should be simple and clear. and diagrams showing the situation should accompany the
articles. Articles of discussion will not be limited in length, personal opinions
can be expressed and a contention regarding a certain viewpoint and a certain article
can be expressed. The viewpoints should be clear and arguments and reasons should
be presented to explore the problems patiently. Articles submitted should include
the code name of the units and the writer's duty and should be mailed directly to

the editorial group of "Studing Military Affairs.

1
FORlDFFKJAL.USELONlJ
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Tactical Problem
Beijing JIEFANGJUN BAD in Chinese 26 Sep 80 p 3

[Article by He Xingwen [6320 5281 21:29] and Liang Tongzhan [2733 0681 2069] of the
infantry school of the Beijing units: "In This Situation, Should the Firing Positions
Be 0ccupied?"]

[Text] The 1st Company of the Red Army infantry has attached to it the 85-1- cannon,
the 82-m mortar and heavy machineguns. As established by the higher authorities. it
occupies a fortified defense position. The lst Company has constructed an antitank
network position of trenches over 200 meters deep in front of the No 1 and No 3
positions, and it has set up several antitank groups. In front of the forward defense
position are a mixture of minefields, iron wire mesh, cliffs and antitank trenches,
forming an obstacle zone with a depth reaching ‘00 meters. The topography in front

of the forward position 13 flat and open, favorable for the mobilization of tanks and
attracted vehicles of the sine Army.

The attacking force of the Blue Army is a strengthened motorized infantry battalion.
After 30 minutes of firing preparation, two openings 8 meters wide have been opened
up in the Red Army's obstacle zone. Tanks and infantry combat vehicles of the first
combat front begin to pass through the opening and launch an assault on the Red Army.
The tanks, infantry combat vehicles and self-propelled artillery of the second and
third frontlines follow 200 esters and 1000 meters behind the first combat front
respectively and fire at the Red Army during the course of foward advance. At this
time, the artillery continues to fire at the forward positions of the Red Army.

In this situation, should the Red Army hiding in the fortifications occupy the firing
positions?

Bridging Gap in Training Combat
Beijing J IEFANGJUN MO in Chinese 26 Sep 80 p 3

[Article by Yin Li [1438 4539], instructor of the military academy: "How To Study
Academic Problems in Planned Training"!

[Text] Planned training is a good method used to train and improve the organizational
and comanding capabilities and tactical skills of the commander. of course, people
also often call it "paper war," indicating that planned training is different from
real war. How can we lessen this gap in the academic research of planned training?

I will talk about my personal experience.

We must conscientiously study the enemy. At present in planned training, because
of insufficient study of the enemy, we frequently assume victory in every battle
while the enemy can never shake us. Even the atomic bomb seems to be as easily handled
as a hand grenade. In the future, our main war opponent will be a highly modernized
and fierce enmy whose weapons and equipment, establishment, system and tactical
thinking will all be different from past enemies. This requires us to adapt to this
new situation so that the assumptions in the imagined situation coincide with the
combat characteristics and the tactical thinking of the war opponent and so that
everything starts out from the actual situation of the enemy. Only in this way can
we start out from the difficult and follow the strict situation, so that the strict
situation is rational and the difficulties are feasible.

2
ma OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

we must start out from our present equipment. The study of tactical problems in
planned training is inseparable from the weapons and equipment of the two sides. At
present, the tactical principles of the armies of the advanced capitalist countries

of the West are determined by their weapons, technology and equipment. If we follow
the Rest, mainly using antitank guided missiles and surface-to—air guided missiles

to attack tanks and airplanes, then no matter how good the tactics are, it will still
be "empty talk versus empty talk." For a relatively long period in the future, in
weapons and equipment we will still be inferior to the superior enemy. We must never
improperly belittle ourselves; we must fully develop man's subjective mobility, start
out from the presently available equipment our armed forces possess, consider the
possible developments within the near future, and develop a set of practical, feasible,
flexible and mobile tactics. Only in this way can our planned training be established
on a reliable material foundation and the tactical thinking thus developed adapt to
the needs of future war against agression.

He must solve the problem of combination in a key way. Improving the commanding
capabilities and the tactical level of the conander of combined forces to organize
joint combat of various troops and special troops under modern conditions is the
fundamental goal of planned training. Therefore, in the course of developing academic
study, we must grasp this key from beginning to end.

He must pay attention to allowing the facts to speak for themselves. When studying
and exploring tactical problems in planned training, we must emphasize utilization

of the experience gained in exercises, experimental data and related combat cases

and allow them to speak for themselves. He must talk rationally according to facts;
we must not start out from and discuss empty concepts. Yet, planned training means
the study of a certain academic problem under specific and concrete conditions; the
experience of exercises, experimental data and related combat cases drawn upon when
exploring the problem are all unavoidably limited. This requires that in our thinking
we strictly follow the method of going from the specific to the general and from the
concrete to the abstract when studying academic problems in planned training, thus
elevating sensory understanding to rational understanding.

9296
C50: 4005/2112

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MILITARY AND PUBLIC SECURITY

PLA UNITS FIND HAYS TO IMPROVE TRAINING
Drilling According to Needs
Beijing JIEFANGJUN SAD in Chinese 30 Nov 80 p 1

[Article by Liu Qingyan [0491 1987 1750] and Shi venting [0670 2629 0080]: "Ideology
Is Not Relaxed, Energy Is Not Low, The Spirit of Work In Not Reduced; a Certain Tank
Regiment Grasped the End of Training Like It Grasped the Beginning”]

[Text] It is the end of the year; on the exercise field of a certain tank regiment
of the Fuzhou units, the scene is one of activity.

By now, most of the companies of this regiment have completed all of the annual
training courses, and exams in tactical techniques and specialization have ended.
But the leading organ of this regiment has gone down to study each company, and the
energy has not lessened, the spirit of work has not dropped, and the end of training
is being grasped like the beginning of training at the start of the year.

when training began, the commanding, political and logistical organs of the regiment
separately organized and dispatched four working groups to help the companies solve
the difficulties in training. After each company completed the annual training
tasks, none withdrew and none relaxed the work assigned. Several major leaders of
the regiment took the responsibility of teaching the training subjects separately
and obtained good results, and they are now continuing to carry out inspection of
each subject.

The entire regiment, from top to bottom, analyzed the trend in training, and separately
handled the following three situations: Subjects in which training had been good

and in which experience had been gained were summarized one by one. Over 10 training
methods, including the training method of "one continuous line" of tactical techniques
and the combined teaching method of the three levels of the regiment, the battalion
and the company, were summarized one after the other, the coordinated training of the
various arms of the services was emphasized. Activities were launched to seek the
cause of failures in subjects that had been found during inspection and examination

on a mass basis in order to think of ways to solve the problems together. The
subjects which were taught in a hurry in order to catch up with the annual schedule
were repeated in training. The 2d Tank Company, which was in charge of this year's
exercises and construction tasks, began training 2 months later than other units.

Some training subjects were rushed through. Recently, "files" were established on

the training content that was rushed through, and subjects are now being "reprocessed"
to eliminate the obstacles in the specialized communications units, theory of tank
maneuvers and ranging by the first gunner.

ls
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL [ISIS ONLY

This regiment has also organized forces to strengthen the special technical backbone
teams of over 10 companies by reaching out and lining up the technical backbone and
instructor teams of the company, and is holding military technical training classes
for various special troops and personnel and is organizing centralized training for
the backbone members.

Flexibility in Training
Beijing JlEFANCJUN BAD in Chinese 30 Nov 80 p 1

[Article by Jiang Yong [5592 0516) and Zheng Jian [6774 0256]: "Not 'Rehashing'
Because of Regulations, Not Rushing Through To Catch Up With the Schedule: the 9th
Company in Charge of Production Tasks Uses Initiative in Training and Obtains Best
Achievements in the Regiment"!

[Text] The only company of a certain tank regiment of the Kunming units involved
in production, the 9th Company, achieved the best scores in the yearend, training
exams in single-gun live-ammunition direct-aim firing in fixed and mobile target
practice and single soldier exams. This unexpected situation benefited the leaders
of this regiment and taught the leaders that training should not be carried out by
"arbitrary uniformity," but that the companies and units should be given a definite
framework.

Last September, the party connittee of this regiment ordered the 9th Company to take
up the task of production, proposing that the 9th Company's training time be half
that of companies receiving full training. Starting at the beginning of this year,
the regimental leaders and offices did not control the training of the 9th Company
very tightly; the training schedule established by the battalion was not issued to
the 9th Company, allowing the 9th Company to organize and implement training on its
own on the basis of the general training subjects. The cadres of the 9th Company
concentrated on training. Starting out from the actual situation, training was
arranged in a flexible manner. when it was seen that training in certain subjects
had met the requirements, the time was reduced and the company turned to new training
subjects. Training that did not satisfy the requirements was given more time. In
past year, individual gunnery training generally required 2 months. This year, after
20 days of training, the requirements of the training guidelines were completely
satisfied, and the company turned to new training subjects. After the pointers completed
the course of corrections in firing, they were examined in marksmanship using rifles
as a substitute for cannons, and this showed that many comrades did not completely
grasp the main poLnrs. The company rearranged the time in order to provide for
supplementary classes. The cadres of the company units organized training, emphasized
quality, and did not take the training time as the mhin criteria. They urged that
cadres and soldiers be trained strictly, and nobody was seen standing around in the
fields. The soldiers did not "rehas " old exercises because of the training schedule
and they did not walk through the exercises in order to catch up with the schedule;
the whole company carried out training concretely.

The willow becomes a shade tree without any intention of becoming so when planted.
The situation of the 9th Company brought some profound realizations to the leaders

of the regiment, and regimental commander Li Defu [7812 1779 1381] said: This case
fully shows that the initiative in training should definitely be given to the companies

5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and units. The general training content, training standards, and training period

must be uniformly established, but the training in individual subjects generally can

start out from the actual situation of the companies and units and be organized and
implemented in a flexible mnner. Controlling training too tightly is unfavorable
to mobilizing the enthusiasm of the companies and units. The leaders of this

regiment plan to utilize this experience in the future training of the whole regimen ..

9296
(:80: [0005/2112

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MILITARY AND PUBLIC SECURITY

COMBINED ARMS BATTALION CONDUCTS TRIAL TRAINING
seijing JIEFANGJUN M0 in Chinese lo Sep 79 p 1

(Article by Yang Songlin [2799 26106 2651]: "mange the Situation in Which the
'Vehicles. Horses, and Artillery' Do Not Meet; uplore l’roblams in Coordinated
Training of Various Arms of the Services; A Certain Armed Force Begins Training

for the Trial 'Codained Battalion'; Cadres and Soldiers Say Happily: This is Truly
Like Studying Combat Under Modern Conditions"]

[Text] Editor's Note: The news about a certain armed force
that has established a trial "codwined battalion" to gain
experience in coordinated training of various arms of the
services is enuursging. This type of "combined battalion"
cannot be found in the current list of established units and
it has not been seen in documents of the higher authorities.
But custom has been broken and such a unit has appeared in
the mighty Taihangshan foothills. It vividly shows the extreme
importance of implementing the spirit of the party Third
Plenum. insisting on liberating thinking, and insisting on
seeking truth from facts. It can be concluded that if there
had been no departure from inflexible thinking, if we had not
possessed a spirit of brave practice and daring to create new
things. if we had not had the energy to do things in a big
way and been responsible for winning future wars, if we had
insisted on "book worship" in doing everything and had
maintained the spiritual attitude of not doing anything that
was not documented and specified, this type of "combined
battalion" would never have emerged.

Our armed forces, from top to bottom, lack experience in
coordinated training of various arms of the services. This
requires us to be brave in practice and to explore daringly.
This type of "combined battalion" is a kind of brave test
of coordinated training of various arms of the services.
Although the experiment has just begun, the spirit of
creativity manifested by the leaders of this certain erred
force and the officers and men of the "combined battalion"
during the course of taking the first step is worth learning.
It is believed that the leaders of this certain armed force
and the officers and men of the "combined battalion" will

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
soldiers drilling. This was the "combined battalion," which includes six arms of

the services and special squads created on a trial basis by a certain arm of the
military service.

by the military division at yearend, and the combined training for the year would be
completed. Soldiers said: '1he ’vehicles, horses and artillery' do not meet all
year, but at yearend they come for a 'reunion dinner', and after New Year, each
'does its own thing' again!"

How can we change this situation and improve coordinated training of the various arms
of the military service? After the Third Plenum of the 11th Party Congress, during
the course of shifting the emphasis of work, the leading comrades of this military
force continued to think about this problem. The war of self-defense and retaliation
against Vietnam made them see more clearly the extreme importance of coordinated
combat by various arms of the services in modern warfare. They went to the divisions
and the regiments and conscientiously studied together with the cadres and soldiers.

battalion, a tank company, a lZZ-mm howitzer company, an 82-mm recoilless cannon
company, an antisircraftmachineguncompany, an engineer platoon, a communications
platoon, an anti-chemicaldwarfare platoon, a flamethrower platoon and corresponding
logistics squards. Through this battalion, cadres and soldiers of various arms and
special squads lived together, trained together. studied the various difficulties
encountered in coordinated training of the battalion and company, explored various

training period was 4 months. 1his idea was approved and enthusiastically supported
by the higher leading offices.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

on the general principles of combat of the combined army, studied the basic principles
of combined combat by units of the Soviet, American and Japanese armies, analyzed
three typical combat cases of coordinated combat of our infantry, artillery and tanks
in the war of self-defense and retaliation against Vietnam, studied the technical and
tactical functions of the weapons and equipment of the specialized units of each arm
of the services and the principle of using each arm of the services. The cadres stood
around cannons, climbed into tanks and knelt beside antiaircraft machineguna; they

each type of weapon and personally drove and operated the weapons. In the past, these
cadres had gained their knowledge of each arm of the services by going from book to
book, from figure to figure; now they learn by going from books to the real objects,
from theory to practice. Everyone listened and observed, touched the real objects
and carried out real practice, and they learned with great interest. After more than
10 days of study, they generally understood the performance three to five kinds of
weapons other than those used in their own arm of military service; they knew how to
operate and how to utilize them in combat.

During this stage, the infantry completed tactical training from single solider attack
to platoon attack. The artillery and armored troops carried out tactical training

on a single cannon and a single tank. Each special squad carried out applied training
in a tactical background.

"The combined battalion" also arranged three later training stages: The second stage
was to study and solve problems in coordination during each combat phase and each
combat period in battalion and company attack and defense, mainly by seeking a
concrete method of coordinating the infantry, artillery and tanks. The third stage
was to carry out continuous exercises in attack and defense tactics and to solve the
problems of coordinated maneuvers under various complex conditions. The fourth

stage was to conduct combined exercises with live ammunition and real people in order
to examine the results of combined training. The commanders of each level above

the regiment were organized to come to the exercise fields to study and solve the
major difficulties in organizing and commanding coordinated combat by combining theory
with actual progress and to summarize experience and lessons.

The emergence of the "combined battalion" has caused strong reactions in this military
force. Battalion commander Xie Aifeng [6200 l9h7 1496] said happily: "In the past,
each year at yearend there was combined training, but because of the short period

of only a few days, the various arms of the services met superficially and 'did not
care about the three aspects’: they did not care about ideology, they did not care
about life, and they did not care about the usual training. Combined training always
seemed like the men were being 'forced' together. Now it is very different: the
infantry and many special troops and squads live and eat together for a longer period,
they work and enjoy recreation together, they become familiar with each other; I think
of how to cooperate with you wholeheartedly and you think of how to cooperate with me
wholeheartedly; this is true 'combination'." This time the 7th Artillery Company and
the 3d Infantry Company lived in the same village, they "hung around" together every
day, they helped each other learn, and carried out mental exercises in 'how the

tanks should coordinated with the infantry in combat, how the infantry should coordinate
with the tanks in combat" beforehand, and preliminarily explored how tanks should
coordinate with the infantry and how the infantry should open roads for the tanks,
how the tanks should lead the infantry in an assault, how the infantry should cover
the tanks' assault, how the tanks should support the infantry's assault at their

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

original positions, how the single tank and the infantry platoon should coordinate
when the infantry and tanks are at the same frontline in an assault, and similar
problems. They thought about the questions and went to the driving grounds to carry
out actual practice. Many problems that were thought at first to be very difficult
were quickly solved in practice in the field. Soldiers said happily: The coordinated
training of the various am of the service has changed from "talking about it" to
"grasping it in the hand"; we have changed from "storytelling accompanied by music"

to "playing the piano." This is truly like studying conbat under modern conditions!

9296
cso: 4005/2112

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
STATUS OF COMBINED ARMS TRAINING PROGRAM DISCUSSED
Beijing JIEFANGJUN BAD in Chinese 8 Dec 80 p 2

[Article by correspondent Wang Yuzhen [3769 1362 2182) and reporter Li Qike
[2621 0796 4430]: "The Present and Future of the Corbined Training Program—Notes
on Investigative Studies by a Certain Division of the Wuhan Troops"]

[Text] This year, under the guidance of the higher leadership organs of a certain
division of the Wuhan troops. a trial training program involving combined
branches of the armed services in coordinated count was carried out. What was
the most profound experience of this year's combined training? It was concluded
that without reforming the training plan. combined training could not be carried
out.

The Start Has Not Kicked Off Well

In March of this year, the higher leadership organs assigned this division the
task of conducting coordinated conbat training on a trial basis under the subject
of strengthening assault combat in the arly division. The whole division was
enthusiastic. but when they began the annual training plans for each service arm,
they became worried. The annual training plan for each service branch was
separately established, the progress was mixed and not uniform, so combined
training could not be considered. For emple, the armored troops training plan
called for basic training from March to June. applications training from July

to September. tactical training in October and November (not specif"'.ng whether
this included the participation of other service branches in combined training).
and examination and retraining in Deceaber. Slightly different from the armored
troops was the fact that some service branches did include some time for combined
training with other service branches in the plans, but it was like the saying,
"not meeting for a whole year, and at year end, everyone gathers for a big meal."

In addition, with the training stages drawn up by each service branch, they were
not suitable for combined training. For example, in September, the infantry
began offensive and defensive tactical training of the battalion, and according
to the demands of combined training, the regimental artillery squad, the
comunications squad and the engineer platoon should be attached. But at that
time the specialized technical training of the artillery squad had not been
completed, the connunications squad was still studying basic techniques and some

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

applied subj ects, and the engineer squad was busy with its own specialized training.
As a result, the desire to carry out combined training on a trial basis faced
difficulties from the start. So how should the first efforts begin?

There Was a Key To Open the Lock

The current training plan became the "lock" that affected combined training.
Having this lock, a key to open it should be found. This division carried out

major readjustment of the training plan under the guidance of the higher leadership
organs.

Readjustment of the training plan involved reforming the time of training. the
content of training, the method of training, and the examination system. Leading
comrades believed that as it is beneificial to combined training. readjustment
should be carried out with a free hand. They followed the principle of favoring
combined training and considering the characteristics of each service branch and
carried out the following work:

The proportions of time alloted for military, political and cultural training of
all branches of the armed services were unified. According to the original plan,
the proportion of time alloted for military, political' and cultural training of
the infantry squads and the squads of special troops was not uniform; the former
was 5.5:3.5:l. the latter was 7:2:1. They decided that the political caliber of
the cadres and soldiers of the various branches of the service was generally
similar, so the time for political education could be standardized. Thus, they
unified the proportion of time alloted for military, political and cultural
training of the various arms of the service to become 7:2:1.

The division of training stages was unified. While taking into consideration the
progress of training of each service branch as a prerequisite, training was
provided first for small units and then for large units in a developing order of
coutining training gradually. Training of the various service branches for the
whole year was uniformly divided into three stages: The first stage was from
March to July, mainly completing the technical and tactical subjects for units
below the squad. The second stage was from August to the first 10 days of
October, mainly conpleting the tactical training for the platoon, company and
battalion and field operations of consunicstions equipment led by commanders and
comnding officers of divisions and regiments. The third period was from the
middle 10 days of October to the middle 10 days of Noveﬂaer for codained training
of the regiments and divisions. During the course of implementation by each
service branch. "arbitrary uniformity" was not carried out and a definite leeway
was allowed.

The content of training was readjusted and time was utilized scientifically. To
suit the needs of combined training, some subjects were added in the basic training
of each service branch. The infantry's motorized squad mainly added general
knowledge and general principles of coordinated maneuvers in coordinated conbat
with the various service branches mutually suitable at the same level. The

special squads mainly added subjects of coordinated basic training of the service
branches related to the special squads. Bach service branch also enlarged

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
the proportion of special tactical training: the infantry added 10 to 15 percent,
the special squads added 10 percent. With such additional subjects added, where
wOuld the time come from? This division used the method of "accounting and
digging for potential" to solve the problem of time, and the rest could all be
included in the time for morning drill and afterclass hours. There were also some
subjects such as military topography, point location and squad and group
installations of wired equipment of the communications squad which were closely
related, and they could be completely combined for alternate training.

Plan Approved by Practice

what was the result of implementing such training plans after readjustment? After
1 year of combined training practice, looking back over the plan established at
the beginning of the year, they found that the first step. was the most difficult,
but after taking the first step, "the road" was opened up.

The greatest benefit of this plan was that it "legally" established combined
training so that each service branch had a basis and a criteria for grasping
combined training. Because the plan provided time for combined training and
subjects of combined training from beginning to end. this prompted the various
service branches to consciously do a good job of their own training and to study
for the goal of combining with others. Because combined training started from
the small units and progressed to the larger units, from the lower echelons to

the higher echelons, and was carried out in stages, the foundation was established
more solidly, so that when carrying out a higher level of combined maneuvers,
things fell into place and everything was kept in step.

Hill the readjustment of the training plan lower the caliber of training of the
special troops? At the beginning of the year, the special squads had some doubts,
but at year end, they reviewed the specialized technical and tactical training scores
of the various service branches and found the scores generally were higher than in
past years. The comprehensive grades for the whole year showed the following
statistically:

Infantry (including all infantry companies of the whole division; the same in the
following): The final scores for the light weapons and the 40 mm rocket launcher

and the 60 mm cannon live ammunition practice were all superior.

Artillery: Single cannon live ammunition practice and company and battalion live
ammunition practice all scored well.

Armored troops (army tank regiment): Total score of the examination on theoretical
subjects was good. Total scores of trainers marksmanship, combat shooting and
driving examinations were all superior.

Scores of engineering squads. communications squads and anti-chemical warfare
squads were all better than good. Common subjects of the various armed forces
such as military physical education and formation all net the standards estab-
lished by the higher authorities.

13
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Looking at the training achievements of the entire division. people said happily:
this combined training plan has already been approved by practice.

A Few Words in Addition to the "Plan"

This division started out readjusting the training plan and completed the task of
combined training on a trial basis as ordered by the higherauthoritiea. Reviewing
this practice. they believe that there is something more to say.

1. Reforming the training plan was the key in carrying out combined training.

Yet this would not have come about if we had relied only upon the lower echelon
troops. The main reason this division could readjust the training plan according
to the needs of combined training was that the higher echelon leading organs
graspedthesituation. and there were people who provided support. Without this,
no one would have dared to ”do anything." No doubt some comrades who have seen
the exercise by this division have said: "Their experience is good. but we cannot
learn it." This shows that strengthening combined training requires that the
leadership organs at each level first uniformly readjust the training plan to
create conditions for the troops to carry out combined training.

2. "hen talking about combined training, acme comrades have said: we have
"innate deficiencies and acquired imbalances." Hhat is meant by "innate
deficiencies" is that the establishment and the system of our army now do not fit
the demands of a combined army in many aspects. The military training department
and the departments of the other branches of the service have a parallel
relationship, not a subordinate relationship, the military training department is
even further related to the services. As reflected in the training plan, these
departments cannot be "combined" even from the top. "hat is meant by "acquired
imbalances" is that under the current establishment and system, the various
branches of the armed services has not taken active measures to strengthen their
mutual relationship. Whether in establishing training plans or in doing ordinatry
work. all orders are passed on from top to bottom, there is only a "vertical"
relationship. there is no "horizontal” relationship. It is very difficult to
carry out combined training in this situation. Therefore, reform of the
establishment and the system must be carried out. Before the reform of the
establishment and the system has been accomplished, the leading organs should
quickly carry out measures to solve the problems of having "acquired imbalances."
If each branch of the armed services starts out from the goal of carrying out
combined training of units well and uniformly arranges training, a relatively
perfect combined training plan can be realized. After the leading organs have
been "combined." then the business of combining the troops will be easy.

9296
080: 4005/2109

14
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
DMBILIZH) SOLDIERS RECEIVE SECURITY BRIEFING
Beijing JIBFANGJUN MD in Chinese 7 Dec 80 p 2

[Article by Sun Xuanquan [1327 6693 0356}: "Old Veterans of the Sixth Company
Receive Security Education"]

[Text] 0n the afternoon of 19 Rove-bar. the Sixth Company of a certain anti-
aircraft artillery regiment of the Shenyang troops conducted a security education
class for old soldiers about to be discharged and become veterans. Political
instructor Cui Dejun [1508 1795 0193] instructed those present to learn [security
rules] in order to improve understanding of guarding secrets. Then he asked the
old veteran soldiers to observe three requests: 1) Byeryone nust check his
personal belongings to erase and destroy docuaents and diaries showing troop
designations and involving secrets of the units. 2) All lateriais and military
books that carry a secrecy classification must be returned to the cospany and
units. 3) After returning hone, there must be no talk about the secrets of

the units. With such work, chance of any secrets being leaked has been solved

in time.

9296
C80: (0005/ 2109

15
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
can ya: aw.u~ van vuua

MILITARY AND PUBLIC SECURITY

GUIDED MISSILE UNIT COHPILBS NEH TRAINING MATERIAL
Beijing JIEFANGJUN 3A0 in Chinese 8 Dec 80 p 2

[Article by Xu Bin [1775] and Ouyang Shigao [2962-7122 2514 7559]: "Guided
Missile Unit Headquarters Compiles New Training Material; 23 Comrades Participating
in the Compilation and Writing Receive Awards")

[Text] The guided missile unit headquarters recently compiled a set of new
technical training materials of over 1,400,000 words.

80 that the units would have a whole set of training materials to carry out drill
and training, at the beginning of the year the guided missile unit headquarters
assigned 60 special technical backbone members to organize a training materials
compilation and writing group. For the training materials to be systematic and
complete and to have a definite scientific and technical standard and also to be
easily understood. many times they sent people to the units that designed and
manufactured this type of guided missiles to learn and to seek opinions 0n the
campilation and writing of the training materials. During compilation and
writing, there was a shortage of technical data. They contacted concerned units
and gathered, copied, arranged, compiled and wrote down the data. They also paid
attention to including scientific and research achievements of the research and
development and experimental units and the past training experience of the troops
in the new training materials. The new training materials emphasized operation
and use as well as basic theory. Among the comrades participating in the
compilation and writing work, there were 23 comrades who made outstanding
achievements who were given awards by the leading organs.

9296
680: 4005/2109 END

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY