FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10380

12 March 1982

East Europe Report

POLITICAL, SOCIOLOGICAL AND MILITARY AFFAIRS
(FOUO 5/82)

"FBIS FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFHCIAI. USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain infatuation primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign~language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and aaterial enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the u.s. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
EAST EUROFE REPORT
POLITICAL, SOCIOLOGICAL AND MILITARY AFFAIRS

(P000 5/82)

Coureuts

POLAND

"I'IIES' Correspondent Describes wnditiona in Warsaw
(m ﬁles. 8 J” 82) 0000000 o 00000 0.00.0000 ooooooooooooooooo a.

'CUARDIAN' Prints Partial Text of Gomidd Copenhagen State-ant
(m8 WA“, 11"” &)0000000I00 OOOOOOOOOOOOOO 0000000000000

Y UG(S IAVIA

Italian Paper Intervim Hilovan Djilaa
(mlovan Djilaa Interview; comm mm 8m, 1 Feb 82).....
liﬂ!(ﬂﬂﬂ(]Al.USElDNLY

POLAND

'TIHES' CORRB§PONDENT DESCRIBBS CONDITIONS IN HARSAH
PH081319 London THE TIMES in English 8 Jan 82 p 20

[Roger Boyes ”Letter From Warsaw”: ”The Hiseriss of Living Bach Uneasy Day as it
Comes"] .

[Excerpt] Two weeks into martial law and, according to official accounts. local
opposition to military rule had ended. The thousand miners occupying the Fleet
nine in Silesia have ended their sit—in strike. although it is not really clear
how the army achieved this "pacification." Earlier pacification of the quec mine
involved the shooting of seven miners out of self-defense. according to the govern-
ment spokesman.

We have. the government spokesman tells us (foreign correspondents, not the nation),
entered the second phase of martial law: the thaw. That is certainly true enough
of Warsaw, but Radon. Gdansk and other towns appear still to be at the heavy snow-
fall stage of the cycle. And nobody knows how long Warsaw will remain quiet when
the telephones are restored.

Solidarity. the independent union, needs telephone contact to regroup. so the
military solution dictates there will be no telephone systen. Unfortunately, the
economy also needs telephones and enterprise managers. already afraid of making too
independent-sounding decisions. are simply not functioning. The workers sense the
mood and partly in sympathy with Solidarity. partly out of post-Christmas doziness.
produce only token amounts.

Two weeks into martial law and the stunned shock has given way to national lassi-
tude and a barely concealed cynicism. At Szczecin shipyards. fork-lift truck
drivers ferry meaningless loads from one end to another, repeating the process
endlessly until it is tine to go home. Home is where most people go after work
nowadays; cafe society has dwindled to a hardy gaggle of students. unsure whether
they will be called up or whether they will have to repeat the winter semester.

Big ideas, once the small change of cafe conversation, are no longer social
currency. Informers are back in fashion; when asked, people laugh and say. of
course they were asked to cooperate and of course they refused. But the uneasiness
lingers and excuses are made: the last bus before curfew has to be caught at 8.30.

The soldiers no longer know why they are there. manning the roadblocks. acting as
auxiliary policemen. The army newspaper gives warning daily of the Solidarity

1

FINI¢HﬂﬂCJAI,USE¢NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLV

"extremists" but most soldiers would not recognize the gross caricatures fed to
them in their political education lessons. The conscripts have schoolfriends in
the union. while the professionals seem to have been expecting some form of
partisan attack. car bows and shootings.

Instead. day by day they see quite normal Poles, comuting from queue to queue.
some of them openly contemptuous of the rifles and uniforms, must of them sullenly
compliant. The troops are moved regularly. rotated with units outside Warsaw. to
reduce the tedium and the sense of futility.

Even the dullest trooper has now realised that there is no iminent prospect of a
parachute attack on the bridge that he is guarding. Meanwhile, it is impossible
for anyone to cross a bridge by foot in Warsaw. A Pole who lives on the wrong side
of the Vistula will have to wait for the notoriously self-willed trams to take him
the 100 yards to his home.

Solidarity still exists. both officially and unofficially. Officially, because
unions are permitted provided that they engage in no union activities. Unoffi-
cially. because after dusk small knots of Solidarity sympathizers meet in
churches, the only really safe haven. Priests have been instructed by their
bishops to take no part in political activity. but the meetings happen anyway,
sometimes in the vestry by candlelight.

The Warsaw chapter of Solidarity, once nine hundred thousand-strong, can still pro-
duce a regular bulletin of information, mainly about the condition of the detained
union leadership. It bears the hallmarks of hurried printing and is a sobering
testimony to what happens when a sophisticated organization with ten million mem-
bers has to go underground at a moment's notice.

Two weeks into martial law and everything that matters is in a state of suspension.
Marriages are put off , couples defer having children for another year, school-
leavers stop worrying about careers. Before 13 December. there was an obsession
with buying consumer durables--everything from washing machines to abstract
paintings--before the zloty lost its value completely.

Now. the obsession is less pronounced. Best travel light is the philosophy, spend
on food, the daily needs, forget the long-term planning. A journalist on ZYCIE
HARSZAHY. the now suspended, once lively regional newspaper, says he has nothing
to do but there is no point in starting a book he has been planning because it
involves political judgments. It is no time. with a wife and family to support, to
become an instant dissident.

COPYRIGHT: Times Newspapers Limited. 1982

C80: 2020/33

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ma omcm. use ONLY

POLAND

'GUARDIAN' PRINTS PARTIAL rm 0? (DRNICKI COPENHAGEN srammn
P14111205 London m GUARDIAN in English 11 Jan 82 p S

[Unattributed report: “Solidarity Declared War Against the Stats'"-first
paragraph is editorial introduction]

[Text] The following is a partial text of a statement made by Captain Hieslaw
Gornicki. a senior adviser to General Jaruselaki. at a meeting of the World Peace
Council in Copenhagen last week. It is the fullest public explanation of its case
to come from the Polish martial law authorities since the BBC foreign ministers
first raised the possibility of sanctions against Poland.

In this crucial mount of Polish history we ask all our friends in the peace move-
ment, not only for understanding, but also for moral and political assistance.

Armed forces are seldom associated with peace activities. yet there are moments
when the armed forces become the last resort of safe-guarding peace before it' is
too late. This is precisely the ease in Poland. Public opinion asks what happened
in Poland. To our minds. the relevant question is Just the opposite: what did not
happen in Poland. A bloody prolonged civil war did not take place in Poland,
although we were on the verge of it.

A military dictatorship has not been established in Poland. Hartial law is a
temporary measure, and it will be lifted as soon as possible. Civil liberties will
be restored. Finally. European peace and stability were not put into Jeopardy.
This had been a very real ininent prospect.

That is the starting point. Now let me he more specific.

Nobody can blame the Polish authorities for lack of goodwill. They did their.
best to prevent the confrontation. Since last March I participated in all negotia-
tions with Solidarity as a member of the government. For about 16 months the
Polish government was willing to reach a compromise. We did see—perhaps wrongly--
a chance of widening the structure of political life by including an independent
trade union in the pattern of our state.

The sad truth is. however, that it airply did not work. Solidarity ceased to be a
trade union almost as soon as it was born. It became an opposition political
party. The name of an opposition party may not sound very repulsive to many of

NI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

you. but let me make it quite clear: Solidarity was never intended by its
extremist leaders to be an opposition party in the Western meaning of the word.

Gradually it became a conglomerate of just about. everything right-of-centre, from
conservative. openly pro-capitalist tendencies to the brink of fascism.

On 30 October General Jaruzelski offered from the rostrum of the Polish Parliament
an entirely new formula for a front of national conciliation. It was meant as a
way of sharing executive power with nonparty groups and organisations. All mean-
ingful groups 02 Polish society. including the Roman Catholic Church. expressed
their desire to participate in the front. There was one single exception:
Solidarity. ‘

During November. the government undertook several initiatives aimed at national
conciliation. General Jaruzelski met the primate of Poland,'Archbishop Glemp. and
the chairman of Solidarity, Hr Lech Walesa.

On 12 Noveaber. in the town of Trzehlatow [as published; probably Trsebiatow] the
vice-president of Solidarity, Hr Marian Jurczyk. delivered his famous speech.

Hr Jurczyk said, among other things: "What we need are gallows... Those people
who run Poland are not Polish, they are either Russians or Jews with changed
names... No talk with a government of traitors."

Is that a trade union activity? where in the world does a trade union call for the
death and extermination of fellow workers?

0n lo Deceaber, the Presidium of Solidarity net in Radon. This was an open
declaration of war against the Polish state. There is ample evidence that, between
lo December and 11 December, preparations were being made for a regular counter-
revolutionary coup d'etat, patterned after the classical CIA style. In the night
of 12 December, after the Central Omission of Solidarity openly proclaimed a
declaration of war against the state. no other option was left for Poland except
extraordinary measures in order to restore law and order.

This is not the place to refute all lies spread about Poland. 1 will confine
myself to nine most evident distortions.

1. The total number of persons detained was approximately 5,050 at the beginning,
now it does not exceed 10.600. An exact nulber cannot be given because people are
constantly being released. The talk of "several tens of thousands of detainees" is
plain nonsense. -

2. The total number of casualties is eight persons. 1 repeat eight. we all
regret it.

3. Not a single detained person was subjected to cruel treatment. torture. heat-
ing. or exposure to the freezing outdoor air. All those persons will be eventually
released. and they will give testimony as to how they were treated.

lo. While martial law was obviously not greeted with enthusiasm by everyone in
Poland, it was not 'rue that the Polish nation as a whole resented it. On the

1.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
contrary. the Polish "silent majority" met it with a sigh of relief, irrespective
of actual political leanings.

5. The introduction of martial law was a strictly Polish, sovereign, donestic
issue. There is not a single proof or evidence of any foreign involvement.

6. Emergency measures undertaken on 13 December are not aimed at the restoration
of what brought Poland to the crisis of 1980.

7. It is not true that the preparations for martial law had been made many
months in advance... There were no plans for direct military action until
virtually the very last moment.

8. It is not true that Polish clergy have been subjected to persecution or

reprisals. I know of only two or three cases in which priests were detained, but
martial law is mandatory for everyone.

9. It is not true that all Polish trade unions, including Solidarity, were banned
or prohibited or disbanded. Their activities were temporarily suspended and will
be permitted to operate again as soon as possible. However, there will he no

place for an anti-communist opposition political party. That is over-once and
forever.

COPYRIGHT: Guardian Newspapers Limited, 11 January, 1982

650: 2020/34

lNNRCHﬂﬂCJAl.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

YUGOSLAVIA

ITALIAN PAPER INTERVIEWS WAN DJILAS
Milan CORRIERB DELLA SBRA in Italian-1 Feb 82 p 9

[Interviw with Milovan Djilas by Ettore Petta: "The Italian Com-mist Party accord-
ing to Djilas: 'It Follows the Footsteps of the Yugoslavia of 1948 but Its Third
Way Is Not Clear"'] -

[Tut] After the meeting with Mew-Criticisms of the Soviet
Union in the interview with the "great heretic" of Belgrade‘s
couluniem who is an exile in his own homeland.

Belgrade.n.ﬂilovan Djilas, the great heretic of Yugoslav communism. is also wondering
where the PCT [Italian Communist Party] is going: he can already see it moving "on
the road which we opened in 1968" and he thinks that it will go much further. Djilas
is interested in finding out whether the PCT will find a specific position on the
Italian political scene as a "reformist" perty. Finding that place without losing
its image as a communist party however will be a difficult undertaking: the party

of Craxi and the party of Longo as a matter of fact will not give it much room to
maneuver. 0n the other hand, the PCI "at this moment" no longer has a Leninist

cast to it; it has come out in favor of political pluralism which as a matter of

fact is contrary to the spirit of Leninism. Hence the "break" with the Kremlin
which will receive the final official eta-p of approval the moment the Soviets es-
tablish that the Cossutta group is not able to create trouble for the Berlinguer and
Napolitano leadership "with its maneuvers."

In spite of his 70 years. Hilovan Djilas still has a youthful face, almost like a
calm little boy. His permanently half-closed eyes are lively, attentive, looking
at the conversation partner like the eyes of an examiner. The half-lit room, in
which he received me with a little cup of Turkish coffee, is full of huge pieces of
furniture, such as a big desk, e bookshelf, a small table with chairs, and a bed.
The window faces on tree-lined Palmoticeva Street, a silent little street although
it is in a very central location, behind the Federal Parliament. This is his king-
dom as a "domestic exile" where he however can receive anybody he wants to receive,
apparently without any controls. He says that an evolution of "modest liberaliza-
tion" is taking shape in Serbia and more generally in Yugoslavia; he is certainly
less pessimistic about his country's future than he was a few years ago. He does
not rule out the possibility that the PCI's policy "might influence or shake the
awareness of the Yugoslav Communist Party and I believe that the current modest
liberalization in Yugoslavia will continue. The alternative would be anarchy."

6

FOR‘OFFNJAI.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

But our conversation turned toward the conflict that broke out between two big com-
munist parties, an argument which obviously fascinates him: "Our break with Moscow
certainly took place in a situation that was more difficult for us than the situation
faced by the PCI today." For Yugoslavia this was really "a question of life or
death" and this is why, Djilas says, it was not even possible to listen to the argu-
ments of the Yugoslav pro-Soviet group; Berlinguer today can allow Cossutta to

speak without having to fear being overcome by the clout of the Soviet Commie:
Party.

Now-says Djilas, talking about 1948~the crux of the issue is obviously political.
Today, the problem that divides Berlinguer from Brezhnev is essentially ideological;
they find themselves facing a reformist party and a Marxist-Leninist party. After
the conflicts between Moscow and Belgrade and later on with Peking, the current
conflict with Rome "is the most important and also the most original because it is
a conflict on the major questions of Leninism." The PCI however is not in an easy
situation. According to Djilaa, "it is not clear" what Berlinguer means when he
talks about the "third way": the PCI's present policy "is not yet the third way"
and the dileuua is this: a comunist party is that only if it is a Leninist party
and if it is not Leninist, it is no longer even commist.

The "third way?" "I believe that Western Europe as a whole is already living in a
form of democratic socialism, not perfect, not ideal, but there it is. The third
way should be a new form of social and economic existence and this point is not
clear in the PCI. The problem of natimaliaation is complex: if nationalization
is productive, it goes well, otherwise it only produces red tape." The Eurocor
munists, that is to say, the Italian and Spanish columnists, according to Djilas
are "the reformists of modern capitalism," a capitalism different from the one
considered by Marx and Lenin and now also by the Kremlin. "Capitalism has changed
in terms of mentality and in essence" and can no longer be judged through the eyes
of Marx and Lenin.

What is to be done, then? Is it necessary to invent a new Han? Djilas answers

that real socialism is no longer capable of producing a new Marx and thus revitalizing
his theory. Marx' place in the modern world has been taken by Karl Popper and by
Leszek Kolakowski. He also mentioned the nausea of Zakharov and Zinovev, the Russian
exile in Paris, and then added that Leninist ideology is "sclerosed; I would not say
that it is dead, as Zakharov maintains, because it can still be used and the Kremlin
makes abundant use of it." But when it comes to so-called real socialism "nothing
positive can come out of it anymore and that is what Poland tells every day."

As far as the Soviet Union is concerned, Djilas says that he is pessimistic because
"I am afraid that some day it might cause a big war." He says: "Look at Helsinki;
after that conference, the Soviets stepped up the pace of their arms drive, causing
an imbalance in East-Heat military relations." Djilas added that "only a strong
West can save the peace."

Between the Soviet policy of President Reagan and that of Chancellor Schmidt, Djilas
opts for the one of the White House although he observes that he can very well under-
stand Bonn's attitude since the Germans would be the first victims of a war. But
with the [58R "we cannot entertain any illusions: it is a military empire, like

the state of Ottoman Turkey."

COPYRIGIT: 1982 Editoriale del "Corriere della Sera" s.a.a.

5058 sun
:30: 3104/109 7

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY