FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10475

22 April 1982

USSR Report

MATERIALS SCIENCE AND METALLURGY
(FOUO 2/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
m

JPRS publications contain information primrily from foreign
newspapers periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. tutorials free foreign-language
sources are translated; those free English-language sources
are transcribed or repr inteJ, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and naterial enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original inforution was
processed. were no processing indicator is given, the infor-
nation was smarired or extracted.

Unfamiliar nanea rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or nanes preceded by a ques-
tion mrk and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.8. Governnent.

COPYRIGI‘I' LAWS AND REGULATIONS WERNING WHERSKIP 0?
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
USSR REPORT
MATERIALS SCIENCE AND METALLURGY

(2000 2/82)
CONTENTS
FERROUS METALLURGY
Improving Iron and Steel Scrap Processing ... ......... .... ........... 1
STEELS
Advanced Methods of Producing Steel Ingota .................... ...... 7

- a -- [III - USSR - 216 SST FOUC
PERROUS HETALLURSY

UDC: 621.765.635.44

IMPROVING IRON AND STEEL SCRAP PROCESSING
Moscow STAL' in Russian No 11, Nov 81 pp 6-8

[Article by G. s. Khomskiy, Soyuzvoorchermet All-Union Production Association:
"State and Prospects of Development of Scrap Metal Procassing"]_

Text] The importance of steel and iron scrap and waste in steelmaking is well
known. In 1980 64.8 million tons of scrap and waste were consumed in producing
158 million tons of steel, that is, approximately 66 percent of total steel was ob-
tained by remelting scrap. Forecasts indicate that this figure will steadily rise;
in alectric furnace steelmaking 95 percent of the entire charge consists of steel
and iron scrap and waste.

Further increase in steel production and improvement in quality of steel depend to
a significant degree on the quality of preparation of scrap metal for remelting.
Efficient preparation of scrap metal shortens by as much as 25 percent open-hearth
furnace cold charging time; the output of open-hearth furnaces increases by 4-5 per-
cent; a number of other indices also improve.

in the "Principal Directions <‘ Economic and Social Develop-ant of the USSR for
1981-1985 and the Period up to 1990" adopted at the 26th CPSU Congress, the counuyb
metallurgical workers were assigned the task of ensuring fuller utilisation and
high-quality preparation of iron and steel scrap. A program was drawn up for ac-
complishment of this task, specifying further isprovemsnt of organization of
procurement (delivery) and processing of iron and steel scrap and waste, implementa-
tion of which will make it possible substantially to improve provision of setallurgi-
cal enterprises with high-quality metal charge.

To ensure fuller utilization of existing scrap metal resources in the nation‘s
economy, plans cell for substantially expanding by 1985 the network of shops and
sections of the Vtorchemet system. equipping them with modern scrap processing
equipment, and increasing processing volume to 35 million tons for the system as
a whole.

This means increasing by 30 percent receiving and processing of scrap metal at
Vtorchermet enterprises in the llth Five-Year Plan; an increase of only 10 percent
was achieved in the preceding five-year plan (at metallurgical plants volume of
scrap and waste processing increased by 8.6 percent, but by only 6.2 percent at
metalworking plants).

ROI1MHNCIA1.UBE(HVLV
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The relatively small increase in volume of processing at metalworking enterprises
is due to a number of objective and subjective factors, in particular the absence
of centralized planning, insufficient material incentive for enterprises to process
scrap, as well as the difficulty of obtaining high-efficiency scrap processing
equipment.

Assignment of a target to ministries and agencies pertaining to increasing the
processing of metal scrap, communication to subordinate enterprises and organiza-
tions of steel and iron scrap and waste processing targets simultaneously with
delivery targets, construction, renovation and retooling of scrap processing shops
and sections should in coming years promote a sharp increase in the quantity of
scrap metal delivered in processed (proper size) form.

An important role in this should be played by including all scrap supplier enter-

prises in the plan and report pertaining to_cosmodity output and volume of sales,

at full value of scrap prepared for remelting, in conformity with the requirements
of COST 2787-75. "Metals, FerrOus, Secondary."

The necessity of further increasing the volume of scrap processing directly at the
locations where it is generated is also connected with the fact that this reduces
overall labor expenditures on scrap processing, and metallurgical workers receive
higher-quality scrap, since there is an appreciable reduction in mixing in scrap
differing in its physical and chemical parameters. In addition, considerable
savings in hauling costs are achieved. since hauling processed scrap metal costs
from 33 to 50 percent as much.

Metallurgical plants process both their own scrap metal and commerCial scrap supplied
by the Vtorchermet system. The percentage share of commercial scrap comprises ap-
proximately 53 percent of total processing at the present time; one notes a trend
toward its gradual decline.

As a rule, metallurgical enterprises install hydraulic baling presses of 10 MN or
more. and 10 MN hydraulic shears. Many plants have set up their own powerful scrap-
breaking facilities, which make it possible even at peak delivery times to accept
all scrap and to increase processing volume from year to year.

Here we should mention first of all the Magnitogorsk Metallurgical Combine, the
Cherepovets and Makeyevka Metallugical plants: a great deal of work on uninterrupted
supply of high-quality charge material for steelmnking is being done at the
Novolipetskiy Metallurgical Plant. where they are building crane facilities for un-
loading iron and steel scrap and waste received from elsewhere and bringing new
scrap processing facilities on-stream: practically the entire stockpile of scrap
netal is stored only in processed form.

,—

All metallurgical plants should adopt the experience of these enterprises, and
particularly NLMZ [Novolipetskiy Metallurgical Plant].

Total volume of scrap processing at metallurgical enterprises should increase to

32 million tons in the current five-year plan. Metallurgical workers have been as-
signed the task not only of increasing processing volumes on carbon steel scrap but
also of organizing the dismantling of retired cast iron molds, with the aim of
elininating, beginning in 1983, the hauling of scrap cast iron unprepared for re-
melting, as well as eliminating return and inefficient hauls.

2
FOR OFFKJALIJNEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The Dnepropetrovsk Press Forging Equipment Plant makes hydraulic presses for
processing cast iron ingot molds and bottom plates, which are high-output units
and are operating reliably at the Dnepropetrovsk Association and at the

Konstantinovka Vtorchermet Plant. Good results are obtained by employing equip-
ment for chopping cast iron ingot molds, which includes a hydraulic press manu-
factured by the Odessa Press Forging Equipment Plant imeni 16th Party Congress,
and a manipulator designed at VNIPlvtorcbermet [All-Union Scientific Research and
Design institute for Scrap Iron and Steel].

Many years of experience in operating this equipment indicates that its employment,
especially in conditions of metallurgical production, enables one fully to
eliminate the construction of tower and trestle-type scrap breakers, to reduce the
cost of processing, and substantially to improve working conditions.

1he Viorchermet system is faced with large and responsible tasks. In order to in-
crease scrap procurement and processing volumes it is necessary not only to ex-
pand the system's network of shops and sections but also to achieve a fundamental
change in view on the question of where it is more advantageous to process scrap
metal ~- only in large shops and at Vtorchermet plants, or whether it is possible
to utilize for this a larger number of rayon shops and sections, providing them
with the requisite scrap processing equipment.

The experience of recent years, when particular importance has begun to be attached
to maximum utilization of the carrying capacity of each Ministry of Railways
freight car and reducing time spent on loading and unloading operations, has shown
the expediency of the latter variant.

For example, to increase the output capacities of the main shops just of such
largr associations as the Dnepropetrovskays, Sverdlovskaya. Gor'kovskaya, and
especially the Chelyabinskaya, tens of thousands of Ministry of Railways cars are
LOH required to provide for hauling in oversize scrap metal, and their load
capacity is utilized at only 25-50 percent on such hauls.

In connection with this the Soyuzvtorchermet All-Union Production Association is
equipping not only main shops but also all other shops and sections within the
Vlnrchermet system with 3.15-6.3 HR equipment for baling or cutting scrap.

Very important for ensuring high-quality scrap is the method of processing it. The
most effective are separation methods of processing retired scrap, which make it

Push‘hlc to remove nonferrous metals and nonmetallic impurities: shearing. breaking,
etc. in connection with this it is necessary to change the structure of scrap
processing which has become established in this country, substantially increasing

the percentage share of cutting by shears.

Special requirements are imposed on scrap processing equipment for mid-size and
sumll shops: it should have the capability not only of baling metal scrap but also
0' ru'tiug it, with the simplest possible installation mounting arrangement for
sprodiug up and simplifying installations, and should be delivered as ready as
pu<hihle for installation and startup.

3
FOR OFHCIAI. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

0f considerable interest in connection with this are 4 MN combined press-shears,
manufacture of which should begin in the llth tive-Year Plan. These units can both
bale and cut scrap metal in relation to its characteristics; they are sufficiently
powerful for processing all agricultural and domestic scrap, which opens up exten-
sive possibilities for utilization of such equipment in the numerous shops and

sections of the Vtorcherment system with a small annual volume of procured scrap,
15-25 thousand tons.

of the net equipment which in coming years will be installed in the shops and
sections of the Vtorchermet system. we might also mention 6.3 MM hydraulic combined
press-shears manufactured by the Novosibirsk Tyazhstankogidropreas Plant imeni Vital"
and hydraulic presses for processing scrap machine cast iron, manufactured by the
Odessa Press Forging Equipment Plant imeni 16th Party Congress; this same plant has
been assigned development of the first Soviet mobile baling press.

There will be expanded output of 3.15 MN hydraulic shears and alligator shears
which are already being produced by industry.

Expansion of processing of metal scrap on presses of not more than 6.3 MN and rapid
growth of cutting scrap with shears will enable the Vtorchermet system to provide
growing electric furnace steel production with high-quality charge.

A further increase in demands on quality of supplied metal scrap is compelling ex-
perts in scrap processing to look for new technological solutions alongside improve-
ment of existing processing methods (baling and cutting). Breaking lightweight
scrap in special crushers and hot baling seem to be the most promising methods.

As is indicated by foreign practices and experience in operating the Lindeman
hrcukur installed in the main shop at the Gor'kiy Vtorchermet Association, this
method produces the greatest effectiveness when it is necessary to process mixed
scrap consisting of ferrous and nonferrous metals and nonmetallic materials in
various mass ratios.

The breaking process consists essentially in processing lightweight scrap metal in
a hammer-type rotary crusher (disintegrator), with subsequent sorting and magnetic
separation of the broken naterisl. This method can reduce content of nonferrous
metals in the final product to 0.25 percent and can remove nonmetallic impurities.

The importance of this processing method is increasing in connection with steady
growth in the quantity of automobiles, household appliances, and various electrical
equipment going into scrap. Recovery of nonferrous metals from broken scrap makes
it possible to return nonferrous metal scrap to nonferrous metallurgical enter-
prises as raw material and to improve the quality of the produced steel, reducing
its contamination with harmful impurities. The latter factor is particularly im-
portant if one considers that in the last 10-15 years copper content in carbon

steels has increased on the average from 0.10-0.12 to 0.25-0.27 percent, or more
than double.

Even higher results can be achieved with low-temperature processing of scrap metal.
The so-called cryogenic method is based on a peculiarity of carbon steel -- its
toughness decreases b-lS-fold when cooled to -100-120'C, while the toughness of

6
FOR OFFICIAL USEICNVLY
FOR‘OFFKJAL.USEGJNLY

alloy steel and nonferroua metals remains practically unchanged with such cooling.
Thanks to this peculiarity. carbon steel can be broken up into smaller pieces than
alloy steel or nonferrous metals. and subsequently they can be separated with
greater precision.

Since cooled steel has lower strength than at normal tsnpsratures, it is possible to
increase the output of a conventional breaker unit by 3 to 4-fold, depending on

specific conditions, or it can be aade lighter, reducing physical size and drive
mechanism power.

Scrap produced by the cryogenic method possesses significant advantages over other
types of scrap -- it is cleaner and smaller. Its employment in electric-furnace
steelmaking makes it possible to solve the problen of continuous furnace charging,

reduces consumption of electrodes and electric power, and helps extend refractory
lining life and increase furnace output.

Cryogenic scrap can be successfully utilized to cool metal in the ladle during con-

tinuous steel casting and to increase bulk density in loading scoops and charging
boxes.

The cryogenic processing method is being intensively developed abroad.
In most cases liquid nitrogen or refrigerated air is employed as coolant.

In the USSR a method of cryogenic processing of scrap metal employing cold produced
by air turbine refrigerating units (gas-expansion nachinae of Soviet invention) has
been developed by a number of organizations jointly with the Cherepovsts Metal-
lurgical Plant.

Employment of refrigerated air in place of liquid nitrogen sakes it possible to
cut cooling costs Z-a-fold and to develop a highly-efficient scrap metal processing
arrangement.

An expcriaental connercial unit for cryogenic scrap processing is to be constructed
at the Cherepovets Metallurgical Plant.

Hot baling is a second pronising nethod of processing scrap natal. It is especially
efficient for processing chips and other types of scrap which are little suited to
cutting -- steel wire rope. high-strength wire. various tubular structures, etc.

The Konstantinovka Vtorchernet Plant is operating a facility for hot-baling dif-
ficult-to-process scrap, consisting of a two-chamber heating furnace fired by
natural gas and a 10 MN hydraulic baling press. Three years of operating ex-
perience has indicated that with hot baling one can significantly reduce the content
of nonmetallic impurities in the bale, which burn up during heating and. what is
particularly important, one can increase the density of the bales 2-2.5-fold in
conparison with that achieved with conventional cold baling.

For example, heat exchangers with the traditional gas cutting method of processing
are very labor-intensive and produce scrap of less than 0.5 t/n3 density. when

baled following heating to approximately lOOO'c, bales weigh 2.6 tons and have a
density of 3.2 t/m3.

FOI‘OFFIJAI.USEINVLY
M OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Baling wire heated to 9so’c makes it possible to produce bales weighing three tons
with a density of 3.6 t/m3; bales of steel wire rope weigh 3.5 tons with a density
of up to 5.2 t/m3. This highly efficient method of readying scrap for remelting
should be extensively adopted at metallurgical enterprises.

Hot baling of steel chips is definitely of interest; the need to find a highly
efficient method of preparing chips for remslting is dictated by the steady increase
in the volume of chips generated in the economy.

At the present time chips are utilized primarily in making steel and ferroalloys.

Small chips obtained by screening out or by breaking spiraled chips are used in
producing ferroalloys.

Pellets of chips, charge ingots (obtained by remelting alloy chips), bales with

chips added (20-25 percent of the bale by weight), and frequently simply loose chips,
in many cases oversize, are utilized in steelmaking. "hen loose chips are utilized,
loss on ignition runs as high as 25-30 percent at some plants.

VNlPlvtorchermet, jointly with the Lipetsk branch of the Stal'proyekt Institute,
has designed a combined chip processing shop.

The process provides for screening out fine chips for ferroalloy production, with
subsequent degreasing in an inclined rotary furnace. Spiral chips will be batch-
loaded into a lZ-chamber annular rotary furnace in which, after removal of
lubricant-coolant liquids at a temperature of up to 350°C, it will be heated to
650-700'C, which is sufficient for hot baling.

A 4 MN press of Czechoslovak manufacture will be used to bale chips in a heated
state. Choice of this press took into account that the bales, 600 x 600 mm in sec-
tion.are to be suitable for electric-furnace and converter steelmaking.

Calculations indicate the great economic effectiveness of hot chip baling. Construc-
tion is in progress on the first combined chip processing shop at the Kolomna
Vtorchermet Plant (Hoskovskaya Oblast).

The All-Union Scientific Research and Design Institute of Secondary Ferrous Metals
(VNlPlvtorchermet, Lipetsk) is called upon to play a leading role in development of
new types of equip-ant and fundamentally new processes of preparing scrap metal for
remelting, and efficient location of facilities for processing iron and steel

scrap and waste.

high-quality preparation of scrap metals for remelting is an important economic
task; it is a matter of honor for all specialists working on this problem, and
particularly the Vtorchermet system people, to accomplish it successfully.
COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Metallurgiya", "Stal'", 1981

3026
CSO: 1862/49

FOR OFFIChAl.lEﬂE(ﬂ'LY
mmussmv

STEELS

UDC: “9.18-1.12
ADVANCED METHODS OF PRODUCING STEEL INGOTS

Kiev PROGRESSIVNYYE SPOSOBY POLUCEENIYA SIAL'NYKB SLITKOV in Russian 1980 (signed to
press 3 Dec 80) pp 2, 225-228

[Annotation and table of contents from book "Advanced Methods of Producing Steel
ingots", edited by MS]! Acadeny of Sciences Academician V. A. Yefinov. UkSSR
Acadeny of Sciences Institute of Problems of Casting, 500 copies, 231 pages]

[Text] This volune contains naterials on investigation of nodern, advanced nethods
of producing steal ingots and billets - continuous casting on horizontal, curved-
guidance and radial continuous casting machines, hatch electroslag casting. as well
as employ-eat of out-of-furnsce steel refining and degassing units.

Articles discuss investigation of the nature of formation of external and internal
defects in ingots and billets, selection of optimal casting conditions, directed

toward increasing equipnent productivity and imroving quality of the netal.

Articles extensively exanine experinental data on physicochenicel effect on liquid
metal in the process of casting and crystallization. and the design features of
equipment employed for these purposes.

This volume is intended for scientists, engineers and technicians working with prob-
lem of improving the equipnent and teclmology of netellurgical and machine
building production.

Table of Contents Page

Hayorov. A. 1.; Tselikov, A. 1.; and Rotenberg, A. M. Continuous Steel
Casting Machines and Casting-Rolling Equip-ant - Contemporary State
and Basic Problems ................................................. 3

Dyudkin, D. A.; Baykov, V. 8.; Zorenluo. N. A.; and Taub, L. A. Crystal-
lization and Inhonogeneity of s Continuous-Cast Billet ............. 7

Hirsalinov, V. H.; Yenel'yanov, V. A.; Dosbdikov, V. 1.; and Bityutsksya,

c. 3. Selection of Continuous-Cast Ingot Cooling Conditions fron the
Standpoint of Mechanics of. Failure . 110

”WWW?
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Shiftin. I. M.; Tselikov, A. A.; 6ankin, V. 3.; Malinin, M. M.; Danilov,
V. L.; and Abra-0v. 0. V. 0n the Nature of Formation of Internal Cracks
During Deformation of a Continuous-Cast Ingot in a Two-Phase State ...

Kochegura, N. M.; Kazachkov, S. P.; Parkhomenko, V. V.; Mostovskiy, D. M.;
Markovskiy, Ye. A.; and Pilipchuk, V. R. Radioisotope Method of
Monitoring the Process of Crystallization of a Continuous-Cast Ingot

Pronskikh, S. M.; Pavlov, Yu. M.; Deldovskiy, V. A.; Mager, Ye.; and
Urazgil'deyev. A. Kh. Metallurgical Aspects of a New Method of
Monitoring Crystallization of Metal Melts ............................

Zhuk, V. L.; Akulov, V. V.; Bornatskiy, I. I.; Osipov, V. 6.; Kisun'ko,
v. 2.; and Mikhnevich. V. F. Investigation of the Physicocheaical
Properties of Carbon and Lou-Alloy Steels Cast On a Continuous Casting

Hachin? esaosesssssseeseeseesoeassseasssseesssssosesooeasoossosassess.

Vasii'yev, B. K. and Materikin, Yu. V. hydrodynamics of Casting Steel
Through Irmnrsed Dountubes into ContinuOus Steel-Casting Unit Molds ..

Khrykin, I. M.; Kan, Yu. Ye.; Shunilin, D. M.; and Akimova. Ye. I. Blow-
ing Inert 6as Through Metal in an Ingot Mold .........................

Onopchenko, V. M.; ‘I‘aub. L. A.; Dyudkin, D. A.; Kovalenko, V. S.;
Kondratyuk, A. M.; Kurapin, B. 8.; Peregudova. A. M.; and Murav'yev,
V. N. Nonnetallic Inclusions in a Continuous-Cast Billet with In-
troduction of Additional Centers of Crystallization ..................

Menadzliyev, I. Ya.; Dutakov. D. K.; Shnidt. P. 6.; Onishchuk, L. K.;
Serdyuk, V. 6.; and Dronevitskaya, N. A. Features of Formation of the
Outer Shell of a Continuous-Cast Billet During Circulation of Liquid
"etal 1“ a Continuous-caﬂtins unit Mold ssseessssssseesssoOasoossessse

Belyakova, L. 1.; Manokhin, A. 1.; Volkov, I. 6.; Ivashina. Ye. M.;
Gordiyenko, M. 3.; and Shcherbakova, V. M. Quality of Continuous-Cast
Rail Steel Billets with Various Out-of-Purnace Treatment Methods .....

Mayorov, A. 1.; Tselikov, A. A.; Cankin, V. 3.; Dutorov, A. V.; Siaonov,
V. 3.; Mechayev, L. S. and Belousov, V. A. Continuous Casting and
R01 ing Slabs Hith Hide Concave Edges ................................

Korniyrnko, A. S.; Rykhov, Yu. M.; Korotkov, B. A.; Kuzhel'nyy, A. 6.;
Nikolayev. 6. A.; Leushin, N. V.; Dybrina, I. M.; and Kiselev, V. V.
Relationship Between Slab Axial Crack Daaage, Structural Design and
Process Parameters on Curved-Guidance Steel Continuous-Casting Machines

Panchcnko. I. 6.; Sladkoshteyev. V. D.; Pozhivalov. A. M.; Urazayev, R. A.;
and Yelizarov, P. L. Investigation of the Effect of Elevated Casting
Rates on Quality of Metal Obtained on Curved-Guidance Continuous Cast-

lns Machine. asses-000000.000...seessoot-seesosssaessesessoassesses...

l‘)lloiil(JAJ.lﬂﬂi(ﬂVLY

17

23

26

29

33

37

43

66

51

55

58

63
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Latash, Yu. V.; Voronin, A. Ye.; Biktagirov. F. K.; Akinenko, A. D.;
Skvortsov, A. A.; Gus'kov, A. I.; and Sidorov, S. P. Features of Move-
nent of a Metal Melt in Conditions of Batch Electroslag Ingot Casting 67

Grigor'yev. D. K.; Girskiy. V. Ye.; and Sakhnov, V. I. Investigation of
Thermal Bork of an Ingot Mold Hith Evaporative External Cooling ...... 74

Crigor'yev, D. K., and Akinenko, A. D. The Problen of Controlling Metal
Level in 3 Continuous Casting Machine Mold ... ....................... 77

Dobrovol'skiy, V. D.; Mikhnova, B. A.; Potanin, R. V.; and Raahakashvili,
G. V. Influence of the Process of Steelnaking and Casting on a Radial
Continuous Casting Machine on Quality of the Axial Zone of Tube Billeta 80

Latnsh, Yu. V.; Voronin, A. Ye.; Biktagirov, P. 1.; and Krutikov, R. 6.
Specific Features of Forming of Large Batch Electroalag Casting Ingots 86

Kiseleva. S. A.; Monich. 0. D.; Pavperova, I. A.; Manokhina, M. M.;
Ryahkova, L. A.; and Malkina, S. M. Specific features of the Structure
of Continuous-Cast Billets of Sth-lS Steel .......................... 90

Lyudkovskiy, V. M.; Kondratyuk, A. M.; Lyashenko, G. V.; Pilyuahenko, V. L4
Krikunov, B. P.; Kurasov, A. N.; and Osipov, V. 6. Features of the
Macro- and Microstructure of Continuous-Cast Bearing Steel ........... 96

Slndkoshteyev. V. T.; Shatagin, 0. A.; Zubarev, A. 6.; Manokhin, A. I.;
Simonov, V. P.; Litvinova, V. 1.; Besedina, E. D.; Kuchninskiy, Yu. M.;
Nechayev, L. 8.; and Belouaov, V. A. Influence of Process Parameters
of Horizontal Continuous Casting on Quality of Billets ............... 97

Shatagin, 0. A.; Kozachenko, S. M.; Kuchninskiy. Yu. M.; Litvinova, V. I.;
Bogdanov, A. I.; Zubarev, A. 6.; Ivashina, Ye. N.; and Pikus. M. I.
Horizontal Continuous Steel Casting Into Billets ..................... 102

Akinenko. A. D.; Skvortsov, A. A.; and Kalinin, S. A. Ingot Mold Opera-
tion at Slow Coolant Hater Rates ..................................... 105

Marchenko, I. K. Inproving Quality of Metal by Electroslag Meeting of
the Ingot Head 000.00....0.0.'00....0OII.0.0...OOOOOIOOOIOOOOOOOOIOOOI 107

Shmidt. P. 6.; Konovalov, G. F.; Menadzhiyev, T. Va. and Oniahchuk. L. K.
Devices for Mechanical Movement of Molten Steel in a Continuous Casting
Machine Mold .....................1................................... 110

Anikeyev, V. V.; Bobkova. 0. 8.; Khasin. G. A.; Leytes. A. V.; Skornyakov.
8. Ya.; and Khlystov. M. F. For-ation of Slags from Meat-Insulating
Mixtures in Casting Complex-Alloy Steels on a Continuous Casting Machine 114

Udovik, 0. A.; Yakovkin, V. M.; Voytenko, A. F.; and Yakobshe, R. Ya. Ex-
perimental Investigation of the Elasticity Characteristics of Lou- and
Medium-Carbon Steel in the Temperature Range 20-1600°C ............... 121

9

FOI.OFFNJA1.USE(NVLY
IN)! OFFICIAl.lﬂHE(JNLV

Yefinov, C. V. Promising New Rest-Resistant and High-Density Fireclay
Materials for Utilization in Casting Units ..........................

Kenna. S. K.; Petrikov, P. 3.; Kondrstyuk, Yu. M.; Kulikov, I. V.;
Skrebtsov, A. M.; Orobtsev, Yu. V.; and Muratov, 6. A. Estimate of
Heat Losses Through Killed Steel Blooming-Mill Ingot Feeder Head Metal
Surface Under Various Hot Top Compounds .............................

Bratchikov. S. 6.; Frolov, M. V.; Konovalov, 6. P.: and Distergeft, I. M.
Theruophysical Properties of Slags Employed for Continuous Steel Cast-
ing and Their Influence on Heat Transfer During Metal Solidification

Makurov, S. L.; Fedorov, V. A.; Zhitnik, 6. 6.; Kazachkov, Ye. A.
Theraophysical Properties of Meat-Insulating Compounds for Bottom-
Casting Steel, Containing Minerals of the Silltnanite Group .........

Ageyeva, N. A.; Kissil', N. Ye.; Topilin, V. V.; Laktionov, V. 8.; Cubin.
V. M.; and Zhuravlev. V. Ye. Reducing Heat Losses in Small-Capacity

Ladles ..............................................................

Uziyenko, B. A.; Osipov, V. P.; Shcheglov, V. M.; Conchar, B. 8.; and
Prokopenko, L. 1. Investigation of Processes of High-Speed Steel Cast-
ing From Tilting Ladles .............................................

Skok. Yu. Ya.; Volkov. V. A.; Uunov, A. A.; Chumachenko, V. A.; and
Pykhtar', L. K. Increasing the Reserve Toughness Factor of Steel by
Modification With Yttrium-Containing Alloys .........................

Skok, Ya. Ya.; Ignat'yev, V. I.; Klyucharev, V. Ye.; Sobolev, Yu. V.;
Kozlova. Z. L.; Litvak, V. A.; Iodkovskiy, S. A.; and Durynin, V. A.
Properties of Steel Refined and Inoculated on an Out-of-Furnsce Treat-

ment Unit ...........................................................

Udovik, 0. A.; Yakobshe, R. Ya.; and Yefinov, V. A. Poisson Ratio of
Steel at Crystallization Temperatures ...............................

Kulikov, I. V.; 6rinberg, S. Ye.; Yevtushenko, V. 3.; Filonenko. V. A.;
Nosochenko, 0. V.; Pavlov, V. V.; sharov, B. A.; Vistorovskiy, N. T.;
Borodin, V. I.; Lepskiy, M. F.; and Yevdokimov, A. V. Casting Rail
Stccl Through Downtubes With Shaped Channel Section .................

Konovalov, V. S.; Baptiznanskiy, V. I.; Korinovskiy, Yu. 6.; Lavrenko.
S. I.; Kirsanov. V. M.; and Kushnir, Yu. B. Investigation of Enploy-
nent of Low Heat-ConductiVity Hot Top Inserts for a Killed-Steel Ingot

Khasin. 6. A.; Mikhaylov, V. 3.; Baum, B. A.; Puchkov, L. M.; Tyagumov,
6. V.; Yemanovich, N. A.; Laptev, S. .L.; and Krylov, S. M. Conercial
Steelnaking and Production of Alloys in Preselected Heat-Time Condi-

tions ...............................................................

10
INJI1DFF1CJAI.thEI(MVLY

128

130

133

137

160

163

168

153

158

162

164

168
Smirnov, Yu. 0.; Filimonov, S. 6.; Pavlov. V. 6.; Krashchenko. L. S.; and
chov, V. G. InfluenCe of Silicoalloy and Silicocalcium Addition Agents
on Inhomogeneity of Ingots and Mechanical Properties of Rolled Stock 173

Sokolov. V. Ye.; Stupak, V. D.; Mikul'chik, A. V.; and Grin', V. Ye. In-
vestigation of Forging Ingots Cast with Argon Blow-Through ........... 176

Orlov. L. P.; Permitin, V. Ye.; Senopal'nikov, V. M.; Trukhin, M. IL;
Klyucharev, V. Ye.; Liskin, A. 0.; Lubenets, G. A. Increasing the
Physicochenical Homogeneity of Steel Ingots by the Method of Electro-
magnetic Mixing of the Melt in the Ingot Molds 180

Yermakov. V. P. ; Serbin, A. P. ; and Romanov, A. A. Behavior of Nonmetallic
Inclusions in Carbon Steel During Heating ............................ 182

Andreyev. A. K.; Urazgil'deyev, A. Kh.; Gorskiy, A. V.; and Bukovnev, V. V.
lnterrelationship of the Nature and Character of Distribution of Non-
metallic Inclusions in a Rotor Blank with the Process of Forming Them
During Crystallization of Steel ... 186

Rnspopova. G. A.; Tyagunov, A. V.; Baum, B. A.; Khashx, G. A.; Mikhaylov.
V. 8.; and Krylov, S. M. Controlling the Eutectic Structure of 10112
Ledeburite Steel by Temperatue Influence on the Melt 187

Pronskikh, S. N.; Rakevich, S. 2.; Tat'yanshchikov, A. 6.; Mager, A. Ye.
and Sosipatrov, V. '1‘. Formation of the Surface Layer of a Rimed
Steel and Chemically Sealed Ingot ....... 192

Sapka, V. N.; Shepelev, V. V.; Diyuk, Ye. 17.; Pashchenko. N. K.;
chorskiy. S. V.; Chernyavskiy, I. P.; Levin, D. Yu.; and Todurova,
S. 1. Investigation and Development of a Process of High-Speed Csst-
ing of Low-Carbon aimed Steel Through a 120 u Diameter Downtube . 193

Shneyerov, Ya. A.; Konovalov, R. P.; Polyakov, V. 17.; and Bykov, G. D.
Development of Effective Exothermal CompOunds for Ingot Hot Top 197

Mamishev, V. A.; Yefinov, V. A.; Osipov, V. P.; and Sokolovskaya, L. A.
On Space-Time Evolution of Ingot ﬁlo-Phase Zone 202

()ubar' . V. 17.; Nikolayev. A. N.; Kovalev. G. M.; Gracheva, V. 8.; and
Shapovalova, Z. 5. Investigation of Processes of Heat Transfer from
mlten steel to Ladle Lining essences-ass.sasooosoaeosssoassoscosoeeo 205
COPYRlCﬂT: Institut problem lit'ya All 5583, 1980

3021.
C50: 1862/ 78 END

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY