FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10363

3 March 1982

East Europe Report

ECONOMIC AND INDUSTRIAL AFFAIRS
(FOUO 2/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[) are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as apprOpriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.5. Government.

COPYRIGiT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/lI

3 March 1

EAST EUROPE REPORT
ECONOMIC AND INDUSTRIAL AFFAIRS

(FOUO 2/82)

Cameras

BUDGARIA
Land Utilization as Resource for Further Development of Bulgarian

Agriculture
(0. Koynov; DOICLADY VASKhNIL, Oct 81) .

CZECHOSLOVAKIA

New 2.6 Million-Ton St-eel Mill To Operate by End of 1983
(Valter Bonn, Antonin Pindor; Tscmucxr TYDENNIK, 8 Dec 81) ..

New Chemical Separator To Increase Efficiency
(Jaroslav Prochezke; TECHNICKY TY'DEHIIK, 8 Dec 81) .

-a- [III-EE-“Ft
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

BUIGﬂRIA

um UTILIZATION as assouscc ms warms [merchant or suwaxuu AGRICULTURE
Hoacow Datum: vasxhun. in Russian No 10, Oct 81 pp 15-17

(Article by G. Koynov, professor and doctor at Plovdiv Higher Agricultural Institute
imeni V. Kolarov, People's Republic of Bulgaria: "Rational Use of Land -- An
Important Reserve for Increasing the Production of Agricultural Products," (article
presented by corresponding member of VASKhNIL N.P. Panov)]

[Text] Tests which we carried out during the 1976-1979 period, with
regard to studying the influence of post-harvest crops on the growth,
development and grain yields obtained from the principal crops sown
following them, have shown that post-harvest crops furnish good yields.
Moreover, an increase takes place in the grain yields from crops sown
following them as a result of a reduction in the weediness of the

soil and enrichment of the soil with nitrogen, owing to improved
microorganism activity, a reduction in the content of inhibiting
substances and also to an improvement in the phytosanitary condition
of the soil.

In Bulgaria there are approximately 0.5 hectares of cultivated land per capita.
This is precisely what has forced many scientists and practical workers into
searching for the means for obtaining two or three agricultural crop harvests
annually or every one and a half years. With irrigation, the climatic conditions
of Bulgaria make it possible to obtain two or three yields by cultivating post-
harvest crops following barley and wheat harvests.

In the plains regions the first frosts occur during the period from 15 to 20
October. For all practical purposes, there are 90-100 frost-free days from 20
July, following the harvest, to the first frosts. Prior to the average daily
temperature dropping to lower than 10° Centigrade in the autumn, the total amount
of positive temperatures ranges from 1800 to 2000° Centigrade. Under these
conditions, following a barley harvest and in some regions following wheat, it is
possible to grow early ripening hybrids of corn. soybeans and sunflowers. millet
and beans for both fodder and silage as well as for grain. This has been proven in
actual practice on the basis of many experiments carried out at scientific
institutes and on many farms. But no studies were carried out on the influence
generated by post-harvest crops on the development and yields obtained from crops
cultivated following them [1-5]. In this regard, we conducted a study during the
1976-1979 period, in various climatic zones throughout the country, on the effects

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ll'nODaC (average 201‘ [SID-19l5):

corn for grain
corn for silage

“00°
0 a o e
50¢“
M H

—--o n

eoao

Q0640

46.2
507.8
363.7
402.8

corn plus soybeans
peas plus sunflowers

_of post-harvest crops on the development,

yields and quality of wheat. barley and
corn cultivated following them. The post-
harvest crops were sown immediately
following a barley harvest (20-30 June).
Three waterings were carried out: one
prior to the appearance of the seedlings
Guatering norm of 200-250 cubic meters per
hectare) and two -- following their
appearance (15-20 July and 1-10 August
ﬁnkering norm of 600 cubic meters per
hectare). It is apparent from the table
that post-harvest crops furnish good yields
of fodder and grain and that they do not
lower the yields obtained from the
principal crops sown following them. To
the contrary, these yields are increased
mainly owing to a reduction in the
weedinesa of the soil (see Table 2). The
number of weeds in crops sown following
post-harvest soybeans is 3-7 times less
and their bulk is 2-3 times lower than the
vtrient in which soybeans were not
cultivated.

The yields of crops sown following

soybeans also increased owing to enrichment
of the soil with nitrogen, as a result of
the activity of nodule bacteria which
develop on the soybean plant roots, an
increase and improvement in the microflora
of the soil and an intensification in its
activity. It is apparent from Table 3 that
following soybeans and throughout the
entire growing season for the wheat and
barley, the soil is richer in nitrogen and
microorganisms. which serve to improve the
nitrogen nourishment regime for the plants.
In the process. a decrease takes place in
the number of microorganisms consuming
nitrogen.

An increase in the cropping power also
came about owing to an improvement in the
phytosanitary condition of the soil and
in the crops cultivated following
soybeans.(see Table 4).

The studies revealed that the postvharvest
cultivation of soybeans lowers the content
in the soil of the inhibiting substances
FOR 0F?ICIAL USE ONLY

TABII 2

Weedineas of Crops Sown Following Post-harvest Soybeans (average for 1978-1979)

    
 
     

 
 
 

Number of Heads

0“. (Units.per m2)
of
Count
Without Following
So beans ' beans
18
42

 

 
 

(Grams per m :

without
80 beans
21
58

Crop

   
  

Following
Soybeans

   

30 March 121 13

"h“c ( 20 May 21
1 30 March 119 1.3 26 15
3" °y ( 20 May 30 s 67 21
20 u. 1 2 1 a 12

°°"‘ ( 20 JuKe is 2 25 18

Note. Following the 30 March count, the sowings of wheat and barley were

sprayed with the herbicide 2.4-0 and following the 20 Hay count --
t n owi

 

IA!!! 3

Nitrogen and Microorganism Content in Soil (average for 1978-1979)

       

   
  

Indicator and Phase for Computation

Without
Soybeans
Following
Soybeans
Ni thout
Soybeans
Following
Soybeans

   

Ammonium and nitrate nitrogen 0mg/ 100 g of soil):

Tillering 41.3 48.3 40.6 45.3

Shooting 17.2 29.4 12.6 23.7

Ripening 21.9 24.5 22.1 16.2
Hydrolyzed nitrogen 0mg/100 g of soil):

Prior to sowing 42 58 35 56

Shooting 66 64 65 69

Ripaning 33 35 28 38
Ammonium fixing bacteria (thousands per gram of soil):

Shooting 3706 3491 3768 3312

Reading 1211 1787 1917 3958

Ripening 3338 2753 1544 3074

Bacteria which increase on mineral nitrogen Guillions
of grams of soil):

Shooting 29.6 14.6 24.0 20.3

Reading 10.3 5.2 7.2 5.2

Ripening 7.3 8.8 4.5 9.1
Microorganisms which decompose cellulose (thousands

of grams of soil):

Shooting 1.5 1.5 1.1 1.2

Heading 1.5 3.4 1.1 2.2
. Rigening 0.8 1.2 1.3 1.5

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
TABIB é
Damage Caused By Bacteriosis and Root Rot (average for 1978-1979)

Without Following Without
Soybeans Soybeans Soybeans

    
     

  

Following

 

Soybeans
Pusarial wilt of ears (Z of damaged ears) 1.0 0.7 - -
Root rot (I of damaged plants) 15.1 6.3 16.8 6.5
loose smut (Z of damaged ears) 0.65 0.40 2.85 2.20
TABLB 5

Effect of a Soil Extract on the Germinative Capacity of Seed and Growth
in Young Roots (average for 1978-1979)

Tillering

Pollowing without

   

   
  

thract Taking Phase

 

   
    
      
    
   

  

following Without Following

   
 

  
  

Indicator Post- post-
Harvest Harvest
Soybeans Soybeans Soybeans Soybeans Soybeans

  
 
 

Wheat
Cerminative capacity 91 96 91 97 90 96
of seed (1)
Length of roots Gun) 66 58 50 6O 57 61
Barley
Germinative capacity 92 97 92 96 91 97
of seed (1)
Length of roots 0m») 49 59 ' 51 58 56 61

M

released by the barley roots. These substances decrease the germinative capacity
of the wheat and barley seed and retard the initial growth of the little roots of
young plants. We obtained this data during the germination of wheat and barley seed
on filter paper that had been moistened with a water extract taken from soil on
which soybeans were grown and taken from conventional soil (see Table 5).

Based upon our studies and also upon data furnished by other authors, a state
program was developed for intensifying the use of land during the 1980-1985 period.
By 1985, 65.5 percent of the irrigated wheat tracts and 100 percent of the

irrigated barley tracts will be occupied by post-harvest crops for silage and
grain.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

1. Ceorgiyev, D. RASTBNIYEVODNI NAUKI [Field Crop Husbandry Science], 1973, No. 8.

h
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500040009-3

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

7. Georglyev. D. RASTBNIYEVODNI NAUKI, 1973, No. 10.

3. Yerusalimov, P. RAS‘I'ENIYEVODNI NAUKI, 1976, No. 8.
' lo. Yerusalimov, P. RAS'IENIYBVODNI NAUKI, 1976, No. 10.

5. Konstanttnov, K. RASTBNIYEVODNI NAUKI, 1978, No. 8.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Robs", "Doklady VASKhNIL", 1981

7026
C80: 182(0/083

5

FOR nwrrr‘ul new nmv

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02109: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500040009-3
FOR 0F?ICIAL USE ONLY

CZECHOSLOVAKIA

NEH 2.6 MILLION-TON STEEL MILL TO OPERATE BY END OF 1983
Prague TECHNICKY TYDENNIK in Czech 8 Dec 81 p 6

[Article by Eng Valter Bohm and Eng Antonin Pindor: "Construction of Oxygen
Converter Steel Hill at Trinec; An Important Step in the Modernization of
Czechoslovak Metallurgy"]

[Text] In the interest of technical progress in steel production and especially
in the interest of making it more efficient, construction of an oxygen converter
steel mill is taking place at the Trinec Ironworks of the Great October Socialist
Revolution. It will have a capacity of 2.6 million tons per year of steel, and
make it possible to terminate production at the obsolescent open-hearth mill II.
and to reduce the production of mill III, as well as modifying mill III to operate
on the basis of cold charges.

All of the pig iron from the three blast furnaces at Trinec, about 2.1 million
tons per year, is processed in converters. The target for steel production,
including the output of mill III and of the electric steel mill, will be 3.5
million tons. '

This construction project will make it possible to reduce substantially the number
of existing economic production units and to terminate what is an environmentally
almost unsustainable operation, to reduce the work force by 1.034 employees, to
reduce oil consumption by 162,000 tons annually, to reduce steel-making preweight
of 1,158 kilograms per ton by about 114 kilograms per ton (which represents a
savings of 115,000 tons of metal per year). In addition, the consumption of
firing materials will decline 20,000 tons per year and air quality will improve.
It is well known that steel mill II currently operates at a level of consumption
of 32 standard cubic meters of oxygen per ton. and burns oil with a 1 percent
sulphur content, unfavorably affecting the environment in the vicinity of Trinec
with emissions of brown smoke and sulphur dioxide. Labor productivity, extended
over the entire steel production process at the Trinec Ironworks, will increase
almost 41 percent. There will be improvements in the conditions for the production
of quality steels, especially in terms of their purity. The construction of an
oxygen converter steel works will lead to an increase in profits of more than half
a billion korunas annually for the enterprise.

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Time Schedule

The new oxygen converter steel mill is located in the area of the no longer
functioning building of the coking plant, the old blast furnaces. steel mill 1 and
the fire brick factory next to the tracks and station of the Czechoslovak State
Railroads. Construction will take place in three stages, the first concerned with
the oxygen plant, the second and third stages with the mill itself, including

the essential auxiliary operations. the engineering infrastructure, and the
remaining equipment. The initial draft of stage II was completed in June 1979. and
the initial draft of stage III in June 1980. The second stage of construction.
which is now in full swing, began in March 1980. At present, the number of
temporary buildings has increased. and almost the entire building site has been
cleared. Work is progressing on the engineering infrastructure and on the
construction of the water management system, and the first pillars of the steel
framework for the mill itself have already begun to be set in place.

According to a government decree. the new steel mill is to become operational

in December 1983, and construction is is be completed in December 1984, while the
planned production of the mill is to be achieved in 1986. The expected
construction time, according to the project target and the original design, was
eStablished at 58 months. The largest imports from socialist countries are the
converters, transporting cars, guniting equipment. the equipment for the
introduction of the oxygen lances, for the electromagnetic coagulation of sediment,
and other equipment. The largest imports from the capitalist countries are the
gas scrubbing apparatus. the automatic control system (ASR), the reduction and
venting stations. and several smaller operational systems and equipment items.

Operation of Oxygen Converters

Two converters with a capacity of 160 to 180 tons each will be involved in steel
produccion. The lance for the converter process will be suspended on a special
lowering device of Soviet manufacture. One lance will be in operation. and a
second lance at full readiness will be in close proximity.

The 180-ton mass of heat is in accordance with the capacity of the chambers of
soaking pits. The positioning of the converter bearings on steel stands and
concrete footings is being solved so as to make it possible for new stands for
converters with a capacity of 200 to 220 tons to be placed on the same footing.
The flow capacity of the oxygen lance, and the reductiOn and venting stations
are also being designed for these larger converters. In an attempt to maintain
maximal environmental quality. the converters are enclosed by special jacketing
which directs product emissions into a gas-scrubbing plant.

Here are some of the parameters of a converter: specific volume, 145 cubic
memters; heat mass. 160 to 180 tons; average heat period. 31 minutes; blasting
period. 12-14 minutes; maximum blasting intensity, 850 standard cubic meters of
oxygen per minute; oxgyen pressure in the lance. 1.5 megapascals; average
height of steel level. 1,420 millimeters.

One converter will function during normal operation, but when necessary. the
steel mill may operate two converters, although oxygen may not be blown into
both converters simultaneously.

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Production Program and Production Technology

The production program and overall production is established on the basis of the
prospective requirements of rolling mills, and in accordance with the traditional
ongoing programs of the enterprise. nationwide balances, and the needs of the
national economy. In addition to low-grade steels, rimming steels and quenched
steel. the ironworks will produce annually about 200,000 tons of vacuum-degassed
rails, 300,000 tons of steel for patented wire, 35,000 tons of high-quality carbon
steel for reinforcing wire, as well as high-quality carburized steel for
electrodes, and high-quality alloy steel for construction purposes, wires, springs,
and tool steel.

It is evident from this that the production program includes a mix of steels with
carbon content up to 0.8 percent. In addition to a static model, a dynamic model
is also being built to control problems of carbon and of temperature. with the
assistance of special submersible probes--sublances--introduced into the bath,

the bath temperature and its carbon content may be determined during the blasting
of oxygen. The entire cycle takes from 90 to 120 seconds, counted from the moment
of lowering of the sublance. Data gathered with the aid of this probe will
indicate deviations of the actual conditions within the convertere from values
calculated with the aid of the static control model, and will assure the appropriate
corrections, particularly in the amount of blown—in oxygen. It is assumed that
there will be a minimal number of heats with unsufficient blasting, and that a
minimal amsunt of carburizing will occur in the pouring ladle.

The use of the dynamic model will improve operational performance and quality
thanks to a reduction in the percentage of underblasted and overblasted heats.

The prime contractor for the automatic control system is the Swedish firm Asea,
the subcontractor for software is the Swedish firm Datema in conjunction with
experts from the Trinec Ironworks. The subcontractor for the sublance equipment,
including the static and dynamic models. is the Dutch firm Estel. Production of
the sensory elements for the auxiliary probe will be taken care of in
Czechoslovakia.

The other systems and facilities are also interesting. For instance, oxygen for
the converting process will be provided by an expanded oxygen plant, where the
production at three dividing-head machines amounts to 30,000 standard cubic meters

per hour, with 99.5 percent purity.

The installed capacity of the turbocompressor is 3.43 megapascals. The oxygen is
stored in lO lOO-cuhic meter tanks at an absolute pressure in the range of 2.2

to 3.43 megapascals. At the valve stations, the oxygen pressure is reduced in such
a way that prior to entering the lance it has reached 1.5 megapaacals. Two
wet-gas scrubbers are from the French firm Clesid. The fan has a capacity of
400,000 standard cubic meters of gas per hour. The entire system guarantees a
residual particulate content of less than 100 milligrams per standard cubic meter
upon emission. The gas scrubber is controlled by three 05-8 microprocessors

from the Asea firm, which communicate with the main computer, a Model PDP 11/36.

Scrap iron is loaded into SO-cubic meter runners at existing scrap stockpiles,
the runners outfitted with pressductor railway weights by the Asea firm. Movement

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFTCIAL USE ONLY

Construction of WE Extractor

:
i
5,
5
I
I
v
5
i
5
I
I
I
u
5
5
5
v
I

k“““‘\\\“"‘

 

Kunslrukt! enrakloru ”6 so madman: pahvbom paler 10 Mount! onmlna
W0 apardly menuho prdmOru. U mlkokapocunlch chnouk so «men "-
mmor s proupohyoom pater. Soustuua pom n roxdllonn no A»! skuplny -
I. 2, mm :0 pa 093cc suldmmeam mu pom drawn; 1 pﬂpcunhm
k mum — J a palm skupmy 2 1: (Mia - 4, hm! [sou wanna 3 duo-
}uym ore-mum udmnclm puma skuplndm pour harmonic” pohyh pow-
nmy no [on 0 1w. Tim so vyrounduall my a ﬂaky pasoblcl u mﬂunl a my-
sun so stablma wlkych kolon. Prollpohyb pom pmnwo MIMI-m nyssl
"union! dunno”.

The design of a VPE extractor with parallel plate movement is appropriate

especially for smaller diameter apparatus. For high capacity units. an extractor
in which plates move in opposing directions has proven most efficient. The plate
system is divided into 2 groups (1:2) which alternate within the calm. At the

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

same time, the plates of group 1 are fastened to a rod (3), and the plates of
group 2 to a rod (4) which are connected to a dual eccentric which imparts to both
plate groups harmonic motion. 180 degrees out of phase. In this way the forces
and pressures acting within the equipment are balanced, and the stability of large
columns is increased. The opposing movement of plates favorably influences higher
ext rac tive eff iciency .

Diagram of a Column with Parallel Plate Movement

  

I._ am fdu .
konlinuolnf

     

KEY:
a) heavy phase-continuous b) light phase-dispersed

The body of the column is composed of a cylindrical jacket of the column itself (1)
and upper and lower sedimentation tanks (2 and 3). Inside the jacket is located

a set of perforated plates (6) fixed to a rod (5) which is joined to the

eccentric of a vibration drive (6). This imparts harmonic vibrating movement in
the vertical direction to the set of plates. The amplitude and frequency of

the vibrations are adjustable. Normally the amplitude fluctuates within a range

of a few millimeters and the frequency within the range of 1-6 hertz. Lighter and
heavier liquid phases move inside the column in a countercurrent manner under the

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

influence of gravity. The lighter phase is introduced into the lower sedimentation
tank (3) and exits through the overflow opening (7) in the upper sedimentation
tank. In this way the upper surface of the liquid contents of the column is
maintained. The heavier phase is introduced into the upper sedimentation tank (2).

the phasal interface. The phasal interface is found either in the upper or in the
lower sedimentation tank. according to whether the lighter or the heavier phase

is to be dispersed into droplets. The figure shows an instance when the lighter
phase is to be dispersed, and the interface (8) therefore is located in the upper
sedimentation tank (2). The lighter phase droplets formed by the distributor in
the lower sedimentation tank. and formed further during their passage through the
openings of the vibrating plates, agglomerate at the phasal interface to form a
unified film. which then exists through the overflow opening (7). The construction

and output.

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of pig iron from the three blast furnaces to the ironworks is carried out by
mobile mixers with a cylindrical cross section and removeable face segments,

which makes it possible to remove old refractory lining by machine, to imprOVe
working conditions for bricklayers, and shorten the time required to renovate the
refractory lining. The capacity of the newly relined mixers is 320 tons, which
corresponds to the weight of the great majority of blast furnace tappings. There
will be 10 mixers, the construction and production of which will be handled at
Vitkovice. The repouring of the pig iron into l80-ton pouring ladles will be
conducted in a special area. All repouring locations have dust separator apparatus
of Trinec design.

Equipment for the vacuum degassing of steel by the DH method is situated on the
right side of the converter hall. Vitkovice is the contractor. The equipment is
designed to handle a maximum heat weight of 200 tons, and has a capacity of 500,000
tons per year. Mainly rail and steel and certain specialized steels will be
processed on the DH equipment.

Another component of the system is equipment for the washing of melts, casting
houses, stripping halls, and a preparation plant for molded bottom plates with
inert gases, and the injection of insulation inserts into molds, etc.

Fifty percent of the production will be poured into molds from below. In the two
casting houses there are four casting platforms. The casting set is approached
from two sides, and in each casting house there are two pouring cranes with a
capacity of 300 tons each for loading and pouring from foundry ladles. Handling of
ingots is taken care of by semiportal gantry cranes which travel above the casting
surface, while bracket cranes are available for other auxiliary tasks. All the
foundry ladles are outfitted with sliding closures.

Automatic Control System

This extensive and complicated process will be controlled by an integrated control
system. The ASK is divided into three levels, which are mutually interrelated.
but which may also function separately.

The lowest level of control (the so-called basic control system - BCS) controls
the basic technological aggregations and loops, as well as certain technical
operations. In addition to communicating with operators and with other systems
(LDS and PCS), it manages the weighing of scrap. pig iron, the container weights
of converter and ladle additives, crane weights, the control system for the
positions of the oxygen lances and sublances. It weighs with weights outfitted
with magneto-elastic scanners (manufactured by Pressductor) and with DS-8 micro-
computer systems supplied by the Swedish Asea firm.

A Superior, computerized level of control is linked with this basic level of
control--an automatic control system for technical processes (ASR TP), and an

ASR for production processes (ASR VP). These two levels of control are implemented
by means of a model PDP 11/34 computer of American manufacture.

The basic task of the ASR T? (the LD system) is the control of the course of a
melt, according to the static and dynamic models. It also takes care of

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

additional aetivities such as the planning of heats, the monitoring of scrap
preparation by registering the circulation and condition of runners, including
the potential for specifying for the operator the requirements for corrections,
the assurance of pig iron preparation for a given heat. the calculations in the
event of underblasting. the control of alloying. It also monitors the condition
of the equipment of the oxygen converter steel mill, and reports concerning the
progress of heats and the processing of information from various sensors, with
the objective of monitoring the process and its necessary changes. The L0
system gathers and provides statistical data for production statistics, transmits
them to the PC system, and handles troubleshooting in the event of system
disruption.

The task of the ASR VP (the PC system) is the short-term planning of production
(for 26-68 hours), the control and monitoring of production (argonizing. vacuum
degassing, casting halls, the pouring of ingots and the preparation of ladles).

It includes the ability to depict the results of the chemical analysis of steel
samples. and services for the clearing center. One of its important functions is
to communicate with the enterprise's IBM 370/148 system. This communication may
take place with a maximum speed of 2,400 Bauds. with the PC system transmitting
data concerning planned and actual production, and data concerning heat procedures.
The IBM system will transmit data concerning the production plan, and reports
concerning the movement of freight cars carrying raw materials.

A Continuous Casting Factory

At a later date, this oxygen converter steel mill will likewise be outfitted as
a factory for the continuous casting of steel. Even though this project is not
directly integrated into the current stages of construction, we expect that it
will be initiated immediately after the startup of converter operation. because
of its extraordinarily high economic contribution stemming mainly from savings
of metal and energy. A total of 730,000 tons of grade 10, 11, and 12 steel
should be cast continually per year, which is about 27 percent of the steel
produced at the oxygen converter steel mill. Billets will be heated in a walking-
beam furnace which will already have been implemented by this time and, by means
of a number of welds reduced by one-third in comparison with the number of
ingots, roughed down for the profile sequence of the reversing mill without
cutting the ends with block shears, which clearly will substantially reduce
production waste.

The continuous-casting factory will be of the radial type using a curved mold.

The radius of the curve will be 14 meters. there will be 6 casting flows, the
average length of a billet will be 6.000 millimeters, and the maximum length
12.000 millimenters. The pre-weight of a continuous casting depends on the number
of sequential heats and will amount, on the average, to 1,027.8 kilograms per ton.
The pouring ladle will be mounted on a pivoting pouring stand. It is expected
that the payback period of the investment will be about b years.

The construction of the oxygen converter steel mill is the largest capital
investment in Trinec since the liberation and will contribute substantially to
the modernization of Czechoslovak metallurgy.

13

FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CZECHOSLOVAKIA

NEH CHEMICAL SEPARATOR TO INCREASE EFFICIENCY
Prague TECHNICK! TYDENNIK in Czech 8 Dec 81 p 11

[Article by Dr Eng Jaroslav Prochazka, Candidate for Doctor of Science;
portions between slantlines in boldface]

[Text] As an apparatus serving to extract substances during chemical processes,
the extractor is nothing new, nor are any of the various types of extraction
columns anything unknown for us. what caught our attention was the development

and design of a new type which significantly increases the efficiency of all
extractive processes.

The beginning of the development of a new type of this piece of apparatus, which
is so often used in various branches of industry, falls in the middle of the
sixties. At that time the employees of the Extraction Research Group at the
Institute of Theoretical Foundations of Chemical Technology of the Czechoslovak
Academy of Sciences, located at Prague-Suchdol, reached the conclusion that it
would be possible to increase the efficiency and performance of extractors
substantially by utilizing the vibrational movement of their components. The
goal was the development of a new type of apparatus and systematic research on
seVeral processes which, it was assumed, could influence the characteristics of
this equipment in a decisive manner.

/Liquid extraction is one of the so-called separational processes by which industry
obtains valuable compounds from liquid mixtures and which induce chemical

reactions among partially miscible liquids. The process is common in the chemical
industry. in hydrometallurgy, in the liquid-fuel-processing industry, in pharmacy,
in the food industry, in the purification of waste water, and the like./ The
advantage of extraction in comparison with distillation, which may likewise be
used frequently for the separation of liquid mixtures, is primarily the
possibility of reducing or completely eliminating steam consumption, and often,

as well, its greater selectivity or the ability to separate compounds which are
very difficult to separate by means of distillation.

What Is It For, Anyway?
Liquid extraction is based on bringing an unrefined liquid mixture into contact

with an appropriate solvent which is not very soluble in the original mixture,
but which dissolves well certain of its constituent compounds. The maximum amount

15
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of such compounds that a given solvent may dissolve in itself determines its
capacity, while the percentage of solubility of the desired compounds and the
solubility of impurities determine its selectivity.

[To be sure, the properties of a solvent influence extraction and the costs for
raw materials and energy, but whether actual production approaches the expected
or achieves substantially poorer results depends on the characteristics of the
extraction equipment and the way it is operated./ This is true because capacity
and selectivity characterize equally important properties of a liquid system,
i.e., the composition which the system will reach after an infinite period of
contact between both liquid phases. However, in a actual piece of apparatus from
which is expected a certain volume output in terms of the raw materials which are
processed, the contact period is finite.

/It is true that the longer the contact period is to be. the larger must be the
apparatus for a given phase flow, and the higher are the investment and. often.
the operational costs for the extraction process./

It Fulfilled Preconditions

The output and efficiency of an extractor are not determined solely by its size,
but also by its type and mode of operation. It is clear that the larger the

contact surface between both liquids in the apparatus the more rapidly will the
interspersion of compounds between the raw material and the solvent take place.
Therefore, it is necessary to disperse thoroughly one liquid in the other. with

the aid. for instance. of rotating mixers. However. tiny droplets representing

a large contact surface within the apparatus slowly settle to the bottom,

limiting the volumetric output of the extractor. /Therefore, the design of an
extractor and its mode of operation should provide for optimal circulation and
dispersion of the phases. at the same time that great speed should be achieved

in the interspersion of matter between the phases in conjunction with a high
volume of phase flowthrough. Apparatus which would significantly outperform
existing extractors in these areas would contribute significant savings to
production and simultaneously permit the use of extraction even in those
technologies where it has not yet been considered due to high costs for equipment./

Approximately such considerations occurred at the inception of thinking about the
development of an extractor with vibrating plates. VPE (Vibrating Plate Extractor).
The vibrational movement of perforated, horizontal plates is to be used for the
dispersion of one of the phases into droplets. thereby achieving even dispersion
along with optimal droplet size and a minimal outlay of energy for dispersion.

The apparatus shOuld have the shape of a vertical column with countercurrent flow
of the phases induced by the difference in their densities. Plate construction
should make possible the free passage of the united phases, so that the movement
of droplets in the dispersed phase is restricted as little as possible. By this
means high volume outputs should be achieved!

lmpractical Path Coshen

There was still a long way to go from the basic idea of the construction of an
industrial extractor. An appropriate shape for the apparatus and its internal

16

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

components had to be f0und, and the influence studied of all constructional and
operational parameters, as well as the physical properties of liquid systems. At
the same time, the production of the extractor ought not be technically difficult
and the proposed apparatus had to be operationally reliable and easy to maintain.
It was often a matter of conflicting requirements, and for this reason the
thought of utilizing vibrational movement in columnar extractors was considered
at this time throughout the world as technologically impractical.

Techniques of physical and mathematical todeling were applied to this development.
Physical modeling makes use of physical similarities of actions taking place under
certain conditions in models of apparatus of varying sizes. An operational unit
may then be designed on the basis of measurement results on the small model.
Mathematical modeling is directed toward the formulation of systems of mathematical
relationships, which make possible the prediction of the behavior of equipment

of given dimensions by solving this system.

Five years passed from the idea to the conception of the first industrial VPE
extractor. It was first employed in the production of caprolactam (an intermediate
product in the production of silon) following preliminary semioperational tests

at the w. Pieck Chemical Plants of the Vah River Area in zilina. [Only the
successful Outcome of these semioperational tests on a glass column 300 millimeters
in diameter and 5 meters high, produced in the workshops of the institute,
convinced the technical public of the advantages of this new type of extractor.

In the course of a year, two more units were built in zilina, and two at Spolana

in Neratovice./

Universal Properties

In comparison with the normally utilized types of extractional columns in which,
for instance, rotating mixers are used for phase dispersion, la vibrational
extractor of the same size typically has a volumetric output that is several times
greater, and significantly better extractive efficiency. It is appropriate,
therefore, for high-tonnage production. and for production which requires a high
level of product purity./ This universality is increased by the fact that both
aqueous and organic phases may be dispersed in the extractor, meaning that
nonagglomerating emulsions do not occur in the case of mixtures which are difficult
to process.

IHigh output. efficiency. reductions in investment costs and occupied space,
savings of energy and raw materials are thus the result of the work of the
research and development employees of the CSAV./ The relatively simple
construction of the extractor simplifies assembly, maintenance and the processing
of substances with corrosive properties. with an increase in the size of the
extractor, the efficiency and maximum standard output (output per unit diameter
of the apparatus) changes only a little.

And Production Implementation?
Following the refining of caprolactam, the VPE extractor was used in the production
of the medicine efedrine at the Roztoky Research Institute of Antibiotics and

Biotransformations. and for the refining of mononitrotoluene at the Semtin East
Bohemian Chemical Factories Synthesis. These positive results stimulated the

17
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

interest of our chemical engineering industry. The Kralovopolska Machine works in
Brno undertook the machine development of high-capacity VPE extractors and included
the columns in its production program. To date the largest column which it has
produced is an extractor for obtaining phenols from waste water for the A.
Zapotocky Fuel Combine in Uzina. The column has a diameter of 1,200 millimeters
and a height of 15 meters, with a capacity of 90 tons of waste water per hour.

/The construction of the VPE vibrational plate extractor is covered by the
Czechoslovak A0 and by foreign patents. Its designers have also received
inventor's certification for technological procedures which utilize extractors and
which were developed in conjunction with research institutes and Czechoslovak
industrial firms. The extractor has won two gold medals. Last year the collective
of employees which shared in the development and application of the extractor
received the Prize of the Federal Ministry for Technology and Investment
Development.

Interest in the apparatus has also been expressed abroad. for instance for the
refining of aromatic nitrohydrocarbons, for rubber production, etc.

COPYRIGHT: Vydsvatelstvia Nakledatelstvi Roh, mcs. Prague [1981]

9276
C50: 2400/104

18
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY