FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10711

4 August 1982

USSR Report

MATERIALS SCIENCE AND METALLURGY
(FOUO 4/82.)-

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

no: OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers. periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports. and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief. indicate how the original information was
processed. "here no processing indicator is given, the infor«
nation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.8. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
USSR REPORT
HATERuLs SCIENCE AND Menuunsv
(moo 4/92)

Courems

AVIATION HAM

Aviation Imtrunent numb; and Structural Mntericls........ 1
3cm 0? mm

Iqroving Structure of Metal. Input in Indutry................. 7

Benny of Heal Through usher Qunnty mm................... 18
moms mum

ktruction of Copper, luck“ and Cobalt with Suva-‘1
WMOOOOOOOOOOIOIOOODOOOOOOOOOOO§‘IOOOOIOOOOOOODIOOOOOOO. 27

MATERIALS SCIENCE ms

Sosa Directions for Denim-oat of Modern Senna of

mt.ru1.00000IOOQOOOOOOOOCOO...OOQIOCOCOOOOOOOOO'CO'OOOOOOIC. 33

- a - [III - USSR - 216 551‘ PC
F0!‘0FﬂKJAl.USE(HVLY

AVIAIION MATERIALS

UDC: 669.017.018.5 (075.0)

AVIATION msmnm mammmc AND STRUCTURAL MATERIALS

Moscow MAIERIALY DLYA ANIAJPIOMNOGO PRIEOEDSTIOYEMIYA I EOMSTIUEISIY in Russian
(signed to press 19 Nov 81) pp 2-b. 397-600

[Annotation. foreword end table of contents free book "Materials for Aviation
Instrument Engineering and structures", edited by Academician A. P. lelov,
lzdstel'stvo "Metallurgiye", 3300 copies. #00 pages]

[Text] This textbook examines conductor, seeiconductor, dielectric, magnetic
and structural materials eeployed in aviation instrument engineering and
structures. Their electrical, magnetic and nschanical properties are described.
Principal attention is devoted to on analysis of the relationship between the
properties of materials, their conposition and structure. Practical application
of specific eaterials in designing aircraft equipment is shown.

This textbook is intended for students enrolled at aviation higher educational
institutions. It may also be of use to engineers and technicians in the natal-
lurgical and aircraft industry.

TABLE 0! CONTENTS Page

Foreword 3

Part 1. Materials With Special Physical and Physical-Mechanical

Properties

Section 1. Conductor Materials 5
Chapter 1. Metallic Conductor Materials 5
1. Electrical Conductivity of Metals S
2. Metals and Alloys Hith High Electrical Conductivity ll
3. Conductor Elements of Microelectronic Circuits 15
b. Electrical Conductors at Low reaperatures 20
5. Contact Materials 21
6. Alloys With High Electrical Resistance 2‘
7. Einetellic Conductors and Thermobinetals 29

8. Materials Hith Special Electrical and Mechanical Properties
Operating in Conditions of Corrosion Effect 32

FOI‘DPFKJAI.USE(HMLY
MWLIJSEONLY

Chapter 2. Superconducting Huterials

l. Sone Points of Theory of Superconductivity
2. Superconducting Blenents
3. Superconducting Alloys

6. Superconducting Co-pounds
Section 1:. Suiconductor Materials
Chapter 3. Structure and Properties of Soniconductor Haterials
1. Nature of Suiconductors
2. Principles of Obteining Seeiconductor Materials Hith Predeter-
nined Properties
3. Physicochenicel Principles of ﬂeet Treat-eat or Seniconductore

Chapter lo. lasic Groups of Suiconductor listeriale and Areas of Their
Application

1. Cleseification of Seniconductor Keteriels
2. Principal Areas of Application of Semiconductor Hateriale

Section III. Haterials With Special Hegnetic Properties
Chapter 5. Magnetic tutorials With e Rectenguler Hysteresis Cycle '
1. Basic Pereneters and Characteristics
2. Perrites with a Rectangular hyeteresis Cycle
3. Textured terronegnetic 'repea Hith a lectanguler Bysteresia Cycle
Chapter 6. Thin Perronegnetic Film
1. Sone Questions of Theory and Principles of Utilization
2. Futures of the Don-in Structure of Thin Ierronsgnetic I'll-e
3. Hultileyer Perronegnetic mu
Chapter 7. Heterials for Magnetic Recording hedia
1. Powder Magnetic Recording Media
2. Metallized Hepetic Recording Media
3. Materials for Hegnetic lieads
Chapter 8. Perunent Magneto Based on Rare-Barth llelents
1. Electronic Structure and Properties of Rare-Barth lie-eats
2. Technology of ﬂaking Hagnets Beaed on Coupounde of Rare-Berth
Bluents with Cobalt
Chapter 9. Corrosion-Resistant and Minion-Resistant Hegnetic Alloys

1. Corrosion-Resistent Hagnetic Alloys
2. Radiation-Resistant Magnetic Alloys

Nematustoutv

b1

61
67

S3
55
55
55

58
7S

2

82

91
91
96
96
98
98
101
106
107
109
11‘
117
119
120
126
128

128
131
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Section IV. Materials With Special Physiconechanical and Mechanical
Properties

Chapter 10. Alloys Rith "Mechanical Pore Memory" Effect

1. Features of the Kinetics of Phase Transformations in Alloys
Hith "Mechanical Porn Meaory" Effect
2. Characteristics of Alloys With "Mechanical Porn Mallory” affect

Chapter ll. lerylliua and Its Alloys

1. Properties of Berylliu-
2. Alloys of Berylliu-
3. Employment of Berylliua and Its Alloys

Chapter 12. Conposite Materials

1. Couposite Materials Reinforced by Particles

2. Pilanentary Composite Materials

3. Reinforcing Materials

6. Methods of Obtaining Composite Materials

5. Coaposite Materials Based on Aluinm and Ala-inu- Alloys
6. Magnesia-Base Coaposits Materials

7. Michel-Base Conposite Materials

8. Titanium-Base Couposite Materials

Chapter 13. ﬁelding. Soldering and Brazing Materials for Aviation
lnatruasnt Engineering

1. ﬁelding Materials
2. Soldering and Brazing Materials

Part II. Non-Metallic Materials. General Description
Section 1. Organic Mon-Metallic Materials
Chapter 1. Poly-ere -- Basis of Mon-Metallic Materials
1. Structure of and Obtaining Polymers
2. Physical Properties
3. Therm-echanical Properties
6. Mechanical Properties
5. Dielectric Properties
Chapter 2. Thermplastics

l. Nonpo‘ar Thermoplastica
2. Polar Ihemplastics

Chapter 3. Synthetic Resins (Polyfunctional Hardening Oligoaers)
1. Rcaine nardening with the Releaae of By-Producte
2. Reeine Hardening Without the Release of By-Producta

3. Rev neat-leeieting Ileaine
hapter 4.. law and Cured Rubbere

1. General
2. Phyeicotechnical Propertiea oi Vulcanized Rubber-e

ection II. Inorganic Non-Metallic Heteriala

haptcr 5. Graphite

1. Synthetic Graphite
2. Propertiee of Synthetic Graphite

3. hploynent of Graphite
hapter 6. Glue and Sitalle

1. Inorganic Glaaa
2. Sitalle

:haptcr 7 . Cereaica

1. New Inductrial Cora-ice
2. Electrical Engineering Cora-ice

Section III. Iiln-Forning Heteriala
:hnpter 8. Gluee

:haptcr 9. Sealera

:hapter.10. Painte and Varniehee

1. Protective Paint and Vernieh Heteriale and Coatinge
2. nectricel Ineulation Varniehee and Coupounde

Chapter ll. Polyleric Pine
Section IV. Iilaaentery Heteriale
Chapter 12. Filmente
1. Organic Pile-cute
2. Inorganic Pile-cote
3. Pilatentary Gryetele
Chapter 13. Ron-Woven Textile Heteriale

l. Quilted, Lightly-Glued and netted Materiela
2. Yarn. thread and Mated Producte
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Chapter 16. “oven Fabrics, Knitted Goods and Materials 363
l. Uoven Fabrics and Knitted "Goods . 363
2. lbteriala -- Leather Substitutes and Vanished Clothe 366
Section V. Plastics and Conpositee 368
Chapter 15. Gee-Filled Plastics 368
l. loaned Plastics 368
2. Boneycod: Plastics 371
Chapter 16. Powder and Piber Plastics 371.
1. Powder Plastics 375
2. Fiber Plastics 379
Chapter 17. Laninated Plastics 382
1. Traditional Laninated Plastics 382
2. Polymer-Matrix Conposite Materials 385
3. Carbon-Carbon (C-C) Coapoeitee 392
Reno-ended Bibliography 396
FOREWORD

This country's aviation higher educational institutions offer lecture courses
on the properties of structural and electrical engineering naterials enployed
in aviation inetruent engineering. There are no standard textbooks and
nanuals on this subject, however; at the use tine considerable Soviet and
foreign infornation on specific nateriale is contained in nuneroue periodicals
and nonographe and requires certain systenatiaation.

Thus there aroae the need to produce a textbook coabining within the franewwk
of established curricula not only basic information on theory of nodern
specialised eaterials for aviation inetruaent engineering. but also on their
practical application.

In writing this book the authors were guided by the current course curriculu-
"Structural and Electrical Engineering Materials" for Aviation Higher
Educational Institutions. This hook consists of two parts. The first part
deals with neterials with special physical and physiconechanical properties.
It exanines conductor and semiconductor eateriala, nateriale with special nag-
netic properties, and nateriale with special physiconechanical properties.

The second part of this textbook contains a general description of nonnatallic
naterials and exanines the physical. nechanical, and chemical properties of
thernoplastics. synthetic resins, raw and cured rubber, graphite, ceranics,
glass and sitalle, as well as filamentary and fih-forning neteriale. plaetics
and polyur-base conposite natarials.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FINICHWHCJA1.lEﬂE(NMLY

Considerable attention is devoted to study of the most difficult and new areas
of aaterlals science, which are lacking or are inadequately treated in existing
textbooks and manuals. The following sections, for eaanple, are contained for
the first time in this textbook: "Materials With Special Electrical and
Mechanical Properties Operating in Conditions of Corrosion Effect”; "Physico-
chemical Principles of heat Treatment of Seniconductors"; etc. Considerable
attention is devoted to fundamentally important questions connected with
analysis of the relationshp between the properties of eaterials, their composi-
tion and structure, for the purpose of determining possibilities of application
of specific materials in aircraft equipment. In conformity with the curriculum,
the authors also sought to reflect in this textbook important materials con-
nected with the future area of specialization of engineers.

The literature listed at the end of the book is recommended for a more
thorough study of a number of subjects. Compositions of alloys in this book
are stated as percentages by mass.

Subsections 1-5 of Chapter 1 and Chapter 6, Part I, were written by T. S.
Morozova; Subsection 6 of Chapter 1, Part I - Ye. V. Ryebchenko; Subsection 7
of Chapter 1 and Chapter 9, Part I - V. S. Terent'yeva; Subsection 8 of
Chapter I, Part I -- A. A. Klypin; chapters 2 and 10, Part I - Yu. P. Prolov;
the Foreword, chapters 3-5 of Part I -- A. Ya. Potemkin; Chapter 7 of Part I -
V. V. Nikolenko; Chapter 8 of Part I -- M. G. Karpman; Chapter II of Part I --
C. P. Benediktova and A. A. xlypin; chapter 12 of Part I - A. S. Viskov;
Chapter 13 of Part I -- G. P. Petisov; the introductory part, Subsection 1 of
Chapter 1, chapters 3, 5, 7, 8-16, and 17 of Part II -- Yu. I. Sheydeman; sub-
sections 2-5 of Chapter 1, chapters 2, 6, 6, 15 and 16 of Part II - G. Ye.
Vishnevskiy.

This textbook was readied for publication by Doctor of Chemical Sciences
Professor A. Ya. Potenkin (Part I) and Candidate of Technical Sciences Docent
I. Yu. Sheydeman (Part II).

The authors would like to express their deep gratitude to the reviewers for
valuable comments made during perusal of the manuscript: to Doctor of Technical
Sciences Professor P. T. Kolomytsev and the faculty members of the Department
of Materials Science of Electronic Equipment at the Moscow Institute of
Electronic Machine Building, Doctor of Technical Sciences Professor A. A.
Shmykov, chairnan. The authors are also very grateful to the faculty and

staff members of the Department of Aviation Materials Science at the Moscow
Aviation Institute for their considerable assistance in readying the manuscript
for publication.

COPYRIGHT: Isdatel'stvo "Metallurgiya", 1982

3024
C50: 1862/132

6

INDI‘OIINCJAI.USEZ(HVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

scuba or mus

IMPROVING STRUCTURE OF METALS INPUT IR mwsm

Moscow VOPROSY momma in Russian no 4. Apr 82 pp 75-82

[Article by N. lvantsova: "Metals Intensiveness of Production and Reserve
Potential for Achieving Savings in Metal")

[Text] The CPSU Central Oo-ittee and 0883 Council of Hinisters decree en-
titled ”On lnteneifying Efforts for scone-y and Efﬁcient Utilization of Raw
Materials. Fuel-Energy end Other Material Reecurces" specifies a group of con-
crete aeaeures to inprove the systen of planning and incentive applying to
utilization of eateriel resources. The objective is to achieve savings in
resources both in the production process proper and in consunption of the
finiaMd product. -

Machine building, astalvorking and construction are the principal consu-ers of
finished natal products. The growth rate of these industries, change in their
structure, and the level of netels input [astelloyedtost' -- also translated ea
"netals requirsuents" end "Ietals intensiveness”) in production exert direct in-
fluence on the volune of netsl consunption and netsls input of societal product.
Machine building and netelworlting census the largest volunes of netsl. In the
structure of eaterial outlays of nachine building and netelvorking. for exenple,
netals comprise epproxinstely 30 percent taking into account internal turnover
within the aschine building industry, and 50 percent excluding it, that is.

they coaprise the bulk of the material outlays in this branch.

The level of netsls input in production is still conparatively high, which
leads to considerable netal waste in the netel-conauning branches. At the
26th CPSU Congress 1.. I. Brezhnev noted that reduction of losses and waste in
aetelvorking by only one half would be equivalent to s 10 percent increase in
output of finished ferrous netsls rolled stock. natal waste in consuning
branches is growing and presently exceeds 19 nillion tons per year (including
9 nillion tons into chips). The rolled netals utilisation factor in nechine
building has remained unchanged in the last 10 years - 0.72. The decree on
econonising in asterial resources notes the necessity of inproving the
structure of the scone-y, its branches and sectors in the direction of all-
out reduction in the energy and laterials requiremente of production.

The specific netels input of production varies free one branch of nachine
building and netelvorlting to another. and therefore changes in the branch

5'0! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
roe OFFICIAL USE ONLY

structure of this complex exert differing effect on the production metals in-
put of machine building, industry, and societal product as a whole. lieavy,
power, transport, tractor and agricultural machine building are the most
netals-intensive within nachine building. their percentage share of branch
gross output is high (almost 30 percent) and exerts an influence on growth of
the production metals input of all aachine building. In the future the
production volume growth rate of these branches will slow somewhat and the
percentage share of their output in machine building will decline, which will
cause a decrease in the production metals input of nachine building as a whole.
The level of production metals input of the road. construction and chemical
machine building and automotive industry is close to the level of production
metals input of machine building as a whole. The percentage share of this
group of branches will increase and cause a certain rise in the production
metals input of machine building as a whole.

Machine tool building, machine building for light industry and the food process-
ing industry, the electrical equipment industry, and especially instn-ent en-
gineering are characterized by a lower metals input. The level of production
metals input in inatruaent engineering is l/lhh that of heavy, transport, and
power machine building. Intensive development of the above-listed branches
with a lower metals input will promote a decrease throughout machine building,
although natal consunption volumes will rise.

Studies of the internal structure of individual machine building subbranches
attest to considerable reserve potential for reducing the metals input of
aschine building production on the basis of improving the structure of its
suhbranchea and design of the products aanufactured. The structure of
production of tractors, machine tools and certain other machinery and equip-eat
renains fairly metals-intensive. For example, caterpillar tractors comprise a
substantial share in the structure of tractor manufacture (to percent).
Standard metal consumption per crawler tractor is 80 percent more than for a
wheeled tractor. In the future we should inprove the structure of manufacture
of tractors, increasing the manufacture of wheeled and small-horsepower
tractors, including orchard-and-garden tractors. This will help reduce the
aetals input of the tractor industry and machine building as a whole.

The most effective ways to reduce production specific metals input per unit of
principal nachine paraneters are concentration of power in one unit, increased
productivity and improved performance characteristics of machinery and equipnent.
in recent years there has been observed in many types of equipment a gap
between the technical capabilities of machinery being manufactured :nd the
level of its actual utilization, that is, improved performance is far from
fully utilized. For example, the volume of large and heavy metalworking equip-
ment is considerable within the structure of nanufacture of metal-cutting
machine tools and press forging equipment. This ratio causes an increase in
the production aetals input of machine tool building and machine building as a
whole, while large machine tools are not always used at full capacity. This
leads to inefficient expenditures not only of material but of labor resources
as well. It is therefore very inportant that designers and engineers, when
designing machinery and equipment, proceed from the actual conditions of
equip-ent utilization.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
IND! 0531(1AL USIZCMNLY

Improvement of the type-size structure of machinery and equipment remains a
pressing matter. herein lies significant reserve potential for achieving
savings in metal and other productive resources. With unchanged metal re-
sources. using the same production facilities and with comparatively small ad-
ditional outlays, it is possible substantially to increase output of machine
building products. In order to determine this reserve potential one should
caICulate specific metals input when designing machinery and subsequently dur-
ing operation not only for specifications and performance characteristics but
also for work performed. This indicator is determined by the ratio of all
material outlays (production and operation) to the volume of work performed by
a machine during its service up to the first major overhaul. work to optimize
the type-sire structure of machines should be performed in all branches of
machine building. It is noted in the Basic Directions of Economic and Social
Development of the USSR in 1981-1985 and the Period up to 1990 that it is
essential to increase within optimal limits the unit power output of

machinery and equipment with a simultaneous decrease in their physical size.
metals input. power consumption, and a decrease in the cost per unit of end
useful effect.

Efficient utilization of metal products in consuming branches and elaboration
of ways to achieve savings in metals during their processing depend in large
measure on metal product manufacturing branches. In spite of certain ad-
vances in the area of improving the structure and qualitative characteristics
of metal, the requirements of the branches and sectors of the nation's
economy in the majority of highly economical types of rolled stock are far
from being fully satisfied. Hany machines of Soviet manufacture are heavier
than counterpart foreign-built units, primarily because of an insufficiently
modern structure of the metal: a comparatively high percentage share of cast-
ings in the structure of metal production and an insufficient percentage
share of rolled plate, and especially sheet. in the structure of rolled netal
products.

Factors which determine the 1e'el of metals input, reliability and durability
of machines, instruments, and structures include the quality and structure of
ferrous metals. A decrease in structural metal requirements is promoted by im-
provement in the structure of metal production -- a decrease in the percen-
tage share of castings and an increase in the share of rolled products, in-
cuding sheet and economical products. In recent years the structure of con-
sumed ferrous metals has been characterized by progressive trends, but the
percentage share of castings continues to remain comparatively high (see
table).

Consolidated Structure of Hetal Consumed in Machine Building (as percentages)

—___———_———_———————————_-

 

 

Consuming Branches Percentage Share Percentage Share
of Castings in of Plate andSheet
(1) Metal Production in Finished (3)
2 Rolled Stock
1966 1980 1966 1980
Machine building and metalworking 31.1 27.8 46.9 52.6
of that:
tractor and agricultural machine building 38.8 31.9 35.5 43.2
9

FINI¢JFF1CJAI.I£§EI(N‘LY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table on preceding page, cont'd

 

—_————-———————

(1) $22 532
1966 1980 1966 1980
heavy machine building 32.9 33.3 06.3 69.7
automotive industry 18.6 18.5 60.3 69.0
machine tool industry 51.5 51.1 30.3 38.0
road.construction machine building 29.9 26.0 56.7 59.2
chemical machine building 35.5 3b.7 58.0 61.3

 

As is evident from the figures in the table, the structure of metal for machine
building as a whole changed insignificantly during the 15 years: the per-
centage share of castings declined by 3.3 percent, while plate and sheet
production increased by 5.7 percent. In the largest consuming branches -
machine tool building, the automotive industry, heavy and chemical machine
building ~- the percentage share of castings remained practically unchanged.
And an insignificant decrease in the percentage share of castings is planned

by 1985 for practically all machine building branches other than machine tools
and construction-road construction machine building.

The relatively high percentage share of castings in the structure of metals
consumption is due in a number of instances to a shortage of certain types of
rolled steel. This leads to the manufacture of castings out of heavy ingots
and the forming of a high metals-input structure of certain branches of

machine building. Analysis of the structure of castings consumption has shown
that in the future castings production in consumption volumes can be reduced
by 5-7 million tons per year by replacing cast parts with rolled metal and
reducing the weight of castings by adopting precision casting methods. This
will make it possible to reduce production metals input and to obtain sub-
stantial savings. For example, replaceaent of parts made of steel castings
with welded structures of steel plates generates savings of approximately

103 rubles per ton in calculated expenditures. Consequently, replacement of 5-
7 ailiion tons of castings with parts made of rolled stock will make it pos-
sible to obtain annual savings of 500-700 million rubles nationwide.

At the present time a number of organizations in this country have completed
work on technical-economic substantiation of the fabrication of welded
structures out of rolled stock in place of castings. The institutes of the
machine tool and tool industry have designed a number of welded machine bed
structures of rolled stock in place of cast iron for larhes and grinding
machines, machine tools for finish machining, and press forging machines.

Work has been completed on development of lighter-weight structural designu
for agricultural machinery employing parts fabricated of rolled stock in place
of castings.

Considerable work is being done in the area of reducing the metals '.quire~
ments of machine structures by VNIImetmash [All-Union Scientific (asearch
and Design Institute of Metallurgical Machine Building], which has designed,

jointly with the Electric welding Institute imeni Ye. 0. Paton. an automated
line for the manufacture of radiators out of sheet steel (in coils. by
stamping and welding) in place of cast iron. The mass (specific metal

10

FOIEOFFKJAI.USE(MHLY
FOI:OF1WCJAI.USEGDNLY

requirements) of an equivalent square meter of a welded radiator made of

sheet steel is 3.6 times less than with cast iron. Manufazture of radiators
of rolled sheet will save substantial volumes of metal. Vﬂllmetmash has
developed a new method of designing prestressed beds for hydraulic presses.
rolling and pipe mills. Building presses with prestressed beds reduces metals
consumption 2-7-fold in comparison with presses with conventional columns or
with a frame errangement. Stressed-sheathing bed designs for rolling and pipe
mills are approximately half as heavy as unit-cast structures.1

Rolled product which is presently in short supply is required for going into
production with lightweight structures which have already been designed. In
the last five-year plan the production growth rate was the same for rolled
stock and castings, which is not a sign of progress. Appropriate reorganiza-
tion of metals production should be accomplished in the next few years, rein-
forced by a system of economic incentive. in order to ensure that the rolled
metals production growth rate (under the condition of allocation of the

requisite quantities for replacing castings) exceeds the production growth rate
of steel and iron castings.

Reduction in the weight of machinery and equipment is being held back by the
extensive employment of merchant shapes in the consuming branches. Merchant
shapes continue to represent a substantial percentage within the structure of
finished rolled stock: almost 50 percent in machine building and metalworking,
and from $0 to 60 percent in certain branches of machine building.

Change in the production structure of finished rolled products is essential

in connection with the accelerated development of branches of industry with
high requirements in sheet and plate, which are demanding increasingly larger
quantities of these products. Sheet and plate production should grow at a
substantially more rapid rate than merchant shapes production in order to
satisfy the requirements of those branches with high sheet and plate re-
quirements -- the automotive industry and electrical equipment industry; for
the manufacture of pipe for natural gas and oil pipelines, structural tubing.
curved structural shapes. and coated. plated. and clad sheet; for employment in
construction; replacement of castings and merchant shapes. Employment of sheet
and plate. and especially cold-rolled, produces considerable economic effect.
Calculated outlays per ton of finished parts (rubles per ton) fabricated of
sheet and plate are approximately 20 percent less than with merchant shapes.
with an increase in the percentage share of plate and sheet in the rolled
products structure to 50 percent (it is approximately 60 percent at the

present time), savings to the economy could total approximately 1.5-2 billion
rubles.

The variety of available merchant shape: is expanding comparatively slowly.
According to the approximate calculations of experts, the requirements of the
branches and sectors of the economy in these products are running ahead of
production by 50-100 percent. in order fully to meet the requirements of
machine building. for example, it would be necessary to put into production
more than 800 new structural shapes. One shortcoming of the product mix of
simple structural shapes is the limited number of size graduations which
leads to overconsumption of metal (2.5-15 percent goes into chips)2 or to

11

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
roe OFFICIAL USE ONLY

increased metals input of machines and structures, and diminishes societal
labor productivity. An increase in the number of intermediate rolled product
sizes would make it possible substantially to increase metal savings in its
consumption.

0n the whole we must note that there is inadequate production of economical
rolled sectional shapes: merchant shapes and high-precision shapes, and curved
shapes -- employment of which in place of conventional products reduces the
weight of workpieces and finished products. General and special-purpose mer-
chant shapes are more economical. Only half of the entire number of mer-
chant shapes (970) are produced in lightweight versions.

Reduction in the metals requirements of machinery depends in large measure on
utilization of rolled products made of low-alloy cteels, heat-treatment
hardened, coated, plated and clad. special and lightweight merchant shapes.
For the most part hot-rolled co-ercial carbon steel is employed in the na-
tion's economy (75 percent), steel which many times fails to meet the elevated
demands on modern materials, especially as regards strength. Much more effec-
tive are low-alloy steels which are stronger than carbon steels and which pos-
sess good plasticity, toughness, weldability, and resistance to corrosion.

An important means of ensuring the durability of machinery and metal savings
is a systematic increase in the quantities of manufacture of rolled stock with
various types of coatings, platings, and claddings, and heat-treatment
hardened. Losses to corrosion comprise approximately 10 percent of iron and
steel production. A large percentage of rolled stock is produced without
suitable hardening treatment. while heat treatment of hot-rolled carbon and
low—alloy steel makes it possible significantly to increase its strength.
Plastic-coated sheet and sheet aluminum are produced in insignificant quanti-
ties. The economic effectiveness of consumption of heat-treatment hardened
rolled stock, coated, plated and clad rolled products and rolled stock of low-
alloy steel ranges from 20 to 60 rubles per ton in calculated outlays.
Machines and structures made of such metal are stronger and lighter, are
longer-lived, while metal consumption and the metals requirements of products
are reduced. For example, products made of galvanized sheet last approximate-
ly two to five times as long as items made of untreated sheet. Requirements
in these rolled products are considerably greater than volume of production.

In order to improve the structure of metal and rolled stock and to improve
their qualitative characteristics, it is necessary to conduct a number of
measures together with optimization of the organizational structure of ferrous
metallurgy and primary processing production in the machine building industry.
Simultaneous adoption of advanced directions in the production and consumption
of metal and improvement in technological level not only in the producing but
also in the consuming branches ensure conditions for fullest utilization of
reserve potential for achieving metal savings. Let us examine some of these
areas.

Considerable influence on improving the technological level of metallurgical
production is exerted by accelerated development of steelmaking in oxygen con-
verters and electric furnaces, out-of-oven degassing and continuous steel

12

FOI‘OFIICIAI.USE!0NIN
IN)R 0F?!C1Al.lh5£i(MVLY

casting. and extensive adoption of modern, high-output equipment capable of
ensuring the requisite quality of metal products. Possibilities of intensifica-
tion of ferrous metals production depend in large measure on the structure of
capital investment in the iron and steel industry. It is advisable to in-
crease the percentage share of capital spending in rolling-mill production.
including on improving quality and expanding the variety of rolled products.

Precision casting and stamping methods, welding and rolling parts, and powder
metallurgy methods, that is, low-waste and no-waste methods of manufacturing
machine and equipment parts are promising areas in the development of metal-
working technology. Mechanical working of metal by cutting still predominates
in the machine building industry, however, which leads to considerable metal
waste in the form of chips and increases metals input, labor intensiveness and
the capital-to-output ratio of production. what is needed is standardization
of manufacturing processes and development of optimal technologies in the
initial processing shops of the machine building industry. The structure of
manufacturing processes should be planned according to materials labor in-
tensiveness. It is essential to perform analysis of machine structural
designs and processing in a planned and systematic manner. in order to deter-
mine reserve potential for achieving metal savings and to expand the scale of
utilization of advanced structural materials. Improvement in the technical
and organizational level of metalworking technology is one of the important
ways to achieve savings in metal.

An insufficiently high degree of specialization and concentration of initial
processing production in the machine building industry is holding back the
adoption of high-output resource-conserving equipment and efficient manufactur-
ing processes. It is advisable to plan specialization indices for intensive
development of the centralized production of castings, forgings, etc A long-
range specialization and co-production plan for the various machine building
branches should also be drawn up, including the manufacture of castings,
forgings and other initial-process items. Capital investment must be al-
located precisely to these specialized production operations, not into ex-
panding initial processing shops at machine building enterprises or for
building combined plants.

Efficient utilization of metals and a decrease in production metals input
depend on the scale of employment of a number of structural materials used in
place of metals. Plastics are widely employed in all branches and sectors of
the economy. Plastics consuming branches have developed advanced, lighter-
weight structures with employment of polymeric materials in place of ferrous
and nonferrous metals. The level and rate of development of the chemical
industry. however, do not yet ensure technical and economic possibilities of
consumption of these efficient structural materials, both in production volume
and in qualitative characteristics. Production volumes of plastics, especial-
ly modern structural thermoplastics and glass plastics, are still inadequate.
Prices on structural plastics and synthetic resins remain high.

All this is hindering expansion of the scale of employment of structural
polymeric materials and decrease in production metals input. The requirements
of the machine building branches in plastics are being met by 65 percent on

13

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the average. while this percentage is lower for certain types of plastics An
increase in the production volumes of structural plastics, especially with en-
hanced characteristics. which are capable of competing with ferrous and non-
ferrous metals, improvement of the technical and economic characteristics of
plastics production and decrease in the production cost of plastics will an-
sure conditions for reducing not only production metals input but also the
weight of machinery and equipment.

Obviously in the future we should plan accelerated development of structural
plastics and more intensively improve the technical base for their production
and intrabranch structure. The structure of plastics production should be
planned in such a manner that they are utilized primarily in those industries
where they generate the greatest effect. Branch technical and structural
policy should be focused toward this.

One promising substitute for ferrous metals is aluainum, which is characterized
by excellent physical-mechanical properties and corrosion resistance, low
specific weight, good decorative qualities. and effectively replaces steel

and heavy nonferrous metals, substantially reducing the weight of machines

and equipment. Transport machine building is the most effective area of
employment of aluminum alloys. a priority rate in the production and con-
aumption of aluminun has become one of the characteristic features of tech-
nological progress. In our canny the growth rate of aluminum in recent years
has been running ahead of that of ferrous metals.

Achieving savings in metal on the basis of improving the technical and organiza-
tion level of enterprises depends in large measure on indices specified in
production plans. The present system of planning, evaluation and economic
stimulation of production in tons and in volume of product sold leads to the
manufacture of heavier and more metals-requiring rolled stock and equipment.
L. l. Brezhnev noted at the November (1981) CPSU Central Committee Plenu-

that we have not yet succeeded in eliminating indices which essentially an-
courage waste. He was referring to the vaunted "gross" in tone or rubles.
Enterprises have no incentive to manufacture new, lightweight rolled sectional
shapes or lighter-weight machines. since their manufacture worsens an enter-
prise's technical-economic performance indices -- volume of sold production
and labor productivity decline. .In the iron and steel industry the labor in-
tenaiveness and capital-to-output ratio of high-quality product are frequently
increased, since these products require additional processing. All this has a
negative effect on material incentive funds. ‘

The system of measures to achieve further improvement of plan and evaluation
indices specified by the CPSU Central Committee and USSR Council of Ministers
decree entitled "0n Iaproved Planning and Strengthening the Effect of the
Economic Mechanism on Improving Efficiency of Production and Hort Quality" is
being implemented slowly and not in all branches. Incentive for economical
utilization of material resources is provided by planning such indices as
standard net production and sales volume taking into account meeting product
sales deliveries on the basis of contracts and sales orders. It is essential
to plan an expanded product list in units of measurement which more fully
characterize product use properties.

16

IKHICIﬂﬂCJA1.UEE(MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

New indices should be reflected in prices and technical-standards documenta-
tion. Product materials intensiveneas indices were taken into consideration
to a greater degree than previously in elaborating the wholesale prices which
became effective in 1982, which makes it possible to intensify the incentive
role of prices in economizing in material resources. Planning and production
incentive for certain types of equipment, however, are expressed in tons. The
ton also renains the principal planning and evaluation indicator in ferrous
metallurgy, since on the basis of tonnage it is easier to fulfill the plan

by increasing volumes of ordinary-grade rolled stock. He should note that ex-
periments are being conducted in the iron and steel industry on planning and
record keeping on certain types of rolled stock and rolled product in neters,
square esters, and theoretical weight. It is advisable to expand approval of
indicators which most fully take the quality of metal into account. Metals
input and standard weight of product items characterize econoay both of their
production and consumption. Obviously this indicator should become mandatory
in designing structures and manufacturing processes and when putting new or
modernized product items into production. There is not yet adequate econonic
incentive, however, for designers and engineers to develop less materials-in-
tensive products. Insufficient attention is also being devoted to reducing eate-
risl intensiveness of products at machine building enterprises. This is

due to the fact that according to existing regulations an lten is put into
production if it meets all requirements imposed on it other than the require-
ment of reduced materials intensiveness. Nor is a high level of materials in-
tensiveneas an obstacle in awarding a product the Seal of Quality.

An inportant role in overcoming these deficiencies will be played by implementa-
tion of measures. specified in the decree on economising in material resources,
pertaining to further improving standards and technical specifications and en-
hancing their role in improving product quality and in economical utilization
of materials. Now principal product characteristics incorporated into
standards and specifications will include indicators of a product's naterials
intensiveness and energy requirements, corresponding to the finest achieve-
ments of Soviet and foreign science and technology. 0n certification, a

product can be assigned to the top quality category only if these requirements
are satisfied.

In order to implement measures specified by the decree pertaining to economical
utilization of material resources, it is essential to make appropriate changes
in organization of accounting and record keeping pertaining to indices
characterizing efficient utilization of material resources. In partiCular.
there should be established a technically substantiated standards base for the
major sateriel resources, for all metals, as well as for the principal

machine building products. Until recently only savings in hot-rolled metal
was planned. Many machine building products are not covered by standards. As
a result, for example, castings production and consumption volumes unwarranted-
ly grew and. correspondingly, the percentage share of castings in the total
netal structure was declining slowly. This was impeding the progress of
reduction in weight of machines. In addition, consumption standards are not
always revised with the adoption of scientific and technological advances.
Planning of targets pertaining to an average decrease in specific consumption
for steel and iron castings and forgings from ingots, as well is a rolled stock

15

F0!‘0FFKJAI.USE(N‘LV
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

utilization factor was adopted effective 1981. This should provide incentive
for acre efficient utilization of all metal.

The decree specifies establishing, beginning in l)83, for industrial, construc-
tion and transport ministries. associations, enrerprisee and organizations
production cost targets in five-year and annual plans, including a ceiling on
material outlays in aonetary terms per ruble of output. Consumption standards
for the major types of materials, fuel and energy will be established in
physical terms per unit of output. The list of material resources on which
centralized targets pertaining to average decrease in consumption standards are
established will be expanded. In order to carry out thepbaned measures. it is
essential to improve the standards operations of enterprises. Existing
standards on consumption of raw materials. supplies. fuel and energy resources
should be promptly revised and new ones established proceeding from plan tar-
gets. tzking into account adoption of scientific and technological advances.

A number of scientific research institutes have begun implementing these
measures. In particular, NllPiN [Scientific Research Institute of Planning and
Standards] under USSd Gosplan is preparing a list of the most important
materials-intensive products and material resources. is drawing up standard
methods for calculating technically and economically substantiated standards
and for planning the materials intensiveness of products. and is drafting a
standard regulation on organization of bonus payments for achieving savings

in material-technical resources and reducing the materials intensiveness of
products manufactured.

of great importance for efficient utilization of materials is a balance between
production and consumption of all types of resources and the availability of

an optimal central reserve of these resources. A shortage of certain types of
rolled products and ceiling-limited distribution of ferrous metals are forcing
enterprises to incorporate reserves into consumption standards for principal
product items. Enterprises are essentially creating ”their own" internal
reserves for meeting various additionally occurring needs. including compensat-
ing for losses due to production-line rejects. which leads to inefficient
utilisation and freezing (accumulation) of certain quantities of material
resources at enterprises and the development of a short-supply situation for
certain metal products.

At the stage of plan drafting, ministries should determine actual requirements
in all types of rolled products and capabilities to meet these requirements.
Essential for this is elaboration of a balanced metals production and consump-
tion plan. For proportional and balanced development of the economy, when
drawing up national economy econonic and social development plans it is es~
sential to specify centralised material reserves. Their formation will
pro-ate an end to scattering of materials among separate agencies and enter-
prises and will create the possibility of selection of necessary materials and
their more efficient utilization.

The decree on economizing in material resources acknowledges as essential in-
creased incentive for workers, managers. engineers. technicians and office
employees of associations, enterprises, and organizations to achieve efficient

16

FOI‘OFFHJAI.USE(NHLY
FOR OFFKJAI.I£SE(NVLY

utilization of material resources. lbviously a uniform system of material
incentive to economize should be created. Economic incentive funds of
ministries and agencies, associations, enterprises and organizations will be
formed in relation to the level of material outlays per ruble of product (work
performed) and total savings achieved by reducing material outlays in com-
parison with the ratified ceiling. Horkers, foremen, process engineers,
designers and other engineer-technician personnel will be awarded bonuses for
achieving savings in specific types of materhl resources in comparison with
the specified technically substantiated consumption standards. Payment of
bonuses to administrative office personnel at production associations, enter-
prises and organizations would be in relation to the level of material outlays
per ruble of product in comparison with the established ceiling, taking into
account fulfillment of targets pertaining to product cost for the association,
enterprise, and organization. Implementation of all these measures will serve
as a basis for establishing a uniform system of incentive to economize in
resources.

Economical utilization of material resources will be promoted by converting over
all branches of industry to planning a sales volume indicator taking into ac-
count completion of production deliveries according to the full list and
variety. Uhen figuring the material incentive fund, one shOuld take into ac-
cOunt the levels of materials intensiveness of product items and fulfillment

of contracts pertaining to delivery schedule, product quality and variety. It
is advisable to increase the amount of fines and to increase the personal
liability of officials of enterprises, ministries and supply personnel for
failure to meet contractual agreements.

In our opinion the above-examined areas of reducing production metals input and
achieving efficient metals utilisation, particularly optimisation of the
branch structure of metals consumers and improvement in the structure of
structural materials will foster economical utilization of material resources.

POOTNOTBS

1. See A. l. tselikov, "Metallurgicheskiye mashiny i agregsty: nastoyashcheye
i budushcheye' [Metallurgical Machinery and Equipment: Present and Future],
Izdatel'stvo Metallurgiya, 1979, page 136.

2. See N. F. Sklckin, "Ekonomicheskiye problemy povysheniya kachestva i
razvitiya sortauenta chernykh metallov" [Economic Problems of Improving the
Quality and Enlarging the Variety of FerrOus Metals], Izdatel‘stvo
Metallurglya, 1978. page 138.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Pravda", "Voprosy ekonomiki", 1982.

3026
C80: 1862/134

l7

FORloFFKJAl.USE(NﬂlY
FOR OFFICIAL USE OILY

[CW 01' mm. W HIGHER WALITY D8111.

Hoecow mmmtn I mansun mm mm in Ruaaian no 5.
Mn 82 pp 2-6

[Articles "An Increaae in the Quality of netal - the Real Henna of Ira
Bconoey"]

[Text] The econoay of aetal ie one of the key prohleaa of aodern nachine
building. Under conditione of the iaprovenent. expanaion and optiaieation
of the exieting production. the rational uae of netal beconea very i-portent.
Therefore. in the ”Baeic Trende in the Beonoeic and Social Developaent of
the 083! for the yeera 1981-1985 and for the period up to 1990" together
with the formulation of the ecientific and technical probleae. the aolution
to which allowe obtaining a coneiderable eevinga of netallic neteriale. the
need for iapI-enting another. aore effective neene ie underlined: the
:ealoua uae of netal in the proceaa of ite proceeeing. econoeicel with
reepect to the national good. "...He. of courae. will put new aetallurgical
plante into operation. But to overcoat the ehortage of netal. there eniete
another neene. a aore ekillful and coeplete uae of that which in produced."
eaid L. I. Brezhnev at the 26th 080 congreaa [l]. Thia ie a practical
anhodiaent of the Leniniat thought about the fact that comni- begina with
the everyday care of the workere concerning each pond of aetal and grain and
the increaee in the labor productivity.

If we bear in nind the problale of the econoay of netal which ariae free the
firat trend. the ieproveaent of production haaed upon new acientific and
technical achieveaenta. then. firat of all. we need to know the feature

which is characteristic for it: theee probleaa are eaaentially coeplex.

They can he aolved effectively only under the condition of the econoey of
neteriala in all linke of the induatrial chain of aenufacturing a part.
beginning with the uelting of the aetal and ending with finiehing operatione.
i.e.. it ia neceeeary at the eaee tine to eael: the eeane of the econoey of
eetal in the reeervee which are available in aetallurgy. in nachine building.
in particular. in aetal working. and no on. The greateat eavinge of aeteriale
can be achieved in eolving haeic prohleaa of the nodern production of producta:
an increaae in the quality of the natal; ieproveaent of the aetallurgical
convereion; the develop-ant of powder netallurgy; an increaee in the corro-
aion reaiatance of nteriala; the developeent of new atrcutural ateela and
alloya; the iaproveaent and develop-eat of new forna of heat. detonation and
chaaicalv-heat treataenta; and the introduction of low-waste technology.

18

m O’PICIAL US! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The increase in the quality of the metal is the basic way to increase the
life of the parts and one of the main sources of the economy of steels and
alloys. Therefore, the development of ferrous Ietallurgy in the trend of
the improvement and creation of methods of production. which provide an
increase in the quality of the emeltable materials. is. at the same time.
one of the means of the economy of metal. In the llth Five-Year Plan there
will be further development in electric-furnace steel smelting and oxygen-
conversion production 91th and increase in the smelting of steel by 1.6 and
1.3 times. respectively. [1). plasma smelting. and also processes of electric-
slag. vacuum-arc. vacuum induction,and electron-bean reseltings [2]. The
portion of the metal scrap and waste products of ferrous metals will be con-
siderably increased in the charge. For example, in the smelting of electric-
furnace steel, the quality of it will consist of more than 951 of the w ight
of the whole charge, and in the total volume of steel production the portion
of metal scrap exceeds 6b! [3]. There is much interest in the smelting of
steel with the use of metallised pellets as the charge. which was developed
at the Oskol'sk electrometallargical combine. In the next five-year plan.
the production of largetonnage forms of metallurgical production with reliable
and stnble normalised quality characteristics will be carried out. In the
first place. it is necessary to ensure an increase in the uniformity and
purity of the metal with respect to harmful impurities: a decrease in the
content of sulfur and phosphorus down to thousandths of a percent. This
makes it possible to increase considerably the ductility at low temperatures
of the alloyed high-strength and low-alloyed steels for gas and oil pipe—
lines. building structures for the northern regions and so on. The large-
tonnage production of such aetal will be possible because of the intensive
development of the extrafurnace methods of refining. The volume of steel
refined by degassing is increased by 3.2 times. by inert gases. 1.6 times.
and by synthetic slags. 1.3 times. Thus. for example. the use of vacuum
processing of electric (sheet) steels in the ladle at the Cherepovets
metallurgical works made it possible to increase considerably the output

of high-quality steels and. furthermore. to lower the cost of one ton of a
cold-rolled sheet by 18-20 rubles [b]. The refining of steel also permits
reducing the consumption of ferroalloys. decreasing the rejects of metal
with respect to chemical composition and defects of the surface of the
rolled stock. and stabilizing the properties of steel fros smelting to
snelting.

The improvement of the metallurgical process stage is one of the trends
which provide a considerable economy of the materials without an increase
in the volume of its production. The main effect is reached due to the
production of efficient forms of metal production and the introduction of
new progressive industrial processes. which improve the structure and com-
plex of mechanical properties of the metal.

In the first case the most promising are works on the optisisation of the
dimensions. the increase in precision of the rolled stock and pipes, the
expansion of their grades (for the purpose of equipping the customer with
materials with minimal deviations of the dimensions from those required),
and also the creation of fundamentally new deforming devices, for example,

19

FOI‘OFIICJAI.USEGDNLY
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

part-rolling sills which allow making by plastic deformation either the
parts directly or blanhs having the configuration of parts. with nininal
allowances for nachining. At present. ferrous netallorgy in the USSR
produces nore than 1,500 nerchant. shaped roll-forned and high-precision
section dimensions of rolled stock. sheet rolled stock - 22,000 dinenaions.
steel pipes - 30.000 section dinensions. and netsl hardware — 50,000 forms
[2]. In recent years about 900 state and dozens of branch standards and

5‘00 specifications for producible production have been renewed. About 300
obsolete and heavy sections are excluded free the assortnent. and requirements
for deviations free the assigned dimensions are tightened. In spite of the
fact that only in the last five years there has been the developnent and
assimilation of netal production of a large range of products (rolled stock
of 870 new progressive section dinensions. including 339 hot-rolled shaped,
283 roll-forned and 268 shaped of high precision), during years of the llth
Pive-Year Plan there will be an increase in the production of roll-formed
section of 1.5 tines. of wide-flange beans 1.2 times. and of sheet cold-
rolled steel 1.5 times [2]. The naxinun economy of netel is achieved in
precision forging and rolling in a field of negative and narrowed tolerances.
For exsnple. as a result of rolling in a field of negative tolerances, at

the "Azovstal'" plant. the Donetsk. western Siberian. Cherepovets Novo»
Lipatak. Chelyabinsk. and Taganrog netallurgical works. the Dneprovsk
metallurgical works ineni Daershinsk. and the "snurstal'" plant, more than
34,000 tons of netal are saved [5]. Extra-sly efficient is the introduction
at the wire. light-section and nediun-section rolling nills of preliminarily
stressed stands (PSS). which makes it possible to produce rolled stock of
high precision. here the nicrostructure and properties of the metal are im-
proved. losses to scale and the thickness of the dacarbonized layer of the
rolled wire are decreased, and the specific quantity of natal of the struc—
tures is lowered. The national econonic effect resulting fron the introduc-
tion of a new system of stands. at the cherepovets netallurgical works

alone was about 60 million rubles. In the llth five-Year Plan the PSS will
be installed at the light-section nills of the western Siberian and Chelyabinsk
netallurgicel works and the "Krivoy log" plant IS]. A considerable reserve
in the economy of metal is the putting into production of progressive indus-
trial processes based on the nest recent achievenents in science and tech—
nolosy. for exanple. the manufacture of machineubuilding parts by the method
of rolling. About a hundred part-rolling nills are already operating in our
country. An increase of 6-5 times in their number nakea it possible not only
to save 350,000 tons of metal yearly. but also free about 20.00()netal-cutting
nachines and 27,000 workers. The total savings amount to about 500 million
rubles per year [6]. Thus only owing to the development of progressive
methods of producing rolled stock of steel pipes and netal hardware, will

The second trend of works on inproving the netallurgical process stage
permits obtaining an econony of natal owing to an increase in the couples

of its nechsnical properties. The successful developnent in this trend in

the next five-year plan. in the first place. is deternined by the results
achieved in the 10th Five-Year Plan in the field of applied and theoretical
physical metallurgy and the theory and practice of heat and deforestion treat-
ments. The basic neans for increasing nechsnical properties of metal is the

20

INMICNHHKJAI.USEIJ§LY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

regulation of the temperature-rate parameters of processes of the deforma-
tion of ingots in their treatment and the combination 0: plastic deforma-
tion with heat treatment. To achieve the maximum economy of metal. it is
necessary to conduct extensive studies on the finding of efficient indus-
trial schemes of heat and heat and strain hardening with the appropriate
alloying of steel. Deserving special attention among these schemes are:

the hardening of the rolled stock by heat treatment from special or milling
heating. monitorable rolling. heat treatment from the intercritical tempera-
ture range. the use of INT [Thermomechanical Treatment] in the production of
rolled stock from steels with perlitic conversion. and thermocyclic treat-
ment. For example. thermal hardening from milling heating in the flow of

the mills. based on the theory of the thermomechanicsl effect on steel and

a technology worked out in each specific case with the use of simple devices
for the cooling of the steel from the deformation temperature. permits a
saving on the avaerage of 221 of the metal and the obtaining in the national
economy of an economical effect of about 38 rubles per ton [7]. During
1981-1985 an increase in the production of such rolled stock of 1.8 times
will be provided. The monitorsble rolling of the lowvalloyed steels. carried
out with high degrees of deformation at comparatively low temperatures. ensures
an increase in their strength and plastic properties. The putting into opera-
tion of the 3000 mill at the Il'ich metallurgical works permits the rolling
additionally in monitorable modes up to two million tons of plate per year [2].
The implementation in future years of rolled stock by monitorsble modes and
different schemes of heat and thermomechanical treatments will provide not
only a saving of the metal. but also a considerable saving of the alloying
elements. since with such methods of treatment it is possible to use economic
cally alloyed materials. As a result of the improvement of the metallurgi-
cal process stage in all links. by 1985 there will be an assimilation of the
technology of the production of sheet and section steel and pipes with an
ultimate strength of 700.2500 HPa. and the average strength of the metal will
increase by 51-61 as compared with that reached in 1980 12].

The powder or "little" metallurgy in the 11th Five-Year Plan should provide

a considerable economy of steels and alloys because of the high utilization
factor of the metal. In the production of each thousand tons of products

by such method. a savings of 2.5 thousand tons of rolled stock will be
achieved. The effect of the savings. first of all. depends on the volume

of production of the high-quality iron powders and also powders from alloyed
steels and alloys. and. therefore. by 1985 it is planned to increase the
production of metallic powder by 3.3 times. To do this. it is necessary to
concentrate the scientific studies in the direction of obtaining iron powders
by the method of the spraying of melts by high-pressure water and the method
of restoration of the ores and hydrogen superconcentrate and of the obtaining
of pure iron oxide and iron powders of higher quality from the depleted
hydrochloric-acid etching solutions of the rolling production. From these
powders it is planned to manufacture products with increased wear resistance.
life, corrosion resistance. and other special properties. This requires the
development of new heat-resistant and corrosion-resistant alloys on the basis
of intermetallic compounds and refractory metals and the improvement of pro-
cesses of the application of heat—resistant. wear-resistant and snticorrosion

21

FOR‘0F‘WC1AI.USE|MNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

coatings by the gas-thermal and ion-plasaa nethods. There is increased
interest in powder cosposite asterials. and the use of these naterials
allows saving not only the scarce alloying elements, but also the special
expansive steels. Tor exanple, the replacaaent on just one centerless

lathe of rollers of hardened steel nous. which feed and hold the bars to be
aachined. by rollers of sintered alloy, titaniun carbide and stainless
steel. takes it possible to increase the resistance by 15-20 tines and obtain
an annual savings of five to six thousand rubles Ill].

The increase in the corrosion resistance of natarials is one of the east
iaportant probleas of modern physical netallurgy, the successful solution
to which is governed by the effectiveness of conbatting corrosion. which
brings losses in the billions of rubles to the national econony. The basic
studies are conducted in the direction of developaent of fundanentsls of the
alloying of new corrosion-resistant steels and alloys and the creation of
poly-er and netallic coatings with the aininal use of expensive and scarce

aetals and. nanely. snticorrosion coatings for parts of nachine-building
production and coatings for pipes.

In the developnent of new naterials. the principle inportance is in works
on the optimization of the conposition of coaplexly alloyed steels and alloys
for the purpose of reducing the consuaption of scarce netsls. for exanple.
nickel. the investigation of the effect of alloying elenents and inpurities
on the structure and corrosion resistance, and the creation of new alloys
with increased corrosion resistance. The use of coatings. especially polyner.
is one of the proaiaing trends in the protection of aetal fron corrosion.
The coabination of the steel base and poly-er coatings pernits creating new
structural naterials with assigned properties. including resistance in dif-
ferent cheaicsl needle. and thernal and sound insulation materials with good
staapability and a concrcial fora. At the present. rmncumm [Central
Scientific Research Institute of Ferrous lietallurgy ineni I. P. Bardin],
jointly with a number of institutes of the chenical industry, is conducting
works to create a new corrosion-resistant and salt-tolerant naterial for
the autonotive industry of the type "Tsinkronetall" [2]. Of the known
nethods of applying netallic coatings, a special place is occupied by vacuua
chronising (VC). the technology of which has been developed by UkrNIISP'BTsSTAL'
[Ukrainian Scientific Research Institute of Special Steel] in collaboration
with a nunber of netallurgical works of our country [8]. This technology
has certain advantages over other nethods of the application of coatings.
For example, a diffusion layer 100-200 us thick with saturation in a vacuun
is for-ed in 3-5 minutes; to obtain a sinilar coating by gas or powder nethods
28-36 hours are required. Such a high rate of the formation of the diffusion
layer is caused by the special feature of the very process of the vc: the
netallising spray gun is vaporized in the heating process in a vacuus, and its
vapors precipitate onto the surface of the article heated above 7oo'c. Under
these conditions an effective diffusion saturation of the surface layers of
the netal occurs. The natal rolled stock (sheets. pipes) with coatings
applied by this aethod has practically the sane resistance at increased
temperatures as do the corrosion-resistant steels KhlBTl and lOKh13 and, in
individual cases. as austenite steels of the type 18-10. i.e., after such

22

FOROFl-‘ICIALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

treatment the standard rolled stock can be successfully used instead of the
more expensive and complerly alloyed steels. A thin chrome-plated sheet.
with respect to corrosion resistance, is equivalent to a himetal, and its
net cost is considerably lower. The VC of boiler pipes, in the retention of
high heat resistance, allows increasing by 2-4 times the resistance of gas
corrosion. increasing the reliability of operation of high-pressure boilers
and considerably reducing the number of major repairs [8].

Other methods of applying coatings are of great importance. Thus a process
which is progressive is the industrial process of the production of a hot-
aluminized thin sheet - a corrosion-resistant. weatherproof and heat-resis-
tant structural material. the application of which in the construction in-
dustry allows increasing by three times the life of the structures as compared
with hot zinc-plated metal [2].

Special attention in the problem of the economy of metal is being given to the
protection of pipes from corrosion: a decrease in their thickness even of
several percent makes it possible to save a significant quantity of steel and
alloys for the national economy. Thus the use of glass enanel coating of
pipes for heat simultaneously with an increase in the period and service of
five to six times allows decreasing the thickness of the wall of the pipes
by 301 to k0! and sharply reducing the consumption of metal [9]. The appli-
cation of the method of applying coatings developed in the UralNITI [Ural
Scientific Research and Technical Institute] at the Sokolovskaarbay mining
combine. with a yearly productivity of the section of 5000 meters of pipes
377 millimeters in diameter, ensures an increase in the resistance of the
pipes of 10 times [9] and a savings of 150 rubles from the use of each meter
of pipe. A large saving of metals is achieved in the production of multi-
layered pipes. In this case the fundamental importance is acquired by the
metal physical problems of producing high-strength rolled steel, beginning
from its smelting and ending with the development of the technology of de-
formation and heat treatment. Showing promise is the modern technology of
smelting steel in oxygen steel-making converters, which ensures the possi-
bility of obtaining the content of alloying elements in narrow limits, the
uniformity of the structure and mechanical properties of the rolled stock.
and the possibility of using the best possible conditions of the milling
being monitored.

The development of new structural materials is a fundamental problem of
modern physical metallurgy. and the successful solution to it, first of all,
depends on the economy of steel and alloying elements. The creation of

new materials in the near future will be accomplished mainly in the same
directions as that of the 10th PivedYear Plan [10]. The main effect of the
economy can be achieved as a result of the development of economically
alloyed steels and alloys possessing an increased complex of physical and
mechanical properties: low-carbon steels alloyed by abundant elements

CHn. Si, Cr), low—carbon steels with carbonitride hardening, martensite-
aging economically alloyed steels, and low—carbon steels of the ferrite-
martensite grades. A considerable savings can be obtained as a result of
the creation of new materials intended for the introduction of highly

23

FOR 0FINC1AI.[EHE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

then in special operating conditions in regions of the Far North. In connec-
tion with this, there is interest in works on the introduction of scone-inal-
ly alloyed steels for gas pipelines, which operate under a pressure of 100 at.
and highly cold-resistant steels (down to ~120'c) for reservoirs and building
structures [2]. For the Operation of the pipelines at increased pressure.
it is necessary to develop steel with a higher couple: of properties than
is used for this steel 096278. The new steel should possess increased im-

and metal scientists, since to do this it is necessary to develop the technology
of snelting steel with narrow linits of the content of the alloying eluents.

26 In); and the technology of the production of pipes. which ensures a high
reliability of the basic metal and welded joint. and an effective corrosion
coating for pipes. The technology for obtaining rolled stock and pipes

fro. steels with nitride-vanadiun hardening will he assimilated in the nest
five-year plan. Structural steels which are resistant to sulfide embrittle-
nent will be used in the llth Five-Year Plan for pipes of petrolsun grade and
apparatuses for processing natural gas. Also fundamentally inportant are
works on the testing of weldable steels with 0.- 800-1000 HPa for the nanu-
fscture of Inchine building parts and parts of building constructions and
also works on the development and introduction of high-strength steel for
welded housings of new atonic energy plants.

The improve-eat and development of new forss of heat. deformation and chemi-
cal-heat treatments are efficient means in the economy of steels and alloys.

with an increase in the conplex of mechanical properties and structural
strength, new netth and progressive industrial processes sake it possible
to improve the quality of the output production and, consequently. increase
the reliability and life of the essential parts of different structures.

trial frequency for heating; heat treatsent (heating) in protective stnospheres
and a vacuum; and the laser treatment of metals. In the llth Five-Year Plan
the nest prosising are works in the field of m [1'hernonechanicsl Treatnent].
in particular. the introduction of H111 [High-Taperature Themechanical

26

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In the field of chemical and heat treatment (CRT) processes which allow
obtaining diffusion layers of high quality and. ultimately. increasing the
life of the parts will be developed. Belonging to these processes, in the
first place, can be different forms of low- and high-temperature processes

of Chemical-Thermal Treatment: cyaniding. cyanidation. carbonitriding, short-
term nitriding. and others. There is special interest in chemical-thermal
treatment at increased temperatures in a vacuum. and when this is carried

out it is possible to effectively act upon the structure of the diffusion
layer through the change in the pressure and improve the quality of the pro-
ducts through the elimination of internal oxidation.

The introduction of low-waste technology. At present in the creation of
new methods of the treatment of materials, beginning with the smelting and
ending with the manufacture of a part. it is necessary to strive for the
development of low-waste technology. This is one of the main sources of
the economy of metal. l'or example, already for several years the collec-
tive P0 211. [Planning Department of the Moscow Automobile Plant

imeni Likhachev] has been carrying out a long-term progras for introducing
low-waste technology. as a result of which tens of thousands of tons of
netal have already been saved [6]. A considerable importance in this
article of economy is occupied by problems of the lowering of the specific
quantity of metal of the structures and the increase in the utilisation
factor of the metal [6]. In connection with this. special significance is
acquired by the combined development by metal scientists. netal physicists
and mechanical engineers of methods for evaluating the structural strength
for the purpose of optimizing the strength safety factors in the calculation
of structures operating in different temperature-rate loading conditions.
In spite of the fact tint in this direction certain achievements have al-
ready been made (determination of the destructive strength of asterisls and
components of impact strength. the plotting of serial curves. and so on).
on the whole the problem remains unsolved. There is fundamental importance
in the studies of the connection of the structure with structural strength.
the classification of factors determining the brittle and ductile failure,
and the creation of universal criteria for estimating the structural strength.

The main efforts in the creation of new machines and assemblies are directed
at the lowering of their weight in calculati‘m per unit power. For example,
89 of the 128 most important products being produced by the machinevbuilding
works of the Sverdlovsk Oblast have a lower specific metal content than
similar Soviet and foreign specimens [6]. however. as Comrade L. I. Brezhnev
noted. "...the specific quantity of metal of many machines and equipment
being produced remains excessively high. The amount of waste in metal work-
ing has not been reduced. Precision billets are slowly being introduced."
In connection with this. the basic problem lies in the creation of such
processes of treataent which will ensure the obtaining of a utilisation
factor of the metal of higher than 0.72-0.73 [6].

The measures outlined for improving the quality of metal. the increase in
the complex of its physical and mechanical properties. and also the improve-
ment of designs of machines and the technology of metal working and s more

25

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLV
me OFFICIAL USE ONLY

extensive use of netsllic snd poly-er eeterisls nske it possible to save

eight nillion tons of rolled stock in nechine building snd two million tons
in construction [6]. Such s result can be resched only if the capetition
for the saving of netsl tskes on sn even wider scope. end it in esch lshor
collective. ss is required by resolutions of the love-her (1981) Plenu- of

the cc 0280. results of its work will be snslyzed. sud reserves for the
succeuful inlmntstion of the production sssigt-ents will be put into
opetstion. . -~ .

“8le

1. Wisterisly nu s"ye:ds nss" [Heterisls of the beauty-sixth Congress
of the CPSU]. Hoscov: Politirdst. 1981. p 39. '

2. Kugushin. A. A.. "Tests of Drench Science in Light of the Resolutions
of the Minty-sixth Congress of the CPSU." STAL'. 1981. No 9. p 1.

3. Khonskiy. G. 5.. "State sud Prospects of the Denloplent of the Process-
ing of Ketel Strep." 5111'. 1981. No 11. p 6.

6. "Bigher the Quality of Metal.” PRAVM. 1981. 22 Dec.

5. Kostyultov. 1. 1.. "Co-petition end Technicsl Progress." m'. 1981.
lo 10. p 2.

6. "Bcononize the lietsl.” PRAVDA. 1981. 30 Dec.

7. Brodov. A. A.. et sl.. In the Collection: "lftektivnost' tekhnicheskogo
progresse v'chernoy netsllurgii" [Bfiiciency of Technical Progress in
Ferrous Hetsllurgy]. Hoscov: Mstsllurgiys. 1979. lo 3. p 28.

8. Petrov. A. L. et sl.. "Diffusion Chroee Coatings on Steel." STAL'.
1981. lo 9. p 63.

9. 81inov. Yu. 1.. "Protection of Pipes fro- Corrosion snt’. Beer." STAL'.
1981. No 10. p 67.

10. "Phynicsl Hetellurgy snd Best Trestnent on the Boundary of the Tenth snd
Eleventh Five-Year Phns." H110! [METALLOVBDKNHB I TMCRBSKAYA
03mm mm]. 1981. No 2. p 3.

11. Gurevich. Yu. 6.. st s1.. 8111'. No 10. p 77.

comum: lzdstel'stvo "lisshinostroyeniye". "Hetsllovedeniye i ternichesksys
obrshotlu netsllov". 1982

9978
680: 1842/1119

26

MWI’SIONIJ
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

WW5 HEW

unc: 669.2:66.061.S
EXTRAC‘IIw OF COPPER. 31cm. AND MALT U111! SEVEN OXYOXIHBS
Hoscow ‘l’SVE‘l'NYYB WY in Russian No 3, Her 82 pp 24-27

[Article by V. P. ‘rrawkin, V. V. Yekahin, V. 8. Ul'yanov, A. H. Hirokhin and
I. V. Belysyev]

[Text] Hydro-stallurgicel methods are the principal nethods enployed in
processing low-grade off-balance sheet as well as difficult-to-heneficiate
oxidized copper ores. In the past these ores were processed according to the
scheme leaching-cenentation, while in recent years extraction nethods of
recovering copper fro. leaching solutions have been in increasingly widespread
ue. This becene possible in connection with the develop-eat of Lix. SHE-529.
Acorga. end Kelex type reagents [1-3], which are used for selective extraction
of copper fro- weakly acid solutions.

Copper extracting agents belonging to the category of oxyoxines — one [5], AB?
[5-7], and others - have been developed in the USSR. 0! these extracting
agents, alhylbensophenonoxine -- A)? - which has gone through full-scale tests
and has heen recs-ended for co-erciel adoption [8] -- has been studied in

the greatest detail.

In spite of the fact that extraction nethoda are already being enployed in the
copper industry abroad, the search for new. lore efficient and cheaper reagents
is continuing. at considerable interest, for angle. is an evaluation of the
influence of the structure of an oxyoxine on its extraction properties. For
ex-ple. introduction of a chlorine atoa into the nolecule of the Lix 70 re-
agent has the result that copper extraction can he sccoaplished fron mre

acid solutions “Balm-1.5). It therefore was of interest to exanine the
properties of alkoxyoxines containing an oxygen eton. which can increase the
stability of the copper cosplex with the oxyoxine (ADM-l and AOBP-Z). Finally,
the presence of two oxyoxine groupings in the extracting agent nolecule can

lead to an increase in the copper extracting capacity of the extracting agent
(OKFO).

In this article we shall exanine the extraction properties of the following re-
agents, which are were of the class of oxyoxines:

Io-alk (Cy-Cg) oxy-Z-oxybensophenonoxiae (AOBP—l);

27

FOIOFFICIALUSEONLY
FT”!(HWW(1AI.USE‘DNLN

6-alk (Cy-C9) oxy-2-oxyphennaphthenyloxise (asst-2);
bis-(6-oay-S-caprinophenoxiae)-2.Z-propane (OKIO).

he used specinens of r .gents containing not less than 95-97 percent of the
principal substance. All reagents are viscous liquids of a dark brown color.
with a density of 0.92-0.96 g/cn3. The reagents anarzi and A088-2 are readily
soluble in kerosene, and the reagent OKPO - in s nixture of kerosene plus

20 percent octyl a1;nhol. The viscosity of 10 percent (by values) solutions

of these reagents in appropriate organic solvents vaa (1.50-1.95) x 10'2n2/s at
JO'C. Preli-inary tests established that in 2-3 sinutec of phase airing. extrac-
tion of copper into organic phase is not less than 90-95 percent.

0! the greatest interest is extraction of copper fron sulfate solutions. It

is evident free the figures in Table 1 that the tested reagents possess a

fairly high copper capacity and selectivity as regards principal iapurities,
which are not inferior to the properties of A8? reagent. At the ease tine re-
agent AOBI-l is even sonevhat superior in these properties to Ali. and therefore
we shall subsequently era-ins in detail the principal properties of precisely
this reagent.

Table 1. Distribution of Copper and Inpurities During Extraction by 10 Percent
(by Volule) Solutions of Oxyoxines in larosene (0:3-lzl) and Re-
extraction by 20 Percent Sulfuric Acid (0:3-1:1)

Solutions pH Content 1
Cu 11 Fe 111 Zn 11 ni 11 Co 11

 

Initial

Refining

Agent: 2.01 2.3 0.85 1.72 1.68 0.81

OKFO 1.68 0.76 0.86 1.70 1.68 0.81

AOBP-Z 1.66 0.79 0.83 1.71 1.66 0.80

AOBP-l 1.63 0.62 0.86 1.72 1.67 0.81

A8? 1.65 0.67 0.82 1.71 1.67 0.81

Rsextract:

OKFO - 1.69 0.05 0.05 0.06 0.005
AOBP-Z - 1.56 0.07 0.05 0.02 0.005
AOBP-l - 1.68 0.06 0.03 0.03 0.005
A8? - 1.66 0.06 0.06 0.03 0.005

As a rule sulfate solutions for leaching copper-containing ore have a pH of
1.5-3.0. in this case the deter-thing factor in selective separation of copper
free iron, as the principal inpurity, is the acidity of the aqueous phase.
Separation of copper and iron takes place nost efficiently vhen pﬂ-1.0-2.0
(Figure 1).

Renoval of copper and iron inpuritiea fron nickel electrolyte is a couple:
technical problen. During extraction with enploynent of alkoxybenrophenon-
oxiea with pa-S. copper and iron pass into organic phase, while virtually no
nickel is extracted. Reextraction of the copper from organic phase is
accomplished with a solution containing 150-200 gll of 32505. uhereby

28

FIHRGIWWCJAI.USE10NLV
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 1. Influence of pa ov extraction (I) - degree of extraction) fro-
aulfate aolntiona -- copper 1. iron 2. nickel 3. and cobalt 6. by A0" colu-
tione in keroaene. Initial aqueona phaae, gll: 1.2 Co; 2.0 Peal); 5.83 hi,
0.85 Co

 

reextracta are obtained, on which electrodepoaition of copper can be per-
toned.

Studies have ahown that the principal nechanialo of extraction of netala by
alkoxybenzophenonoxina tron aulfate and anlfate-chlorida aolutiona are sinilar.
Copper ia extracted at p850: extraction (pl! at which “-1), equal to 1.2 for
eulfate and 1.0 for aulfate-chloride aolntiona. Extraction of the other netale
tahea place in the following acqnence: iron-nichol-cobalt-nanganeae-zinc
(Table 2).
Table 2. p350; Valnaa of lietala in Extraction by a 10 Percent (by Volume)
aolution of A03! in Ietrachlorethylene

natal Sulfate Solution. Sulfate-Chloride Solution“
Cu 1.2 1.0
Fe 2 . 5 2 . 3
hi 5. 7 6.6
Co 5 . 8 6. 7
Mn 5.8 4.7
Zn 5.9 5.0

’I 50 371 aulfate ion concentration.
H 60 g/l aulfate ion, 10 gll chloride ion concentration.

 

In the case of aulfate-chloride eolutiona, the page; value. are displaced into
the nore acid region. Thia ia probably connected with the uiatenca of
chloride or anlfate—chloride groupa in ouch aolutiono, which are better ex-
tracted by oxyoxine than netal eulfatea.

uploynent of tetrachlorethylene aa a diluent pravanta the fornation of a
second organic phase, which ia connected with the high aoluhility of conplexea
of copper or other netala with oxyoxinea in diluenta of thin type. In addition,

29

MWLIJSEONLV
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

«ploy-ant of this diluent askes it possible to extract aetals froa nore acid
solutions than with the eaploynent of a solution of A031? reagent in kerosene.
For exaaple. with extraction of copper fron sulfate solutions of 10 percent
(by volt-e) alkoxybenrophenonoxins in kerosene. ﬁlm-1.65, while in
tetrachlorethylene , pasoz-l. 2 .

0f practical significance is the separation of copper and zinc when they are
both present in sulfate and sulfate-chloride solutions. Extraction of zinc and
cadniun by oxyoxines, even when pin-s, is quite insignificant (razom). which
aakea it possible selectively to recover copper fron such solutions by
extraction. The extraction process can be used to renowe copper fro. ainc
electrolytes and to treat copper-chlorine cake in the production of zinc.

Ansonia nethode of processing copper- ad nickel-containing ore are of in-
terest. Processes of extracting copper [9) and nickel [10] fro. a-onia solu-
tions with oxyoxines used as extracting agents are in practical use at the
present tine. One can encounter in industry anonia solutions with a fairly
high content of carbonate. sulfate and chloride ions. Concentrations of copper,
nickel, and cobalt in these solutions can vary across a broad range.

I
100
M

  
 

M

[n.1, m

Figure 2. Relationship between extraction of copper l. nickel 2, and cobalt 3
froa an .onia concentration for an A031? solution in kerosene.

Aqueous phase. gll: 1.1 Cu; 3.6 Ni; 1.2 Co; 10 003'

 

As is evident fron Figure 2. change in s-onia concentration in s-onia-
carbonate solutions has practically no effect on extraction of copper, while
nickel distribution factors increase fro- l to 10. and extraction of cobalt in-
to organic phase is quite negligible «demon-0.003). Consequently.
selective separation of copper and nickel fron cobalt during extraction fro-
n-onia-carbonste solutions is possible. The slight influence of changes of
concentrations of main nakes the process of extraction of copper and nickel

easily controllable.

The concentration of carbonate ion in the aqueous phase has practically no ef-
fect an extraction of copper, which is extracted by 10 percent (by volune)
AODF-l with a high Q (>100). Extraction of nickel decreases smoothly with

30

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
an increase in con entration of carbonate ion: for solutions with a 003' -10 g/l.
ltd-10. and for [ 1-60 gll - [4-1 (a-onia content 50 g/1). Thus in the case
of mania-carbonate solutions. the separation factors of copper-cobalt and
nickel-cobalt pairs are large across the entire range of change in carbonate

ion concentration. For «sale, with a carbonate ion concentration of 40 3/1
and anonia 50 g/l. para-16.000. and 3.1143,:350. This nkes it possible
selectively to recover copper and nickel froa the aqueous phase. Separation

of these netals can be accolplished at the reextraction stage. A sulfuric

acid solution at a concentration of 50-80 g/l is used for resurrection of
nickel. and 150-300 g/l for copper.

Extraction of nets;- froa a-onia-sulfate solutions has certain peculiarities.
For exeaple. an increase in the a-onia concentration leads to suppression of
copper and cobalt extraction. while nickel is extracted by oryoxiae [l] in a
fairly narrow range of anemia concentrattns (30-80 gll), with Kd-Z-h. The
metal separation factors reach saxima values with fairly low a-onia con-
centrations (to 60-60 gll).

I

m i

70

to

m ’

0,0 M m on
toad. m

Figure 3. Relationship between extraction of nickel 1 and cobalt 2 froa a
calciua chloride concentration for an A0” solution in kerosene. AqueOus phase,
3/1: 4.6 Ni; 1.5 Co; 90 M3 (bond)

 

Sulfate ion concentration in the aqueous phase does not greatly affect ex-
traction of copper: Rd: 10 in the range 50-250 g/l of sulfate ion. Extraction
of nickel increases with an increase in sulfate ion concentration, while
extraction of cobalt decreases. Bxperinental data indicates that with the aid
of alkoxybenrophenonoxiae [11 one can selectively recover nickel and cobalt
froa anonia-sulfate solutions with high sulfate-ion concentrations (>150 g/l)
and comparatively low a-onia concentrations (< 60 g/l). In these conditions
cobalt renains in solution.

Recovery of netals fron anemia-chloride solutions has been exsnined in the
example of nickel and cobalt. with a constant concentration of calciun

chloride (~150 g/l). change in the sunnia content in aqueous phase does not
lead to a substantial change in extraction of nickel and cobalt. Throughout the
entire investigated range of anaonia concentration (60-120 g/l). nickel distribu-
tion factors rennin high (ltd; 100). and cobalt -- low (lazOJ). This sakes it
possible to separate nickel and cobalt with [33900-1000. Calciun chloride

31

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

concentration also has little effect on the coefficients of distribution of
nickel and cobalt (Figure 3). Thus nickel and cobalt can easily be separated
with extraction by oxyoxias [1] also in the case of sulfate-chloride solutions.
Conclusions. 1. The high selectivity of recovery of copper fro. eulfete and
sulfate-chloride solutions with the eqloy-ent of slkoxybentophcnonoxiae so
extracting agent hae been shown.

2. The possibility of separating copper, nickel and cobalt iron as-
aonia-carbonate and a-onia-eulfate solutions by neans of extraction by
alkogbenuphenonoxiu has been established.

3. lickel. during utrection fro- a-onia-chloride solutions. transi-
tions to organic phase with high coefficients of distribntion. while cobalt
renaina in aqueous phase.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
l. Hut. 0. 5. am. IND“ No 17. 1977, pp 706-712.
2. Van der zeeuw, mm. Vol 30, lo 6, 1977, pp 30-37.

3. Probert. ‘l‘. 1.. and Richards, K. 1., Pace. 1830. Vol 2. 1980. Liege. Belgim.
pp 80-228.

6. user. I. 1.; Giganov. G. P.; and Redneva. Ye. 31., rsvmm METAL“, No 2.
1976. pp Zb-ZS.

S. Laskorin. I. IL; Ul'yanov. V. 5.; end Sviridova. R. A.. rsvmmn mum.
I70 10. 1972, pp 17-18.

6. Laskorin. B. 11.; Ul'yanov, V. 8.; Sviridova. l. A.; and Akinove, I. 0..
TSWB “FULLY, No 6, 1975. pp 26-28.

7. Laokorin. 3. IL; skorovarov. D. 1.; Shatalov. V. V.; et a1, 13m
mum. Ito 6. 1971, pp 19-21.

8. Trevkin. V. 1.; Ivanov. A. V.; Yakshin. V. V.; et sl, TSVB‘IIIYYB MAL“,
lo 11. 1979. pp 26-28.

9. Kuhn. H. C.. CMJIIN. MD at. b .. Vol 67. 11, No 762. 1976. pp 62-73.
10. CI“ BULLET“. Vol 67. Rio 7402. 1976. pp 82-86.
COPYRIGB‘I': Irdatel’stvo "Hetellurﬂya", ”TSVBMYB MY", 1982

3026
(:80: 81“ I 1166

32

”WIMONLY
MATERIALS scmcs ms

UDC 66.017

5013 DIRECTIONS ?08 0mm or was sum 0? MATERIALS
Moscow VESTNIK WWII “AUX SSSR in Russian No 1. Jan 82 pp 47-56

[Article by Ch.v. Kopetsxiy, corresponding member. 0881! Mada-y of Sciences. and
LP. Vyatkin. candidate of physical and mathematical sciences]

[Text] The solution of problems related to the creation of materials with given
physicochemical and mechanical properties determines the progress being made in many
branches of technology and the national economy. In connection with this, there are
heightened requirements for the development of the science of materials as a field
of knowledge that has been called upon to provide scientific substantiation and
practical recommendations for the creation and utilization of new and the production
of traditional materials with extremely good characteristics. One of the main goals
is to investigate the surface of materials. which has a definite effect on a materi-
al's properties and the nature of the processes taking place when articles made from
it are being used. The rapidly growing flow of scientific publications in this
field has resulted in an extraordinarily broad spectrum of practical problems. the
successful solution of which is directly related to understanding the properties of
a surface. the progressive development of methods of investigating it. and the emer-
gence of new. highly effective methods for treating both the external and internal
surfaces of \aterials. In this article we discuss several of the areas of investi-
gation in the science of materials that have been developing most actively in recent
years.

The traditional object of the science of materials is metal. The knowledge that has

been amassed in the field of the science of materials makes it possible to formu-
late, in particular. the following conclusion: in order to provide metal articles

with the hast mechanical properties. it is necessary to create a given macro- and
nicrostructure with a controllable chemical composition. including that of any al-
loyed material; in connection with this. in most cases it is important to have chem-
ical and structural uniformity.

It is a well known fact that a metal polycrystalline aggregate is characterised by a
ramified system of internal surfaces: these are the boundaries of the grains. on
which intergrain. internal adsorption of impurities--primarily harmful ones--active-
1y develops. In this case, the grains' boundaries obviously become the weakest
place in the material. Censequently. for a generally invariable content of harmful
impurities in a metal. reducing the size of the grain--that is, increasing the over-
all area of the grain boundaries-«must result in a reduction in the impurity content
per unit of grain boundary area and an increase in the material's three-dimensional
strength. -

33
It”!(lﬂﬂ€141.lﬂﬂi(ﬂ1l¥
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

     

$33 Per this purpose we are developing differ-
ent methods for treating metals that are
‘0 realized during crystallization from the
liquid state and during processing of a
3° metal in the solid state. They include.
,0 for example. the use of ultrasound in the
zone of crystallization of a steel ingot in
«0 continuous casting units. which results in
a reduction in the size of the grain that
vooo .9... "00 no use mo .0 is accompanied by an improvement in the
Figure 1. Dependence of iqact strength characteristics.
strength on temrature: 1. after
treatment with ultrasound during rigure 1 depicts the dependence of ispact
crystallization: 2. without treatment strength a): on tesperature for a piece of
with ultrasound. steel subjected to such treatment (curve 1)

and a piece cast without the use of ultra-
sound (curve 2). The equiaxial. small-crystal structure that is typical of an ingot
treated with ultrasound. instead of the coarse-grained dendrite structure that is
obtained by standard technology. provides» as is obvious from Figure l--a twofold
increase in impact strength.

A substantial reduction in grain size in the solid state (for steels. in particular)
is also possible when other metal treatment methodsuincluding detonation and re-
crystallisation processes with repeated heating and cooling--are used. because of
phase recrystallization (including phase cold hardening during rapid heating). Such
treatment proved to be particularly effective for the pipe steels for the main high-
pressure pipelines that are used in the northern regions of our country. For in-
stance. the method of cyclic (three or more cycles) heat treatment with heating
rates of lo deg/s and cooling in water after each cycle makes it possible to obtain
a material with a grain size of 3—5 um (13th ball). which results in an increase in
impact strength and a lowering of the fracture transition temperature. When l7GlS
steel in treated in this way. its impact strength is increased from 6 to 10.5 )ug/cm2
(when tested at 40°C).

In the limiting case. the small-crystal structure can be represented as amorphous.
Right now, intensive work is being done to develop different methods for hardening
from the liquid state for the purpose of obtaining an amorphous or extraordinarily
small crystalline structure. In order to do this. it is necessary to achieve cool-
ing rates of 106-107 deg/s. The interest in such materials is huge. since they dem-
onstrate new and unique properties. for example. for compounds of the Pe-P-C and
Pe-Cr-P-c types. the maximum strength °B is 310 and 385 kg/s-z. respectively. while
filaments with an amorphous structure that are made frou the alloy P960036m6328
have 03 u 450 kg/l.2 and. in addition. are very hard and resistant to wear1 (the
level of hardness for “80320 reaches 4,100 kgf/uz). The mechanical characterist-
ics of amorphous alloys are extraordinarily sensitive to a change in the alloy's
composition. for example. replacement of part of the iron in the alloy "80":7‘913
with titanium, vanadium. chromium or manganese leads to an increase in its micro-
hardness from 750 to 850 kgf/mz. However. the introduction into the alloy of such

 

1See: Duhay. 9., Sitek. 1.. Prejsa. m. and Butvin. p.. ms. 5m. s01... Vol 35m.
No 1. 1976. pp 223-233.

3‘

FORWUSEONLY
«lvwmts as cobalt nickel or copper results in a lowering of the microhardness val-
nor-:1 to 650 my .

The detonation mechanism of such alloys is interesting. Hhen stretched they are
subject to brittle failure. whereas during compression or flexure testing a high deo
gree of plasticity is seen. Por example. bars made from the alloy Pd-rLs-Cue-Silsj
that are 2 am: in diameter can be rolled into strips that are 0.1 II thick. The high
plasticity of amorphous materials makes it possible to produce deformable tapes from
brittle materials, such as hu—Si and hu-Ge solder and other solders used in elec-
tronics to join stainless steels and heat-resistant alloys (NiagCrsi'e3814Sie).

Rapid hardening from the liquid state. which eliminates segregation effects almost
completely. provides both a uniform chemical composition and a homogeneous structure
in the solid state. The absence in amorphous metal alloys of defects of the type of
grain boundaries. dislocations and so on. which are typical of a crystalline struc-
ture and are sources for the origination of corrosion processes. provide these ma-

terials with good anticorrosion properties. In the present literature there are
description of many experimental facts that note for amorphous alloys either a com-

plete lack oi corrosion losses or a reduction in them in comparison with crystalline
alloys having the same composition.

The magnetic characteristics of amorphous alloys are extremely good: high magnetic
permeability and low coercive force. while the magnetostriction of the saturation of
a number of alloys reaches previously unachievable values (6 5°10”) . Thanks to
these properties. amorphous materials are extremely promising for the production of
magnetic circuits, transformers and motors (instead of texturized ferrosilicon). the
magnetic circuits of magnetic recording heads. magnetic screens and so on.

Thanks to the development of methods for directed action on the external surface of
materials in recent years, it is now possible to solve on a qualitatively new level
the well known problem of insuring the optimum relationship between the surface's
properties and the bulk of the material. Here we are talking about the intensive
development work that is being done on methods involving laser treatment, ion doping
and modern methods for creating special coatings. The use of these surface treat-
ment methods makes it possible to raise the level of the mechanical and physico-
chemical properties of material surfaces and achieve fundamentally new effects that
are expanding substantially the boundaries of the practical utilisation of such ma-
terials.

Surface treatment with lasers is being introduced intensively in various technologi-
cal methods for treating materials. We should also point out the extensive intro-
duction of laser technology in the automobile industry and other branches of machine
building. which is being can; ed out under the leadership of Academician Ye.P.
Velikhov. when the treatment modes are varied, it is possible to realize different
mechanisms for strengthening material surfaces. For instance. by partially melting
the surface of a piece that is being worked. rapid cooling causes the effect of re-
duction in grain size to be achieved. when working without partial melting, mechan-
isms typical for traditional hardening methods are realized. he Academician v.0.
Sadovskiy points out. phase cold hardening plays the basic role in them.

ISN‘: Hasumoto, Tu SCIENCE REPORTS JUST NHOKU UNIV” Vol 26A. No 4/5: 1977: PP
246-262.

35
FOR 0mm USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Laser chemicothermal treatment, or laser doping, offers extensive prospects for the
creation of materials with unique properties. Hith the help of treatment of this
type. by using the effect of rapid melting and hardening it is possible to introduce
into the surface layers of steel the most variegated calponents in cosbinations and
quantities that cannot be achieved by standard chemicothermal treatment methods.

“'0 9

    

    

      

.5 .0 lb 0 l
0.6 to 3.3 10' 25 “(1) 0 | 3. l’ -(1)

Figure 2. Change with depth of hardness of steel (left) and coaposition of
alloying ccaponents (right) after laser chemiootheraal treatment.

Key: 1. Depth. an 2. Composition. Q

When the treatment mode parameters (radiated power and duration of the effect on the
zone being treated) are chosen appropriately. it is possible to create a given
structure in the surface layer of a material. For instance, when fusing together a
powder with a complex cuposition (Ho. Cr. Ni, Si and chronium carbide). using .
continuous €02 laser with a radiated power of 8-10 ha and an exposure time of about
1 s, in the surface layer of low-carbon steel a structure that insures a fourfold
increaie in hardness (Figure 2) and has a ramified system of micropores is ob-

Such a structure. as is well known, insures the maximum wear resistance
for the parts of a friction assembly that are functioning under hydrodynamic fric-
tion conditions.

When creating laser treatment (in the pulsed mode. for example) conditions that in-
sure the hardening rates needed to obtain amorphous alloys from the liquid state, in
alloys of the Pe-B-Si type it is possible to create a thin surface layer (about
10-15 um thick) with an amorphous structure. The nontriviality of this statement is
based on the fact that the amorphous phase exists in direct contact with a crystal-
line phase having the same composition.

At the present time there already exist quite a few publications describing the use
of laser thermal and chenicothermal treatment to improve such operating properties
as wear and corrosion resistance. thermal stability and so forth. In connection
with this. the basic advantages of the laser treatment of materials over furnace and
induction heating catsist of the possibility of carrying out effective surface ther-
nal treatment with a high productivity rate, including the possibility of local

 

 

1800: Pelmondo. A” and Castagna, H" ‘1'!!!“ SOLID runs. V01 64, 1979. pp 249-256.

36
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

thermal strengthening of given sections of a surface with mir imal distortions of the
geometry of the surface being treated and minimal thermal stresses. The latter fact
is particularly important when treating precision parts with complex shapes and ar-
ticles made of cast iron. At the sue time, energy consumption for the heating of
the inner bulk of a material, which is not being strengthened, is eliminated.

Laser chemicothermal treatment opens the possibility of the widespread replacement
of expensive alloyed steels with simple carbon ones. Nevertheless. the present
stage of development of this method can be characterised as the initial one, con-
sisting of the accumulation of experimental facts. The quite thorough science of
materials analysis of phases and structures that are obtained and the determination
of the general rules governing their formation and evolution--in a word. everything
that has been developed for traditional thermal treatment methods--is now of no val-
ue. This area is still a ”blank spot“ in science of materials.

This applies to equal degree to methods f -r
treating materials using ion doping. It
now firmly implanted in technological meth-
ods for the creation of modern semiconduct-
ing instruments, but in the field of metal
treatment only the first steps have been
taken. The well-known skepticism with re-
spect to implantation metallurgy. which is
usually related to the shallowness of the
effect on the material (no more than sever-
al thousand angstroms) and the relatively
complicated and expensive equipment, is
disappearing rapidly because of the exten-
sive possibilities of the treatment method.
Ion doping makes it possible to introduce,
in the required concentration, any admix-
ture in any material at any temperature to
a given (within the capabilities of this

      

o
9

o 1.2 2.4 so As method) depth. As a result. it is possible
: vauueuQ) to obtain states in the surface layers of a
Figure 3. Dependence of rate of nor- material that are fundamentally impossible
malised wear of stainless steel on to realize by such traditional methods as,
slippage distance: a. unimplanted for example, cementntion and nitriding.
sawles; b. implanted samples.
Key: 1. Normalized wear rate A large part of the different uses of ion
2. Distance, km doping are related to improving the mechan-

ical properties of the surfaces of metals.
This means, primarily, increasing the wear resistance and fatigue strength. For in-
stance, when stainless steel is doped with carbon. boron. nitrogen. titanium or a
combination of titanium with one of the named metalloids. the wear resistance of
test pieces is increased by a factor of 100 (Figure 3)1. In connection with this it
turns out to be essential that the effect of the increase in wear resistance pene-
trates to a depth many times greater than that achievable with an implanted ion.

 

15cc: Hirvonen, 1.x., et al.. rum soup FILMS. Vol 63, 1979. pp 5-10.

37

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

This phenomenon is related to radiation-stimulated diffusion, which is well known
from the science of irradiated materials and which consists of a significant (up to
several orders of magnitude) increase in the diffusion coefficients of a material's
components when radiation defects are introdu-ed into it. During ion doping. when
the ions' energy can reach 200 kev and the dose is about 1013 ions/c1112. a signifi-
cant concentration of radiation defects is also achieved. In addition to this. when
materials undergoing wear tests are subjected to friction, quite high temperatures
are realized at the interacting pair's area of contact, which leads to an increase
in the mobility of a material's different components and complexes of them contain-
ing radiation defects. .Radiation-stimulated diffusion and the local increase in
temperature at the point of contact result. therefore. in the propagation in the
body of a test piece of a dose of initially introduced ions. the maximum concentra-
tion of which is reached at a depth of 500-1 .000 K in the irradiation zone. depend-
ing on the nature and energy of the ions.

As far as the detailed mechanism of the process of increasing wear resistance is
concerned. because of the insignificant amount of experimental data from investiga-
tions of composition and structure. it is still quite difficult to draw even quanti-
tative conclusions. It should be mentioned here that even in materials not doped
with ions this multifaceted mechanical process. which is composed of different
physicochemical phenomena. has not yet had any clear description at the atomic lev-
el. This applies, in equal measure. to the understanding of the phenomenon of an
increase in a material's fatigue strength after ion doping.

Ion doping is also extremely promising from the viewpoint of increasing the corro-
sion resistance of materials. In the first place. it is possible to achieve high
corrosion resistance values because of the creation in the surface layer of com-
pounds with new physicochemical characteristics. It is obvious that such is the
case when titanium is doped with palladium. when the treated material's resistance
to corrosion1 increases by a factor of more than 1.000. In the second place. when
the material to be irradiated and the doping ion are chosen appropriately. along
with the energy and intensity of the irradiation. in the treated material's surface
layer there appears an amorphous state that is also characterized by increased cor-
rosion resistance (as is the case for amorphous alloys produced by hardening from a
liquid state). The possibility of obtaining amorphous states by ion doping methods
is also interesting because it can be realized for even pure metals. This has now
been achieved in practice for the following systems: copper implanted with tantalum
or tungsten and iron implanted with tantalum. me distinctive property of such
amorphous states is their high thermal stability. for example. a Cu-H system does
not lose the characteristics of an amorphous structure even when it is aged at 600'C
for 1.5 h.

As in the case of amorphous layers obtained by laser treatment methods. during the
creation of ion-doped layers. the amorphous surface layer coexists with the crystal-
line state without any disruption in continuity. In both cases the transition from
the amorphous to the crystalline state apparently takes place through a series of
intermediate states. This type of structure is of extraordinary theoretical inter-
est, since it can give information about the nature and evolution of the amorphous
state. which is of importance for the practical utilization of amorphous materials.

—.___.—————

1'l‘oumshev. N.D.. Guseva. H.I.. et al.. DOKL. AN SSSR. Vol 256. No S. 1981. pp 1129-
1133.

38

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
_ “a. BLgIILl-luﬂllbc uaacaw u, av" wy‘ll" “nan-"3,

methods is the creation of complex surface compounds that cannot be produced by tra-
ditional methods. including methods for hardening from a liquid state and direct ion

doping methods. since the ion doping process is accompanied by atomization of the
basic material. for sufficiently large doses a state is reached where no further in-

tration in the substrate is limited to a certain value. In crder to achieve a high-
er level of concentration of a required ion in a given substrate, the process is

A thin (on the order of several hundred
angstroms) layer of the material that is
needed in order to obtain the required com-
pound in the surface layer is first applied
to the substrate's surface in any manner.
such as by thermal evaporation in a vacuum.
This two-layered composition is then ir-

gee radiated by flows of ions of . for example.

a an inert gas. As a result of the complex

93-0 processes occurring when the gas ions col~

i lide with the atoms of the applied surface
. 33.7 layer. as well as the dissipation of the

implanting layer's energy, the applied lay-
er mixes with the material of the basic
substrate and compounds with different
stoichiometric compositions are formed.

    
 

”’0 so 40 00 so too This method is now the only possible one
A. «x u. N- for obtaining, in a solid state, alloys
Figure 4. Dependence of lattice pa- with a uniform distribution of components
rameter of metastable solid alloys in a broad area of concentrations of sys-
formed by ion-beam mixing, at differ- tens characterized by limited solubility
ent temperatures. from an initial both in the liquid and the solid state.

film composition: a. G‘i‘sK [possibly For example, for an Ag-Ni system the maxi-
face-centered cubic) solution based mum equilibrium solubilitv in the solid
on Ag: b. G‘rsK solution based on Ni. state is 0.1 at. \ Ni in Ag at 960°C and 2
Key: 1. Lattice parameter. X at. t Ag in Ni near the monotectic tempera-
2. (Vegard's) Law ture of l,435°c. Over a broad interval of
compositions. in the liquid state this sys-
tem is subject to lamination beC'use of the limited solubility of the components in
each other. When the ion-beam mixing method is used on a multilaer composition con-

20-100 X and the total thickness being 800 i, when xenon ions with an energy level
of 300 kev are used it is possible to obtain solid, homogeneous alloys throughout
the entire interval of concentrationsl. An analysis of these alloys showed (Figure
4) that there are two phases present. in them: a solution based on Ag and a solution
based on Ni, differing not only in the parameters of the crystalline lattice. but al-
so in other properties. in particular the dependence of the Ni-based solution's lat-
tice parameter on the temperature at which the alloy was formed.

_—_________
1500: Tsanr, a.v., and Hayer, I.w.. apps. pays. LET'I‘., Vol 37(4), 1930, pp 389-392.
39

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The prospects for using ion doping to create materials with special properties are
extremely good, and it is already clear that they are far from being exhausted by
the exawles given above. morefore, the science of materials aspects of this meth-
od of treating material surfaces are becoming the determinant ones for the introduc-
tion of ion doping in practice.

The first investigations of the properties of ion-doped layers already show that
with this method it is possible to obtain the most variegated structural states and.
in particular, stable solid solutions that are typical of equilibrium conditions for
solution formation. For examle, an Au-Ag system forms a continuous series of solid
solutions both for standard methods for the formation of these alloys and when ion
doping is used. However, for systems characterised by limited solubility in the
solid state, such as Cu-Ag, the solubility limits are enlarged considerably: in oth-
er systems there appear different metastable solutions of a substitutional as well
as an interstitial nature. The regularities governing the formation of these solu-
tions are not subject to the known rules of alloy formation, although to formulate
new rules is still impossible, since only single binary systems have as yet been in-
vestigated. The theoretical analysis of this problem is quite complicated. because
along with the physicochemical properties of the elements forming the alloys it is
necessary to take into consideration the effects caused by the alloy formation pro-
cess itself . such as the formation of radiation defects, replacement collisions and
so forth.

Among the methods for directed action on the surface of solids, the creation of
coatings is new the one most cosmonly used in practice. In connection with this,
along with the traditional methods (diffusion, galvanic and so on) intensive devel-
opment work is being done on new ones: plasmochemical, magnetronic vaporization
methods, various methods for ion-beam deposition of coatings and so on.

Progress in the development of these methods is related to the possibility of creat-
ing. with their help, coatings from materials from a broad class, ranging from sim-
ple materials to complex composition and compounds that determine, in turn, the var-
iegated spectrum of properties of these coatings and make it possible to use these
materials in the most widely separated areas of the national economy, from machine
building to the production of the very smallest instruments used in medical technol-
ogy and the submicron elements of semiconducting instmnts and superconductors.

Industry--particular1y different branches of machine building and the machine tool
building industrynis now making extensive use of coatings to increase both the wear
resistance and fatigue strength of friction assesbly parts, as well as the wear re-
sistancc of cutting tools. As a rule, the materials used for coatings of this type
are compounds characterized, on the one hand, by a high hardness level and. on the
other, low chemical activity. The choice of coating is determined by the fact that
in most cases a material's wear resistance is directly proportional to its surface
layer's microhardness and inversely proportional to its chemical activity. Allowing
for this, as well as economic factors, the coating most cosmonly used right now is

titanium nitride.

For instance, when this coating is produced under certain conditions, it is possible
to obtain a microhardness value of about 3,500 hg/mz, in connection with which the
coating's compositionl corresponds to a eutectic mixture of 50 percent Tin and SO

 

1See: Yacobson, 8.3., Nil-sajadda, R., and Banshah, ILL, mm SOLID FILMS, Vol 63.
1979' Pp 333-339.
so

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ope-WI”.
88
M
0
83...
z
.55
3.?
“g
00
5:
Q
'9.
5.5
F:

nub. In"
3
u
0
5
a
n

A
Inc
w

00:! a esion, m a
umber of cases multilayer coat‘ngs are
' 1203. created. e use in the tool inauatry, 1’:
Key: 1. Depth of wear crater, u example. of. multilayered coatings of the
me + A1 03 and MC + um
tools is slgnificant and increaaea t service life 0
to: of 4-10 (Figure 5). In this case
material that "

e ion'a ener
lace. e advantages of this
continued convincingly by measurements of coating Inlet-alumnus:
its level is always higher or Couposlte coatings.
Unique propert

emstrated by 30-1:

alled diam
methods for

obtaining th

.5.

61
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI OFFIOAL USE ONLY

cmplex conditions of the cosbined effect of an aggressive nediun and high tespera-
tures and so on. The effectiveness of their use at the present time and further
progress in the development of methods for obtaining then depend essentially on our
gaining an understanding of the formation and evolution of the coatings' structures
and coqositions, as well as the processes taking place on the interphase boundar-.
ies.

At the present time, the study of coatings in the science of materials is lagging
considerably behind their practical utilisation. As was pointed out earlier, this
applies to all the modern methods for acting on internal and external interfaces
and is obviously related to the fact that the layers of a material in which substan-
tial changes take place in both structure and properties as the result of treatment
with modern methods are extraordinarily thin. Traditional science of materials
methods for investigating such structures cannot produce the necessary intonation
about the processes taking place in these layers.

Therefore, further progress in the development of the science of materials as ap-
plied to thin surface layers must be related to the use of modern methods of surface
analysis. Quite a few original and smary works devoted to the development and ap-
plication of nodern surface analysis methods have now been published in both the
foreign and domestic literature. The spread of these methods to specific science of
metals investigations is being held up only because of 'a lack of the appropriate
equipment, since the Soviet tool buil"ng industry has only just begun to develop
and produce some types of it. The development of the tool building industry for in-
vestigations in the field of the science of material surfaces will undoubtedly make
it possible to elevate this research to qualitatively s new level.

COPYRIGHT: Isdetel'stvo 'Nauka". 'Vestnik Akademii nauk sssn". 1982

11746
C50: 1842/1128 - m '-

62

5'0! OFFICIAL USE ONLY