FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10599
18 June 1982

East Europe Report-

SCIENTIFIC AFFAIRS

(FOUO 3/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also fron news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. "here no processing indicator is given, the infor-
nation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the u.s. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OUNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/l

18 June

EAST EUROPE REPORT
SCIENTIFIC AFFAIRS

(P000 3/82)

Couteurs

CZECHOSLOVAKIA

Bottom Pouring of High-Alloy Steel Produces Improved Yields
(Vladimir Hrabe, Jiri Bauer; HUTNICKB LISTY, N0 2, 1982)

Gasoline Trends, Production Surveyed
(Oldrich Svajgl; CHEMICKY PBUHYSL, No 2, 1982) .........

-a- [III-EB-GSE'OW
FOR OFFICIAL USE ON LY

CZECHOSLOVARIA

BOTTOH POURING OP HIGH-ALLOY STEEL PRODUCBS IMPROVE) YIELDS
Prague HUTNICKE LISTY in Czech No 2, 1982 pp 123-130

[Article by mg Vladimir Hrabe and Big Jiri Bauer. POLDI United Steelworka
National Enterprise [POLDI SONP], Kladno: "Potential for Increasing Yield
in the Casting of High-Alloy Steels"]

[Text] The casting of corrosion-proof. heat-resistant and heatproof steels
is technologically very demanding. These steels can loosely be classified
in two groups. ferritic and austenitic. These high-alloy steels contain
large quantities of alloy additions, particularly chromium and nickel, but
also molybdenum and tungsten. while some steels also contain even smller
quantities of titanium or niobium. Host of them have low or very low
carbon content. although a few have medium carbon content.

Some varieties have a strong tendency to form a transcrystallisation zone to
an extent which sakes them difficult to shape. This necessitates slow casting
at a low temperature. Others must be cast quite rapidly. These steels. for
example austenitic steels stabilized with titanium, contain metals with a
great affinity for oxygen and nitrogen which cottine easily with these

gases. forming compounds that produce a protective slag layer with a tendency
to coagulate. As a result. the slag becomes thicker and casting becomes more
difficult; surface defects may be produced in the ingots as a result of large
surface inclusions.

Some high-alloy steels, particularly austenitic types, are extra-sly tough.
so that pouring asseublies are difficult to take apart and may be damaged
when the ingot is being freed. It is difficult to increase ingot weight.
Plant 1 of POLDI SON? has long practiced top-pouringof high-alloy steel into
ingot molds producing 4,900—kg ingots. with top pouring it is very difficult
to prevent the steel from splashing when it strikes the bottom of the mold.
and the speed of casting can be controlled only by selecting the diameter

of the fireclay nozzle. which cannot be changed during the course of casting.
The operation of the protective slag layer is extremely unstable during top
pouring. particularly as a result of splashing at the place where the stream
strikes. Thus the simplicity of this type of casting is dearly paid for in
subsequent stages of production.

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Design Constraints

These considerations led the Steelworkers of POLDI plant 1 to the decision to
change over to bottom pouring, even though this meant reconstructing the
entire casting system. The reconstruction had to meet the following require-
ments:

--allowing the casting of high-alloy steel at a wide range of casting speeds;

--replacing classical hot tops with insulating plates. along with reconstruc-
tion of the upper parts of the molds; the plates were to be designed so as to
decrease ingot croppage losses.

--solving or eliminating difficulties expected in the bottom pouring process
during breaking down of thepouringassembly and removal of the ingot (break-
age of the ingate neck without the use of force);

--designing critical locations with fireclay shapes which would limit leakage
of steel under considerable ferrostatic pressure.

Solution

The operating system in the foundry made it impossible to bottom-pour more
than two ingots at one time. The basic specifications for the bottom-pouring
molds were not substantially altered from those of the top-pouring molds. but
the bottoms had to be redesigned and the top sections lengthened so that the
hot top could be assembled from insulating plates. The mold dimensions can
be seen in Pig 1. This is an octagonal mold with a rather large taper of 6.b
percent and a width-to-thickness ratio of 3.7. The hot top is formed by
eight insulating plates.

Heavy fireclsy neck-down cores were used as mold gates (Pig 2). It was
necessary to use large cores so that the mold could not damage them when it
was set on the stool [bottom plate]. The core was purposely designed to form
a weak point on which stress would be concentrated when the cast ingot was
removed from the mold, thus assuring that the neck would break at that place.
The flow of steel is relatively quiet over an increased area, governed by

the size of the cavity (a conical frustum) in the core. so that filling of
the lower part of the mold proceeds smoothly.

The upper part of the casting stool is lined with firebrick runners, a con-
necting runner and an end runner. The runner diameter was chosen as #5 mm
with positive tolerance to enable the required casting speed to be achieved.
The fountain was initially made of hematite, but subsequently a cast sheet
steel fountain was used to increase operating life. The junction between
the fountain and the stool is the weakest and most vulnerable point in the
entire pouring assembly. The vertical flow, which at least initially
arrives with considerable kinetic energy, is drawn off horizontally by a
firebrick distributing block. A considerable ferrostatic pressure is
gradually developed in the system because of the height of the fountain
(2.900 cm) and the mold (2.630 mm). In order to prevent leakage of steel

2 .
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 1. Hold for casting high—alloy steel ingots for foundry

% 7

Figure 2. Pireclay core (insert) for bottom of Iold. used in
casting S-ton ingots

at these locations not only were the connections node by the ususl key and
lock method. but in addition the horizontal gap between the fountain and the
stool was blocked by a firecley insert which extends as far as the body of the

3
F!”l(ﬂﬂﬂ(lAl.USE¢3NLX
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

end runner in the fountain and to the distributing block in the stool. This
nethod creates a labyrinth which cools any steel leaking into it so that it
hardens and prevents further steel leakage. (See asselbly in Fig 3).

y,

 
    
    

 
 

   

Figure 3. Combination of end tube of fountain. insert and distributing 1
block in nold stool

Key:
A. End tube C. Fireclay distributing block
B. Insert blocking gap between in nold stool

fountain and stool

The diameter of the tubing in the fountain is 80 m. Thus the ratio of the
cross-sectional area of the fountain to the sun of the cross-sectional areas
of the connecting runners is 1.56, which is sufficient to create an excess
pressure in the fountain. thus allowing a considerable range of casting
speeds. The maxi-ml casting speed with this system is over 3 tons a minute,
while relatively low casting speeds are also possible.

Technical Evaluation of the Results Achieved

The introduction of this runner system was attended by a number of diffi-
culties. This is understandable because it increases the demands on the
foundry workers, while the technical, economic and labor effects show up
only at the steel mill. Initially, pouring assenbly life was short; dis-
assenbly after casting was a particular problen in this connection. Now
the technology. and thus the life of the individual pouring assembly con-
ponents. has been stablized to the point that the entire operation can be
evaluated. even though certain problems still rennin.

A. The Ingot hold
Over the long term, an average of 110.5 castings per mold was achieved. This

is a short life. resulting from intermittent use. since S-ton high-alloy
steel ingot casting runs for the forging shops are irregular, and in this

1;
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ()Nl.\'

type of use cycle the mold life is not cmsrable with that of molds in a
regular-use cycle. The other causes for short mold life should be resolv-
able. (See below.)

3. Metal Fountain

This has a long life and its design may be considered satisfactory.

C. Casting Stool
This is also suitable for use with the metal fountain.
Effectiveness of the Technological Measures Undertaken

A. Breaking Away of Ingot from Ingate Neck

Concentration of stress on the taper below the bottom of the ingot occurs in

about 80 percent of cases. When the neck does not break off. of course. its
excessive strength hinders removal of the ingot from the mold, so that it is
necessary to use force. which may result in breakage of the sold. In
accordance with the investigations undertaken in preparation for the study.
it will be necessary to redesign the fireclay neck-down core; according to
experience. a cylindrical shape. which will not hinder release of the ingots
and thus will not threaten the casting process. should be used.

Leakage protection in the apparatus is good and meets requirements.

B. lngot Surface Quality

The ingot surface quality has been greatly improved and in particular there
are no bottom losses. which in top pouring were extremely bad as a result of

splashing.

In the earlier cycle. after cooling. the ingots were first machined by
turning. then forged to the specified dimensions, after which the square
section was again finished with a milling cutter. of course. in forging too
there were ingot bottom losses, frequently to a height of 500 m.

In the new technology. with bottom-pouring the ingots are sent to the forging
shop while hot and are forged after supplementary heating. Botton losses
generally do not exceed 2 percent. The square blocks are sent back to the
machine shop for finish milling after forging.

Technically the results may be characterized as follows:

1. Elimination of metal losses during forging and the use of a single
machining operation increased metal yield by at least 15 percent;

2. The process cycle was speeded up by about 14 days by elininsting the
first finishing operation;

5
roe OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR 0mm“. liSl-Z ONLY

3. Energy requirements were decreased by about 50 percent, since in the
earlier process, cold ingots were heated to the forging temperature. while

in the new process only a supplementary heating to the forging temperature is
required.

Reflection of the Technological Measures in Economic Figures

In the production of about 3,000 tons of S-ton high-alloy steel ingots a
year the economic effect was as follows:

1. An increase of Kcs 365,000 in costs after the changeover to bottom pour-
ing, even with the service life of the metal parts of the pouring apparatus
that has been achieved;

2. A decrease of Kcs 2,182,000 in costs as a result of more complete use of
metal, decreased energy consumption and elimination of some machining opera-
tions;

3. The overall effect is a decrease of Kcs 1,837,000 in production costs.

Conclusion

The process of casting S-ton ingots for the forging mills was changed,
replacing top pouring with bottom pouring. This resulted in a considerable
increase in the metal utilization rate. a saving of energy and a shortening
ofthe process cycle, yielding an annual saving of approximately Kcs 1,837,000
compared with the situation before the changes were made. Experience indi-
cates that the saving can be increased even further by eliminating certain

defects.

COPYRIGHT: SNTL, Nakladatelstvi Technicke Literatury, Prague, 1982

8480
CSO: 2402/35

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFK'IAI. USE ONLY

CZECHOSLOVAKIA

GASOLINE TRENDS, PRODUCTION SURVEYED
Prague CHEMICKY PRUHYSL in Czech No 2, 1982 supplement CHEHIE A LIDE pp 3-6

[Article by Oldrich Svnjgl: "Improving the Quality of Automotive Gasolines
in Czechoslovakia"]

[Extracts] Environmental protection and a considerable increase in the price
of crude oil were the primary factors in the development of the automotive
industry and automotive fuels production worldwide during the last decade.
Views on conventional fuel for internal combustion engines changed more funds-
mentally during that period than in the several decades preceding it. At the
beginning of the 1970's we too created a research base for increasing the out-
put and improving the quality of automotive fuels. This measure led to a num-
ber of recommendations for modernizing the processes for producing gasoline
ingredients, for the introduction of new processes for producing hydrocarbon
components. and for the use of nonhydrocsrbon additives of various types. in-
cluding optimizing the types and quantities of lead-based antiknock addi-
tives. At the beginning of the 1980's the Czechoslovak refining industry is
preparing for a number of changes in gasoline production and quality. This
article discusses the main changes in output and quality, particularly in
Chemopetrol's refineries. during the 1980's. All of these changes are being
made in connection with the two main factors, mentioned above, that govern

output. economy and emissions.
The Situation in Czechoslovakia During the 1970's

In the 1970's there were some changes in the Czechoslovak motor vehicle inven-
tory's gasoline requirements. As older vehicles went out of service. inter-
est in NORMAL gasoline, with an octane number of 80. decreased to the point
that it was almost completely abandoned. Host new Skoda vehicles and import-
ed models did not have high compression ratios as was the case in the west.
As a result, the ratio between the two high-octane gasoline varieties was the
reverse of the situation in Western Europe, where the PREMIUM (SUPER) variety
with an octane number of 96-99 predominates. The price difference between
the two varieties was disproportionate to the difference in production cost
and was always higher than in the developed countries, which led to increased
interest in medium-compression vehicles in spite of the greater economy of
high-compression engines.

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Automotive gasoline was produced in Czechoslovakia by three hydroskimming re-
fineries: Slovnaft, Chemicke Zavody CSSP [CH2 CSSP: Czechoslovak-Soviet
Friendship Chemical Works], and Kaucuk, in order of annual output capacity.
The refineries had similar technical facilities, so that both of the main
types of gasoline. BA-90 and BA-96. differed very little in chemical composi-
tion.

The gasolines were produced from light gasoline distilled directly from
petroleum and catalytically reformed products. The desired octane number was
achieved by varying the proportion of the two main components and the amoant
of lead added. Tetraethyl lead [TEL] was added to SPECIAL gasoline, and
tetranethyl lead [TEL] to SUPER, in the standard lead concentrations of 0.60
to 0.77 g/liter.

There was a great difference between the antiknock properties of the light
and heavy components of SPECIAL gasoline, so that its highway octane number
was low at low engine speeds. The gasoline was nonolefinic and had only a
small quantity of aromatics, so that it has a low sensitivity to changing
engine speed.

SUPER gasoline with THL had all the properties of a high-quality gasoline
with a high highway octane number and low sensitivity (difference between
OCVH and OCHM [7research octane number. motor octane numberl).

By the end of the 1970's. long-term research had achieved the following:

improved the quality of the varieties of gasoline supplied and decreased their
production cost;

provided data on other fractions for production during the 1980’s. particu-
larly data on improving reforming. introducing isomerization. producing and
using HTBE [methyl t-butyl ether], and fuller of the waste fractions of
pyrolytic gasolines;

provided the preconditions for decreasing the lead content of gasoline and
adding detergents to it.

At the end of the 1970's all refineries began to produce improved SPECIAL
gasoline and some improved SUPER in accordance with research results.

The difference between the octane numbers of the light and heavy components
of SPECIAL was decreased by adding a 3:1 mixture of THL and TEL (designated
PM—75). The highway octane number at low and high speeds was improved by
decreasing 4>R1 on C and by the use of THL. Its highway octane number ex-
ceeded that of oviet AI-93 gasoline. specially produced for the Lads. The
addition of linear alcohols [alkyloly] decreased production costs by 2 to 3

percent a

Hith PH-75 added, the antiknock characteristics of SUPER gasoline remained
at the same level. but its production cost was decreased.

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

New Gasoline Components in Czechoslovak Refineries During the 1980's

All three of our refineries made changes in their structure at the end of the
1970's. The simple refinery flowsheet was expanded to include new facilities,
whose introduction primarily affected automotive fuels. The changes differed
at each refinery, so that in the 1980's Czechoslovak gasolines will have dif-
ferent compositions. The refineries are preparing to decrease the lead con-
tent of gasolines as much as they can. and possibly to change the relative
proportions of their products. i.e. to change over to the higher quality SUPER
gasoline for most motor vehicles.

Slovnaft National Enterprise. which is the largest producer of automotive
gasoline in Czechoslovakia (50 percent). plans the largest changes in gasoline
production. Its main gasoline source will remain the catalytic reforming of
heavy gasolines, which will yield a product with an octane number of about 92
and a distillation characteristic which differs very little from that of the
final gasolines. The primary light components are desired here for pyrolysis;
thus some waste light gasoline from petroleum refining, particularly light
reformate and light pyrolytic gasoline, are used. Both light components have
better antiknock characteristics, so that they yield a better value of

Asklooo c. Limitation of the amounts of low-octane light components added
results in an "excess" octane number for blending, so that gasoline with a
relatively low content (0.2-0.6 g/liter) is now being produced. But Slovnaft
is not yet taking advantage of the economic benefits of adding PH-75 to SUPER
gasoline.

The Czech refineries have made their preparations to decrease lead content
and to switch to high-octane types in different ways.

CH2 C88? in Litvinov is still expanding its range of components to include
pyrolytic gasoline and C5-C6 isomerizate. It is expected to have 80,000 to
100,000 tons of light and heavy pyrolytic fractions (Cs and C9+ fractions),
i.e. 20 to 25 percent of the total output, for the production of automotive
gasoline. These fractions have favorable octane characteristics; the light
fraction replaces poor-quality light gasoline and evens out the octane charac-
teristics of the blended gasoline, while the heavy fraction replaces re-
formste. The olefin content has some effect on the engine octane number,

and thus on the highway octane number at high engine speed. Another fraction
for automotive gasoline, Cs-C6 isomerizate. will soon be obtained from light
petroleum gasoline. This contains primarily the high-octane components
isopentsnc and isohexane, and is very sensitive to lead. The isomerizate

is an alternative to the C fractions from pyrolysis, some of which will be
shipped elsewhere. CH2 c339 will not have light low-octane components avail-
able to it; the automotive gasolines which it produces have all the prerequi-
sites for lowblead varieties (as little as 0.15 g/liter). If a fluid cata-
lytic cracker is built at the end of the 1980's= CH2 CSSP's gasoline will be
a high-olefin type. with high sensitivity to changes in engine speed. and
almost lead-free. The tendency to form gums and deposits must be regulated
by detergents and antioxidants to a greater degree than otherwise.

Kauchuk Kralupy adds to its gasoline up to 15 percent of an important non-
hydrocarbon component, HTBB. The effect of this compound on the output and

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

quality of gasoline in this refinery was studied in detail. MTBE only slight-
ly decreases the caloric content of the gasoline, while it improves the anti-
knock properties of the light gasoline and has a considerable effect on the
octane number (the octane number of the blend is 120-130). MTBE is produced
from the C4 fraction obtained from pyrolysis and methanol, and is more soluble
in hydrocarbons and less soluble in water than alcohols are. The MTBE appa-
ratus allows Kaucuk Kralupy to produce both gasoline varieties with 0.15
g/liter of lead, to decrease the aromatic content of the gasolinea by 10 to

15 percent and to use light hydrocarbons from petroleum for petrochemical pro-
duction.

Thus anyone who drives through Czechoslovakia in the 1980's will have avail-
able to him three different gasolines of the same octane number, all meeting
Czechoslovak norms and the "appetite" of this vehicle. The lead content of
the gasoline, and thus of the emissions, will fall to about a quarter of the
earlier value.

If every refinery included a detergent additive, average fuel consumption
will decrease by about 4 percent and the concentration of C0 and hydrocarbons
in emissions will be lowered.

Conclusion

In agreement with worldwide tendencies, during the 1980's there will be
changes in gasoline production and its quality in Czechoslovakia. The re-
finers are already improving existing catalytic reforming processes, intro-
ducing light gasoline isomerization processes and catalytic cracking of
solar oil, and using optimal components from pyrolysis. In addition, large
quantities of HTBE will be manufactured and added to gasolines. The result-
ing gasolines will have low lead content, with comparable octane characteris-
tics along the distillation curve, and for the most part will also have
smaller sulfur concentrations. while detergents added in concentrations of
20 to 100 ppm will have a favorable effect on mileage and emissions. The
refineries are also providing an octane number margin against a possible
change in automobile requirements to high-octane gasolines as a result of
higher compression ratios. which will give more economical operation.

COPYRIGHT: SNTL, Nakladatelstvi Technicke Literatury, Prague, 1982

8480
C50: 2602/47

END

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY