FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10075
26 October 1981

USSR Report

MATERIALS SCIENCE AND METALLURGY

(FOUO 5/81)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as

given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the U.S. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSRIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHF ATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRB um:
26 Octobex

USSR REPORT

MATERIALS SCIENCE AND METALLURGY
(P000 5/81)

CouTsms

COATINGS

High-Temperature Protection of Materials .........................
C(HPOSITE MATERIALS

Polymers and Polymer-Based Composite Materials in Industry .......

New Book on Composite Materials ..................................
MECHANICAL PROPERTIES

Stress-Strain Testing of Materials at High Temperatures ..........
NONFHZROUS MB‘I‘AIJAIRGY

Present, Future of USSR Titaniun-Magnesium Industry ..............
POWDER ETAIJAIROI.

Titanium Powder Metallurgy .......................................
MISCELLANEOUS

Kinetics of High-Teuperature Failure of Materials

- a - [III - USSR - 216 Si?
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

COATINGS

axon-rznpsnaruns PROTECTION OF MATERIALS

Leningrad WSWWTURNAYA ZASHCHITA HAWV in Russian 1981 (signed to
press 8 Apr 81) pp 2. 299-303

[Annotation and table of contents from book "nigh-Temperature Protection of
Materials". edited by Academician H. H. Shul'ts, Doctor of Technical Sciences A. I.
Borisenko. Candidates of Technical Sciences Ye. A. Antonovs and A. Ye. Sitnikove,
Doctors of Technical Sciences 8. S. Solntsev and N. P. Kharitonov, USSR Academy

of Sciences Institute of Silicate Chemistry imsni I. V. Grebsnshchikov, Izdatel'stvo
"Nauka", 1900 copies, 306 pages]

[Text] This volume is based on scholarly papers presented at the Ninth All-Union
Conference on heat-Resistant Coatings. These papers contain the results of the
latest research conducted in the area of obtaining protective coatings for
structural materials. They present the physicochemical principles of obtaining

and investigating the properties of temperature-stable protective and other

special coatings in metallic and nonmatallic structural materials. Various types of
coatings are examined: diffusion. plasma. detonation, dross-firing, low-temperature
hardening, etc. Considerable attention is devoted to a description of methods of
bonding and testing coatings in variOua corrosive media.

This volume is intended for scientists. engineers and technicians working in the
area of development of highly efficient means of protecting structural materials in
various operating conditions.

Table of Contents Page

General

Borisenko, A. I., and Vyashchenkq K. A. Diffusion Processes at the Metal-
COating Interface 3

Antonova, Ye. A.; Kayalovs, S. 8.; Pevzner, D. 2.; Sszonova, H. V.; and
Sitnikova. A. Ya. 0n the Genesis of Phases in Heterogeneous Inorganic

Coatings Obtained by Suspension-Firing Technology 8
lvanov. Ye. G. Thermodynamic Principles of Calorising 20
l

FtNlCﬂﬂﬁCJAI.USEiﬂﬁlY
90R OFTNCJAL USIZCNVLY

Prokoshkin, D. A.; Barzov. A. A.; Loskutov. V. 8.; and Karaaov, A. A. Study
of Cracking of Oxide Films on MoSiz by the Acoustic Emission Method 25

Svatovskaya, L. 3.: Sychev. M. M. and Yukhnova, 0. c. The Concept of Bond
Monsaturation and Sane Problems of Obtaining Materials 31

Gorbatenko, V. Ye.; Rat'kova. V. P.; and Berestova, Ye. 6. Application of

Methods of Planning Experiments in Synthesis of Beat-Resistant Enamel
Coating 34

Svatovskaya, L. B. Boridothernal Synthesis of Materials 60

Berezina. N. M.; Belikov, A. M.; and Vorontsov, Ye. 3. Change in Activation
Energy in the Process of Growth of a ZrOz Pill 62

Corbatenko, V. Ye.; Donchenko, D. M.; Guziy, V. A.; Kushnarev. A. 8.;
Thachev. A. 6.; and Thachevs, 0. M. Methods and Instruments for Investiga-

tion and Monitoring of the Properties of Enamels, Coatings, and the
Quality of Enameled Products 46

Tsygulev, O. V.; Sosnovskiy. L. A.; and Astakhova, 2h. A. Investigation of
High-Temperature Creep and Creep Limit of a Niobium Alloy with Combined
Coatings in an Oxidising Medium 50

Antonova, Ye. A., and Semenov, S. A. Effect of Ultrasonic Oscillations on
Flow of Ni-Cr-Si-B-C Melts on the Surface of Steel 53

Kizhner, M. M.; Mizonov, V. M.; Kurhovkov. Ye. 6.; Tolstopyatov, R. V. and
Shkolyar, P. S. Microinhomogeneous Residual Stresses as a Ca: e of
Failure of Class-Enamel Coatings 56

Lysenok, L. M.; Kuznetsov. A. 1.; Vasil'yev. L. 1.; Bskhtiyarov, A. Sh. and
Lukashevich, M. A. Structural-Cheaical Role of Iron in Reaction Processes

of Sealing of Titanium With Iron-Containing Non-Alkaline Aluminus-Boron-
Silicate Glasses . 61

Cuseva, I. V.; Mashchenko, 1'. 8.; Borisenko, A. 1. Chemical Precipitation
of Coatings With the Inclusion of Pilamentary Pillars 66

Corin, L. P. Criterion for Quantitative Evaluation of the Effectiveness of
Heat-Resistant Coatings 68

Diffusion Coatings

Martsenyuk. I. 8.; Kaplina, G. 8.: Braun, S. M.; and Borisovs, A. L. Ad-
hesive Interaction of Specimens of Borated Steel with Preliminary Iron

Plating 71
Tsirlin, M. S., and Kasatkin. A. V. On Obtaining Coatings with the Partici-
pation of Liquid Phase 75
2

FOR OFHCIAI. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Tsirlin, M. 5., and Krasovskiy, A. I. Protecting Niobium and Molybdenu-
Pron High-Temperature Oxidation

Sosnovskiy, L. A.; Kaplina, 6. 8.; Astakhova, 2h. A.; and Korol', Ye. A.
Combined Silicide Coatings on Niobiu-

Abrainov, N. V. Investigation of the Effectiveness of Certain Beat-Resisting
Diffusion Coatings on Nickel Alloys

Goryachev, P. T.; Genel', V. A.; Makerova. I. A.; and Corbunov, N. S. Dif-
fusion siliconizing of Steel with Silicon Oxide

Mudrova, A. 6.; Corbunov, N. 8.; Hedko, Ye. K.; Dayeva, L. 8.; Moroz, V. V.;
and Aleksandrovs, V. V. Effect of Diffusion Nickel Saturation on the
Structure and Properties of Carbon Steels

Hudrova, A. 6.; Gorbunov, N. S.; Horoz, V. V.; Medko. Ye. K.; Bayeva, L. 5.;

and Yashin, V. A. Diffusion Titanium Coating and Its Application in
Shipbuilding and Ship Repairs

Sprayed-On Coatings

Hovchan, B. A., and Malashenko. I. s. Enploynent of Electron-Bean Vaporiza-
tion for Obtaining Heat-Resistant Coatings

Klinenko, V. 5.; Skadin, V. 6.; and Roriaova, A. L. methods and Results of
Diagnosing the Process of Detonation Spraying of Coatings

Bartenev, S. 5.; Ped'ko, Yu. P.; and Redel'ko, V. Ye. Dependence of the
Filtration Factor of Detonation Coatings of Aluminum Oxides on the Con-
position of the Detonating Gas Mixture

Borisova, A. L.; Klinenko, V. 5.; Shiyanovskaye, I. Ye.; Kudrevich, R. A.;
Skadin, V. 6.; Astakhov, Ye. A.; 2verev, A. 1.; and Gol'dfayn, V. N.
Phase Transformations During Detonation Spraying and Their Effect on the
"ear Resistance of Aluminum Oxide Coatings

Borisova, A. 1...; Borisova, Yu. 8.; Braun, S. H.; and Hartaenyuk, I. S. In-
vestigation of the Adhesive Interaction of Plasma Coatings of Eutectic
Alloys on High-Temperature Corrosion-Resistant Steels

Karpinos. D. H.; Zil'berberg, V. 6.; Vyal'tsev, A. H.; and Kukhtareva,
T. V. Plasna Coatings of Refractory Oxides and Their Conpositiona

Karpinos, D. H.; Zil'berberg. V: 6.; Chekhovakiy, A. A.; and Paderno, ". N.
Investigation of Conditions of Producing and Properties of Places Nickel-
Chrone Coatings on Objects of Spherical Shape

Kitayev. P. 1.; Lekarev. Yu. 6.; and Litvinenko, V. N. Thermal State of
Particles During Plasne Spraying of Metal-Solid Lubricant Coatings

FOR omcfu. USE ONLY

79

83

86

90

93

96

99

103

109

112

115

120

126

128
FOR‘OFFKJAL USElNVLY

Kitsyev, P. 1.; Tsidulko, A. 6.; Russnov, V. N.; and Litvinenko, V. N.
Plasma Coating of Ti-Ni Composition for Protecting Titanium Alloys
Against Near 132

Kulik, A. Ya.; Zakharov, N. 1.; and Hezernitskiy, A. Yu. Plasma Oxide
Coatings on Diesel Engine Parts 134

Alekseyev, V. V.; Coryachkovskiy, Yu. 6.; Katasov, A. .A; and Loslutov,
V. 5. Plans Spraytg of a Heat-Resistant Coating onto Graphite 137

Polyakov. S. P.; Kravetskiy, G. A.; Pozdeyev, G. A.; Konokotin, V. V.;
Komarov. B. V.; and Corbatenko, E. V. Plasma-Flame Spraying of Protective
Coatings onto Graphitizeu Electrodes 140

Concharov, E. V.; Bakman, L. L.; Degtyarenko, V. N.; Dashkevich. 1. P.;
Synorov, V. P.; Shelina, T. A.; and Tsennykh, K. H. Applying Protective
Coatings ina Stream of Induction Plasma onto the Surfaces of Metal 144

Beketov, A. R.; Svistnnov, V. V.; Obabkov, N. V.; and Shurygin, V. s. Some
Features of Obtaining Temperature-Stable Coatings by the Technique of
Spraying on Materials with a Stream of Lowaemperatura Plasma 168

Ksrpinos, D. N.; Zil'berberg. V. 6.; Vyal'tsev, A. N.; Kalyuzhnyy, A. D.;
and Shul'ga. O. V. Utilization of Plasma Coatings in Tape Advance
Assemblies of Video Tape Recorders 152

Kopylov. V. .I.; Shatinskiy. V. P.; Strongin, B. 6.; and Varvus, 1. A.
Heat Resistance and Relaxation Properziss of Solids with Plasma Coatings 155

Obabkov, N. V.; Sorokin, V. 6.; Guznov, D. N.; Deketov, A. R.; Svistunov,
V. V.; and Shurygin, V. S. Temperature-Stable Near-Resistant Coatings
Containing Chromium Borides 159

Solov'yev, B. N.; Degtev, G. F.; Casik, L. N.; Vashkevich, P. P.;
Zhuravel', V. 1.; and Dudenko, A. N. Comparative Investigations of the
Properties of Heat-Resistant Coatings Obtained by Electric-Arc Netslliza-
tion and Plasma Spraying 16b

Dekhtyar'. L. 1.; boskutov, V. 8.; Gorshkov, B. N.; Lazarenlto, C. P.;
Kudryavtsev, Yu. P. Ignat'kov. D. A.; Murav'yev. A. 1.; and Khanin.
A. Ya. Methods of Determination and Principal Properties of Plasma-
Sprayed Coatings of Nichrome 167

Sokolova, T. V.; Kozlova, 1. 8.; Derko, Kh.; Kalyada, T. L.; and Sokolov,
A. A. Investigation of the Parameters of Porous Structure and Phase Com—
position of Plasma Coatings Based on High-Temperature Oxides 172

Dross-Piring Coatings

Svirskiy. L. D.; Bondarenko. T. 8.; Bragina. L. l..; Cordiyenko, Ya. 1.;
Zhukovin, V. 1.; Kazakevich, V. N.; Latysheva. H. N.; and Prikhod'ko,
L. 1. Some Results of Investigations in the Area of neat-Resistant Coattup 178

h
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Petrenko, H. 1.; Ryabov, S. 1.; Prolmpalo, H. 6.; Nikoleyeva, L. V.;
Borisenko, A. 1.; and Khashkovskiy, S. V. Industrial Protection of
Niobium Hot Closed-Die Forging Blanks

Sazonova, N. V.; Gorbatova, 6. IL; and Kurapova, N. 1. Study of the Condi-
tions of Formation and Heat Resistance of Silicon Carbide and Boron-Base
Coatings on an Graphite

Boriaenko, A. 1.; Pugach, ‘1'. IL; and Ivanov, A. A. High-Temperature
Protective Coating for Tantalum Alloys

Khaahkovskiy S. V.; Borisenko, A. 1.; Nikolayeva, L. V.; Yefimova, L. N.;
and Lazukin, V. B. Interaction in the Metal-Coating System During
Facing

Antonova. Ye. A., and Sinay, L. 1!. Interaction of Elements in a Hixture
of Ni-Cr-Si-B Powders During Heating

Borisenko, V. A., and Sitnikova, A. Ya. Interaction of Components in a
Glassceramic Coating Layer

Sednale, G. P.; Sednalis, U. Ya.; and Tsindin'sh, R. A. ﬁigh-‘Imerature
Protective Coating Based on Alninosilicate-Phosphste Systems

Sazonova, H. V., and Smirnova, G. '1'. aroz-ugo-smz Coating for Porous
Magnesia Ceramic

Ban'kovskaya, 1. 8., and Sezonova, H. V. Decrease in Gas Permeability
of Porous Ceramic Hith Magnesium Oxide-Based Coatings

Kayalova, S. 8., and Baykova, G. V. Influence of the Composition of
Silicate Liquid Phase on the Properties of Coatings Obtained by the Ad-
sorption Deposition Method

Dnitriyev, V. 8.; Nikolayeva, L. V.; Borisenko, A. 1.; Lapenkova, V. Ya.;
Kvasnevskiy, I. P. Investigation of a Glassceramic Insulation Group
for High-Temperature Electrical Binding Hires

Kolganova, V. A.; Nikolayeva, L. V.; Borisenko, A. I., and Lapenkova,
V. Ya. Investigation of high Heating-Resistance Hires with Ceramicglass
Insulation

Nikolayeva, L. V.; Belova, 1. V.; Vyashchenluo, K. A.; and began, M. 6.
Interaction of Lanthanum Oxide with Solution-1V1» Glasses

Corbatenko, v. 12.; mchev. A. 6.; Svetlichnyy, v. A.,- Kushnarev, A. s.;
and ‘l'kacheva, 0. N. Study of Gassing in an Enamel Melt During Firing

Pevzner, B. 2.; Dzhavuktsyen, S. 6.; Piller, H. D.; Dyagilev, A. IL; and
Zagaynyy, V. K. Pyroceranic Seals

5
ran omcm. us: ONLY

181

1810

188

191

196

201

205

208

212

2110

218

221

225

228

231
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Kuznctsov, A. I.. and Suykovskaya, N. 6. Classes for Sealing Electrical Con-
nectors

Ushakov, D. L, and Kuznetsova, A. I. Enamels for Protective-Decorative
Coatings on Aluminu- Alloys

Venzel', L. 1.; ludrayvtseva, G. A.; and Rudenko, L. V. 0:: the Relation-
ship Betveen Stressed State of Enamel Coatings and Temperature Stability

Popov, N. ll. Fracture of Steel at the Interface with a Gaseous Mediu- and a
Thin Layer of Silicate Nelt

Lowaeaperature Hardening Coatings

Kharitonov, N. P. Investigation of the Structure and Properties of Organo-
silicate Coatings

Bova, Ye. A.; Kharitonov, N. P.; and Pstyayev, Ye. A. Effectiveness of h-
ploynent of Organosilicate Coatings

Starodubtaeva, ll. 8.; Nakhapetyan, II. A.; Glebova, I. 3.; Spiridonov, V. 1.;
Ostrovskiy, V. V.; and Kharitonov, N. P. Physicochenical Methods of
Investigation of Organosilicate Coatings

Ostrovskiy, V. V., and Kharitonov, N. P. Theoretical and Experimental Data
on Increasing the Heat Resistance of Orgsnosilicate Coatings

Krivtsov. V. A.; Kharitonov, N. P.; Khudobin, Yu. 1.; Stepanov, K. BL;
Andreyeva, N. A.; and Chipanko, V. 2. Ripley-ant of Organosilicate
Materials in Thermophysical Monitoring Sensors

Krotikov, V. A.; Filina. I... V.; and Kharitonov, N. P. Investigation of
Phase Transfornations of the Polymer-Silicate Base of Organosilicate
Coatings, Taking Place at Temperatures up to lbOO'C

Leongard, A. D.; Potapov, A. P.; Stepanov. K. IL; Kharitonov, I. P.; and
Khudobin. Yu. I. Heat-Resistant Orgsnosilicate Coatings in Thar-no-
electric Heater Elenents

Dnitriyev, V. 8.; Stepanov, K. N.; Khsritonov, N. P.; Kvssnevskiy. I. P.
Heat-Resistant Electricsl Insulation Coatings and Adhesives for
Protection and Joining of Pernsndur-Type Alloys

Stepanov. K. IL; Khartoum“. P.; Besuyeva, Ye. V.; Degen, H. 8.; and
Polyakova, V. 6. Influence of Oxides on the Microatructure and
Strength Characteristics of Organosilicate Coatings

Paahchenko, A. A.; Sviderskiy, V. A.; and Tkach, V. V. nest-Resistant
Coatings with Elevated Bioresistance

Borisenko, A. 1.; Kuznetsova, 1.. A.; Perveyev, A. 17.; and Troshltin, S. V.
Some Data on the Light-Resistance of Diffusely Reflecting Coatings

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

236

239

2103

266

252

255

262

267

272

2710

277

280

286

288

289
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Sychev, H. IL; Krylov, 0. 8.; Hedvedeva, 1. N. and Bogoyovlmhya, G. A.
Heat-Resistant Adhesives Based on Inorunlc Bonding Agents

Sychev, M. IL; Komrova, G. 1.; Svatovskaya, L. B. and Yukhnova, 0. G.
Binders Based on Inorganic Polymer Solutions

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'svto "Nauka", 1981

30210
(ISO : 1862/ 1

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0FFKJAI.USE‘0NLY

COMPOSITE MATERIALS

UDC: 678.675
POLYMERS AND POLYMER-BASED CONPOSITB MATERIALS IN INDUSTRY

(signed to press 2 Feb 81) PP 2-6, 179-180

[Annotation, foreword and table of contents from book “Polymers and Composite
Materials Based on Then in Technology", by Dmitriy Moyseyevich Karpinos and
Valentina lvanovna Oleynik, UkSSR Academy of Sciences Institute of Problems of
Materials Science. Izdetel'stvo "Naukova dunks", 1500 copies, 180 pages]

[Text] This monograph synthesizes advances in the development and investigation of
polymeric materials in the last 15-20 years in the USSR and abroad.

Alongside growth in production and expansion of areas of application of traditional
polymeric materials (polyethylene. polypropylene, polystyrene, phenolformaldehyde,
epoxy, polyester and other resins), an industry of new polymeric materials is begin-
ning to develop in all countries (polyimides, polyphenylene sulfide. polyester
sulphones, polyphenylene oxide, ABS-plastics, polyurethanes,etc); in addition to
glass fiber as a reinforcing element for polymer-base composite materials. the
manufacture of which is steadily increasing, new reinforcing fibers are appearing in
the industry of various countries - carbon. silicon carbide, boron, organic (poly-
amide hydrazide, polyoxyquinoline, polyphenylene, etc).

The authors examine polymers and reinforcing components manufactured and used in in-
dustry, their properties. types of products manufactured, output value, cost, area
of application, modern methods of reinforcement and modern concepts on the mechanism
of failure of polymer-base composite materials under various load conditions.

This volume is intended for a broad group of specialists working in the area of
materials science.

Table of Content. Page
Foreword 3
Introduction 5

Chapter 1. Present State and Development Trends in the Manufacture of

Polymers and Polymer-base Composite Materials in the USSR and
Abroad 7

8
F0l.0i1ﬂ(]Al.USE|JNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Principal Features of Development of the Polymeric Materials Industry in
the USSR

Polymeric Materials Abroad
The Reinforced Plastics Industry Abroad
Mew Polymeric Materials

Chapter 2. Thermostable Polymers and Composite Materials Based on Them

Polyimides

Chemical Structure and Methods of Obtaining Polyimides
Commercial Polyimide Resins

Cornercial Molding Polyimides

Chapter 3. Thermoplastlcs in Industry

Folyurethanes

Acrylonitrile Butadiene Styrene (ABS) Plastice
Polyphenylene Sulfide

Aromatic Polysulphones

Chapter Io. Reinforcing mm for Polymer-Base Composite Materials

Carbon Filaments

Organic Filaments

Boron Filaments and Silicon Carbide Filaments
Aluminum Oxide Filaments

Chapter 5. Methods of Reinforcement and Mechanism of Failure of Polymer-
Based Composite Materials

Reinforcing Hith Filamentary Fillers

Types of Filamentary Reinforcement

Types of Filaments

Matrices in Composite Reinforced Materials

Mixed Reinforcement (Hybrid Compositions)

Mechanism of Failure of Filamentary Polymer-Base Composite Materials
in Various Conditions of Application of Load

Compressive Failure

Tensile Failure of Filementary Composite Materials

Shear Failure of Filamentary Composite Materials

Buckling Failure of Filamentary Composite Materials

Influence of Interlaminar Stresses on Failure of Laminated Materials

Filled Polymers

Influence of Environmental Conditions on Polymer-Based Composite
Materials

Chapter 6. Modern Methods of Processing Polymeric Materials Into Finished
Products

Processing in a Viscous-Flow State
Processing in a highly Elastic State

FOR OFFIC‘BL USE ONLY

35¢“

28

29
30
33
106

53

61
66
67
75

81

82
91
95
96

97

97
100
102
103
106

107
108
111
113
115
116
117

1210

132

135
168
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Methods of Manufacturing Products of Reinforced Plastics 156
Processing Oriented Reinforced Plastics and Randomly Reinforced
Holding Materials Into Finished Products 158
Pracessing Polymeric Materials by Sintering l6l
Applying Powder Polymeric Coatings 162
Employment of Polymeric Materials in Bearings 165
Thermoplastics [11) 165
Setting Polymers, Thermosatting Resins and Other Materials 166
Bibliography 172
FORM!!!)

polymeric materials. A number of polymers have been synthesized, the heat resistance
and thermal stability of which up to 100°C exceeds the corresponding values of
traditional polymers. This qualitative leap forward has been achieved due to ad-
vances in planned synthesis. The materials obtained on the basis of these

polymers can operate at a temperature of 260-300'c for several thousand hours with-
out deterioration of properties; they include the polyimides, for example. A number
of thermoplastic polymers have been synthesized, characterized by the ability to
operate for an extended period of time at a temperature of ZOO-260°C, by radiation
resistance, dimensional stability, creep resistance, chemical stability, and other
properties essential in industry which make it possible to replace metals with

silicon carbide filaments, filaments of aluminum oxide, organic fibers (polypara-
phenylene, polyoxaline, polyamide hydraside, etc), which expand possibilities of
developing composite materials with a large range of properties. New kinds of
reinforcement are being aployed, such as hybrid reinforcement combining different
types of reinforcement, which leads to the development of composite materials with
a felicitous combination of properties. Success has been achieved in investigation
of the mechanism of failure of composite polymeric materials, which also makes it
possible to develop materials with improved properties.

phthalate, polycarbonatea, polyarylates. and phenylone, manufactured by Soviet in-
dustry, but many other new polymeric materials are also utilised in the world
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The purpose of this volume is to present a synthesis of world experience in the
development of new polymers and polymer-base composite materials in the last 15-20
years. This volume examines materials which have found practical application,

are manufactured by industry, or are on the way toward conercial manufacture.

An analysis presented in Chapter 1 on the state of and development trends in the
polymeric materials industry, conducted on the example of industrially developed
(USSR, United States, the Scandinavian countries, Austria) and some developing
countries indicates that this industry is a rapidly growing, promising branch of
production. In addition to the manufacture of traditional polymeric materials
(polyethylene, polypropylene, polystyrene, polyester, epoxy, phenoloformaldehyde
resins, etc), new polymeric materials have been developed and produced by industry
in the last 10-15 years (polyimides, polybensimidazoles, pyrrones, polyphonylenes,
ABS-plastics, polyrurethanes, polycarbonates, aromatic polyamides, polysulphones,
polyphenylene sulfide, etc). New types of reinforcing elements for composite
polymeric materials have been developed and are being manufactured.

Chapter 2 describes new thermostable plastics (polyimides). The chapter describes
the history of development, level of industrial production, growth prospects, and
types of products being manufactured and developed in the USSR and abroad (the
following resins: Skybond, pyraline, Qx-13, P13“, PlOSA, NR-lSO, polyimide 2080,
89—6, SP-lZ, SP-95, kainol, PM-67, PM-69, and others). Methods of processing,
hardening operations and the properties of end products are described, with examples
of application in the aircraft industry. machine building and other branches of in-
dustry.

Chapter 3 examines new thermoplastics and composite materials based on them, dis-
cusses principal products, properties, methods of processing, and areas of ap-
plication. Polyurethanes, ABS-plastics, polyphenylene sulfides and polysulphones
are described in detail.

chapter 4 contains research results on new reinforcing filaments for polymer-base
composite materials. The discussion includes the principal methods of obtaining
filaments and the types of filaments employed for reinforcing polymers. Carbon
filaments are described: history of development, production methods, types of
products manufactured abroad (tornell, modmor, grsfil, etc), production volume, cost,
development prospects, properties, areas of application, as well as new organic
filasents manufactured by foreign industry (nomex, kevlar, X-SOO). Their chemical
structure is given, as well as production process, properties, production volume,
cost, and examples of application. Various components of fixed-wing and rotary-
wing aircraft in the manufacture of which carbon-containing plastics are employed
are analyzed.

Chapter 5 describes modern methods of reinforcing polymer-base composite materials,
and modern concepts on the mechanism of failure of reinforced and filled polymeric
materials under various loading conditions, as well as in conditions of environ-
mental influence.

chapter 6 describes the principal modern methods of processing polymeric materials
into finished products, the specific features of processing new polymeric materials,
and development trends in manufacturing methods.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatelbtvo "Naukova dunks", 1981

3024
C80: 1802/176

11
FOR 0F11C1AL USE‘ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

NEW BOOK ON COMPOSITE MATERIALS

[Annotation. foreword by Academician N. . Zhavoronkov and table of contents from the
book "Composite Materials". chief editor, USSR Academy of Sciences corresponding mem-
ber A. I. Manokhin, Izdatel'stvo "Ranks". 2.350 copies. 294 pages]

[Text] Annotation. This collection presents results of theoretical and experimental
work on basic directions in the problem of composite materials. It is drawn from ma-
terials of the 4th All-Union Composite Materials Conference and examines the physico-
chemical properties of coated and uncoated reinforcing materials, the thermodynamics
and kinetics of the interaction between reinforcing and matrix. the structure. pro-
perties and technological features of manufacturing and testing both structural and
special-property composite materials with filament, laminate and dispersion reinforc~
ing based on metal. ceramic. carbon and polymer matrices. methods of joining compo-
site materials. and some areas of application. Research results are presented on the
mechanics of composite materials. strength under short-term and long-term load. types
of failure and corrosion behavior of composite materials, and problems in planning
and designing items with complex shapes. The work is intended for a broad range of
scientists and engineers. designers. metallurgists. technologists and materials spe-
cialists working on the development. production and application of structural mater-
ials in new equipment.

Foreword. The development of new composite materials with filament, laminate and
thin~dispersion reinforcing. better physicomechanical and special physicochemical
properties. will lead to a qualitative leap in scientific and technical progress, not
only in aviation. space and ship-building technology, but also in machine building.
power engineering. electronics. electrical engineering, radio engineering. transport.
construction and other branches of the national economy.

Over the past five years. we have achieved some success in developing the theory and
technology of obtaining composite materials and reinforcing media. the theory of non-
homogeneous media and optimum reinforcing. the physics and mechanics of strain hard-
ening and strength in composite materials with a broad spectrum of structures, pro-
perties and areas of application.

Whereas super-strength. rigid. lightweight. filament-reinforced composite materials

were called the materials of the future in the early 1970's, they are already the ma-
terials of today.

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A number of questions of the physicochemical theory of the contact interaction of
matrix and reinforcing materials, principles of choosing plasticizing, barrier and

technological coatings for reinforcing materials and technological methods of apply-
ing them. and efficient new processes for obtaining composite materials have been

worked out. Much research has been done on the mechanisms of strain hardening, de-
famation and failure of filament composite materials under various load conditions.

A number of filament composite materials with polymer. metal, carbon and ceramic ma-
trices reinforced with boron. carbon and metal filaments. laminate and dispersion-
hardened materials have been developed. Threadlike crystals combined with continu-
ous filaments have found application in composite materials with polymer matrices.
Industrial production of boron and various carbon and organic filaments, threads and
strips, tungsten, molybdenum and other filaments has been set up. as have the produc-
tion of several threadlike crystals, the experimental production of silicon carbide
filaments and high-strength metal filaments and the pilot-industrial production of
plasma-sprayed intermediate composite materials and others.

Industrial technology has been developed for producing sheets and certain other types
of intermediate dispersion-hardened composite materials. filament (aluminum-boron fi-
lament) and polymer composite materials, as has pilot-industrial technology for ob-
taining thin defamation-alloy foils by rolling in a auperplastic state. Intensive
work is being done on obtaining and studying the properties of composite materials
with directional eutectic structures. Research, development and production of a
number of new composite materials with special physicochemical properties, as well

as of refractory and heat-resistant ceramics and other materials. have been developed
substantially.

Glass-, boron- and carbon-plastics. materials of the carbon-carbon type. dispersion-
hardened metal~ceramic materials and others are already being used widely.

In recent years, we have set up the production of intermediate composite materials
on a metal base, of the aluminum alloy - boron or borsik filament type, in the form
of plasma monofilaments which are then used to manufacture pipe and cylindrical hous~
ings by hot pressing and sheets by pack rolling. Using such production as a base.

we are currently doing the technological-design development needed to expand the pro-
duction of intermediate products and filaments for reinforcing them.

ordinating fundamental and applied research on composite materials here. The mater-
ials published in this collection. from the lath All-Union Conference organised by
the USSR Academy of Sciences' Scientific Council on Structural Haterials for New
Equipment. Scientific Council on Synthetic Materials, Metallurgy Institute imeni A.
A. BaykoV and the All-Union Order of Lenin Scientific Research Institute of Avia-

tion Materials. sum up work on the problem as of 1978 and outline ways of further de-
veloping it.

Table of Contents

Foreword
Chapter I. General Problems
Fridlyander. I. N.

Properties of Composite Materials and Effectiveness of Their Application
Shorshorov. H. Kh.

Physicochemical Interaction of Components in Composite Haterials

13
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Portnoy. K. 1.

Present Trends in the Development of Composite Materials
Gunyayev. C. M.

Designing High-Modulus Polymer Composites with Predetermined Properties
Mashinskaya, G. P., and Perov. B. V.

Composite Materials On An Organic Fibers Base
KarpinoSe, D. M.. and Tuchinskiy. L. 1.

High-Temperature Composite Materials
Kostikov. V. 1.. and Kolesnikov. S. A.

Carbon-Carbon Composite Materials
Makeyev. V. 9., and Yershov, N. P.

Principles of Designing Composite Material Products

Ihapter 2. Reinforcing Filaments

Shorshorov, M. Rh.. Savvateyeva. S. M.. Chernyshova, T. A.. Kobeleva, L. 1., Flat-
yushkin. A. A.. lvsnova, L. M.. and Sultanova. I. N.

Technological Coatings 0n Carbon Filaments
Varenkov. A. N.. Kostikov. V. 1.. Mozzhukhin, Ye. 1.. and Shimsnyuk, V. T.

Forming Silicon Carbide 0r Titanium Coatings on the Surface of Carbon-Graphite

Filaments
Kilin, V. 8.. Dergunova. V. S.. Shorahorov, M. Kh.. Antipov, V. 1.. Krivtsun. V. M..
and Kotelkin. A. 8.

Various Barrier Coatings 0n Carbon Filaments
Tsirlin, A. M.. Zhagach. A. F.. Sbchetiline, Ye. A.. Balagurove. A. M.. Poaokhina.
E. 6., and Obolenskiy. A. V.

Morphologic Features of Boron Threads
Tsirlin. A. M.. Alekhin, V. P.. Kolesnichsnko. S. V.. and Yusupov, R. 8.

Effect of Boron Filament Defects 0n Initial-State Strength and In Composite Ma-

terial ADI-V
Shorshorov. M. Kh.. Savvateyeva, S. M.. Chernyshova. T. A.. and Alekhim, V. P.

Developing Filament Coatings for Composite Material Reinforcing
Mostovoy, C. Ye.. Kobets, L. P.. Frolov, V. M.. Timoshina. L. M.. and Martynova.
Ye. L.

Effect of Test Temperature on Stability of Carbon Filament Mechanical Properties
Shorshorov, M. Kh., Katinova. L. V.. Manuylov. V. F., Kudinov, V. V., Sokolov, V.
8.. Tsirlin. A. M.. and Tseplyayeva. T. N.

Nature and Dynamics of Change in Boron and Borsik Filament Strength During Plasma

Spraying. Heating and Plastic Deforming
Semenov. B. 1.. Kruglov. S. M.. and Tishchenkove. Ye. F.

Strength and Failure when Stretching Hire Reinforced Hith Steel and Boron Fila-

ments

:hapter 3. Composite Materials With Metal Matrices

Kostikov. V. 1.. Antipov. V. 1.. Krivtsun. V. M.. Koshelev, Yu. 1.. Filimonov, Ye.
F., Savvateyeva, S. M.. and Tatiyevskaya. Ye. M.
wetting Carbon Filaments With Metal Matrix Melts
Varenkov. A. M.. Kostikov. V. 1.. Mozzbukhin. Ye. 1., and Shimanyuk. V. T.
Obtaining a Composite Aluminum-Carbon Filament Material From Plasma Intermediate
Products By Hot Pressing
Stroganova. V. F.. Corodetskays. L. A.. and Tokar', Ye. M.
Composite Material of the Magnesium-Boron System
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Chubarov. V. M.. Salibekov, S. Yen Gribkov, A. N., Batrakov, V. P., Grachev, 1.. V..
Konissarova, V. 8.. Denisov. B. 5.. Bolgova. G. I.. Yegorova. N. V.. and Sadovnikov,
S. N.

Operational Characteristics of Boreluninum Composite Material VKA-l
Sakharov. V. V.. Salibekov, S. Ye., Romanovich, I. V.. Sledkov, V. N., Nikolayeva.
'l'. 3.. and Mukaseyev, A. A.

Interactioc of Boron Filament With Aluminum and Its Alloys In Diffusion Welding
Aref'yev. B. A.. Gur'yev, A. V.. Corina, N. V.. Gribkov, A. N., Yepikhina. N. M..
and Nosko, I. N.

Structure and Properties of Mot—Rolled Boraluminum Sheet
Shorshorov. M. 101.. Kolesnichenko. V. A., Anan'yev, A. I.. Kamyshkov, A. 8.. Cor-
elov. M. 6.. Godin. V. M.. 'l'rutnev, V. V.. Terent'yev. I. M.. and Dolgalev. B. Ye.

Mechanical Properties of Longitudinally Reinforced Composite Aluninun-Boron Pi-

lament Pipe
Beletskiy, V. M.. Krivov, G. A.. Yetsenko. M. 1., Kudinov. V. V.. Galkin. Yu. A.,
Katinova. L. V.. and Tseplyayeva. 1'. N.

Evaluating the Mechanical Properties of Unidirectional Filament Material On a

Metal Matrix
Trutnev. V. V.. Terent'yev, I. M.. Potapov, V. I.. Maksimova. L. 1., Vasil'yeva,
T. K., Shebanov. V. V.. Godin, V. M.. and Antipov, V. I.

Pressing Aluminum-Boron Composite Materials In Contact Fusion
Kudinov. V. V.. Aref'yev. B. A.. Galkin. Yu. A.. and Kalita. V. I.

Mechanical Properties of the AD-l Matrix Obtained By Plasna Spraying
Kolpashnikov. A. I., Pavlov, Ye. A.. Kiselev, V. A.. Shiryayev' Ye. V.. and Ko-
cheshkov, I. V.

Process for Obtaining Curved Boraluminm Shapes
Tikhonov. A. 8., Manuylov, V. F.. Aret'yev. B. A., and Calakhov, A. V.

Principles for Calculating Defamation Parameters for Filament Composite Materials
Gribkov, A. N., Solov'yev, V. P.. Snirnov, V. I.. and Chichkov. Yu. N.

Certain Deformation Features of Filament Composite Materials With Metal Matrices
Karpinos, D. M., Kadyrov, V. 101.. and Moroz, V. P.

Strength of Composites On An Aluminum Base At (helical Load
Manuylov. V. F.. Tolstaya. M. A.. Mukhina. M. 6.. and Gryunval'd. M. P.

Corrosion Behavior of Boraluminum Obtained By Rolling
Meshcheryakov. V. N., Popov. I. A.. and Zhanonova. V. I.

Interaction of Components in Filament Composite Materiel On An N150 Base Rein-

forced With “hungsten Wires
Meshcheryakov, V. N., Bakerinova. V. 1.. Makhmdov, K. D.. Aleksandrov. A. A.. and
Faustov. N. I.

Obtaining Vacuum-Rolled Titanium-Molybdenum Wire Composite Material
Karpinos, D. M.. Kosolapova. ‘1'. Ya.. Listovnichaya. S. P.. Balakhnina. V. N.,
Dzeganovskiy. V. P.. and Mateera, V. Ye.

Interaction of Zircon Carbide With Chromium At High Temperatures
Antipov. V. I.. Rybal'chenko. M. M.. Sedykh. V. S.. Kriventsov, A. N., and Solov‘-
yev, I. A.

Structure and Properties of Filament Composite Material With a Nickel-Based Alloy

Matrix Reinforced With Tungsten Wire
Beletskiy, V. M.. Krivov. c. A.. Mel'nikov. R. V.. Tsapenko, D. N., Romashko. I. M.,
Katinova. L. V.. Kudinov, V. V.. and Ustinov. L. M.

Strength of Aluminum-Boron Composite Material Compounds Obtained By Precision

Contact Welding

15
roe orncm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Pridlyander. I. 8.. Beletskiy. V. M.. Krivov, G. A., Romashko, I. M., Stroganova.
V. F., Yudina. S. In, and Konovelovs. M. A.
Use of Unidirectional Metal Composite Material As Overlapping
Savitskiy. Ye. M.. and Baron, V. V.
Composite Superconductors
Ivanova, V. 8.. Kop'yev. I. M.. Volkov. V. 8.. and Busalov, Yu. Ye.
Mechanical and Functional Properties of Friction-Besistant Composite Material
for Slip Bearings
Semanenko. V. Ye.. and Somov. A. 1.
Composite Microstructure Formation During Electron-Beam Recrystallization of Re-
fractory Systems Based On Niobium and Nickel
Kalashnikov. Ye.V ., Sidorova. T. A.. Guts. Z. A., Andreyev. A. A.. Korkin: I. V.,
and Smirnov, V. V.
Growth and Structure of Eutectic Metal - Transfer Metal Carbide Composite Mater-
ials _
Pirogov. Ye. M.. Artyukhina. L. L., Konoplenko. V. P,, Svetlov; 1. L., and Khus-
netdinov. F. M.
Calculating Stresses and Constructing Cyclical Deformation Diagrams for Best-
Fatigue Load In Composite Materials
Skorokhod. V. V.. Panichkine. V. V.. and Konchekovskaya. L. D.
Shrinkage In Caking Dispersion-Hardened Molybdenum Alloy Powders
Babich, B. N.. Kuatov. Yu. A.. and Portnoy. K. I.
New VDU3 Dispersion-Hardened Alloy On Nickel-Chromium Base

Chapter é. Composite Materials With Polymer Matrices

Kobets. L. P.
Effect of Surface Treatment of High-Modulus Filaments 0n Compatibility With Poly-
mer Binders
Trostyanskaya, Ye. 3.. Bahayevskiy. P. 6.. and Bukharov, S. V.
Improving Polymer Matrix Rigidity and Its Effect 0n the Mechanical Properties of
Composite Materials
Polyakov, V. L.
Residual Stresses and Certain Questions on Composite Material Strength
Gunyayav. G. M.. and Khoroshilova, I. P.
Effect of Epoxide Matrix Composition On Properties and Technological Effective-
ness of Carbon Plastics
Sorina. T. 6.. Surgucheva. A. 1.. Buyanov. G. 1., Pinogenov. C. N.. and Yartsev,
V. A.
Behavior of Carbon Plastics Given Complex Load-Environment Effect
Cunyayev. C. M.. Rumyantsev. A. P.. Ped'kova, N. N.. Mitrofanova. Ye. A., Chekina,
2. F., Stepanychev, Ye. 1.. and Makhmutov I. M.
Optimizing Composition and Structure of Reinforcing Bi- and Tricomponent Compo-
site Materials
Geller. A. B.. and Parepelkin. K. Ye.
Temperature Deformations of Carbon, Organic Reinforcing Filaments and Composite
Materials Based on Then
Yershov, N. P.
Designing Components Using Composite Materials with Polymer and Metal Matrices
Kalinnikov, V. A.

Using a Linear Statistical Model to Optimize Production of Composite Filament
Material Components.

16
me om '
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Trostyanakaya. Ye. 3.. Shiahkin. V. A.. Novikov. V. A.. and Concharenko. V. A,
Using Polymer Rivets and Welding to Join Polymer Composite Materials

Chapter 5. Composite Materials Hith Carbon and Ceramic Matrices

Sobolev. 1. V.. Kevan. T. M.. Kiselev. B. A.. Mosal'skiy, V. V.. Pisarenko, G. S..
and Skvortsova. N. V.

Change In Properties of Class- and Carbon-Filled Polymers During Pyrolysis
Karpinos. D. M.. Crosheva. V. M.. Morosova. V. M.. Listovnichaya. S. P., Morosov' ,
Yu. 1.. Dzeganovskiy, V. P.. Yakovlav. K. 1.. Kalinichenko, V. 1.. Klimenko. V. 8., '
and Mikhashchuk. Ye. P.

Composite Materials Based on Ceramic Reinforced With Refractory Ceramic and Me-

tal Filaments
Karpinos. D. M.. Rutkovskiy. A. Ys.. Morozov. Yu. 1.. Ivaahin. A. A.. Yakovlev.
K. 1.. and Luzhanskiy. G. A.

Silicon Carbide Filament - Quartz Glass Composite Material
Krasulin. Yu. I... Timofeyev. V. M.. Ivanov, A. 3.. Darinov, S. M.. Domoratskiy.

V. A.. and Asonov. A. N.

Shell-Structure Type Highly Refractory Ceramic

Chapter 6. Strength and Methods of Testing Composite Materials

Ustinov. L. M.. Vinogradov. L. V.. and Zhamnova. V. 1.
Effect of Brittle Interlayers on Strength of Filament Composite Materials Vith
a Plastic Matrix
Ovchinskiy. A. 8.. Sakharova. Ye. M.. Kop'yev. 1. M.. Bilsagayev, N. K.. and Sa-
vel'yeva, S. A.
Analysis of Dynamic Effects When Redistributing Stresses and Digital Computer
Simulation of Failure in Metal Composite Materials Vith Curved Filaments
Penkin. A. 6.. and Cusev. O. V.
Developing an Acoustic mission Installation for Testing Composite Materials
Gusev, 0. V.. Penkin. A. 6.. and Shorshorov. M. Rh.
Effect of Intermetallide Interlayers on Acoustic Emission Parameters when
Stretching Aluminum-Steel Composites
Mikhaylov. V. V.. Zaytsev. G. P.. Sarina. T. 6.. Zyryanov‘ -1. A.. and Ivanova. 1.. A.
Mechanics of Failure When Stretching High-Strength Reinforcing Plastic Elements
Vith Surface and Open Cracks
Zhigun. 1. 6.. Dushin, M. 1.. Panfilov, D. V.. Ivonin. Yu. M.. and Tanevskiy. V. V.
Effect of Concentrators on Strength of Composite Materials
Skudra. A. M.. Perov. B. V.. Mashinskaya. G. P.. Dulava. F. Ya.. and Deyev. 1. S.
Microstructural Features of Organoplastic Failure and Their Effect on Strength

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Nauka". 1981

11052
CSO: [842/150

17
non orncm. ass ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MECHANICAL PROPERTIES

UDC: 620.1.05:620.17l.3

STRESS-STRAIN TESTING OF MATERIALS AI HIGH TBHPBRATURIS

Kiev HEKHANICHESKIYE ISPYTAHIYA HATERIALOV PHI VYSOKIKH THHPBHATUHAKH in Russian
1980 (signed to press 16 Dec 80) pp 2-4, 206~208

[Annotation, foreword and table of contents from book "Mechanical Testing of

Materials at High Temperatures", by Mikhail Hironovich Aleksyuk. Vilentin Alekseyevich
Boriaenko and Valeriy Petrovich Krashchenko, UkSSR Academy of Sciences Institute of
Problems of Strength. Izdatel'stvo "Naukove dumka", 1750 copies, 208 pages]

[Text] This monograph examines methods and equipment for testing materials employed
in new equipment under conditions simulating actual operating conditions. The
authors describe new methodological solutions and corresponding unique equipment and
devices for investigating refractory and composite materials across a broad tempera-
ture range (from 20 to 3000°C) and range of rates of deformation.

The authors examine problems of experimental investigation of hardness, character-
istics of elasticity. short-term and long-time tensile, compressive, and bending
strength. The authors describe systems of providing force and temperature loading
conditions and present examples of their calculations. Particular attention is
focused on ensuring accuracy of measurement of temperatures. loads and deformations
in determining the stress-strain characteristics of materials in conditions of a
vacuum, inert and oxidizing media.

This volume is intended for scientists, engineers and technicians working in the
area of investigation of the mechanical properties of materials of various classes.

Table of Contents Page
Foreword 3

Chapter 1. General Principles and Features of Test Equipment for Studying

Strength of Haterials at High Temperatures 5

l. Methodological Features of Stress-Strain Tests at Accelerated Rates
of Deformation and High Temperatures 5
2. Method of Thermal Calculation of Heaters ll
3. High-Output Heater Voltage Regulation 19

18
FOR|DFFNJAI.USE(MHLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Chapter 2. Investigation of Hardness of Materials up to Temperatures of

1.

2.

3300'!

Fundamentals of Method of Measuring Hardness of Materials at high
Temperatures

Method of Studying the Hardness of Materials at Temperatures up to
3300°K

Mechanical Fundamentals of Hardness Tests

Equipment for Studying Hardness of Materials Across a Broad

Range of Temperatures

Problems of Damageahility and Selection of Indenter for High-
Temperature Tests of Micro- and Macrohardness

Indenters for Measuring Hardness of Materials at High Temperatures
Accuracy of Determination of Hardness of Materials at High Tempera-
tures

Chapter 3. Investigation of the Microhardness of Materials up to a Tem-

l.
2.

perature of 2300°K

Equipment for Investigating the Microhardness of Materials
Method of Investigating the Microhardness of Refractory Compounds

Chapter 4. Investigation of Strength Characteristics and Kinetics of

l.
2.

3.

Deformation of Materials at High Temperatures

Equipment for Studying Tensile Strength of Microspecimens at Tem-
peratures up to 3300°K

Equipment for Investigating Creep and Long-Time Strength of
Refractory Materials

Equipment for Investigating High-Temperature Cyclic Strength of
Structural Materials

Chapter 5. Investigation of Strength of Materials in Conditions of High

3.

6.

Temperatures Under Tension-Cospression, with Simultaneous
Determination of Microhsrdness

Equipment for Investigating the Strength of Materials Across a
Broad Range of Temperatures

Equipment for Investigating the Strength of Materials Under
Tension-Compression Hith Simultaneous Determination of Microhard-
ness

Method of Investigating High-Temperature Microhardness of Materials
on a Mikrat-h Machine

Method of High-Temperature Tensile Testing of Materials

Chapter 6. Investigation of Strength and Plasticity of Materials Under

1.

Tension Across a Broad Range of Temperatures and Rates of
Deformation

IP-IO Machine for Investigating Strength and Deformahility of
Materials at Rates of 10‘ ~10. seconds in a temperature range of
l70-2300‘K

19
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

22

23

29
36

62

51
SS

58
63
63
70

76

77

87

90

95

96

98

107
112

122

122
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

2. Equipment for Testing Materials at liigh Rates of Deformation, High

and Low Temperatures 136
3. Equipment for Investigating the Hardness of Materials at Various
Loading Rates Across a Broad Range of Temperatures 139
4. Equipment forStress-Strain Testing of Fibers 144
Chapter 7. Investigation of the Stress-Strain Characteristics of Com-
posite Materials Across a Broad Range of Temperatures 168
1. Method of Determining Stresses in an Adhesive Compound 158
2. Investigation of the Strength of an Adhesive Bond in a Complex
Stressed State 152
3. Equipment for Determining the Strength of Adhesive Compounds 155
b. Equipment for Testing the Strength of an Adhesive Bond Between
Constituents of Compositions 159
5. Equipment for Investigating the Stress-Strain Properties of Hon-
Metallic Materials at Temperatures of l70-570‘K 166
6. Equipment for Investigating the Stress-Strain Properties of Non-
Metallic Materials at Temperatures from 80 to 870°K 171
7. Thermal Calculation of Convective Heating of Specimens 179
8. Equipment for Stress-Strain Tearing of Heat-Protective Materials
with Unidirectional Heating 188
Bibliography 192
POREHORD

Development of the modern machine building industry and especially power, aero-
nautical and rocket engineering is connected with the development of new heat-
resistant structural and protective materials capable of operating under condi-
tions of high temperatures and mechanical loading close to maximum. In connection
with this,scientific research aimed at determining the patterns of behavior of
structural materials employed for components operating at high temperatures has
become considerably more important. Performance of such research is dis-
tinguished by a high degree of complexity and requires elaboration of new

methodological devices in conducting experiments and building appropriate test-
ing equipment.

The conditions of stress-strain tests have become extended in recent years.
Problems of stability or variability of the physical structure of a material in
the process of deformation are acquiring primary significance.

The complexity and diversity of the physicomechanical processes taking place in

a deformable solid lead to ambiguous and results. which are manifested in the form
of unexpected failure or unwarrantedly high mechanical resistance. A correct ex-
planation of the behavior of a material under load and, what is more important,
prediction of this behavior are possible only after determining the physical es-
sence of the processes which take place. In connection with this. such widely
known operating factors as degree of complexity of stressed state, rate of

20
FOanﬂﬂCJAL.USE(MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

deformation, broad range of temperatures, degree of physicochemical activeness of
the environment, etc, should be examined from the standpoint of their influence on
the structural foundation of the material and through it on the observable
mechanical properties.

Modern materials science is offering technology a large number of materials of the
most diversified function. Many of these materials are employed for the manufacture
of critical machine parts, some are utilized as reinforcing elements in the form of
wires, filaments, foils, coatings, and laminations, which in turn can be components
of complex macro- and microheterogeneous materials, forming the heterogeneous
structure of the majority of alloys or matrices and hardeners in composite materials.

Investigation of materials in normal conditions is performed with traditional
methods on standard equipment. Development of new methods, however, has also
required new design solutions.

Methods of investigation of hardness, microhardness, and tensile testing of small
specimens are promising and sometimes the only possible methods for determination
and study of the mechanical properties of materials in small volumes. These tests
can be conditionally assigned to the category of micromechanical methods of in-
vestigation of the properties of materials [121, 128, .166, 205]. Development of
methods of studying the strength of refractory metals at temperatures which are
double to triple the temperature reached in testing equipment (up to 1300°K) was a
highly complex problem, the solution of which required overcoming major engineering
and methodological difficulties. A group of new special high-temperature high-ac-
curacy testing machines was developed, equipment which eliminmes the influence of
harmful extraneous phenomena on the specimens being tested: evaporation and
oxidation of materials, friction in the guides and seals of the micromachines, heat-
ing of force measuring devices, vibration of equipment components and the building,
as well as many other factors.

In connection with the necessity of perfoming structural tests simultaneously with
force loading, high-temperature testing mechines are equipped with metallographic
observation devices. The majority of newly designed and built testing machines and
their assemblies are original inventions.

Designs of testing equipment and devices have been developed for investigating the
strength characteristics of structural materials, as wall as certain types of

f ilamentsry compositions, loaded across a broad range of temperatures and rates of
deformation.

This monograph presents a survey of stress-strain testing methods and descriptions
of corresponding equipment, with analysis of their design and methodological features.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Naukova dunks", 1980

3021.
C50: 1842/177

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

NONFERROUS METALLURGY

unc: 669.295.721.008
PRESENT, FUTURE OF USSR TITANIUM-MAGNESIUM INDUSTRY
Moscow TSVBTNYYB METALLY in Russian No 7. Jul 81 pp 55-60
[Article by A. N. Pctrun'ko: "Along the Path of Technological Advance")

[Text] Synthesis of the scientific and production experience of establishment,
development and improvement of the titaniun-nagnesium industry in the USSR, the
successes of which are universally acknowledged, is extremely inportsnt for in-
novative utilization during achievement of the pl a n targets specified for 1981-
1985.

Considerable ground has been covered. The lessons of the past have been useful and
instructive, and this offers a foundation for recalling several stages in the work
of the All-Union Titanium Scientific Research and Design Institute.

 

In August 1956 a GSPI [State Special Design Institute] branch was established in
Zaporozh'ye. based at the Dnieper Titaniumeﬂagnesiun Plant. The task of this
branch was to provide engineering design documentation for the pioneer of the
Soviet titanium industry -- the Dnieper Titanium-Magnesium Plant.

Over a period of two years the institute's designers and engineers built ex-
perinentsl models of equipment for the plant's second unit, developed experimental

models of apparatus and equipment, and designed basic and auxiliary production
facilities.

22
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFIIC1AL.US£1ONLY

In 1958 the branch was transformed into the Ukrgiprotsvetmet Ukrainian Design In-
stitute of Nonferrous Metallurgy. Performing basic work in the area of development
of titanium production in the city of Zaporozh'ye. the institute was also involved
in performing general design activities for other nonferrous metallurgical facili—
ties in the Ukraine. A scientific research component was established as an element
of the institute.

The team of designers and researchers was established by the beginning of 1960, and
the institute's facilities were improved.

The institute's first director was I. S. Zagorskiy, while in the subsequent period
considerable work in the area of institute organization and development was per-
formed by director V. P. Denisov, USSR State Prize recipient. and his deputy for
scientific affairs, B. Ye. Lukashenko.

In the laboratories research was conducted in the area of improving production of
aluminum, titanium, and silicone compounds; new methods of analysis and physico-
chemical investigations were developed.

Research was supervised by candidates of technical sciences L. N. Antipin, S. P.
Vazhenin, I. P. Sorokin, I. A. Grikit, V. V. Rodyakin, S. l. Denisov, and N. A.
Akimova.

Lacking its own experimental facilities, the institute initially conducted research
directly on industrial equipment, in laboratories and shops of titanium-magnesium,
aluminum, and electrode plants. Enterprise specialists took active part in this
work. The subject matter focus was basically in conformity with current production
needs, and practical adoption of research results was accelerated. The main thing
was the fact that the work force developed a striving toward close cooperation
between scientists and production people, which was and continues to be of great im-
portance in their work.

The work effectiveness of the institute during this period was also promoted by
considerable attention toward the institute's needs and activities, and constant
assistance by the directors of DTHZ [Dnieper Titanium-Magnesium Plant], DAM
[Dnieper Aluminum Plant] and 082 [Dnieper Electrode Plant] - P. I. Hiroshnikov,
I. K. Strel'chenko and S. H. Goncharenko.

As the institute grew and the qualifications of the staff improved, scientific re-
search and design activities in the area of titanium production expanded. In the
period 1960-1965 a number of large-scale design projects were carried out for the
Zaporozh'ye Titanium-Magnesium Combine. There occurred extensive development of
scientific research work in the area of development of enclosed-type ore roasting
furnaces and a process of melting titanium slags in these furnaces, high-output
chlorinators, efficient condensation systems, high cyclic output reduction and
separation equipment for obtaining sponge titanium, as well as a number of research
projects aimed at improving the quality of sponge titanium.

The USSR titanium-magnesium industry was built in a short period of time. Growing
metals requirements dictated a rapid pace of development. This evoked the necessi-
ty of extensive enlistment of talented manpower. An enormous volume of work

23
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

pertaining to designing enterprises and equipment for scientific research as well as
bringing equipment and processes on-stream was performed during the construction of
titanium-magnesium plants: by VAMI [All—Union Institute of Aluminum and Magnesium]
in construction of the Bereznikovskiy plant; by Giredmet in construction of the
Ust'-Kamenogorsk plant, and by the Titanium Institute in construction of the
Zaporozh'ye plant. A mutual exchange of information and know-how and the es—
tablished productive cooperation among the staffs of these institutes promoted
movement on—stream of the original design capacity of these enterprises largely in
the Eighth Five-Year Plan.

In 1965 the Titanium Institute was designated the lead branch institute for the

titanium-magnesim industry and was renamed the All—Union Titanium Scientific Re-
search and Design Institute.

in subsequent years all scientific research topics pertaining to titanium were
transferred over to the institute from VAMI, as were the functions of lead insti-
tute in the production of magnesium. Radical structural changes have taken place
in conformity with the institute's specialization, and its facilities have im-
proved. A significant contribution toward the organization of scientific research
and design projects as well as determination of the main areas of institute ac-
tivity during this period wasmadeby its director. P. V. Inashvili, its subsequent
director, R. K. Ognev, deputy directors for scientific affairs V. I. Borodin and
N. V. Galitskiy, and chief engineer M. T. Krivoshey.

In 1976 the Bermnikovskiy branch, which is also celebrating its 25th anniversary
this year, was made a coaponent of the Titanium Institute.

Today the Titanium Institute is a lead branch institute, with its own experimental
production facilities, performing scientific research, experimental design, de-
sign engineering and technical-economic work, which are defining the future develop-
ment prospects of the titanium-magnesium subbranch.

High-Output Unit for Producing
Sponge Titanium

 

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
li)R‘0FTﬂCIAl.lﬂﬂE(MVLY

The institute contains an EDP center, equipped with third-generation Yes-1020 com-
puters and Nairi units, with the aid of which results are processed, engineering
design calculations are performed, and automated scientific and technical informa-
tion systems are being created. Greatly utilized in design activities are the

simulation-model method, copyless production of drawings, standard so? cions and
applications.

Organizational development of the Titanium Institute was accompanied by continuous
improvement in its scientific and practical activities as well as improvement in
personnel qualifications.

The productive activities of institute personnel have increased. In the last five
years 287 certificates of invention have been granted, and 69 inventions have been
incorporated into production, with overall savings of 6.7 million rubles. The
institute's project results are being registered under foreign patents.

Institute staff personnel have published 57 books and pamphlets, and more than
1,300 articles in scientific journals. A total of 18 volumes of collected scien-
tific papers and specific-topic volumes have been published, dealing with problems

of improving existing and development of new industrial processes in the produc-
tion of titanium and magnesium.

A total of three doctoral and 65 candidate dissertations have been defended based
on projects carried out at the Titanium Institute.

The institute staff is continuing to expand and deepen a tradition which was
established in the initial period - productive cooperation with enterprises and
institutes in a partnership arrangement pertaining to seeking and adopting major,
important improvements in the equipment and technology of titanium-magnesium
production facilities. This has helped transform the titanium-magnesium subbranch
into a large-scale modern industry employing high-output and high-efficiency

process equipment which makes it possible to achieve guaranteed high product
quality a

A substantial increase in titanium and magnesium production in the last decade,
1971-1980, has been obtained exclusively by means of renovation of enterprises and
modernization of equipment, for the most part without building new facilities, with
utilization of the results of scientific and technical projects conducted by the

staff of the Titanium Institute in cooperation with enterprises and other in-
stitutes of this branch.

In the area of titanium slag processing, projects pertaining to designing and build-
ing high-output enclosed ore roasting furnaces and process development were headed
by S. I. Denisov. V. c. Raspopin, V. G. Bryndin, G. H. Shekhovtsev, H. Sh. Reyngach,
and V. V. Asaf'yev participated actively on the working team.

The renovation of ore roasting furnaces conducted in 1980, with their capacity be-
ing increased, is completed. Renovation boosted furnace output at BTHK
[Bereznikovskiy Titanium-Magnesium Combine], for example, by 51 percent, while
reducing specific consumption of electricity by 16.4 percent; recovery in this

2
FOR OFHKJEi.USE(HVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

process was increased by 3.3 percent, and the relative number of workers was
reduced by 35.

A large aggregate of scientific-technical and design projects was performed on the
process of chloridizing roasting of titanium slags and titanium tetrachloride
treatment. As a result of adoption of project results, the design output capacity
of shaft and salt chlorinators has increased by 36 and 56 percent respectively.
During the 10th Five-Year Plan alone shop output capacity increased by 7.8 percent
as a result of renovation of chlorinatora at BTHK, without increasing the number of
personnel. N. V. Galitskiy, A. B. Bezukladnikov, and D. P. Baybakov made a substan-
tial contribution toward solving these problems.

Under the direction of N. V. Galitskiy, V. I. Stershenkov, and V. I. Drozhzhev, the
institute worked on improvement and development of new methods of deep treatment of
titanium tetrachloride and study of the composition of the impurities of complex
substances contained in it and methods of removing them. Adoption of research
results made it possible at all enterprises sharply to improve quality of the
product of this process and to boost equipment output. In 1970-1975 enterprises
adopted copperless cleaning of titanium tetrachloride with lower chlorides of
titanium, with employment of a new, more available andcheaper reagent. which
generated more than 1 million rubles in savings. In 1979-1980 there occurred exten-
sive investigation of rectification conditions in large-diameter towers. Adoption
into industry of the new towers made it possible to increase output by 50 percent
in this process and to boost to 95 percent output of the top grades of titanium
tetrachloride.

Improvement and modernization of basic industrial equipment in the process of ob-
taining sponge titanium were accomplished, beginning in 1966, under the direction
of A. Ye. Andreyev. V. H. Hal'shin, and V. H. Skrypnyuk. In a short period of
time, through the unified efforts of scientific personnel, design engineers and
production people, working with specialists from the Giredmet Institute and other
organizations, high-output, high-efficiency units were developed, and total renova-
tion of this process was accomplished at all enterprises.

Alongside improvement of equipment. a great deal of work is being done to improve
the quality of sponge titanium. At the present time the quality of sponge titanium
produced by Soviet enterprises is at the level of the finest foreign product,

while the highest-grade sponge, 10-90. has no equal abroad.

A special place in the institute's activities is occupied by the search for areas
of efficient application of titanium and titanium alloys in civilian branches of
industry. Resolution of this problem was assigned to the institute in 1969.

Under the direction of S. F. Vazhenin and V. V. Volynskiy, research was conducted
on the employment of titanium at more than 200 enterprises of various branches,
and an extensive campaign was organized to publicize the properties and advantages
of this remarkable metal. As a result, by 1976 consumption of titanium in non-
ferrous metallurgy, chemical and petroleum machine building and the chemical in-
dustry had increased more than fivefold. Annual savings from accelerated adoption
of titanium amounted to approximately 3 million rubles.

26
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

v. v. Volynskiy, c. A. Kolobov, and ‘Iu. v. DobrunOV were awarded the Ukrainian ssn
State Prize for their work in the area of application of titanium in the chemical
industry.

One of the most important and promising problemareaa in which the incitute has
been working since 1965 is the development of titanium powder metallurgy technology.
By 1970 the theoretical principles of obtaining powders by the electrolysis method
had been elaborated, under the direction of L. N. Antipin, and experimental-com-
mercial scale electrolytic cells had been designed and built. Subsequently these
projects in the area of titanium powder metallurgy were headed by Yu. G. Olesov,

V. V. Nerubashchenko, N. N. Koygushskiy, V. A. Drozdenko, and R. K. Ognev. Through
the efforts of the research teams under their direction, working in cooperation
with the Ukrainian SSR Academy of Sciences Institute of Problems of Materials Sci-
ence and the Zaporozh'ye Machine Building Institute, by 1977 a process and equip-
ment had been developed for producing powders and products of powders, generating
savings ranging from 3 to 15 thousand rubles per ton of product. Employment of
titanium filtering elements in the chemical industry and in nonferrous metallurgy
is particularly effective. Savings amount to 100,000 rubles per ton of filters.

Highly effective, radical improvements have been accomplished in the area of mag-
nesium production. working jointly with VAHI, development of equipment has been
completed, as has the total renovation of magnesium electrolysis shops at all
enterprises of the subbranch, with installation of new, high-output electrolytic
cells without cathode box. This has made it possible to increase their output by
up to 20 percent, to boost output volume without increasing work force, to reduce
specific consumption of electricity by 1400-2000 kilowatt hours, to increase
chlorine yield by 50 k !t, to achieve significantly healthier working conditions,
to eliminate laborious cathode replacement operations, and to mechanize sludge
recovery. Research is continuing, under the direction of V. N. Devyatkin, Yu. H.
Ryabukhin and G. N. Svalov, on.further improving the magnesium electrolysis
process, on reducing magnesium and chlorine losses, and on developing methods of
protecting structural components against oxidation and the aggressive action of
the melt.

In recent years the institute staff has done a great deal of work on improving
existing and developing new techniques of treating stack gases, effluents, on
neutralization and utilization of production process chloride waste, which has made

it possible substantially to reduce discharge of harmful material in the environ-
ment.

Stable production of merchantable hypochlorite pulps has been achieved by im~
proving the process of treating chlorine-containing magnesium production gases.
Research has been conducted on utilization of chloride waste in deep well drilling;

tion of cements and concrete.

The work accomplished by the Titanium Institute since its establishment has at-
tained a very large scale. At the present time the average annual volume of
scientific research work runs in the vicinity of 4 million rubles, while the total
volume of design and development work runs at approximately 2.0 million rubles.
Each year the institute presents design-estimate documentation representing a sum

2
FOR OFFIGA‘. USE ONLY
FYMICHWHCJAI.USE(NNLY

in excess of 20 million rubles. Savings achieved from adoption of completed re-
search in the last 10 years has almost doubled. amounting to 9.190.000 rubles in

1980. Correspondingly. return on each ruble spent is now 3.95 rubles. in com-
parison with 2.49 rubles in 1970.

The institute's scientific and technical activities in the last 10 years have been
directed toward boosting the technical level of the titanium-magnesium subbranch
and improving the technical-economic indices of enterprises. A11 production
volume growth. both in titanium and magnesium. was obtained in the 10th Five-Year
Plan solely as a result of reequipping enterprises. Basic technical-economic per-
formance indices have improved substantially during that same period.

Output of sponge titanium bearing the state Seal of Quality increased to 86 per—
cent in 1980. while the figure for magnesium and magnesium alloys rose to 84 per-
cent. Percentage of complete utilization of raw materials improved: it has reached
84 percent in titanium production. and 88 percent in magnesium production.

Further development of this subbranch and improvement in its technical-economic
indices in the llth Five-Year Plan will be achieved both by elaboration and adop—
tion of new technical solutions and improvement of existing industrial processes,
awdps aresult of reducing the msterials-intensiveness of production. achieving
savings in metal and energy resources. and mechanization of manual labor on the

basis of comprehensive specific programs worked out by the enterprises and the in-
stitute.

Subbranch technical development plans for the llth Five-Year Plan call for further
modernization of basic industrial equipment in all processes. adoption of new in-
dustrial processes. continuous-flow mechanized lines. and creation of the pre-
requisites for total mechanization and automation of production.

A slag granulation process will be adopted in titanium slag melt processing. along-
side further increase in the output of basic process equipment. which will make it

possible to eliminate a number of laborious operations and boost titanium recovery

by 1.5-2.0 percent.

An increase in the output of chlorinators and adoption at all enterprises of the
process of deeper treatment of titanium tetrachloride in high-output screen rectify-
ing towers will be accomplished in the chloridizing roasting process and treatment
of titanium tetrachloride.

In the reduction and vacuum separation process. efforts are to be concentrated on
bringing on-stream high-output units. deepening reducer treatment. and optimization
of conditions with the employment of automated control systems.

In the 11th Five-Year Plan particular attention is to be focused on commercial-
scale adoption of continuous-flow magnesium production. Adoption of this technology
will make it possible substantially (by 20-30 percent) to boost labor productivity
of basic production personnel and to create the prerequisites for total production
mechanization and automation.

Plans call for a substantial change in solving problems of production waste recovery
in all basic processes.

28
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Institute efforts will also be focused on creating the scientific-technical founda-
tions of new processes and equipment, including a continuOus titanium production
method, the plasmochenical and electrolytic techniques of titanium production,plus
a number of others.

Further acceleration of technological advances in titanium-magnesium production
will be promoted by a more thorough study of advanced know-how in achieving high
indices, and mutual exchange of experience among enterprises and institutes in the
area of adoption of advanced equip-cut and processes.

The necessity ofdirectingthese efforts is a most important task of the Titanium
Institute in the 11th Five-Year Plan.

The tasks facing the work forces of the Titanium Institute and titanium-magnesium
enterprises are large and complex, and the principal task is that of maximum
satisfaction of the needs of the economy in high-quality metals - titanium and
magnesium. The high level of personnel skills and qualifications, substantial
experience and know-how in organizing joint projects amassed by the institute and
enterprises of this subbrsnch, and close cooperation between institute scientists
and production specialists in solving concrete problems constitute a guarantee
of accomplishment of these tasks.

COPYRIGHT: IZDATEL'STVO "METAILURGIYA". "'rsvamvr METALLY". 1981

3024
C50: 1842/159

IN)! 0F11Ci2l,USE(NﬂLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Pom METALLURGY

UDC: 669.295:621.762
TITANIUM POWDER METALLURGY

Moscow POROSHKOVAYA METALLURGIYA TITANA in Russian (signed to press 6 Apr 81)
pp Z—é, 267

(Annotation. foreword and table of contents from book "Powder Metallurgy of Titanium",
by Valentin Semenovich Ustinov, Yuriy Georgiyevich Olesov, Viktor Antonovich
Drozdenko, and Lev Nikolayevich Antipin, Izdatel'stvo "Metallurgiya", 2000 copies.
268 pages]

[Text] The first edition of this book came out in 1973. In the second edition the
authors examine the present state and development prospects of titanium powder
metallurgy. They discuss the technology of the basic processes of obtaining titanium
powders; attention is devoted to the properties of powders and sintered products
made from titanium powders in relation to the method of production, additional
treatment, alloying and precipitation hardening. The authors discuss industrial
safety in the manufacture and application of titanium powders and sintered products
made of such powders. The authors show the technical-economic effectiveness of
powder metallurgy methods in the manufacture of sintered products of powders in
place of cast titanim, as well as from employment of such products (porous and
structural) in the nation's economy.

This volume is intended for engineers and technicians working in the field of
titanium powder metallurgy, and can also be useful to graduate students and higher
educational institution upper-division undergraduates of the corresponding fields
of specialization. Fifty-two illustrations, 75 tables, 269 bibliographic items.

Contents Page

Foreword 3

Chapter 1. Metallothermic Reduction of Titanium Compounds 5
Chapter 2. Obtaining Titanium Powders by Ileana of Thermochemical and

Nechanochemical Processing of Metallic Titanium 23

1. Interaction of Titanium With hydrogen 23

2. Process of Hydrogenation of Metallic Titania: b2

3. New Trends in Thermochemical Elbrittlsnent of Titanium 1.9

lo. Grinding and Additional Processing of Embrittlemsnt Products 51

30

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
INDR 0FF1C1Al.USII(MULY

5. Breakdown of Titanium Hydride (Dehydrogenation) $8
6. Atomization and Granulation of Molten Titanium 70
Chapter 3. Electrolytic Preparation of Titanium Powders 77
1. Raw Material and Electrolytes for Electrolytic Production of Titanium 78
2. Designs of Electrolytic Cells and Auxiliary Equipment 91
3. Electrode Processes in Obtaining Powder Titanium on a Cathode 103
6. Influence of Electrolysis Process Conditions and Composition of
Electrolyte on Quality of Cathode Metal and Process lndices 115
Chapter 4. Properties of Titanium Powders. Methods of Monitoring and
Control 127
1. chemical Composition 127
2. Processing Properties 131
3. Controlling Properties of Titanium Powders 137
Chapter 5. Producing Products of Titanium Powders 163
1. Preparing Preforms for Sintering 143
2. Sintering Powders and Compression Molding 161
3. Intensification of the Processes of Forming and Sintering 173
a. Titanium-Ease Composite Materials 182
chapter 6. Processing of Titanium Powders 185

1. Employment of Titanium Powders as Component of Charges and Compounds 185

2. Obtaining Porous Products of Titanium Powders 195
3. Obtaining Compact Products 200
Chapter 7. Fire and Explosion Hazard of Powdered Titanium 209
1. Combustibility of Titanium-Ease Powders 209
2. Measures to Prevent Igniting and Explosions of Titanium Powders 219

Chapter 8. Technical-Economic Effectiveness of Titanium Powder Metallurgy 223
Bibliography 236

POREHORD

The first investigations in the area of titanium powder metallurgy were conducted at
the end of the 1930's. but research in this field did not reach a sufficient degree
of intensity until commercial production of metellothermic titanium was developed.

Powder metallurgy methods are employed to produce items with properties comparable
with the properties of melted metal, as well as new materials which are difficult

to produce from molten metal (gas absorber filtering elements. metal-polymer coatings,
antifriction products, etc).

31 '
roe OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Development of the manufacture of high-quality (electrolytic) titanium powders

made it possible to employ commercial-scale processes for producing a number of
sintered items -- structural components of the engine and instrument engineering in-
dustries, filters, dispersing agents, etc (1). Since publication of the first
edition of this book, the technical-economic characteristics of titanium powder
metallurgy have been defined, requirements on powders have been detailed, and the
principal parameters of the processes of molding, sintering and additional process-
ing of sintered products have been elaborated. It was determined that sintered
titanium products can be produced with utilization of equipment employed in ferrous
powder metallurgy and that of other metals (mixers, grinding and compression molding
equipment, aintering furnaces).

An optimal combination of physical-mechanical, physicochemical and process proper-
ties of titanium and titanium-base alloys is attracting the attention of representa-
tives of practically all areas of new technology - from aerospace to medicine.

The problems which are arising thereby (shortage of titanium, high cost of products,
etc) can be resolved with utilization of powder metallurgy methods.

The development of new processes of obtaining titanium (plasma metallurgy, continuous
metallothermic process, electrolysis) will lead to producing part or all titanium
in powder form, and if so, powder metallurgy will not only supplement the existing
method of mass production of titanium products but will replace it to one degree or
another.

The authors have analyzed Soviet and foreign experience in the development and adop-
tion of industrial processes and equipment for obtaining titanium powders and
products from such powders. Since the first edition of this book was published
(1973), a considerable number of scientific research results have been published in
periodicals, especially dealing with new trends in titanium powder metallurgy. A
number of theses presented in the first edition on the basis of analysis of data in
the literature and laboratory investigations, have undergone experimental-industrial
testing and verification at that time. Fundamentally new areas of application of
titanium powders have been determined, such as obtaining refractory titanium com-
pounds by the method of self-propagating high-temperature synthesis (SVS-process).
Products and materials obtained from titanium powders have been tested in industrial
conditions. All this has dictated the necessity of thorough revision of this book
during preparation for publishing a new edition.

The authors hope that the materials contained in this volume will prove useful both
for engineers and technicians working in the area of producing and processing
powders and for the users of products of titanium and titanium alloys.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Hetallurgiya", 1981

3024
C50: 1842/151

32
FOIIOFFHJAL.USE(MULY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MISCELLANEDUS

UDC: 629.7.036.S.-536.3.001.2(082)

KINETICS 0P HIGH~TEHPERATURE FAILURE OF MATERIALS

Kiev KINETIKA WSOKOTWEMWOGO MIRUSBDIIYA MATERIALOV in Russian 1981 (signed
to press 30 Dec 80) pp 24, 151-152

[Annotation, foreword and table of contents from book "Kinetics of High-Temperature
Failure of Materials". by Vasiliy Semsnovich Dvernyakov. UkSSR Acsdsuy of Sciences,
lzdatel'stvo "Naukova dunks”, 1100 copies. 152 pages]

[Text] In this monograph the author describes nethoda of studying the process of
high-temperature failure of, for the most part. heat-protective materials, under
conditions of radiant, convective. and combined heating. The author presents a
conjugate problem variant for the case of combined heating and conditions on the
saving boundary of physicochemical transformation within a material in the process
of failure (Stefan condition). The author briefly describes external and internal
regions of interaction of materials in various environments and extensively
presents an experimental base created on the principle of utilization of radiant
energy of the sun (special solar units) and other sources. The author presents
results of investigations of the process of interaction and shows the fundamental
possibility of estimating experimentally the kinetics of high-temperature failure
of materials.

This volume is intended for scientists, engineers and tscluicians conducting
research in the area of materials science and design of flying vehicles and engines;
it may also be useful for specialists in related fields of technology, graduate
students and undergraduates at higher technical schools.

Table of Contents Page
Foreword 3
Basic Symbols 5

Chapter 1. The Process of Heat Exchange and a Survey of Experimental
Equipment (External Region of Interaction) 7

Some Specific Features of High-Temperature Failure of TZH [Beat-
Protective Materials] 7
Heat Exchange with a Non-Destructing and Ablating Surface 11
Figuring the Radiant Couponent of Heat Flow 13
33

POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Experimental Methods and Equipment for Investigating the Kinetics of
Failure of TZM 24
Special Solar Units (860) 29

Chapter 2. Moving Boundaries of Physicochemical Transformations and
Principal Factors of Interactions (Internal Region of Inter-

action) 64

Heat and Mass Transfer Through Regenerated Zones of a Destructing

Material 66
Properties of Materials at High Temperatures 73
Classification of Materials 79
Properties of Individual Constituents of TZM and Their Influence on

Overall Effectiveness 81
Influence of External Factors on the Process of Interaction 86
Some Features of the Process of Failure of Materials in Conditions of

Radiant heating 88

Chapter 3. Substantistion and Derivation of a Conclusion Combining Ex-
ternal Conditions and Properties of a Material During Mass

Removal 98
Statmnt of Conjugate Problem for Conditions of Combined Heating 98
Model of high-Temperature be {lure of TZM in Conditions of Combined

Heating 106
Chapter 10. Determination of Input Data. Evaluation of Criteria, and

Results of Solving Equation (111.27) 116

Interrelationship of External Parameters and Properties of Materials,
Determination of the Range of Their Variation 1110

Determination of Values of Criteria of Equation (111.27), Equation
Solution and Analysis of Certain Relations 117

Analysis of Extreme Cases of Flying Vehicle Conditions of Flight 125

Chapter 5. Various Conditions of Interactions of Materials Hith the
Environment and Experimental Methods of Estimating Kinetics

of Failure 129
Analysis of Various Interactions 129
Analysis of Experimental Results 132
Experimental Method of Studying the Kinetics of nigh-Temperature
Failure of Materials 134
Bibliography 160
FOREVER!)

The contemporary stage of study of the problem of spacecraft entry into dense layers
of atmosphere involves thorough study of the problems of physics, hydrodynamics, and

3h
ron omcut use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

chemistry of the phenomena which accompany the process of interaction of a heat-
shield naterial (T214) with the surrounding medium. Comparisons of theoretical cal-
culations and experimental data have made it possible to achieve significant
progress in understanding the structure of the flow field as well as physico-
chenical transformations which occur. There has been a substantial improvement in
the accuracy of calculations connected with analysis of spacecraft reentry into the
atmosphere, such as calculations of convective and radiant heat flows, mass
removal and heating of the heat-protective coating. radar cross section of the
trail, etc. In spite of the fact that one can with a fair degree of certainty ex-

which there is a substantial quantity of experimental data. elaboration of nethods
of determining the dynamic interrelationship of the properties of media and nstsrials
with the rate of failure and heating remains an extremely important stage in
selecting an optimal heat shield.

It has now becone necessary to seek ways and methods of synthesizing information on
effective, thernophysical, optical and other properties of materials in the process
of their disintegration in media with various composition and thermodynamic
parameters. The available large quantity of factual material requires appropriate
classification and convenient forms of conpect presentation of experimental and
calculated data.

This book is a result of work performed by the author together with various experts:
industrial engineers who design heat shield materials , the design engineers who
utilize these materials, and testing personnel, who accomplish feedback from ex-
perinent results to the formula and process of manufacture of the materials.

The author's task was greatly facilitated by the following published monographs:
Yu. V. Polezhayev and P. Yu. Yurevich, "'l‘eplovaya zsshchita" [Heat Shielding]
(Moscow, Energiya, 1976); B. H. Pankratov, Yu. V. Poleshayev, and A. K. Rud'ko,
"Vzainodeystviye materialov a gasovymi potokami" [Interaction of Materials with
Gas Flows] (Moscow, Hashinostroyeniye, 1976). Thanks to these studies, it was

no longer necessary to make a detailed examination of the problems of heat and mass
transfer in high enthalpy flows and solids, the nechanism of absorption of heat and
the physicochemical processes which take place within heat-protective naterials.

This nonograph is divided into five chapters, unified by the canon idea of compact
presentation of the process of high-taperature failure of heat-shield naterials

35
roe OFFICIAL us: ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

taking into account the influence of the radiant component of overall heat flow.

A brief survey of experimental aethods of investigation and equipment is presented;
an examination is made of the influence of external factors on the effectiveness
of materials; experimental equipment which utilizes the radiant energy of the sun
(special solar units) is presented.

Chapter 2 examines the moving baundaries of physicochsmical transformations within
TZM (internal region of interaction), presents the properties of typical TZH by

zones. presents a classification of well—known naterials and examines the properties
of individual components of TZH and their influence on heat-shielding effectiveness.

Chapters 3, 4, and S are devoted to substantiation, derivation and analysis of the
solution of an equation which reflect the kinetics of high-temperature failure as a
particular case of conjugate problems for conditions of convective and radiant
heating. They also contain analytic expressions of the most typical interactions
of materials in the conditions of various experimental equipment, with comparison
of certain experimental data and solution results. These investigations are a
part of the problem of designing engines, heat-stressed equipment and flying
vehicles as a whole.

The author would like to express his profound thanks to UkSSR Academy of Sciences
Academician I. N. Frantsevich for his daily attention and discussion of the manu-
script. and to V. V. Pasichnyy. V. s. Tsyganenho. and c. P. Gornostayev for
assistance in preparing individual sections. The author expresses thanks to his
colleagues, young specialists and graduate students for their participation and
critical comments. The author would like to express particular thanks to 0. A.
Teplyakova for her assistance in readying the manuscript for publication.

COPYRIGHT: lzdatel'svto "Naukova dumka", 1981

3024
680: 1842/175 END

36
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY