FOR OFFlCIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10274
22 January 1982

USSR Report

MATERIALS SCIENCE AND METALLURGY

(FOUO 1/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characterLstics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.8. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OHNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION

OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
USSR REPORT

MATERIALS SCIENCE AND METALLURGY
(2000 1/82)

CONTENTS

COMPOSITE MATERIAIS

Composite Materials ....................................................
POWDER METALLURGY

Research in Technology of Metal Powders and Sintered Materials .........
REFRACTORY MATERIALS

Refractories Industry Growth in 11th Five-Year Plan ....................

High-Temperature Heat-Insulating Materials .............................
MISCELLANEOUS

Materials Science and Shipbuilding .....................................
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CMOSITE MATERIALS

000 669. 71
COMPOSITE MATERIALS

Hoecow KOHPOZITSIWE HAWAII in Rueeien 1981 (signed to press 7 Apt 81)
pp 3-1., 288-292

[Foreword end teble of contents tron book "Conceite Meterisls", edited by

A. I. Kenokhin, editor-in-chief, corresponding nember, USSR Acedeuy of Sciences.
Izdetel'stvo "Noukn". 2350 copies, 305 pages]

[Text] Foreword

The creation of new conposite aster-isle with fibrous, leninsted, end thinly-dis-
persed hardening which have increased physico-nechenioel and special physico-

chenical properties must lead to a. qualitative gump in scientific and technical

progress not only in the eviction, space and shipbuilding sectors of technology

but also in machine building, power, the electronic. electrical engineering. and
radio engineering industries. transportation. construction. and other sectors of
the national econony.

During the past five yeers definite success hes been achieved in our country in
the area. of developing the theory and technology for obtaining composite enteriels
and reinforcing agents, the theory of heterogeneous media and optimum reinforce-
ment, the physics and mechanics of strain hetdening and composite nterisl
strength with the broad spectrum of structure. properties. and areas of use.

If at the beginning of the 1970's super-stro st and light composite ester-
ials strengthened with fibers were called thggnnte of the future. then they

are now already today's materials.

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

x number of questions have been worked up concerning the physics-chemical theory
:f the contact interaction of matrix and reinforcing materials. principles for
the selection of plasticizing. barrier and technological coatings on reinforc-
ing materials and the technological methods of applying them. and new efficient

processes for obtaining composite materials. A large amount of work has been
carried out on studying the mechanisms of cold hardening and deformation. and the

destruction of fibrous composite materials under various load conditions.

A number of fibrous composite materials have been developed with polymer. metallic.
carbon. and ceramic matrices. strengthened with boron. carbon and metallic fibers.
laminated and dispersion-strengthened materials. Thread-like crystals coupled
with continuous fibers have been used in composite materials with a polymer matrix.
“they have organized the industrial production of boron and various carbon and
organic fibers. fabrics and tapes. tungsten. molybdenum and other fibers, the
production of: several items of thread-like crystals. the experimental industrial
production of silicon carbide fibers. high-strength metallic fibers. the experi-
mental industrial production of semi-finished composite material products by the
plasma spraying method. etc.

The industrial technology has been worked out for the production of sheets and
some other semi-finished products of dispersion-strez‘gthened composite materials.
fibrous (alumina-boron fiber) and polymer composite materials. the experimental
industrial technology of obtaining thin foils from deformed alloys by rolling
under super-plasticity conditions. Intensive work is going on to obtain and
study the properties of composite materials with directed eutectic structures.
Research and the development and production of a number of new composite mater~
ials with special physico-chemical properties. and also refractories, heat-resist-
ant cenmics. etc., have been significantly developed.

Glass. boron and carbon plastics. carbon-carbon type materials. dispersion-
strengthened metal ceramic materials. etc., are already in wide use today.

Production has recently been organized of composite material semifinished pro-
ducts on a metallic use of the aluminum alloy-boron and borsik fiber type. in
the form of plasma uni-strips which are then used to manufacture pipes and cylin-
drical casings by hot moulding and sheets by pack rolling. Technological design
efforts necessary to widen the production of semifinished products and fibers for

The USSR Academy of Sciences is paying great attention to the organization and
coordination of fundamental and applied research on the problem of composite
materials in the country. The materials of the 1+th All-Union Conference organized
w the Scientific Council of the USSR Academy of Sciences on Construction Hater-
tale for new Technology. the Scientific Council of the 1553 Academy of Sciences

>n Synthetic Materials. the Institute of Metallurgy imeni A. A. Baykov of the USSR
\cedemy of Sciences. and the All-Union Order of Lenin Scientific Research Insti—
tute of Aviation Materials. published in this collection. sum up the work on .‘nis
guestion up to 1979 and outline the paths for its further development.
Academician 3. 2’1. Jhavoronkov)

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
roe omciAL use ONLY

Table of Contents:

Pref‘cGOOOO.ICI’OOOOOQIUOCClII.IIt.I0.0000000DOOODIO.......‘OOUUOOOOOOOOOODO

mPter 1. Gen.m ProuMOODDOOIOIOOI...I.O...OOOIOOOCOOUOOOOOOOIOOOOO0..

I. :2. Pridlyende:--Propertiee of Composite Materials and the Effective-
n.“ of “4.1:USQOOOIC.00....CO0000'IIIIIOIOO0-0004OOIIOIOOOOOOOOOCOCCCOQ

:4: Kb. 3horehorov--Phyeico-Chemioml Interaction of Components in Goa-
90811.9 ‘huml‘OOO0.00.0.00DIOCIOOOOIODOOOIOOCC.ODIOOOCOOIDOOOIOOOIOOCIO 11

:1. I. Penney-modem: Tendencies in the Development of Composite

\n mug

mten‘lSOOIOCOI00.00.000.000000000COODOOOOOOOOOIOO.30.0.0000.DOD...It... 18
C. M. GumernDeeign of nigh-Module Polymer Composites with Fixed
mettioai.COOOOOIIOOIIIOOOOOOOOIO0.0I0....OIOOOIOOIIIOOIO!OI0.0.0.0000. 2“
G. P. 'tvimehinekmyn. B. V. Perov--Compoeite tutorials heed. on Organic
PimeOIOI0......IOOOOCOOOIOI...‘UDOO‘OUUCO'COIOOOOCCCIOI....IOO.0...II| 29

D. :4. :(mrpinoe. L. I. Tuchinekiyuﬂish-Tempenture Compoeite Eaterials... 35
. V. I. kloetikov. S. A. KoleenikoVuGIi-bon-Car‘con Composite .Ieterialeuuu «'40

V. P. l’mkoyev. N. P. Yerehow-Principlee for the Construction of Articles
out Of conwut. mtOmlsl.OI.I....IOOOOCOOIIOIOIDOOOOOI.UIIOOIII"00... 46

mp“: 20 Remomw FlumOOUDOOOIOOOOOOIDUOIDIODD'CIOOODOOCOOIOIIODOOCI m

PI. ”:Ch. Shorshorov, S. 24!. Seweteyeve. T. A. Charm/shove, _L. I. Kobeleva,
A. A. Pletyuehkin. L. H. Innova, T. N. SultmnovanTechnologioel Coatings

on mun nbNODIOOIOIOOOCII..I...’.ID.OIDOOOOC¢O00'300000IIDOIODIOD... $

A. .'. Varenkov. V. I. Zoetikov. Ye. I. Hozzhukhin. ‘l. T. Shimmy-nit"
Taxation of Silicon Carbide or Titanium Coatings on the Surface of Car-.-
‘mn 513th 5‘1““.OOOOIOIIOOIOOOOOIIOOOOO0.0...DOIOOOOOOOIIOIOOOOJOOOCI 9‘

V. S. Iilin. V. S. Demunova. H. 1’11. Sharehorov. V. I. AntipoV. V. M.
ilrivteun. A. S. ..ote1kin--Stud.y of Various arrier Continse on Cmrbon '

Flumﬂi0.00.00.bIIIOOOIIOOOO‘COOOOOOCIDOODOIOO0......IIOOOOOOOOOOOUJOII' 5?

A. P3. Tsirlin, A. F. Zhigach. Ye. A. Shchetilinm. A. ii. 3186mm.
3. G. Posokhine. A. V. Obolenekiyu-ﬂorpholosicml Features of Boron Film-

nentst..0.IOIIODOOOOOOOCOUiOIII...COOIOOOODOIIDOI'IOOOIOODOIUOOOCIOUO... 61

A. . . Tsirlin. V. P. Alekhin, 3. V. Koleenichenko, R. S. Yusuteovn
Influence of Defects of Boron Fiber on Its Strength in the mic State
Md m the ”wait. mt.“ ”1-VOOO...l...l.OODOOOCOOODODOOOOOOOOOCIO 66

“a 231. Showrov. Se He SMNttder‘l, To A. Chomshou. V. Po “emu"
Problems of Developing Coatings on Fiber: for the Reinforcement of Con-
posit‘ mmmlsoooﬂIOOOISIOOO0.000'.0..OOIOOIDOOCOOOOOODIOIOOOO00...... m

C. Ye. no‘tovoy. In P. 2501”“. _Ve I e mlovp In No me’ Y‘e Le
thrtynovanInfluenoe of a. Test Temperature on the Stability of Carbon
F1“: :‘emal PropemeaegeeooeeIee-oeeeeeeeoeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeto... B

3 .
roe omcm. use ONLY
FOR OFHCIAI. USE ONLY

1-1. 3.21. Shorshorov. L. V. Liatinova. V. F. Pia-nuylov, V. V. Ludinov,

'I. 3. Sokolov, A. a. Tsirlin. '1‘. N. TseplyayevauStw of the Character

and Jymics of the Change of Strength of Boron and acrsik Fibers in the
Process of Plasma Spraying. Heating Up, and Plastic hefornation......... . 78

B. I. Senenov, 3. N. .Lruglov. Ye. F. Tishchenkovauéitudy of Strength and
Destruction 'Jhen Stretching Hires .leini‘oroed with Steel and Boron Fibers. 82

Chapter 3. Composite materials with Hetellic Matrices...................... 89

V. I. Kostikov, V. I. Antipov, V. H. .Irivtsun, In. I. Eoshelev. Ye. F.
Pilisonov. 3. H. Samteyevs. Ye. 1-1. Tatiyevsiayauﬁeseerd: on .‘Xoisten-
ins mmn*ht°r1‘ls "1m “Callie mtm rhino..OOOOOOOCOOOIQOIIOODOIOO 89

[\e No ankov, V. I0 KOSuKOV, 2°. I. Hollhukhin, V. To Shmuk“
Research on Hoistening Cuban Fibers with Aluminun Melts with Active Ad-
mtmsmmAmly‘is of mm: ZODOSeeeeeeeeeeeeoeuooeoooeeeeeeooeeeo. 92

v. I. Antipov, v. a. ﬁrivtsun, v. I. Zoetikov, v. s. aergunova. B. A.
sax-mun. A. S. KotelkinuPestures of Obtaining Aluminum-Carbon Fiber
Composite Hater-1&1 fron Plasma Seaifinished Products by the Hot For:-

1n8 "amen-000000000000...OOOOCCOOIIOOOIICCOOOCOOOIleiaeoeeeool‘ecttclt 99

V. F. Stroganova, L. A. Gorodetskaya. Ye. M. Tom'o-Mesim-Bomn
System ””81“ murmOOOIIIOI'IOOOO.ll...I0.00000000IOOOOOOOIOOOOCOOD 103

‘I. h. amber-0v. S. Ye. Salibekov. A. N. Grilkov. V. E. Betrekov. L. V.

Grachev. V. S. lionissarovs, 3. S. Denisov, G. I. Bolgovs, N. V. Yegorovs,

S. N. Sedovnrouaesearch on the Operating annotation” of Vim-1

Eton “mnmlconpoait. MMeoeeoeeqoaoeeeeecoeeoooeoeoeeeeeeeoe-ees 106

V. V. Sekharov. 8. Yo. Salibekov. I. V. Removich, V. K. Sledkov.
T. B. llikoleyeva, A. A. t‘luknseyev-Jntersction of Boron Fibers with
Aluminum and Its Alloys in the Diffusion welding Process................. 111

B. A. Aref'yev, A. V. Gur'yev, N. l". Corina, A. E. GritkoV. N. H.
Yepikhins. I. N. Noeko-oaeseuch on the Structure and Properties of
mmn.umnul sheet‘ Obtained by the “0‘: Rolling iiethod................. 115

H. th. Shorshorov. V. A. i-.olesniohenko. A. I. Anan'yev. A. S. Lianyshkov.

M. G. Gorelov, V. H. Godin. V. V. mm”, I. h. Terent'yev, 3. Yo.
Dolgalev-Jzedxsnicnl Properties of longitudinally Reinforced Pipes Hide

of Alumna-Eton mu: comaite munuOOOOUIOIDOOOIOOOIC.DOCOOOOOODO. 123

V. M. Beletskiy. C. A. lirivov, h. I. Yetsenko. V. V. Z-tudinov. Yu. A.
Cslkin. L. V. listinove. ‘1‘. ﬂ. Teeplywen--Assesuent of the Mechanical
Properties of a Unidirectional Fihrous material on a. HetAllic Matrix...” 126

V. V. Trutnev. I. H. Terent'yev. V. I. Potapov. L. I. Iialuinovs. T. 2—2.
Vasil'yevs, V. V. Shebnov, V. H. Godin. V. I. Antipov--Pressing of
Aluminum-Boron Conpoeite laterals Under Contact Fusing Conditions...... . 130

V. V. ItudiliOV, B. A. mf'YOV, Yu. A. Cslkin, '1. I. Knuth-Mechanical
Properties of ”I “'1 FEW Obtained by PM 3pmy1n3.......:-...u.u 133

1;
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A. I. Kolpeshnikov. Ye. A. Pavlov. V. A. Kiselev. Ye. V. Shiryayev,
I. V. Iiocheshkovnﬂeseardl on the Process of Cbtaining Curved Profiles
from Bo:‘0n-Alull1mm.uuuuuno...............................u.n...

A. S. Tikhonov, V‘. F. Hanuylov. B. A. Aref'yev. A. V. CalskhoVuBases
for Calculating the Deformation Parameters of Fibrous Composite

LhuImSeeeseeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeseeeeseeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeee

A. . . Grihkov. V. P. Solov'yev, V. I. Smirnov. Yu. N. azichkow-Some
Features of the Detonation of Fibrous Composite rater-is]: with a
"On-1113 “W0...I0.00IOIOOOOOOOOOIOOOOOC0.000..ODOOOOOOOICIOOIIIOOI'.

D. N. Itarpinos. V. Rh. Radon-0v, V. P. Moron-«Strength of Composites
339d on Aluminu- during Gymm masooeeeeeoeeeeeeeeeeeeeoeeueeee

vs Fe MWIOV. Me A. T018113”... He Ge “M1”, K. Po GWVEl'd--
Research on the Corrosive Behavior of Boron Aluninum Obtained by Rollins

V. . . Neshcheryakov, I. A. PopoVI. V. I. ammonulnteractior of Con-
ponents in Fibrous Composite Haterial Based on NTSO Alloy Reinforced
"1th msten 21mg...000'O'OO‘CCOIDOOOCOOIOOOOC0.000UCUOOCIOIICOOIOOOIC

V. . . Heshcheryakov. V. I. Warinova, K. D. Hakhnmdov. A. A. Alek-
sandrov, N. I. F‘sustov--Features of Obtaining Titanium-Howbdenun Hire
conP081t9 mun“ by 3011136 in a meoOeOIIlieeseeeleleeeeeeeeeeeeee

D. H. Earpinos. ‘1‘. Ya. Kosolapova, S. P. Listovnichaya, V. N. Bunkh-
nina, V. P. Dzeganovskiy. V. Ye. Esteem—Research on the Interaction of
Zirconium Carbide with Chrome at high Temperatures......................

V. I. Antipov, N. N. Bybl'chenko, V. S. Sedykh. A. N. Kriventsov,

I. A. Solov'yev--aesearch on the structure and Properties of Fibrous
Composite Material with a Matrix from an Alloy used on Nickel Strength-
ened “1th Msten ”in!0.0.0.00000000000000000IDOIDOODI'IIOI'OCOUOIO'0'.

V. N. Beletsldy, G. . :Irivov. R. V. Hel'nikov, D. N. Tsapenko. I. H.
30mm. Le Vs I'AtinOVS. Ve Ve :udino‘I, Le no "StinOV--3trength of
Alumina-Boron Composite Material Joints Obtained Through treasure
sonnet Smt 301m.OOC'OCIIOOOOICOOOOICIOC.OOOOCQOOOOOQQIOOOOOOOIIIOOO

I. N. Eridlyander. V. N. Beletslciy. C. A. Crivcv. I. H. Romashko. V. 5‘.
Stmgsnovs. S. A. Yudina. N. A. .{onovalovanUse of Metallic Unidirec-
tioml Composite Lhterm AS PutBSeeeeeeeeeceeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeoee

‘.'e. :4. Savitslciy. V. V. Harem-Composite Superconductors. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

V. 3. Ivanova. I. N. !-.op'yev, V. N. Volkov, Yu. Ye. BusaloVuﬂechanical
and Service Properties of Anti-Friction Composite Material for Sliding

mimOOOIOOUIOOIDOOOOOICCOIODOO.DOIOCOOCCCOIOIIOOOOIOOOIOOOOOOOOOCOOO

V. Ye. Senenenko. A. I. Snow-Features of Forming 3. Composite Micro-
structure in the Process of mectron-Aay Zone Recrystallization of Re-

fnctory sysu“ mod on Niobium and Nickels-esse-beeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeee

Y9. V. Kalashnikov. T! A. slum”. Z. A. Guts. As A. Mmyev' I. V.
LIorkin. V. V. 3nimov--Research on the Growth and Structure of mtectic
Ccmposite :‘htenns of Mem'catmd. Tmitiom ﬂames. eeeeeeeeeeeoee

5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Ye. N. Pirogov. L. L. Artymkhina, V. P. Konoplenko. I. L. Svetlov.

F. H. Khusnetdinov--Calculation of Pressures and Diagram Construction

of Cyclic Defamation during the Thermal ~Patigue Loading of Composite
intermaIOCCIOOIIIOOOOOOUOIOOIOOO'OOOO0.00.00.00.00.IOOOPIUUOOIIOOOI.I. 191
V. ‘l. Skorokhod, V. V. Panichkina. L. D. Siondlakovslayausmdy of the
Thickenirg Process during the Caking of Dispersion-Strengthened. Holyb-

denu- Alloy PowderSOIOOOOIO000'IOI..0'0OOIOOOOCIOOOOOOOCOOOOOI0.00.00... 1%

3. N. Bidet). Yu. A. :Custov. K. I. Pcrtnoy--Neu Dispersion-Strengthened
Alloy mod on the tllckel Gimme VDUZOOOOOCOI00......OOOOODIIOOOOOOOOIll 19?

Gupta: 18. Composite Materials with Polymer l-Iatrices...................... 201

L. P. Kobets-olnfluence of Surfacing High-Module Fibers Compatible with
P01yn°r Connectives..."n..u.n...n........u..........n”nun"... 201

Ye. a. Tmstyansksya, P. c. minyevskiy. s. v. mow-Increasing the
Strength of a Polymer Matrix and Its Influence on the Piedzanioal Pro-
Perties or composite *Bun‘l’OOOOOIOCI00.00.0000...OCIIIOOOOCOOOOIIOOOO 20?

V. L. Polyakovnﬂesidml Stresses and Some Questions on the Strength of
conwsite ‘hurialBOOOIOOODICOD'OOOIO.IOIOOOIODOCOIOIOOOOIOII.ICC-COD... 210

G. a. Cunyayev, I. P. lmomshilcvaulnrluence of the Composition of
an Spow Matrix on the Properties and Technological Qualities of Carbon

Plasu50l.C0......COIOOOIOOCOOCOIOOOOIC.IOCOOOOOOOCQOOOOOCOOOOOOV00.... 21“

T. N. Sarina, A. I. Surguoheva. C. I. Buyenov. G. N. Finogenov. V. A.
YartseVuBehavior of Carbon Plastics durim the Coupler Action of a.
iaedimalndWO0.00......IOODOODOOIOOOOODOOOOIODOOOOOOOIOOIOOOIOI.00... ' 218

G. H. Gunyayev, A. 5‘. Rumyantsev, N. N. Fed'kova, Ye. A. Jﬁitrofauova,

Z. 5‘. Qaekina, Yo. I. Stepanyohev. I. H. Minnow-Optimization of

the Composition and Structure of Reinforcement of Bi- and Tri-Component
c0lp°81t° :‘utemls.OIOOOIOIOIQOIIOOOIOI.00OI.It...OOOOOOOIOCOOOOOOIIOOI 223

A. B. Geller. it. Ye. PerepelkinnCharacteristics of Temperature Deform-
ities of Carbon, Organic 3einforcing Fibers and Composite Materials
med 0" malt-0010.00DI.0.00.0...IIIOI.OOOOOOOOODOOCIOODIOOOOIII'OOOOO 228

N. P. Inﬂow-Characteristics of Designing Structures of'Composite
ﬂat-ends with Power and “Game r‘tnmeeeeeoeseeeeeseeeeeeeeeeceec 231

V. A. :ialininRoVu-Use of a Linear Statistial Model for the Task of
Optimizing Processes for the Production of Structures Out of Composite
Elm” munmioooOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOIOCIOOOOOOI|OOOOO.IOOOOOOOOIIOOO. 236

yen Be Trostmkaya’ V0 A. Shiahkln. V. A. nomv. V. A. GondmnkO"
Combining Polymer Composite laterisls with Polymer Rivets and Ueldizg... 200
Chapter 5. Composite materials with Carbon and Ceramic ﬂatness........... 24b

1. v. Sobclev. T. H. Kim". 3. A. ICiselev, v. s. Nosal'skiy, o. s.
Pisarenko. II. V. 3kvortsova--Che¢ge in the Properties of Glass and
carbon-Filled Polymers in the Pyrolysis Process......................... 2%

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

3. H. tin-pines. v.11. Grosheva. . :. Horosovs, S. P. Listovinchsys,

Yu. I. Rotozov, ‘I. P. Duanevskiy. K. I. Yakovlev, V. I. Ifalinichenko.
V. 3. Zilimenko. Ye. P. Hikhsshc’nukuComposite R-‘sterials ksed on Cere-
Mc‘ Remote“ With 3011113017 cmc And 150181116 amuse-eeeeeeeeeee
D. M. ifsrpinos, :1. Yo. Rutkovskiy. Yu. I. ticrosov. A. A. Ivashin. 22. I.
Yakovlev. G. A. LuzhanskiyuComposite Phtsrial Quartz Silicon Carude

cl“; FibrOOOOOOOOOIOIO'OOOOCCODID...DODOOOOOOOOOIICCODOOOOOIOOIICOIOOOO

'.’u. L. Knsulin. V. N. Timofeyev. A. B. Ivsnov. S. . . Benn“. V. A.
Demontskiy, A. N. Asonov--Highly-Refrectory Framework Construction

c°MuOOIOICOIOOOOOIOOIIOOOOOI.IODC.CI.0.U0......IOOOICOCOCIOOIOOOOO...

Chapter 6. Strength and Methods of Testing Composite I-isterisls............ .

L. H. Ustinov. L. V. Vinogrulov. V. I. ZhamnovanInﬂuence of Brittle
Intermediate Layers on the Strength of Fibrous Ccmposite Pictorials with
aPlauc FAWOOQ‘CDOOOOOOOIOOOCIDDOIOOOCOOOCIOOCIIODOOODOOIOCOII’ll...

A. S. Ovchinskiy. Ye. I}. Sakhamva. I. H. licp'yev. :2. It. Bilsaahv,

S. A. Savel'yevsn-Analysis of Dynamic affects during Stress Redistri-
bution and Computer Kodeling of the Destruction Processes in Pietali'ic
Composite Materials with Brittle Fibers..................................

A. G. Penktn. G . V. Gusev--Development of en Acoustical hission Set-up
in Conformity with Composite Haterial Tests..............................

0. V. Gusev, A. G. Penkin, H. m. Shorshorov--Influence of Inter-Retellic
Intermediate Layers on Acoustical Emission Penmeters during the Stretch-
“ of “mu'3t001 WW‘1MCOOOC.‘O...0......OODOOOIOOOCOOOOODOOODOO

v.-'v. Mikheylov. c. P. Zayteev,.'1‘. a. Sarina. I. A. Zyryanov. L. A.
IvanovenProblem of Destruction Mechanics ilhen Stretching Elements Made
of High-Strength Reinforced Plastics with Surface and Open Cracks" . .. . . .

”I. G. misun, E. I. Bushin, 3. V. Psnrilov, Yu. 1:. Ivsnin, V. V. Tenev-
sltiyuInfluence of Concentrators on Composite Materiel Strength.. ....... .

A. “o 3km. Be Po Pemv. Ge Po Avian-tun”, Fe Ya. Marvs. Is 3s aeer"-
moroetructural Features of the Destruction of Organic Plastics and
meir Iﬁluence 0n smMmOOUOODOIIIOOCUOOOOOO'OOOOICIODOOIOOIOIOOIOICOO

2148

mPYRIGh'Ta Izdstel'stvo "Nada”. 1981

8 52!;
(30: 1812/6

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POWDER METALLURGY

UDC: 621.762
RESEARCH IN TECHNOLOGY 0F METAL POWDERS ARD SINTERBD MATERIALS

Sverdlovsk ISSLEDOVANIYA IEKHNOIDCII IBTAHICHESKIKB POROSHKOV I SPECBENNYKR
MATERIALOV in Russian 1980 (signed to press 22 Oct 80) pp 2-8, 135-136

lAnnotadon. table of contents and editor's introduction from book "Research in
Technology of Metal Powders and Sintered Materials", edited by V. Ya. Bulanov,

V. F. Ukhov, and Ye. S. Michkova. USSR Acadeny of Sciences Urals Scientific Center,
UNTs AN SSSR, 700 copies. 164 pages]

[Text] This volume contains articles dealing with current scientific-technical and
economic aspects of powder metallurgy. It presents the results of study and
theoretical substantiation of industrial processes of producing metal powders and
sintered structural materials based on iron and other elements. This volume
presents the results of investigations to study the properties of sintered
materials, heat treatment and combined heat treatment and mechanical working on the
basis of research conducted at organisations in the “role region.

This volume will be of interest to scientists and practical specialists working in
the field of powder metallurgy.

Contents Page
Editor's Introduction 3

M. A. Bykovs and G. F. Mokshsntsev. Thermodynamic Analysis
of the Process of Reduction of Silicon in the Solid Phase in the Presence
of Iron 9

V. l. Vorob'yev. L. A. Vorob'yeva. and L. G. Kamanetskiy. Drying Copper
Powders for Structural Materials by the Deflocculstion Method lb

6. F. Moshkantsev. Vu. A. Mel'nikov, and M. K. Belousov. Hydrochemical
Alkaline Method of Obtaining Iron Alloy Powder 17

V. Ya. Bulsnov, N. A. Vatolin. P. I. Volkova. V. A. Kopysov. A. V. Sinyukhin.
V. N. Bulygina, A. N. Ptitsyn, and R. N. Ufimtsevs. 0n the Possibility of
Obtaining Iron Alloy Powders from Kachkanar Ore Concentrate 23

8
‘ FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
N.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

L. Kotovskaya, A. V. Pomosov. and T. I. Cor'kova. Effect of Electrolysis on
Physicomechanical Properties of Copper Powder 29

Ye. Ye. Usol'tseva, A. V. Pomosov, and L. V. Shevalava. Benzotriazole as a

V.

Regulator of the Properties of Electrolytic Copper Powder 3b

Ya. Bulanov and V. I. Rudakov. X-Ray Structural Investigation of the Pine
Structure of Particles of Iron Powder in the Process of Molding and Sinter-
ing 38

N. Antsiferov, N. N. Maslennikov. and s. M. Kimerling. Sintered Martensitic
Aging Steels 43

A. Bykovskiy, V. A. Dubinin, V. P. Krivov, and I. P. Nichkov. 0n the Nature
of Porosity of Material Sintered from Beryllium Powders 52

A. Zhilyayev, V. V. Pedorenko, cu C.P.Sthkﬂm Mechanism of Formation of
Coaxial Structure in Titanium Carbide and Carbonitride Base Metals 57

R. Beketov, I. L. Shabalin, and N. A. Filonov. Physicomechanical proper-
ties of Carbide-Carbon Composite Materials 65

N. Antsiferov. L. M. Grevnov. V. I. Ovchinnikova, A. P. Timokhova, and
P. G. Cherepanova. Features of Formation of the Structure of Sintered
Chrome-Molybdenum Steels 69

I. Bogodukhov and I. B. Rabinovich. Investigation of Anisotropy of Proper-
ties of Sintered Products 76

I. Rakhmanov, I. F. Pan'shin, and Yu. G. Gurevich. Austenite Transformation
in Sintered Steels During Continuous Cooling 81

V. Russkikh. Combined Heat Treatment and Mechanical working of Powder
Materials 86

I. Rakhmanov, 1. V. Pan'shin, Yu. G. Gurevich, and Yu. I. Pozhidayev.
Investigation of the Structural State and Mechanical Properties of Sintered
Steels Following Heat Treatment _ 94

I. Bogodukhov. Investigation of the Properties of Sintered Material in
Relation to Heat Treatment 97

. N. Nebol'sinov and S. I. Pavlov. Determination of Optimal Charge Composi-

tions and Conditions of Heat Treatment of Sintered Materials 100

. L. Shaballn, M. I. Podkovyrkin, A. R. Beketov, and Ye. V. Levashov. 0b-

taining Composites Based on Refractory Titanium Compounds During Combustion 105

C. Gushchin, A. I. Timofeyev, 0. V. Toms, 0. V. Demidovich, N. A. Mityuzhcv,
and V. A. Perepelitsyn. Lined Crucibles of Periclase Powders for Induction

Vacuum Melting of Platinum Alloys 111

9
FOR 0FFNJAL.USIIONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

v. I. Domogntskiy and A. V. Kostryukov. Specific Features of Mechanical Work-
ing of Sintered Piston Ring Blanks 120

Ye. S. Hichkova. Approximate Estimate of Production of Iron Alloy Powder by
the Hydrometallurgical Chloride Method 126

A. A. Kuklin. Economic Prerequisites for Development of the Powder Metallurgy
Method in the Urals 127

V. F. Kotov and V. l. Domogatskiy. Some Technical and Economic Problems of
Development of Powder Hetallurgy in the Southern Urals 131

EDITOR' 8 INTRODUCTION

Modern industry is imposing increasingly more extensive and rigid demands on
variOus materials. Development and improvement of such areas of science and tech-
nology as physics, chemistry, electronics, and all areas of machinery engineering
have placed on the agenda the question of developing and utilizing materials with
special properties, which has required the development of powder metallurgy on a
higher scientific andtechnological level. In the last 100 years numerous orga-
nizations and industrial plants have been established in such countries as the USSR,
the United States, the PRC, Czechoslovakia, Japan and a number of others, which
work with development of sintered materials, and experimental data have been
amassed. Intensive utilization of advances in the natural sciences for synthesizing
practical results and formulating a general theory of processes of obtaining
aaterials with preselected properties began in the 1950's and 1960’s. From the
above we can formulate the following problems of physical powder metallurgy.

The problem of obtaining powders with prescribed properties and dimensions. Develop-
ment of powder metallurgy at the contemporary level involves solving a nunber of
technical problems, one of which is obtaining metal and nonmetallic powders of a
specified structure, properties, and composition. The term "powder” should be
defined more broadly, with the term including composition, structure, and properties
of powder particles. The single concept of powder as a particle visible to the
naked eye within a specific range of sizes (from several microns to fractions of a
millimeter) does not tie in theoretically with the theses of modern powder metal-
lurgy. At the present time we can obtain such particles ranging from several
angstroms to several millimeters in size. 0n the basis of these particles we can
produce materials with predetermined properties, structure and composition, both
ultrudense and ultrsporous. At the present time it is possible to obtain powders
with unlimited dispersion of particles (from microparticles to filaments) by
physicochemical methods, on the basis of application of the laws of physical
chemistry and chemical physics.

The properties of materials produced by the powder metallurgy method depend bauically
on the composition and physicochemical properties of the initial powders. The best
way to alter the compositions of these materials is to use natural dispersoids, each
of which will be single- or complex-alloyed, and uniformly (homogeneously). It is
possible to produce such homogeneous-alloy dispersoids only by chemiconetallurgical
methods which, on the one hand, make it possible to obtain a predetermined and

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFK'MI. IISE ONLY

selective degree of refining and, on the other hand, to leave in each dispersoid
the requisite number of needed alloying elements or any phases. At the present
time such tasks are accomplished in two phases -- initially pure powders and pure
alloying elements or their alloys are produced, and subsequently the latter are
artifically charged into the base. This method of producing multiconstituent
materials is unwieldy and does not enable one to create a continuous series of
homogeneOus materials. It essentially repeats the traditional methods of obtaining
cast alloys of discrete composition, approximately 600 of which exist at the
present time, and all of which were created over several decades, taking account of
various intuitive experiments by means of selective sampling.

But it is essential to bear in mind that there cannot exist in nature ready combina-
tions of various elements in one and the same raw material. Therefore in order to
create materials with a predetermined composition and properties it is necessary

to employ a combined method —- chemical control of the initial composition of dis-
persoids with supplementary artificial charge addition prior to chemical processing
of the raw material, so that the alloying elements and phases organically enter the
compounds being reduced or oxidized, that is, performing controlled physicochemical
synthesis (UFKhS).

The problem of physicochemical investigation and prediction of the properties of
sintered materials. After producing powders of any specified degree of dispersion,
one can proceed to the next stage in developing new materials -- elaboration of

the physical and physicochemical fundamentals of shaping and sintering, their inter-
action and combining, or elimination of one of them, which would make it possible
to create any predetermined properties of materials. In this area it is necessary
to investigate the processes of interaction and reaction of the particles of
powders of any degree of dispersion in relation to the properties, composition and
structure throughout the entire diversity of various combinations of given proper-
ties and atomic-molecular bond between the dispersoida proper and their phase con-
stituents. One should take into consideration the submicrostructure of point.
linear and plane defects, the most important of which are dislocations in all their
diversity.

Correct elaboration of the above-listed problems determines the possibility of
eliminating additional operations following molding and sintering (machining, heat
treatment, etc) or improving and reducing them to a minimum. with the aim of ob-
taining the final shaped part.

The properties of microobjects of dispersoids of any size are determined by many
interrelated factors.

The functional relationship between optimized parameters and numerous factors cannot
be determined with the aid of the well-known traditional divisions of higher
mathematics. Recently developed cybernetic methods ("black box" methods) enable

one to solve variOus problems of powder metallurgy without going into the essence of
the complex physicochemical processes taking place during the forming of a sintered
body. The mathematical method of extremum experiment planning enables one to link
practically all the major factors by a regression equation and to determine the
parameters of the initial dispersoids and the conditions of formation of a sintered

body from them or any processes taking place with the employment of disperaoids --
metallurgical, welding, machining.

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR ()FFK'IAI. USE ONLY

New possibilities for predicting and producing multiple-constituent materials or
processes are offered by graphic-analytical forecasting, where all properties,
conditions and compositions of a material of any complexity are represented in the
form of a three-dimensional cluster of symbolic points (OFT). With the aid of un-
complicated graphic operations, expanding all system components onto a plane, one
can solve the problem of determining optimal system properties in relation to the
physical characteristics of the initial dispersoids.

As improvements are made in the equipment and methods of physicochemical analysis
of metals and alloys at denim- and submicrolevels and a sharp increase in labor
productivity in computer interpreting research results, it is possible to determine
the functional dependences of optimized parameters on numerous physicochemical
factors and their relationship by means of mathematical processing of graphic-
analytic relations. This will make it possible in materials science to depart from
the traditional methods of seeking new materials. Hith the aid of precise
mathematical calculation, one can predict properties in relation to the character-
istics of the initial building blocks (dispersoids) and the conditions of their
forming and sintering, in the process of which various physicochemical processes are
also taking place at the atomic-molecular, submicro—, micro- and macrolevels.

Further improvement of experimental method and method of determining the properties,
composition and structure of dispersoids and materials based on them is essential,
particularly since they are assuming an increasingly more complex composite
character. The accuracy and sensitivity of methods of analysis and their ob-
jectivity determine the possibility of reproducibility of obtaining the specified
materials at different points in a single specimen.

Exclusively physical methods must also be employed for phase analysis - x-ray
diffraction analysis, photographic analysis, and analysis with ionizing recording,
with discrimination of individual radiations, and electron-diffraction analysis in

conditions of diffraction, microdiffraction, local analysis with X—ray microanalyzers,
etc.

In connection with the possibility of producirg dispersoids at the level of atoms
and molecules, nuclear and electron magnetic and paramagnetic resonance units should
be employed for analysis.

For direct and indirect observation of microstructure, it is necessary to employ new
equipment -- microscopes with remote screens (scanning), with automatic computer
devices, and high-resolution electron microscopes. All.this would make it possible
to determine not only dislocation tracks but also to make kinetic observations of
processes taking place in zones commensurate with interatomic distances and the
size of individual molecules and atoms. These devices should be combined in opera-
tion with the most advanced aummatlc recording devices for interpreting the obtained
information -- microphotometers. oscilloscopes, and electronic computers.

we should note that obtaining separate, fragmentary information cannot provide any
exhaustive information for predicting and discovering new laws. It is essential

to obtain not discrete but continuous information on a given process, on both a
dynamic and kinetic basis, with its numerous variations in composition and at the
micro- and submicrolevels. Only after detailed processing of this information is it

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFF“ 1“. USE ONLY

pnusihlc to obtain functional patterns for predicting the properties of sintered
mnltlcuustituent materials.

dispersoids —- differs from one surface zone to another, ranging from 20 to £00 kg/mmz,
while the theoretical strength of these dispersoids, taking into account their phase
composition and the physicochemical properties of the structural components. can
amOunt to 700 kg/mm2 or more for iron powders, for example. Thus two discontinui-
ties exist between the strength of produced sintered materials and the individual
dispersoids of which they are formed. The first lies between the calculated
theoretical strength of ideal dispersoids of complex structure and the strength of
the actually produced material of actual dispersoids. This gap constitutes a
strategic reserve of powder metallurgy. and the maximum strength obtained by cal-
culation is that cherished, fairly realistic goal toward which every investigator
should strive. The second gap (somewhat smaller) lies between the strength of cer-
tain zones of each dispersoid and the strength of the material obtained on the

basis of that dispersoid. There is a realistic possibility of achieving the ex—
perimental strength characteristics of individual zones within the next few years.
Up to the present time iron-base materials have been obtained with a strength of
80-100 kg/mmz. and achieving a strength of 200-400 kg/mmZ is not far off.

improvement of existing processes of forming and sintering, chiefly determination
of optimal conditions (time, temperature, environment), development and employment
of heat treatment. combination chemical and heat treatment methods as well as other
means of influencing the structure of materials in order to change their properties
in the desired direction constitute one of the important tasks of powder metallurgy.
Employing dynamic methods, high and ultrahigh pressures for forming and shaping, as
well as preheating and heating materials while applying pressure to them, one ob—
tains compact and ultracompact materials with both already known and new, unique
properties. This requires development of totally new processes of forming and
shaping by the direct effect on the powder of electrical impulses, electromagnetic
waves, ultrasound, high-frequency currents and other physical factors, as well as

activation of the processes of forming and sintering by affecting dispersoids with
chemical. physical or combined methods.

of sintered products and materials:

a) structural materials, with any desired properties. with final geometric
dimensions and configurations, which require little or no machining, unlimited in
weight and size. commensurate with machine parts manufactured by other methods
(casting, forging, stamping, etc);

b) antifriction materials (machine parts) for any desired operating condi-

tions, within a broad range of conditions -- temperature, environment. pressure.
load;

c) friction materials (machine parts) operating in various conditions and en-
vironments;

d) porous materials (filters) operating in any environments;

13
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFF“ 1“. USE ONLY

c) materials for the manufacture of electrical contacts, materials with high
electrical resistance and, the reverse, superconductors. This problem can be
solved with a radical change in the process of manufacture of stators and rotors
of electric motors, generators and transformer cores, by employing magnetodieiectrics
in place of the traditional packages of plates with their complex treatment and
processing and their uncontrolled characteristics.

The following dispersoids can he employed to produce materials for machining metals
and other complex alloys and materials and for achieving further increase in labor

productivity in metalworking, particularly in finishing operations, as well as for

reinforcing impact-stamping tools, including molds for powder metallurgy:

of a specified cOmposition and size for contrdUJng crystallization processes in
general metallurgy -- ingot, casting, etc (with further improvement in labor
productivity, quality of the metal produced, reduction in production—line rejects
and, finally, control of the processes of producing metal with specified mscro-,
micro- and submicroproperties);

of various composition and structure for welding production and for producing
welded seams and surfacings with specified properties, as well as for employing
electrodes of predetermined composition for all kinds of welding, including electro-
slsg remelting.

with the aid of dispersoids, obsolete methods of producing semifinished products
by means of blast furnace, open-hearth and other metallurgical processes will
gradually be eliminated, with a transition to new physicochemical-metallurgical
processes -- direct production of powders of a specified composition an structure
from ores, with subsequent production of rolled stock of any size and sectional
shape with controlled properties and with a substantial reduction of energy ex-
penditures and total, no-waste utilization of raw materials.

Employment of dispersoids will make it possible to develop advanced research methods

and to create a general theory of materials on the basis of new laws of materials
science.

COPYRIGHT: UNTB AN SSSR, 1980.

3024
C80: 1842/23

1h

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

REFRACTORY MATERIALS

UDC: 666.76.002.3
REPRACTORIBS INDUSTRY GROHTH IN 111a FIVE-YEAR PLAR
Moscow OGNEUPORY in Russian No 9, Sep 81 pp 1-8

[Article by G. Ye. Zaychenko (Soyuzogneupor All-Union Production Association): "Raw
Materials Base of the Refractories Industry in the 11th Five-Year Plan"]

[Text] Implementing the historic resolutions of the 25th CPSU Congress and ex-
tensively employing various forms of socialist competition, the work forces of

mining enterprises of the refractories industry successfully accomplished plan

targets pertaining to production of refractory raw materials for the 10th Five-
Year Plan (see table).

Table l.

 
 
 

Production Plan Percenta;e of Fulfillment
For Soyuzogneupor For Ukrogneupor—
All-Union Produc- nerud Republic
tion Association Production Associa

‘ t ion

     
   
  
    
   

Raw Materials

  
 

  
 

Refractory clay 102.8
Kaolin 101.b
Hagnesitc 102.7
Quartaite 104.8
Dolomite 103.8

Successful completion of the 10th Five-Year Plan was promoted by intensification
of minerals production at existing enterprises, bringing new surface and under-
ground mining facilities on-stream, replacement of obsolete and worn-out mining
transfer and auxiliary equipment, increasing labor productivity, adopting new
forms of organization of labor, dissemination of the advanced work methods of
production innovators, as well as further improvement of mining technology.

In the 10th Five-Year Plan the Kuleshovskiy and Vostochno-Bezovskiy refractory clay

production sections were brought on-stresm in theSannmkyeHining Administration,
more than 7 kilometers of hard-surface road were built, an asphalt plant, a new ad-

ministration and services building, and a gas scrubbing department in the fireclay
shop; in 1981 construction will be completed and a garage for heavy-payload dump
trucks will go into operation.

15
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In the mines of the Borovichskiy Refractories Combine, the ChPU, MBLD, and KMSh con-
tinuous miners experienced further adoption in excavation. preparation. cutting and
stoping operations, which made it possible to boost the level of mechanization of
these operations from 35 to 86 percent. Hoisting equipment of obsolete design at
Mine No 2 imeni Artem were replaced by new, more sophisticated equipment; rotary
bucket excavators for extracting refractory clays were renovated at the Ust'ye-
Brynkino pit.

The work force at the Semiluki Refractories Plant, working with the Donets affiliate
of the Scientific Research Institute of Mining, developed the BR-315/630 rotary
bucket excavator, which at the present time is the most sophisticated and high-out-
put equipment for selective working of refractory clays and kaolin deposits.*

A considerable volume of excavation and preparation work was performed in construct-
ing the Belyy Kolodets and Strelitsa Blizhnyaya pits. As a result, designed output
was reached ahead of schedule at the Belyy Kolodets pit, and refractory clay
production began at the Strelitsa Blizhnyaya pit.

At the Tarasovskoye Mining Administration low-output excavators and drilling
machines were replaced with higher-output EKG-4.6 excavators and ZSBSh-ZOOdrillt
ing machines; considerable work to remove dust from the air at work stations was
performed at the crushing and grading mill.

At the Chelyabinsk Mining Administration, the Bugor pit was constructed and brought
into production, and has already been brought up to designed output; the production
and stripping rotary bucket excavators. with self-propelled belt spoil dumpera,have
been upgraded and modernized; an administration-services combine, boiler house and
other facilities were completed and brought into operation.

The work force at the Bogdanovich Refractories Plant further expanded mining opera—
tions at the Kul'durskiy brucite mine, as a result of which on-line production

capacity was exceeded. A crushing and grading unit was built at the mine, as well
as standard-gauge tracks linking the industrial site with MP8 [Ministry of Railways]

tracks, which makes it possible to load crushed brucits into MP8 cars directly at
the mine.

Considerable work has been accomplished at the pit mines of the Magnezit Combine in
further replacement of obsolete mine transport equipment by more sophisticated and
higher-output equipment, narrow-gauge rail transport with trucks, and on boosting
production at the Karagayskiy and Stepnoy mines. A pit to exploit the Nikol'skiy
section of the magnesite deposit went into production, renovation of DO? [Crushing
and Concentration Hill] No l was performed, and designed Output was reached in the
magnesite concentration in heavy suspensions department at DOP No 2 (Figure 1)
[photo omitted). Construction was completed on an experimental commercial-scale
department for concentrating magnesite by chemical means; preliminary tests produced
encouraging results. A truck-hauled overburden dump 96 meters in height was suc—
cessfully put into operation (Figure 2) [photo omitted]. The mine railroad shop

* C. Ye. Zaychenko. Yu. I. Berezhnoy, P. M. Kut'kov, at al, 06MBUPORX, No 2, 1981,
pp 29-32.

16
POI! OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL lJSE ONLY

completed track switching control automation and centralization, repair of dumpcars
and electric mine locomotives.

Improvement of excavator, drilling and blasting operations continued at the
quartzite mine of the Pervoural'sk Dinas Refractory Brick Plant; equipment was
modernized at the plant's crushing and grading mill.

The miners at the Chasov-Yar Refractories Combine put into operation a pit mine in
the Redkodub section, second units of the Vostochnyy and Yuzhnyy mines, and improved
mining operations in complex geologic conditions.

The work force at the Druzhkovka Mine Administratizn accomplished a considerable
amount of work on constructing a second pit unit for working the Novorayskoye
refractory clay deposit and on improving mining production operations with the
employment of high-output mine transport equipment -- ESh-lS/90, BSh-10/70, and
EKG-4.6 excavators in combination with BelAz-Séo heavy-load dump trucks.

The Kirovograd Mine Administration constructed and put into operation a pit in the
left-bank part of the deposit. Complex geologic conditions and unconfirmed
geologic data on commercial mineral reserves required great efforts on the part of
the work force for development of mining operations and for achieving refractory
clay production plan targets.

The work force of the Priazovakoye Hie Administration began production in_a new
section of the deposit with complex geologic conditions.

The miner work forces at the Vatutinskiy and Velikoanadol' skiy combines improved
mining operations in conditions of increased kaolin bed flooding and a heavier layer
of overburden (Figure 3) [photo omitted].

Thanks to the adoption of higher-output mining and drilling equipment, the work
force of the Ovruchskoye Mine Administration, in spite of increased pit depth, suc-
cessfully met the production target in the 10th Five-Year Plan.

The work forces of refractories industry enterprises devoted constant attention to
reclaiming and utilizing land disturbed by mining operations. Figure 4 [photo

omitted] shows reforestation of a reclaimed mined-out area of the Zapadnyy Mine at
the Chasov Yar Refractories Combine.

Considerable credit for meeting the refractory raw materials production targets of
the 10th Five-Year Plan must go to highly skilled, conscientious workers -- produc-
tion leaders and innovators, who successfully mastered the new mine transport
equipment and mining operation processes and who have an innovative at-

titude toward their job.

The new five-year plan (1981-1985) assigned even more complex and responsible tasks
to the miners of the refractories industry.

Production increases in the 11th Five-Year Plan over the 10th Five-Year Plan are
targeted as follows: refractory clay - by 13.2 percent; magnesite -- by 6.8 percent;
kaolin -- by 6.8 percent; quartzite -- by 3.6 percent. Geologic conditions for
working refractory raw materials deposits will be more complex in the new five-year

17
FOR‘0FFKJAI.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

plan. Production growth in refractory raw materials should occur primarily

through intensification of production processes, improvement in mining process
operations, replacement of low-output, obsolete and worn-out mine transport equip—
ment, mechanization and automation of production processes, improvement in forms of
socialist competition, and increased worker labor productivity.

The following principal measures must be carried in order to meet the targets of
the 11th Five-Year Plan pertaining to mining operations and providing raw materials
to enterprises of ferrous metallurgy and other branches and sectors of the economy:

Borovichi Refractories Combine: construct and put into production the
Okladnevo Mine, with an annual output capacity of 600,000 tons of refractory clay;
proceed with development of the second unit of the Ust'ye-Brynkino Mine; continue
adoption of KHSh and chPU continuous miners in underground mining operations, bring-
ing mechanization of preparation and production to 90-100 percent; increase the
volume of crushing of overburden limestone for the construction industry and
maintenance of in—mine and spoil dump roads: perform a group of ren0vation opera-
tions at the Volgino Nine;

the Suvorovskoy; Nine Administration: complete construction of pit facili-
ties and reach designed output capacity in refractory clay production in the
Vostochno-Bezovskiy section; complete construction on and put into operation a truck
garage with outside parking for BelAz-SQO and KrAZ-256B dump trucks; assemble and
put into operation an Bah-lO/705wa1king excavator in the Vostochno-Bezovskiy section;
convert fireclay shop and boiler house operations over to natural gas; improve the
quality of repair and maintenance of process equipment in this shop; prepare tech"
nical documentation for mine construction to work the Ul'yanovskoye refractory clay
deposit; reclaim and replsnt areas disturbed by mining operations in Section No 16
and the Kuleshovskiy section; '

Semiluki Refractories Plant: complete relocation of the gas and communications
line at the Sredniy Nine and intensify overburden removal operations on the forward
benches; complete construction and bring on-line industrial facilities at the Belyy
Kolodeta and Strelitsa Blizhnyaya mines; renovate the overhead cableway between the
plant and the Belyy Kolodets Mine, with the aim of boosting its capacity to 150,000
tons per year; expand the refractory clay storage area at the plant site in order to
boost volume of fireclay shipped to customers to not less than 200,000 tons per year;
reclaim and replant land disturbed by mining activities; prepare technical documen-
tation for development of the quartz sand production section for refractory linings
at the Strelitsa Blizhnyaya Mine; complete preliminary studies at the Strelitsa
Blizhnyaya and Belyy Kolodets mines for the purpose of improving mining operations,
with the employment of BSh-10/70A and Bah-6145 walking excavators;

Bogdanovich Refractories Plant: step up construction and movement on-stream
of production facilities and housing at the Kul'durskiy brucite mine, bringing the
facility up to designed output; accomplish further improvement of mining operations
at the Yuzhnaya Poldnevsya Mine, producing refractory clays, and at the Kul'durskiy
brucite mine;

Eastern Siberian Refractories Plant: construct and bring into production a
department for concentration and briquetting of refractory clays from the Trash-
kovskoye deposit; complete construction, bring on-stream and reach designed output

18
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

at the refractory clay pit; prepare design documentation mining and land allocation
formalities, and commence construction of priority facilities at the Savinskiy
Hagneaite Combine;

Hagnezit Combine: accelerate construction and excavation operations at the
Hagnezitovaya Mine; complete renovation of D0? No 1; complete construction and reach
designed output at the Tsentral'nyy and Zapadnyy mines of the Nikol'skiy section of
the magnesite deposit; accelerate construction of industrial facilities and housing
in the new microrayona; renovate equipment in the existing magnesite concentration
in heavy suspensions department; build the second magnesite concentration in heavy
suspensions unit; perform construction and preparation work for delivering grade IV
magnesite from special storage sites to DOF No 2; prepare design documentation and
build a third magnesite crushing and concentration line at DO? No 2; complete
preliminary studies and perform preparation work on the south edge of the
Karagayskiy pit for siting waste rock dumps; prepare design documentation and con-
struct an overhead cableway for transporting crushed magnesite to TsMP-Z rotary
furnaces 5 and 6; reach designed output of a commercial-scale unit for magnasite
concentration by a chemical method; prepare design documentation, land and mining
allocation formalities for pit expansion in the Galyaminskqe molding sand deposit
section; perform preparation work for constructing a pit in the Berezovskiy section
of the magnesite deposit; step up work on increasing magnesite production in the
Palenikhinskr—Hel'nichnyy section;

Pervoural'sk Dinas Refractory Brick Plant: strip overburden and commence
working the southernsection of the Cora Karaul'naya quartzite deposit; perform
major overhaul of the crushing and grading mill; build a hard-surface road between
the mine and the crushing-grading mill;

Tarasovskoye Nine Administration: build a rail spur and storage facility
for shipping quartzite and quartz sands; organize selective digging of quartz sands
for shipment to customers; prepare design documentation and commence construction
of a new pit; fabricate and install at the pit a facility for screening material
in order to reduce the hauling of waste rock to the crushing and grading mill:

Yuzhno-Ural'sk pit of Soyuzmetallurgprom: complete construction of pit
facilities and bring refractory clay output up to the designed figure;

the mining enterprises of the Ukrogneupornsrud Republic Production Associa-
tion: accomplish construction of a refractory clay pit in the Block No 9 section;
expand production of molding sand in the Sukhoy Yar section of the Chasov Yar
Refractories Combine;

Druzhkovka Nine Administration: prepare design documentation. land and mining
allocation formalities, accomplish construction and bring on-stream a pit in the
Western Section of the Novorayskoye refractory clay deposit; accomplish renovation
of the molding sand pit on the Bantyahevskoye deposit;

Kirovograd Mine Administration: step up geological exploration activities
and confirmation of refractory clay reserves in the new Left Bank section, prepare
design documentation and begin construction of a pit in this section;

19
FI"!()F1WC1AL.lEﬂE(MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Priazovskoye Mine Administration: step up preparatory activities for expand-
ing the production of refractory clays and kaolin in Section No 1; continue con-
struction of approach spur and in-pit tracks;

Vatutino Refractories Combine: accomplish construction, movement on-stream
and achievement of designed output at the Hurzinskiy kaolin pit; construct an ex-
perimental commercial-scale kaolin concentration unit;

Ovruch Mine Administration: cut and prepare for working lower levels of the
quartzite deposit at the presently operating pit; begin preparation of technical
documentation for working a new quartzite section.

Growth in volume of converter steel production at metallurgical plants in the
southern and central part of this country in the llth Five—Year Plan makes it neces-
sary to increase production of top-grade tar-dolomite refractories.

it has been established on the basis of amassed experience as well as laboratory
experiments and full-scale tests that the highest-quality raw material for making
tar-dolomite refractories is dolomite from the Bosninskoye deposit, which is
produced by the Kavdolomit Quarry Administration. Reserves of these dolomites are
practically unlimited for the foreseeable future.

This quarry is to undergo renovation in de llth Five-Year Plan, with the aim of
increasing production of Bosninakoye dolomite to 1 million tons per year and satis-
faction of the requirements of enterprises of the USSR Ministry of Ferrous Metal-
lurgy and Ministry of Construction Materials Industry.

During the period of renovation and development of the Bosninskiy quarry, beginning
in 1981, dolomite from the Tkvarchel'skoye deposit is to be utilized, produced by
-the quarry of the Ruatavi Metallurgical Plant. In the llth Five-Year Plan the con-
verter shops of the metallurgical plants of the Urals, Siberia and Kazakhstan will

be supplied with refractories the manufacture of which will involve magnesite powders
from the Magnezit Combine and dolomitea from the Alekseyevskoye deposit.

In the llth Five-Year Plan obsolete and worn-out mining transport and auxiliary
equipment is targeted for replacement at enterprises producing refractory raw
materials. On this basis there will be obtained further improvement of mining
operations and increased labor productivity with the aim of increasing production
volume and meeting plan-specified raw materials production targets.

it necessary to step up exploration of the Kriushanskoye (Annenskoye) refractory
clay deposit for the Semiluki Refractory Plant; the Ul'yanovskoye deposit for the
Suvorovakoye Mine Administration; refractory clay sections adjacent to the
lehne-Uvel'skoye deposit; the second unit section of the Yuzhnaya Poldnevaya
refractory clay pit; the Zapadnyy section for the Druzhkovka Mine Administration;
the Left- Bank refractory clay section for the Kirovograd Hine Administration;
refractory clay and kaolin sections of the Polozhskoye deposit for the Priazovskoye
Nine Administration; kaolinscctian near the town of Zvenigorodsk for the vatutino
Refractories Combine.

The 26th CPSU Congress has specified an ambitious program of further growth and
development of our country' s industry. including ferrous metallurgy. of which the
refractories industry is an integral part.

20
FOI.0F1ﬂC1Al.USEtDNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The Soyuzogneupor All-Union Production Association, the Ukrogneupornerud Republic
Production Association, and all enterprises of the refractories industry have
elaborated measures aimed at successful enterprise growth and development, improve-
ment of production technology. mechanization and automation of production processes,
adoption of scientific and technological advances.'scisntific organization of labor,

improvement in the quality of produced refractory raw materials, and establishment
of safe and highly productive working conditions.

To achieve successful accomplishment of the assigned tasks, it is necessary to
communicate the targeted measures to each and every worker and to support accomplish-
ment of these tasks with appropriate high-output mine-transport and auxiliary equip-
ment. material-technical resources, and scientifically substantiated organization

of labor, working daily on indoctrinating working people in a spirit of excellent
production discipline and responsibility for the assigned task. Mine workers of

the refractories industry will apply all their resources. knowledge and experience
in order honorably to accomplish their assigned task.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Hetallurgiya", "0gneupory", 1981

3024
CSO: 1842/22

21
m OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC: 669:66.018.lo; 66.043.2
llitﬂl-‘l’EMPERA‘l'URE HEAT-INSULATING MATERIALS

Moscow VYSOKOTBMPBRATURNYYB TBPLOIZOLYnTSI'ONNYYB MATERIALY in Russian 1981 (signed
to press 25 Mar 81) pp 2-11

lAnnotation, table of contents and introduction from book"High-Temperature Heat-In-

sulating Materials", by Samuil Mikhaylovich Kata, Izdatel'stvo “Metallurgiya”,
3,720 copies, 232 pages] _

{Text} This volume presents the first systematized information in the area of
technology and properties of high-temperature heat-insulating and heat-shielding
materials based on refractory metals and their compounds, oxide ceramics, carbon-
graphites, and composites. New methods of obtaining them are examined, as well as
specific features of employment in furnaces, testing equipment, power generating
equipment and other structures operating at high temperatures (2500-3200’C). The
author presents calculated characteristics and methods of estimating the principal
physical—mechanical properties of highly porous materials of cellular-powder. foam
and fibrous structure.

This volume is intended for engineers and technicians employed at scientific re-
search institutes, higher educational institutions, design institutes and design

offices of the metallurgical, machine building and chemical industries, working in
the area of development and application of these materials.

Contents Page
Introduction 4

Chapter 1. Nonporous Heat-Insulating and Heat-Shﬁﬂding Materials

Heat Shielding and Thermal Insulation of Beat-Resistant Oxides 12
Heat Shielding and Insulation of Non-Oxide Compounds 35
Pyrographitic Materials 51

Chapter 2. Fibrous High—Temperature Thermal Insulations

Physical-Mechanical Properties of Fibrous Materials 59

High-Temperature Thermal Insulations of Highly Refractory Oxide Fibers 83

Thermal Insulations of Carbide and Other Non-Oxide Fibers 92
22

INJR CNN“(]A1.!£§EL(MHLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Chapter 3. highly-Porous Beat-Insulating Materials

Physical-Mechanical Properties of Porous Materials of Cellular Structure 112

Physical-Mechanical Properties of Powder Materials 137
Physical-Mechanical Properties of Cellular-Powder Materials 152
Physical-Mechanical Properties of Cellular-Cellular Materials 164
Physical-Mechanical Properties of Pham Materials 169
Highly-Porous Oxide Insulations 177
Poamad Carbides and Other Non-Oxide Insulations 199
Highly-Porous Carbon-Graphite Insulatione 206
Multiple-Screen Thermal Insulations 215
Bibliography 223
INTRODUCTION

Heat-insulating and heat-shielding materials are extensively employed in the most
diversified areas of metallurgy, power engineering, machine building, and construc-
tion. In recent years extremely high—temperature materials. with a working tempera—
ture from 1500-2000 up to 3000-3500'6 have become increasingly important.

Increased requirements in such materials in the metallurgical industry are due to
increased temperatures in heating, roasting and melting furnaces. It is also due
to the necessity of further increasing the efficiency and economy of equipment and
production processes as well as equipment boosting.

Extremely high-temperature insulations and heat shields (linings, coatings, screens)
are required in foundry operatiOns, especially in die casting, in press forging

(for insulating induction heater-containerd,in the aerospace industry (for in-
sulating gas turbines and combustion chambers), in thermal converters, in test equip-
ment for testing materials and structures, and in a number of other areas of tech-
nology. A substantial increase in operating temperatures should be expected in
coming years in nuclear power engineering, in rocket engines and spacecraft, magneto-
hydrodynamic generators, in vacuum arc furnaces, etc.

The need for heat insulation and shielding for the temperature range 2000-3500'C,
which exceeds the operating temperature of the majority of conventional high-tem-
perature thermal insulating materials based on oiides, metals and other heat-
resistant materials, has required the development and application of new alloys and
composites in these materials, in particular possessing the requisite mechanical
properties at the specified temperatures. In connection with this, attention was
focused on compounds of refractory metals with carbon, nitrogen, boron, as well as
various composites. The heat-insulating properties of such materials are determined
chiefly by their highly porous structure. This dictated the development of new in-
dustrial processes for producing highly refractory compounds Ln the form of foam
materials, felts and other porous bodies. Theoretical methods were developed for
analyzing the physical-mechanical properties of various highly-porous bodies.
processes of molding and sintering, etc. In addition, the specific features of
these materials and the conditions of their employment required the development of
special methods of bonding, reinforcement, application of coatings, gaseous-phase

23
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

deposition, new structural forms of composites, reflective shields, etc. Thus

there has developed in recent years the area of heat-insulation and heat-shielding
technology, which should be called ultrahigh temperature, as an addition to existing
categories of high-temperature or highly refractory materials with a melting point
of up to 2000°C.

He shall first discuss the general classification of heat-insulating and heat-shield-
ing materials contained in Table 1.

Thermal or heat insulation serves to limit the conductive, convective or radiation
heat exchange between the insulated medium and its environment. Heat insulation is
employed either independently or as a component part of a heat-shielding device.

heat shielding serves as a barrier separating the protected structure from the ef-
fect of a hot environment, and is in the form of a coating, facing, lining, or more
complex layer of compact or porous materials. Requirements on heat-shielding and
heat-insulating materials differ, although in many cases their function coincides.

Table 1. Classification of High-Temperature Heat-Insulating Materials

 

T e Desi ation Dia ram Peculiarities and Areas of A lication
l 2 3 lo
Heat-Insulating Materials
1 Nonporous Material: refractory oxides; thermal conductivi-
1.l Isotropic ty 2-6 w/(m°K); high strength; heat resistance
2200-2500'0 .
1.2 Anisotropic Material: pyrographite, 3“; thermal conductivi-
‘(V‘ ty 1-2 w/(m‘K); high strength; high cost
11 Highly-porous Beat resistance to 3000°C; all refractory
11.1 Powder: /( materials employed
loose' /‘ Porosity 20-60 percent,- thermal conductivity
0.01-2 w/ﬁ'K); does not bear load, requires
. packing; high specific surface; significant
m rate of ablation by vaporization; danger of
caking of finely dispersed powders
bound (granular) ' Porosity 20-40 percent; thermal conductivity
‘ 5-30 w/ (m‘K)
11.2 Cellular m Porosity 10-70 percent; structural stability
at high temperatures; relative thermal con-

ductivity Ilka-0.84.1. Simplicity of manufac-

- ture
11.3 Cellular-cellular ﬂ Porosity 30-80 percent; relative thermal con-
ductivity 1/ A 0-0.5-0.05; enhanced mechanical
properties
11.4 Cellular-powder: Porosity 50-85 percent; relative thermal con-
looae ductivityh/Ao-0.2-0.03; enhanced mechanical
bound (granular) properties

 

2:
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
l

[1.5

11.6

111
111.1

III.2
111.3

IV.
IV.l

IV.2

v.1
v.2

VI
V1.1

V1.2

VII
VII.1

VII.2

Note:

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

2 3

Multiple-screen %

Fibrous
Non-fabric
(felt)

Fabric
Composite

 

 

 

a

Porosity 50-99 percent; relative thermal con-
ductivity h I k o-O.3-0.01; enhanced mechanical
properties

Material: graphite, refractory metals and com-
pounds, screen thickness 0.05-2 mm; low radiant
and conductive thermal conductivity [10‘3-

10'2 w/(I°K)]; maximum temperature 2200'C

 

Fiber material: oxides. carbon-graphites,
oxygen-free compounds; porosity 50~99 percent;
relative thermal conductivity h/h 0-0. 1-0.001
Low strength. High Heat resistance

Porosity 30-70 percent. Enhanced strength and
rigidity

Heat-Shielding Devices

(lining)

\’
Coat inga /
luv

Heat-radiating
"Hot" design

"Cold" design

Barrier
Fac ing ‘/\/‘
/‘

’mw

   

Heat-absorbing

Passive heat
absorbers

Active cooling
systems:

cooling by sweat- -
ing '/\(
film cooling /~ ,
Self-destructive
(ablation) /”
Non-carbonizing

Cnrbonizing

Material: oxides, graphites; heat resistance to
2500°C; thermal conductivity 0.5-10 u/(m°K)

Material: oxides, metals, metal-like cermets
(carbides, borides. nitrides) and ceramic-like

cermets (51c, BN, etc); heat resistance to
3000°C

In

J -- screen; H -- insulation; T.n. -- heat absorber; 0.". -- porous material;
0 -- coolant; A.n. -- ablation material; 0.c. - carbonizing (or permeable)

layer

25

FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE(NNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The principal characteristics of heat-insulating materials are their maximum operat-
ing temperature and coefficient of thermal conductivity.

high-temperature insulating materials can be subdivided into four groups on the
basis of temperature level:

1. Hith a maximum operating temperature up to 700°C. These include many
general-use construction and industrial insulating materials, organic and inorganic:
mineral wool, glass wool. cellular concretes, foamglass, asbestos. sovelite, kaolin
and other heat—insulating materials.

2. Refractory. fibrous and loose insulating materials with a maximum operat—
ing temperature to l750°C, chiefly based on oxide ceramics of $102, A1203, HgO,
Zroz, ZrSioa, lightweight fireclay and silica brick insulation.

3. Highly refractory porous insulation materials with a maximum operating
temperature to 2300-2500'6 -- of cormdum, magnesite. chrome-magnesite and
zirconium dioxide, as well as of highly refractory oxides of beryllium, yttrium,
scandium, etc.

la. Especially high-temperature insulating materials with a maximum operating
temperature in excess of 2500°C. Insulation of this group is made of carbon-
graphitic materials, based on refractory metals and their compoands and alloys, as
well as of certain oxides: 11:02, HfOz.

Comcrcially manufactured heat-insulating materials of the first two groups [158—
160] [bibliography not included] are currently classified not by coefficient of
thermal conductivity but by volumetric mass. They are subdivided into grades (15-
700) according to volumetric mass (kg/m3). The coefficient of thermal conductivity
of conventional heat-insulating materials at room temperature ranges from 0.03 to
0.17 w/(m'K) for mderately efficient and to 0.25 w/(m’K) for low—efficiency in-
sulating materials.

This estimate shifts considerably in especially high-temperature heat insulating mae-
rials. In the temperanne ram: 2000-3000'c a thermal conductivity of 2-6 w/(m'K)

is generally considered satisfactory, while insulation with a thermal conductivity
of 1-2 v/ (m'K) is considered very effective. Therefore in a member of instances
certain highly porous materials are examined in this book. which were not designed
specifically for utilization as insulation but possess low thermal conductivity.

All insulating materials can be subdivided into four basic types by type of pore
structure (see Table l).

The first type includes certain nonporous materials possessing low thermal con-
ductivity at high temeratures. A therml conductivity of less than 6 w/ (m’K) at a
temperature of more than lBOO'C can be claimed by many oxides: HfOz. Th02, mg.
ZrOz. Y203. Sc203, A1203 [6].

Some pyrolytic anisotropic materials possess satisfactory heat-insulating proper-
ties [A<2- 3 w/(nfltn in a direction normal to the surface of deposition: various
kinds of pyrographite at 2500-2800'c, and boron pyronitride at tenperatures up to
2000°C.

26
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ()Nl..

The other kinds of heat-insulating aaterials achieve a reduction in thermal con-
ductivity as a consequence of their porosity. An extensive class of highly

porous insulating materials (Type II) can be subdivided into several groups: powder,
cullular, cellular-powder, and foam.

The porosity of powder (granular) materials (Type 11.1), with loose pouring or
‘sintering of tightly packed grains does not exceed 0.3-0.6. loose powder insulat-
ing materials possess low thermal conductivity due to considerable thermal
resistances in the contacts between individual particles. Therefore not only poor-
ly conducdng oxide but also carbon-graphite, carbide and other powders the intrinsic
thermal conductivity of which is high are employed in these materials. Friable
cellular-powder loose materials (Type II.&), the porosity of which is 0.7-0.9, .
possess even less conductive thermal conductivity. In these materials, however,

as a con equence of an increase in size d of the cellular pores, there is a sub-
stantial increase in heat transfer by radiation between particles, a multiple of

d and T3. One substantial limitation in the employment of powder and other

porous insulating material with a large active surface figure is the considerable
ablation as a consequence of vaporization and elevated temperatures. The refractory
metals tungsten, rhenium, niobium, molybdenum, dense graphite, and carbides of
tantalum, niobium, hafnium, and zirconium possess the lowest rate of evaporation in
a vacuum. For example, the vaporizabilitg of particles of tungsten 200 microns in
diameter (specific surface fsp-l.65 x 10‘ mzlg) at 2500°C is 0.51/h. The rate of
removal of like particles of zirconium dioxide at 2500°c is significantly greater --
up to 972Ih. Usually removal of 201 of mass is considered allowable in estimating
resource of loose powders, just as other highly porous insulating materials. We
should note that the rate of evaporation of materials in an inert gas is as a rule

5 to 10 times less than in a vacuum. In addition, as a consequence of the low heat
conductivity of powder insulating materials, temperature in these materials drops
off sharply through the thickness of the layer.

Widely used cellular-powder materials with a porosity of up to 0.9 possess excellent
heat-insulating properties; they are obtained mostly from oxides by the methods of
gasification, expansion, or introduction of burning additives. The best materials
of this type can operate at temperatures up to 2300°C and have a thermal conductivity
of not more than 1-2 w/(m°K). Employment of highly porous insulating materials in
stressed structures is limited due to the sharp decrease in strength and creep
resistance.

Foam materials, which can be manufactured today out of practically all refractory
substances, possess superior mechanical properties. Successes achieved in this area
have made it possible to obtain highly effective foam thermal insulating materials
(Type II.5) -- graphite foams, carbide foams and others with a porosity of up to
0.85-0.99 and a coefficient of thermal conductivity of 2-3 w/(I°K). The principal
methods of obtaining them are based on utilization of carbonizing plastic foams.
Highly porous heat insulating materials based on ceramic and carbon microspheres
have become particularly widespread.

The class of fibrous insulating materials (Type III) is developing the most inten-
sively at the present time. Fibrous insulating materials combine excellent heat-
insulating properties and convenience of utilization in the form of flexible mats,
sheets. felt pads, and cloths. Fibrous insulating materials possess mechanical

2?
FOR(MHHCJALIEHZONIY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

properties which are superior to cellular and other highly porous materials of
equal porosity.

Materials of high-temperature heat-shielding systems can be broken down into heat-
shield barrier facings. radiation-type twat-dispersing systems, heat-absorbing
systems, and self-destruction (ablation) coatings.

Thick-walled barrier-type facinga. In many furnaces, high-temperature flues and
combustion chambers the metal or ceramic structure which forms the hot cavity

should be faced with a more highly refractory layer. Such a layer, assembled of
separate prefabricated components, serves to protect the main load-bearing structure
from the effect of hot gases, melts, and abrasive particles. It is made of heat—
resistant oxides, non-oxide ceramics, metals, and carbon-graphites. A refractory
facing of oxides is extensively employed in melting refractory metals, in aerospace
vehicles as jet and rocket engine exhaust nozzle inserts, and to heat-shield leading
edges and nose cones which heat to 2200-2750'6.

The majority of oxide refractory linings are also heat insulators, which reduce heat
losses to the environment, and therefore should possess minimal thermal conductivity.
Considerable efforts are directed at reducing brittleness and increasing the heat
resistance of oxide linings. This is achieved as a result of reinforcing oxides
with metal, oxide. and nitride filaments, impregnation with resins and thickening
with pyrolytic carbon, as well as creation of a microcrack structure.

Thin barrier-type coatings can be single and multiple layer, and in chemical com-
position can be metal, cermet (metal—like and ceramic-like), oxide and silicate.

In the simplest case a heat-shielding coating is formed directly on a metal surface.
Some costings possess comparatively poor thermal conductivity and can appreciably
reduce the heat flow to the shielded metal structure. Heat-insulating properties
are improved with the application of porous coatings. by plasma vaporization coating,
for example. Employment of refractory metals (molybdenum, tungsten, niobium,
tantalum) as heat-shielding coatings and layers is connected with their high
operating tenperature, low volatility in a vacuum and in gases, and high reflectivi—
ty. Refractory metal coatings deposited on graphite from gaseous phase improve its
gastightness, wear resistance and erosion resistance in high-temperature oxygen-
free environments.

Crystalline oxide coatings are extensively employed as heat-insulating coatings.
Drawbacks of oxide coatings include poor heat resistance, brittleness, poor
cohesion with protected surfaces, and limited refractoriness.

Many metal-like and ceramic-like cermet coatings possess high hardness, resistance
to wear, and refractoriness. Coatings of metal-like compounds based on silicides,
borides, and carbides of d-transition metals possess comparatively high thermal
conductivity, which ensures their heat resistance, but their heat-insulating
properties are diminished. Of special interest among heat-shielding coatings
based on ceramic-like compounds with high refractoriness and resistance to wear are
coatings of pyrolytic boron nitride, boron carbonitride, a -SiC, AlN.

Radiation-type heat-dispersing systems are suitable for shielding against large
radiant flows. An equilibrium temperature can be achieved in a thin outer layer

28
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

with high reilectivity, whereby the bulk of the arriving heat flow is reflected

back into the surrounding medium. Heat insulation is one of the component

elements in these systems. With interior placement of insulation, 3 metal power-
generation structure -- facing shields -- is subjected to external heat flows. Such
a design is sometimes called "hot" (Type v.1). Exterior facing can be of smooth or
corrugated metal sheets with protective coatings, equipped with stiffeners, in the
form of girders or honeycombs, for example. Facing can be uncooled or have supple-

mentary cooling, but in all cases the exterior Surface should have high radiating
capacity or reflectivity.

A "cold" design is extensively employed. especially in electric furnaces, a design
in which the heat insulation proper is subjected to external heating, this insula-
tion being placed on the surface of a metal shell (Type v.2), or heat insulation

faced with a denser lining, which also has comparatively poor thermal conductivity.

Other types of high-temperature heat—shielding systems —- heat-absorbing and self-
destruction (ablation), which are characterized by short duration of operation.

characteristic chiefly of space hardware, are not examined in this volume; informa-
tion on formulas and the mechanism of destruction of the principal classes of these

heat-shielding coatings is given in [14]. Therefore we shall limit Ourselves to
the classification in Table l.

Heat-absorbing devices include systems which employ passive heat absorbers, with
gas and hydrodynamic cooling, as well as containing partially removed materials.

Systems with passive heat absorbers are based on utilization of the heat capacity
of a material possessing high values of specific heat and coefficient of thermal
conductivity. In addition to accumulation of heat due to a material's heat capaci-
ty, part of the applied heat is radiated by the exterior surface. High thermal
conductivity is essential for uniform heating of the heat absorber, avoiding sub-
stantial temperature fluctuations. To prevent intensive heat transfer to the

protected structure, addition insulation is placed between it ace the heat absorber
(Type V1.1).

Heat absorbers employed for heat shielding can operate for a very short period of
time. With very high thermal loads and high friction stresses, active gas- and
hydrodynamic cooling systems are employed (Type V1.2). They include cooling sys-
tems in which cooling agent is fed into the flow thrOugh porous material, and sys-
tems with film cooling.

Heat-insulating materials employed in the range lSOO-l700°c are not examined in
this volume, since they are described in detail in [158-160]. The same applies to
the manufacturing process and properties of commercially-manufactured highly
refractory oxide materials discussed in books written by prominent Soviet in-
vestigators l2, '6, 19, 21, 130].

Principal attention in this volume is devoted to especially high-temperature
materials, including those based on oxygen-free compounds and graphites, which make
it possible to achieve operating temperatures of 3000-3500°C, including the most
effective fibrous, cellular-powder, foam and multiple-screen insulating materials.

29
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Selection of an optimal (for specific applications) type and parameters of heat-
insulating materials, as well as a scientifically substantiated area of technology
in developing a new heat insulating material with specified properties is possible
only if one takes into account the functional relationship between the physical—
mechanical properties of the material and the specific features of its concrete
porous structure. Toward this end the book undertakes to examine various
properties of the basic types of porous bodies based on an analysis of their
generalized structural models. In View of the complexity and diversity of actual
porous structures, such a model analysis cannot be considered completed. The aim
of this work was further development of theory and practice of especially high-
temperature insulating materials on the basis of a critical examination, synthesis
and classification of the latest advances in this field.

COPYRIGHT: Isdatel'stvo “Hetallurgiya”, 1981

3024
C80: 1862/33

30
F03¢NﬂﬂKJALIﬁEIONlY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MISCELLANEOUS

UDC: 629.12.002.3(075.3)
MATERIALS SCIENCE AND SHIPBUILDING

Leningrad MATERIALOVEDENIYE DLYA SUDOSTROITELEY in Russian 1981 (signed to press
24 Jun 81) Pp 5-6, 266-2b8

[Introduction and table of contents from book “Materials Science for Shipbuilders“,
by Viktor Vasil'yevich Andreyev, Izdatel'stvo "Sudostroyeniye", 18,000 copies, 248

pages]
[Text] INTRODUCTION

Various materials, the number of which is increasing year by year, are utilized in
the shipbuilding industry.

In the past ships were_constructed of wood, and it was not until the 19th century
that iron began to be employed in building ship hulls, and later Bessemer and open-
hearth steel plate. Up until approximately 1945 carbon steel was the principal
material in Soviet hull construction. After the Great Patriotic Var low~alloy steel
began to be extensively employed for ships‘ hulls. Today almost all large vessels
are built of high-grade carbon and low—alloy steels.

Aluninum—magnesius alloys began to be utilized in shipbuilding in the 1930's.
Earlier attempts had also been nade to use aluminum alloys. At the end of the

19th century, for example, torpedo boats were built in Russia of aluminum alloys,
but they failed to receive recognition at that time due to poor corrosion
resistance and strength. Extensive employment of high-strength and corrosion-
resistant aluminum-magnesium alloys in the shipbuilding industry began in the 1950's.
Structural components made of these alloys weigh half as much as corresponding
steel ones. This makes it possible to increase a vessel's load-carrying capacity,
to increase its speed or lessen the horsepower of the propulsion units. These
alloys are used in building ship superstructures, hulls of hydrofoil vessels, rescue
vessels, etc.

Extensive employment of new materials, such as plastics, is a characteristic feature
of modern shipbuilding.

A shipisacomplex man-nade structure, construction of which requires a large quanti-
ty of diversified materials: carbon and alloy steels, aluminum—magnesium alloys,
titanium and titanium alloys, copper and copper alloys, cast iron. concrete, wood,
plastics, paints and varnishes, etc.

31
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Material is selected on the basis of the requirements imposed on a vessel,
structure or component part (mechanical strength, durability, economy, reliability,
etc). By making a correct choice, one can increase a vessel's reliability and
service life, increase its speed and load-carrying capacity, reduce its weight,
reduce operating costs, reduce cost of construction and increase labor productivity
in construction.

A mastery of materials science will help determine the question of the suitability
of the material for specific purposes.

Materials science is the science which investigates the composition, methods of
producing, physical, chemical and mechanical properties, methods of heat treatment
and combination chemical and heat treatment of materials, as well as their function.

The fundamentals of this science were laid down in-the third decade of the 19th
century, when a general concept was formed of the structure of metals and alloys

and when commercial methods were developed for producing steel and the fundamentals
of heat treatment were elaborated. From that time forward physical metallurgy began
to assume increasing importance in determining questions of the suitability of
metals for various uses, production of alloys with specified properties, imparting
to them the required properties with the aid of heat treatment and combination
chemical and heat treatment, etc.

The fundamentals of theory and the scientifically substantiated technology of heat
treating steel were laid down in the writings of D. K. Chernov (1839-1921) on the
netallography of iron and steel, which gained international recognition. He also
developed the theory of crystallization, created one of the most advanced

quenching methods -- isothermal hardening, and pointed out the advantages of crystal-
lization under pressure and centrifugal casting.

The biggest discovery of the 19th century was the periodic law of D. I. Hendeleyev
(1834-1907), which enables one to establish the relationship between properties,
composition and structure of metals and to predict change in both physicochemical
and mechanical properties. ‘

Further successes in physical metallurgy are inseparably linked with the names of
Soviet scientists N. A. Hinkevich, S. S. shtaynberg, N. T. Gudtsov, N. S. Kurnakov,
A. A. Baykoz, A. A. Bochvar, G. V. Kurdyumov, and many others.

Today plastics and other nonmetallic materials are utilized throughout the economy,
the creation of which became possible thanks to the work of A. H. Dutlerov on
theory of the chemical structure of organic compounds; s. V. Lebedev, who
demonstrated the possibility of the commercial manufacture of synthetic rubber;

V. A. Kargin, who performed structural investigations of polymeric materials, and
others.

The 26th CPSU Congress assigned industry large tasks. For example, the "Principal
Directions of Economic and Social Development of the USSR for 1981 and 1985 and

the Period up to 1990" specify that the ferrous metallurgical industry is to produce
in 1985 117-120 million tons of finished rolled ferrous metal products. Cold-
rolled sheet output is to increase by 50-150 percent. Electric furnace steel
production is to increase by 60-percent; in nonferrous metallurgy aluminum output

32
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Author's Note

Introduction

Section One. Fundamentals of Physical Metallurgy

Chapter I. Basic Information on Metals and Their Alloys

1.
2.
3.
I.

General Information on Metals and Their Alloys
Internal Structure of Metals and Their Alloys

Constitutional Diagrams of Alloys
Methods of Studying the Structure of Metals and Alloys

Chapter II. Properties of Metals

5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.

Physical Properties of Metals

Chemical Properties of Metals

Corrosion of Shipboard Structures

Methods of Protecting Metals Against Corrosion
Mechanical Properties of Metals

Testing Metals for Tensile Strength

Testing Metals for Hardness

Testing Metals for Toughness

Testing Metals for Fatigue Strength (Fatigue Resistance)
Calculating Strength of Machine Parts and Structures
Processing Properties of Metals

Chapter 111. Production of Pig Iron

16.
17.
18.

Starting Materials for Producing Pig Iron
The Blast Furnace and Its Auxiliary Devices
Blast Furnacc Operation

Chapter IV. Cast Irons

19.
20.
21.

Effect of Impurities on Properties of Cast Irons
White and Gray Cast Irons
Alloy Cast Irons

Chapter V. Steelmaking
22.
23.
24.
25.
26.
27.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

General Information on Stee1making
Converter Steelmsking

Open-Hearth Steelmaking

Electric Furnace Steelnaking
Pouring Steel

Ingot Crystallization

:hapter VI. Steele

28.
29.
30.
31.
32.
33.
34.

Classification of Steels

Carbon Structural Steels

Alloy Structural Steels

Carbon Tool Steels

Alloy and High-Speed Tool Steels
Special Steels and Alloys

Clad Steels

Chapter VII. Nonferrous Metals and Their Alloys

35.
36.
37.
38.
39.
40.
41.
42.
43.
44.
45.
46.

General

Copper

Brass

Bronze

Nickel, Copper-Nickel and Nickel Alloys
Aluminum

Forming-Quality Aluminum Alloys
Aluminun Casting Alloys

Magnesium and Its Alloys

Titaniun and Its Alloys

Refractory Metals and Their Alloys
Tin, Lead and Their Alloys

Chapter VIII. Obtaining Metal Semifiniahed Products

47.
48.
49.
50.
51.
52.
53.

General

Producing Ingots

Rolling

Types of Rolled Stock and Its Grading
Hire Drawing

Presauorking

Forging

Chapter IX. Heat Treating Carbonjlron Alloys

54.
55.
56.
57.
58.
59.
60.
61.

General Information on Heat Treatment
Constitutional Diagram of Carbon-Iron Alloys
Conditions of Heat Treating Carbon-Iron Alloys
Annealing

Normalizing

Quenching

Tampering

62
63
67
70
73
75

77

77
83
89
92
93
95
99

101

101
101
101
105
107
108
110
113
114
115
118
119

122

122
122
125
127
134
135
137

140

140
141
147
148
150
150
153

General Information on Combined Chemical Treatment and Heat Treatment 154

34
FOR OIIWCJAL U8E(MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Chapter x. Hard Alloys and Career Materials

62. Hard Alloys
63. Cermet Materials

Section Two. Nonmetallic Materials
Chapter XI. Plastics
66. General Information on Plastics
65. Types and Properties of Plastics
66. Methods of Producing Finished Goods and Semifinished Products of
Plastics
67. Employment of Plastics in Shipbuilding
Chapter XII. Rubber Materials and Glues

68. Rubber Materials
69. Glues

Chapter XIII. Paints and Varnishes

70. Use and Basic Components of Paints and Varnishes
71. Basic Types of Paints and Varnishes

Chapter XIV. Lubricants

72. General Information on Lubricants
73. Lubricants for Launching Hays

Chapter XV. Abrasive Materials

76. Uses_and Types of Abrasive Materials
75. Abrasive Tools

Chapter XVI. Ceramic Materials and Class

76. Ceramic Materials
77. Glass

Section Three. Special Materials (Additional Materials Employed in
Shipbuilding)

Chapter XVII. Hood and Mood Materials

78. Employment of Hood in Shipbuilding and Its Properties
79. Types of Hood Materials Employed in Shipbuilding

Chapter XVIII. Concrete

80. General Infornation on Concrete

35
INDR 0FI1ClAl.UBEZ(MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

81. Employment of Concrete in Shipbuilding
Chapter XIX. Insulating Materials

82. Uses of Insulating Materials
81 Types of Insulating Materials Employed in Shipbuilding

Chapter xx. Materials for Pacing Interior Spaces and Covering Decks

81.. Materials for Facing Interior Spaces
85. Materials for Covering Decks

Chapter XXI. Sealing Materials and Fasteners

86. Sealing Materials
87. Fasteners

Chapter XXII. welding Materials

88. Materials for Arc Welding
89. Materials for Gas welding

Chapter XXIII. Materials of Nuclear Reactors

90. Structural Materials of Nuclear Reactors
91. Nuclear Fuel and Beat-Transfer Agents

Appendix 1. Laboratory Study Activities

Appendix 2. Correlation Between Units of the SI System Used in This look,
Units of Other Systm, and Other Units

Bibliography
COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Sudostroyeniye", 1981

3021;
C50: 1842/3 9 END

36
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY