APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/00: CIA-RDPOZ-00050R000100040025-0
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100040025-9

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JI‘RS 11/8389

10 April 1979

TRANSLATIONS ON NEAR EAST AND NORTH AFRICA
(FOUO 13/79)

U. S. JOINT PUBLICATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82—00850R000100040025-9
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers. periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines. editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[I are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Hhere no processing indicator is given. the infor-
motion was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been suppliedasappropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within iteaw are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.8. Government.

COPYRIGIT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GWERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATXON
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED EUROFEICIAL USE ONLY.

~
TRANSLATIONS 0N NEAR EAST AND NORTH AFRICA
(POUO 13/79)

CONTENTS

INTER-ARAB AHAIRS

PM) Will Seek U.S. Recognition as Sign of 'Good "111'
(Holland scum; mm AFRIQUE, 28 m 79)

IRAN
Women Who Believed in Money/n1 -
(Ksnize ﬂoured; LE sown. osssmmmn, 19 hr 79)
Briefs
0n Khomeyni's Blacklist
ISRAEL
Article Fhmmincs Hov Hat lino 'I‘rsnsi‘omd Zionism
(Ax-yen Ya'ari;
SUDAN
Opposition Leader Describes unrest in Sudan
(sun-1r uuan ni-num Interview; Amman AL-‘ARABI,
11.17 J” 'r9 OOOIOOQOOOOOOCOCOOOOIDIOCOOOOOIOOOOOOOO
TUNISIA

Nader Investments Slated for Mining, Irrigation
(memes momcwx 3r mom, 16 Feb 79)

Destourinn Party Prepares Congress, Hoes Youth
(MARCHES TROPICAW ET mm, 9 m 79) .....

Brie fs
Bou Ame Mineral Deposits
7 you omcm. use any

comma (Continued)
mm sum

Fauna-10's mm Mn To "in Want mum-y Victories
(mm 16, 18 un- 79)

- b -
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPFICIAL USE ONLY

INTER-ARAB AFFAIRS

PLO "ILL SEEK U.S. RECOGNITION AS SIGN OF 'GOOD HILL'
Paris JEUNB APRIQUB in French 28 Mar 79 p 26 Lb
[Report by Mohamed Selhani: "The PLO will Continue the Struggle"]

[Excerpt] "The signing by al-Sadat of the American-Israeli-Bgyptian agree-
ments is meaningless to the PLO since the Arab world has unaninously con-
demned it." Ibrahim Sus, PLO permanent representative in Paris, told us.

"If such a signing had immediately followed the visit to Jerusalem (19 Nov-
ember 1977), it would certainly have been difficult for the Arabs to counter
it. But now. particularlysince the Iranian revolution, the balance of power
in the area has changed. Egypt is isolated and so is Israel, economically
and politically."

The PLO's position has been strengthend by Jordan's. Following the husayn-
'Arafat meeting in Amman on Saturday 17 March, the ﬂashemite sovereign,

who was to receive Zbigniew Brzezinskiy the next day, condemned the Israeli-
Egyptian treaty and declared in favor of a Palestinian state.

The PLO has called for an Arab summit, at which it intends to demand imple-
mentation of all the secret resolutions passed at the Baghdad summit (2-5
November 1978)-particulsrly those which stipulate a series of political,
economic, social and cultural sanctions against Egypt. In this respect. how-
ever. the PLO's demands are likely to come up against the reluctance of

Saudi Arabia which, although condemning the treaty. is opposed to an eco-
nomic boycott.

The moderate countries display roughly the same attitude as Riyadh. But

the PLO intends to concentrate the main thrust of its offensive in the

United Nations. According to Ibrahim Sus, it is going to demand implementa-
tion of the General Assembly resolutions concerning the Palestinian people's
rights: "In this way we will be able to judge 0.8. good will when it comes
to seeking a just peace in the region. However, this good will should show
itself first through recognition of the PLO as the sole legitimate represent-
ative of the Palestinian people."

Parallel to this diplomatic campaign "on a large scale, the PLO will con-
tinue the armed struggle both inside and outside the occupied territories."

cannon-r: Jeune Afrique enuwn 1979
cso: 1.800 1
you omcm. usz om:
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

IRAN

HOHEN wuo BELIEVED IN KHOHBYNI
Paris LE NOUVEL OBSERVATEUR in French 19 Mar 79 pp 64-65
[Report on conversations with lranian women by Kenizc Hourad]

[Text] You laughed in my face. Nusrat. as you did. Soleyls. and us you did
too. Nassrin. when l was in Iran a month ago expressing my concern about

the place of women in an Islamic republic. That was the day after the
victory. The people. led by fedayin and mujjaeddin groups, had conquered

the barracks. emptied the arsenal and were now singing in the streets. You
had participated in everything. under your long black chadors. in the great
demonstrations, in the distributions of tracts. in the inspection of the arms
and sometimes in the combats themselves. You were happy. proud, sure of
yourselves. and the details of the Sharia. the Koranic law which specifically
permits repudiation and polygamy, prescribes that the "honest woman" hide

her hair and her form. and orders stoning for adultery. did not worry you
very much. "Those are ancient customs." you would remark. "they will be
adapted as a function of present conditions, as is the custom in Shiite

Islam where the ijtihad. the interpretation of a great ayatollah is pre-
scribed. In any event." you added. ”in the Koran it is written that men and
women are equal because they are created from the same essence.“

Today you are uneasy. Thousands of Iranian women have demonstrated against
wearing the chador and to demand equality of political. economic and social
rights with men. And you too. under your bﬁack veil. you have demonstrated
so that the choice may be left to each one whether she will veil herself or
unveil herself. And you have been attacked. some women have even been
wounded with daggers. Provocateurs? SANAK agents who want to lessen the
prestige of the new regime? Perhaps. But you are only half convinced of

it: you know very well that there are fanatics and reactionary Hullahs

who would be willing to profit from circumstances in order to find the

place once again where 50 years ago they replaced "monarchy with mullarchy"
and rest their authority on that half of the population which used to be easy
to control: the women. You have won a preliminary battle: the Ayatollah
Khomeini. who had asked you to cover "your heads. your necks. your arms and
your legs." has conceded that this was "not an obligation but only... a duty."

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The Black Kerchief

Hearing that veil! You are annoyed that westerners and a certain number of
your compatriots give so much importance to it and that it should be con-
sidered as the symbol, the barometer of the evolution or of the liberty of
Iranian women. "The French or American feminists were not as worried when
under the Shah's dictatorship we were imprisoned and tortured. And. for that
matter. what rights did we have? They tried to force us to accept values
which were not our own. they interdicted access to the universities and to
the schools to those women who wore the chador or even the hejab (a small
kerchief for hiding the hair). Hith a great deal of publicity they tried

to transform us into dolls, into sexual objects which would not be dangerous
for the regime."

Dolls. sexual objects, the key words are spoken. Between 1966 and 1976 the
consumption of beauty products in Teheran increased SOD-fold. Is that the
standard by which the progress of Iranian women is measured.

But the veil is not in itself a factor of progress anymore.... On that. you
have argued among yourselves, you are not in agreement. "First of all,

what veil? The chador is not a Hoslem costume but an Iranian one. It
existed among us long before Islam, Mohammed simply recommended that women
should cover their hair and should not carry themselves in such a way as to
excite men." "For me," Nuaret, a law student. declares, "to wear the chador
was a political act. a sign of rallying against the regime of the Shah who
forbade it. Now. like many Iranian women. I no longer wear either the chador
or the hejab." As for Soleyla. she is a physical engineer. During the
struggle, she also wore the chador, but today, in order to go to the factory
where she works, the only female engineer among the workers. she finds the
black fichu which hides her beautiful blond hair to be more comfortable.

All of you women speak to me of Ali Shariati, that Iranian philosopher who
died in London three years ago. Some people claim that he was assassinated
by the Shah's agents. Among you. his portraits cover the walls. "He was
the reel instigator of the Iranian Revolution. He turned the young people
upside down by making them find once again the real sense of Islam, beyond
the dusty traditions which blurred its image. He rejected the idea of the
submissive Hoslem woman which our families presented to us as a model.
Between that traditional woman and the 'modern' woman who lives according to
patterns imported from the Heat. we want to freely find our own identity."

Repudiation, Stoning

And the equality with men, for which you are struggling, is that according
to the Koran? Repudiation, for example? "In Islam. woman always has had

the right of divorce, while you westerners have not received that right until
recently and it is still forbidden by the Catholic Church. Under Islam, it

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

is sufficient that it be specified in the marriage contract. But many people
among us did not even know it; Khomeini reminded us of i: in a recent speech."

And polygamy? It's spelled out in full in the Koran. What do you think.
Nassrin. you who are married. of the opinions of the great Ayatollah of Hachad.
who declares that "as a rooster needs several hens. a non needs several women?“
The Koran stipulates that a nan may have four wives only if he loves all of
then equally and if he treats them equally. That is impossible."

"If that were possible. if it is possible. would you accept?"

"No. unless I were very sick. so that I could not have sexual relations or if
I could not have children."

"However, in spite of those reasons. it is in the Koran and you must accept
it." Poor Nassrin. you blr-h. you nervously bite your fingers. you are
torn between your loyalty to Islam and the reality of being a young woman in

love. I have stopped my questioning because you were on the point of
bursting into sobs.

And that couple who several days ago were flogged in the public square for
an act of love outside the contract. A light penalty if it is compared to
the stoning of the adulturoua woman prescribed by the Koran. Soleyll rebelled:

"They always speak of the stoning of the woman. but according to the law the
man also is stoned."

"But things are not set up that way."

"No." you recognized. "but in fact Islam has put such conditions on stoning
that it turns out to be almost impossible. It is necessary for four trust-
worthy witnesses to have seen the act while it wastbaing.consummated."

'"However, Soleyls. don't you believe that if the Xoranic law is re-establiahed

many jealous husbands or husbands who might just be tired of their wives
might buy such witnesses?"

"Yes. of course." you sighed. "That is why. as Moslems. we do not wish only
a change in the relationship between men and women. as we know very well that
they are based on social reletions of mendacity and exploitation. He want
change in all of society."

if Khomeini is Mistaken

And suddenly. to my great stupefaction. I saw all three of you clad in your
black ehadors holding a conversation with me similar to that which I had
heard a hundred times from Maoist or Trotskyist militants. A similar con-
versation. but still a little different. because you did not deny Islam even
for a moment. "That Islamic republic is only n stage; our goal is a class-
less society. The central idea of Isles. is in fact the 'tohid': unity.

h
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The unity of God and the unity of the world. From that source flows the
notion of tohidi society. a society without classes." For that ideal.
Nassrin. you told me that yov :ould voluntarily sacrifice your husband. your
baby. your life. At the school of Shariati and of the nujjaeddin. you read
Marx and Lenin: you are in agresnent with their economic and social theories
but not with their philosophical ideas. Like the Ayatollah Talagnahi, the
one who has been called “the red bishop of Teheran" and the "father of the
nujjnedin." you believe in socialism but you do not see in what way it is
contradictory with the idea of God. "It was contradictory in a precise
historical context where the Church upheld the owning class, but in Shiite
Islam. the Ayatollahs are counted among the spokesmen of the people."

I hesitated a Iowent before the sacrilegious question: but if the Ayatollah,
if Khomeini were listakenf And very naturally you answered me, as on the
night before the workers in the Awwaz factories had answered me: "If

Khoseini is mistaken. if he does not express what we consider just, we shall
reject him."

Copyright: 1979 "Le Nouvel Observateur"

12.116
C50: 6800

5
FOR OFFICIAL use omx
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

mm
on mommr's BIACKIJSh-A blacklist or 16,000 persons "forbidden to leave

the country" has been commicated to all Iranian bordar posts. [5:22:27
[Paris vumms Acrunm in French 26 Mn 79 p 36 [A]

CSO: '0800

6
FOR omcm. use can
roe OFFICIAL [BE 0111:!

ARTICLE lemmas Had "AR HAS TRAISI'W ZIONISM

[Krtlcle by Dr Aryeh Yo'ari:

ﬁexg

"Rom ﬁler-Zionists to heee-Zioniemy

In order to understand how peace may melts its contribution to Zionism.
we should first oxamlno how war — or rather the loot of belno In a constant
state of war — has been tronslorntlng Zionism. ‘

It has been said again and again that
Zionism is a movement 0! national liberation.
But such a deﬁnition, as accurate and indis-
pensable as it is. may fail, by seeming to be
an over-sintpliliml generaliration. It is well
known that each national movement fl!!!
sesses its own speciﬁc particularities, which
are detemtined by tlte historic conditions
which have errand or lormed it. The Zion-
ist movement wanted to distinguish itsell
{rum all other national movements. While
strength has been the political foundation
of most national movements, the weakness
of the [with people has been the political
justifieatinn lor Zionism. While most na-
tional tnowntentt have legititnatetl their
rights and claims through pu-srnre and roots
in their natite soil. the Zionist mowmt‘nt
has ernpltasired a lat-It of territory. exile, and
a separation of the people itom its land.
l’indter's "Auto-Knutttt-itxttion" presented tlte
formula :

“for the lirinx, the Jew ts a dead man;
lor the natitn, an alien and a “gram;
[or the rtrlt, .t hen-u;

[or the ptmr, a wealthy etplniter;

lor putt-nth. .t nun without a country:
and in the eyes at all

a hated that."

Such 1 pt-ople't IllIt'I-lllnn ntotetnent in-
evitably had a vital appeal to mankind's
sense ol’ justice.

Universal Principles and Values

Natiotutlinu is strongh- t-hantt-tt-rivrd by
an emphasis on partieularisnt --- to tile
degree ol' running: the tislt of t-ndint: in chau-
t-anisnt and in thr- n-jrt-tiun of others. Zion-

7

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ism. which is a movement of the rejected,
hatl no alternative but to draw its inspira-
tion lront universal principles and values. For
Mme-s lless. the revival of the Jewish people
and the redemption of all mankind went
hand in hand. The aim of Zionism is not the
jewish people’s diilereneiation, but rather
its integration among the free nations of the
ttorlrl. All should have a right to indepen-
dence. and every people should exist. free
from any kind of oppression or discrimina-
tion. "The Jewish state “1‘" be. for the whole
world needs its existence", said Herzl. Many
other Zionist thinkers could be quoted who
strongly support this view.

The also of Revisionism
But in this case, we have to deal with an

unusual phenomenon: in most nationalist
tometnrnts that have aeltiesed independence,
the extremist wing which led the way at the
beg'ntting of the process yielded ground to
tlv- moderates. The Zionist movement has
gone the other way; the extremist wing,
jabotln-leg't m—isionism —- which had a mar-
ginal role for hall a century — ltas ﬁnally
arhieted prmer. and has taken oser the helm
of both the state and the movement. lts
victory is not only political. it is ideological
as well. its slogans. such as "The Land of Is.
rat-I on lIOlll banks of the Jordan", or (own
wine) "jttdalt will rise by blood and fire",
which were slteer laughing stock [or a long
time, have become quite acceptable. Follow-
ing the 6 Day War. parts of this outlook
m-n light: to inth the ranks and the lead-
(‘Dltip ol Labor Zionism The dilierenee lie-
turen delnrtned labor Zionism and militar-
ittie litti-inttisltt atnounh to a tactical mum.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

rel about the best way to .achiwe the same
results. ,

Sell-Determination ior Both Peoples

llow iar away in time we find ourselves
today from the early Zionist leaders' decla-
rations about rights to the land, which were
to be equally bestowed upon both Jews and
Arabs! in the thirties. Ben '3urion declared
beiore a British Royal Commission that our
aim was the creation oi a bi-national state:
“li we were oiiered a jewish State we would
reiuse it". 3‘e said. And it was also the young
Ben Curion who wonderfully deﬁned the
positiott oi Socialist-Zionists in terms oi the
acute problem of the Palestinian people’s
ri ts : -

ah “i am wholeheartedly tor the right oi reli-

determination ior every people.“

"l‘his right cannot be linsfxd or conditioned
hecanso oi ltr eiiect upon us or our allairs.
There is no doubt but that the Arab peoples
oi the Land oi lsracl pom the right to sell-
detennination. 'lhis right cannot be restricted
out oi tear that it might encumber our en-
deavors. The moral ease oi Zionist tltouaht
implies that a people -- every people - coa-
stitute an end in itseli. it is not an instru-
lnenlality ior Ilse attainment oi obiectises oi
other peoples."

“We seek that the jewish people be a sove-
reign master oi its destiny in history without
being dependent or the. will — yes. the good
will oi other peoples. ljlewise. we seek the
same ice the Arabs. lit-en ii the matter were
entirely within our jurisdiction and subject to
our will, we cannot s-irw the Arabs oi the Land
oi Israel as a means inc our code We cannot
determine the late at their rights."

"It is possible that the consummation oi
Arab aims ior sr-li-dv-terminatimr might impose
irtrsnidahle diiiieulties uptm us. lioness-r, that
cannot sent as a principle to retract that right
item the Aral-sf

“A iorce lacking a moral inundation is tran-
sient. llistnry has not established that physical
might alone is suititient to sustain rule ior
gent-rations. We, in any use, cannot depend
on a policy at physical might - rs-en ii we
so desired. World public opinion — upon
ulmse recognition and sympathy we depend —
will insist tlut we uhilsit the inlicst benevo-

8

lessee tos.rd the neighboring people.”

“Visions oi 2min political policy mm.
iullest concern ior Arab rights not only indicate
an absence oi sensibility and intqrity — but
that oi political realism as well."

A comparison between this conception —-
which inspired a noble humanistic tradition
— and the present opposition to the Pales-
tinian's right to sell-determination -— equally
shared by jabotinshy's and Ben Gurion's suc-
cessors -- indicates how low the morals oi
the Zionist movement have iallen. somewhere
along the road between its aspirations and
its achievements. (The debates art-l the re.
solutions adopted during the last Zionist
Congress —- which were ratiﬁed by a strong
majority. in spite oi the laudable eiiorts oi
the [cit-wing minority -- are a sad illustra-
tion oi these statements.)

The Problem
What is the real problem? is it an un-

avoidable evolutionary process that charac-
terines the road that many a ttationist move-
ment has travelled? Lloyd George cried out:
“i am in despair as I see small nations which
have scarcely caught a glimpse oi light and
cannot wait to oppress other nations."

Collective ethics, est-n more than indivi-
dual ethios, are both a product and a lone-
tion oi interests. But the iear and mistrust
that hatred, adversity, and aggression have
generated. all cloud the ability to make a
clear distinction between genuine and spec
cious interests. The stupeiying rise oi ultra-
orthodox obscurantism which has joined ior-
ces with fanatic cltausanistn, is an obvious
symptom oi the inauspicious process which
the Zionist ntowrnent, once liberal and en-
lightened. has gone through.

The. impact oi War

The only factor which explains this muta-
tion is - war -— which in the course oi
time became the iundamental condition and
the permanent context oi the relations be-
tween the ]esss and the Arabs. The Arabs“
itttplat-able reiusal to recognise the legitimacy
oi the national aspirations oi the Jews.
eroded any beliei in ,xaceiul coexistence.
and undermined its credibility. And not only
was the [sensibility of coexistence denied, but

FOR ONICIAL USE ONLY
ma OFFICIAL USE ONLY

even the very existence 0! both nations was
challenged. Sooner or later, most leaders
stsccurnlietl to the idea that conﬂict was
unasoidable. and that the issue could only
be delincd in terms ol victory here versus
deleat there --- which led to certain political,
military. and ideological conclusions. lien
Gurion's memorable ennlessiott in l9“ about
his partition plan (The Baltimore Plan) was
a heartbreaking revision of his previous ap-
proadt, which had sullered many blows In
the past. Those liltc lluber, Magnets, Ernst
Simon, Ksharislty. Altaron Cohen. and Ben-
tov. who continued to tit-lieu.- that only re-
t-iprocal recognition could guarantee the na-
tional rights ol both the Arnhs and the Jews.
were. isolated and "tptaratttitted". They were
condemned as utopia“ dreamers hy some.
and as trouble-matting: deleatists by others.
Their voice was soon drowned out by the
roar til the cannons. llttt despite hut-in; to
go through these lll""'|lt‘|\ mrl lI-Itrltsl wars.
moat nl the jewish population til Palestine
(the Yislrtw) longs-cl lur pears: and was ge-
nuinely eager [or st-cmstiliatinu (instlronta-
tiots was declared to he an unamirlnlsle. en-
tlurahle. yet dcplmahlt- :tntl tlrsastrrnut ml.
The victory in the ls Hay War led to the
“translr-rntatinn at dinner tnto virtue“ (to
qttntt: the lictttwn el|ttsMimL A complete
rcwrsal ol the principles. values and aims
ol Zionism was ellceted. Patatlnsrit-ally, the
mt slanderous accusations nl Aral: propa-
ganda became “wll-lnllrlling prophecies". In
I956, Israel acted tout-ther- wills declining
imperinlist cmrntriu tit-ring thr- Sinai War.
In “$7. “Israeli expansionistn", at the ex-
pense til the tlm-r lrllint-n-nt Amh states.
lsctatttc n L's! t. N" sl:stt' l\ t'\'t‘l’ ranger tts Rise
up rnsrrpserrsl lt‘lllltllll“; .stttl hutm‘it‘ rights,
steers! alt-ulum‘tlt t-t mnestral land. security
pruhlt-tns. and last Inst not least. stuhliorn
Arals srjn-tis-nmu (llw three "m“ at Kltar-
tntttn). :irrmnlunictl liy lilitttl Palestinian tet-
rntism, :rll lmtlitatrtl Israel's rtsrntal adapta-
tion to its new condition, Art oppressed peo-
ple l-rfnl'ﬂt' an npprrsmr people

A Sad Symmetry

'lhat is host slit: Zitmist .‘lnserttent the
lit-st tuttiplt- til :i sell-th-ternnnation which
tr.“ arhirtctl in spite 0! many obstacles -

f‘
r

" came to deny thai same right to the Pale»

tininns. The argument which is presented
- the I‘LO's criminal and insane behavior
—- cannot justify such a tele Shouldn't
we recall the history ol many new states
whose independence was won with the aid
ol sat-age terrorist activities? And imagine
what would have been the situation if Begin.
and not Ben (iurion. had been the leader ol
the jcwish Yirlttro in l940. Begin, the leader
ol the lrgun. like the Palestinians today,
stubbornly reiccted the UN. "solutions, and
did not relrain lrom using terrorist methods
against English soldiers and Arab civilians
(Dir Yasin). ll these methods had been
dominant. perhaps the State ol lsracl would
not have been established. But. it such a his-
torical catastrophe had occurred, would it
have invalidated or reduced the Jewish peo-
ple's right to sell-detcmtination and national
independence? The obvious answer is no.
It is well lrnown that extreme nationalism is
characterised by a relusal to recognize equal
rights and reciprocal duties. Thus. the rise
ol revisionist nee-Zionism to ptmr has re-
sulted in a sad symmetry between two equally
absurd and sell-destructive reicctionist ap-
proaches, which could lead the tragic eon-
llict to a dead end. just at the Palestinians.
30 years ago. sacrilied their chance to indeo
prudence because ol their um snimousity
towards the creation ol a Jewish state. so
the present Israeli government may miss the
historic opportunity lor an immediate recon-
ciliation with the leading Arab state (Egypt).
Maine at its anti-Palestinian obsession.
posed as an untouchable national taboo.

Zionist Roluvonatlon

\\'.is the idealistic phase only the initial
generator nl the Jewish national liberation
mmerrsrstt’ And alter the movesrtent's aim
has her-rt Irat‘ll‘d, has it inexorably aged to
the point ol denying its past and 0! bartering
abstract values lor material goods? "ace the
shot ts-nse oi justice and equity at the move-
ment her-attic :t heaty and unwanted burden
lot a state which relies on strength lor its
sun-ital’ For Israel. thctc politics would
signily not only a crime. they would he an
error nl gigantic proportions. "are we let-
tztittrn that the cstahli-litnrntol the state does

wen OWTCTAI. "SP MIN
M OFFICIAL USE 0!le

not imply the lull achiesernrnt ol Zionism?
Aren't we aware that ”'1: ol the Jewish
steeple still is in the lliaspma. threatened by
two mortal dangers; by rapid assimilation.
and by the vicisitudrs o! the precarious lives
ol minorities. That is why, without Zionism.
and without its rejusenatioo. neither the per-
manence ol the state not the survival of the
people are guaranteed. Just as war was the
strain instrument of in degeneration. so peace
appears to he the condition. sine qua non.
lor tlte regeneration ol Zionism. Only the
reconciliation henveen Jews and Ara --
which will follow theindcspensable mutual
recognition oi Israelis and Palestinians —
may inaugurate a rtew historical era; the era
ol pence.

Constructive Energy and Moral
Radiance

Israeli involvement in the «aim. in addi-
tion to producing incmttthettsurahle political
and economical advantages [or the state. for
all of the states in the area. could imbue
Zionism with a new sitality. At a time ol
serious problems in the Third World. aid
from n twigltboring state lnr the deselnptnent
oi these countries would enhance Israel's
prestige and in attractisrnesa in the eyes 0!
the lx'ol of the jest-ids )oullt throughout the
world. If Israel today inspires (ear. ansiety
and cornmiseration -— tomorrow it could
once again become an ohitct of admiration
-- no longer let its military virtues and
acltiesemcnts —- but rather [or its construc-
tive energy and its moral radiant-e. Not long
ago. Paul johnson. the editor 0! the llritish
"New Statesman“. could still write about
Israel :

"l'lre [ten-Israel syrup-thin rurrent auntie
Social Democrats stem Irons Israel's democrat-e
socialism rather than hum its Zu-rmrn. We are
not lllarltﬂl In Israel Inuit-r it is a Jewish
slate, lurl rather Imam:- it is urtultstsc. ltl
lrtretrsmt est-tannie lit-Ion are In llllh'lq. hands
'I heir trust-tanner“ is riul demnl [rum the
wealthy slam-s s-r lrtltn thr prestigious st Insole,
hut lﬂntl llu‘ lrlslrtrll rn-rrInI-rrtrlus. 'I ll" pause
mined-up i- ellrrtrd uttluu-t “I‘ll"‘llﬂ‘: ilrwto-
rratii ﬂutter-l 'llm l\ a unique emnl-inttm
inhirh a Snial-it hits to haul rlwnliere on
link lid-r "us Is In srwsll-ttlnI-Mlnm lo hltll

10

is lound in Arab lands. despite their revolu-
dons."

Universal Foundatlona _
The unrorntnon attraction oi the ”alarm

(pioneering) ideals for the generation which
built the ltihhutz mos-.mcnt wosdd be an
enigma. were it not lor its universalistic
loundation. Beyond the wishes {or the re-
demption oi the jewish people and ice the
uphuilding at its country. there was a pro.
diglotts ambition to give birth to a new so-
ciety. a new man. a new prototype for the
iutnre ol humanity.

ll, among the many achievements of ls~
racl, only the ltibbutr. attracts universal ad-
mirzttionI this is not sheer coincidence. With-
out such a social message — which ollers an
answer to problems and vital needs of all
peoples in the area. and throughout the
world. "statist slandardiution" would deny
Zionism its “soul“ and would reduce it to
the level of ordinary nationalism. Such a
mosement presents no interest to other peo-
ples. it is not esen endowed with the power
ol attraction towards the scattered Jewish
people. as the current acute crisis oi the Zion-
ist movement indicates. ll the present status
qno will continue, the crisis will be aura-
voted.

Only peace can enable Israel and the Zion-
ist mosement to break the internal circle of
solitude and hatred. Only peace can enable
lstacl to change its image of harshness and
intransigence. Only peace may create new
conditions lor a Zzonist resolution; a renewal
and a return to smarter. an upheaval oi
norms. criteria, and priorities.

Such a tevnltttintt is not just an alutract
and pious concept. It is an utmost rcquim
ment (or a traiistic political aplmrh. The
"N phase nl lit-trims was the retunt ol the
Jr‘s‘l‘ll pmple to ill homeland. The new hit-
totic phaxt- ol ottr national rehirtlt -- which
pure would begin - - has to he Israel‘s union

with other nations

II we will it it w-Il he no legend.
Postscript

'l he alime llll"\ were strutten belon- the
(ramp l).t\id ('onh-rt-ncr. 1 lie agreement
that “at ri-aelml hettm-n. Israel and llespt

I'm OFFICIAL IS}: ONLY
)PYRIOHT:

30

M OFFICIAL USE “LY

_ that pt'nt't‘ is not only desirable and
mtlmlnle, it is possihlc. despite the doubts
and oppnsition ul tnany nu bnth sitlcs ol the
border. lltn wr- sltonltl still cmphnsine tltnt
peace is still only a possibility. Many. both
at home and :thmad, are waiting to: it to
tail, and even it —- as we hope -- a peace
tteaty will he signed between Israel and tlte
largest and most important Arab state -—
it will not yet he a stable and lasting peace.
The stability ot peace will only be gusianteetl
if it stands on luv left. '

Israelis and Pslsstlnlsns

The main coullict is between the Israeli
mile and the l‘alcstinhn people, antl as
long as it will not he rrsnlvrsl. no genuine
peace will come tn he in our region. In outlet
to reach this mil, we must mmotnc tsvo
snain ohstarh-s. 'I'ht- lirst is the stuhhorn
selusal ol the Palestinian leads-ts to lnllill .1
condition. without which nen titty-pt \soultl
not haw utﬂ't‘ﬂlﬂl in lt‘ttwﬂlltf; lll't' con-
quetﬁl trvritmics lrutn lsrnrl; :t tntupletc and
unconditional recognition at tltt‘ "glues ol the
lunch nation to its hon-clans]. svltilt- gisinz
ttp the lake antl hollow slogan til a "demo-
cratic. secular, l’alestitt‘nts state". The second
obstacle is the policy ot the Government 0‘
Israel. Mtcr the illusion at s tcvritotial status
(pm on all {nu-ts was sltattescd. the l'legit't
(‘msrrnmcnt is cultivating a more limited il-

1979 by New Outlook

: htlzo

ll.

lusinn. but one which is no less tlntnanging:
the possibility ol reaching a separnte peace
with Egypt. whirh will nllow (or the con-
tiuttntinn ol Israeli rule itt the West llanh
and on the Golan Heights. This illusion will
not last (or long. neither for ten mon- years.
or even {or the 5 years propmrd for by the
autonomy plan. The dynamics of the peace
process will be accelerated by some powerlul
lat-tors: American pressure will intense and
grow. The comolidation nl American inter-
ests in the region will require the ptcvention
ol Egypt's isolation. by inducing jordan to
join the peace ptoccss, and by gaining the
blusings and support 0! Saudi Arabia, and
perhaps eseu by inducing Sytia to join the
more” tttwartls a comptchensis'e settlement.
Ilut a nccevnty condition tor achieving all
of tltt‘se goals is a solution which ssill satisfy
the national aspirations ol the Palestinians.

Thus, the circle is closed. antl the dispute
"turns to its historical starting point: the
existence 0! two nations which an latctl to
live side by side. Blood-tilled historical ex-
perience. and considerations ol svistlont. emo-
tion. and justice. require us to conclude that
we must base our reiations upon mutual rc-
eognition, peace. and cooperation.

The stmggle lor peace — a complete and
stable mare -~ must continue, and the pos-
sibilities ot success me today much greats-c
tlt.sn they ﬂ‘t‘t' wcte below.

t" AWYI‘TA' IR? “WV
FOR ON’lCIM. USE ONLY

SUDAN

OPPOSITION LEADER DESCRINBS [NRKST IN SUDAN
I’nriu MPHATAN AL-'ARM| in Arabic 11-17 Jan 79 pp 28-29

Iinterview with Opposition Leader Sharif llusayn al-liindi: "Nullsyri
Vlolnted Conciliation Agreement"; in Paris. date of interview not given]

lText! During his visit to AL-iM‘i'AN AL-‘AMBl's office in Paris. Sudanese
leader Sharif llusoyn al-liindi disclosed the hidden phenosena which ads the
national peace in Sudan were ink on paper. Sharif al-llindi directly accused

the Sudanese regime of failing to carry out any of the conditions of the
asreeaent.

Shnrif nl-illndi related in detail the conditions and circuastancse which
made al-Sadiq al-hahdi leave Sudan in enharrassaent. lie also drew a bleak
picture of the internal situation, assuring us of the opposition'e ability
to bring down the regime without bearing am against it. Finally. he
lifted the veil f ran the presence of naval. air and ground forces in Sudan
to support the Nunnyri regise and protect it from popular tremrs.

Perhaps it is worth noting that the waves of popular discontent in Sudan
are erystailizins in widespread strikes. The latest of these was the open
strike this week begun by 60.000 eleaentery school teachers delanding is-
pnwesunt in their living conditions.

At the nose rise. reports are circulating about love-eats and rebellious
disorders in Southern Sudan, to place the Sudanese situation open to any
possibilities.

a'erhaps the following conVersation with Sherif Hussyn al-Ilindi coqletea
«one links in the picture of the Sudanese situation.

lQucstionl As a seaber of the National Front. you accused President Ja'far
Nuaayri's reprise of failing to fulfill any of the conditions of the national
reconciliation. "hat will the Front's position be in confronting the resins?

1?
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Answer] In the past. the National Front participated in several arsed
civilian and lilitary confrontations and led popular confrontations. desen-
strations. strikes. civil disobedience. and various riots. However. according
to the infatuation i now have about the deteriorating situation in Sudan.

the gathering of all individuals of the Sudanese people in the opposition.

and the acute incospstibility between the leadership of the regise and the
rest of the groups of the Sudanese people-including the armed forces-I now
believe that all of this collective forlstion of blocs which constitutes

cosplete and total opposition is a substitute for the need to bear srls
against the Nunsyri regime.

Egyptian Forces Present

[Question] How much truth is there to what is heing said about Egyptian
forces being present in Sudan?

IAnswer] I am certain that there are Egyptian forces in Sudan. There are
naval forces in Port Sudan. air forces at the Hedi al-Sayyidnah and Khartoum
air bases. and ground forces in Khartoua and in the east, south and west of
Sudan.

He have information that the number of these forces is continually increasing.
especially recently. That is in addition to their penetration of other
sensitive apparatuses. such as the security agencies and others.

Egyptians have increased Tension

[Question] "hat is your position concerning these Egyptian forces in case
they move to protect the Nussyri regime?

[Answer] in sy opinion. the presence of Egyptian forces in Sudan. especially
at this tine. and their taking over protection of the rsgiae has increased
the intensity of the tension between the Nusayri regime. the people and
their arsed forces. especially since these forces were withdrawn from con-

frontation with the lsraeli enesy in order to confront conquered. starving.
helpless people.

The deep-rooted historical links between the Egyptian and Sudanese people

and states make using the Egyptian stay to subjugate the Sudanese people a
latter of calling for grief and sorrow. However. as a conquered and wronged
people fighting for our freedom and our rights. we cannot be blaled if we
defend our land and our rights against imported armies. These arsies which
weak reuiasu: bring in to oppose their people cannot fight and win in an un-
friendly ell-ate and against people who do not accept their presence.

It has been-e known that Iltlonal armies themselves. if they control their
people. cannot overcome the will of these penple. no matter how such they
are arsed and no setter how strong their night and the effectiveness of

their weapons. There isnn exaaple which emphasized our belief now in Iran.
where the lronian army. which had been considered one of the five strongest
stolen in the world. stood isolated and defeated before the revolution. wrath
and tremr of the lranian people.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Rebeilon in the South

(Question! Sudaneue opposition sources any that there are movements hostile

to the regime in the South. however. Joseph Lagu. head of regional autonomy
in the South. has denied that.

[Answer] The facts confirm that there are student and popular demonstrations
in all areas of the Southern region. particularly in the Jonglei region. He
can even say that there is an actual rebellion in Southern Sudan. There are
whole cities which have been subdued and occupied by the rebels. Perhaps
Joseph Lagu. head of the Executive Council in the South. meant that these
movements are not opposed to his local government but to the central authority.
This is true. because this movement is part of the Sudanese people's movement

in the south. north. east and west against the ruling regime in Khartoum and
against its incorrect national and international policy.

The popular movement now present in the Sudanese South is not an ethnic or
separatist movement and is in no case directed against the Arabs. Rather.
it is a popular tremor in the form of armed confrontations directed against
the regime in Khartoum. against the joint defense agreenent between Sudan
and Egypt. and also against imaginary projects of integration.

There are similar movements taking place in all parts of Sudan. but they are
marked by a thick veil of gloom domestically. on the Arab scene. and inter-

nationally. while the problem of the South is emphasized to stir up racial
fears.

[Question] Is there coordination between the National Front and the move-
ments in the South of Sudan?

[Answer] The opposition is one in the whole country. and it is oppositioa
against the current regime. This opposition has complete coordination in
determining its plans and programs accordint to their timing.

Southern Sudan suffers from starvation. chaos. loss of basic commodities.
poor administration. and sectarian and corrupt policies by the central
authority in Khartoum. exactly as the North suffers. This is not strange.
and this situation is shaking the Sudanese people in the South and North
in different formn. i believe that this is only the beginning.

Nu Subordination

[Questionl in an interview which he granted recently. al-Sadiq al-Hahdi
said that he could remove the subordination of the Sudanese opposition and
its link to others. what is your opinion?

lAnswerl in this area. i would like to confirm that the Sudanes nationalist
movement In known historically for its independence and lack of subordination
to any party or regime. and i want to say a word which in all fairness must
be said. There is no subordination. suggestion. or collaboration in the

1h
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

relationship of the Libyan Republic to the Sudanese nationalist movement.
it is a link of the Arab struggle which has existed. does exist. and will
continue to exist with the Sudanese people nationally and with the Arab
people as a people.

On this occasion, i also want to refer to Sadiq al-iiahdi's statement in the
same interview that Ethiopia is trying to weaken Sudan for racial and ethnic
reasons. I believe that this is untrue. There are no racial or ethnic
questions between Sudan and Ethiopia, and there are no racial and ethnic
questions within Ethiopia itself. There is one Ethiopian people which did
away with the sectarian imrial authority. and there were alliances for
the rule of the Ethiopian people as a whole.

Riddle of Nature of Sadiq al-Hahdi
[Question] iiave you met with Sadiq al-iiahdi since he left Sudan?

[Answer] We have not yet met with Sadiq al-iiahdi since he left. we do not
know why he left. and we do not know whether he is an opponent or a supporter
of the regime. lie says that he is an opponent of the Camp David agree-eats,
noting that these agreements really began with Sadat's visit to the occupied
land when al-Sadiq was at the peak of harmony with Numayri. 0n the other
hand. he confiras that he is part of the regime. that he will participate

in it and that he is not an opponent of it.

He do not know al-Sadiq sl-Hshdi's political nature. Is he part of the
regime as he says he is? is he opposed to some of the policies of the
regime. as he opposes some of the participants in this regime? Is he an
opponent? All of this is a mystery. and therefore we see no use in meeting
with sl-Sadiq al-iiahdi. we consider ourselves to be in opposition, since
the Numayri regime violated the agreement on which the peace must be based.
Consequently we cannot meet with al-Sadiq until we understand clearly whether
he is an opponent of the regime.

Numaryi Violated Agreement

[Questionl Let us go back to the beginning. Hhat are the conditions of the
peace which the Numayri regime failed to implement which led to your decision
not to return to Sudan?

[Answerl we offered 15 conditions. They included repealing the state security
law. in the first article of the 20 April. 1977 agreement. the authority
recognized that this law is incoqatible with all democratic rights. They
also included liheralizing public freedom; relying on the principle of the
separation of power; defining the powers of the president of the republic;
avoiding a policy of capitulation in the area; supporting the right of the
Palestinians to determine their own fate and establish their state;
abolishing the bipartite mutual defense agreement between Egypt and Sudan
to avoid a policy of being dragged into regional axis; following a policy
of positive neutrality and impartiality: and supporting African liberation
movements.

15
son orncm. use may
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in return. we agreed to end the opposition in the National Front, have all
the fighters abroad return. and stop armed battles and turn over our weapons
to the Sudanese forces.

The authority pledged to hold free elections for parliament. which will
have full legislative authority and the cowlete right to supervise the
executive authority. it also agreed to abolish the political apparatus
now existing and to replace it with an elected national council which would
have supreme authority.

however. the authority has not yet fulfilled any of the conditions of the
reconciliation. either on the national level or the Arab level. although
more than 20 months have passed since the reconciliation agreement was
signed. On the contrary. a glaring violation of these conditions occurred
on the Arab level when the authority agreed to Sadat'a visit to the occupied
Arab lands and to his initiative which ended in the Camp David agreement.

in light or the delay in inlementing the promises and co-itments, it was
clear to us that the regime does not intend to have a national or Arab
agreement. instead. it wants to contain the opposition and draw it into
the ranks of the regime to solve its domestic and foreign problems.

For all of these reasons. we refused to return and refused to join the ranks
of the regime. He felt that there was no agreement as long as the agreement
which was written. signed. and announced internationally has been rejected
by the authority in Sudan, and we have reached the point of dissolving it.

[Question] what are your impressions about sl-Sadiq al-Hahdi's departure
from Sudan?

[Answer] when aloSadiq al-Hshdi went to Sudan the first tin he was starting
from his co-itment to the conditions of the reconciliation as determined in
the meeting of the Political office of the Sudanese National Front. However,
in his negotiations with Numeyri, as he himself explained to us and as inter-
medlaries explained. he did not agree with him on anything. when he returned
to meet with us. he started off by saying that Numayri had changed and that
he was confident of the sincerity of his efforts on behalf of the settlement.
Thus. what el~ﬂahdi presented relied only on confidence in [his] iwreasion
of the change which he saw and felt in Numayri. however. we had another
opinion. He explained to him that we had popular and national demands. and
we could not rely solely on these feelings of a change in Numayri's personality.
Consequently. we could not accept a peace concluded in individual meetings
between al-Sadiq and Numayri without taking into consideration the conditions
which we set down as a basis for the reconciliation.

This occurred in our first meeting with al-Hahdi after he left Sudan the
first time. During this meeting he requested that the opposition return
to Sudan and join the ranks of the regime. Naturally. we refused.

16
ron orncm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

It becaaa clear later that the conversation between al-Hahdi and Nunayri
had no effect. All that happened was that a minister from al-Hahdi'a group
Joined the executive authority. and a number of hio aides were chosen for
the People's Council and the Central Committee of the Socialist Union in
its present form.

Al-Sadiq aldHehdi joined the authority without written condition and without
any mention at all of oral conditions.

After that it was clear as a matter of course that the confidence which
al-Sadiq had placed in Numayri was shaken. especially after he was faced
in Khartoum with the radio constantly repeating: “th did you bear arms
ngoinut the Hay Revolution? Uhy have you returned to join us now although
laws limiting freedoms exist. and the prisons exist. and their doors are

open?" The radio continued to repeat this for days without any justifica-
tion except a desire to humiliate.

It must be mentioned that it is well-known that the masses on whom al-Sadiq
relies did not believe in the unconditional reconciliation. The opposition
continued and confronted el-Sadiq himself with this: The Sudaneee opposition
was no longer party or sectarian opposition. but popular nationalist opposi-
tion assembling all Sudanese forces. On this basis. al-Sadiq al-Hahdi found
himself in a predicament which led him to leave Sudan again. No one can
determine now whether his departure is final or teaporary.

COPYRIGHT: 1978 AL-HATAN AL-‘ARABI

7587
CSO: 6802

17
NR orncuu. use ONLY
I’Oli OFFICIAL USE ONLY

TUNISIA

MAJOR INVESTMENTS SLATED FOR MINING. IRRIGATION

Paris HARCHES TROPICAUX ET HBDITERRANBBNS in French 16 Feb 79 pp 861-662
lAtticle: "Tunisia"l

[Text] industrial Projects

Blabornting on the infatuation on Industrial activity in Tunisia provided on
the basis of the results of the first half of 1978 (see HARCHBS TROPICAUX

ET HBDITERRANEENS of 9 February 1979 page 309) and as we had announced, we
propose to survey the country's industrial projects. He cite below only
those projects approved by the Fifth Development Plan of 1977-81 which are
either in the process of realization or at a very advanced stage.

Furthermore, the API [Investment Promotion Agency] approved in the initial
9 months of 1978 nearly 1,000 private industrial projects representing ag-
gregate investment of 138.7 million Tunisian dinats. Nearly half of those
projects involve new plants.

I. Hines

A major effort is anticipated in this field for the improvement or modern-
ization of the phosphate nines:

u. Improven-nt oi the Schib mine: Total cost. 38 million dinats. its
loreign exchange portion is financed by the ﬂorid Bank and France; 8 million
«llnnrx were counted in l978.

h. Open pit exploitation of a new deposit at Kef Echfaist: Total cost.
37.6 million diners; 7 million dinars committed in 1978.

c. Modernization oi the mines of "'Dhilla (13.7 million diners), Hetlaoui

(2.7 million dinars). and Redeyef (2.9 million diners); 6 million dinars es-
timated in 1978.

d. For nonfetrous metals 2.5 million dinars were anticipated for 1978 making
possible the entrance of the Fej ﬂassine zinc mine into full production.

18
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

2. Energy

The Fifth Develop-ant Plan seems to have been albitious in this sector for
sole projects already are beginning to see the deadline for their realization
postponed.

a. Sousse thermal power station (300 legawatts: Cost. 70 nillion dinars
whose financing is provided by German and Austrian suppliers' credits; 13
nillion diners were estinsted in 1978 to continue the realization of this
project; the end of the first stage is set for 1980; the operation of the
power plant is to be by ssans of fuel oil pending natural gas fro. southern
Tunisia.

b. Installation of gas turbines in the cities of Sfax, Henzel Bourguiba.
and Hetlaoui. increasing the installed power from 390 segawatts (1976) to
860 megawatts (1981); cost, 13.5 Iillioa dinars of which 10.8 sillion di-
ners in foreign exchange to be financed in part by the World Bank and
suppliers' credit.

c. Exploitation of the Hiskar offshore gas: Total cost. 205 million di-
ners; an agree-ant was nsde between the Tunisian Government and the BRA?-
Aquitaine [Petroleum Exploration and Activities Enterprises-Aquitaine] group
for a studies and research progras.

As of 30 June 1978 10 sillion diners had already been connitted. but the
Tunisian Govern-ent decided to delay the realization of that project while
waiting to becose better acquainted with the reserves of the deposit and
the cost of gas extraction. This progran will start to be carried out only
if the boring of a single couple-entary well proves to be sufficient.

d. Extension of the Bizerte refining capacity (STIR [Tunisian-Italian Refin-
ing Cospanyl): Cost. 90 sillion diners; the study is under way and Tunisia
prefers to carry on this financial sacrifice and to continue to inort in-
expensive [crude] oil.

e. Conpletion of the water injection progras at the El Borne and Ashtart
oil fields: The last install-eat of 25.5 sillion diners was paid in 1978.

f. The year 1979 will witness the start-up of the laying of the Algerian-
Tunisian—ltnlisn intercontinental gas pipeline. A network of secondary gas
pipelines is planned so as to transport the gas fro. this supply source to
the consulption centers.

Ill. Hanufacturing industries
A. Agricultural and food industries

l. Kairouan tobacco cowplex.--Production estisated at 300 million packs a
year which will subsequently reach 530 million. Total cost. 21 sillion

19
FOR orncm. use any
diners of which 6.1 million dinars in the form of outside foreign exchange
crcdit slated for the acquisition of special equipment. Start-up of the
plant's operation: l98l. with a production of £0 million packs.

2. Construction of a new sugar rcfinery.--Unit capable of processing 600
tons of sugar beets daily (production capacity: 250,000 tons of sugar a
year). The cost continues to be undetermined. The technical study has been

presented for financing within the framework of technical cooperation with
Belgium.

3. Construction materials industries

1. Extension of the Bizerte cement plant increasing its capacity from 660,
000 tons a year. Estimated cost revised to 42 million dinars. Financing:
Contract with the Danish company of P. L. Smith (June 1976) for the supply
of equipment and German loan (KPH [Credit Development Bank!) of 133 million
Deutschmarka (Harch 1976).

2. western cement works.-—Annual capacity of 1.2 million tons of cement and
120,000 tons of artificial lime. Cost. 66 million dinars of which 70 percent
In the form of outside credit. An agreement concluded in July 1976 with the
French Fives-Cail-Dahcock company calls for the supply of the plant in turn-
key condition 59 months after the agreement went into effect (end l980).
Already. 14 million dinars were committed an of 31 December 1977 and 30
million diners were slated to be earmarked in 1978.

3. A cement works in central Tunisia (at Enfidha) with a capacity of 1 mil-
lion tons a year (3.000 tons of clinkers). Estimated cost: 71.5 million
dinnrs of which 50.5 million in the form of outside credit.

a. 1wo hydraulic lime plants with a capacity of 200,000 tons a year. Total
cost: 16 million dinars.

5. Other projects are under way or under study and hear on three quarries
(2.1 million diners). two brick kilns, tile plants. one prefabricated ele-
ments plant. a sixth cement works, a white cement works. a plateglass plant,
and a unit for the production of items in asbestos-cement at Bizerte (capa-
city: 21,000 tons a year beginning in 1979; cost. b.5 sillion diners).

c. Mechanical and electric industries

Even though important and anticipated under the Fifth Development Plan. the
prospects included in this sector are relegated to second rank on the scale
of priorities and will witness delay in their realization.

I. Construction of a mechanical complex for the production of diesel engines
and awchanical parts.

2. Extension of the Al-Fouiadh iron and steel plant's production capacity
to ZZSJKNitons in 1980 through the installation of a new electric furnace.
(bat: l0 million dinara of which 7 million in foreign credit.

20
FOR OFFICIAL U$£ ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

3. Increase in steel and iron production capacity. Cost: 200 million
dinara.

6. Construction of two plants at Sousae. one of them for the asseably of
light automobiles (8.000 a year) and the other for the trucking industry
(1.200 a year). Coat: 2.7 million dinars.

5. One production unit of flat rolled items as well as steel rings and
sections at Biaerte. Cost: 6 million diners; production: 100,000 tons a
year; financing: Tunisian banks. Inniaian and Italian industrialists.

6. The other projects involve a unit for the production of dry batteries

and electric equipment. the building of a aetnllic construction unit at Gabes
(3.1 million dinars). of another to produce sections at Mental Bourguiba

(3.5 million dinars). and completion of the building of a drilling platform
at Sousac.

D. Chonlcal industries

I. SBPA [Phosphated and Nitrogenous Fertilizer Company] project at Gabes.

For a total cost of 180.0 million diners. this project envisions construction
and exploitation of a complex for the production of phosphated and nitrogenous
fertilizers from natural resources (phosphate and gas).

The first stage: 82.5 million diners of which 60 million dinnrs in foreign
exchange. A contract was signed in June 1976 between SEPA and the French
firm of Meurtey Industries for the delivery of a turnkey plant (58.6 million
dinars). Abu Dhabi's participation is 50 percent. A sum of 25.1 million
dinars had been committed as of 31 December 1977 (30 percent of the project).
Putting into industrial service scheduled for September 1979.

2. The second stage (101.5 million dinars) is tied to the production of gas
offshore and will have to be postponed because of the uncertainties weighing
on this program.

3. Extension of the ICM [Chemical Industries of the Maghreb].
8. Textile industries

1. Increase of the production capacity of the Sousse spinning plant in order
that capacity may reach 5,500 tons and of the Ksar Relal [Mellal] weaving
plant to 8 million meters of indigo fabrics. These productions are planned
for export. Cost estimated at 5.6 million dinars.

Agricultural Investments: 109 Million Dinars in 1979
For Tunisia, the year 1979 should be an iaportant year for more than one

reason in the agricultural sector. It will constitute a kind of examination
which will consecrete the triuaph or failure of the agricultural policy.

21
FOR 0F?ICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

‘Ilmt is what L'ACTION, the Tunis daily, wrote in its issue of lo January 1979
on presenting the investment prograa of this sector for 1979.

Investments slated for agriculture for 1979 are in the order of 109 million
dinnra. that in. 20 percent more than in 1978 (90.2 Iillion diners).

If one wishes to break down these inveataents one finds that 50.9 million
dinars are earmarked to irrigation, 11.8 million to livestock raising,

5.5 million to tree cultivation. 15 million to agricultural equipment, 3.2
nillion to fishing. 6 aillion to forests and soil and vater conservation and
11.6 ailiion to various other agricultural activities.

Accordingly. the lion's share goes to irrigation because of the significance
of the projects under way (Sidi Salem and Sidi Sasdi dale) and new projects
(Hedjerds-Cap Bon Canal and outfitting of the liedjez El Bab-Testour region).

Sixty-seven percent of total investeents (73 million diners) originates from

the public sector and the rest, that is. 33 percent (36 alllion diners), fro-
the private sector.

0a in part. the Special Agricultural Develop-ant Fund should invest some
16 alliion dinars broken down as follows (in Iillions of dinars):

HF? [world Food Frogranl #82 project 1,000
Cernan Irrigation Fund 50
Special Fishing Development Fund 2.500

Project in cooperation with the Swedish Development Agency 200
laproveaent of irrigated public land laid out in cooperation

with the German Democratic Republic 100
Modernization of irrigation canals in the lower Medjerda
valley and the Nebhann region 700

Improve-ant of the productivity of anall- and intermediate-
sized agricultural farms at Beja, liabeul, Zaghouan, and

Siliana 750
Equipment for irrigation 1,700
Rural housing 500
Crops 600
lrrigatlon 1,000
Fodder 50
Forests and nail conservation 300

COPYRIGHT: Rene Morena et Cie., Paris, 1979

2662
C30: 6600

22
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

TUNISIA

DES‘IOURIAN PARTY PREPARBS CONGRESS , "008 700111
Paris MICHES TIDPICAUX 31‘ 160113me in French 9 Her 79 pp 611-612

[Text] President Bourquiba returned to Tunis on 10 January, after he had
long, effective medical sojourns in Switzerland, Prance and finally in the
Federal Republic of (bunny. in 1978. As usual. he was greeted by an en-
thusinntic crowd and he addressed the Misian people in n language suit-
able for stinulatinq their hopes and energy. In fact, no one is maware
of the fact that 1979 should be a decisive year for Tunisia. because of
the General Congress of the Destourian Socialist Party. For nany Tuni-
sian citizens, the "suprees fighter‘ will be the one who will give that
plenary meeting of the party its character. its strength and its direc-
tion. Many things may depend on those Desteurian sessions, regardless at
whether they confirm sore or less coepletely this kind of present status
quo that must foreshadow a “time after Bourguiba" without surprises or
shocks, or whether they will outline an evolution designed to renovate
the facts and developnent of political activity in Nnisia.

Some think that the slightest sim eade by President Bouguiba would suf-
fice to start the change. They do not rule out the (act that that nay
come about, in the coming nonths. In fact. the "swrsns fighter”. tar
tron withdrawing into an august retireeent, continues to follow, or ra-
ther. to guide public affairs, with an attention so keen that it often
ueens apprehensive. lt nay be thought that he will not rely entirely on
the "absolutely safe“ solution established by his care to assure the per-
petuity of the regiee. It is possible, therefore. to inagine that. under
none sudden inspiration. he say possibly introduce into the nestourian
machinery ideas or sen capable of upsetting the reassuring arrangement

of the present none, structures and provisions. Because 'Murguibiss,‘
for him. has never been synonymous with ”imbilisln." M episode like the
sudden reconciliation with Libya. several months ago, shows that he always
known how to impose his will. when the occasion arises suddenly and abruptly.

Nevertheless. these are nonconfornist opinions for which no official per-
son in Tunisia accepts responsibility. The present party machinery, to
which the governnent is closely tied. has absolute stability (or a 609a

23
ion nrncm. vs! mm
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and believes that its duty is to watch over it strictly. Moreover. every-
thing that has been mdertaken or everything that has happened during the
last few years else at or leads to making the slightest deviation or even
the slightest inflection ispossible. Although it is still understood that
any idea say be stbeitted within the party. in fact i ,e "liberals" and their
swathisers have been separated from its ranks and especially free its
executive organisations. Although it is still agreed that labor mionisn
may have opinions to propose. the purge that it underwent after the 26 Jan-
uary 1978 events will certainly not favor expression of origianl views.

The sysptons of evolution that night appear. nevertheless. within the PSD
[Destourian Socialist Party] and the 061T (Tunisian General Federation of
Labor] could only be slightly perceptible. at first. Therefore. in spite
of its redundant monotony. the development of internal political activity
in Tunisia will continue to he observed carefully. Sons: signs slight ap-
pear in it. in the course of time. But. without doubt. it would be im-
prudent to extrapolate too quickly and to regard any softening of language
or gesture of opening as significant.

Problems of a ”Changing Society" Treated Prudently

As anticipated. the Political Bureau of the Destourian Socialist Party
stresses right away the inportance of the current year. The proclaeation
co-sesnrating 18 January. the date marking. in 1952. "entrance by the na-
tional liberation mvenent into its decisive phase," provided it with the
opportunity to bring up the two principal events of the casing maths:
party congress and legislative elections. it does that by stressing pri-
eerily the role of the congress and of the party. It uses tens capable
of giving a strong iepression of stability and. at the same tin. of de-
sire for progress:

"The national congress of the party is the broader framworl: in which
the nation’s elite essuise responsibility. on behalf of the people. to
evaluate the nation's progress and to mark out the way in the country‘s
near and distant future. Because the nation has the right to require
the party to state its basic problem clearly. The 'Nnisian people. be-
came of their elabition and characteristics of vitality and action. still
aspire to a constantly better level. The authenticity of the Destourian
Socialist Party. the permanence of its mission and of its objectives. the
popularity of its structures and the nature of its mthods of working make
up the most appropriate framwork within which the active forces can act
on behalf of the people. in order to continue mving towerd progress and
prosperity and to ensure consistency and success. With regard to the le-
gislative elections. they will be an opportunity to evaluate legislative
activity and its direct effect on the functioning of state institutions
and their structures. as well as on the life of the cornunity and of its
sewers. The congress will be held on the scheduled date and will be
the beginning of a broad national dialog \mdertahen in every region and
at every level.“

?h
For nrrlcm. i'SIT om
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

“to prime minister. liedi Nouira. who spoke on the same day in the small city
of Nabeul. on the edge of the fertile Cap Don District. which has set an
exasgnle for the country‘s: other regions because of its wisdom. amered. as
usual. to the economic and social aspects of the govemusnt's activity. Also
as usual. he said that. on the whole. he was pleased with the results al-
ready obtained. we suggested that young persons visit other countries.

with a view to making a marison and to making a good “evaluation of the
scope of the action undertaken.“ But he ilIediately added some rsnsrks
that nake not a little room for the idea of novenent:

"Ne have reached a stage. both decisive and critical, the stage of an up-
surge on the economic. social and political leVels. because Tmisian so-
ciety is changing. That is why evolution must be nade parallelly on those
three levels."

Just an imdiately, In addition. the prime minister warned Tuninian so-
ciety. "whose asbitions are mnerous." not to disregard the fact that 'N-
nisia misses a nwnber of facts in economic evolution. because they depend
on the cost of inported equip-set and raw materials. "Therefore. we have
to sell. and. in order to sell. our products must be competitive. This
ahows that everything is interdependent." This observation was imdiately
noderated by another remark: an excessive nubsr of personnel is maintained
in sale nthinistrations and enterprises. with a view to safeguarding en-
ploynent. "more is a coral problem there that must not be lost fron sight.
Because politics is an indivisible whole.”

in this same order of ideas. lledi Nouira confimd the fact that the au-
thorities "give favorable consideration to everything that can imrovs
working conditions and facilitate thewage earners' task." In this con-
nection. he reconnended direct contact between the executives of enter-
prise: and their personnel. in a spirit of solidarity. Moreover. he did
not refrain from a final thrust against the regime's detractors who will
be countered by “its creative and constructive efforts.“

Therefore. in view of this speech. new social seasures. but prudently lini-
ted. should be expected. 1his will be the usual “April neeting.‘ But it
may possibly be wondrred whether there will be political evolution “paral-
Iclll. as one passage in that speech seam to announce.

The use and Youth

No other sign has cover. up to now. to corroborate this very slight indi-
cation. On 22 February. President Bourguiba received the director of

the 950. Mohamed Sayah. minister delegate attached to the prime minister.
The party chief announced that the party has 765.3'0 meters. or 200,000
more than in I977. He reported on preparation for the congress and re-
ported that the president has recassuended esphasizing national rarity in
the party's education and orientation activities.

25
ma nrncut VS!" -i\'l.\'
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

0n the following day. Hedi Nouira presided over a joint nesting of the Po-
litical Bureau and of executives of uses organisations. "is speech. ex-
clusively econonic and social in nature. is another presentation of the
action mdertahen by the government. of the obstacles encountered. of the
reasons for continuing with the greatest prudence. For various reasons.
including the "January I978 tragedy.“ Tunisian econonly has progressed less
than expected (gross doeeetic product 5.7 percent. instead of 7.8 percent)
and conausption increased still sore (8 percent. instead of 6.6 percent)
to the detrimnt of savings.

Onthe other hand. noting increases in wages and salaries that went beyond
the increase in prices. the prim minister recon—ended restraint of con-
swuion. He stated that the 0611' ”will have to protect work more than

the workers.“ and the other organizations will have to join in this action
by making an effort to create the greatest nuber of jobs. he put special
esphasis on the need for guaranteeing young persons "a job that will enable
then to be incorporated in society.” because. as he added with a sudden
touch of pessisiisn. "the day will cons when those who haves job. regardless
of how snail it is. will be happy in coaparison with those who have no job."

This attention paid to the problems of youth will be especially noted. ﬁiie
kind of direction is certainly not new in “Nnisis. but from now on it is
certified with a cospletely remarkable vigor and continuity. Horeover.
although the P80 is at the bottoa of this effort on behalf of young per-
sons. it does not always give it a “partisan“ slant. The problea is taken
up and treated froe various. cosplessntary points of view.

The niniater of national education. hohansasd Hull, who frequently tackles
these problens of youth before teachers and party officials. but also be-
fore young persons thenselves at the tine of school youth congresses. con-
nented on the sins of the teaching reform being imlemnted at present.
This reforn intends to open upschools better to the industrial and agri-
cultural environmnt. for the purpose of tying education to employ-ant
and thus giving it an ”is—ediately mrationn‘ chic-rim." no that valid
openings nay be obtained for students. Education seeks. therefore, to
adapt itself to the peculiarites and possibilities of each region and to
meet the needs revealed by the job market and by local economic develop-
mnt.

Pro. this point of view. prinery education is changed into "fundanental
education“ that. owing to its extension in the seventh and eighth year.
prepares young persons to go straight into active life. it is being
stated now that the too theoretical education of fomr tines kept edu-
cation at a distance fro. the social environ-cut is which it was ad con-
tributed to a resoval of the students free their surroundings. A train-
ing adapted to local situations and to jobs available or created on the
spot will favor. on the other hand. attechnent of the student and family
stability.

26
FOR m‘ncm. vsr om
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Moreover. it is advisable -- and the minister in charge of the Plan, Nous-
tai‘a Zabbiybu, readily stresses this, for development projects not to sin
newly at inproving living conditions. but for then to be inspired. on a
priority basis, by a desire to create jobs. The Destourian executives and
officials plead in favor of jobs in agriculture. in handicrafts, in nanual
trades. The insistence with which they recomnd concrete mssihilities of
modest but probably stable earnings is striking.

in this connection, civil service is often described as asking it possible
toenhance manual work in the eyes of young persons who perform it to the
benefit of the nation and who regard it. therefore, as more noble. Never-
theless. Hohasssed Hull, in turn, also points out political training of
young persons as necessary. When he laid the cornerstone of a high school
in Ouardenine. in the Sahel. on 22 January. he stated that it will be no-
cessary to help young persons fill thc void that they feel deeply and to
train then spiritually and materially so that they will be able to protect
the nation against any destructive ain, ”regardless of where it cones from."

This political training nust be broad and open. It is desirable for it to
be carried out by way of dialog. A proeinent person. often portrayed as
authoritative, ”aha-ed Sayah. director of the party. stated. on 20 Jan-
uary, before the Yomg Destourians in Xalaa Kebira. in the Sahel, that no-
thing must prevent young persons fro- tackling all problems and fro- be-
coning aware of all theories. Misian youth will be able to differentiate
between good and bad and to make judicious choices.

nut sore ”directive“ guidelines can also be recorded. Tijani Hakni, de-
puty and mayor of Sfax, nerber of the Political Bureau of the '50. stated,
when he addressed the Youth Congress of the South sfax cell on 21 January.
that it is incubent of that organization to 'polarise" yomg persons, to
ensure then of a sound political training and to involve them in ths work
of development. when sleheddine Baly, minister of Justice. nssber of the
PSI.) Political Bureau. presided over the Youth Congress of the Destourian
cell of the City of Tunis. on 16 February. he urged that organization to
make young persons aware of the party's principles. ' Mien nahnoud Charchour.
assistant director of the party, addressed the School Youth in Sousss. on
17 February. he stressed the role that youth mst play in making yomg per—
sons aware and in training than in a knowledge of the nation's choices and
of the party's ideology. The party ”never ceases calling on youth not to
confine theuelves in purely denanding attitudes'I (L‘ACTION. 23 January).
It also seen absolutely necessary to the editorial writer of the party‘s
newspaper (L'ACTION. 2 February 1919) ”to provide young persons with a po-
litical training that will teach them to revolt at extremists and to adhere
to constructive dialog and to respect for others.“

Slaheddine Baly concluded. besides. that by opening up to young persms,
the party is deciding in favor of renovating its structures. and its 10th
congress "will make it possible to deters-inc the shape of the eedian so-
ciety that we are working to build." And Pu'ad Hebazsa. minister of
Ptblic Health and also a senber of the Political Bureau. stated before

27
FOR orncx-u. I'sr om
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the lane audience that "every recounndatlon to be euhaitted to the con-
greee will aim at giving preference to youth."

In the eyoe of the Deetourian leadere. the increaeing influx of young per-
eone ie the problem of the inediate future. 1hemfore. an increaeed train-
ing effort in canto-plated. Tmieian structures ieply that thie training
be given within the party framework. from thoee political aepecte. But

it ie not eure that the rieke of authoritarianien and of militarization
concealed by theee pointe of View will alwaye be perceived clearly.

0091mm: lune Horeux et Cie. Parie, 1919

10,042
(280: 4400

28
FOR OFFICIAL cs: 0va
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

TUNISIA

BRIEFS

MU AOUANE MINERAL DEPOSITS--At the tile of the visit that the governor of
Jendouho Governorete nude on 26 January 1979 to the Boo Aouane lining region.
the director of the nine disclosed that a study had confined the existence
of zinc and lead ore renervee estimated at 6 million tone that will unite it
possible to continue the exploitation for e 17-year period. Production of
the Boo Aouane lines. which now have 821 perunent writers. was eetinated

at 8.500 tone in 1978. It is projected that it will increase to 10.500 tone
in 1979 and to 15.500 tone in 1980. The acquisition of modern equip-eat
which Is envisioned should make poooible better exploitation and the process-

ing of products before their export. [Text] [Paris HARGIBS TROPICAUX 31'
HEDI‘I‘ERMNBENS in French 16 Feb 79 p “2] 2662

C50: 1:600

29
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"3872!“ SAHARA

POLISMIIO'S MAIN All! To "IN “NORTH“ nun-rm VICI'ORIBS
Madrid MIG 16 in Spanish 18 Her 79 pp 54-55, 57

[Test] it was an iqmessive sight. Coluns of islpeccably-milornsd sol-
diers filed past the main reviewing stand. Behind than. a long line of
jeeps carrying ultrauodern sachine gms, sophisticated antinircraft eateriel
and trudts bearing 106 u recoilless rifles raised clouds of sand. Md
move the din made by the passing soldiers and engines there was the con-
stant shouting of the woesn waving the flags of the Saharan Desocratic Arc:
mpmlic [BOAR].

It we the third anniversary or the birth of the reprblic, and for those,
such as M10 16's special correspondent Lia levit, who had witnessed pre-
vious ceresonics there was a marked change: An any. rather than eager
guerrilla groups, was marching in review. Koreover, the repdalic was sou-
what sore than a hope of becoming a cowlex of institutions and the infra-
structure of a carefully organized national state.

"We have won the battle for existence. and now we are resolutely mdertaking
the struggle for independence.“ a spokes-an for the son told M10 l6.

He also revealed that Pousuuo strategy has two prongs: diplolstic activity,
reflected in negotiations with uauritania and Norocco. and Iilitary activity.
"min is the year in which we go after the Moroccan Any. how we'll carry
the war to the heart of Horocco.“

1he Diplosutic Struggle

There is no question that the rousmo Pront’s ﬁllity to achieve these
military objectives directly depends on export tro- Algeria. Regarding
this. the entire process of finding a successor to President Bomdiene has
witnessed endorsement or the Saharan cause by the various factims of the
National Liberation Front.

The musmo's strategic objectives in the unitary sphere entail the
genuine danger or direct controntation between Algeria and Morocco (See
M10 16, No 316). Alar- concerning this has already been expressed in

30
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

seen Arab capitals. Following the events in Iran. the repercussions of which
are being felt throutmout the region. the confrontation between Yemen and

the Yemn Arab Mpmlic has disturbed the Arab league. of which Morocco and
Algeria are sewers.

At the league noting hold to foruelize the cease-fire in Yemen an effort
was again nade to establish a policy forbidding warfare among Muslin com-
tries.

Nevertheless, Algeria's coqlete support for the POLISARIO gives significance
to Horocco'a annomced intention to "exercise the right of pursuit to the
enely's bases." mat is, to pursue the Saharan guerrillas to their quarters
on the Algerian border.

International Backing

It is within this context that the widespread international support received
by the pousamo Front has considerble iaportance.

While within a week Ethiopia and Vietnam recognized the SDAR. in 'i'eheran
the Ayatollah Khenyni received a delegation from the POLISARIO Front. pro-
nieing its nelbers his country's full support in the struggle. Khomeyni's
worth, caning on the SDAn's third anniversary. reinforced the POLISARB’J
leaders“ decision to intensify during the coating Ionths the struggle being
carried out at all levels by the Saharans to obtain independence for the
former Spanish colony.

"Following this third anniversary we Saharms are going to achieve the con-
plete liberation of our territory,“ Mohamed Lamineudiairlean of the SDAR
Comcil of Hinisters--said emphatically during the festivities held at the
encamnent south of Tindouf.

'l'he Saharan prim minister's annomceunt coincides with the intensification
of the eilitary operations co-posing the 'Houari Domediene offensive.“
lamched by the POLISARIO Front on 1 January. which had made its deepest
thrust on 23 January with the occupation, within 4 daylight hours. of the
Moroccan city of Tan-Tan. Having suspended the war on the southem front
because of the cease-fire declared in Mauritania. the POLISARIO Pront has
thrown all its effort into the war in the north, against Morocco.

Delaying Tactics

“We've given the new Mauritanian leadership a golden opportmity to asst-e
its responsibility; but although the train is loving. tin is. too, and
nothing has been achieved yet.” Lamina charged. The Saharan leader bland
the new neuritanian Governunt for the stalemate in negotiations, asserting
that it was practicing delaying tactics, although it had repeatedly said
that its country had no interests to defend in the western Sahara. Lenine

31
FOR OFFICIAL HS}: ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL "SI-2 0le

revealed that Mohamd Abdolazis--secretary general of the FOLISARIO Front--
had held talks with ﬂuid Saleck, president of Mauritania, "in the presence
or a senior Ard: official.” The best guess is Libyan Hu‘a-aar Qadtdhafi.
Moreover, mine said, high “officials close to uassan u not with represen-
tatives of the POLISARIO Front in an African capital," recognizing the sov-
ereimty of the Saharan people.

”We don't want war,“ Lamina said, "and that is why we have launched a cam-
paign for peace in the region. If the peace is ruptured, we won't be respon-
sible. Despite everything it has said, Mauritania is continuing to fight,

for it is still occupying our territory." Lanine declined to set a deadline
for the expiration of the cease-fire if the negotiations with Mauritania do
not produce concrete results. He also withheld the nature of the talks with
Morocco. although the latter did acknowledge the fact of his group's existence

Recently there has been widespread talk about the possibility of creating a
Saharan mini-state in the region occupied by Mauritania; but the Saharan
leaders have rejected this idea outrigwt. "Our people are fighting for con-
pleto liberation, and they reject any division intended to destroy national
mity.” they said.

In view of the presence of over lo delegations from Asian, African and latin
American countries and of nearly 100 representatives of political parties
and liberation novenents located throughout the world. Lasine lamented

Saudi Arabia's and lraq’s support of Hassan 11, "who is using noney fro-

a Muslim people to exterminate another Muslin people.”

The Saharan prise sinister also criticized Spain and France. "mtil now,“
he noted, "the only role that Spain has played has been the one it chose
when it signed the hateful tripartite Madrid pact. He hope that it will now
play a role which will erase the dishonor." 01 15 February the French Gov-
ernnnt spoke of the Saharan issue--i'or the first tissues a "proble- of
decolonisation." Saharan leaders considered this an indication of notable
progress, although they observed that the error "lies in believing that
there's a problem along Spain, Morocco and France. he only problss is the
one the Saharan people are having with those aggressing against than.“

1he Algerian Caverns-ant used the salsa language in its vigorous protest on
rejecting the terms of the statement by French officials proposing a net-

ing with representatives of Algeria to discuss the issue of the Western
Sahara.

While disclaining participation in the conflict. Algeria-which sent a
large delegation to the festivitiesureitentad its support of the Saharan
people's cause. in a letter addressed to Hauritanian President Ould
Saleck, chadli Bendjedid, the new Algerian head of state, urged Mauritania
to “satisfy the legitimate aspirations of the Saharan people” as a mans
of strengthening the bonds between Algeria and nauritania.

32
FOR OFFICIAL lfSE ONLY
FOR ONICIM. USE ONLY

1079. the Year of Morocco

Mhile in recent eenths the tide of the diploeatic battle scene to have turn-
ed in favor of the Saharan cause. Morocco has experienced, especially in re-
cent weeks. internal social wheavals which aggravate its isolation. The
presence of the shah of Iran and the recent defection of a form: deputy and
a Moroccm lieutenant to the POLISMIIO Front have helped to worsen matters.

hollowing a fruitless trip to Paris, uassan II had to acknowledge that after
10 years of his rule, the comtry was facing a critical situation. With a
productivity level of scarcely 50 percent of capacity. Morocco, which has

a pepulation of less than 20 million. has over 1 million unemployed and an
annual inflation rate of sees 15 percent, while wage increases are less than
10 percent.

'ihe governmnt and the opposition agree that the war in the Sahara is a
cancer which is devouring the Moroccan economy. Moreover, this mass of
wealth being consmed by the war has grown since the POLISMIIO Front began
its "Mouari Boundiene offensive" on 1 January. Every day the Moroccan
Army receives painful blows at various bases in areas it occupies in the
Sahara and. sore recently. in Moroccan territory itself.

The Saharan leaders state that their forces now control all of the territory
except for bases and cities. which Morocco is able to provision only by sea.

armim Gtali Ould Mostefa, SMR minister of defense. said. ”when we began the
arsed struggle we had only seven or eight game which we took from Spanish
soldiers.“ when over 3,000 fighters for the Pousamo Front marched in re-
view on 27 February in honor of the third anniversary of the proclanation

of the seas. they displayed before the press an imressive collection of
area-ant taken. they say. free the Moroccan arsed forces. French, Spanish
and Aserican equipsent passed the reviewing stand. Aromd 100 had mvers
bearing lechine guts and trucks carrying 106 In cannons evidenced the notwle
inroveoent in the quality of the anamnt used by the Saharan People’s
Liberation Arty. which even used missiles in the offensive against the Moroc-
can city of Tan-Tan.

"Iit present,“ the defense minister said. "the Moroccan Army has over 70.000
soldiers. to which ”hould be added soee 20,000 citizens recruited for the
Green March." Me estimated that nearly 1,000 Moroccan soldiers have been
killed since the beginning of the "Houari Boundiene Offensive.“

“For us this year. 1979, will be the year of Morocco and. were precisely.
that of the Moroch aned forces.” the defense minister concluhd ewhati-
cally.

1he journalists present at the celebration of the third anniversary of the
seas were taken on a rapid tour of an enca-peent in the “wilaya' (province)

33
FOR orrzctan. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

uf :‘mmarn. Distributed for over 200 kilometers along the border between
the Western Sahara and Algeria, the 'dairas" (encammntn) are grouped into
three wilayan: El helm. Dakhla and Samara, each of which is administered by
a 'wali" (govarnor). There are now 22 dairas, each with a population of
between «000 and 7,000 people.

A daira is led by a people's cannittee having sis newborn. Five are in
charge of other committees and one is an administrator who votes in the
daira people's asselbly. The five comittees are responsible for what are
considered the most isportant tasks: child care, food supply, justice,
craftwork and health.

The population of the encamsents consists largely of woman, the elderly
and children, who are organized into cells which meet twice a week.

in accordance with the national education plan, each daira has a school
which offers preschool and priuary training. The 9 of Jun: Sdiool serves
the entire nation, and children can cosplete their studies there. Although
its buildings have not been finished. 1,100 children (of the 2,000 antici-
pated) are already receiving instruction in Arabic and Spanish. 'iherc are
24 classronus, each with a capacity of so students, with classes being con-
ducted by (omr students, teenagers belonging to the pousuuo Front.

Like education. health care is suaject to national planning. When we visit-
ed the National hospital, Salek Ould Boujaha, the minister of health, said,
“Each deira and each wi laya has a camittes on health, and each wilaya has

a clinic as well as access to this recently-opened National Hospital.“

1he hospital, with a Goo-patient capacity. now has only 300 beds. mgarding
this, the sinister of health noted that in soon instances international as-
sistance has; not set expectations. He said that a major difficulty is the
scarcity of vehicles for the transportation of patients from the dairas to
the hospital.

”People receive not only radical care here,“ the minister said, “but the
hospital also gives sick people and maternity patients courses in reading.”

Although it contains a special roots for it, the hospital does not have an
operating theater because it lacks the necessary equipment.

Despite the linited facilities. Salek Ould Boujaha said he was satisfied
with the results. "The health care situation,“ he resarked, "cmnot be
separated from our people's evolution in all spheres. Between 1975 and
1976 we had to face the prablen caused by the exodu. mousands of people
who left the cities for liberated territory. He had to confront problem
with almost nonexistent facilities. Now we can state that our health care
systee has taken a large step forward.“

COI'YRIOITX 1979 CWIO 16

9085 END
cso: «10 3"
FOR nrrtcm. I15}: om