APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00860R000200020038-0
Near East/North Africa Report

No. 2046

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. interials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[l are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Hhere no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Hords or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the U.S. Government.

PROCUREMENT OF PUBLICATIONS

JPRS publications may be ordered from the National Technical
Information Service, Springfield, Virginia 22161. In order-
ing, it is recommended that the JPRS number, title, date and
author, if applicable, of publication be cited.

Current JPRS publications are announced in Government Reports
Announcements issued semi-monthly by the National Technical
Information Service, and are listed in the Monthly Catalog of
0.8. Government Publications issued by the Superintendent of
Documents, u.s. Government Printing Office, Hashington, n.c.
20602.

Indexes to this report (by keyword, author, personal names,
title and series) are available from Bell a Howell, Old
Mansfield Road, Wooster, Ohio 60691.

Correspondence pertaining to matters other than procurement
may be addressed to Joint Publications Research Service,
1000 North Glebe Road, Arlington, Virginia 22201.
It. Awlu! (Lu-m: 200 Ml

This serial report contains intonation on socioeconomic, government. political.
and technical developments in the countries of the Near East and North Africa.

:7. Guam MIWI a Out-unto

Political Science x_Inter-Arab Affairs _Libya LSultanate
Sociology _North African _Hauritania of Oman
Economics Affairs LHorocco _Syria
Culture (Soeial _Afghanistan _P'eop1e a Deno- _’l‘uniaia
Sciences) ___Algeria cratic Republic _x_United Arab

Ethnology Lnahrain of Yemen Emirates
Geography _Egypt _Peraian Gulf __Heatern Sahara
Technological x_ Iran Area _x_Yenen Arab
Military Sciences _Iraq _Qatar . Republic

x_Iarae1 x__ Saudi Arabia

_Jordan __Spanish North

x_Kuuait Africa

x Lebanon Sudan

5. um-r-«IM-ema You»:

I COSMH’WIWa 5D. SC, 5K. 15
ll. {vat-suit

Unlimhc'dm Availability

Sold by NT 18 at. MOI-u um um nl'rm
Springfield, Virginia 22161 UNCLASSIFIED

mama” w a. mum». on M mom. m an (4-1"
cum-m mus-m

MM .0 “Ila-no.

   
 

IO. M elm (1N! M II. No. It
UNCLASSIFIED 1N5.
NEAR EAST/NORTH AFRICA REPORT

~ No. 20“

CONTENTS

Im-ARAB AFFAIRS

Arab Gulf St'ltes Bear Strain of Regional Conflicts
(Salim al-Lavzi; AL-BARADITB, 5 Oct 79)

OPE: Agrees To Increase LDC Aid
(THEARAB WORLD my, 13 Oct 79)

Arab Gulf States Dem Shi'ite Rumblings
(nu: Hashim; arm AL-‘ARABI HA AL-DWAIJ,

7 001': 79 ooooeoocaoooooooa...ooooo-eoooooouooevbooo

lsr ie (‘5
PLO-Iranian Di fferenccs

mo, Mossad Plan Palestinian's Death
Arabs Fear Israeli Nuclear Test

BAHRAIN

Opposition and Resentment Against Government Identified
('Adil "111111.; All-mum!’ 17 Sep 79) ooooooooievocv

PFLB Louder C‘nim Dozens Arrested by Government
(AL-m, 20 &p 79) ocoooooo-oooo'voooceoo-cvcoco.

PPLB Discusses Possibilities of Escalated Political
Struggle in Country
('Abd-al-Rahmn al-Nu'aymi Interview; AL—HURRIYAH,

1 mt 79) 0000.0a...3.000.000.00000000090000.0000...

Millions of Dinars Contributed to Kordestan Disturbances
(mm'm, 21 Aug 79) no.0...oooooooovuoo-ooeoooooo
comms (Cont inued)

Yazdi Leaves for Havana Nonalined Conference
(mm'u, 26 Aug 79)

Front of the Oppressed, Nonalined Conference Examined
(mu, :1 Sep 79)

Postponement of Second Gas Pipeline Praised
(W, 11 sep 79) eessences-00.00000oeeoo'oealaee

ISRAEL

Retrospective on Yom Kippur War Presented
(E11 Fleinwsh; AL mm, 28 Sep 79)

KUMI'I‘

'AL-ANBA' Consents on al-Asad's Moscow Talks
(m, 19 OCt ”) eooeIe'Iooeeaoeaeeeoeeee00-000...

Single Arab Policy Viewed as One-Dimensional, Shortsighted
(Editorial, Henry Haunti; AL-cuuaAs, 22 Sep 79).....

Arab's Hurry for Palestinian Solution Criticized
(Editorial, Henry Bamti; AL-oms, 23 Sep 79).....

Jordanian, Palestinian, Lebanese Agreement lauded
(mitoriﬂ; “I'm, 26 Sep 79) eeeoeeeaeoeeeeooee

Census To Be Conducted in Rebruary 1980
(mm, 2? ﬁp 79)....000000000000000000.0.0.0..

Briefs
Plan To Centralize Oil Industry

LEBANON

Public Security Director Announces Personnel Transfers
(AL-m, 3 0C1: n) cocooneaeolaooeeeeeeoeeoleeoao

WOO

Central Committee Issues Commique Following
30 September keting
“mum, 5'11 M '79) eeeeooeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeno
comms (Continued)

USF'P Sec (‘u-n BOuabid Addresses Meeting of Central
COInmlLLOv
(Abderrahim Bouubid; LIBERATION, 5-11 on 79)

SAUDI ARABIA
Amir Sultan Interviewed on Austria Visit
(run 'A‘ud al-‘Aziz Interview; AL-WSI‘AQBAL,
22 Sep '19)ooieoooeeooooeeonooeOeueoeoeeeoonlooul

Press Criticizes Attitude of Millionaires
(AL-“HABIT“, 28 Sep 79) eoee'eeeeoeooeeeeeeooeee

Briefs
Port Deve lopment

SULTANA'I'E OF (MAN

Electrical Projects Spread in Administrative Regions
('IMAN, 1 Sep 79) coooeeeeeoeoeeoeoeoeeoooeoooeoe

Thamrit-Salalah Road Project Begins
(‘m‘, 2 wt '79) 0.00....IOIIOOOOIOOOOIIOOOOOCO.

UNITED ARAB EMIRATES

Um Shaif Boosts Offshore Production
('m: ARAB mam my, 13 Oct 79)

Dubai Police Stations Linked ‘oy Arabic Teleprinters
(mmﬁ ms,2 mt n) OOOIOOIIOICIOOOOIIOOOOO

Dubai's Imports Rise by 30 Percent
(mm: was; MATE nuts, 11 Oct 79)

YFMEN ARAB REFJBLIC

Soviet Arms Said Shipped to Country
(“l-MHADH‘H, 28 Sep 79) IOIOOOOOOIOOOOCOOOIOOOI.

Agreement With Chinese Construction Company Signed
(WWW, 3 Sep 79) oneoeeeooeee'eoeeeeeoeeeeo
ARAB GULF STATE BEAR STRAIN 01’ ”£10th CONFLICTS

London AL-HAHADITH in Arabic 5 Oct 79 pp 20-21

[Article by Salim al-Lawzi: "No Change in the Regiaes Foreseen for Next 2
Years, Except a Heakening of Their Decision-Making Mere”)

[Text] For the fourth time in 3 weeks. Egyptian policies have recently
forced theuselves on the attention of the Baghdad sunnit states, stirring up

hurriedly contacted the Jordanian march, but were reassured that the
Byptian president's statenent was incorrect. Some of the Gulf states even
rushed to fulfill their financial obligations to Jordan ahead of schedule.
The second tine was when President al—Sadat announced that Egypt stands by
Morocco and is prepared to send nilitary forces to support King ﬁassan
against threats from Algeria and the Polisario. Suddenly, a host of Arab
rulers descended on Rabat, severally and collectively-«one had even cut
short vacations they were spending in Dnropeuin an atteupt to put out the
fire in the western Sahara so as to prevent the possibility of any Byptian
intervention in the Algerian-broccoli dispute. The third time was when a
Lebanese source, one that is rather extensively hnwledgeable about conditions
in the Arab world, stated that there is no truth to reports that Lebanon
will Joint the Camp David accords. Suddenly, Arab states, which had tepidlv
received the call by Lebanese President Elias Sarkis to hold an Arab
conference to discuss the Israeli aaression against southern Iebanai,
wasted no time in announcing that the holding of an Arab sunnit was now sore
necessary than ever because the situation in the ubmese south constitutes
a threat to the attire Arab region. The fourth tine was last Vednesday, 26
Septenber, when Husni Muzbarak. the Egyptian vice president, said that Iranian
threats against Bahrain are an act of folly which threatens the security of
the Gulf and should be firmly and strongly confronted. and that Egypt is
willing to discuss nahrain's needs to defend itself against such threats.

In so doing, Egypt was upstaging Iraq which 2’: hours earlier had declared
that Iran's fingers will be chopped off if they were to touch any Arab part
of the Gulf. Only hours after Mubarak's statements, all the Gulf states
eagerly declared their support for Bahrain.
And so Arab politics returned to the methods and language of the 1950s in
their attenpt to tackle the problems of the 1980s. Cold war methods were
revived to become the striking force of the new Egyptian diplomacy in its bid
to re-classify the Arab states which reJect the Camp David accords.

Hhile this diplomacy has not overstepped the expected limits in the nan-oil-
producing countries. it is exacerbating the confusion, disarray and fragien-
tation besetting the Gulf region. James Schlesinger, the former American
secretary of energy and defense secretary and a for-er number of the national
Security Council. had cautioned about the inherent dangers in the turmoil
engulfing the Gulf, only 3 days before an attempt was made to set off a
sectarian strife in Kuwait and Bahrain. What he said was that "the danger

posed to the oil wells does not stem from the possibility of a Soviet domination
of the region, but from the likelihood of disintegration in the region and

the spread of the Iranian brand of chaos in it."

Before Schlesinger. Richard Helms. former director of the American Central
Intelligence Agency (who now manage a public relations firm in Washington).
made renarks that alnost coincide with reaarks contained in an article
published in the Soviet newspaper NEDELYA. Helm said: "Iran is rapidly
heading for the laps of the left. nomyni's revolution has failed to develop
into a modern force capable of dealing with the dynamic leftist organisations.
It has succeeded in bringing down the ash but has not succeeded in grasping
power." The Soviet newspaper in turn said: "'Ihe theocratic government in
Iran has failed to establish a state. Instead of dealing with anarchy and
unemployment and improving the conditicns of workers, it is instead
slaughtering the Kurds."

Regardless of the different terns used to describe the danger threatening
the Gulf, its security, its states and its oilo-oil is the most important
factor here--observers in the area believe that there are five major sources
of danger. They are:

1. The disintegration of authority in Iran. and the actions of some
"ayatollahs" who have opened their own [political] stores either to serve
certain foreign agencies or promote petty opportunistic interests or out of
an impulsive ignorance of the region's affairs. A call such as the one

made by Ayatollah Sadiq Ruhani to foster a revolutionary movement in Bahrain
can only lead to the results predicted by Schlesinger, Balms and the Soviet
newspaper NBDELYk-that is. the exportation of chaos and sedition to the
Gulf states under the slogan of "exporting the Dialeynist revolutiar." Also,
demands by spokesmen of linen lOaaneyni to bring to trial Hassan lasih,
president of the National Iranian Oil Company, are no more than an attenpt
to replace specialists with Iranian revolutionaries who want to gobble up
the oil after they have devoured authority in the name of "the revolution."
Such a breakdown in authority will lead to serious consequences which nay

be used to mount subversive actions in the oil fields.

2. The leftist trade unions' control of oil workers. especially in the
Abadan area. A strike in the Iranian oil fieldsna likely prospect—seam
a stoppage in the exportation of Iranian oil, in other words, a new economic
catastrophe far worse than the catastrophe faced by the western nations before
the last ’0 months. The question which seems to force itself upon the dis-
cussions of "eaten and Japanese industrial circles is: ”when will the Soviet
Union play the card it holds in Abadan? "

3. The possibility of blowing up an oil tanker in the Hormuz Straits, thus
disrupting the oil traffic in the straits. This possibility has been
previously cited by Ahmad Zaki Yamani. the Saudi oil Minister, in a press
Statement which he made after the OPEC meeting in Geneva. It is this pos-
sibility which has nude Lloyds, the British insurance company. declare the
Gulf region a war zone, in other words refine to insure oil tankers. The
British firm cannot afford to sustain a stiff loss equivalent to the compen-
sation payment on. say. a 500,000-tan tanker which may be blown up by radical
elements in the Koran: Straits thus blocking the flow of oil.

in. The ailitary force trained and prepared in Aden under the supervision

of Communist experts and estzmated at about 35,000 men. It was believed that
this force was readied for the purpose of stirring events in the- region,
either in the direction of northern Yemen to secure Saudi Arabia's recognition
of the Soviets'right to maintain a presence in the region. even if a cureial
one only, or in the direction of the Sultanate of Dunn which has been building
up its military forces following the security agreement it has concluded with
the United States. But after the agreement between 'Ali Salih. the President
of northern Yemen. and 'Abd al-Pattah Isma'il, the Adeni head of state, reached
in Kuwait several months ago--an agreement which was later reflected in

the Soviet Union's decision to resuae supplying northern Yunen with the

latest types of weapons and which nde observers expect a settlement of the
outstanding issues between the two Yemens under the supervision of the
Soviets—the Adeni military force became fully targeted against the Sultanate
of Oman. in other words, against the entrance to the Gulf. The decision by
southern Yemen and Saudi Arabia to reJect Chan's plan for the protection of

the Hormuz Straits has had the effect of tightening the Arab siege of man.

thereby increasing the likelihood of the expected blowup between Aden mad
man.

5. The statements made by some leaders of the Palestinian resistance move-
ment, which have been classified by sane studies within the category of
"worst case possibilities" and which have been ascribed to the existing
alliance between Khomeyni and Yasir 'Arafat. At the press conference he
held during his visit to Spain a month ago, the PLO leader was asked whether
he believed that oil is a political weapon. ’Arafat answered: "It is our
right to use the economic weapon which we have in our hands. This is a
legitimate right exercised by many nations. The united States used it against
Cuba and China and, therefore. has no right to ask us why do we use it
ourselves. The question of energy is linked to the Palestinian question and
the two cannot be separated." western circles related this statement to a
story attributed to Yasir 'Arafat to the effect that the PID alliance with
the Khomeyni revolutian has metaphorically become something akin to a falcon
used to scare the bastards [a bird related to the crane]. The Palestinian
-Iranian alliance is now having reflections on the opposition movements not
only in the Gulf states but within Iraq too.

If we were to add to those five sources of danger threatening the Gulf a
number of other minor factors, such as the errors comitted by authorities
dealing with troubles, the tribal and sectarian complexes governing official
behavior and the anbitions and fears which obsess the regimes. we find before
us a mosaic of clashing colors and overlapping lines where it becomes
difficult to distinguish between buffer zones and minefields.

It is in such an atmosphere that the question of the Gulf security is being
revived. It is clear, however. that discussion of this subject lacks depth
even in the specialized Journals whhre we find that traditional and conven-
tional thinking is the prevailing norm and the dominant mode of interpreting
and analysing the plans. ideas and solutions being bandied about in the area.
The Sultanate of man which 10 days ago proposed the establishment of a Gulf
defense pact that would embrance, in addition to the Arab Gulf states and
Iran, the United States, Britain and West Germany (Onan later backed down
from this proposal). understands the security of the Gulf as one of defense
against Conunist threats-4s if the Soviets intend to attack the oil wells
or send occupation forces or dispatch a commando force to block the Horaus
Straits. Indeed, NEWSWEEK has reported that Sultan Qabus has applied for
Arab aid to big minesweepers to clear the waters of the Hornus Straits in
the event of "Moscow agate" asbedding then with mines. The magazine said

that the sultan would have to seek help from American experts if the Arab
states failed to respond to his request.

Iraq has wasted no tile in seizing this opportunity to ride the wave begun
by the Shah of Iran after the withdrawal of the British forces from the
Gulf. the wave which is premised on the armmt that the security mum
in the Gulf should be filled by the states of the region, that these states
are able on their own to defend the region. Iraq has also contended that
man's plan mounts to a revival of foreign nilitary pacts in the region.
Iran, meanwhile, sowed quickly. The Iranian fleet carried out military
maneuvers and Tehran Radio announced that the Iranian revolution is
singularly capable of protecting the Gulf in the interests of the peoples
of the Gulf. not in the interests of foreign powers as the ﬂash used to do.

If we were to lay aside all this verbal war and ponder the real neaning of
the Gulf security. we will find that there are two concepts in this
connection which are, in fact. two sides of the same coin. hey are:

1. Protection of the regimes frat sabotage and infiltration. This cancept

is embodied in the security cooperation accord concluded between Iraq and
Saudi Arabia as well as the security cooperation and coordination which
already exist among Saudi Arabia. Abu mabi and Bahrain a) the basis of
exchanging information and advisers and setting up nonitoring and surveillance
procedures. This concept of security does not view the dangers posed to

the Gulf from a military perspective but sees such dangers lurking in
possible sabotage and infiltration in areas with open borders.
2. Advance control and supervision in the oil areas. In this context, some
Gulf states are stuWing a plan to install electronic systems similar to the
advance warning systems used in Sinai between the Egyptian and Israeli forces.
The electronic eyes of such systems can detect the movement of even an insect
and project it on monitoring screens. Those states believe that such
electronic networks are the best means of lessening the dangers of "sabotage"

and decreasing the chances of infiltration by saboteurs to oil fields in the
area.

Beyond such effective arrangements to safeguard the security of the Gulf. the
political disputes, sectarian strife. border problems and the struggle for
leadership, control and influence will have limited results. 'E'he regimes will
no change, nor will the systems be overturned. The rulers of the Arab wor.‘.d,
fran the Atlantic to the Gulf, know better than anyone else that the inter-
national powers stand in the wq of presumed and reatU-to-happen changes.
They also know that their stay in power is not due to their own popularity or
to internal forces and factors but to international calculations and Soviet-
American fears of a possible nuclear confrontation in an area whose oil is
seen as strategically necessary for the national security of the two super-
powers. For the next year or 18 months-mend may be even for the next 2 years,
that is until after the American elections, the United States will want to
freeze the situation in the Middle East. The Carter Administration is un-
willing to take a grand stand, in fact it is incapable of doing so. On the
other hand. the Soviet Union realises that any attempt to change conditions
or to exacerbate the situation in the Gulf will gladden the hearts of
electoral experts in the United States and prompt a weak president like
President Carter to adopt hardline positions which would make him look like

a national hero compared even to the hawkish presidential candidates, as we
have seen in the crisis of the Soviet military force in Cuba.

The freezing of the situation, however. does not mean an end to tensions nor
would it prevent local conflicts from turning into brush fires. Nevertheless,
all the contending forces and parties--including Iran, Iraq and the
maneuverings of Wptian diplomacy-are unable and unwilling to cause a

major clash which would force the two superpowers into a nuclear confronta-
tion--a confrontation which, were it to materialize, will, as all international
observers agree. unleash a terrible deluge with incalculable consequences

to the fate of manking and the world.

Hhat then can be the results of such conflicts and brush fires and the
consequences of inciting and arousing the have-not and wronged classes in the
Gulf region? Since the replacement of the regimes is out of the question
under the present intemational conditions. the only result will be the
weakening of the decision-making ability of those regimes. This is the very
state of disintegration and chaos feared by both the Americans and the

Soviets. They are united in warning of the consequences of such disintegrap
tion and chaos.
OPEC AGREES TO INCREASE LDC AID
Beirut THE ARAB HORLD WEEKLY in English 13 Oct 79 p 7

[Text] OPEC Finance Ministers neeting in Vienna last week agreed to step
up their aid to developing countries. The OPEC ministers decided to con-
tribute another $100 million to the joint fund set up by the UNCTAD in 1976
meeting in Nairobi. The fund was set up to fix the price of raw materials
and primary products to developing countries.

The OPEC countries had announced last Noveder that it will financially
support the joint fund which was to help 29 countries classified as the
world's poorest countries.

The main aim of the joint fund is to provide a steady flow of exports of
primary products to developing countries, namely to LDCs. It operates as
an autonomous body which can intervene in the market to affect prices with
its accumulated stocks of these products. This raised the need for substan-
tial financial resources and called for contributions from rich countries.

OPEC Ministers had decided to increase their total aid to developing coun-
tries by $800 million bringing the capital of the mtual fund to $2.5 billion.
In their meetings OPEC Finance Ministers exchanged views on the international
monetary systen and the coordination of nonetery policies between the Arab
countries. there were rueours that the ministers will also discuss the
prospects for the sliding us dollar but some officials said the dollar will
not feature on the list of issues being discussed.

The UAE Oil Minister, present President of OPEC was sharply critical in the
meeting of the industrial countries' failure to cure high levels of infla-
tion at home which contributed to the gradual erosion of the oil revenues

of OPEC countries. Otaiba said the OPEC countries are currently contributing
between 20 and #0 per cent of their real national income to the developing
countries while the industrial countries' contributions to the developing
world does not exceed 0.5 to 2 per cent of their national income.

It is noted that the ruours that preceded the neeting and talked of possible
discussion of a shift away from the dollar had prompted a sharp drop in the

value of the dollar against all eejor currencies and brought gold to a new
record level.

nan. 1. 09A
ARAB GULF STATES DEFY SRI'ITB RUMBLIMS
Paris AL-IIANAR AL-'ARABI HA AL-DWALI in Arabic 7 Oct 79 p 9

[Article by 'Ali Hashim: "Bahrain Truanr Has Sprayed Emirates But Kuwait
Is Still Calm; Gulf Smit to Confront Ayatollahs' Preachers; Iranian
'vlinds Moving in Direction of Gulf nave Turned in Recent Days into Storms
Blowing on This or That Emirate"]

[Text] Kuwait--Kuwait and Bahrain. the two states in which the traces of
the Islaaic Iranian revolution have begun to emerge. have asserted that
they will fight any attenpt to incite sedition and disturbances and that
they will stand fin-1y and resolutely in the face of any intervention in
their doaestic affairs, regardless of whether such intervention comes from
Iran or free other sources.

After detaining Ahmad 'Ahhas al-Mahri, the son of Ayatollah Khoneini's
sister, the Kuwaiti authorities also stripped his father 'Abhas al-Hahri,
who lives in Tehran at present. of his citizenship. The Kuwaiti authorities
have also repealed the passports of Dr Huha-ad Essen Nusayr. 'Adnsn 'Abd-
al-Sanad and lawyer Khalid Khalaf.

Dr Husayr is one of the high-ranking officials of the Kuwaiti Ministry of
011. 'Abd-sl-Samad is a Shi'ite aster [umber of class said to he
descending from prophet's daughter] and an alployee of the Ministry of Oil
also. He is a relative of two high-ranking Kuwaiti officials, nalely
Ahaad 'Ahd-al-Salnad, the Ministry of Information's assistant undersecretary
for financial and adninistrative affairs, and his brother Yusuf. head of
the political department of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. Khalsf is a
well—known lawyer and a former ale-her of the Kuwaiti National Asselbly who
had aahit'ione to hold a ainistarisl portfolio one day. he has published
several articles in the Kuwaiti papers dealing with reform, deaocracy and
legislation.

Reply to Reply

Iran's initial reply to this step has been Ayatollah KhoIeyni's appointment
of 'Ahbas al-Hahri as the I'riday preacher in Kuwait.
An informed Kuwaiti has said that Kuwait will reject this appointment and
consider it intervention in its affairs. He said that the authority
concerned with such appointment is the Higher Shi'ite Authority, i.e.,
al-Huqallid and ﬁujjat al-Islam [the tradition follower and the reason of
Islam] Abu-al-Qasim al-Jaw'i who lives in the venerable al-Najaf, and that
this authority has not approved this appointment.

The charge addressed to al-Mahri, who is detained pending interrogation,
and to those whose passports have been repealed is the charge of taking
part in unlicensed political symposium held in mosques and al-Busayniyat
[Shi‘ite clubs], of inciting sedition and of instigating against the regine.
Repealing passports is a Kuwaiti means to which the government resorts
against whoever violates the law in force to prevent the person concerned
from leaving the country and to interrogate him at any time, if necessary.

Kuwait is relatively calm at present. The government measures have been
received with regret by some circles and with satisfaction by others. But
what is certain is that the uproar raised over all these issues has subsided
and no longer evokes the interest of anybody because the Kuwaiti people

are not inclined toward troubles and like stability, even though they like
to whisper and to exchange rumors and "gossip" in the social get-togethera
that are a nightly Occurrence.

Good Relations

A Kuwaiti official has described the official Kuwaiti-Iranian relations as
good, especially since the visit paid to Tehran by Shath Sabah al-Alnad,

the deputy prime minister and foreign minister and in view of the major

role played in the Iranian capital. by Shaykh Nasir al-Al-ad al-Jabir sl-Sabah,
the Kuwaiti ambassador and the doyen of the diplomtic corps.

The official added that what has happened is no more than a sunset cloud
and that the official relations between the two countries will remain
normal despite all circumstances and new developments.

A Gulf diplomat in Kuwait has said that the "Gulf states deal with Iran as
a sovereign state and a big neighbor and not as a revolution, religion and
creed."

With the calm situation in Kuwait, there is an uproar in the Gulf over the
Iranian intervention in Bahrain's affairs—an intervention that creates
fears of an attempt to touch off the situation in this quiet island state.
The Iranian position has aroused the interest of all the Gulf states.

AL-NAHAR AL-‘ARABI HA AL-DWALI has learned that if the Iranian intervention
in the Gulf states' affairs persists, the emits and heads of the Gulf states
will be invited to an urgent au-ait to study the situation and t.) adopt a
united position toward Iran.
The area's ministers of foreign affairs are expected to be invited to an
urgent meeting to prepare for this summit and to draw up its working paper.

The Iranian actions in the area have evoked strong reactions. Instead of
causing collapse and disintegration, these actions have made the area's
peoples rally more strongly around their rulers and move closer toward each
other. They have even created cohesion among the Gulf states that have
discarded the sensitivities, as well as some regional conflicts over border
demarcation or over some oasis and islands, existing between the- earlier.

The official Iran has said nothing so far about what is happening in the
area. Only Dr Ebrahim Yazdi, the Iranian minister of foreign affiara, always
disavows the actions of some clergymen and denies that they have any official
capacity or that they have been entrusted with official missions.

Problem-Story

The story behind all that is happening is that some Iranian clergymen arrive
in the area' 3 states and appoint themselves spiritual leaders for the area's
Shi' ites. These clergymen then start to interfere in the affairs of the
country which they enter, delivering sermons, criticizing and giving
instructions as if they are the people with the power and the authority.

This conduct has aroused the resentment of the area's Shi'ites before that
of others. The area's Shi'ite leaders say that if the Shi'ites suffer from
any injustices or have any complaints, then these leaders are the ones to
eliminate them within the framework of the traditions followed in the Gulf.
i.e., through the existing institutions or through the shaykhs.

UAE

The problem of Bahrain has touched with its spray the UAE, especially the
emirates of Dubai and Sharjah.

Ayatollah Sayyid Hajj hadrasi came to Bahrain and began to deliver sermons,
make speeches and attack [the government], so Bahrain' a government deported
him to Sharjah. In Sharjah, Hadrasi resumed his ways, helped from Dubai by
Shaykh 'Abd-sl-Razzaq al-Jawahiri. They were both detained for a week in
the UAE and then deported.

In Tehran, Ayatollah Sadeq Rohani declared himself "leader of the Bahraini
revolution," threatening to restore Bahrain to Iran and to lead in it a
revolution that will overthrow Shaykh 'Isa ibn Salman Al Khalifeh. the
state's amir, his regime and his family. This attack and these challenges
have aroused the anger of all of the Gulf area states. The Iraqi government
has also moved, sending envoys to the area's states to declare Baghdad's
support for their rulers. The Iraqi press has also launched its strongest
attack against Iran since the revolution. The Kuwait press has taken part
in this attack and the Kuwaiti government has moved to declare its support
for the Bahraini regime.
The UAE has not escaped the spray of the Iranian clergyman. one of whom
has threatened it with woes and terrible things for deporting two clergy-en.

The Gulf sumit has become urgent, as stressed by a prominent Gulf source.
This summit my issue resolutions compatible with the size of the storm
that has begun to blow on the Gulf states.

84910
050: 6802

10
BRIEFS

PLO-IRANIAN DLFFEREMES-Jeirut-inforued sources in the Lebanese capital
have disclosed to AL-SIYASAH that during his recent visit to Lebanon and
Syria, Iranian Vice Prime Minister Sadeq Tabataba'i held talks with the
Palestinian leadership and that the talks revealed that these sources
described as differences of opinion on several issuer-differences which
necessitated Abu Jihad (Khalil al-Uazir) visiting Iran for talks at the
highest level. These sources added' that Bani al-Hasan's departure for
Iran as PLO office director there came after these differences of opinion
had at tines reached a pitch that neither the Palestinian or Iranian side
wished to delve into or reveal. There are two points worth noting in this
respect: l--The presence in Iran of 12,000 Palestinians who are helping
the revolution stabilise the internal situation. 2--The Iranian revolution
has given the Palestinian revolution 700 million rials as aid to bolster
the Palestinian struggle. These informed sources concluded by saying that
current evidence indicates that no matter how great the differences of opin-
ion between the Iranian and Palestinian revolutions, the intensification
of contacts at that level would maintain the strategic bond between then.
[Text] [LDl9l3S3 Kuwait AL-SIYASAB in Arabic 17 Oct 79 p 1 Ln]

PRC, nossan PLAN PALESTINIAN'S DEATR--Beirut, 21 Octobero-‘rhe Lebanese paper
AL-SAPIR today discloses a plan to assassinate Palestinian leader Salah
Khalaf, alias Abu Iyad, Fatah Central emittee neaber. The paper adds that
the plan, which was drawn up by the Mossad and the PRC intelligence apparatus,
was supposed to be carried out by a Fatah officer who was detained for sons
time in the me. The paper says that the Palestinian officer, lst Lt 'Abd
al-Hali 'Abid, was subjected to physical and psychological torture during
his detention. Intelligence officers threatened to kill his fanily should
he refuse to carry out the assassination. The paper says that 'Abid, who
was detained in the PRC in February on charges of possessing explosives,
shot himself and succuﬂaed to his wounds last Thursday in a Beirut hospital.
The paper quotes a Palestinian source as saying that 'Abid's colleagues

and Patah officials noticed that he was in poor psychological condition
after his return iron the FRG. The source added that 'Ahid disclosed every-
thing during his convalescence and that Abu Iyad visited him several tiles
to encourage his to return to work. The paper also publishes a warning to
the m from the Palestinian source, who said that such actions would

11
endanger its interests in the area. The source added: At a time when
Western European countries are adopting positive stands toward the Pales-
tinian people, the PRC adopts this surprising attitude and coordinates
acts of tortures against our people and plans to assassinate our leaders.
A statement issued by Fatah pledges to avenge 'Abid's murder. [Text]
[JN211551 Doha QNA in Arabic 1020 GMT 21 Oct 79 JR]

ARABS FEAR ISRAELI NUCLEAR TEST--Hashington--Diplomatic sources have stated
that there is a strong suspicion that the mysterious nuclear explosion that
took place off the shores of South Africa last September was a test of an
Israeli tactical nuclear warhead. Egypt and a number of other countries
concerned are studying reports being reiterated in diplomatic circles here
that the nuclear explosion was the first test of an Israeli nuclear weapon
carried out by South Africa on Israel's behalf. According to these sources,
Egypt is very worried by these reports. One such source said that, if the
reports are true, Cairo will view the matter as a "very serious development."
Analysts believe that the Carter administration knew about the test in
advance and secretly approved it in order to alleviate Israel's security
fears and facilitate an overall Middle East peace. However, it is known
that some 0.5. officials are worried that Israel's growing nuclear caps-
bility could lead to a nuclear arms race in the Middle East. The 0.8.
administration was therefore so eager to divert public attention from the
possibility of Israel having a role in the nuclear explosion that it claimed
that South Africa was responsible for the explosion. [Excerpts] [1D060925
London AL-SHARQ AL-AHSAT in Arabic 3 Nov 79 p 1 LD]

CSO: 4802
OPPOSITION AND mm AGAINST GOVERNMENT IDEM'IPIED
Beirut AL-HURRIYAH in Arabic 17 Sep 79 p 35

[Article by 'Adil Hunir: "What Is in Bahrain; Open Doors for Honopolies
and Bases; Popular Opposition and Position of Organized National Forces"]

[Text] After the Iranian revolution's triulph, the 0.3. intelligence started
to study the influence of this revolution on the neighboring countries

with anxious care because the area in which this big fire [revolution] has
taken place contains nore than 60 percent of the world oil reserves and
supplies 30 percent of the total world oil production. This is in addition
to the area's strategic position and to its being a vital Iarkat for

western goods.

After double-checking their calculations, the 0.8. agencies estinated that
Bahrain will be foremost along the countries to be affected by the fire for
several reasons:

Because Bahrain has a revolutionary reserve elbodied in a national love-ant
with organizational fraleworks that are nore than 30 years old and that
include a working class with revolutionary and unionist traditions.

Despite the damage suffered by this love-eat after the August onslaught
and despite the ceaseless suppression operations organized by (Henderson),
the specialised adviser, this novelent has continued to operate under the

conditions of a secret (comma) and has been waiting for the opportunity
for a new revival.

The presence of deep disputes within the ruling regime due to the dual tribal
and bouregeois character of the ruling fanily because sons leaders of the
fanily have aploited the oil revenues and emissions to carve for tha-
selves places outside the tribe and within the co-ercial and industrial
bourgeoisie.

There is popular opposition to the use of Bahrain as a 0.8. base for aggression
against the Arab peoples and the Iranian revolution. This opposition has
escalated with the approaching date for renewing the contract [for the

base] with the United States.

13
There is in Bahrain a religious aovement opposed to the regime. Moreover.
the presence of broad masses who are not represented in the government

has caused this movement to be strongly influenced by the Iranian revolu-
tion.

Open Doors

With the policy of open doors. the government has tried to steal Lebanon's
role as a middleman, at least in the Gulf area. The regime's leaders

enjoy describing their country as the Gulf 's "Bongkong." After the civil
war in Lebanon. numerous companies and banks moved their headquarters

to Bahrain and the number of banks in the country rose to 70 banks which
recycle the Gulf surplus monies to New York and London. Many foreign
investments [companies] have been operating in the country directly or
through Bahraini representatives or partners. But most of their investments
are employed in the construction, services and mintenance work sector.
These companies have stood as a barrier in the face of the creation of a
local industry. But the benefits of the policy of open doors have been
confined to a small sesaent close to the ruling family whereas broad sectors,
which include not only the workers and the toilers but also broad segments
of small merchants, industrialists and contractors have been hurt by it.
This policy has been coupled with economic chaos and stagnation because

of the low oil prices [sic] and high prices of comaodities in the capitalist
market and because of the growing size of the administrative agencies.
especially the suppression [intelligence and security] agency that absorbs
a large part of the general spending.

After dissolving the parliament and the unions, the regime tried to compen-
sate the masses with promises to solve the inflation, housing and one-ploy-
ment problems. But these problems have intensified as a result of the
onslaught of the foreign firms and expertise. This is why the policy of
open doors has been coupled with the concentration of capital in the hands
of small segments whereas the poor and middle classes have gotten poorer.

Form of Opposition

All these factors have energized the opposition movement after a relatively
long period of lukewarm activity. This opposition has been abodied in
appeals, memoranda, sit-ins and marches staged by workers and employees

who happen to be relatives of detainees. and especially of the students
banned from travel. But the more prominent form of this opposition is the
religious form because the authority's oppression has been directed mainly
against the organized opposition. Since the August onslaught. the authority
has expanded implementation of the state security Law, has dissolved the
Constituent Assnbly and the unions. has suspended many of the constitution's
provisions, has promulgated a penal law providing for life imprisonment

or the death sentence "for whoever exposes the state external or internal
security to danger," has jailed many stmgglers and has prevented more than
100 students from leaving the country to continue their studies. Recently.

1h
the acts of oppression have expanded to include more than 120 clergymen
and students. Despite this extensive onslaught, the government has been
careful not to touch the religious opposition which has escaped the
campaign. This has helped this opposition to rise with its full strength
relatively [sic] and to lead the new opposition movement, relying on the
big victory of the Iranian revolution.

Even though the religious movement has projected some democratic demands
(such as release of the detainees, curtailing the foreign influence, dealing
with some aspects of the ruling family's corruption), its slogans continue
to fall very short of the slogans of the democratic movuent. The religious
movaent does not present clear positions against the presence of the 0.5.
bases and of the foreign monopolies. Under Bahrain's backward position,
this religious opposition has imbibed nany of the negative aspects of the
Iranian revolution, such as projecting sectarian slogans and getting
preoccupied with sidebattles, such as banning alcohol and mingling [of the
two sexes]. This is why the new opposition faces significant difficulties:

If the religious quality predominates the national opposition movaent,

there is a likelihood that this opposition will assme a religious form,
especially since the Shi'ites constitute 50 percent of the population whereas
the regime is Sunni. lbreover, some parties of the Iranian revolution
encourage this form of opposition.

The conflict within the ruling regime is not likely to flare up currently
because of its interlocking interests. Moreover, Saudi Arabia will
constitute a safety valve that will not per-it these conflicts to flare up.

Bahrain's position within the general Gulf position has not been decisive
but rather a position like that of Lebanon which reflects the conflicts in
the area. This is why Bahrain's position should not be taken in isolation
from the area which is experiencing currently retreats in Iraq and in Iran
under the threats of 0.5. intervention. Horeover, Bahrain's position is also
connected with the settlement in the area—a settlement in which oil con-
stitutes one of the decisive factors.

The entire national direction, and not movuent for the sake of movmaent or
for the sake of underlining a position serving one of the movement's
parties, that be taken into consideration.

These tasks require the organized national nova-mt to play the leading
role through a co-on action progran seeking to mbilize the broad leases
and their capabilities so as to abolish the military bases, release the
public liberties, curtail the activities of the foreign monopolies, inrove
the living conditions of the toiling masses and adopt a liberated foreign

policy.

8691.
C80: 4802

15
PPLB LEADER CLAIMS DOZENS ARRESTED BY WW
Beirut AL-SAPIR in Arabic 20 Sep 79 p 10

(Article: "Popular Front in Bahrain Says in Press Conference: Calpsign
of Arrests Included 120 People and Country Living Under Undeclared State
of hergency"]

[Text] A leader of the Popular Front in Bahrain [AL-HURRIYAB identifies
front as the PEP-Popular l'ront for the Liberation of Bahrain] has
warned of the plans of the imperialist and reactionary circles that seek
to instigate and nurture sectarian sedition in Bahrain.

'Abd-al-Rahsan al-Nu'ayni. saber of the Executive Conittee of the Popular
Front in Bahrain, has stated at a press conference held at the Press Union
premises in Beirut that the front has called for the creation of the Bahraini
national coalition to foil these plans.

He said that the government is trying to distort our people's struggles

and to prepare for a sectarian sedition. he pointed out that the authorities
depict the recent nova-ant as being confined to the Shi'ite sect alone and
are trying to link this nova-ant to state-eats Iade by ele-ents inside Iran
who have no connection with the Iranian revolution, such as Ayatollah lohani.
He also said that the prise sinister is resorting to strengthening his
relations with the Sunni notables who—not the Shi'ite leaders—have expressed
their resentment over the policy that he has been following.

Al-Nu'ayni discussed the broad lines of the Bahraini national coalition
and said that the front is currently holding contacts with all the forces
and notables in Bahrain to reach nini-un agreenent among then.

He also dealt with the impact and role of the Iranian revolution, denying
that "Iran has exported the revolution to Bahrain." But he did stress
"the revolution's positive objective effects" and referred to the "need to
strengthen the relationship between the Arab revolutionaries and their
Iranian brothers."

16
He added that to underline the importance of this relationship, the front
responded to an invitation from the Islanic Republican Party. visited Iran
last June and net with nost of the Iranian leaderships, led by Ayatollah
Khoneyni.

In t".‘.s context, al-Nu'ayni stressed the Arabisn of Bahrain and the fact
that it is an indivisible part of the Arab honelsnd. He said that the
theories that view Bahrain as part of Iran respect nobody other than the
revolution's enemies. Al-Nu'ayni attacked the policy of the Bahraini
authorities and described it as a policy of "estrangenent," considering
this policy responsible for the deteriorating conditions reached by the
country and leading to the creation of an "inport syst- supported by the
Americans, the British and Saudi Arabia and living under a constant and
undeclared state of energency and anong people who reject it and who are
wrathful at the regime."

Concluding his press conference. al-lh'ayni announced the mes of acne of
those arrested recently by the govern-ent authorities and numbering 120
people. including Shaykh Huhriz al-‘Akarai, Shaykh 'Ali al-‘Usfur and
'Abd-al-Jalil al-‘Aradi.

86910
050: (0802

17
PPLB DISCUSSBS POSSIBILITIBS OF BSCALAIED POLITICAL STRUGGLE IN COUNTRY
Beirut AL-BURkIYAn in Arabic 1 Oct 79 pp 40-61

[Interview With 'Abd-al-Rahaan al-lu'ayli, Huber of Executive Omittee
of Popular Front for Liberation of Bahrain, by Valid Nuwayhid"]

[Tut] Bahrain is witnessing nowadays an extensive protest love-eat that
forewarns of significant political changes if the Bahraini national nove-
Inent can take advantage of the conflicts touched off by the policy of
opening up to [foreign] capital adopted by the governaent at the beginning
of 1975.

The protest maent is not confined to the popular sectors but also
includes the various forces and activities in the relatively poor island
in which no oil has been discovered. The island naintained its historical
structure [for a long tine] but this structure has begun to be exposed to
foreign blows embodied in the transfornation of Bahrain into a free co-er-
cial nsrket and into an area in which foreign banks are concentrated.

This position has notivated Saudi Arabia to send 350 troops to Bahrain to
contain the political and religious nov-eats that have expanded and
whose influence intensified since the call made by Ayatollah Khomeini on
the 17th of last August on occasion of the Jerusalea Day.

What is happening in Bahrain at present? What are the forces moving on
the arena? What are the spheres of the Bahraini national novuent? What
is the inpact of the Iranian revolution on the area? What are the tactics,
slogans and alliances of the Bahraini delocratic national forces?

We took these questions to 'Abd-al-Rallaan al-Hu'ayai. saber of the
Executive Omittee of the Pm [Powlar Front for the Liberation of
Bahrain] end we have tried as such as possible to provide some answers
that shed light on sons aspects of the issue that will cause an upheaval
in the Gulf situation in the near future.

[Question] The Gulf area was subject previously to acne kind of a balance
imposed by the area's two leaders: Iran and Saudi Arabia. This balance

18
has been subject to political fluctuations depending on the winds prevailing
in the neighboring countries. In the wake of the Iranian revolution, what
are the current directions of the situation and what is the position of the
forces present in the Gulf?

[Answer] There is a firm connection between nahrain and the area. The
transformations that take place over separate intervals and the effects
that these transformations have on the Gulf area, especially Bahrain,
should not be separated.

The Iranian revolution's victory has shaken the firm mainstays of the imperi-
alist plans in the area as a result of the collapse of one of the basic
mainstays of the 0.5. plan in the Gulf and the neighboring area.

This collapse with all its weight has had an impact on Bahrain where the
ruling class has been hit with a confusion that has made it embark on a
series of moves to contain the initial positive results of the Iranian
revolution. Talk has escalated about the need to impose security by force
under the pretext of protecting the "Arabian of Bahrain" at one time and
the pretext of fighting the "11.8. threats" of military invasion at others.
There have also been rising calls to organize and unite the ranks in order
to face the future eventualities.

Naturally, the aim of these goverrnnent containment attempts has not been to
create an internal bond that truly seeks to protect the Arabism of the Gulf
and to confront the 0.8. invasion but to find political pretest: to

cover the truth of the movement which started on the eve of the shah's

fall and mmeini's triumph. The true goal governing all of the govern-
ment's moves is sun-ed up in the fact that they are moves to protect the
authority itself against disintegration and collapse and to launch a
counter offensive against the religious and political inclinations that
have recently merged in Bahrain in light of the victory realized in Iran.

Here, we can talk about the negative aspect of the authority's movement—a
mov-ent started inediately upon the shah's fall.

This movanent is armed up in a number of contacts made by the government
with some Sunni clergymen and merchants in an attapt to divide the
national ranks and to create a political split between the two major
religious sects in Bahrain. The authority started by launching a rabid
political campaign against the Shi'ite sect, accusing it of wantint to
overthrow the regime and to establish a Shi'ite state tied to Iran.

These suspect attempts fell on deaf ears insofar as the people and the
clergymen are concerned, especially after the patriotic man in the street
moved to project his fundamental delands that focus on the achievement of
a number of national and pan-Arab slogans that aspire to realize real
independence and to wrench some reformist and sodal concessions [from the
government].

19
As for the political forces existing historically in Bahrain, they have been
affected by the events by varying degrees. There is an opinion that says
that the authority's opening up to the opposition forces is nothing but a
phased tactic whose aim is to absorb the popular wrath and to expose the
positions of the opposition forces prior to striking them in the future.
There is another inclination that believes that what is happening in Bahrain
at present reflects to a large degree the rupture occurring in the area,
especially after the Iranian revolution, considering that the balances have
been tipped in favor of a broad political and religious national revival
that makes it possible to project certain daaands that can be wrenched

fron the authority.

On the other hand, there is disagreement in assessing the religious movements
that have taken place in the area and in Bahrain recently. Some parties
view the religious movements as movements independent of the current
transformations in the country and believe one should steer clear of them
and should maintain the national positions developed in previous stages.
Other parties view the religious movements as a political force which

should be dealt with flexibly and believe that a ainimun common points of
agreeaent must be established with them so as to launch a battle that relies
on numerous forces which agree on a broad program of political, social and
economic danands.

So far, no unified visualization has yet developed from these views to

help the various parties agree on a single line that could add to the national
movement a popular and historical dimension that peraits turning a new

leaf in the history ofthe Gulf area's states. This, specifically, is what

we are seeking to achieve and what we have been seeking to achieve recently.

Re have demanded the creation of a broad front including all the forces
opposing the regime and bound to a political line truly hostile to the
Americans so as to block the path in the face of any reactionary attaipt
seeking to transform Bahrain into a center of intelligence and sabotage
against the Iranian revolution.

In this regard, we have presented for discussion the issue of the "broad
democratic national coalition" and have defined its daaands in 10 general
points that focus, for example, on the question of restoring the National
Council (Parliament), beginning preparations for elections, releasing the
detainees, restoring the democratic liberties, permitting political action
and other demands that the various parties and forces can approve. So
far, the contacts to form the daaocratic national coalition have not
achieved considerable success.

[Question] Within the fraaework of the visualization that you have just
projected, what are the spheres of the Bahraini national movement and
what are the possibilities of making gains under the canopy of certain
balances that are difficult to break?

20
[Answer] There is no doubt that the question of changing the regime in
Bahrain is tied to the area's situation generally because it seems impossible
to wager on fundamental transfornation at a time when Bahrain is considered

a U.S. military base, a link between the area's states and a commercial

and financial center through whose channels the Arab monies pass to the
outside world.

As I have already said, the Gulf emirates are mere appendages to the area's
[major] states. Therefore, this or that inclination prevails in them,
depending on which way the balances are tipped. Consequently. change does,
definitely. not come from within then. They merely reflect the course of
affairs and the total transformations in their environment. This is why
the national political and religious forces must always take advantage of
the area's events to continue the struggle, to improve their positions and
to dictate their terms to the limits within which we can act.

This is why we on our part believe that there is a broad possibility at
present to impose on the authority a specific reform program, if we can
take advantage of the atmosphere of the Iranian revolution.

We have actually started a number of these political movements that have
begun to grow and to produce some positive results. The latest battle we
waged against the government was the battle to defeat the decision banning
Bahraini students from going abroad to continue their studies. The govern-
ment was compelled on the 12th of the current month of September to back
down on the decision and returned 212 passports to the students after a
series of demonstrations, statesents and sit-ins had been staged against
the decision.

0n the other hand, we can see Saudi Arabia's moves in the area and its fear
of the winds of the Iranian revolution. Saudi Arabia has embarked on a
series of contacts to contain every rebellion and every movement to express
progressive religious opposition. By the way, Saudi Arabia has sent 350
troops to Bahrain and it is building a modern bridge linking the island

of Bahrain with the Saudi coast at a cost of one billion dollars which will
be completely paid by Saudi Arabia.

[Question] Let us return a little to the opposition religious aovaaents.
what are their forces, inclinations, goals and spheres of growth?

[Answer] Traditionally, the religious mucus: in Bahrain, both the Sunni
and the Shi'ite movenents, have been supported [financially] by Saudi
Arabia. In the past, there were two Islamic groups: The Islamic Enlighten-
ment Society (Shi'ite) whose leaders were reactionary and had direct
relations with Saudi Arabia and the Islamic Reform Club (Sunni) which had
good relations with the regime and with Saudi Arabia at the and time.

with the early signs of the Iranian revolution, an opposition clergyman
emerged and foraed what is known presently as al-Busayni Fund. The fund
leader, Shaykb hubs-ad lladi al-Hadrasi, adopted a position supporting

21
Khomeyni whereas the Enlightenment Society opposed him. After the Iranian
revolution's triumph, the Enlightenment Society reconsidered its position
whereas the Reform Club persisted in its opposition [to Khomeyni]. Khomayni
accredited al-Madrasi as his official [representative] in Bahrain.

Thus. some clergy-en saved in the direction of supporting Khomeyni and the
signs of an independent religious opposition movement raising some demo-
cratic and political slogans appeared. This is why the Popular Front for
the Liberation of Bahrain adopted from the outset a position supporting

Khomeyni and every political or religious line wishing to move against
imperialism and reaction.

The call issued by the religious opposition men for a march on 23 February
1979 came in support of the Iranian revolution. The Popular Front did
not hesitate to participate in the march side by side with the clergy-en.
He raised our slogans with the other slogans so as to block the path in
the face of any attempts to exploit Khomeyni's movement. The government
tried to insert its elements in the demonstration and to pretend that it

supported this demonstration. But the plan failed and a clash took place
with the reactionary elements.

Khomeyni issued his call for the Jerusalem March on the 17th of last August
and the clergymen moved to organize a march on the occasion. We took part
in the religious march. raising our national and political slogans.

Then came the incident of the arrest of Shaykh al-‘Akari at the airport upon
his return from Iran and his meeting with Khomeyni to touch off the political
situation anew. Al-‘Akari is a radical clergyman who is opposed to the
government and who supports Khomeyni's movement and he has always nixed
political issues with religious issues and attacked the regime and corruption
in his sermons in mosques.

After the arrest, the clergyman called for a protest demonstration on the
holiday. A big match was staged and we participated in it strongly, raising
the slogans of releasing the religious detainees and restoring the dnocratic
and unionist liberties. When the march reached the police headquarters, a
clash took place with the security men. one man was killed and two were
wounded. This was our first actual contact with the clergyman and with many
popular groups that we had not penetrated before.

A short time ago, another problem erupted between the clergyman and the
government when 60 clergymen submitted a plea demanding that the state
carry out a mnnber of reforms. The government rejected the plea and this
has led to faster growth in the religious opposition. The statements made
by Ayatollah Rohani in Iran in support of the demands made by the clergy-en
came as a stab to these clergyman who proceeded to issue a statement
stressing the "Arabian of Bahrain and of the Gulf" to prevent the government
from attempting to exploit Rohani's statements against them.

22
The government also recently arrested Shaykh al-Hadrasi and deported him
to the UAE on the pretext that he holds a UAE passport. This incident
created reactions that led the government to arrest a number of clergyman.

At the same time, Khalifah ibn Salman. the prime minister, embarked on
several counter moves, contacted the Sunni clergymen and tried to stir up

the sectarian situation but he has received no favorable response. especially
from the Sunni business circles.

It is our assessment that instigating sectarian hatred is a part of the U.S.
plan to fragment the Bahraini national movement and to divide the area on

a sectarian basis. It is our opinion that the successful means to confront
sectarianism is to speed up building the independent democratic national
coalition so that it may face the government with the fundamental demands.

[Question] What are the tactics of the Bahraini national movement in light
of the country's social and economic structure?

[Answer] There are in Bahrain currently numerous crises (housing, living
conditions, services). The country's area is small and it has a population
density of 1.100 persons per square mile. The country is poor in natural
resources and work opportunities are not available in it, compared to the
neighboring countries.

The 1973 war came to raise oil prices fourfold. Thus. the government
embarked on the operation of facilitating the flow of surplus monies and

of helping their investment. But the authority confronted the obstacle

of the National Council which it had established in 1972. after independence.
So, the authority proceeded to dissolve the council on 24 August 1975 in
order to eliminate legislative control over the decisions and to confine

the decision-making to the amir [country's ruler]. the prime minister and
the crown prince.

In November 1975, the state issued the offshore law which permitted the
transformation of Bahrain into a financial market controlled by 50 foreign

banks whose task is to pump the surplus Arab monies to the United States,
west Europe and Japan.

Offshore commercial companies were also founded in Bahrain, turning the
country into some sort of a Rongkong or s "Gulf Lebanon" whose task is to
act as a commercial middleman between the Gulf states and the international
imperialist network. In return, Saudi monies flooded the country. aid

was doubled and American experts were brought in. Thus, corruption has
spread, graft increased. morals have disintegrated fearfully and the
foreign presence has escalated in a manner that exceeds the country's needs
and its absorption capability.

This policy has conflicted with all values and has left its imprints on the
entire society. Certain social groups have collapsed and other peripheral

23
groups have risen in a period of no more than 5 years. All this has created
a strong reaction among the clergy-en and has enabled the political movenents

to grow anew as a result of society's disintegration and of its intensifying
crises.

If we examine the country's present social and economic structure. we find
that the peasants, farmers and fishermen do not exceed 6,000 persons whereas
the working class constitutes more than 166,000 members of the total work-
force. including 96,000 foreign workers. The number of students of all
stages amounts to 60,000 students out of the total original population of
Bahrain which amounts to (300,000) persons.

In view of this socio-economic structure of Bahrain, we can see that there
are national and class forces that can dictate their conditions and wrench

their demands if the struggle is escalated and the democratic national
coalition for-ed.

We on our part find it most likely that the political. social and economic
situation will deteriorate. There is also the possibility of changes in
the authority and of the alteration of balances at the top. It is likely
that 'Isa ibn Khalifah, the country's amir and ruler, will resign and that
his son Bamad ibn 'Isa, the crown prince and the ninister of defense who
is supported by the Americans, will take his place.

If such changes happen, their purpose will be obvious-—namely to contain
the ongoing transformations in the country.

8696
C80: 6802

26
MILLIONS OF DINARS CONTRIBUTED T0 KOBDESTAN DISTURBANCES
Tehran BTTELA'AT in Persian 21 Aug 79 p 2

[Text] A group of government and military officials held a radio-television
press conference yesterday afternoon concerning the problem of security in

the country. Reporters from news organizations took part. Participating
were: Hashem Sabaghian. Minister of Interior; Brigadier General Daneshvar.

commander of the gendarmerie; General Riahi, Minister of National Defense;
Major General Shaker, chief of the Joint Staff of Army of the Islamic Re-
public; and Brigadier General Mbstafa'i, Police Chief of Islamic Republic
of Iran. First to begin the questioning was the government spokesman.
Sadeq Tabstaba'i, after which reporters' questions were answered.

In response to a question from the government spokesman that people think
there is a problem because the government is not taking decisive steps to
strike down opponents of the revolution. the interior minister answered
that the government does not accept the idea that decisive steps are not
being taken. Our armed forces have passed from the shadow of the oppres-
sive regime into the embrace of the people. Bringing about order is neces-
sary for reform in the military. This command was executed by General
Riahi. former defense minister. Still necessary decisiveness is lacking.
In this way we are trying to create a peoples army and you saw in the
events at Paveh how a decision was made and at the team's order they went
and punished the invaders of Paveh.

The Police

Dr Tabataba'i asked the chief of police whether there was any reason for
the police not having the necessary morale. General Mostafa'i answered
that fortunately the morale of the police was very good now. In answer to
the question whether this morale was such that they could maintain the se-
curity of the city he said that, in general. yes.

General Daneshvar said in regard to the gendarmerie that 95 percent of per-
sonnel had good morale. but after the Emem'e order this went up to 1,000
percent. The morale of the armed forces and the entire Iranian nation in
a difficult period in the world has been without parallel and has been the

25
same throughout history. Now the personnel of the gendarmerie have no
operational problems and only in regard to the living conditions of some
personnel in remote regions do we have any concern. General Riahi said
that after the order of the Imam the morale in the army rose extraordi-
narily and the officers. NCOs and soldiers volunteer more than we can
accept.

Mobilizing Model Units

A question was asked about the situation in Paveh, where, it is said, be-
fore the lmam's order that the army did not want to go. General Shaker
said that he could not agree because before the Imam's order several units
had announced that they were on alert and after the order troops from all
over mobilized into one model unit.

Dr Tabataba'i asked: What actions had the army taken prior to the Iaam's
order? General Shaker said that the day before the order they had set up
counussions after a report arrived that a gendarmerie and police unit were
besieged by more than 2,000 people. Steps were taken including reconnais-
sance flights which broke the sound barrier and then orders were given to

open fire. After the Imam's order morale, discipline and the attitude of
the people came alive and made the commanders' job easier.

Against the Revolt in Kordestan

A question was asked about the events in Kordestan and how much sprang from
real political sources and how much from insurgency. The interior minister
said: we have stated categorically that the forces that cause trouble
there are separate from our Kurdish brothers and the problem of Shia and
Sunni does not exist. As the Imam has said the rights of all the people
are protected in the constitution. They try to use economic shortages

and the welfare of the region against the revolution. but we know these
problems do not come from the free will of the people. We have many devel-
opment and economic plans for Kordeetan and with the return of peace to

the area we are beginning to implement them.

Dr Tabataba'i asked the commander of the gendarmerie what the situation in
Paveh was. He said that it was peaceful now. A question was raised that
therefore his opinion was not certain because he said "now." General
Daneshvar said that perhaps there was some agitation. He then spoke of
the incident at Paveh and said that the invading elements were followers
of the Democratic Party and Hollah Bakhtiar, representative of Talabsni,
and they were completely equipped. After the dawn bombardment of 28 Hordad
[19 Aug] these forces went into hiding and some were taken prisoner.
Eighteen million diners of help had been spread around by Talabani. He
captured a man who had been hiding with him in a place where orders were
given to blow up places.

The general added that he had said in a meeting with Abdolrahman Qasemlu
that they were both Iranian Muslims and brothers and that these small

26
differences should not come between them. “here there is justice there
can he no differences. Qnsemlu said that he wanted all of Kordestan to be
one lranian province and asked my cooperation in this sin.

General Daneshvar said at another point that the announcement that the
period of military service was 1 year had impaired the army. taken away
its capabilities and made it so that for awhile it could not function. He
added: we have had difficulties created by the Kurdish Democratic Party
and Jalal Talabani, whose mouthpiece is ‘Azaeldin Hosseyni. he promised
that 80 percent of the people of Hahabad were in favor of intervention and
have telephoned asking us to finish the job. I have tried for 6 months to
eliminate gunfire in Kordestsn.

A question was asked as to why of all the groups in Kordestan only the
Democratic Party was declared illegal. The interior minister answered
that the only group with a 40-year record was the Democratic Party. the
tool of Jalal Talabani. It is not really a party but a rebel group from
over the border. If it happens that other groups join in these activities
we will ask the Revolutionary Council to declare them illegal also.

Source of Agitation

General Shaker said: those who attacked the army in Sanandaj were not the
same as those in Paveh. but the source of the agitation was the same. Con-
cerning Gonbad also, where there are signs of fire, we predict that this

is also the result of agitation. The government is at work to stop this
with aid programs.

A question was asked as to what measures the government was taking through-
out the country to prevent such incidents as Kordestan. General Riahi
answered: We believe in the army that there are many plotters, both in-
side and out, and that the Islamic Republic must consider itself in a state
of partial war. This was the reason for the Imam's order for all units to
be on alert. He want no intrigue among the people and we ordered all of

it destroyed throughout the country. The interior minister said that ac-
cording to the Imam's order those units with military training were to go
to the guards camps and those units without training were to register at
revolutionary bases so that training could be done.

General Daneshvar said in connection with universal military service that
the period of service was a year and a half and that everyone high or low
would serve, with the difference that after doing a period of training
those that are surplus will be excused. The initial period is 4 months
and after this, according to need, some soldiers, from privates to those
having sergeants certificates. will be chosen to finish the training.
Those having their licsntiate and more will become officers. This law

is without precedent. Those that formerly were students and excused. in-
cluding all those with diplomas and born before 1337 [21 Mar 1958-20 Her
1959] will still be excused. This law has been enacted.
Plan for the Press

The interior minister then talked about the press plan. He said that in
troubled times the press plays a great role and must refrain from giving
out false information. If we protest about this, they say that the news
services are giving out this news. For example, to weaken morale they

were spreading unkind rumors about my dear brother, Dr chemran, that he

had been shot, or as the Voice of America said, had become a martyr. The
entire press knows which among them have real devotion. These devotees
announce that there is a free press and then create false and inflammatory
news. All of them have deceitful plans and tried hard to upset order after
the revolution. A correct press law is overdue and will be announced as
soon as possible and will stop these disorders. They used to protest to

us that such and such a thing was said by such and such a paper and asked
if we denied it. The government would have to deny a paper every day.
General Shaker has given the answer to your question as to, in our opin-
ion, what threats the nation faces. I do not see any danger. Agitations
exist and will continue, but in my opinion these agitations will not inter~
fere with attaining the aims of the revolution. In answer to the same
question. General Riahi said that we will have these agitations because

the Heaters governments are not happy with the Islamic revolution. Eastern
governments have not said much but we have many words and deeds from the
West.

Duty of the Press

The journalists then asked their own questions. One journalist asked that
since you have stated that the Kurdish Democratic Party is connected with
Talabani and planned the recent events, how can the governsent's election
of Dr Qasemlu to the press assembly and the Imam's meeting with Talabani
be explained?

The interior minister answered that the sole reason was that the Demo-
cratic Party had created strong armed forces in the area and could threaten
voters. Of course, 110,000 votes is not much, but because each cast sev-
eral votes they could elect their own representative. I do not have any
information about the Imam's meeting with Talabani, but as we have said
before, we are positive that the disturbances were caused by the Demo-
cratic Party and Talabani and we will confront them. For this reason the

Hasehm Sabaghian said in answer to another question about a studied plan
for the press and whether it would not be better to guide and limit the
press instead of stopping it, that no one forgets the service of the press.
The press was very valuable after the revolution and a healthy press can
play a role in all parts of society. An analytic press could he very en-
lightening but the alternative is very different. Host of the press, per-
haps not a majority, we have spoken about and have confidence in, the

28
other played a role in the disturbances. Instead of analysis it offered

a threat. Because its information was not sufficient, particularly in
places distant from them, the press played a large part in deviations and
the people wanted then stopped. Because our revolution must build, not
destroy, the news of the government and its spokesmen must be official.

Our views are not those of all of the press. Part of the press does not
support the Islamic revolution or its policies and many have destructive
aims toward our revolution because they profit from disorder. Dr Tabataba'i
said that he gave his word that the news in these papers was so completely
fabricated and so grossly that he did not at first have a press conference.

Tabataba'isaidat another point the object of the press law was not to
limit the press but to prevent abuse of freedom, not keeping information
from the people but seeing that they are fully informed. He said that the
paper PEYGHAH~E—EHRU2 the day before yesterday made eight clear mistakes
and deviations about the events in Paveh. It was closed because of this
wrong information given to the people. The interior minister, speaking
about the plan of the komitehs to reform themselves, said that it was not
planned to abolish the komitehs. They would gradually absorb the revolu-
tionary guards and police. The plan has been put into effect in Tehran
and more so in the provinces. In regard to reforming the komitehs this
task has already been undertaken by the central komiteh. Reductions will
begin in Tehran and have already started. It is natural in reforms that
there would be some unrest, but the central komiteh has faced up to this
unrest. In the provinces where komitehs are not needed, an announcement
of dissolution has been made.

The defense minister said in regard to the existence of an intelligence
and counterintelligence service that the service known as SAVAK was dis-
solved and a new organization has been formed in the Ministry of Defense
called the National Intelligence and Counterintelligence Organization.
It has just started work but we hope that it will produce good results
and safeguard the nations information.

A question was asked as to who was responsible for looking out for polit-
ical and social organizations that have not been banned and which of those
in the national movement should be banned. The interior minister said
that at first this was in the office of the People's Sacrifice Guerrillas
which was made up of many groups. After that this oversight was the
responsibility of the revolutionary guards where it still is until a de-
cision is taken by the government. In regard to the building of the
Mujahidin organization. I have talked with representatives of that or-
ganization and told them that, if they agreed, the government was willing
to assume the responsibility using the revolutionary guards to protect
the building. Two or three days later they announced that they did not
want the responsibility and that the interior ministry was willing to as-
sume responsibility using the revolutionary guards.

A question was asked concerning Kordestan and economic plans for the area.

Sadeq Tabataba'i said that all programs which were initiated were stopped
and workers assigned to the projects were taken hostage.

29
Hashem Sabaghian said that Kordestan is not the only place that needs
economic aid but also Sistan, Baluchistan, Bushehr, Bandar Abbas and other

places.

We have divided Kordestan into three areas: white, yellow and red. The
white area is that which has no security problem and developnent can take
place, but still no work was going on in these areas. He promised the
Hahabad City Council that if it is named a secure area we will commence
development as quickly and broadly as possible.
YAZDI LEAVES FOR HAVANA uonaum CONNOR
Tehran man's: in Persian 26 Aug 79 p 12

[Text] Dr Bbrahin Yazdi, foreign sinister, announced at his departure for
Cuba that Iran's foreign policy is founded on neutrality and noncomitnent
to the superpowers and noninvolvenent in the cold war. The conference of
nonslined nations is a good opportunity for us to introduce the values of
our revolution to the world.

Dr Yazdi brought up this topic during the discussion. He said that previ-
ously representatives of Iran had participated in the Rabat Islamic Con-
ference but our attendance at the nonalined conference is proper for the
welfare of an important world group. It is inportsnt both for us and for
the countries which are nenbers of this bloc.

Our foreign policy is always based on neutrality and no attachnent to the
superpowers or participants in the cold war. Therefore, it is possible
for the first tine for the Iranian revolution to make itself known to the
world. It also gives us the opportunity to nake known the great values
of our revolution.

Threats Against the Revolution

As you know there are many threats against our national revolution and
hence against the existence of the Islsnic Republic of Iran. At this con-
ference. which will have about 100 participants and guests. the opportunity
exists, in spite of these threats. to nake known the values. benefits and
reality of the Iranian Islamic revolution.

In the nonalined organization sole countries are nsiaers whose activities
are not for the good of the nonalined. The duty of countries interested
in the welfare of the organization is to stop these countries that tend to
the right or left and bring the influence of the superpowers into the or-
gsnization.

The active participation of Iran in the conference will bring effective

help to preserve the principles and unity of the nonalined organization
in real tom and with correct philosophy.

31
Hove to Cuba

The Iranian foreign minister, who left for Cuba today as the head of the
delegation, said in regard to the quality of actions and programs of the
conference that the presence of Iran is to strengthen the principles and
basic philosophy of the nonalined against the superpowers. Also, countries
of the third world want information on the basic ideas of our revolution

as a world ideology and our presence will further this.

In answer to the question, what will be the most important problem for Iran
at the conference, Dr Yazdi said that this would be to make known the real-
ities of the Iranian revolution to the nonalined and the third world. It
is important for us but also important for them. We have problems with
Palestine, Lebanon, fighting Zionism and we will also set forth ways to
organize the world's potential to fight imperialism. In answer to the
question, will Iran make specific proposals at the conference, the foreign
minister said that of course we have plans and proposals concerning rela-

tions with countries like Yugoslavia, Algeria and Syria which we hope will
be accepted.

At the end of the discussion Dr Yazdi remarked that we recognize the non-
alined as a new front and strong movement in the struggle with the super-
powers. The member countries of the organization in the third world have
similar strengths and capabilities, which based on the similarities in our

own foreign policy. can form a united front to fight superpower economic
domination.

96108
(:80: [0906

32
FROM: 0? THE OPPRESSED, NONALINED CONFERENCE WEED
Tehran mama in Persian 11 Sep 79 p 10

[Text] The conference of the nonalined in Havana. capital of Cuba, was
a demonstration of power and yet of a painful reality that where once
there was fire in the ashes. these seen to have gone out. He say see- to
because every developing country has touched upon its alinenent or non-

alinenent but none wants to or can spread its own renedies anong these
special countries.

The painful reality is the loud cry of billions of deprived people through-
out the world. Deprivation is caused by hunan actions and nest of the
deprived are the result of the exploitation of one hunan being by another.
In this regard the holy Koran uses the word "deprived" to nean "deprived
by someone." In the Last two centuries. which saw the growth of Hestern
inperialisn, the downtrodden of nenkind were day by day led into nore
weakness and misfortune so that other countries could becone nors afflu-
ent and powerful.

This cry that we nade constantly was an unanswered cry in the wilderness
before the Islamic revolution. with the revolution, another situation
prevailed. For the first tine in the history of an the greatest satanic
power was sent to the historic graveyard. llew fomlas for standards to
evaluate power cane into existence. These show other nations that they
can change history if they want. We see that the leader of the revolution
has tine and again invited the deprived of the world to unify. In his
statenent to the Islanic conference in Algeria. which he sent via
Bojatollah Khosroahahi, he asked for the creation of a united front of
the deprived. from both Isle-1c and non-Islamic countries. This invita-
tion, which was node at the sane tine to the nonalined countries. is
inportent and valuable from several aspects. History shows that fro-
the forsation of the first nonalined conference in Bandung in 1956 until
today. the nonalined have not only failed to forn a united front but in
these 23 years greater differences have arisen between then.

Principal Bases of Ilperieliss

The nonalined comtries have never agreed. The biggest crawls could be
the case of Egypt and Indonesia. canal Abd-el-Nesser and the late Soeharno.

33
with Nehru and Tito, were founders of the nonalined movement. After their
deaths their countries took on the appearance of bases for American imperi-
alism. Iran's message explains these facts. As long as the organization
is not in the hands of the nations they are condemned to break up. Coun-
tries following policies of the day and their own welfare divert the or-
ganization from the correct path. It is true, as we said at the beginning,
that this conference would be like past conferences and be a show of
strength. The reason for this is also basic. In these 23 years what

have the nonalined accomplished? Published statistics from the United
Nations show that the nonalined could not form a united front to solve
their own difficulties and work together.

Their problems are:

1. Hunger. Based on published statistics from the Horld Food and Agricul-
tural Organization, in 1974 a half million people in the poor countries,
also members of the nonalined movement, died of starvation. The reason
for this in the words of the organization is not only the lack of food but
there was no system for investing in agriculture and technology to create
more food. Another report published by the International Food Research
Society says that every day 25,000 children in poor countries, some of
them members of the nonalined movement, die of starvation. The United Na-
tions added in its announcement that 1.5 billion in Senegal, Hauretania,
Gambia, Cape Verde, Mali, Upper Volta, Niger, Chad, Zambia. Sudan, Pakis-
tan, Indonesia and tens of other countries suffer from hunger. In India
alone, 5 million children die of starvation. Malnutrition affects 75 per-
cent of the poor people of the world.

In the face of this great human problem, why do not some of the nonalined
countries make haste to save these countries with help at a time when the

great powers are selling them billions of dollars a year in arms.

2. Armaments. The U.S. Arms Control Agency said in a report that in 1976
more than $398.9 billion of arms were sold, of which $308.3 were spent by
developed countries, $90.7 by developing countries.

The United States in 1977 sold $13.4 billion in arms to under developed
countries. Last year the figure did not pass $11.5 billion. Saudi Arabia
alone spent $6.4 billion for arms.

3. Refugees. Millions of citizens of nonalined countries have fled for
their lives and have taken refuge in other countries. According to offi-
cial UN statistics the number of homeless from various countries are:

Palestine: 2.5 million homeless, Lebanon 200,000, African continent, be-
tween 6 and 5 million, far eastern countries, 650,000.

In Cambodia 3 million out of 6 million lost their lives as a result of the
civil war.

3h
According to official statistics. there are now $1.00 billion worth of arms
in the world. but the financial office of the UN Refugee Comittee. founded

in 1951, has a budget of only about $200 million a year and is responsible
for administering aid to more than 20 million homeless.

in view of these figures we say that the nonalined countries should think
primarily of the condition of their own pitiful people if they really care
about anything besides putting up a front.

A United Front of the Disadvantaged

Until today these conferences have been noted only for speeches and propa-

ganda. after which each goes his own way. If these countries really want
to help their own people they must:

1. Follow the words of Imam Khomeyni and form a front of the underprivi-

leged in all developing countries. To achieve unity, the disadvantaged
must for- a front which can then oppose the well fed which so far the de-
prived of the world have done separately.

2. To take a non-Bast. non-Heat foreign policy. But nonattachment or no
military agreements with East or West cannot be the sole criterion for
membership, because countries like Indonesia and Egypt and Palestine are

not members of a military pact but are still political and economic ad-
herents of imperialism.

3. To diminish their stupendous military budgets and stop buying weapons
to kill each other. Cooperate economically and politically.

lo. To expand cooperation in the fields of industry. agriculture, educa-

tion and economics it would be best to form a permanent organization like
the United nations.

5. Rich countries of the nonalined should aid the poor countries and if

they have large reserves of oil and gas they should sell them to these
countries for less than the international price.

If the countries that are meeting today in Havana want to eliminate self-
ishness and expansionism and want to help other countries, they can bring
into existence a genuine third force against both East and Vest using the
greatest God-given natural resource. the great power of humanity, and
bring a better life to their own pitiful and backward nations.

910108
C50: 6906

35
POSTPONEHENT 0P SECOND GAS PIPELINE PRAIS-
Tehran KEYHAN in Persian 11 Sep 79 p 10

[Text] The Islamic Republic radio has announced that the Iranian govern-
ment has decided to postpone the second gas pipeline all over the country.
This pleases the friends and well wishers of the nation and makes them
hopeful of the future. It also angers and threatens the world's oil and
gas exploiters who are against the people of Iran. Friends are happy be-
cause they know that the abundant gas which lies in the ground, and which
makes up a major part of the nation's riches, will be safe from plunderers.

The Kangan gas field, one of the three or four largest in the world. has
nearly 2 trillion cubic meters of gas based on small information from only
a few wells. In view of the depth and level of the deposit and the few
existing wells, these reserves must be considered the minimum which we can
estimate now. For a true estimate many more wells must be drilled. Drill-
ing is difficult because of the thickness of the geologic crust. greet
variable pressures. aineral deposits and the great distance fron sources
of water and manpower. Up to now this could only be done with the help

of profit-seeking foreigners.

Finally, the extraction of gas fron the Kangan field is also technically
difficult because the field has more than one layer of gas, thus requiring
expensive methods to drill wells, the result of which produced the nulter
of severe and expensive contracts with foreign companies.

Transporting gas to consumers: 1) using large, extensive pipelines, e.g.
to the border of the Soviet Union or Turkey, requires a great investment
and the construction of a widespread system of pulping stations; 2) liqui-
fying the gas in plants near the field and hauling the liquified gas to
consumers by see also requires great expenditures to build the plants.

If we went to ship the liquified gas ourselves we would also need to in-
vest enormous sure in shipping lines.

Implementing This Master Plan

None of these difficult operations can be undertaken at this time without
the participation of foreign, profit-seeking colpanies and modern technology.

36
Therefore. we would be obliged to use foreign workers to implement the
Plan and make weekly expenditures to buy modern technology. Thus, if the
current, artificially low price of gas remains, it would not accord with
exPenditures and making huge investments from the pockets of the people
C°uld not be justified, especially if there are other places in the econ-
OUY that could use them. The flood of foreign specialists would also stop
39 We Iranians do not have the means to implement a complicated industrial
plan. Transferring the execution of this project to foreigners using
their investment, with accompanying large profits and severe political
consequences, which no one knows better than we Iranians, is out of the
Question except for the traitoroua Shah's government. From what existed
before, the insane from our oil can now be used for projects of benefit

to the country, praise God. There is no necessity for the extraction and
sale of cheap gas, the strategic energy of the 20th and let centuries.

It 18 much better strategy to keep these enormous sources of gas in the
SYOUHd, to stop depleting natural resources and not supply the reserves
Of the world's oil eaters. The nation will get along in any case. After
rebuilding the ruined society left over from the corrupt, traitorous
Pahlevi regime, we still have enough left over for industrial growth. By
“91n8 gas for daily needs we can so these projects ourselves. We can
either use it, put it up for sate, or increase production by using the
inJection process. depending on economics, the political situation or the
needs of industry.

Revolutionary Decisions

Perhaps it can be asked, why do other countries sell their gas? First,
it must be remembered that not many countries have our great blessing,
area: quantities of gas, because nature does not divide its treasures
equally. Countries that at present have large amounts of gas are: the
Soviet Union. Iran, the United States, Algeria, Holland, France, etc.
France, the United States, Holland and the Soviet Union do not sell gas
at Present but the Soviet Union, Algeria etc. must export some gas to
Obtain foreign loans. After the great Iranian national revolution. some
exPorting countries also changed their views about exporting this stra-
tesic product and this has brought lower levels of production.

"by 18 the cartel of world oil users angry with Iran over this clear-
sishted decision? We know that gas makes up nearly 20 percent of world
energy use (oil is about 45 percent) and its price is nearly 20 percent
Ch“Per than oil. Many industrial countries take advantage of the cheap
price and abundance of gas by burning gas in industry, factories and even
autos. Therefore. Germany, France, Italy and England, which lack gas or
hﬂVe only limited amounts, are trying to obtain gas supplies from abroad
for its industry which needs more every day. For example, a 300-kilometer
PiPeline carries North Sea gas to the northeast coast of England and an
A18¢r1an pipeline supplies ltaly, Austria and Germany. Therefore, indus-
trial nations are always looking for new sources of cheap gas and to this
end "111 stop at nothing. He know that from the first Jet of gas from the

37
Kangan gas well a few years ago the oil companies and their powerful pa-
trons, i.e., the industrial nations. turned to Iran with great appetite
and through treason and the loyalty of the treasonous. thieving government
of the former Shah imposed a second vast pipeline on the country which be-
came an artery for the life blood of its own industry. They had dreams

of gold from these valuable fields of the Iranian nation. They thought
that quickly they could do with then what they had done to the oil of
Khuzestan (From about 8 billion tons of oil in the Khuzestan fields. about
half was extracted between 1286 [21 Mar 1907~20 Her 1908] and 1333 [21 Mar
1954—20 Mar 1955] by British imperialism and later by the American, British,
Dutch and French consortium, who stole it at low prices). of course. this
golden dream of stealing gas was ended by the victorious revolution. This
is the reason for the anger and enmity of the oil thieves to the decision
of the Iranian nation to preserve its oil underground for the future. Most
news services of the exploiting countries have said that Iran and the other
exporting countries are the principal cause of the economic crisis. They
say that perhaps Iran has turned off its gas out of enmity to Europe. The
truth that no values have been turned off and that gas is being preserved
in the ground is concealed from their people in order to aggravate and
anger them toward the Iranian revolution. This is also meant to convince
the people that all their economic problems are not the fault of their sys-
tems and governments and hang the blame around the neck of Iran and the
other exporting countries.

In contrast to these acts of the enemies of Iran, any honorable person who
shows to the present government that he has the welfare of Iran in mind

will be aided. We want happiness as the result of this decision and noth-
ing else.

9448
650: 4906
RETROSPBCTIVE 0N YOH KIPPUR UAR PRESENTED
Tel Aviv AL HAMISHHAR in Hebrew 28 Sep 79 Weekend Supplement pp 8-9
[Article by Eli Feingarsh: "The Secret of the Generals' Har"]

[Text] As the years go by it is possible with more ease and objectivity
to look back upon the Yom Kippur war, with its political viewpoints and
the many military issues. The present anniversary day of the Yom Kippur
war pushes further from us the horror of the wars of Israel, at a distance
beyond the time measure of a single year. The first year of peace. "which
passed peacefully" and brought in its wake political and security attain-
ments beyond what had been planned for and anticipated, placed the Yom
Kippur Var in another and different light than in the past. In a conspic-
uous and clear manner the great tragedy of two nations which have signed

a peace treaty between them now stands out and screams out after they had
drawn the blood of their sons in a cruel and needless war.

Three Books

One of the means permitting an evaluation of the Yom Kippur War that is
more comprehensive and objective is the three source books which were pub-
lished during the past year. Yitzhaq kabin's book “Service Record“ for

the first time reveals important and authentic details about the tripartite
negotiations for an interim arrangement or partial agreement that focused
on the opening of the Suez Canal. It becomes increasingly apparent that

the failure of these negotiations is the chief polluting agent for the Yom
Kippur War. It is superfluous to point out the significance of this version
with respect to the factors which brought about the failure of the nego-
tiations in the early years of the 1970's.

The book of Ranoch Bartov on "Daddo" deals mainly with the moves and the
events during the war as determined and viewed on the political-military
strategic level. The book revises recorded history, both public and
privileged, of the Agranat Commission Report and its harsh projections
upon the senior military echelon.
The book of "Beren" Avraham Aden, "0n Both Banks of the Suez," details the
prircipal tactical moves on the battlefield itself, analyzes and clarifies
complex situations and draws cautious conclusions. The three books comple-
ment one another in several political episodes and in many military events,
but for a full and consecutive view of this chapter of the war there is
still a lack of source books which might complete and broaden the political
and military backdrop, and of those able to bring other clarification,

knowledge and intellectual grasp to the events and the battles which are
already known publicly.

The Eighth of October

One of the topics on which a great deal of writing and consideration has
been devoted is the Eighth of October, the day of the first counterattack
of the ID? on the southern front. In general they are prone to dealing
with the technical moves and description of the battles in the area while
dealing less with the factors which moved the war machines and those who
operated them. Such is, for example, the issue of the War of the Generals.
Within the overall tragedy of the war an Israeli tragedy revealed itself,
which laid bare the weakness of the social foundation and the system of
relations among the senior IDF commanders. The very highly positive
social image of IDF commanders in the Israeli public view and in world
public opinion absorbed a severe blow. The struggle of the generals,
first revealed in the events of 8 October on the Egyptian front and becom-
ing damagingly sharper, continued and days and months thereafter, was
boundless in its accusations, vilifications and sharp outbursts.

It must not be assumed at all that differences of opinion and tactical
perceptions. as they became clear on that day, were the sole source of
this mighty outburst of mutual accusations. The generals who grew up and
were trained on the values of the Haganah and of the IDF, in which they
served together for most of the best years of their lives, and tMose for-
mations they commanded in all of lsrael's wars, certainly stored up within
them over the course of years sensations of depression and envy as well

as blind struggles on differing perceptions. All of these reached a
boiling point under the battle stress of the Yom Kippur War.

Answers to questions as to whether this outburst of passions was by the
force of reality, and why it occurred only on the southern front, and how
other military organizations cope with so sensitive an issue, might dispel
the mist of battle surrounding the struggle of the generals. Even among
other nations there must surely be differences of opinion and fixing of
blame on one commander or another, but the national social norms protect
them within the area of civil and ethical expression. Considerations of
overall national damage which might come about from unbridled verbal hos-
tility moderates and reins the individual in his personal expressions.

The senior officer knows also that in order to clarify conflicts for

no
absolving from blame or for clearing of his name there are at his disposal
reliable governmental instruments and institutions, to which he is not only
enabled and obligated to turn with his allegations. but that they are also

what prevent him, by the law. from giving total freedom to the venting of
wild passions.

Among a number of ID? generals of that period, such civil and ethical "in-
dividual confidence" was totally lacking. Hith no consideration whatever
of the destructive influence that open and unbridled hostility was apt to
cause to the military in particular, and to all of society. they made
heard their words with no limitations of timing content or style. This
was clear expression of extreme egotism which destroyed many vital sections

in the area of fundamental values in the military, such as wartime comrade-
ship.

However. when the start of the struggle of the generals was revealed pub-
licly, the senior military and political echelon failed as well. The
chief of staff no longer retained the authority to silence by a decree
those generals who were going wild with their language, and the political
echelon was incapable of channeling the outbursts of the commanders into
appropriate and responsible instruments and systems. The arbitrary limi-
tations which the Agranat Commission imposed upon itself and upon its many

witnesses made it impossible for the generals to express their pleas as
they desired.

Both of these senior echelons were in fact involved, in this measure or
another, in the moves and the events which took place during the first
days of the war and the projecrions of which found expression in the public
portion of the Agranat Commission Report, but the lawful authority to con-
trol the situation was still at their disposal. And so there prevailed

and continued without hindrance a massive anarchy on the national ethical
level.

Between North and South

The absence of sufficient control of the senior echelons in the nation on
the military commanders and the disdain on the part of the letter in
accepting decisive governmental authority, which manifested itself also

in the lack of operational discipline, were an outcome of the system of
relations and the atmosphere which prevailed in the ID? even previously.
The confrontation of the generals began in effect even before the Yom
Kippur War, in the discussions and the expressions of opinion on leading
military and-security matters. Chiefs of the general staff and of com-
mands showed disdain for the authority of the military establishment,

they leaned upon a civilian system of public relations. Every self-respect-
ing general acquired for himself a press entourage which very willingly
absorbed his thoughts and opinions, in order to disseminate them in public.

kl
The military establishment lost its power to influence permanence and pre-
paredness in the strategic area and battle theory. Against this background
there were circumventions of discipline in the high echelons and many see
in this overall atmosphere which reigned at that time in the IDF the malig-
nant source of the drop in the level of discipline in the military.

The senior commanders who fought on the Syrian front also lived and func-
tioned under such background conditions, of course. The opening conditions
of the war on the Syrian front were more difficult for the 10? than were
those on the Egyptian front. In the north there was no strategic depth.
the stopping of the Syrian forces was accomplished literally at the edge

of the descent into the Huleh Valley, the ratios of forces during the first
2 days of the war were worse than in the south, improvisations for unifi-
cation of forces and of tactical solutions greatly characterize the battle
against the massive Syrian incursion. Despite these difficult conditions
no confrontation whatever erupted among the commanders of the northern
command.

What. then, were the "special" reasons of the southern front which germ-
inated the severe struggle of the generals?

In a slightly more penetrating comparison between the battle conditions on
the two fronts during the first 2 days of the war it appears that despite
what has been written above, the sum of the conditions and the factors of
which a military establishment in a broad battle sector is composed were
inestimably more severe in the south than in the north. Among such fact-
ors the senior command is the principal component which determines the
outcome of the campaign. The quarrel of the generals erupted against the
background of the battle events of 8 October. The failure of the first
Israeli counterattack broke all of the accepted wisdom with respect to the
battle capabilities of the Egyptian enemy and the superiority of the IDF
command. The breakdown of concepts and perceptions, feelings of dissap-
pointment and frustration-~these were vented in the search for a culpable
one in the military failure.

A Type of General

The central figure in the war of the generals was Major General 8. Gonen,
a general in the southern command. The Agranat Commission attributed to
him the principal blunders which led to the failure of the attack. and
recommended limiting his utilization by the IDP. In the description of
the personality of Gonen, Beren writes, among other things: "I knew Gonen
well. I was his commander during the many turns of his service (since
1956). I knew he had qualities. In Operation Kedesh he earned a decora-
tion of the chief of the general staff. During the Six Day War, when he
fought as Unit Commander 7. he gained a great deal of publicity. He was
courageous and a professional armored corps-an. He fashioned for himself
an exhibitionist image and a reputation as a severe disciplinarian, and in
that I was dissatisfied with him. He imposed discipline upon his command-
ers through intimidation, both from the standpoint of style and from the
standpoint of substance. More than once I saw him fling objects. tear maps.
and bellow at those surrounding him. and impulsively rushing to incarcerate
soldiers. It was amazing that a type so impulsive toward those subordinate
to him knew how to control his emotions and exercise extraordinary self-
control when it involved ranks superior to him. Toward his commanders he
was a moderate among moderates; he was what is called in military jargon an
aceomplished "cyclist," among those who press hard toward the bottom while
their eyes are riveted toward the top. The most serious of all in his style
of leadership appears to me to be the restricting of the movements of those
subordinate to him. They were forbidden to take a step, no matter how
small, without his knowledge. Fear reigned around him and more than once

i saw adults losing their power of thinking while standing in his presence."

The capability of Gonen's staff work is described by Beren when he mentions

a group exercise in which Conan served as an officer in the operations
branch at general headquarters:

"In the course of the exercise I observed close-up how unsuccessful Gonen
was in carrying out his mission. That because he bellowed and imposed fear
on his aides, thereby causing them to freeze with terror. A situation was
created whereby people were incapable of assisting him. Naturally, under
such conditions Gonen was unsuccessful in accomplishing his mission."

Qualifications for Failure

At the conclusion of that exercise Beren reported to Daddo, who was at that
time the commander of the group being exercised. on Gonen's behavior and
work capability. He stressed the hazard to the IDF from an officer such as
Gonen who, in his opinion. has no place in the military. In the course of
time Daddo promoted Gonen to general and subsequently to head of the south-
ern command. In Beren‘s Opinion, Gonen was not mature enough for his mis-
sion and possessed all of the qualities for failure: "Control over large
bodies of troops requires help in staff work, and Conan was incapable of
consolidating staff work. Even his experience as commander of a group was
limited and restricted. since he commanded a reserve group during a rela-
tively short period only. He did not even have the opportunity to drill
himself in command of a group with all of its troops and components."

The stories of the character and behavior of Conan are many and fascinating.
Whoever was not an eye~witness to these manifestations will not believe that
thus indeed was the face of things in the formations which he commanded.

His image was an anomaly in the IDF--it was quite easy to discern the feel-
ing of inferiority and the aspiration toward superiority of the type of
person so amply characterized by Beren‘s definition, "the cyclist."
With the outbreak of the war a perplexing situation was created. Gonen,

the young inexperienced general, commanded the principal war front, while
the veteran and experienced Generals Sharon and Adan were under his com-

mand. Gonen did not remain in this assignment to the end of the war and

the question is whether his inevitable replacement should not have taken

place immediately upon the outbreak of war.

The chief of the general staff. who according to Beren's interpretations
felt friendship for Conen since the time he had served in his group as an
officer of the operations branch of general headquarters, but unlimited
confidence in him and did not distinguish the obstacles which directed all
of the activities of his student.

The Crossing Insanity

The feeling of inferiority and superiority, the arrogance and the disdain
for the enemy, directed the considerations and decisions of Gonen even on

8 October. Without considering the tactical situation which had taken

form in the area, he dreamed of only one thing--crossing of the Canal. All
of his plans which had been altered numerous times on that day had this
common denominator. His reports to the general staff were influenced by
visions of an improved military situation, which makes possible and requires
the crossing of the Canal. His zeal to demonstrate to the entire world that
he, as the commander of noted and experienced generals, is to lead the
troops of Israel over the Canal into the heart of Egypt disconnected him
from any realistic vision and rational thinking which were required by the
severe situation which prevailed on the front.

In this compulsion to cross the Canal at the earliest "impossible" oppor-
tunity, Gonen found great love and support in Arik Sharon. The second
central image in the war of'the generals also was revealed in all its per-
sonal and negative nudity. The egotistical urge of Sharon to accomplish
at any price his original p1an--to cross the Canal-cut him, too, off from
an overall perspeccive of the severe battle picture.

Beren argues in his book that Sharon, who knew what the activity of the
enemy in his sector was, did.not clarify the situation to Gonen, and thus
erred in that he did not hold his sector appropriately and abandoned it
before the forces of Beren seized it. Beren criticizes Sharon severely
for failure to carry out orders of the command-to transfer a battalion to
his group-as well as for his refusal to support it toward evening in an
attack upon the enemy from the south to the north.

The significance of the behavior of Sharon symbolizes mainly a lack of war
comradeship and an extreme egotism. The two generals at the center of the
war of the generals, therefore, were of identical lines of character and
similar norms of behavior and authenticity. During recent years we have
seen that even in the civilian careers of both, these characteristics
manifest themselves. "It's all a matter of character"--that is the only
appropriate explanation for the confrontation among the generals, which
visited such great damage upon the ID? and upon all of society.

8090
080: 10805
'AL-ANBA' ' COHEN'I'S 0N AL-ASAD'S PDSCOH TALKS
LD190953 Kuwait KW in Arabic 07116 GMT 19 Oct 79 L0

[Text] MaitnAL-ANBA' said that the building of the Arab military force
was the only way to make sure that we are not trapped into negotiations
and are capable of war or peace. Moreover, this is the best alternative
for those who want genuine victory.

The paper was coanenting on the Moscow talks by Syrian President Hafiz al-
Asad and the announcement about their total success on the political, arna-
nent and economic levels.

The paper referred to the statements by the Saudi crown prince and the
chairnan of the no expressing expectations in connection with the estab-
lishment of a just peace and the setting up of a Palestinian state.

AL-QABAS cemented on the Soviet-Syrian statement issued at the end of
President Hafiz al-Asad's visit to Moscow. It said that the joint state-
ments do not always reflect the real decisions reached at talks because
they are often drafted with extreme precision to create specific suggestions
which night be true but which night be nerely a canouflage.

The paper referred to what it termed the vague expression in the state-ant
with regard "to the continuation of support for the strengthening of Syria's
capabilities." AL-QABAS expressed its hope that the strengthening of capa-
bilities neans the continuation of the support “with greater drive and
larger volu-e in proportion to the increasing challenges which Syria and
the Arabs in general are being subjected to in this part of the world."

The paper believed that the Soviets did not disappoint President al-Asad.
although they did not meet all his demands. It said that the alliance be-
tween Demons and Hoscov had made long strides "and it is no longer in the
interest of the Soviets to leave Syria exposed to Israel nilitarily." It
added that the Canp David parties have chiefly concentrated their pressure
on Syria to achieve a further sin, namely to exert pressure on the Soviets,
to try to expose than in the Middle East and, if possible. expel the- fro-
the region.

156
SINGLE ARAB POLICY VIEWED AS ONE-DIMENSIONAL, SHORTSIGBTED

Kuwait AL-QABAS in Arabic 22 Sep 79 pp 1, 17

[Editorial by Henry Hemeti: "Re-examination Required for Single Arab Policyy

[Text] A single Arab policy prevails at present in the Arab world. These
are the principles of this policy:

A. Arab solidarity.

3. Restoration of the territories occupied in June 1967 in return for peace
with Israel and recognition of its existence.

C. The creation of a Palestinian entity that reduces our rights in Palestine
to a part of the West Bank of Jordan and Gaza Strip.

D. Entrenchment of the political and social map of the Arab states and of
their regimes.

E. Peace in the Middle East and equal relations with all countries of the
world under the western wing of the international detente.

A single Arab policy, we say?
Yes, a single policy!

Even Egypt, which is outwardly outside the concept of Arab solidarity. is
practically within the Arab consensus of these principles which the steed-
fastness and confrontation states have turned into their slogans and goals.
The truth that many dare not declare is that the urgent Egyptian sove
needed the steadfastness and confrontation denonstration and benefited
free it by the degree of the practical progress that this nova achieved
for this single Arab policy in the area and within the international
sphere. This is an actual fact and it is futile to deny it. The contro-
versial relationship that binds the love and the deaonstration is sost
like, if you wish. two conflicting roles in a drsns: Bach achieves its
desired effect by the degree by which it distinguishes and strengthens
itself.

In
However, the single Arab policy includes nothing other than these principles
concerning Palestine and which have now come to be known, even in the
popular "terminology," as "the issue of Hiddle East peace." This is the
entire sphere of this policy. Within this framework, this policy has set
for itself a final goal which it has expressed in the demand for "the just
and lasting peace" with its two well-known conditions: Withdrawal of

the Jews from the Arab territories occupied in 1967 and their recognition

of the legitimate rights of the Palestinian people.

So, what we mean by the single Arab policy is the Arab consensus on these
two conditions and the joint external political coordination to realize
then. after guaranteeing that abidance by the two conditions will constitute
the ultimate boundaries of the political thought and political action in
all parts of the Arab world. This consensus has not been impossible,
despite the social and political differences and conflicts contained with
the Arab societies and their political systems. This consensus has not
been impossible for numerous reasons, the most important being the size of
the mini-states confronting the conflict with its international caliber and
the retreat of these states to the point of succumbing to the will of the
U.S.-Soviet detente that has drawn the Middle East peace map in its own way.

Yes, it can be said that the unity of the current Arab policy is a reflection
of the international detente. This statement of ours does not justify the
retreat and the acceptance. It simply explains the historical fact concealed
by the medis--s fact which finds a fuller explanation in an analysis of

this united Arab position toward the Palestinian issue. Stating this fact
requires no eloquence and no metaphor. The fact is simply summed up in

that the confrontation mini-states cannot launch war without western money
and eastern weapons, without the less important capabilities possessed by

the single Arab policy, without a convenient international climate permitting
these states to reject peace and recognition and without intrinsic domestic
conditions that free them of the pincers of social and political disunity

and of economic and cultural backwardness and enable them to say no with
their own strength and through another, and different, Arab policy.

However, there is between declaration of the principles of rejection and
declaration of the principles of acceptance a possibility for a different
kind of action-~namely, harboring the principles of silent action. The
Arab approach toward the Palestinian issue has excluded this kind of action
from its calculations and has set no place for it on the stage of the
political drama that it has agreed to perform.

It seems that silence is the true steadfastness in this phase. The single
Arab policy lacks any principle that we can achieve silently in our real
life, as if the sole purpose of this policy is to underline the sincerity
of the Arabs, their moderate demands and their honest intentions. Hhat we
declare is all we harbor inside and there is nothing else there whereas
politics consist of the apparent and of the hidden, of what we promise
and what we intend!

hB
The historical fact on which we are trying to shed light in this quick review
of the single Arab policy is the absence of the principle of the possible,

in its dynamic sense, from among the principles of this policy. This policy
lacks. therefore. a futuristic diaension.

The fact that must be underlined in this review is that the ainiaum-limit
policy of which the Arab states talked collectively in Baghdad is actually
the maximum-limit policy followed by each of the Arab states separately
within its own political entity and within its relations with the other
states. especially in regard to the fundamental needs that the confrontation
requires of these mini-states and of their econoly, culture and ethnic
structure. At the level of the bilateral relations between these mini-
states and at the level of the social, psychological and political problems
under which they are suffering, we can see nothing that goes beyond this
minimum limit, either in the thought or in the approach of these states:

Their political relations with one another have continued to accmlate
inadequacy.

Their internal relations--and Lebanon is a mirror that reflects all of them--
have continued to be an explosive (coapound).

We will not be exaggerating if we say that these mini-states have found in
the minimum-limit policy a way out, a pretext and a support—and there is
no need to explain the meaning of these words.

Moreover, what has compelled the Arabs to abide by the aim-lint policy?
Besides, what drags and drives them to hurry up a solution for the
Palestinian problem in this manner, as if all the historical chances have
escaped their hands and this is the last chance? There is no doubt (the
fault lies in the interpretation of the facts and phenomena of sociology
and of politics). Meanwhile, the centers of Arab strength on which the
Arab strategy is built are in conflict with the actual Arab policy. both
qualitatively and quantitatively.

This is unless the fault is more than a transient mental slip in the course
of human life with its regular laws.

8491s
CSO: 4802
ARAB'S HIRRY ma PALESI‘INIAN SOLUI'ION CRITICIZED
Kuwait AL-QABAS in Arabic 23 Sep 79 pp 1, 21

[Editorial by Henry Hamti: "Centers of Strength and Weakness?

[Text] Every strategy is established on points of strength, and so is the
current Arab strategy. Our concern here is solely within the liaits of
conparison between the reality of the Arab strength and the dimensions of
the Arab co-aon strategy toward the Palestinian issue.

It is also our concern that these words not be used—like all words against
the United States, Israel and Egypt—to serve this strategy, to persuade the
west of the enormous concessions ends by the Arabs or to qloy rejection
in order to highlight the virtues of acceptance.

To put it briefly. the Arab financial-political strength coupler-under
which we can include the various for-s of the oil and marketing power, the
geographic daographic and ideological strength and the econouic, cultural
and political conditions conducive to the western interests--is the prinry
base of the Arab political action at present.

The picture of this enormous base is revealed in the following observations:

Economic colonialisa, or the so-called econonic relations between the northern
countries and the southern countries, is practically impossible except when
two conditions are available: Industrial baclnvardness and Haney.

The position of the Arab market internationally lies in the fact that it
possesses the soot valuable cash resource in the world, with a backward
industrial situation.

The dialogue between the north and the south is futile because the south

is backward and possesses no money to purchase the advanced production of
the north.

The significance of the oil does not lie in its being a source of cash
revenues but in its being a source of energy. by being a source of energy,
the western society. Socially, it has been possible to eliminate the control
of the owners of the "fundamental industries" through nationalization.
Internationally, there is no solution to this problem--the problem of the
predomination of oil as a source of energy that is ever-increasingly needed
by every economic activity--except military colonization. This is why the
United States. the west generally, and the east—through the exchange of
benefits--have an interest in the continued presence of Rhodesia, Israel.
Taiwan and similar places as hot areas or as readily available pretexts

for military intervention. or at least the threat of military pressure.

Through the theories of liberal economists, or the remants of such theories--
theories such as having the state impl-ent big public projects through

which it puts into circulation sums of local currency necessary to enable

the cannon people to purchase the goods produced locally—the European state
has been frequently able to save its industry from collapse. (Before World'
War II, the rescue operation cue through destroying the economic structures
of the backward colonies, plundering their raw materials at trivial prices
and forcing them to purchase consumer production). However, the application
of these theories at the international level currently, in the form of aid

to the developing countries and within the limits to which this aid has

been offered, has not been enough to guarantee the fate and future of the
western industries. especially the European industries. However, this aid
has been enough to increase inflation by such an enormous degree which has
made raw materials (except oil--the source of energy) of relatively small
value. This means that the poor countries will become more and lore incapable
of purchasing the western products.

The Arab market which has no industry and which is full of money--along with
the other oil countries: Iran, Venezuela and Mexico-do the real south with
which the dialogue, the northern industrial countries are aware, is useful.
The dialogue with this south is a must. is vital and is even fateful. As
for the remaining poor countries of the south, the European countries have

found themselves compelled to rotate their due debts. out of need and not
out of generosity.

With this position, we are a thousand times better off than China. Yet,
China has not accepted to be a corpse and Taiwan a living body! Taiwan
constituted a gap in China's wall and the Chinese did not accept the
continued presence of this gap or the west's entry through this gap. They
refused to open their doors, despite their needs that were rising to the
point of strangulation, before toppling Taiwan and they have toppled Taiwan.
Despite their needs, they have toppled it!

With this position, we are a million times better off than the Organisation
of African Unity. Yet. the west's position toward Rhodesia is much firmer
than its position toward Israel.

What has come to be constantly described as a political victory may not be
in fact more than a catastrophe.

51
'de are witnessing a sharp psychological obsession with scoring a political
victory against Israel that reflects at the saunter-in the visualization
of the current Arab strategy--Israel's recognition of the right of the
Palestinians to a part of the bank of a river and to a severed strip in
return for recognition by the Palestinians and by others of firm Jewish
rights to Palestine.

Our sole concern is comparison!

In the face of the current Arab power, we find that the United States is
dealing with us firmly at a tine when it is under the energy crisis, under
the pressure of the dollar crisis and under the burdens of its allies in
Europe and the Far East.

We find the Europeans, the predatory nations. still dealing with us hesitantly
at a time when they are under the threat of an industrial collapse that can
result, within a letter of a few weeks, in a crushing political collapse

of all the European democratic systens.

We find Israel acting like a lion and a tiger, in the words of Jewish author
Ephraim (Sivila), at a tine when it is engaging in "international beggary."
It is now begging from the United Stated 3.5 billion dollars to cover its
economic collapse!

Our sole concern is comparison!

After all this, we find ourselves—surprise of all surprisasncowpelled to
entrench the Israeli presence with peace and recognition and forced to
offer guarantees that sake the peace lasting. These guarantees are demands
that we are afraid to embark on. The biggest danger of the present Arab
strategy is that it is in a hurry and that it does not keep any thoughts
to itself. It contains nothing but itself at a tine when it is based on
an enormous Arab power that we have nisevaluated and misused.

When we exasine the subject of our hurry on its own and without the other
subjects, we discover a fatal miscalculation. Vs find, for example, that
it is in the interest of the United States itself and of the west generally
for setters not to proceed with such speed, for the Middle East probla
not to be coupletely settled at present and for the Arab acceptance not

to be so cowrehensive and profound to the degree whereby Israel stops
being a proble- for us and loses its position as a center of pressure
through which they control the oil prices because the oil prices will then
follow the law of supply and desand, like the western products.

If Israel is not going to disappear, why the hurry?

If Israel's survival will keep us, if we do not deal with its tomorrow in
its capacity as a problem under the nightmare of international pressure
similar to the pressure under which we live at present, then wh; all this
hurry? -
If it is in the interest of the United States for Israel to continue to be
a problem and for the labor preceding the birth of peace-a birth with
which the United Stated claims to be helping Israel--to be prolonged (10
years have passed so far on the Rogers Plan and this is a period counted
as part of the oil era), then isn't it in our interest to re-exasine.

with mini-um consideration for our power, the elenent of strength in our
Arab strategy? Perhaps we say discover that in addition to lacking any
futuristic thinking. this strategy is also free of concerns that require
time to be settled, except the concern of settling the Palestinian issue
before it is too late.

We are confident that we do not need all the current Arab economic and
political weight to destroy Israel in the aanner in which Taiwan and Saigon
have been destroyed. It is our opinion that we do not need all the current
Arab economic and political weight to conclude peace with Israel and to
recognize it when such peace and recognition become a useful goal!

We need a faithful and intelligent strategy that includes the other concerns
that are totally disregarded by the current Arab strategy. Re need a
strategy that does not repeat the only word it knows for one or two decades
of our life and that is not committed to tile and not bored by it. We need
a strategy that requires tine to utilize its points of strength and to
develop them so that it may achieve through then what it does not declare.

8694
C80: ‘802

53
JORDANIAN, PALESTINIAN, LEBANESB AGREEMENT MUD-
Kuwait AlrQABAS in Arabic 26 Sep 79 p l

[Bditorialz "Jordan, Lebanon and Resistance: ktracting Strength Pro.
weakness")

[Text] weakening the Arab regines will not strengthen the Palestinian
resistance and strengthening the weak Arab regines will not weaken the
resistance. on the contrary it will strengthen it.

The no should have finally realized this, even though it acted in the past
on the strength of the opposite concept.

It has been proven now that the confrontation with Jordan weakened both
sides while adding strength to their co-on ene-y. It is also being proven
now that the frag-entation in the Lebanese structure is reflected on the
Palestinian resistance by the sane severe degree by which Lebanon is harmed.

what the P10 is currently trying to do is to extract strength tron weakness,
both in Jordan and in Lebanon. King Bussyn's neeting with Chair-an 'Aratat
in A-sn a few days ago was sons kind of a legitinate noting of two heads
under one roof, a kind of agre-ent to share the piece of bread instead

of fighting over it and an endeavor for solidarity in good tines and bad
tines.

It scene that the sane thing is being repeated in Lebanon through the meeting
of President Sarltis and Chair-an 'Arafat. The decision that any have been
taken by the Palestinian resistance to withdraw its forces free southern
Lebanon does not weaken the resistance and it strengthens Lebanon. "hen

the Jordanian-Palestinian-lebaneae robe is fully woven, the three parties
will find the-selves in a better position internally, internationally and

at the Arab level.

Since the announcement of the Can David accords, the PLO has displayed

a larger degree of independence in its actions and conduct. This independence
has allowed the Palestinian resistance to shine lore brightly at the inter-
national level, to perform a bigger role at the level of. the Arab nova-ant

and to have a greater presence in the international calculations.

5'0
This fact nust eliminate the Arab illusion that has prevailed in the ninds
for long years, nsnely the illusion that custodianship over the resistance
is better for it than independence. It has now became evident that the

Arab custodiansbip over the resistance has weakened the Arabs and weakened
the resistance also.

If the resistance pursues its thrust in this sound direction, it may succeed
in penetrating all the Arab negative barriers to become a center of polariza-
tion for the Arab regimes and for rspprochenent anon; then. Let us dream
that the agreement of al-Husayn, 'Arsfst and Sarkis for better or for Horse
will reflect its positive traces on the Syrian-Iraqi relations.

8&94
C50: 4802

55
CENSUS TO BE CONDUCTED IN FEBRUARY 1980
Kuwait AL-QABAS in Arabic 27 Sep 79 p 2

[Article: "Preparations for Population Census at Beginning of February;
Population Increased Hundredfold in 200 Years"]

[Text] The Ministry of Planning, in participation with specialized experts,
is currently preparing for the population census which will take place in
Kuwait on 1 February 1980.

The previous population statistics and estilates that date back to 1765
stress that between 1765 and 1975, i.e.. within nearly 200 years, Kuwait's
population increased 99.5 tiles.

The statistics also show that in the 18 years between 1957 and 1975 the
population increased fourfold.

The results of the latest population census conducted in “sit in 1975
showed that Kuwait's population mounted to 995,837 people whereas the
population in 1765 was. according to an estimate by Danish explorer (Karston
Peuter). 10,000 people.

historical Glilpse

A pamphlet issued by the Ministry of Planning and containing a historical
gliwse of the censuses in the State of Kmait refers to acne historical
figures publist on Kuwait's population in the past. Pros these figures,
it is possible to recognise the degree of population increase. The
palphlet points out that Kuwait's population between 1900 and 1910 was
estinated at 35,900 people whereas this population was estisated by the
Supply DepartIent at the beginning of World Far I! at 80.000 people. The
sinistry‘s pamhlet points out that these figures are nere esti-ates that
do not rely on conrehsnsive surveys or official cenwses.
First Census

The pamphlet says that Kuwait carried out the first census in 1957 and that
the results of this census showed that the population amounted at the
time to 206,673 people. The second census was carried out in 1961 and
showed that the population was 321,621 people. The third census, conducted
in 1965, showed that the population amounted to 467,339 people. The fourth
census was conducted in 1970 and showed that the population rose to 738,662

people. The latest census, conducted in 1975. showed that the population
rose to 995,837 people.

Preparation for Next Census

The pamphlet says that the current efforts are focused on getting ready the
printed forms to gather the data, to train the workers and to follow up
their production in every phase of the process of data collection which
will begin as of 1 February 1980. At the same time, arrangements are being
made to receive and supply more than 2,500 workers, to divide them into
field-work cadres and to prepare the programs to train them theoretically
and practically on the means of data collection and data review.

Building and Installation Count

Implementation of the first of these programs which are designed to train

the controllers, supervisors and assistants, who exceed 150 trainees.

will begin on 2 December 1979 and will continue for 25 days. This general
population census will be accompanied by a count of the buildings. houses

and installations to find out the degree of construction and housing develop-

ment and the progress achieved by the construction sector in the past 5
years.
BRIEFS

PLAN TO CENTRALIZB OIL INDUSTRY--Kweit is planning to bring to an end the
broad measure of autonomy enjoyed by several state-owned oil and oil-related
companies by merging then into a single corporation headed by Oil Minister
sheikh Ali Khalifa al-Ssbah, it was reported last week. The reports said
the Kuwait Oil Company, the Kuwait National Petroleum Co-pany, the Kuwait
National Petroleum Company, the Kuwait Petrochaaicals Industries Company
and the Kuwait Oil Tankers Cowany would all be brought under the new con-
pany's control. [Text] [Paris Ali-“Am ARAB REPORT & MEMO in English

15 Oct 79 p 8]

050: 10820
PUBLIC SECURITY DIRECTOR ANNOUNCES PERSONNEL TRANSFERS
Beirut AL-SAPIR in Arabic 3 Oct 79 p 5

[Article: "Abi al-Lan' Issues Resolution on Assignments of Public Security
Conissioners" ]

[Text] Director General of Public Security Paruq Abi al-Lan issued a
resolution bearing the nunber 175 on 1 October 1979. It determines the
assignments of Public Security comissioners.

The text of the resolution is as follows:

The Director General of Public Security, in accordance with Decree No 105
of lb April 1977, Article 19 of Legislative Decree No 139 of 12 June 1959,
and Resolution 100 98 of 27 July 1979, hereby resolves the following:

Article 1. The folloving co-issioners shall be transferred to the posts
indicated beside each of their oases:

Col-issioner General (distinguished) Hustafa Qa'qur-Chief, Public Security
Office, Beirut and Homt Lebanon.

Comissioner Gueral (distinguished) Bahjat 'Iso al-Kuri--at the disposal
of the Director General.

Lieutenant Colonel Na'in Farah-Chief, Office of Investigations.
Omissioner (distinguished) Yusuf Sour-chief, Office of Foreigners.

Co-iasioner (distinguished) liuani al-Shaykhahv-at the disposal of the
Director General.

Collissioner (distinguished) George HaddaHhief, Passport Office.
Co-iasioner General Zahi Busted—Counsellor of the Director General.

Co-issioner General As'ad al-Taqsh-Assistant to the Chief, Office of
Investigations.

59
Comissioner General Hanan al-Snbo'--Chief, Public Security Office. Beirut
Airport.

Conissioner General Hafiz Shihadahnchief, Junayh Port Station.

Go-issioner General Muhammad Hater-Chief, Public Security Office, Southern
Region.

Counissioner General Sayf al-Din Yusuf--Chief, Public Security Office,
Northern Region.

Comissioner General Mikhail al-Raluz--Assistant to the Chief, Inspection
Organization.

Comissioner General Nabil Khayrallah--Chief, Residence Registry Office.

Omissioner General Michel al-Khuri Iliyas—Chief , Public Security Office,
Port of Beirut.

Comissioner General Hayyam Abu Sa'd Bustani--Ghief , Public Security
Directorate, Affairs of Nationality, Passports and Foreigners.

Connissioner General Layla Payyad Latif—Chief, Public Security Directorate,
Affairs of Nationality, Passports and Foreigners.

Go-Iissioner General Huhi al-ﬂalsa—Office of Foreigners, Chief of Temporary
Residence Division.

Conissioner General Yasmin lens'ileffice of Foreigners, chief, Arab
Residence Division

Co-nissioner General Rabi'ah al-Khayli al-Ladiqi--Public Security Director-
ate, Chief, Affairs for Organization and Studies.

Commissioner General 'Ali al-Hueawi—Public Security Directorate, Chief,
Operations Affairs.

Comissioner General Naji Abu Khalil—Chief. Secretariat General.

Conissioner General Munir ‘ra'nah--Office of Investigations. Chief , Internal
Politics Division.

Comissioner General "ahib Qayqanuwchief, Printed Material and Recordings
Censorship Office.

Co-issioner General Chasm Zahr al-Din--at the disposal of the Minister
of Interior.

Connissioner General Ghattas Shuvayri—Chief, Public Security office of
al-Biqe'.

60
Comissioner General Joseph Abu Samara—at the disposal of the Director
General.

Comissioner General Antoine Barud—Chief, Public Security Directorate.
Administrative Affairs.

Couissioner General Sani Abu al-Rasan-Chief, Administrative Office.
Conissioner General Hustafa al-llaJ—Chief, Office of Inquiry.

Comissioner General Antoine Jubayli—Senior Assistant to the Chief, Beirut
and Mount Lebanon Public Security office.

Co-issioner General Nabil Haydar—Office of Investigations. Chief, Labor
Unions Division.

Conissioner General Sulaynsn Sasin—Office of Investigations, Chief,
Students Division.

Conissioner General Padil IdhaniuAssistant to the Chief , Public Security
Office for the Northern Region.

Go-issioner General Sin'aan Bubayqab—Assistant to the Chief, Public
Security Office, Beirut International Airport.

Conissioner General 'i'allal sl-Khadarinbeputy Assistant to the Chief,
Public Security Office for Beirut and Mount Lebanon.

Co-Iissioner General Rizqallah Prayfar—Chief, Public Security Cabinet.

Conissioner General Jan Mikhail—Administrative Office, Chief, Disciplinary
Division.

Conissioner General 1111 Dani-Administrative Office, Chief ,I‘eclnical and
Accessories Organisation.

Co-Iissioner General Kuhn-ad Paqih—Assistant to the Chief, Office of
Public Security for the Southern Region.

Co—isaioner General Mufid Abu metals—Chief. Press Censorship Affairs.

Co-issioner General Siham Beulah-Chief, Security Office. Beirut Inter
national Airport.

Co-issioner General Pu'ad 'Dvaydat-Security office for Beirut and Mount
Lebanon, Chief, Bayt al-Din [Station].

Comissioner General Ru'uf 'Atallah—Public Security Office for Beirut
and Mount Lebanon, Chief, Ba'bda Station.

61
Conissioner General Furial al-Khunsa--Assistant to eh Chief, Secretariat
General.

Cmissioner General Sunniyah Shatah--Inspection Organization.

Omissioner General Kaeal Midvar-w-Public Security Office for Beirut and
Mount Lebanon, Chief of the al-Jadidah Station.

Comissioner General Aflayn al-Rashim—Public Security Office, Beirut
International Airport, Chief of Service.

[Comissioner General] Maha Shabib--Assistant to the Chief, Residence
Registry Office.

Cmissioner General Nabil l‘aqi al-Din—Public Security Office, Beirut
International Airport, Chief of Service.

Conissioner General Dallal Rahbani--Office of Foreigners, Chief of Artists
Division.

Omissions: General Sanir Hanud--0ffice of Censorship of Printed Materials
and Recordings, Chief of Television Censorship Division.

Conissioner, 1st Class Muhammad al-Saba' I'aynn-Adninistrative Office,
Chief, Division of Personnel Matters.

Conissioner, 1st Class Rudwan Qahwaji—Assistant to the Chief, Public
Security Office, Port of Beirut.

Couissioner, 1st Class 'Isam Nasir al-Din, Public Security Office,
Beirut and Mount Lebanon, Chief, 'Alayh Station.

Conniasioner, 1st Class Muhamad 'Asi--Office of Investigations, Chief,
Counter-Espionage Division.

Commissioner, 1st Class Antoine Tarrsf—at the disposal of the Director
General.

Conissioner, lst Class Basan 'Abdallahm-Public Security Office, Beirut
International Airport, Permanent Secretary.

Conissioner, lst Class Shuqi KhalifahnChief. Infomtion Affairs.
00-issioner, 1st Class Michel al-Qadi—Inforlation Affairs.

Conissioner, lst Class 'Abd sl-Rah-an Bu'iyun-Public Security Office,
Beirut and Mount Lebanon, Chief, Second Beirut Station.

Co-issionsr, 1st Class Butrus 'Awn-vAdninistrativs Office, Chief,
Licensing Division.

62
Comissioner, lst Class Joseph Jermanus--Public Security Office, Beirut
and Mount Lebanon, Chief, First Beirut Station.

Comissioner Mib 'Aqiqi--0ffice of Investigations, Chief, the Scone-y
and Banks Division.

Commissioner As'ad Lahud--Public Security Office, Beirut and Mount Lebanon,
Chief, Jubayl Station.

Comissioner Yusuf Hattit--Public Security Office, Beirut and Mount
Lebanon, Chief, Third Beirut Station.

Commissioner Fu' ad Qustun--Public Security Office, Beirut and Mount
Lebanon, Chief. Junayh Station.

Comissioner Ahad Ramadan--Public Security Directorate, Information
Affairs.

Commissioner War Rihhal--Public Security Office, Port of Beirut, Chief,
Operation Squad.

Commissioner Tavfiq Khuri—Public Security office, Port of Beirut, Chief,
Division of Passports and Residence.

Comisaioner Jan Shan'un--Public Security Office, al-Biqa', Permanent
Security.

Commissioner Farid Ja'ja'—0ffice of Investigations, Chief, Public Places
Division.

Comissioner, Jan Shadiyaanublic Security Office for the Northern Region,
Chief . Baahar and al-Kurah Stations.

Comissioner Yusuf Hu'rauim-Public Security Office of al-Biqa' , Chief,
al-Masna' Station.

Comissioner Rani: Hayyak—Adninistrative Office, Chief, Hazra'ah Yashu‘
Station.

Comissioner Pavzi Rumiyathublic Security Office for the Northern Region.
Chief, Zgharta and al-Batrun Stations.

Commissioner Kuhn-lad a1-Sabbah--Public Security Directorate, Information
Affairs.

Comissioner 'Ali Haydar—Public Security Office, Beirut International
Airport, Chief of Service.

Comissioner Sanir Bnrjawa-u-Office of foreigners, Chief, Division for
Palestinians.

63
Comissioner Paris Kassab--Public Security Office, Beirut International
Airport, Chief of Service.

Cmissioner Salin Dagmar-Administrative Office, Chief of Accounting
Division.

Coulissioner Hudhath a1-llaj--Inspection Organization.

Comissioner Kamal Ha'wid--Pub11c Security Directorate, Administrative
Affairs.

Co-nissioner Antoine Istifan-Public Security Directorate. Operations
Affairs.

Comissioner Ziyyad al-Bajjar-Public Security Office. Beirut International
Airport, Chief of Service.

Comissioner Ili Oasis—Inspection Organization.

Comissioner Hunir Latif—Public Security Directorate, Affairs of Nationality.
Passports and Foreigners.

Comissioner Baddi' Abu Sulayman--Secretariat General. Chief, Hail Division.

Comissioner Antoine Qazi—Public Security Office, Beirut International
Airport, Chief of Service.

Comissioner 'Habib Paqih—Security Office for the Southern Region. Chief
of Bint Jbayl Station.

Comissioner 'Abd al-Rahnan al-Shaniw-Public Security Office, Beirut
International Airport, Chief of Service.

Comisaioner Adib a1-'Alan-Division of Poreigners, Chief, Secretariat
Division.

Comiasioner Georges Khalil—Public Security Office for the Southern
Region, Chief, Jazzin Station.

Conissioner 'Atif Hariri-Public Security Directorate, Administrative
Affairs.

Connissioner Ghari Shulq-Secur1ty Office for the Northern Region, Chief,
Secretariat Division.

Conissioner Sayid Na‘wid—Insp-ction Organization.
Commissioner Hannahti-w-Office of Inquiry.
Commissioner Ahnad 'Addadah—Inapaction Organization

Article 2. This resolution shall be announced where necessary.

7811
cso: 1.802 6“
CENTRAL COMMITTEE ISSUES COMMUNIQUB FOLLOWING 30 SEPTEMBER MEETING
Casablanca LIBERATION in French 5-11 Oct 79 pp 10-5

[Communique issued by Central Committee of the Socialist Union of Popular
Forces (USFP), following 30 September meeting in Rabat]

[Text] The Central Committee of the Socialist Union of Popular Forces met
on 30 September in Rabat, in its second regular session for 1979.

After hearing the political report presented on behalf of the Political
Bureau by First Secretary A. Bouabid;

After a thorough examination of the social, economic and political situation
prevailing in the country in relation to its struggle for our territorial
integrity and the developments in the Arab Maghreb; and

In the light of our fundamental options as confirmed by our Third Congress,
which assigned a clear strategic horizon to our objectives:

The Central Conmittee notes with bitterness and concern the successive
failures experienced by government action aimed at the defense of our terri-
torial integrity and their consequences on the reputation and respectability
of our country as a state and nation, failures that have no other counter-

part than the successes of our enemies in the pursuit and intensification of
their aggression. which inflicts on our country losses of human life and re-

sources whose importance can no longer be underestimated and whose effect
can no longer be ignored.

It is in fact necessary to recognize that the absence of an unswerving
political will in the service of an overall strategy excluding all hesitation
or ambiguity in our country's positions has made it possible for the war of
attrition that has been imposed on us for 4 years to achieve several of the
tactical and strategic objectives that our enemies assigned to it in the
political, diplomatic and nilitary spheres which encourages them to step up
the speed of their plan of action in the field.

Our enemies have succeeded in imposing on the Moroccan Government a veri-
table diplomatic isolation. enabling them to achieve the adoption by

65
different international organizations of positions in keeping with their
own. as was the case in Monrovia and Havana and as one has every reason to
believe will be the case in the United Nations in its current session.

After obtaining the backing of several official or semi-official bodies, our
enemies are preparing to extract from the United Nations a resolution that
would give their increasing aggression against our country the international
legitimacy they are seeking and thereby confer on them a new dimension
helping to fulfill the slogan they have often used: the imposition of a
military solution. This objective now seems feasible in the eyes of our
enemies and credible in the eyes of those who support them because of the
repeated successes enjoyed by the mercenaries in the attacks they have per-
petrated with the help of heavy, sophisticated equipment. These attacks,
inside our country and several hundred kilometers from the enemies' bases,
cause doubt about our ability to control our borders and to enable our armed
forces to play their proper role at the proper time.

Government officials and their administrative networks have demonstrated
such hesitation. if not actual negligence, and such incompetency in exer-
cising their duty to control our borders and achieve the required coordina-
tion with our armed forces in the field that we are now faced with the
question of outlining responsibilities for the manner and style of conduct-
ing a sacred national affair. Without answering this question, we shall
never understand what happened at Tan Tan, Assa, Poum Bl Essen, El Bouirat
and elsewhere.

Naturally, the acts of heroism that the officers and soldiers of the Royal
Armed Forces (PAR) demonstrate in battle are striking proof of their tech-
nical capabilities, their willingness to fight and the high level of their
morale. But the heavy losses suffered by the different forces of order

in the surprise attacks also show, with equal proof, that the level of
command in charge of coordinating and defining plans of actions and making
decisions -- that is, the level having the ability to determine and assume
responsibilities -- suffers serious inadequacies.

The same causes produce the same effects in the different spheres: Diplo-
matic and military failures are the effects of the absence of an overall
strategy and a firm political will, the absence of a governmental authority
capable of determining responsibilities with precision and clarity. but
also capable of assuming its own with competency and boldness.

Such an absence makes any control laughable and illusory and can only lead
to a deepening of the process of degradation now experienced by our country.

This observation is also valid when one examines the economic and social
situation and when one sets about analyzing problems of education in our
country:

1) the patching of the budget -- twice resorted to by the government during
the year - by means of an increase in indirect taxes, which erode the

66
purchasingpowerof the masses of the people, and an increase in the prices
of food staples, despite the government's pledges not to modify them;

2) the increase in unemployment, the dismissal of government employees
and white- and blue-collar workers in a mass, arbitrary fashion;

3) the systematic use of repression and arrests, political trials and
sentences based on texts dating from the Protectorate; and

6) the absurd campaign launched to hide the very serious problems affect-
ing our education and reduce them to the normal ups and downs of the beginning
of any school year.

All of this proves the total, final failure of the choices adopted since
the 1960's. The class which derives its privileges from the place it enjoys
in the main centers of economic and administrative decision making is no
longer able to sooth itself by self-satisfied slogans or to preach the vir-
tues of liberalism.

We are faced with a government that serves this class and that can now do
nothing but shamefully admit its failures, which it prudishly terms "diffi-

culties" so as to disguise its inability to solve the problems existing in
all domains.

In the face of the results to which the process of the impoverishment of the
masses has led it -- a process of which it is the source and beneficiary --
and confronted with its ineluctable need to reap what it has sowed, the
privileged class tries to wash its hands of its responsibility for the cur-
rent situation, invoking the burdens imposed by the recovery of our terri-
torial integrity, while accelerating the drain of capital going to foreign

countries and engaging in operations in which its class behavior can scarcely
be distinguished from national betrayal.

As a result, our country is faced with very serious questions that demand
adequate responses, both with respect to our territorial integrity and our
economy and politics.

The USPP, which refuses to be limited to wait-and-see positions or to take
an opportunistic path, avoiding what is required by a responsible commit-
ment, owes it to itself not to be limited to an analysis of the situation
and to propose its alternative, the very alternative that was defined

scarcely 10 months ago by our Third Congress following an overall evaluation
of the situation and on which the current conditions confer historical
dimensions.

Therefore, based on this alternative, the Central Committee believes that
it is its duty to reaffirm its demands:
l) with respect to the struggle for our territorial integrity:

a) the definition of an overall strategy that must be put into action and

carried out by a political will acting within a framework in which all re-
sponsibilities at all levels are determined;

b) the lifting of repressive measures of which members and citizens in the
southern region of the country are the victims and the opening up of new
horizons for them, horizons in which, with the cooperation and the confidence
of every one. they will be able to work in their political and trade union
organizations for the mobilization of the people so necessary to the sup-
port of actions being waged by our armed forces in carrying out their duty

to defend our nation and its children;

c) the effective and massive arming of citizens in areas whose strategic
situation exposes inhabitants to surprise attacks;

d) the creation of mobile units able to face the mercenaries and attack
them at their own bases;

e) the drafting of a coherent and intensive diplomatic plan of action based
on an overall, progressive and open vision aimed at eliminating our country's
isolation and correcting the grave errors that have been committed;

f) a systematic policy of sincere cooperation with Mauritania aimed at
guaranteeing trusting co-existence at a time when our common struggle has
permitted us to become neighbors; and

g) a refusal to overestimate the attempted mediation with Algeria, which

can in no way lead to what only the action of a Morocco in a position of
strength can bring about, to wit, the recognition of its territorial integrity
and the region's need to work for the building of the Arab Maghreb. However.
the Central Committee cannot let this opportunity go by without renewing

our party's willingness to join with the Algerian FLN in a constructive and
responsible dialog aimed at creating the objective and subjective conditions
necessary for the creation of real prospects for the building of the Arab
Maghreb. We remain convinced that such prospects alone are able to make

it possible to go beyond the contradictions and conflicts that have grown
deeper and that threaten to lead to an armed confrontation between the two
brother nations in an absurd war that would be nothing but a historical crime.

2) with respect to the economic and social situation which is the source of
the deterioration in our people's living conditions:

The Central Committee demands:
a) that we follow the sole path capable of providing the effective, overall

solutions to the economic and social problems affecting our country, the
path of the recognition of the real origins of the current situation and

68
the application of a firm political will in order to eliminate them, which
first of all requires a real. far-reaching and concrete political opening;

b) the choice of new methods in the decision-making process and administra-
tion and new social and political relationships; and

c) that we meet the problems of the future with a spirit open to the future
and with a determination that will give rise to enthusiasm.

It is within this framework that the Central Committee of the USFP, meeting
Rabat in its regular session on 30 September 1979, renews its trust in the
alternative which our special Congress and our Third Congress defined and
expressed in a minimum program capable of being applied immediately and
constantly enriched by practice.

It believes that regardless of the acceptance gained by this alternative,
it is its duty:

1) to require that the government reconsider its decision to increase the
prices of sugar and oil, just as it reconsidered its decision to increase
water and electricity rates. This is all the more feasible since receipts
from such increases can easily be compensated for by taxing the privileged
classes and the companies that exploit our country and by a coherent policy
that will put an end to the waste which drains the country's projects of
their promotional nature and harms their economic and social effects;

2) to denounce the systematic and "soft" repression begun in the spring
of 1979 and whose results can be measured by over 1,500 exclusions and several
dozen trials and prison sentences; and

3) to demand that the government nullify its arbitrary decisions that bring
into question a recognized right, inasmuch as its obstinacy in this matter

can only be interpreted as the expression of a political determination to
repress citizens for their membership in a given trade union or political

organization. which obviously leads those involved to derive from such a
situation all the imperative political consequences.

In this connection. and no matter what decision the government might make
on this question, the Central Committee can only renew the complete soli-
darity of all its members with the working class in the struggle headed by
its powerful organization, the CDT [Democratic Labor Confederation]. It
also expresses its satisfaction with the success enjoyed by the solidarity
campaign organized to support the victims of repression and summons all
trade unionists in our party to redouble their mobilization in order to
deepen and intensify this action so as to make solidarity the rock against
which the repressive measures and the arbitrary decisions will be broken.

The Central Committee hails the resumption of the legal life of the UNEH
[National Union of Moroccan Students] after the success of its 16th Congress,

69
which opened up new prospects for the organization of students on democratic
foundations and for their struggle at hone and abroad on the trade union and

national level, thereby pursuing their historic mission in the movement of
national liberation.

11,464
C50: 6600

70
USFP SEC GEN BOUABID ADDRESSES MEETING 01' CENTRAL COMPETE!
Casablanca LIBERATION in French 5-11 Oct 79 pp 2-3

[Excerpts from Speech of Abderrahin Bouabid, first secretary of the Social-
ist Union of Popular Forces (USFP), at 30 September meeting of the Central
Comittee]

[Text] The Central Col-ittee of the USP? held its regular neeting on Sunday.
30 September, in Rabat. A large portion of its work was devoted to an anal-
ysis of the economic. political and social situation prevailing in the
country. The Political Bureau report opening the discussion touched upon
three aspects: the political and economic situation, the question of the
achievement of territorial unity and party activity. A thorough, wide-ranging
discussion followed in the usual denocratic atmosphere characterizing our
party's operation.

Following this debate, the first secretary of the USP? took the floor to
one up the discussion and in order to provide clarifications which certain
speakers requested.

"The alternative to the situation prevailing in the country is contained in
the final political state-eat of the Third Congress of the USFP," he said.
"It requires a questioning of the elective, administrative and governmental
apparatuses." He noted that the final declaration of the Third Congress of
the USP? is a mini-us program constituting an alternative that can bring
the country out of the worsening crisis. irresponsibility and inroviaation.

"As for the democratic experinent, we have said from the very beginning that
it is a false desocracy." he said. "He have becone involved in order to
denounce this falsification and its direct repercussions on the economic,
financial, social and cultural situation and on the overall crisis in our

country." The democratic experiment has failed; this is a fact. "Did we
expect that our presence in Parlianent and in the nunicipal and comnal

councils would halt the repression and change the nentality of the adminis-
trative apparatus?" he wondered. "No one expected these institutions to be

anything but another fighting front." The first secretary then added:
[words onitted] does not consist in rehabilitating this desocrecy but in
furthering the fight for democracy and for the coming of a new society based
on the choices that we defend."

He should not be surprised that repression continues to be used against the
members of our party. "Our enemies will always try to erect obstacles in
our path." he said. "but this can only strengthen our party's will and

force and increase the trust demonstrated by the masses. We believe in
democracy, we fight for its coming and every day. we offer up victims to
defend it. He shall continue this struggle because it is a legitimate
national struggle aimed at freeing citizens from oppression and exploitation
and at building a free, democratic and socialist society."

Before concluding. Bouabid recalled that thanks to its constant struggle,
our party has won a wide international following.

At the end of its meeting, the Central Committee approved a communique, the
translation of which we are publishing in this edition.

Abderrahim Bouabid at the USP? Central Committee Meeting

The regular meeting of the Central Committee of the USP? was held on 30 Sep-
tember in Rabat. Abderrahim Bouabid, first secretary of our movement, de-
livered tne main speech on the general situation in the country. A wide-
ranging debate on the topics covered followed.

The following are lengthy excerpts from his speech.
Turning to social problems, Bouabid said:

"All Horoccans can now judge the gravity of the economic and social crisis
in which the country finds itself. All of our party's predictions have
unfortunately turned out to be correct. The increase in the cost of living,
accompanied by a wage freeze for those lucky enough to have a job in our
country. results in a deterioration of the purchasing power of the exploited
classes. When one realizes that that purchasing power is reduced 60 percent
every year, one is justified in asking certain questions: How has this
happened? what are we to do about it?

"He must tirelessly recall that the source of the evil is found in the capital-
ist option and the system of outrageous exploitation imposed on our people

in the management of the country's affairs. If those in power attribute

this deterioration in the purchasing power to the international situation.

they forget or pretend to forget the essential point: The main reason

actually resides in the increasing dependency of our economy on the inter-

national capitalist system."
Speeches Are One Thing, Reality Another

Failure can be seen everywhere and the failure is admitted even by the advo-
cates of liberalism, who are beginning to recognise their inability, not

72
only to rectify the situation, but simply to put an end to its deterioration.
And yet. the government has made many promises. How many times has it been
said that measures will be taken in order not to make the lower-income

groups bear the burden of the increase in the price of staples such as sugar
and tea? How many timeshavewe been told that there will be wage increases
for those on the bottom of the scale? All Horoccans can now see that speeches
are one thing and reality another. Nor does this surprise us, considering

the fact that those in power have a completely erroneous vision of the real-
ity of things.

The first secretary then went on to say that the deterioration in the situa-
tion requires that we intensify our action in the direction of a greater
mobilization of the social classes that are exploited, encouraging them to
refuse, in their daily life, to suffer the consequences of the crisis, to
rise up against our country's increasing tendency to come under the boot of
the system of capitalist exploitation, to denounce the bourgeoisie which.
seized with panic in the face of a situation deemed to be unstable, has no
other concern than to protect its capital by putting it in foreign banks.

"Our struggle and that of our party has no other objective than to create a

new society. And yet, that objective will not be achieved through any miracle.
It depends on our ability to mobilize the Moroccan masses that suffer grievously
in their lives and on our strength of persuasion in this mobilization."

Going on to speak about education, Comrade Bouabid noted: "The beginning of
the academic year in our schools and universities clearly illustrates the
failure of the government's policy in this domain, as in others. How far
have we gotten with the national demand concerning universal education?

He have not forgotten that this was considered by the government itself to
be an objective to be achieved first of all in 1970 and then in 1975. Now
they speak about 1995. #0 years after independence! One can therefore see
that promises do not cost those in power much, but we know better than anyone
what the true story is and the picture before us is eloquent: Only 50 per-
cent of all children of school age are actually in school this year. The
remaining 50 percent have no other prospect before them than the streets.

"in secondary education, the situation is the same. The so-called reforms
adopted in this cycle raise other obstacles by means of competition prevent—
ing our children from having access to higher education. The result of this
new policy will be to limit access to higher education to a small elite,
which will certainly include the sons of those who, by virtue of their rela-
tions and their personal intervention, have a 'long arm,‘ despite the real
results of the competition. It should be noted that the introduction of
entrance examinations comes at a time when the different officials cease-
lessly repeat that Morocco is lacking in technical personnel. He agree that
restrictions may be imposed on access to the so-called literary disciplines,
but why should we close the School of Medicine, the School of Science and
the technical institutes to high school graduates wishing to pursue the
study of medicine or scientific and technical studies? One of the most eur-
prising aspects of this situation is that the country continues to appeal

73
to foreign doctors and technicians. with all that this implies for our
finances. Forcing high school graduates to take another examination can
have no other explanation than an incoherent, improvised policy in the field
of education. It is therefore not surprising that those in power, deprived
of an instrument responding to the needs of rational planning. cannot find
any solutions to the problems that exist. They play everything by ear and
improvise solutions as the need arises."

There are now thousands of high school and even university graduates who
are forced to join the ranks of the unemployed every year. There are at
least 3,000 law school graduates who are unemployed at a time when 40 per-
cent of the upper-level personnel of the joint Moroccan-foreign companies
working in our country are not Horoccans.

Unemployment, which spreads its tentacles year after year, now affects the
young and people pretend to forget that this burden is borne by the social
classes because those who have the good fortune to have a job must also

pay for the increased cost of living along with the unemployed or laid-off
relative or cousin who lives off of his meager daily pittance,even consider-
ing the noble habitudes of family solidarity that characterize our people.
It is precisely this trait of the Moroccans that has warded off the ininent
explosion so far.

Our Position: Set Forth by the Third Congress

Naturally. our officials miss no opportunity to attribute the current crisis
to the imperatives dictated by the defense of our borders. No one would think
to deny the need to throw into the fray the entire weight of our potential

for the national cause. This is perfectly clear. but we have the right to

ask certain question:

Is this potential being judiciously used in the field of defense?
Is there no waste?

The simple truth is that this burden is heavy only because there is faulty
management and because there is no clear. overall view of the problem. This
being the case. we cannot allow all the burden of national defense to be
borne solely by the lower classes. while the Moroccan bourgeoisie does not
even pay the taxes levied by an unfair tax system.

Regarding the means to be mobilized for the defense of our country. our
party has its own ideas on the matter. They are contained in the political
manifesto of its Third National Congress. But what is one to do and think
in the face of a class which, overcome by worry, protects its capital by
placing it in foreign banks?

"In substance, this is the situation that now prevails in the country. As

one can see, there is no lack of problems. but the proper solutions can be
found. They are essentially political in nature. They can be summed up

7h
as placing national potential in the service of all Moroccans and not just
a minority. That has always been our position, it is our credo, we have

not changed and our line remains the one set forth by the will of our members
at the Third Congress of the USFP."

Concerning the situation on our southern borders. the first secretary of our
party noted:

"On this matter also. our idea of the defense of our borders is different
from that of those in power. It is unfortunate to note that our adversaries
found their policy on our territorial integrity on Morocco's weakness and on
its inability to decide to pick up the challenge imposed on its borders. This
weakness is not imaginary. It is real and can be explained by the total ab-
sence of an overall strategy and the nonparticipation of the broad masses in
the defense of our borders. We are convinced that only the mobilization of
our people can cause our adversary to lose hope of one day attaining its
objective. Our country's suffering is real and painful and the sacrifices
made by our armed forces on the front lines are heavy. but the war of attri-
tion imposed on us calls for the use of other means and another strategy.

"0n the diplomatic 18V21. our isolation is so great that we have difficulty
finding sincere support for our cause and no country dares to proclaim openly
that the Sahara constitutes an integral part of our country because of the
deterioration of Morocco's image abroad."

In the United Nations, our adversaries are working to see that the current
session of the general assembly adopts a recommendation inviting Morocco to
withdraw its forces from the recovered territories.

Coming after so many international encounters, such a position on the part
of the United Nations would automatically be followed by an intensification
of our adversaries' offensive in the field.

This scarcely enviable position was foreseeable and on countless occasions.
our party has called attention to the deterioration of our international
position.

There are those who naively claim that Morocco has nothing to fear from posi-
tions hostile to our country as long as such hostility is limited to the
diplomatic level and as long as Morocco stands its ground. Such claims

are simplistic because standing our ground is not enough to preserve our
territory. When we have the capability of safeguarding our land, interna-

tional opinion will reconsider its positions on the Moroccan nature of the
Sahara. Most of the countries that vote against us do so either based on
erroneous assumptions or because the question has not been presented in a
convincing manner.

Avoid Confrontation

Still on the international level, another new element that some individuals
try to minimize. despite its grave implications for our territorial unity.

75
is the meeting of the Spanish. Italian and French Communist parties in Madrid.
That meeting is not a coincidence. We know that the French Comunist Party
does not undertake any action wihtout long reflection and a thorough analysis
of the possible consequences. Therefore. the meeting in Madrid cannot have
been called for the sole purpose of satisfying the Algerian rulers. Re are
going to see the consequences that will result from such a meeting involving
the participation of the Italian Comunist Party, which had previously

been relatively n served on the question of the Sahara, and the Spanish Com-
munist Party. which is separated from the other two Heat European Communist
parties by more than one divergency. In the still recent past. these parties
could not come together on the Vietnamese question despite their unified
views. Georges Marchais has never been able to meet with Santiago Carrillo,

even on the Spanish candidacy for the EEC, due to their disagre-ent on the
matter. Now they are all together on the crucial question of the Sahara.

This is an event that must be taken into consideration because of the effects
it will have on Morocco's relations with the two blocs.

Ne are witnessing flagrant ueddling in the region by parties that carry weight
and have influence on national opinion and the working class in their respec-
tive countries. meddling that demands self-determination of the Sahara and
the recognition of a so—called Saharan people and their sole representative.
the pseudo POLISARIO Front.

Clearly, this self-determination is but a pre-established recognition aimed
at covering an entity shaped 3; the Algerian Army and emanating from it.

It is an entity with weapons and funds which no liberation movement in Asia,

Africa or Latin America has enjoyed in the past. It is an entity established
only a few months ago.

Comrade Bouabid then wondered whether the Moroccan officials would continue

to follow the path which has created the situation endangering the country
and its future. "111 the government always play deaf to the voices of the
people and Morocco's human resources?

Morocco is truly facing a threat that is growing every day in a region where
a confrontation between two brother peoples becomes increasingly likely.

The first secretary of the USP? stated that "that is what caused our brothers
in the PLO and particularly Abou Amar to undertake mediation between Morocco
and Algeria so as to prevent these two countries from having a confrontation
that will have the worst repercussions on the Palestinian question and the
Arab question in general."

If the Irreparable Should Come To Pass. ..
"He can therefore understand the concern of our Palestinian brothers on this

matter because they know better than anyone else the horror of what could
happen if a fratricidal war should break out in this region of the Arab world.
"Are there any Indications of a detente?" In answer to this question,
Abderrahim Bouabid said that unfortunately, nothing seems to point to any
desire for dialog on the part of the Algerian leaders. He. also recalled
that the USP? has always addressed itself to the leaders of the M for

n franc and constructive dialog, proposing a solution within the framework
of the Arab Maghreb. a Maghreb of peoples. Avoiding the irreparable is the
top priority, for it is the irrevocable that our people and the majority of
all Algerians reject."

Referring to the Algerian political leaders, whose number was recently expanded,
Abderrahim Bouabid said that they are not of the same line as the governmental
positions on the matter because "they are familiar with the phases of the
liberation of our two countries at the time of the common struggle. If they

succeed in creating a trend in Algerian opinion favorable to an understanding,
this will help to avoid a war.

"As for certain rumors, whether new or dreamed, we must not attribute any
importance to then. This does not mean that we are pessimistic because we
are working for understanding and openness.

"Whatever the case, if the irrevocable happens, the result will be to plunge
Morocco into one bloc and Algeria into another in a process that will damage
our region, moving toward dangerous dependency.... In this connection, we
issue a warm appeal to the Algerian people and the FL“, reassuring them that
our duty and the legacy left by our martyrs will prevent us from creating a
zone of tension which our two countries can well do without. tension that would
give rise to the intervention of several countries. He owe it to ourselves

to work to solve these problems within the framework of an overall vision of
the interests of the Arab Maghreb.

"Moreover, this does not prevent us from reaffirming that the Moroccan people,
who are on the defensive, will no longer tolerate attacks without replying
as required by the situation."

Moving on an analysis of the pseudo democratic experiment in Morocco, Comrade
Bouabid said:

"We have agreed to embark upon what has been called a democratic experiment.
From the very beginning, we have said that it was impossible — with the
administrative apparatus being what it was - to expect honest results recog-
nizing the weight and strength of our party. The accomplishment was not

the previously known result, but rather, a positive dialog and means of
struggle on a national level in all regions.

"Our comrades in Parliament and on other fronts express the ambitions of
the masses and their opinion on territorial unity, social problems, the
question of wages and prices, the problems of the fundamental freedoms of
individuals and groups, and so on.
"This is a mission entrusted to our comrades working within an unrepresenta-
tive parliament emerging from rigged elections. Despite their small number,
they make the voices of the masses heard by everyone. The day when we feel
that their action in Parliament is no longer of any interest, the party's
leadership organs will decide whether it is fitting to keep them there.

“As for the municipal and rural councils, the prime concern of the adminis-
trative apparatus in most of the provinces is to prevent our conrades' action
aimed at serving the population. On this subject, one government official
even said, in speaking to our comrades: 'If I let you carry out these pro-

jects, it means that I am helping you now to prepare for the next election
campaign. '

"In cases where defections occur on the part of our elected candidates,
owing to their capitulation and their lack of firmness with regard to pres-
sure from the government or certain temptations, the regional bodies of the
party are vigilant and make sure that all action by elected officials is

in the interests of the citizen who has placed his trust in the USFP.

"But the action of our comrades in most provinces is honorable. It responds
to needs, particularly in the distant provinces. How is it possible to in-

prison the president of the municipal council of the city of Ifni, the gate-
way to the Sahara?

“Such measures destroy all mobilisation. lead us to despair and encourage
our adversaries to doubt the will of our country.

"if repression is the response of some officials. we shall restate our
firmness, firmness that requires more organization, wisdom and responsibility,

firmness that also requires, under these circumstances, that we avoid futile
action."

11,464
630: 4400
AHIR SULTAN INTERVIEHED 0N AUSTRIA VISIT
Paris AL-HDSTAQBAL in Arabic 22 Sep 79 p 15

[Interview with Saudi Defense Minister Sultan Ibn 'Abd al-‘Aziz: "Sultan
Ibn 'Abd al-‘Aziz Tells AL-HIISTAQBAL: Re Have no Plans New to Exchange
Representation With Moscow"]

[Text] Vienna—Last Saturday, Anir Sultan Ibn 'Abd
a1-'Aziz, the Saudi Minister of Defense and Aviation,
ended his official lo-day visit to Vienna. Austria. The
visit was highlighted by a lengthy meeting between Anir
Sultan and Austrian Chancellor Bruno Kreisky which
lasted for more than 3 hours. Another high point of

the visit was the 2-day military maneuvers held
especially on the occasion of the Anir's visit (with
live a-unition), during which were displayed all the
types of weapons—locally produced or imported and
developed-weed by the Austrian arned forces. In Vienna.
AL-HUSTAQBAL had a brief interview with Mr Sultan. The
following are the min points of the interview:

[Question] Has your visit led to any positive results pertaining to the
prospects of Austria selling arms to Saudi Arabia?

[Answer] Hy visit to Austria was not connected with any specific purpose
inasnuch as it was concerned with fostering cooperation between our two

countries and meeting with our friends in that great nation to get

acquainted with what they have [sic] and to develop Saudi-Austrian friend-
ship. This was the purpose of the visit.

[Question] In which direction is the [Middle East] region roving? Is it
headed for war or peace?

[Answer] The Arabs seek peace, but what they want is peace based on justice
and right. As to the other side. it is knowu what they want.
[Question] After your meeting with Chancellor Kreiaky, have you detected
any possibilities for an effective and real peace?

[Answer] It is known to all the Chancellor Kreisky has been serving the
cause of world peace for a long time now, and it is natural for us to
have conducted our talks within that context.

[Question] Have you agreed with Chancellor Kreisky on the outlines of a
peaceful settlenent?

[Answer] The issue here is one which belongs to our Palestinian brethren.
No other Arab has the right to speak for them. Therefore. any discussion
of this specific problen should be done with the Palestinians the-selves.

[Question] According to information by the Center for Strategic Studies
in London, the situation in the region has changed following the events
in Iran.

[Answer] I do not think so. The speculations which are being bandied
about nowadays are made by consciences [sic] that are unaware of the
realities of the Middle East. They are particularly unfaniliar with the
realities of the situation in Saudi Arabia and the Gulf states.

[Question] Is the region facing any dangers?
[Answer] I do not think so.

[Question] Do you have any tendency now to establish relations with the
Soviet Union?

[Answer] Our relationship with the Soviet Union as a great power derives
from the United Nations charter. Ve cooperate with the Soviet Union if it
follows the path of right and justice on any issue. We are not colnitted
to any one state against another.

[Question] But are you considering exchanging diplomatic relations with
Moscow?

[Answer] 1 do not believe that there is any particular plan at present.
We believe that when the Soviet Union realizes that doctrines cannot be
exported, we may then begin to consider the idea of establishing relations
with the Soviet Union.

[Question] Does the kingdon have any intention of using oil as a tool of
pressure, as it had done in 1973?

[Answer] The kingdom exercises the right of sovereignty, but we are now
in the process of supporting the entire free world as well as supporting
all peoples-~be they in Europe, Anerica or anywhere else. Therefore, we
hope that we would not be forced to take any measure which would affect the
interests of other states.

[Question] Based on the extensive talks you held today with the Chancellor
of Austria and based on the daring initiatives Chancellor Kreisky has taken

so far, do you expect any particular new steps toward solving the Arab
problem and restoring Arab rights?

[Answer] Chancellor Kreisky has exerted great efforts in favor of a just
peace. He implore God to insure the success of this trend which would
assure the Palestinian people and the region's states happiness and peace
under the banner of securing the legitimate rights of all states.

[Question] Saudi Arabia has called for the unification of Arab ranks. How
can this be done at the present time?

[Answer] This policy of ours has been consistent since the era of King 'Abd
al-'Aziz. Its objective is to unify Arab ranks, and I believe that regard-
less of whatever events and problems that may occur or arise. the Arabs

will stand as one when duty calls.

[Question] In the context of Saudi moves in all directions and on all
levels. are there any prospective neetings in or visits to Europe or other
parts of the world?

[Answer] Visits and meetings will continue between Saudi Arabia and friendly

nations as well as between Saudi Arabia and other nations in the service
of world peace and the econonic well-being of mankind and the Arab nation.

9256
C50: 4802

81
PRESS QITICIZBS ATTITUDE 0P MILLIONAIRBS
London AL-HAHADITH in Arabic 28 Sep 79 p 27
(Article: "Criticism and Counter-criticise in the Saudi Press"]

[Text] Sane political and media currents can be likened to hurricanes.

They develop in a given society and soon they rage out of control, slashing
all obstacles and sweeping away barriers that had asde some areas seen
inpregnable. Observers have been lately struck by certain phenomena

which can be classified as self-criticism specifically the cmaign mounted
by some Saudi newspapers against certain business and financial deals and
commissions. The campaign has reached such proportions that the newspaper
AL-RIYAD recently published an article by Hubs-ad 'Alwan which included

the following renarks:

"I will not pose (to Khashqui and Akran 'Ijjah) the question. 'how did you
get your wealth?’ because we know the answer in advance and because we

do not want to delve into the details of how they made their wealth and

to what extent were their actions and practices legitimate. The question
itself is unacceptable in principle because if we are to bring such wealthy
men to account we would need nany co-issions [of inquiry] costing millions
[of rials] as well as a ten of specialists and legal and judicial experts...
It is our hope, however, that their conscience will awaken, even if for one
time. because that one tine would be enough to put an end to this blatant
ravistnent of the wealth of this hoaeland either in the one of asking a
comission or in the name of striking a business deal, to the rest of all
those new euphemism of revisinent."

Addressing himself to 'Adnan Khashqui, Hubs-ad 'Alwan goes on to say: "You
are probably bewildered by this uproar against you and against the wealth
you have amassed, but I say, no, this is your money and you have used your
own abilities. regardless of whether they were positive or negative. as

well as various methods and expertise. regardless of whether they were

legal or illegal, to make this wealth of yours. This is your own affair.

But we have reached a simple conviction, nelely, that it is not for us to
bring you to account. although the perennial question 'how did you lake

your wealth?‘ will linger in our ainda and will continue to bound you and

82
all those who have accumulated enormous and incredible wealth that cannot
be measured by the standard gauges of normal human effort. intelligence

and productive capacity... Nevertheless, many people join me in wondering
about what have 'Adnan Khashqui and Akram 'Ijjah offered their country."

'Alwsn concluded his article by apologizing to Khashqui for taking so much
of his time "because you might need this time to strike a new business deal
or get a new fat commission by which you would beef up your wealth and
deprive a young man or a young woman in your country of a job opportunity.
May our country rejoice in its wealthy men! God Almighty was right when

He said: 'If We want to destroy a town, He will have its wealthy and
affluent men sin and spread depravity in it, thereby making it deservant of
Our destruction."'

This article has been considered the most vehement criticism of its kind to
a group of millionaires who have sccmlated their wealth through business
and financial conissions and deals as well as American and French arms
deals. Prominent Saudi financiers, businessmen, engineers and contractors
have been photocopying such articles and mailing them to their friends
abroad, on the basis that self-criticism, a wave started a year ago by the
Minister of Electricity al-Qusaybi in an article severly critical of Akram
'Ijjah, is spreading and building up and may in fact develop into a popular
trend which might go as far as naming names, citing figures and disclosing
secret accounts.

what has been puzzling and raising tens of question marks is that the self-
criticism campaign being played out in the Saudi press against business
commissions. deals and unjustified wealth coincided with a parallel press
campaign in Egypt against 'Adnan Khashqui and Akram 'Ijjah, but in a more
biting and disparaging language aimed at those who stand behind Khaslqui
and 'Ijjah--to such an extent that a well-known journalist, Kamal Abu
sl-Hajd. has published an article in the weekly AL-HUSAWAR in which he
delved into Khashqui's personal life to the point of even naming his
Italian girlfriend, Laura, although Laura has converted into Islam and
changed her name to Lamya and has in fact made a pilgrimage to Becca and
performed the ritual circmmbulation of the Ka'bah. It has also been said—
though this was disregarded by the Egyptian press—that Khashqui has taken
Lamya as his wife for more than a year now—that is. before the death of

his father, Dr Huharnad, but that he has chosen to keep his marriage shielded
from the limelights.

The question now is: Is it true that Ashraf Harwan stands behind the Egyptian
press campaign against Khashqui, as Khashqui's friends say. and is the
source of all those and other stories being published in the Egyptian press?
Then there is another question: Is there a link between the self-criticism
campaign in the Saudi press and the daring article written by Amir Nawwef

Ibn 'Abd al-‘Azia. former adviser to King Paysal, and published by the
newspaper AL-SHARQ AL-AWSAT which is funded by a group of Saudi financiers

and businessmen headed by Shaykh Kamal Adham, a former special adviser to
King Faysal?

83
Amir Nawwaf's article in AL-SHARQ AL—AHSAT was entitled "Who Will Answer
Carter and Preserve Our Dignity?“ The following is an excerpt:

"The American President Jimy Carter has said that none of the Arab leaders
he has met has particularly expressed a desire to see the establishment

of a Palestinian state, despite the public statements made by those leaders
in this connection. President Carter went on to say that the Arab leaders
with whom he has met have never demanded the establishment of an independent
Palestinian state. This is what the president of the United States is
saying. He is telling the peoples of those Arab leaders, 'Your leaders are
lying to you.’ In so doing, President Carter disregarded diplomatic norms
and etiquette and has deliberately defamed Arab leaders... Why then are
they tolerating his behavior, unless, of course, what he has said is true“!
who will believe us after what President Carter has said?"

Amir Nawwaf concluded his article as follows: "If the president of the
United States has chosen to ignore diplomatic norms for a specific purpose
in his mind or for a certain political goal relating to his electoral
situation, then it becomes incubent upon Arab leaders, in keeping with
their responsibilities toward their peoples, to sweep aside diplomatic
norms and make public all the letters they have exchanged with President
Carter on the question of the Palestinian state and disclose the minutes
of their meetings with him relating to the issue of the Palestinian state.
Only then will we have credibility in the world. Only such action will
enable us to preserve our dignity. Only such action will remove the label
of lying which president Carter has attached to our leaders."

This article has caused quiet ripples and reactions among the Arab and
foreign political and diplomatic circles, and a lot of people have been

trying to surmise whom Amir Nawwaf means when he says. "Who will answer
Carter and preserve our dignity?"

Initially, some observers believed that there were differing views within
the ruling Saudi family on the question of, "should we answer Carter or
not?" It has also been said that the American ambassador, John "est, a
personal friend of President Carter who was chosen to act as a bridge
between President Carter and Amir Fahd [the crown prince], matinee spends
a week or two waiting for a meeting with senior Saudi officials. Once

he insisted on an urgent interview with Amir Fahd, only to be told: Put
what you want to tell his Highness Amir Fahd in writing and you will receive
an answer as soon as possible, because the Amir's schedule is so full that
even an urgent meeting cannot be arranged before 2 weeks.

Sources connected with American circles say that treating the representative

of a superpower-indeed, the only superpower with which Saudi Arabia dealt-
in such a manner is a phenomenon which deserves exmination, that it
demonstrates that American-Saudi relations are not doing well.

As to hit Newaf'e article, "Who Will Mover Carter and Preserve Our
Dignity1", King Khalid reportedly made remarks similar to those contained

8h
in the Amir's article at a private meeting held 2 weeks ago in Geneva

where he spends part of his annual vacation. It was clear that King Khalid
was very annoyed by the American President's disregard of diplomatic practice
and the inaccurate statements he has made. not to mention that President
Carter's action was an affront to the Arab leaders he had met. It seems

that Amir Nawwaf, who is known for his sedateness among his brethren, the
sons of King 'Abd al-‘Aziz. decided that it was better not to keep quiet
about President Carter's remarks. He must have figured that if the officials
in power preferred not to enter into a battle of words with President Carter.
then it was at least incumbent upon a member of the royal family who has

no position of authority to express an opinion which represents the Saudi
viewpoint on President Carter's behavior and remarks.

However. a week after the appearance of the article in question, the newspaper
AL-SHARQ AL-AHSAT used a regular back-page column entitled "Good Morning"

to carry a comment by one of its publishers, Hisham 'Ali Hafiz. in which

he said that the issue raised by Amir Nawwaf with regard to President Carter's
remarks does not merit the level of uproar and clamor which the Amir had

tried to arouse, because President Carter did not lie. since the Arab

leaders involved have not actually asked him to recognize the Palestinians'
right to a national state of their own, but simply demanded that the
Palestinians be granted the right to self-determination.

A lot of people were puzzled by all this. Who after all knows more about
whether President Carter's remarks were correct or not: the Arab kings,
princes and leaders who had met with him or Amir Nswwaf or Hishan 'Ali hafiz?

The sense of bewilderment is not due to the Saudi publisher's affirmation
that the Arab leaders in question have not raised the question of the
Palestinian state with President Carter-everyone knows that Shaykh Kamal
Adham, the head of the Saudi group which owns the newspaper AL-SBARQ AL-AHSAT.
is a well-informed man and is considered, in fact, to be one of the most
important sources of information in the Arab region. The puzzle-ent
results from the fact that the task of correcting the information of Amir
Nawwaf was assigned to Hisham 'Ali Hafiz rather than to Dr al-Yamani, the
Saudi Information Minister, or to the Secretary General of the Arab League
or at least Dr Clovis Haqsud who has a double function as a contributing
editor of AL-SHARQ AL-AUSAT and an Arab League official.

At any rate, the recent campaign of criticism and counter-criticism in
the Saudi press, in or outside Saudi Arabia. has stirred up a great deal
of whispers and rumors which quietly circulate in various private and
formal circles and in the foreign embassies. At the same time. however.
it has raised an inevitable question: Will the campaign stop at the
expected limits or will it build up into a hurricane which will rip the
wraps off the closed Saudi society and throw its doors and windows wide
open to criticism and counter-criticism?

Commenting on the press debates going on in his country, a Saudi official
said: Criticism is in our nature, but what has happened is that such
criticism have been transferred from private circles to the pages of news-

papers.
9254

cso: 4802 65
BRIEFS

PORT DBVBLOPHBNT-Jhe coIpetent authorities in Saudi Arabia are undertaking
a progran to develop Saudi ports in order to cope with the expansion in
imports and exports resulting from the continuous economic growth and the
increasing needs of the various regions of Saudi Arabia. Most ports are
being expanded under the government's long-tern port development plan. As
to ports on the Red Sea. 20 reserve piers are being added to the port

of Jidda which has 27 piers, seven piers are being built in the port of
Yanbu’ and two in Jisan with the possible addition of seven note in the
future. The develop-ant of the ports of Al-Ivlsjh and Al-Qunfudheh is being
studied. 0n the Arabian Gulf. 18 piers are being built in the port of
Abba-nar-four for the unloading of containers-4n addition to the port's
26 piers. At the port of Al-Jubayl, 14 piers are being build. These will
be later supplemented by 110 others which will exclusively service the
industrial and petrolchenical couple: there. Work is now going on to
improve the port of Al-Khubar. The Saudi authorities Ind earlier solved
the probl- of pile-ups in the kingdon's najor ports by nechanising loading
and unloading facilities. Total goods unloaded at the ports of Jidda.
Al-Dalnan, Yanhu' and Jizan aeounted to 27.6 million tons in 1977. an

increase of 67 percent over 1976. [Text] [beirut AL-AIWAR in Arabic 28 Sep
79 p 7] 9251.

080: (0802
ELBCTRICAI. PROJECTS 5PM IN ADMINISTRATIVE REGIONS
Muscat 'UHAN in Arabic 1 Sep 79 p 1

[Article: "26 Power Stations l'o Operate in States by 1980; Government Is
To Pay Residential Book-Up Costs"]

[Excerpt] His Excellency sl-Shaykh Bamud ibn 'Abdallah sl-llarthi minister
of electricity and water stated that his ministry has made major strides in
completing the program it had prepared for 1979 with regard to providing
water and electricity for the capital.

His excellency added in a special interview he granted to the Newspaper,
'UHAN. that the ministry will carry out implementation work in its special
program for cities and villages and that this program will begin early next
year.

He said that 1980 will be the year during which all the power plants in the
administrative regions—there are 26 plants-will become operational. "than
we say they will become operational, we do not mean the machinery will be
operating. but we do mean that we will give the citizen an opportunity to
benefit from electricity services.

His excellency the minister of power and water added that it will be the
ministry and not the National Power Company that will carry out the opera-
tion of residential hook-ups and connections. Ila said thet the company's
function will be confined to operating the stations. nintaining the power
lines and collecting consumption [Pay-ants] in accordance with citizens'
wishes. The feasibility of this method has been proven in the ministra-
tive region of News and it will he universalised in all the administrative
regions.

Ilis excellency the minister denied that the ainistry intended to raise
consumer prices. and he said that his ministry was not thinking of such a
matter.

Ilia excellency the minister of electricity and water said that the ministry
had made similar progress in providing drinking water and that a sisilsr

87
drinking water program was progressing hand in hand with the electricity

program that had been prepared by the ministry to serve different areas of
the sultanate.

His excellency said that 1980 will witness the birth of water systems
projects in Nazwa, Suhar, Sur and al-Buraymi.

with regard to immediate solutions to the water problem. his excellency
Hamud al-Harthi said that the ministry was implementing and studying emer-
gency means for supplying the areas that are suffering from a water problem,
and especially the populated areas such as al-Batinah.

8592
C50: #802
WIT-SW ROAD PROJECT sums
Muscat 'IMAN in Arabic 2 Oct 79 p 1

[Article: "Work on Thaaarit-Salalah Road Begins; Bork on Road To End in
1983; Exhaustive Study for Construction of Port in Sur"]

[Text] Engineer Salin Hamid al-Ghasani. acting undersecretary of trans-
portation for the affairs of roads and ports affirled that work on the
ﬂazwa-Thaasrit Road had begun early last aonth. It is expected that work
on this road will be capleted in February 1983. Engineer al-Ghasani said
that the ministry was currently carrying out the studies that were necessary
for the coapletion of internal roads in none of the administrative regions.
The lengths of these roads anount to approxiaately 90 kiloneters. These
roads include the liatrah-Suhar Road and the roads that breach free it to
Barka', to al-Hasna'ah. to al-Suwayq and to Sahara. That is. the area of
sl-Batinah will be tied together with a systea of aoder-n. paved roads.

He added that the ministry has a plan to build other roads. In addition,
to the Naus-‘lhaasrit Road. work is underway on the second phase of the
Hatrah-Qurayat Road and on the Name-'Ibri Road with their branch roads.
Work is also underway on the al-Bustan-Sidab Road.

lie added that the other roads are being studied and will be iapleaented
soon. These are the al-Jsbaliyah Road in the southern area, the roads
in the Elussndn area and the IOIesab-Bulrha Road.

The acting undersecretary of transportation said that work was underway
at the present tine to expend the runway at the al-Sib International Airport.

With regard to ports. Engineer al-Ghssani said that a contract had been
signed with an international consulting firs: to carry out a detailed and

an expanded study for the purpose of establishing a port in Sur. In
accordance with royal instructions and with the coordination of the Riusandaa
Conittee. a snail port for ships will he built in Bskha in the area of
Husandaa. Another sull port will also be built in lhaaab. Both of these
ports will be seven asters deep and will play a role in the co-srcial

and econonic life of this area.
Engineer Salim ibn Hamid al-G'hssani concluded his statement [by saying]
that the ministry's plan also seeks to improve and develop the port of
Rsysut so it can receive 35,000 ton ships, as for as oil tankers are con-
cerned. Completion of these ilprovements is expected in March of next
year.

8592
C80: 4802
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00880R000200020030-8
UHH SHAH" BOOSTS OFFSHORE PRODUCTION
Beirut THE ARAB WORLD WEEKLY in English 13 Oct 79 pp 4-5

[Text] Offshore production in Abu Dhabi now centers on the Urn shaif field
which last year produced an average of 249,600 barrels a day, and the Lower
Zakum field which produced 245,929 b/d. Developnent of the Upper Zakun
field was started in 1977 and the first production is expected in 1981.

This should build up to a capacity of 500,000 b/d in 1983 for the first stage
of the development. The field will push Abu Dhabi's total production to
about 2 aillion b/d in the mid-1980s. Upper Zakun field is a more difficult
reservoir to produce from than than Shaif or Lower lain-a, but is of impres-
sive size. Ultimately it could produce at about 1 million b/d if a second

stage of development is approved and it could hold this production for 60-
70 years.

Upper Zakum will require water injection to maintain production pressures.
It is one of the most ambitious offshore field developments ever undertaken
in the Gulf. The investment figures compare with the capital expenditure

needed for offshore developments in the far more hostile environment of
the British North Sea. '

About 170 wells will be drilled in the first stage. A total of 25 were com-
pleted last year. 35 should be finished in 1979, and drilling will probably
continue in the 1980s. The production facilities will be concentrated on
one major central platform, satellite structures while there will be about
70 small platforms around the field. At the same time an onshore reception
and export loading terminal is being built around the field on Zirku island,

as well as an airport and housing for a scheme expected eventually to sqloy
600-700 people.

At the refining end of Abu Dhabi's oil industry ADNOC is pressing ahead with
the construction of a $600 million refinery and export terainal at Ruvais.
The plant will have an initial capacity of 130,000 b/d, but this could well
double later. with domestic demand increasing rapidly Abu Dhabi is having
to import about half its requirements of oil products.

Onshore production comes from four main fields: Bu Bass, with an output
last year of 445,000 b/d. Assab (316,000 b/d), Bab (5l,000 b/d) and Sahil_

91
25,000 b/d. A fifth field, Shah is being developed and should be produc-
tive by the first half of 1981. The planning and technical design work
has started and output should reach the level of about 50,000 b/d.

Another small discovery the Ardanah field should come on stream with the
output building up to 50,000 b/d. One other small field, A1 Bunduq is
located on the median line between the Abu Dhabi-Qatar offshore conces-

sions. Oil revenues from the field are shared equally between the two
states.

Individually most of the major Abu Dhabi fields now in production could
achieve significant higher levels of production but Dr. llamra Krouha,
General Manager of ADNOC, is determined to prevent repetition of past oil
companies' practices of forcing maximm production from some reservoirs

at: the expense of jeopardising the ultimate level of recovery of oil and
gas.

is an example of this policy, besides the Bab onshore field which has a
production potential of 130-150 thousand barrels per day, but which is cur-
rently producing only some 50,000 b/d, "this field has badly developed at
the beginning and is therefore showing bad signs of fatigue. In the world
of today oil companies are interested in not wasting a single barrel. It
is criminal to develop a field with a short term approach thus taking the
risk of not getting the maximum recovery" Krouha said. He maintains that
as much as 6 per cent of the oil in place has already been lost because
vater has been injected too near the center of the reservoir with the re-
sult that some oil has been forced behind the water.

he Abu Dhabi National Oil Company is considering a new development pro-
grame with its partners for the field. But if the consortium rejects
the plan on the grounds that it is too expensive it is likely to press

ahead independently along with any of the individual companies that wish
to join it.

The pattern of independent development by ADNOC has emerged strongly in
recent years as some of its international partners have shied away from
connitting the kind of major investment required for Abu Dhabi's more am-
bitious schemes. At the back of their minds all oil companies operating in
the UAE are aware that at any time Abu Dhabi could choose to follow the ex-

ample of several other OPEC members by opting for a 100 per cent takeover
by the state.

There are no signs of this happening in Abu Dhabi but oil companies reluc-
tance to take on new coanitments must be strengthened by the fact that the

major new development programes now underway will take several years to
show any return.

cso: 4820
92
WI mly Immv m “been,
and usually tmheao cum
Ind mam

slower

W hodmcounules.

One other mm o! the new
ammth-lbdmafwlumm

not too damn (mus. \vlﬂ help an:
the boulemu 1M ave Ion-cum

mumMMn.Ioulonllﬂo
mmunlulom. the MI
mthaMeIemm-m
Wmmm

Accom’ unnammsheteded
mmm .Iocou .Suumon
Ont-nu. the W m of the
m I: mum. in the

93

warm '

memmam»
Meal-n can no or
wind. Ihe u the “In The
DUBAI'S moms RISE BY 30 PERCENT

Abu M1 EMIRATES NEWS in English 11 Oct 79 p 1

[Article by Haruf ninja]

[Text]

men. 1&0“st
uhmuuammamm
on by M mo ulna Mum

”MWNWUM
mummumwmw.

mum-25 toluene»!
mauvmdmm
mummumw
hlemdmhyeuﬁdyl
maulmbm

mmmml’musmﬂm
toll)! mlllondm

Will: the vine 0! mm
MWMMM
mufmumwum
dim-m. the am, W kl
from ”I Mllnu “usually“
umuummammm
duhusaoodsmmmclu
mummiﬁemdou.

umwfuummmm
mmhmhumd
SOVIET ARMS SAID SHIPPED T0 COUNTRY
London AL-KAUADITH in Arabic 28 Sep 79 p 12
[Article: "Soviet Arms Shipped to North Yemen and Mediation with the South"]

[Text] Western intelligence agency reports are saying that the Soviet
Union is resupplying North Yemen with different kinds of arms and that
[this activity] followed in the wake of a "secret" visit that was made by
a San'a' government delegation to Moscow early last month. These reports
state that the first shipment of Soviet arms did arrive at the port of
al-Hudayidah on the 29th of August. This shipment included anti-aircraft
missiles. anti-tank missiles, quantities of Kalishnikov machine guns,
bazooka guns and ammunition.

What is being said in western capitals at the present time indicates that
President 'Abdallah 'Ali Salih had become impatient with the procrastination
of the Americans who had promised to supply North Yemen with am when
disturbances with South Yemen occurred 8 months ago. "hen the intensity

of the crisis was growing, Hashington announced that it will send military
supplies worth 500 million dollars to the government of San'a'. These
supplies were to include P—S airplanes. "-60 tanks and other air defense
and field artillery weapons. But what did actually arrive to the Yemenis
was much less than what the United States had promised. The airplanes

and the heavy tanks in particular did not arrive. “me San'a' government
sent several mssages to Washington inquiring about the arrival dates of

the promised weapons, but it received no satisfactory answer. Last June the
San'a' government sent emissaries to the 0.5. government to make direct
inquiries about the weapons. but they returned from Hashington without any
reply from (LS. officials.

It was then that the San'a' government decided to reopen negotiations with
the Soviet Union. After preliminary negotiations with the meters of the
Soviet military delegation in San'a', a military Yemeni delegation--and

it is being said that it included the minister of defense and the chief of
staff—flew to Moscow on a Soviet Aeroflot airplane, and they were accom-
panied by some of the members of the Soviet delegation in San'a'. In
Moscow the delegation met with Chairman Leonid Brezhnev and with the Minis-
ter of Defense Dmitriy Ustinov. Heatern sources state that the meetings
were also attended by some Soviet experts who are working in South Yemen.

95
As a result of these negotiations Soviet weapons began arriving in al-
Hudnyidah. It is being said that delivery began less than a weeks after
the Yemeni delegation's trip to the Soviet capital. Western sources are
also stating that the Soviets promised the Yemenis they would send them
three squadrons of MIG-21 fighter airplanes. so heavy T-62 tanks and 100
T-SS tanks. An agreement was also reached that experts from East Germany
would be sent to train Yemeni troops to use the new weapons.

Some diplomatic sources in London are saying that Moscow will not try to
solve the dispute between the two parts of Yemen in its own fashion. In

return it will gain the name of being "the catalyst for unity between Arab
brothers whose purpose is to solve their disputes."

8592
C50: 6802
AGREEMENT WITH CHINESE CONSTRUCTION COMPANY SIGNED
San'a' AL-TRAHRAH in Arabic 3 Sep 79 p 2

[Article: "Agreement Is Signed Between Republic and Chinese Construction
Firm; Chinese Firm Is To Draw Up Special Designs for International Conven-
tion Center; Project Costs. 500 Million Riyals; Project Area, 26,000 Heters"]

[Text] An agreement was signed yesterday at the Ministry of Public Horka
between the Yemen Arab Republic and the Chinese Architectural Construction
Company. The agreement stipulates that the company carry out the architec-
tural design work for the construction of an international convention cen-
ter in the area of 'Asar. It is to be located 145 meters from the San'a'-
al-Hudayidah Road west of the capital and is to be built over an area of
24,000 surface meters.

The Saba' News Agency has learned that the center will seat 1,100 persons
and that its annexes will be built over 2,000 surface meters. The annexes
will include a hotel. large and small meeting rooms, a restaurant for
guests and ten hospitality units in the form of bungalows over an area of
8,000 surface meters.

The building will also include a reception hall, exhibition halls for the
sale of souvenirs. lounging areas, a movie theater and a theater. There
will be special areas for printing, telex. first aid and mail services.
There will be a security [office], a library and simultaneous translation
services. There will also be parka. parking places for cars and an arena.

The agreement was signed on behalf of the Yemeni side by our fellow
Engineer 'Abdallah al-Khurshami, the minister of public works. The deputy
director general of the Chinese Architectural Construction Company signed
on behalf of the firm. Total costs for the project that will also be
implemented by the company aaount to approximately 500 million riyals. This
project will be financed by the government.

The signing ceremony was attended on the Yemeni side by [our] fellow citi-
zens, the director general of Technical Affairs at the ministry and the
director of Rural Hater Projects. 0n the Chinese side the ceremony was
attended by the charge d'affaires of the Chinese Embassy in San'a', by the
economic adviser and by a number of the firm's senior experts.

8592 3N2
cso: 1.802 9!