FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10204
22 December 1981

Near East/North Africa Report

(FOUO 47/81)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
MTE

JPRS Publications contain information primrily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[) are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each itea, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate. how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.5. Government.

COP'IRIGIT LAHS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OHNERSHIP OI"
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
NEAR EAST/NORTH AFRICA REPORT

(P000 47/81)

Coursms

INTER-ARAB AFFAI RS

Pan-Arab Support for Libya Expressed
(Editorial. Walid Rbu Zebu] Ala-m7”! Air-'ARABI.
28 Aug-3 SQP 81)seesoeeoesssoesosesesooeossesesssessseoooo

{£155th

Kabyle Question Examined
(Hugh Roberts; 1113 mm REVIEW, Sop-Dec 1980) ............

Content . Potentiality of Household Census Data
(Keith Sutton; m2 MGRREB REVIEW, Hay-Aug 1981) ............

Agreements in Mic. Industrial Areas Signed with Soviets
(HARCHES TROPICAUX 81‘ "BMW, 30 OCC 81)............

official Says No Plans To Regain Country's Archives Pro- France
(WES TROPICAUX ET MEDITEW. 6 Nov 81).............

Cooperation with France in Automotive Industry Possible
(MARCIIES TROPICAUX ET “DIEM, 6 Nov 81) . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Ocean Transport Dispute With French Shipmrs Clarified
(HARCHBS TMPICAUX B‘l‘ HBDIW, 30 Oct 81)............

1.1mm
Electron to Popular Comittess Described
(J. Davis;1‘RE "AGRREB REVIW, Sop-Dec Bl)
Management of Agricultural Resources in Coastal Area
(THE MAGHREB REVIEW. SOP-DOC 81) nu....................- ...
:IORCCCO

Formation, Functioning of Moroccan State: Related Developnental
Topics
(Paulo de Mas; THE mam REVIEW, Sap-Dec 1980)............
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Effect of Various Variables on the 1981-85 Plan Reviewed
(MARCNES TROPICAUX ET Harms, 30 Oct 81). . . . . . . . . . .

SUDA N

Darfur Agricultural Project To Include Saudi. British Financing
(HARCHES TROPICAUX ET MEDITERRANRBNS. 23 Oct 81) . . . . . . . . . . .

Briers
Old Suakin Port Study
Czech Cooperation Accord
International Catering Firm
Presidential Plane From France
TUNISIA

Port Expansion Agreements signed with PR6
(MARCH-:5 TROPICAUX ET MEDI‘I‘BRRANEENS. 6 Nov 81). . . . . . . . . . .

Vegetable Oil Production Outlined
(HARCHES ‘I‘ROPICAUX ET MBDITBRRANEENS. 30 Oct 81) . . . . . . . . . .

WESTERN SAHARA

United Kingdom‘s Heath Advises West on Sahara Conflict
(Edward ﬂeath; THE TIMES, 4 Dec 81).......................

ab-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
PAN-ARAB SUPPORT FOR LIBYA EXPRESSED
Paris AL-HATAN AL-‘ARABI in Arabic No 237, 28 Aug-3 Sep 8: p 17
[Editorial by Valid Abu Zahar: "Arabian Lies With Libya"]

[Text] The position taken by the Iraqi leadership on the American attack against
the two Libyan planes represents another stage along the pan-Arab course. It is
profitable to make a few observations about this position, although it is not a
natural and expected extension of this course in the face of current issues.

An official Iraqi spokesman stated that Iraq. based on its established and funda-
mental pan-Arab positions. affirmed its support for Libya against the American
attack to which the Libyan planes were subjected. He added that Baghdad always
supports the Arab side. whatever its political hue, when it is subjected to for-
eign aggression.

The fact is that this position is not a new one but sanctions for the thousandth
time a deeply rooted position held by the Iraqi leadership. This position can
be summed up in a few words: Always on the Arab's side without the least hesi-
tation or criticism in his struggle with the foreigner, whoever he may be.

Therefore. the position was expected, despite the fact that the incident itself
was not devoid of a certain amount of showmanship. especially since observers’
reports subsequently proved that Libyan officials did not believe for a moment
that the American planes would oppose the Libyan planes. Aside from this, other
information says that the Soviet Union wished to sound out Reagan through this
manufactured incident to determine the seriousness of his recent warnings on dif-
ferent occasions and thus requested that the Libyans send their planes on an in-
torcepr mission over units of the American fleet in the Mediterranean.

And so what happened, happened.

We are not prhmariiy concerned with the background of the incident, or its jus-
tifications, or the scenario enploy.d by Qadhdhafi or Brezhnev in relation to
it. Rarhur. we are more interested in shedding light on the various dimensions
of the commanding pan-Arab position maintained by the leadership in Iraq with
respect to the incident despite the fact that the Libyan reghne is providing
financial support and weapons to the Iranian regime which is killing Iraqi Arab

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

soldiers. as everyone knows. Perhaps someone may say that Colonel Qadhdhafi
adopted a similar position when the Iraqi nuclear reactor came under attack. He
contacted President Saddam Husayn and expressed his sorrow at the Israeli raid.
He also dispatched 'Abd-al-Salam Jalud to Baghdad to confirm the pronouncement.

This observation may be appropriate. but it requires some additional consent.

The Libyan regime generally says one thing and does the opposite. Drawing paral-
lels is one thing, but actual practice is something else. Similarly, a show pos-
ition based on a circumstantial reaction is one thing, but an established pan-
Arab position that remains indiviaible is quite another action. When Jalud
arrived in Baghdad, he heard an important theory the gist of which is that the
"pan-Arab conflicts" are an indivisible whole and it is impossible to separate
the component parts of this whole. Just as it is impossible for you to be at
one and the same time on my side against Israel and an ally of my enemy, the
Iranian regime. it is unacceptable for you to declare in an elegantly worded
statement your support for Iraq against the nuclear reactor strike at the same
time that you secretly and openly resume weapons shipments to Tehran to strike
at the land and people of Iraq.

This is a policy that is incompatible with the basic principles of the sound pan-
Arab course. This course rejects "fragmentation" of positions on major issues
and demonstrates the vast distance that separates the rostrul talks and resound-
ing radio speeches. wnich are appropriate on any public occasion, and honorable
pan-Arab practice, which views events from a comprehensive perspective that aﬂns
only at the greater Arab welfare apart from any disagreeaents--especially when
there is a confrontation between ’?ab and foreigner.

On this basis. and based on the principles of pan-Arabian and the honor of de-
fending them, we must stand with Libya in its confrontation with the foreigner--
Libya of the people and Arabism.

So we have learned. and so we will raisin.

COPYRIGHT: 1981 AL-HATAN AL-ARABI

8591
C50: 4504/7

FOR 0F1WC1A1.USEGDNLY
KABYLE QUESTION WIRED
London Tit: tinctures REVIEW in English Vol 5, Non 5-6, Sop-Doc 1980 pp 115-124

[Article by Hugh Roberta. University of East Anglia: ”Mazda an Understanding of
the Kabyle Question in Contemporary Algeria”

[Text I Introduction

For a number of reasons. it is particularly opportune
to hold a seminar with the comprehensive title of ‘Con-
temporary Maghreb‘ at the beginning of the Milk. For
one. it is useful to direct the spotlight to a region which is
characterized by active processes of fermentation in the
socio-political and cultural arenas. Both within and
between the dilferent countries of the region. moreover,
there is political and military friction and even open
conﬂict. At the same time. the Maghreb is struggling
with the question of what its place ought to be within a
broader pan-Arab and pan-Islamic perspective. indeed
simply recognizing and describing these tensions would
be ample justiﬁcation for organizing this gathering. in
which people with different backgrounds and interests
can present their views on problems and developments
in the individual Maghreb states or in the region as a
whole

In my opinion. it may prove especially proﬁtable to
focus on the Maghreb since this region can serve both
as an example and a testing ground fora large number of
contemporary topics and theories in diﬂ’erent disciplines.
The purpose of our contribution. which is intentionally
provocative. is to stress the nomothetic approach. and
we believe that the spatial and functional unity in diversity
-. which is true of Maghreb —eonstitutes a fertile context
in which to analyse various socioeconomic and political
processes. This belief. indeed. is inherent in the way
human geographers tend to think. Positioned about
half-way between abstract theorizing at the one extreme
and spatial reality et the other. the geographer deliber~
.‘ttcly attempts to link these opposite ends by empirically
verifying operatimalited theories and concepts.

The chief purpose ofthis paper is to advocate a specific
way of looking at the Maghreb—a way in which one
can combine elements of political and development

3

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I"Oil MICIAL USE ONLY

geography as they are being practised today in the
Netherlands. In this approach. elements of theories on
development are grafted on to the concept of the state.
which forms the focal point for politico-geographical
research.

To iliustrate our approach. we will conﬁne ourselves
to only one of the Maghreb countries, namely Morocco,
a choice based on the fact that we have several years of
research experience in this country. Nevertheless. oppor-
tunities will be provided for making comparisons with
the other Maghreb states. and our topic—the formation
and functioning of the state of Morocco—offers noints of
contact not only with other topics relating to this country
touched upon during this seminar, but also with similar
processes in the other Maghreb countries.

The Scope of Political Geography’

Politics has never been the exclusive domain of any
one particular group of people. Philosophers. jurists.
historians. journalists and economists have continually
put forward their respective claims and. more rwently.
political scientists have joined them as well. Geographers.
too have long been interested in political phenomena. In
this regard, Dutch political geographers are particularly
concerned with (I) the processes of the integration and
distintegt-ation of political systems. (2) the relations that
exist between political systems at the national level and
those at the international level. and (3) the spatial
aspects of the functioning of political systems at the
intra-state level. This being the case. it is not surprising
that the state has become the central focus of attention
and the most fundamental theoretical concept in political
nonwhit-

The geographers' emphasis on the spatial inﬂuence on.
and spatial elt‘ects of. the functioning of the state and its
constituent parts allows for a classiﬁcation consisting of
four major ﬁelds of interest. each of which may be
subdivided into smaller themes. These four major fields
“(I

. State formation;
State functioning;

. State control; and

. External relations!

ﬁbreJ-e

Thts clearly indicates that there are numerous facets to
the concept of state. but for the purpose of this paper we
will limit ourselves deliberately to only a fee aspects of
state formation and the functioning of the state.

The choice of the state as the basic frame of reference
and integration results from several considerations. First.
during the period of decolonisation many new states
came into existence. although in this respect the term
‘decoloniration' is rather ambiguous. While this does not
imply a return to pre-colonial political systems, neither
does it mean that new poiitical systems came into

4

non oer-sent. use ONLY
existence. 0n the comma! fawn? state-toe.
introduced by Europeans It. W W ~

cuestty, most or the newa mat-Mile»: states of the
African continent—includms "‘0"- of the Manhatt—
are a legncy ol' the colonial pl.“- M l ”Inﬂuence. the
processofstateformationsssomewhatarttﬁcial in
naturc.andthisartihcialityts00en¢ﬂednthecauaeof
the ‘awkward‘ location of interutional boundaries, the
laclt of internal stability and the friction which exists
between ttca‘gtthottting notes (for «9991:. between Mor-
occoandAigedgorhetwcen'l'untssaand Uhya). Such
observations spring from an jawed proposition. Le.
thattheprocessofstateformattonsneuropertaelrwa
‘natural' one. In fact. nothillt 00“” 53 W (tom the
truth. and it is only because state formation in Europe
hegansolongagoandtooltplacesoslowlymtw.
tend to perceive the Mimi“ “"3 n "0019180660

In Europe. the pm of nationobuildtng ml],
followed—rather than preceded—the process of state
fonnation. and the numerous ethnic minorities ”a
separatist sentiments that can still be found in Mt.
a” Europe (Williams. "80) serve as reminders 0'. this
prom. It would seem. indeed. that in this respect the
eircurnoMediterranean countries have more in common
with each other than they have diﬂ‘erencea.

Howeverthiamaybninarelativelyshortperiodof
tints there emerged frameworks for integration based on
colonial(and inthecaseot‘the Maghrebpartlyalsoon
pre-colonial) systems. which appear more stable than
one might have presumed at ﬁrst. Although the authority
of the state may be weak within particular states or my
cvenbelargelyjuridicalandtheoreticalinnature.there
is no other institution that can supplant its role. It is
therefore not surprising that the Organization «African
Unity recognizes the African sates as sovereign entities
and accepts their boundaries as legitimate and inyiolable.
Even though the form may be ofmnt origin. and in
many cases artiﬁcial. this does not mean that some other
construct would be any less problematical, for the prob-
lem associated with the recent process or state formation
are of a myriad nature.

Many young states. for example. face the problem of
having to integrate their population into a single cohe-
sive national unit. and capreasions such u ‘from tribe to
nation‘ (Gellner and Micaud. I972) or 'tribe and state'
(Scddon. I977) clearly reveal the crux of the problem.
Kinship relations and the lilte must be replaced by 0
sense of nationhood which dominates public life and
which mediates. or even regulates. when the interests of
one group within the state clash with those of another
group.

Elias (I974; introduce. the concept or integration
level. according to which it is possible to distinguish
dill’erent levels of integration. all of which have their
own spatial base. such as the national state. province.

POR MICIAI. USE om
to}! OHICIAL US! GIL?

district. etc. However. it is also possible to have integra-
tion levels which do not necessarily have to coincide
with the spatial entities mentioned above. It is possible.
for example, to have integration frameworks on the
basis of functional criteria (modal regions). or others
based on real or perceived common characteristics.
'Communities’ are examples of such local integration
levels. Elias further posits that the process of state
formation involves integration at the higher level of the
national state. which goes hand in hand with a relative
loss of autonomy. for the lower levels lose functions and
power and become dependent on the higher levels. where
decisions are made and Where the distribution of resour-
ces takes place. This loss of function, power. autonomy
and identity. however. is often not accepted without
resistance. and history proVides many examples of this
form of resistance. either on linguistic. religious or
ethni. grounds against centraiization at the state level.

Summarizing, one may conclude that focusing on the
state as the frame of integration entails certain internal
as well as external aspects. The internal aspects refer to
to the formation of the state with all the problems
associated with that. while theatetnal aspects involve the
recognition by other states of the sovereignty of the
bounded space. this recognition. Which constitutes a
prerequisit. may itself present problems. As noted above.
the former colonies have not only inherited—with more
or less difﬁculty—their present form and style of govern-
ment. but their ideological foundations as well. This
includes both the ideal of the intemtcd nationostate.
and that of the welfare state. and state and development
have become synonymous. This. indeed entails the con-
sideration of some ideas from development geography.
which will be discussed in the following section.

Recent Ideas in Development Geography
In the mid-l960s new currents of thought appeared

which were to challenge the so-callcd traditional theories
of development. such as the economic-technological
theory. or those of dualism. growth and modern'mation.
This criticism came mainly from what we will call. for
the sake of convenience. the 'dependeocia’ tlieorists and.
during the protracted trench warfare that ensued a
sustained theoretical bombardment eaposed the wealt-
nesses of the traditional theories.

The earlier overly monistlc and a historial approaches
were not considered adequate to nice an eaplanation for
the problems of underdevelopment. The startinppoint
for the dependencia theorists is the consideration that
causes of differences in the dense of economic develop-
ment have to be sought in external and supra-national
factors. Within this perspective. development is not the
product ofan independent impuhe withinagivencco-
nomtc structure. nor of the removal of social differences

POR OFFICIAL 083 MY
within urban-industrial (capitalistic) societies. Neither
does underdevelopment represent a lower stage to be
traversed. following which a spontaneous process of
growth can begin. and culminating in a ‘modern' or
I'developed society.

Rather the circumstances of development and under-
development must be sought in a world economy of a
capitalistic character. The central thesis of the dependen-
cia theory is that developed countriesgmv autonomously.
while the lesser developed ones show a growth-pattern
that is a derivation from the latter. a deduction derived
from the classical Marxist theory on imperialism.
which is interwoven into the thinking on dependency.
1hisisnew.insofarasoneseeltstoattributethetendest
eies in the development ofdependent economies to the
functioning of the world economy. and this emphasis
ontheeffectswhichca pitalistieenpansignhasonperi-
pheral economies (the impact of enternal factors on
internal conditions) indeed. forms the essential contribu-
tion in the discussion on developmental issues.

While this theory has proved its initial utility. there ts a
danger of stagnation in thinking, due to an over-emphasis
on some (capitalistic) elements of the enternal aspect.
combined with an under-estimation of internal Jeers.
Indeed. the contradictions and dualistic phenomena
within the less developed countries themselves have been
pushed into the background. while the problem of
developmcnthashaenshifted totheleveloftheworld
economy. thereby ignoring the development within
individual states and often stressing the nsptive eifects
ot‘ eatemal dependence.

Studies on individual dependence relations are also
usually limited to the analysis of modes of production
and their relations to social formations in general and
to the penetration of capitalistic modes of production
into large areas of the world. Velllnga (1979. p. 108).
for example. notes an 'empirial anaemia' in these
studies. whereby attention is limited to general economic
problems on an aggregated level. the muladon of
capital. its distribution and use.

Recently one has witneesad gradual counter-attacks
from different sources. in the form of criticism of the
rather weak deﬁnitions. operationaliaation and verio
ﬁcation found in the bulk ofdependencla theory (Enema.
I979a.b; Reitsma. I980; Sedr'en. I977; Walters. I979).
‘l‘hishasledtoatimidrapprochementbetweenthe
formerly conﬂicting parties. and to a beginning of the
onerous task of operationaliaation and testing and.
perhaps, avowed empirists and zealous theoretists—if on
speaking terms with each other—could form a workable
combination and bring about a breakthrough in the
actual deadlock.

Nodoubttvedohaveatthemomentanimpaaaein
research on development. One has lost his bearinp and
it is necessary to orientate oneself while. in the meantime.

FOR MICIAL 083 MY
'03 MIC!“ 083 ONLY

discussions are going on about the direction to take.
Obviously. the theoretical signs we thought of as valuable
and reliable prove to point to nowhere or. at best. to a
dead-end street. A good example or Ian) confusion is a
recent seminar held in Rabat. Morocco.’ in with nurly
all the Moroccans working in the ﬁeld of developnmt
research as well as a considerable number of foreign
experts. participated. The theme of the seminar was the
dependence of Morocco and the question of transition.
Elsewhere (De Mas, l9”. pp. 93492) we have already
noted that a large majority of the younger generation
of Moroccan scholars eahihits a marlted disposition
towards dependencia theories. It is surprising. however,
thatthcsewhostresstheirnportance ofalltypesof
dependency as the explanatory concept for underdevelop
nsent. should themselves enhtbit such a surprisingly
degndent attitude by uncritically embracing such
t ties.

The overrall mutation in Morocco and indeed con-

siderable dependence on foreign capital and the world
economy in general. are explained by ‘dependencistas'
only in tertns of the dependence on foreign capital.
loans. products and raw materials. The explanation.
therefore. is put forward that the economic and military
penetration of the European colonizing states, which had
culminated in the French/Spanish protectorate. has con-
tinued even after the acquisition of political independence
by Morowo.‘

In brief. since the end of the eighteenth century
Morocco has been integrated in the world economy,
resulting in a demdent peripheral mode of production
with the «mid formation inherent in that. So far so good.
According to this theory. the wonomic and military
penetration by France and Spain and the creation of two
protectorates appear as events. setting in motion the
modernization of traditional Morocco which. however.
was to prove that the Marxist model ofabrupt transition
from traditional to modern society is hardly applicable
to Morocco. Attheendoftheseminar.itwaaobvious
thattherewuatheoreticalmmmdala
pense‘.andconfitsionaatothebeginning.theendand
thevariousstawsofthstnnaitionJhegenaalInding
wasthattheactualideasondspendencecentreperiphery.
change in the modes ofproduction and social formations
—including the functioning of the state—has little
explanatory value when held against the light of the
Moroccan experience. In this situation. where the future
transition towards capitalism or socialism scents blocked
in well. the confusion is substantial.

Fortunately. somepeopiedidproposeadilerent
direction and a few others have indeed already chosen
that direction and turned their attention ﬁrmly to it.
This paper is an invitation to those who and themselves
confused to follow this direction. Perhaps one of Mao's
less-quoted citations may serve as guidance in this

1"01! current. use can
a ”n“ “H theOI'y does not 83'” with reality. than”
.. t .

th: theoO'3
3n Apnea-chin”: 5;? in i e “gave that a concentration

w hate .
on e:temal';:aon ho meant a decreased interest in the

l crate. “pram-l .
Egg-ion of dependent” 't h“ :l’ouﬂh‘ “’9‘,“ m “b.“
“do, has been the neglect 0 Moms ore-colonial
history. Given the “Cl. 9 we ““1 Mm .‘n new m
hm, Mailed the ideology of a united natton-state, and
”m the t‘olOﬂi’l MSW deltherately stressed the
momma along the urban-rural. Nib-Berber and
Makhun-Sibl lines for the French and Spanish beneﬁt.
it is perhaps understandable 9|“ ID 9" ﬁrst Ya" CM
independence Moroccan: dsd not feel the need to
concentrate on the internal m of their situation.
11“; tendency to stress external factors_hecarne even
greater in later years. because—which ts indeed the
second reason—attention to internal aspects mu
sooner or later have entailed an inevitable indictment of
the storm gun in Morocco.

But the time now seem right fora change. Recentiy.
in analysing the structure. functioning and ideoloot of
the Moroccan administration. we drew the conclusion
that the present Moroccan state is a cumulative and
negatitc result of a long process covering all the pre-
ceding periods of the sultanate. protectorate and the
prescn‘ monarchy. The arahesque intertwining the prescm
and the past. external factors and the whole of religions.
social and economic factors of internal order. have led
us to the conclusion that a purely abstract approach
which {arts to take account of the historical and spatial
context 0! Morocco has little explanatory value. Similar
ideas have been expressed during the seminar held in
Rabat and have been illustrated by a growing number of
studies. It is not by chance that Guessous (a geographer
himself) stated that 'we all sull'er from excessive globaliza-
tion and macroconceptn while reality is heterogeneous
in tune and space'. He and Pascon stress rather the
need for a concrete approach instead of unfnlitful and
sterile epistit'nolop'c quarrels and debates or a literal
and ritual repetition of the classics.

Here. ll is necessary to remark that regarding the alien.
but wrongly. quoted theory on imperialism. Lenin
himself made clear that deﬁnitions and concepts are
historically determined. and that therefore we need to
observe concrete realities of the world economy in a
given historical and contextual situation. thereby
including speciﬁc time/space considetations (Atriahi.
I978. Chap. I; Blusse et at. I980). There are signs.
however. that a period of empirical groping in Morocco‘s
historical dark has begun. and recent studies by El

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR MICIAL 082 MY

Malki (I980), Ben Ali (I971, I980). Bouphassoul (I980)
“a Pascon exemplify this new approach!

Having said this we hasten. or" :‘ves, to declare that .
“5.0.5“; approach alone is also not sufﬁcient. If this were
the case. the often excellent descriptive works from the
colonial petiod could already be considered adequate.
In our opinion. however. two further aspects should he
added; a new theoretical framework and the spatial
element. As far as the new historical approach is con-
cerned, there is a clear tendency in Morocco to condemn
the colonial historians (Ayache. I979a; Moray. I979).
especially their view concerning the role of the state
and aspects connected to the Malthaen-Siba relations.
The danger is apparent that. simply as a reaction to the
colonial points of view on that matter. one can talte
diametrically opposed standpoints. Ayache states. for
instance. that there was indeed a Moroccan nation and
that the Siba (including the RiOdid not mean a complete
rupture with the Makhun. but had morethe chew of
peripheral integration. aspects of which we shall return
to later.

1heissueatstaltehereiswhetherornottlsishistorical
approach is subject to the same llasvs we mentioned in
regard to research on development in general: being
overly global and empirically weak. In our opinion.
this historical revival is related to the growing interest in
one's own Berber/Memo culture. alter that had been
slighted for so many years. a revival that by the looks of
it cannot be detached from recent pan-Islamic develop-
ments. However. it is to be hoped that this significant
self-discovery does not lead to mere introspection and a
defensive attitude to all foreign inﬂuences. Indeed.
Moroccan and. more recently. Iranian history oﬂ‘er ex-
amples of curious coalitions between traditional eletnents
and ultra-progressive and nationalistic forces against per-
ceived external dangers. whether of religious. economic
or military nature. and recent events in Fee should be
seen in this perspective!

Historically oriented research therefore. should be of
a clear theoretical and thoroughly empirical conception.
As an example of such an approach one can citethe
work of Seddon (I979) describing the complea process
of articulation between (European) capitalist and
(Maghreb) pro-capitalist modes of production. In it. he
clearly demonstrates. on the basis of the dilferenees
between Morocco and Algeria. that the attempt to
characterize the particular social formation of the whole
Maghreb. or even that in the dill‘etent countries. with
one single mode ofproduction isbound to be unfruitful
and inadequate. He argues that the history of the Ira»
formation of the Moroccan and Maghrebian political
economy can be conceptualized as talting place at
several different levels and in a number of distinctive
modes of production, anemia that ‘beyond this general
rule [Marxist ‘law of motion‘—PDM] lies the need foran

10

POI! OFFICIAL USS aunt
Investigation. in each instance. of the speciﬁcity of the
articulation in a series of conjectures to identify the
determinants of the individual history of a particular
social formation' (Sneddon. p. 37).

We spec with this point of view concerning future
empirical research and. as we said earlier. it is the ﬁrst
step on a long and winding road, paved with many
contributions from different disciplines and at diﬂ‘erettt
spatial and analytical levels. A great number of issues.
research ﬁelds. as well as current and past research. ﬁt
surprisingly in this framework. among which one can
mention the formation and functioning of the pre-
colonial stale and its internal and external relations;
the relations between rural and urban. between Malthaen
and Sibs and the dilferent social classes and categories.
Even the external relations between the sultanate of
Morocco and the outside world in their broadest mean-
ings have to be taken into account. This necessitates a
massive number of new studies. but also a reinterpreta-
tion of the abundant literature and material inherited
from the colonial era.

Our own contribution limits itself to the political-
geographic aspects of the formation and funaioning of
the Moroccan state and related developmental topics.
as indicated before. and in doing so we hope to add two
elements to Seddon‘s approach.

Firstly. and a direct result of our stated interest in the
concept of state. we have the conviction that research
on peripheral regions should not limit itself to external
economic relations. but should also include attention
to the way in which a region is integrated into a state.’
Therefore. we have concentrated on the Rif. which
according to Galtung‘s (l97l. p. 84) theory could be
considered part of ‘the periphery of the periphery‘.
The history of the Rif shows how wrong it is to consider
this a given and timeless situation. First of all. what is
peripheral and who. what and where is the centre?
These questions touch on the supposedly timeless Sibel
Malthzen stereotype. as well as on the position of
Morocco as periphery.

The history of Morocco and the Rifshows how an.
cult it is to generalize about Galtung's theory in a situa-
tion where both the centre itself (divided into centre
and periphery) and the periphery itself (also with its
own core and margins) change constantly. Brande!
(I979. ll). for example. presents an historical process,
whereby core and dependent region change constantly
because of the rise and fall of important cities acting as
centres. Recent discussion revolves around whether or
not the Rif can be considered peripheral and. if so.
whether this has always been the case. Ayaehe. for one.
claims that this was not the case during the sultanate.
but that it became peripheral because of European
penetrr'ion and the consequent protectorates. Seddon
(I974, p. 156). on the contrary. maintains that it was not

11

FOR OHICIAL USS OIL!
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

peripheral during the sultanate. and not even during
the protectorate (because it was integrated completely
into the Spanish colonial economy and the Spanish
colonial political and adminisuuwc system). but
became peripheral when integrated into the more
developed sectors of the southern none in the porn
colonial economy and newly formed slate of Morocco.
Heinemeijer and De Mas (I980) leave the question open
regarding the pre-colonial period, because of the contra-
dictory nature of the evidence presented to far.’ but
they do declare that although the conditions for regional
moonwerepresentintwoperipheralregionsﬁhekif
and the Sous, this in fact never happened. Though the
searsofthe past maystillbesecninthepresentstateof
Morocco. the state will not break up along the former
lines of division. However. ample evidence is available
to suggest that the political and economic integration of
the southern periphery (the Sons) is far more progressed
than that ofthe northern periphery.

Even concentrating ontherelationbetweenonespecihc
part of the Morowan periphery and the centre indicates
the need for detailed regional historical research to
supply the general body of theory with hard empirical
evidence. Studies on other Moroccan region hire those
on the Haouz (Pascon. I977). Seksawa (Deanne. I978)
and the Eastern frontier (Dunn. I977) prove this
convincingly.

'l'hesecondpointwewishtoaddisthatoftheneed
to study the manner in which the process of integration
and functioning of the Rif took place under the Spanish
protectorate and is taking place today in the independent
Moroccan state. We have already claimed that there is a
continuity from protectorate to the present state. and
fromthe pointofviewoftheltimanaonecould perhaps
loolt upon both forms of integration as being quite
similar. The reaction to the Spanish penetration was
ambiguous. ranging from outright violent resistance
(I92I-I926. Mohammed Ben Abd-el Kristi) to an open
league with the enemy. often by one and the same
permtss or group of persons! The reaction to the per-
ceived ‘internal colonization‘ (a term introduced by
Hechter. I975) by the new Malthnen in I956 was similar.
ltishecomingmoreandmoredurusothanona
national scale. the same ambiguity existed as reﬁnance
andtheprotenesystembothmarltedtheperiodof
European penetration and the ensuing protectorate.
It is striking. that an exact duplicate of the protege
system. in which inﬂuential Muslimand Jewish Moroccan
families played important roles. is found in the coastal
areasofthe Rif.aswellaaintheﬂighAtlasandthe
Oriental plains (Brown. I976. I919; Schaar. I966;
Bowie. I970; Dunn. I977).

hymeansofresearchonthisparadoaofresistanceand
cooperation.aswellaaefthewholeproblernofthe
traditionalandmodemeconondcpenetrationanddomino

12

POI! OFFICIAL 088 0.11.!
since and the traditional and modern ‘protege' belonging
to it. too much emphasis is laid on structural analysis
of the so called ‘elite'. ‘hourgeoisie‘ or ‘comparadore
bourgeoisic‘. This is a result of the classical theory
whereby society is presented as a class model and where
the state is perceived as an instrument of the “ruling class'.
The problem is that it is difﬁcult to delineate the enact
relation bein society and state. or even to provide
adequate operational deﬁnitions of these two concepts.
Furthermore. the formation or disintegration of states
ontheonehand.andthatofclassesontheother.are
only partly interconnected. both having their own
dynamics (Wolters. pp. 198-200.

This stnictural approach to Moroccan cluses in the
past and present hampers considerably current research
on social formations and the structuring and functioning
ofth: state administration. Social chases and institutions
are too schematic. rigid and simpliﬁed analytical tools
to tackle Moroccan society and state. They leave out of
consideration the highly personal and ﬂexible patterns
of patronage and clientele. estisting alongside and
oftenwithinoroppoaedtotheinstitutionaandstnsctures
belonging to the realm of the state and to ditl’erent
social and economical sectors. We have mentioned that
these institutions and structure may he comparable. at
ﬁrst glance. to those we know in the Western world (in
fact mostly inherited from it). but their working is
quite dillerent and can only be fully understood by
superimposing the panonage and clientele structure
upon them.

Ample evidence is given for Morocco (De Mas. I900)
to prove Boissevain's (I97l) thesis that procedures and
institutions which operate well in certain system cannot
always be implemented in other contexts in which
dtlferent structures operate. If this implementation is
done. procedures and institutions may lead to con-
ditiominwhichscarceresoureesaremisnaedforeectional
or personal interests. The phenomenon of pauotngc
forms the really crucial. if umcltnowledgsd, political
and social reality behind the nominal constitutional and
social facade. This is certainly the case in Morocco.
other Mediterranean countries and. to a lesser degree.
alsoincouutrieseisewhereintheworldmalnerand
Waterbury. I977).

We therefore strongly plead for the incorporation of
this aspect into research on the Maghreb. especially in
regard to the role it plays in hampering or obstructing
the functioning of the state and its institutions. the pro-
cess of integration. and so on. Furthermore. it should be
established to what degree the networks of patronage
and clientele coincide with ethnic and/or racial conta-
distinctions.

Soggested Approaches tome-them
It will by now be clear that the ‘contemporary

13

308 0016151: US! OIL!
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Maghreb‘ cannot be understood properly without the
ltind of empirical research presented ab0ve for the specific
Moroccan situation. the only dilTemv‘: being that the
scale of the research is considerably greater. chain: at
the same time greater possibilities for cc-nparative.
longitudinal studies. in our introduction we owe
already pointed out that the uniqueness of the Maghreb
as a research field lies in the fact that phenomena and
protxssesdonotoccurthereinthesamewayorwith
the same intensity as elsewhere. but still do so with such
regularity that it is useful to study them. The diversity in
homogeneity is the surplus value we ascribe to the
Maghreb and it is this characteristic which makes this
area pre-eminently suited for testing various aspects of
political-geographical and development geography we
think relevant.

There are already a substantial number of detailed
studies on practically every domain for the diﬂ'erent
Maghreb countries. Unfortunately. this research tends
to follow a more ideographic (singulariringldescriptive).
than a nornothetic (generalizing/explanatory) approach.
While both approaches have description as well as
explanation as their goal. the propositions in the ideo-
graphic approach are about limited and contiguous time]
space regions. Whereas the propositions in the nonto-
thetic approach deal with phenomena that (at least in
principle) can be found over a wide ﬁeld of non-con-
tiguous space/time regions (see figure below).

"L; "E

w
“ﬂbn

Therela' bet " ' unleand
tron “WWW!-

 

Thus.thepropositi aintbeidaographicapprcach
areprogrammaticallylisnitedtoacontiguousregion

(usually one interval in the history ofone nation or
region.oro{semeaelectedaspectsofit).whereosthe
proposition in the nomothetie approach know no such
boundaries. Obviously. the borderlinea between the two
approachesarebynouanssherpandasisusualwith
dichotomies. thev have a tendency to polar-be not only
thinking but also people.

This is particularly important in connection with the
other disputed relationship between the synchronic-
approach (dealing with phenomena that take place

1‘

FOR OFFICIAL 088 cm
anywhere in space. but within a relatively narrow time
.ntcrval) and the diachronic approach (dealing with
phenomena that taltc place anywhere in time but within
a limited space region) (see Galtung (1967. p. 24) claims
that: 'What is missing would he ideographic. synchronic
science: the really good set of treatises about a given
region in space . .. Correspondingly, the total set of
historical and much socioeconomic worlt may till both
time and space by joining works about adjaaent and
contiguous space/regions. What is missing here would be
nomothetic. diachronic science connecting all this
knowledge in theoretical frameworks that know no limita-
tions ir- space and time. operating at the level of indivi-
duals and of social structure.’

He stresses the need to tear down the artiﬁcial barriers
between the four approaches mentioned above. by an
approach which. theoretically. explores relations both in
time and space. in contiguous and non-contiguous
regions at the explanatory and descriptive levels. This
means that keeping. for instance, a spatial unit (e.g. a
state) constant would yield a diachronic analysis. while
keeping time constant would yield a synchronic analysis.
Giving both dimensions of time and space free play.
would give a kind of analysis (nontothetic variety)
towards which research should he directed. In connection
with this. the whole Maghreb should be considered
divided into a multitude of time/space units (not ncces~
sarily corresponding to states or other administrative
units) according to a division into the respective time
and space dimensions. “Hie way a researcher studies
the Maghreb as a contiguous space/time region would
depend on the problem deﬁnitions of the respective
disciplines.

In this paper we have indicated various ﬁelds of interest
in political geography and development geography. We
hope that during the seminar more topics will he touched
which could be integrated into the abovementioned
approach to the study of the Maghreb which, due to
its distinctiveness and variety. forms an excellent area
of study.

NOTE

'mspanerisbaaedonthsconceptualwordeanAmarsfoort
and Van der Waco. both aerator lacturera la maphy. Uraveraity
goalimi'mm and editors of a forthcoming introduction to

It“ ”W.

’Theset‘nurmainr nalds form the oorttartt olthspubtiatlon

nsgnéioned'mahove, m. da la

0 us 'Dependana et tiqua tramition'.
to-tz April mo. Facults dea ' Juridlcuas. Econorrtioues
et Sociales. Universitd Mohammed V. Rabat.

‘ See Oualalou's article in ill-Madam. No. I when he divides
the Mdmllaﬂ into three paloda: rash-sets. tstspms.
and alter ms. thereby leaving the period balors lISQaslds. .

l seminar in Rabat. [tennis on the role at the Fuss-cornmretal
elite after ItSOandBoughassnulonehanosstnrnodasdproduenon
in the Maghr‘: from ISOttll I9?“ I

"lashes weent police ao-callad'insaats' 'tesmusu-
mans' in the religious capital 0! Morocco. Already in the 1930s
the resistance against the French protectorate was a coalition

15

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR W’ICIAL USE ONLY

between trad-lionel MW element and ounget. modem

cduwed n'-Ino.ultttt (El Rotten. l9‘l7o.bl. or the mm! o!

intuest m the Mmmn cullunl wirimny. we weak], No. ,
IIS; AI-Am. No. l9 o W") An wish. knee Alma:

d'uuoln a dc cit-anal». . I. ma.

’Ettetna (I900) claim «not the inlcﬂdiO'l her-out 'cndoeentt‘
chavmiuin and ulcers! utteuttlion decides llte 'tlcome of the
new of Irviphenlnwm. ‘lt is the com o! wttpml-atton
‘whéat‘mmt he studted nn tts actual 3 its historical dimensio-u‘
.D. )-

‘Pﬂcou wall pnbhsh en histaicel use-outta, on the valley of
MIMI-h movince of Al Hooeime) in e foelltcotnim Punch

blunt-on of (he REDRA prom; e match wojoct or the

nmenteolcoouoolty. Untvmlt otAmtetdetnond L'Imlilul
Agronomquc ot Vtwinene "nan l in Robot.
'llnd.. Pam.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Am: a 0mm (197$). 'Rcchenhte memes ear I: Mow:
modane'. mun MW e: Soda! a Moro: Miation
Documents. No. Ill-In, Rohu.

AI Mocha (WM). No. I. Row.

A??? “glam Revue Motorola-e d'hluoln a dc «dilution.

. . t.

Ametfoon. 1.). M.. Rein-new. W. F. and an det Wm. ll. ll.
(ma). ‘Gen «meld volt Stolen' (A weld ol’ none). My in

Mme: rqﬁe (fonlteoatim)

6.097 ). mam 'W. noun-I
Holman raw... NLB. [.0042an ’ 0/

Ayuhe. 0. (W790). Dada film ”W. SMER Robot.

Amattem). Lapel" delemdullif.‘ht¢oede
doclonle d'Em. Univen'l his hair.

ﬂange. J. (I970). De L'admm d 'Atla. 1 volumes. Sindbod.

Bit“. 1... Weeding. H. L Ind Winks. G. D. (eds) (IN). ”(glory
and (hundred-0mm: an 1 on Underdrnlopml and Evo-
m Enamel: In Add «IA/rm. Cenm for the History of
Emma expeneion Leiden university. Leiden _

Boiseevoin. J. (l9?!) ballot”. development end ptoptwllonol
«cremation: o Sicilian as. Iota-to! of Development studies.

3.311"???va mm (New 'M

' o t. tn «new.
Ilﬂ-IOIZ'. Mn la IHWSM‘“. mm. No. II.
Ohio Univenit . Atltene Ohio.

Model. F. (1979‘. cums-m W. W (I Cowl/one.
J tunes. Malena Colin. Pork.

Dem. K.Lé_|ﬂ6).Pupth.Wtho
“gem Ily. mo.» . W Unholy PM“.

a.

Brown. K. L.(l971).W fame «new it o Motown

gig. I’m; $4 (“an Realm Mtg-adaﬁ.
net . e . Mouth, London. . .

Deood. z (mo). um“... Noam new. '9: m. “-25.

De Mu. 7.0978). www.mohm

undue when Wzbwbw
NUFFI'C’ﬂMWOO.m' “PLO .‘I'Ielleue.
Dmit.£.(l977).hmu1k M.mw

to Fee-eh lard-Ilsa; Jul-1912. Goon. latdon.
Elia. N. (1974 . 7m. Ma downwind. 1km;
WIy.¢d.C.mlM .Ne-tvy.undon. .
El Land“ 0977.). W new at Colochl-ne.
Wd‘mujeudlm. No. Lao-so
El Kohen mull 09111)) ‘Le mat-tho {elm ot I'm-
mdelevillcdonele Mmmdldm.ﬂn4.

am'w. A. (mo-)3 end dew-west. W
eoor Mat-he (n Soda: at No. l. N.

. V
Elm. w. A. (19790). ten wen done-m
mow ms at intone mugs-um (amt
we at economk dependence end w nun-I
notion) Discussion now No. 2. Department o( Owen».
Ummity ot Utrecht (mt

W .
Plum. w. A9910). 'Spenieh :o use etudy in mitten!
inlay-lint“. . Amsterdam.

16

FOR OIPICIAL USE ONLY
n Malll. u (mo; '0 'uhsmg “In. new.“
h‘mmmn ct want-may: 6' .- WW'M- la us go at“?
('mmnmaauon COW Wm ct Mm... do 1"
mnmm‘. 10-12 Ami. Row.

Gallon; J. "961). My and Medal! o/Sodd Rum/L Allen
and Umm. Won. . .

cum; 1. mm ‘A mill-1! meaty o! Mg; 19...,
«I'm tumult. No. 3. "407- 'W'H“

Gcllna. E. and Maud. Ch. (048) (1972). Aids “4 MM:

«cmmvmwmnﬁrmm- '

"H. '8”? . . . N
"Miranda Mum. Duck-loan. 1m a!” l”
m y“ *

”cu-unna. w. r. m 0. Mn). (may 15:
Muouumc wt'aurmuoa oldie Mm 3013.))...

On (mum. ”manic museum w...
Mal}? (I900). In 116 Own an Mona: AnkAlmw u.

I“. 26-”. . ' '
Men). M. ([979). Contact)! “can l‘hiuolre do ‘

o mm. um. No. m-m. m—m. sum ' ""
Omhlou. F. (I900). MIW ”on“. 81153. KIM.
m, p, #9711). “1.33:“: dt Momma. 21m. Rahal.
Mum, . . MW . 1|:an

nations. and the apinlmic mum”. mm a 0.0.

Umsily at Amanda: (mm M.
m. u. «966). ‘Conﬂict mg.” a. mmmum

93“..“ D' ( 97:"? mm; ”W '
. l ). ' wow u "a duct
meat in Noah-Eu: Mam‘. Chem and c, at]. J, 0.3.:
Athena has. [gunman m-Ieo.

Sodom, D. (1977; '1’:- and sale: am to
Memo. 1» Mama new". Vol. 2. No. 3.1340. mum

Vaninp. M. 0979). ’1’de m oolwiklclinpthouic'. Saddam»

Glam}! lOl-ll).
William. M. (1980). ‘Elhnic min in Wm Ell ‘

wam. W. a. (1m '54.“: ' k '
.. mm. A... _ .. WWW mm":
a: m Samba-u MI). Winch 6145. Not. 1-). l 1-”.

17

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
roe OFFICIAL USﬁ ONLY

CONTENT. menu?! W WSMID CENSUS DATA

stoma

tendon THE mm REVIBi 1n qulioh V01 6, lb. 3-4, May-Aug 1981 pp ‘5-48

[Article by Keith Sutton: "Household Census Data Prom Algeria:

Potantsauey'l

[Ml

Abstth

The I977 Population Census of Algeria offers re-
searchers a rather unique collection of data because the
results are available at the levels of each household and
individual. Thus. the researcher can make a precise study
of a single village or of an urban quarter. or he can
extract large samples without the problems of generalize.
tion which result from the use of data aggregated to the
level of :ommunes or arrondlssements. The range of
information available from the Algerian census is
described and demonstrated for two villages, a centre de
rqrwpenwnt and an spatial: reform Village. The object
is to show the possibilities offered by these census
documents for Third World studies.

The analysis of spatial and social patterns as revealed
by population census data is invariably hindered by the
aggregated nature of data supplied by census authorities
who are anxious or required to maintain a degree of
confidentiality about individuals and households. Where-
as much sophisticated statistial analysis of census data
by tracts or communes is possible. the researcher remains
one short but tantalia’ng step removed from his subject
matter.' Sample questionnaire surveys are possible but
these pose organicetionel problems linlted to the time
and money available for ﬁeld worlt and oﬂen sull‘er from
inadequate response rates which can bias the results.
These data problems were obstacles for the author
enquiring into the 1980s situation ofregrouped settlement
centres established in Algeria by the French army.
I9S7-l96l. Over 2.300 of these centre: de "aw
existed by l96l and contained upwards of 2.350.M
people. or one in three of the rural population! Much
evidence existed that many oftheee supposedly temporary
centres remained in existence during the 1966 and were
evolving into permanent additions to the Algerian rural

18

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Ice Content and
settlement system! However. published census data for
I966. and those planned for I917. were at the geographical
scale of the commune. too large an areal unit for studies
of the populations of individual rural settlements A
partial solution was to use some 1973 preparatory census
documentation. the We ”come districts I973.
which allowed localities to be identiﬁed and a rough
estimate of their size to be made from the numbers of
occupied dwellings listed as a guide for the later use of
the census enunterator ‘ Sorne functional chncteristics
of the surviving centre: de regroupement cottld also be
ascertained from this I973 data source.

On the basis of personal assurances from census-
ofhcials that the results of the l9?) census would ulti-
mately be available to researchers at the very basic scale
ofeach household and each individual. a brief reconnatso
sance exercise was undertaken at the Centre National de
Departmental! of the Cmtrsortor Norman! aux Re-
censements er Enquirer -Ytotlstiques (C.N.R.E.S.) in Oran!
Samples were sought from the completed household
census forms (ferrules de Menage) for two villages for
1977. the centre de regroupemt at of Djebabn and the
agrarian reform village of Aures el Mcida. A further
sample from the I966 census was obtained for Djebabrs.
The census officials in Oran were most cooperative in
providing the tiles of household census forms as re-
quested. and it was an exhilarating experience handling
data which in Britain and elsewhere would remain
conﬁdential under the loo-year rule or similar restrictions
on access. In view of this quite dilerent attitude on the
part of the Algerian census authorities towards the con-
fidential nature of household level census data. it is
proposed to illustrate the nature of the information
contained in the hope that others working on Maghreb
and Third World problems may perceive the potential of
this data source for analytical work at a scale rarely
possible wuhout considerable field work.

The Contents of the 1971 Census Form

The basic feut'lle de meme. or household form.
amounts to a large single sheet folded into four pages.
the last of which is an Arabic translation of the questions.
which together with instructions to the enumerator, are
in French. All the manuscript responses in the samples
taken were also in French. After details of the address.
geographical code. date. and the names of the enumerator
and controller. the census form is divided into sections
on the construction. the dwelling and household. and the
demographic and «ado-economic characteristics of each
individual. Construction questions ascertain whether the
building we or post-dates 1966. the tune of building. the
state of repair. the number of storeys. and the nature of
the walls and roof.

The mend section. entitled Logement e! Menage,
ranges widely enquiring alter the following:

19

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

whether the dwelling is inhabited and whether it has a
non-residential function

an interior courtyard. independent or communal

a kitchen and a bathroom in the ......-.!ing

"w numb“ of rooms .ind those used “0.- dwelling

“'2:th mm is an inside or outside toilet and the

t memo! . .
theiﬁter source: PIP“. “’°"' 59""5' ““1
electricity and gas supply. and Whether piped or bottle

m5?“ nershi" of the building: local authority. private.

Matcher the household rents or owns the dwelling o,
uhcthet it is aocommodatedthere free Ofcllarge

“has,“ the household receives any money from
relatives dwelling elsewhere to Meets": or abroad. or
from state or other pensions.

thl!\, the membership or the household is divided into
nuf categories: residents present; residents absent for
,m than six months; emigrants abroga; and mm“
.mng stayed for less than six tumult;L

the third section gives the following details for each
unusual member of the household. with mm.
ucsttons obviously not being gum,“ on behalf of

htldrcn:

Mm, set. and relationship to the head or other
member of the household

date of birth or. if a birth certiﬁcate is not possessed.
the year of birth

the place of birth. The commune only is asked for.
\silh a request not to add the donor or district

matrimonial situation. including separatodand divorced

the place of residence of absentccs and Visitors

the place of residence in April I966. the date of the
presious census

year when each indiVidual moved into the commune.
Obviously many had lived there from birth

presious place of residence

nationality

the education section covered languages which could
he read and written. the ﬁnal class attended at school
or college. and the highest academic diploma
achieved .

the economic situation encompassed those in work. out
of work. studying. housewife. retired. invalid. and
an ‘other non-active' category which would include
children not in education

(or those unemployed. data were sought on their
previous job and on the length of time without work

the kind of employment. A precise job description was
asked ol‘ench individual as well as a crude indication
of whether skilled or not

20

POIOFHCIALUSIONLY
iurther employment details covered the situation. i.e.
employer. cooperator. permanent or seasonal em-
ployee. apprentice. etc. and the length of time in
the presenl job

for the place of work of each individual. data were
sought on its main economic activity. its location by
commune or urban district. and its sector. i.e.
administration. public. autogestion. cooperative, or
private

A similar range of socioeconomic data had been
sought in the I966 census. although slightly less detailed.
and the previous residence information was restricted to
place of residence on l July I962. that is on Independence
Day. rather than at birth and at the time of the previous
census.

CaaeStadles: DlebabraandAtreaelMeldalalm

To illustrate the nature of the information afforded by
the [Miles de meme. two constrasting case studies are
brielly discussed. The village of Djebabra' originated in
the late I950: as a centre de regmupemenr created by the
French army as part of its anti-guerrilla strategy. Aurea
el Meida is also an artiﬁcial creation as one of the first
agrarian reform villages which lnve. since I973-l974.
formed part of the ”reunion Agralre programme. 0n
the basis of a 25 per cent sample Djebabn has about
l40 households which contain about 628 people. From a
33 per cent sample Aures cl Meida contains about
lSO households with about 969 people" The non-
residential buildings in Djebabra numbered eight.
encompassing seven functions; those in Aures el Meida
numbered eight. as did the functions. So. the two villages
are similar in size. with the agrarian reform village having
a higher average density per house. Being a new settle-
ment. all houses in Aures el Meida had a piped water
supply. electricity. and bottle gas. By constrast. all
houses in Djebabra obtained their water from a spring.
only half had electricity. while practically all used bottle
gas. Average family size was slightly larger in All!“ el
Meida (4-75 persons compared with 4-49). wlui: its
balanced sex ratio contrasted with Djebabra’s higher
proportion of females (54 per cent). Households. and
often families. of ten or more were not uncommon in
both settlements. Juvenility is stronger in Djebabra. with
57-4 per cent below 2| years of age. 3” per cent aged
2l-50. and l0-8 per cent and SI or more. Given its
agrarian reform orio‘ns. Aures el Meida enjoys a higher
proportion of people in the active age groups. 34-5 per
cent aged 2l-50. compared with 52-2 per cent below 2|.
and l3-3 per cent above 50.

In view of the recent and artiﬁcial origins of both
settlements. data on the migration history of their
populations are especially interesting. 0f Djebabra's
population aged II and over. 95.1 per cent were residing

21

FOR OFHCIAI. USE ONLY
l-‘Ol OFﬂCIAL USE ONLY

in the same commune in I966. Aures el Meida obviously
did not exist tn I965. but 840 per cent of its population
were living in the same commune then. 0f the thirty-four
individuals elsewhere in I966. eigi.... .. were in the same

wilaya of Sidi Bel Abbés. thirteen tn the adjrcent wilaya
of Salda to the south. and three in that of Own '0 the
north. The question about the year people settled in ti..:
present commune of residence revealed that 860 per cent
in Djebabra and 55-7 per cent in Aures el Meida had
lived locally since birth. 0! the ”3 immigrants recorded
in the Aures el Meida sample. two peak periods are
detectable. l964-l966 and I975. but the sample is too
small to read much into this. For the in-migrants. data
ontheirprevionsplaceofresidencesuggestedapre-
dominance of short-distance movement. The adjacent
two communes to the north of Djebabra. Meurad and
Hsdjout. accounted for most of its immigrants. wlu‘le
68-6 per cent of those who had moved to Aures el Meida
came from the same wllcyn of Sidi Bel Abba. 0'0"!”
26-3 per cent had moved northwards from the steppe
wilaya of Salda. Several young children and babies were
listed as in-migrants. though not their mothers. suggesting
that a temporary move to a maternity hospital or to
relatives for the birth was being recorded. so ailecting
the census results. Spatially. the its-migration data for
Aures el Meida showed concentrations within Sidi Bel
Abhes wilayu.particularlytothesouthfromthecom-
munes of Good Berket'hes and Sidi Ali Boussidi. and to
the south-west. from those of Atn-Tetnouchent and Aln
Kihal.

The last section of the census form supplies data on
employment and economic activity. In both villages low
activity rates emerge: I” per cent of the population in
Djebabrn. and 196 per cent in Aura el Meida. A further
Tl per cent were unemployed in Aures el Meida. and in
both places the numbers of schoolchildren equalled or
exceeded the employed total. No one regarded themselves
as 'retired'. despite some elderly men being included in
the sample. Women were invariably recorded as 'house-
viives‘. Occupations were dominated by agricultural
labourers. vineyard workers. and tractor drisers. The
narrow range of occupations in the centre Jr W
mr contrasted with the wider range displayed by the
larger sample from Aura el Mada. which included
teachers. social workers. and other service sector workers.
Likewise. contrasts emerged in job situation in that the
largest group of workers in Aures el Meida were co-
operators. the product ofthe agnrian reform. whereas
seasonal workers were marginally more important than
permanent employees in Djehabra. Place of work data
revealed only one commuter in Djebabra and two in
Aures el Meida plus a few individuals working and living
away from home elsewhere in Algeria and in France.
Both villages were thus, as eapeeted. self-conﬁned
agricultural settlements.

22

POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
For Djebahra a 25 per cent sample was also taken
from the I966 [miller dc Menage to allow some compari-
sons The 130 households containing 589 people were
only slightly fewer than in 1977. All the l966 sample

were living in the same commune in I962. Compared
with I977. a higher proportion of people were working,
over half of them in viticulture, a branch of agriculture
which had disappeared from Djehahta by 1977. With this
change. the dominance of the aurogerrlon sector had also
disappeared, l966-l977.

The Peteatlality ol‘ the Data for Third World Studies

Although the previous section presented a few detailed
aspects for just two villages. it is hoped that this has
demonstrated the wider research potentiality or the data
source. 11! micro-scale at which the Algerian population
can he sampled and studied should he re-emphasined.
Individual villages, hamlets. and dispersed dwellings can
he isolated for study, as can blocks. streets and individual
constructions in urban localities. Both detailed local
studies and wider sample studies can he made using this
census documentation. These can use individual or
household level information and so avoid having to
infer relationships from generalized data at various
aggregated levels from communes upwards. For example.
hypotheses of relationships between the educational level
of individuals and their socioeconomic status can he
tested. and the social and spatial details of the large hut
poorly documented unemployed sector of the population
can he studied, without being blunted by the use of
aggregated data. Population migration in particular can
he examined through three items ol'infonnation contained
in the census: ﬁrstly. an individual's place of birth;
secondly. his residence in I966; and thirdly. his place of
residence prior to his present address. Many migrant
path: would he amply covered by these three items, and
samples of the populations of shanty-towns. inner city
slums. or agrarian reform villages would yield interesting
results. Evidence. put forward by Mutin.’ of the continued
occupation of accommodation on Mogesllolt estates by
former workers who have moved on to urban industrial
jobs. could be substantiated, though some such illegal
oowpanls may well have evaded the census or. at least,
some of its questions. The details of housing conditions
and of services. could be ascertained for areal samples of
urban slums or rural centres de regroupemenr, samples
which would require a major organizational effort in
terms of questionnaire surveys in the ﬁeld. Further, the
availability of the 1966 census, with a similar range of
questions. allows the time dimension to he added.

In short. the quite different attitude talten hy the
Algerian authorities towards the secrecy of census data
allows researchers to investigate problems at whatever
scale of aggregation is appropriate. rather- than to make
do with more generalized data sets» Regional and

23

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

national samples can be employed which would be quite
impucticable on the basis ofpenoual otcvea team ﬁeld
wotk. It it to be hoped that Algeria's example is followed
by othet Third World eem'tu anthems and to encour-
ages the maximum ‘1“ P 3 "ftmcnse and val

collections of data embodted tn lbﬂl’ national “an?"

NOTES

'1. M. L. ttohenm. "Demand my .
Hangman o/ kiwi! GWWJ. image-llama? ‘4': {6.6:
t. - . - .

= M. Com-ton. Le: renamed: lam .
new" wwwnaz mm]? 3: ’°"' W

. tonl . . Iv ' opu on - .
«3mm eh: and the mat settlement Nm'..?m
3%”?!on J. hummus. New Series, Vol. 3, 3, 1d

‘lc. Stutton. ’A note on the use «my. Mm
«on in the study of total aettlement in A“)?- "W
"In!!!" (”Adm-”um PM), Vol. 5, )9 . ”i4“

‘ The authoc ushqto mom has thank: to M. Boumi and M
ml! at the Centre Nuttottal de Depoulllement ol the C.N.R.E.S. It:
gm in to. we Asp-nut Maoued Ahmed (clone Mmuehaux).

an.

'Djehebta lien in the mutate of loo Media. in the dam ol
Milieu. in the tel/0N of £1 Ash-tn. Aura cu m a gum“ in m.
083nm”: and «aim of Human Boo Radial. h the we,- ol Sada

Abba.

"The validity of these ample}: conﬁned by a precise time!
638 inhabitant; [of thtbta uveu in the Table.- ulna!
Cthtgh tt_adoeunwaunmmthemm d
hotneholds and Indavtduab at each settlement at can: met In the
“mme . .r *m term“
it ooota a l more n en
(El MW“. 5 April 1979; ‘

' G. Mum. ’Devdomtent et «dune 0e r en Mitidja'),
Revue J! WW * Lyn, Vol. 52, No. I. l , 6-”.

2O

FOIOMCIALUSEONLY
AGREEMENTS IN SWIG. INDUSTRIAL AREAS SIGNED HIT! SOVIETS
Paris HARCEES TROPICAUX B1? HEDITBRRANEBNS in French No 1877. 30 Oct 81 p 2N6

[Text] The seventh meeting of the Algerian-Soviet commission on economic. scientific
and cultural cooperation. at the vice-presidential level. held in Moscow. ended 20
October. The two sides at that time signed several documents elaborating new areas
of Algerian-Soviet cooperation and initialed a protocol. that will serve as a basis

for the work of the seventh meeting at the ministerial level. to be held in Novedaer
in Algiers.

Various documents approved at this preparatory session show the intention of both

sides to deepen cooperation by taking account of the priorities established by Alberia's
fifth 5-year economic development plan. The Algerians and Soviets agreed to work
jointly to carry out a major hydraulics and land isprovenent program. involving four
big dens. and examined the possibility of joint participation in building a series

of other dams in Algeria.

In the industrial sector. the two sides agreed. anong other things. to construct a
spare parts uorkshop at El Hadjar. a 500.000-ton cement works at Djelfa. to expand
the plate-glass mit at Oran. and exanined the possibility of increasing the current
level of cooperation in the metal industries. mining and construction nterials sector.

In the field of vocational trsinmg and national cadres. the two delegations decided
on the modalities of construction of 20 vocational training centers and announced
the decision to build 40 others together. Still on the subject of training. several
advanced institutes will be established in Algeria as part of the Algerian-Soviet
cooperation agreenents.

The experts on the two delegations also examined the possibility of cooperation in

the field of housing, railroad infrastructure and transfer of skills and technology.
and in a general way means of expanding cooperation between the two countries.

COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux et Cie Paris 1981.

9516
C80: (619/101

25

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
F0!‘0FFKJAI.USE(NNLY

ALGERIA

OFFICIAL SAYS N0 PLANS 1‘0 REGAIN COUNTRY'S ARCHIVES FRO! FRANCE
Paris HARCHES TROPICAUX ET HEDITERRANEERS in French No 1878. 6 Nov 81 p 2811

£Texg7 At a press conference which he gave on 29 October, Raymond Courriere,
secretary of state responsible foe former residents of Algeria. said that there
are no plans for an inediate transfer of the Algerian archives. The french
secretary of state said: "If anybody thinks that tomorrow we are going to ship
out the 600 tons of Algerian archives. I can tell you that they are mistaken. I
know that our repatriates are worried over this matter which was raised by the
Algerian Government 20 years ago but I do not want it to overshadow our efforts
of the last 5 months to improve and finally settle the situation of the repatri-
ates."

The problem of these archives is a case where "you cannot see the wood for the
trees." Courriere reckons and he expressed his surprise to see it being raised
“just when the government is working to improve the conditions of the former resi-
dents of Algeria." "Everybody knows that since 1962 the Algerian Government has
been calling for the return of the archives kept by France and covering the
colonial period from beginning to end, but we are not prepared to let anybody
down." Courriere :aid. pointing out that the Algeriens, "as e setter of fact, had
never asked for all the archives. I think that it is normal for the French Govern-
aent to defend its interests and for the Algerian Government to do the.same," he
added. Courriere explained that the Secretariat for Former Residents of Algeria
had taken part in the discussion which are in progress between Paris and Algiers.
"The problem of the archives," he said, "is one of the items under discussion."

It is also reported that some 30 associations of French residents in North Africa
have asked the government to abandon the idea of turning over to Algeria the
archives, now being kept in Ais-en-Provence, covering the period of colonial rule
in that country. According to a communique published by the ”Algerian Circle,"
those associations have decided "to remain vigilant and to jointly take all the
necessary measures" to prevent any future transfer to Algeria of the archives

brought from that country to France in 1962.

On 20 October. the Overseas Academy of Sciences already spoke against the possi-
bility of France handing over to Algeria the archives of the former Governor
General Administration of Algiers. In a resolution. the Academy stated that the
archives "belong to the French nation. they are sovereign archives which cannot
be turned over to a foreign government," and added that "premature disclosure"
of the political archives could rake up past events which fell under the statute

of limitations but only in France.

26

FINRCMHHCJAI.USEGMNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The Overseas Academy of Sciences has proposed that Algerian historians be given
access to the overseas archives kept in Aix-en-Provenco and it has put forward
the idea of creating a French-Algerian Joint Commission entrusted with the task

of reproducing in microfilm documents which do not jeopardize people still alive
and to hand over these documents to Algeria.

COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux et Cie Paris 1981.

8796
C80: 4519/62

27

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR‘OFFNJAI.US£‘ONLY

ALGERIA

COOPERATION WITH FRANCE IN AUTOMOTIVE INDUSTRY POSSIBLE
Paris HARCHES TROPICAUX ET HEDITERRANBEHS in French No 1878, 6 Nov 81 p 2811

[Text7 Hitterrand's forthcoming trip to Algiers could be an opportunity to dis-
cuss several projects of French-Algerian cooperation. This is all the more

likely to happen if it turns out that an agreement is reached before then on the
price of gas and if OPEC finds again a certain measure of unity among its ranks.

The outcome of the negotiations on hydrocarbons will really boost Algeria's
earnings.

In this connection, the present report circulated by the AGBFI [expansion unknown7
adds that in the industrial sphere the main development expected is the signing of
contracts involving the automotive industry (passenger cars and industry vehicles).
But French car manufacturers, with Renault at the top of the list. are going to
face a strong competition. Right now, Algeria has several projects on the drawing
board. These projects involve the purchase of finished vehicles and the building
of an automotive plant.

Accoruinc to infornztion provided b; the news agency, the first negotiation:

will deal with the purchase of between 20. 000 and 30,000 passenger cars and with
the purchase of commercial vehicles for a reported total vslue of between 700 and
1.000 million francs. Regarding the sale of passenger cars, the two French
manufacturers are contending with a Japanese competitor as well as with Volkswagen
and Fiat. Lately, these last two companies have been supplying the Algerian mar-
ket, the first through its Brazilian subsidiary and the second by the intermediary
of its Spanish associate SEAT (a partnership which has now been dissolved).

As for the car plant, it is said that the project has been given prominence again.
But the Algerians are reported to have introduced some changes in their plans
lowering the amount of local integration. Let us recall. the AG!!! goes on to say,
that the plant being envisaged should be capable of making 100,000 cars a year
while, right now. there is an estimated market of 70,000 cars a year. But the
demand could be higher. Renault. which already signed a contract in 1970 only to
see it canceled, seems to stand a good chance of getting the business if the
project comes to fruition.

COPYRIGHT: Rene Moreux et Cie Paris 1981.

8796
cso: a519/42

28

FOR 0FTﬂC]Al.USEIMNLY
OCEAN TRANSPORT DISPUTE WITH FRENCH smrowms CLARIFIID
Paris HARCHES TROPICAUX ET MEDITERRANEENS in French No 1877. 30 Oct 81 p 2746

[Text] Early this month we published a notice from the Nord-Hanche-Atlantique French
Shipowners Group. dealing with practical implementation of the inter-governmental
agreenent governing trade between France and Algeria and calling for an equitable
sharing of the traffic--50 percent for French owners and 50 percent for Algerian
owners. Noting that this distribution has not been put rigorously into effect in
every field. but only in a general and internittent way. in accordance with the deci-
sions of the Conference. the notice said: "In the context of the above. the French
shipowners group asserts that nerchandise nay be carried on ships of either of the
two flags indiscriminately. without regard whatsoever to destination. Any special
convention giving preference to one flag over the other is contrary to the spirit
and the letter of the Franco-Algerian governeentel maritime accords." arm of 9
October 1981).

While not disputing the facts as stated in the notice. CHAN (Algerian National Navi-
gation Company) underlines the fact that the Algerian-French naritine accord states
that traffic will be shared between the two aarchant fleets proportionally on the
basis of the smunt of transport resources each fleet has available. The Algerian
commercial shipping industry asserts that if more of the business in 1981 between
the Nord-Hanche-Atlantique region and Algeria has gone to the Algerian fleet than
to its French partner. the reason lies in the fact that the toner offered shippers
more reliable service. by maintaining regular service to French ports. while the
French shipowners interrupted the circulation of their vessels.

Our readers will recall that we published in early July a notice from the French
Expositions Comittee (cm). calling on Prench exporters. especially those exhibiting
at the Algiers International Fair. to ship their goods via Atlantic and luditerranean
ports. because of a reworary interruption of nsritine service between Algeria and
ports in northern ﬁance. They will also recall that CHAN issued a "correction"
noting that the interruption of service between the ports of the Hanche and Algeria
was not in any way the fault of Algerian ships. which planned to continue serving
Caen. Rouen and Dunkerque with the sane frequency as in the past (lﬂ'li of 3 July.

p 1760 and 210 July. [3 1931).

CNAN hopes that shippers will understand that an intergovermaental maritime accord
dividing up the cargo business must take into consideration the legitinate interests

of the users of mrititae transport. who should not bear the cost of a voluntary decrease
in transport service.

OOPYRICHT: Rene Horeux et Cie Paris 1981.

9516 29
050: 4519/“ ms omcuu. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ELECTION TO POPULAR CWI‘I‘TEBS 023mm

LIBYA

London Till! WREB REVIEU in English No 5-6. Sap-Dec 81 pp 99-103

[Article by J. Davis]

[Text]

This note consists largely of ethnography. and it
describes the conduct of an election in Ajdabiya in I979.
That election was not typical in all respects-the vio-
lence for example was unusual and it is unlikely that the
heterogeneous and newly established populations of
‘lripolt. Benghnri. perhaps Sabha. express their internal
oppositions in quite the some ways as Ajdabiyans do.
Nevertheless. the purpose and form of elections are
common to all Libya. and are related to the doctrines
of The Gm» Book. It is likely that some features of
Ajdnhiyan elections are found also in other small-tov
middling towns and settlements.

The election was to select members from the Ajdabiya
Basic People‘s Congress (the nearest analogy in English
would be 'constitueney‘: it is the basic territorial division
of the masses) to serve on the sixteen district popular
committees which run government services for the
district -electricity and justice. telecommunications and
health and so on. Ajdabtya is one of six settlements
which elect members to the committees. and it is by far
the largest: of the total population. about 45.000. some
40.000 live in Ajdabiya; but each settlement elects two
members to each committee. The protagonists in the
election are the main groupings of the population.
which are who?! ‘tribes‘. The most numerous are
probably zawiya who in tlte past have swept the board
in Ajdabiya town. although they do not dominate in the
committees because they do not have enough representa-
tives to secure the chairmanships. leiya own land to
the south and south-east of Ajdabiya. and are dominant
in the southern oases ol' Kufra. Rabbiana. Tanrbu.
They are relatively mixed: a result of their involvement
in the southern trade is that many Zhwiya. authentically
derived in the patriline. have Sudanese mothers, grand-
mothers. grandmothers. meat-grandmothers. A result of

30

their responsibilities to their slaves alter the abandon.
ment of slavery is that three of the ﬁve sections have
several black lineages. co-responsible but not intermarry-
ing with free leiya lineages. Ziwiya have always
welcomed athliating groups: their control of the remote
desert made their land a refuge from 'htrleish and ltalian
government. and the ZJwiya tribe contains many such
group‘. assimilated in a variety of ways.

leiya are regarded asltance by the two other large
groups. who compare the relative purity of their descent
from the Princess Sa‘ada. their much longer settlement
in the coastal sub-desert. their claim to burr status
and their long association with Turkish government to
the rather mongrel pedigree of the rougher new zawiya
arrivals from the desert. some of whose lineages formerly
had client status to the Sa’adi groups. “Die Majabr are
the traditional rivals of the Zawiya. and are outnumbered
by them. They are allied with the Maﬂrba, landowners
olthe area between Ajdabiya and Sirtc. neighbours and
occasional allies with the al-Qaddllh to the west. The
Maﬂrba command the support of half a dozen client
groups living in the smaller settlentetus ol' the district
and the ahailth of the Maﬂrba in Ajdabiya. 'Abdulnabi
alljatahuteatheirvotestoselectthcchairmenol'
committees.

'l'henotionofelection isoncoftheohscurer points
in The Green Book. which merely says that basic people‘s
congresses elect ookrdm. always translated as ‘chom‘
in the English version) members of popular congress
and of popular committees. Election is under-emphasized.
far more stress is placed on the abolition of parties. and
on the directneas of democracy. The essence of the
“tin! Universal Way is that government is never taken
from the people, never seized by a party. a tribe or
scetThenationistoobigt‘orallthemasseatomcet

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL L'SE ONLY

together to govern. and some individuals have to be
chosen to run governmental institutions (the Popular
Committees) and others to supervise them (the Popular
Congresses). Each district therefore has a complete set
of committees and in congress, and is theoretically auto-
nomous. Each district also provides members of the
National Popular Congress and their task is to supervise
government at the national level.

It is difﬁcult for a Westerner to dissociate the two no-
tions of election and representation—what else. after
all. could elections be for ?—tht Qaddm’s claim is that
the scheme of government outlined in The Green look
describes a system which is non-representational, a
direct democracy without a hierarchy of authority. The
claim is made of the scheme as a whole. and there is
no discussion of the purpose of
theory of elections-which-do-not-produce-representa-
lives. It is worth noting that the Westerners‘ diﬁculty is
shared by many Libyans who were familiar with the
procedure and purpose of election to create members
of King 'ldris' parliament and to send representatives
to the Arab Socialist Union in the first years of the
revolution: the notion that there can be no election
without representation docs not seem to be part of a
purely Western “Ch of thought. The Ajdabiyan elections
of I979 are not typical in all respects of all Libyan
elections; nevertheless an account of them shows that
they have features which can be directly attributed to
the doctrines of The Green Book. and which are part of
Libyan election procedure Moreover the triennial elec-
tions are the political institution in which most Libyans
are most involved. and it therefore seems worthwhile to
complement commentaries on the political ideas of the

Libyan resolution with an offering of basic grass-roots
ethnography.

groups. the other by the

Ziwiya. the Director of
[attention viho was 7.5wiyi and standing for re-election.

and by one or two other young men. The elections were
postponed until February. conﬁdently expected on I
l'ehruary. and after that day the chairman of the popular
congress ’plioncd each afternoon to Tripoli to ask if the
elections were due. On the evening of the 6th the Ministry
of Information Landrovers toured Ajdsbiya announcing
that ward committees would be elected on the 7th.
popular committees (which are what this paper is about)
on the ltth. On that day the voters assembled on the
town's football pitch. together with a television crew,
some police and an electoral commission headed by a
Captain 'Awud from Benplia/i. staffed by members of
the Ajdabiya district People‘s Congress. Each voter who

31

entered showed his identity card for an electoral oﬂcer
tocheclthisrighttovote.andtotecordhisnameand
number. At 1000 um the gates were shut—anyone
migui leave. no one might enter. That is to prevent a
sudden influx of new voters to swing the result. ln
Ajdabiya on that day the turn-out was 2,300-odd. The
captain then presenteo the candidates for the ﬁrst
committee. as it happened. the development committee.
They included a young primary school teacher supplied
to the Magarba list by the Awtad Shaikh. and a professor
of economics from Benghaa' university with a United
States doctorate. unfortunately unable to be present
himself. but supported by the zawiya. The captain
proposed that. since the total number of voters was
know. it would be necessary to count only the votes
for one candidate. And he asked the voters to divide
themselves into two halves. each to occupy one halfof the
pitch. The Maﬂrba were then marshalled into the
westerly quarter. a tetler‘s dealt set up near the goal
posts. and the voters walked from the west quartet tit-hunt
the goal posts to the east quarter past a clerk. The clerk
touched each elector on the head. and counted each poll
aloud over a megaphone. After one hundred polls he
started again from one. and the teller marked 00' the
hundred votes. A police ofﬁcer Itept an independent check.
When the Magirha vote was announced at LZJS the
Zawiya immediately protested that there were Magi‘irba
present who had no right to vote: alter a check or identity
cards some left. and the vote was begun again, this ti

broke out at the leiya goal because the teller. secretary
to the district popular congress, therefore technically
also a Maurba. therefore watched
very carefully. claimed to have

The Zliviya thought it should be Loon.
policeman. The teller offered to swept their count. but
this was rejected on the ground he might have stolen more
than 1m. Stones were thrown. and the teller was hustled
off the pitch into a police car. driven hurriedly away. In
the discussion which followed zawiya argued that five

escorted out by police) it would be better to have the
elections another day. The Maurba leaders resisted this.
They thought they were in the majority, and were right
to thinlt the leiya could muster more voters after such a
confrontation. The captain left the pitch
to Tripoli. returned to say that elections would be held
again on Saturday.

In fact. later that evening.

the loudspeaker vans
cruised the town

announcing the election for Friday.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
the next day. And on the next day the ZJwiya did indeed
muster a majority of It? votes in the ﬁrst count. This
time the Magarha protested. and did so so vigorously
that the electoral commission‘s table was overturned and
Captain Awud's arm has broken He was taken to
hospital and the police put .1 rordnn sanitaire across the
pitch while the chairman of the popular congress ‘phoned
Tripoli to ﬁnd out how to conduct an election when the
returning officer had retired hurt. After an hour. and for
no comprehensible reason. the police cordon was
removed. A fight broke out within minutes. and lasted
for several hours. Shots were fired—everybody agreed by
cinltans—the ﬁghting spread to the nearby streets.
several people were wounded. and the election was again
abandoned. During the night the hospital was sealed off.
so that no one might know precisely who was wounded
nor how many The rumour spread that an unidentiﬁed
victim had died of his wounds

For the next fess days Ajdabiya was extremely
unsettled ‘ﬂ‘P-‘t'illf‘ltl dnttissiim gtotips formed when-
ere! a mail s.it outside his house Young Zs’tvtiya talked
sitth .itti't'.’ and shock. lips and hands trembling. about
tilt: pertidy oi the Mai-Jilin Some older men. middle-
.i;°cd. \‘L‘lll into quasi-iiinurmng. unshaven. heads
mapped in scarves. eyes red. serious and withdrawn.
Sidr lltnein. a Ihmva \h'lﬂl in the south-east of the
lttssit. «as \chcd off with a mud block manned by
many or so young adults armed with pick-axe handles.
A ll‘.:if;ti‘toul. a Zardani, turned up and toured the streets
.n his Mercedes, a deputation of zawiya went to Ben-
gli.i/i to prmest about the irresponsible withdrawal of
the police Discussions took place in the street behind the
barricades. and in private houses. about future tactics.
\tenmslitle the Mzgirha tnct near the Post Office to
discuss their town A number of reinforcements from
the outlying settlements turned up and camped in a clump
oi trccs :r [en kilometres to the west of the town.

the original lass-rya list had included a number of
trier. from other groups' this. Zawiyai argued. showed
their point f.iiili. their lack of obsession with archaic
. and their reluctance to dominate Ajdabiya.
As a result of tlic unprovoked attack by Maga'trba they
decided to raise the stakes. and drew up a
candidates “ho ssere all ‘l.-'ivrt_s-a, and all possessed of
doctorates 'Doetor‘ is a title which may he used some-
rshat freely when the heat of argument leads you to
assert that your tribal group is the one mast qualiﬁed by
ohiccttse criteria of niodcrnitt' to rule a district. A third
attempt at election was held on I4 February. An entire
clcs'tion committee was brought in by bus from Ben-
chair. and the locale was changed to the playground of
.l school “hie-h had one entrance. telephones. and ofﬁces
where any necessary discussions might be held tn privacy.
Troops. also from Henghazr. lined the perimeter of the
playground. and were posted vuih machine guns on the

32

roofs of buildings overlooking the election. All voters
were searched as they entered the school gates and were
relieved of pocket-knives. heavy belts. walking-sticks
and various few more obviously offensive weapons.
They were also counted unoﬁcially according to how
they would vote by their own tellers, as they went in.
What happened next is rather indeterminate. but at
some point-either after their own private count had been
completed. or after the first vote had been taken--the
ZAWiya protested to the electoral commission that they
were outnumbered by four votes (l.26l to 1.257) because
Magarba had been allowa-d to inﬁltrate veters from the
outlying districts of Bur and Marada. They were over-
ruled. and left the election en bloc. The election pro-
ceeded While they sat in the streets near the school
listening to the announcements of successive unanimous
votes of Magarba: 'candtdates without‘—as one bank
manager said indignantly and exaggeratedly—‘without
a school-leaVing certiﬁcate between them‘.

In a British election. where there is a secret ballot and
polling stations are open for the voters to call at any
time during the day. the eteCioral contest is not really
a contest of voting: the struggle goes on in the vteelrs
before the pre-announced polling day as the candidates
persuade electors to vote for them: polling is the measure
of their success: it is not as much a direct part of the
contest as it is in Libya or as it is in Parliamentary voting
or some trades union elections. That is one reason
Libyan elections are in some sense a direct confrontation.
Another is that the voting itself becomes competitive
because in the system of direct democracy established
after the publication of The Green Book there is no
secret ballot—each man has to exercise his share of the
sovereignty of the masses With responsibility. asa British
Parliamentarian has to. When 'l system precludes
counting papers. heads have to be polled; when more
than one vote has to be cast (quite easy on a ballot
paper) the proceedings turn out quite lengthy because
in theory each head has to be counted in each vote.
Those are practical consequences of a theory of direct
democracy. and they increase tension: voting itself is a
confrontation. and it is a confrontation necessarily
lasting several hours.

If Libya has no secret ballot. still less does it have
parties. They—litre 'tribes. sects, classes'—attetnpt to
seize the government in order to dominate their oppon-
ents. Which is dictatorial. It is because parties are un-
democratic that no political debate occurs of a kind
familiar enough in the parliamentary democracies. There
are no candidates‘ addresses. no speeches. no attempt
to persuade the electors that one candidate's policies
are better than another's. Voting therefore takes place
between ideologically undifferentiated candidates. an
that is another feature of Libyan elections. The point is
not to try to explain the violence in Ajdabiya (not all

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL L'SE ONLY

I.Ih)'dn elections are violent: not all parliamentary
elections are peaceful) but to show in the ﬁrst instance
how speciﬁc features of elections are related to the high
exotic theory of The Gram Book. You might say that
non-ideological elections are all very well in a one-
party system. where unopposed candidates are returned
by unanimous votes of all registered voters. But if you
have contested elections and no ideology. the law of
sacuums. which in this instance says roughly that can
(has cannot take place without an ostensible reason.
the last of vacuums allows you to predict that alignments
will occur on some principie. even if it is a principle
which neither you. nor Colonel Qaddafﬁ for that matter.
would accept as strictly speaking political. It is true that
Zauiya claimed greater modernity—more educated
cand:dates than their opponents. but so did the Maghrba;
moreover. Zawiya modernity was gained at the cost in
some instances of presenting candidates who could not
or would not turn up on the election day. It is true that
Zawiya complained blllﬂl) of the solidary tribalism of
their opponents. which forced them into a contcstatory
tribalism; but so also did the Maga'irba.

In fact the Ajdabiya elections on the midi football
pitch turned into something very like the opposition of
elements in a segmentary system. Public voting together
with conﬁnement in a limited space. together with the
absence of formal political ideological discriminators
turn the count itself into the contest. and change the
assembly of the masses into the ntassing-etfect of the
opposition of segmentary elci ents. ln addition to the
formal political institutions. moreover. there are con-
ﬂicts from tradition: Zawiya and Majibr are ancient
rivals. and have killed each other in elections since I952;
Magarba align themselves with their fellow Sa'adi.
otherwise in a minority. against the upstarts.

Some confirmation of this account comes from evidence
of the elections in Kufra and 1am districts. In Kufra
the main political contestants are two sections of ZIwiya.
the ‘Awlad 'Amira and the Mannai'a. In l97$ 'Asvlad
'Amira took over office from the Mannai'a. in 1979 the
Mannai‘a regained office with Jlitilat support. placing
various Jlolat candidates in chairmanships. Voting was
said to be very close. Again. in ”In district the three
communities tend to vote on segmentary lines: the oasis
of Jilt‘i itself. inhabited mostly by Majabr. vies with the
Zawiya of 'Ajﬁarra oasis for the support of the ‘Aujli
(mostly of Berber origin) in 'Aujla oasis. However,
since each of these settlements is more or less homo-
geneous. and each is a sub-district in its own right. the
main competition is to secure the chairmanships of the
committees. and the elections within each settlement are
uncontested and unanimous.

The voting in elections. partly because of the practical
consequences of ideological decisions. becomes something
like a scgmentary confrontation in which social controls
secure solidary support for a bloc of candidates. There is

33

and the heat of the
moment would make it very difﬁcult to cross the pitch.

Although passions are aroused. and the elections are
keenly contested. turnout is relatively low. No woman
has ever voted in Ajdabiya. and that excludes more than
half the electorate. lf Ajdabiya‘s poralation is around
40.000 that leaves about 18.000 males. Of those. about
two-thirds are not of voting age. giving an elective male
electorate of around coon-7.000; of those about 2.500
vote. a turn~out of 35-40

polities: one man. for example. thought
that his cousin, a leiyi. should not stand for reelection
to the education committee. But he could not go to the
election and vote against him. and so he stayed away.
Others thought it made no difference who held ofﬁce.
and they too stayed away. People have diverse reasons
for doing nothing. and the abstainers undoubtedly have
more reasons than those listed here: on the other hand
it scents fair to say that the inbuilt quasi-segmentary

confrontation in the elections discourages precisely those

lineage lea
gain advantage. against Zawiya.
case may be. by appealing to as wide a cross-section of
the population as they can. When they are opposed.
their supporters rally round. and a quasi-segment is
formed. It is in the nature of segmentary systems that a
segment is called into being by opposition; and ii is
therefore always true that ‘the other side started il'.
That applies also to the electoral W88. or quasi-
segments.

There is one hnal point to make. and it has to be made
very inadequately in a short note such as this it is
possible. not at all misleading. to understand the illogi-
calities and inconsistencies of The Green Book as arising
from the very real dihiculties of combining two models

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
COPYRIGHT:

both highly valued by Libyans. each indicating contrary
courses of action. On the one hand an

aeephalous. Sunni tradition in which each man struggles
to maintain his personal sovereignty; on the other. a
bureaucratic state providing education. health and
welfare schices. electricity and water. telegrams and
justice. but apparently necessitating both hierarchy and
representation. Of course. Qaddllll's theory of popular
democracy. of government without representation does
not apply to all the state apparatus: the military. the
police. the petroleum industry and the R.C.C. itself are
not mentioned in The Green Book and do not have
popular committees and are not controlled by People's

Congress. But where the theory does apply the issue of
election is crucial: to Western eyes. and also to many
Libyans. election and representation are inseparable.
and are closely associated too. with party and with
ideology. What The Green Book proposes is the separa-
tion of election and representation, and the exclusion of
representation and ideology from politics. lt asserts that
government can coexist with personal sovereignty.
that its formal institutions can be subject to the rules of
the non-Western egalitarian aoephalous model. On the
other hand. some more restricted number of persons
has to taltc car of the day-to-day running of what are
quite complex governmental tasks: the answer is elccliom
vhich do not produce representatives. in which popular
direct democracy is undrminishcd II' it a difficult notion.
even a paradoxical one. The Aidabiyans tn I979 clearly
assimilated elections to the traditional egalitarian and
aoephalous model. in which personal sovereignty was
maintained by the mutual support and opposition of a
segmentary system.

The Maghreb Review 1981.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

LI 31A

WM}?! 0? AGRICULTURAL RESOURCES IN COASTAL AREA

London THE HAGHREB REVIEW in Bngliah No 5-6. Sop-Dec 81 pp 106-116

[Text]

Abstract

The character of the renewable natural resources of
coastal Libya has always constrained agricultural
development. The paper examines the experience of
those responsible for managing various phases of
lihya's economic development of the recent. past. The
period of Italian colonization will be discussed brieﬂy;
the experience in the pre-oil phase as well as that of the
ml era before and after the revolution will be treated in
more detail. The changing status of renewable natural
resources is described and the impact of environmental
management policies evaluated.

Agricultural Resources h the Semi-arid
Mediterranean

Agricultural development in the Mediterranean buin
can largely be explained i.i terms of the disposition of
water resources. The seasonal deﬁciency in summer rain-
fall .eslncts agriculture to the winter season except in
lhOsc areas where groundwater. surface storage or rivers
provide a source of water for irrigation. The quantity
of water available wholly to support summer fanning.
and to supplement that in the winter. varies from the
substantial quantities (50 billion m3 per year approxi-
mately) brought to the region by major rivers. such as
the Nile. to much smaller volumes (for example under
1 billion inJ along 200 km coastal tracts in Libya) which
rind their way into the coastal aquifers of the basin. The
pattern of the availability of water for agriculture has
:thins been conditioned by climatic factors and these
are still inescapable in wholly rain-fed regions. The
sources of water for irrigation have. however. been
subject to two complementary management strategies.
First there has been a constantly upward trend in the
demand for irrigation water and secondly there has been
a tendency to improve the effectiveness of water manage-

3S

ment at various levels from the individual farmer to the '
government agency responsible for water resources.

From an economic point of view the analysis of the
problem of how to optimize the utilization of agricul-
tural resources‘ in the semiarid Mediterranean lands is
straightforward. Land is rarely a constraint on activity;
water on the other hand is always a constrain. Labour
and capital vary in availability and of econo-
mies with unhibited supplies of labour are juxtaposed
With ones with unlimited supplies of capital. The fauor
which is only slightly less constraining than labour on
the optimal overall utilization of agricultural resources
is the shortage of that specialist element in the labour
force experienced in managing new technologies and
systems of water distribution. This last constraint
aﬂ’ects the use of water at farm level but has even more
important implications in higher levels of the regional
and national institutions responsible for water manage-
ment.

The temperature regime of the Mediterranean basin
provides its farmers with many advantages over com-
petitors in Northern Europe (Amiran, I978. p. I22).
Where water supplies can be assumed throughout the
year then two or three crops per year can be raised in
the region. The temptation to talte advantage of the
favourable growing temperatures has led many farmers.
usually supported in their intent. initially at least. by
governments. to push for high levels of production.
expanding horizontalty and also intensifying irrigation.
often with serious consequences for the resources upon
which sustained agricultural production depends.

One part of the region. the coastlands of northern
Africa. have experienced the disorientating occupation
by colonial powers which extended until I95] in Libya
and into the l9603 further west. The French and Italian
occupations extended cultivation and irrigation. in the

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R0005000‘l 0002-3

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

ease of Libya doubling the total area farmed and with
that expansion more than doubling the irrigated area.
The experience gained in the ﬁrst half of the twentieth
century in utilizing northern Africa's natural resources
revealed the very limited nature of the water resources.
and strategies were developed which tool: into mum
the need for production systems with low water using
requirements. Dryland farming was an important
element in the agricultural strategy. raising grain and
tree crops which were able to withstand the low rainfall.
Even so the irrigated farming which was implemented
did begin to all’eet the coastal groundwater resources
and water levels did begin to fall in the coastal reservoirs
(Allan. I971. p. 2I2). Extensive studies ensued to locate
other deeper groundwater reserves but none was dis-
covered which was not unusable because of high levels
of salinity.

Libyan Agricultural Resourees (Flues 1 sad 2)
Agricultural development in Libya since the colonial
era (Le. since l95l) has been particularly interesting
because it was achieved through a number of phases.
In these phases the mix of the factors of production
changed dramatically. Libya achieved independence in

 

62364656667600

F' re t. Oil productiot
0| StatbtiaIDe

I9SI and for the ﬁrst t¢
of the country was sup
form of direct grants. r
Britain and by rent I
United States and Br
meneed in l96l. marl
phase. In the early 19
by l965 Libya was bt
oil revenues. By I968
the economy had char
government and prii
sector was attracting

36

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP82-00860R000600010002-3
war..- a.- ‘- .I—I

37

..——-._

ment. however. because of the two unavoidable con-
straints of limited environmental resources and the
shortage of advanced agricultural management.

Libya's coastal plains and uplands are rich in some
resources. Solar energy for crop production is adequate
for crop production througnout the year. Other natural
resources are poorly disposed. $011: as in other arid
and semi-arid areas are poor. being generally sandy.
and because of the high summer temperature regimes
they are poor in organic matter content with negative
consequences for their fertility and especially their
moistureholding capacity. There are tcchnologies.
however. which make it possit‘le to use such soils. but
these techniques can only be deployed if there is a
reliable source of irrigation water. Libya unfortunately
has no ﬂowing rivers. the potential for surface storage
is extremely limited and groundwater reservoirs in the
coastal regions are nowhere rich. Only in the remote
south of the country are there substantial groundwater
resources and these are the ﬁnite. fossil resources of the
Kufrah and Sarir regions in the east and of the Fans
in the south-west. This paper is not conceer with these
regions. but in the Libyan context the water resources
or the south are important both in actual potential, so
far only realized very partially and without any economic
rationale (Allan, I979. p. 25). and especially in the
opportunity for extravagant investments which they
afford. Awareness overtook successive regimes in Libya
that the agricultural resources at the coast were limited,
and in due course the very big spending targets of the
W705 could only be achieved by pouring money into
the expensive enterprises located in remote southern
regions. It was recognized meanwhile that the absorptive
capacity of the coastal agricultural schemes was limited
by the quality of the environmental resources.

The coastal strip’ in the area to the south of Tripoli
and to a lesser extent near Benghazi. and the coastal
uplands of the Jabal Nafusah in the west and the labs]
al Althdar in the east. have sufﬁcient rainfall to support
dryland farming. The seasonal pattern of rainfall limits
rain-fed farming to regions within the 200 mm isohyet.
that is to an area which is only 2 per cent of Libya of
which 1635 than half is cultivable for reasons of terrain

'4 soil conditions. Even 200 mm annual average
r- 'l is not. however, ideal for dryland farming in
regions in which high temperatures and dry winds
occur protractedly; a level of 300 mm or upwards
assures reliable yields and the area with this higher
expectation is approximately 07 per cent of the country
of which only one-third is usable because of broken
terrain and poor soil. In other words one is considering
approximately ”.000 lun‘ of cultivable land with more
than 200 mm average annual rainfall and approximately
4.000 lun’ with 300 mm average assuming reasonable
crop yields. Pallas (I977, p. 2) suggests that there are
9,400 km: in the Gel'ara and Jahal Nufusah rep-on and
”.000 km' in the Benghazi and label al Mhdar region

A measure of the poor quality of the soil resources
and marginal rainfall are the low wheat yields achieved
even in areas with over 300 mm annual rainfall. Yields
of under I tonne per hectare were usual in I980 in I’m--
oured areas (compare dry-land yields in the United States
which average l'z tonnes per hectare and in Australia
l-2S tonnes pct hectare). and in tracts with 200 mm

average rainfall ytelds fell to 0-5 tonne per hectare. The

strategies. This sequence which has been observed in the
Libyan government's approach to the use of coastal water
resources. will also be shown to have been experienced
in the management of rain-led farming experiments on

the Gefara Plain and to a lesser extent on the Jabal al
Akhdat’.

informed lmmt to proposed agricultural investment. By

38

was the “enthusiasm for agricultural spending had
slactenetl, at least at government level {or the very good
reason that it had been recognized that further tnvest~
minirrigationoftherypemade in the l960smadeno
acne inthe light ol'the progressive depletion ot‘coastal
aquifers) The revolutionary regime increased allocations
to agriculture and specially to the development of water

tltis was trying in one stroke to implement a policy of
redistributing land according to socialist pnnaples.

and at the same tune to create management units consis-
tent with economic production and regulated water
utilization.

Whereas the capital resources of Libya after oil
enabled a national indulgence in an ill-founded optimistic
agricultural policy. there were other constraints which
impeded the realinu'on ol' the optimistic targets. Labour
to man new enterprises was already in short supply by
I969. but with the strong relationship with Egypt in the
years immediately after the revolution farm labour
began to enter Libya from Egypt in large numbers.
An exact breakdown of immigrant labour is not avail-
able but it is likely that well over $0,000 Egyptian t'arm
labourers were present in Libya in the early l970s until
1975. when relations with Cairo changed (see Figure 3).
Libya imported labour steadily during the years of oil
revenues and by I975 to per cent of the population was
from abroad and towards $0 per cent of the working
population was from overseas. A small but signiﬁcant
element of this population consisted of professional staff
knowledgeable about land and water resources and their

 

sinauuuwaaaezonnnarsh

* ‘ I wot-two
Fm 3' h an 9:53;: Departmbl
ininttpemcnt, but though helpful these staff and con-
sullanls could only ameliorate and not solve the prob-
lems created by the shortage of Libyan professional stall‘.

n. Source: Census
I977.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

tt-.tl staff were essential for the effective monitoring of Verily in this 1‘ Q 5i!"
ttrveys and the evaluation of plans and recommenda- For "me who 8th “10"!”

'.“"‘ "9°" “1"” ”m .m"°"°.' P°"°¥ m" be ““5- t: .. .‘utive Authority tor Jlbll tt Akhdat’. I978. p. 3)
lhe untrue Lthyan experttv: was impossibly overstrctched

n the unrewardtng task of managing a polyglot. muEti- A sense that mismanagement of otherwise rich resources
~ttlturcd. and often incompatible community of experts.

t was recognized that there was being accumulated ,
priceless experience in the various ﬁelds of land re-
rlatnatton. secdtng. planning and reconstnrction .. . '
Jodah. I978. p. l6) but in practice this experience was
icing assimilated by only a small proportion of Libya‘s
irofessional agronomists and agricultural engineers.
fltis is no way of measuring the degree of the constraint
mposed by the shortage of Libyan professional staff on
he direction and quality of agricultural policy and on
:he productivity of the agricultural sector. but in the
rsttmation of the author it was even more important
:han the poor quality of the environmental resources of
:oastal Libya.

It is not always easy to relate to the realities of agri-
:ultur.tl change midst the strident rhetoric which attends
tgrictiltural pciicy making and pronounceman about
.tllcﬂdt‘d investment. National plans before and aﬂer
I969 gave agriculture in significant place in proposed

3

IIHI__-4

I -o ht rodent Y's--
v-o no v-ot “than“
a-o he «an cal-van
- m sown-DI!- re
a.” II- wso‘I
u. or» una- \—
rm

JL—LI

s r “um

I a sand

a-. raw
3

:conomtc detelopmcnt. The first ten years of oil revenues ‘- .3
weft the government uncertain about the capacity of the i 2
agricultural sector for cﬂ'ecttve absorption of investment. i ;
ind I-‘tgure 4 shows this hesitancy of the late l960s. é -
The diagram also shows that agricultural investment toolt g i
Mi agztin in the early I970s at a higher rate than in the 3

[965 1969 period. out not at a higher rate than In the
:K‘riod I962-l965.11te period of revolutionary govern-

 

ment has nevertheless been associated with a strong ‘3
:mphasts in agricultural investment. Figure 5 shows this 2
:mpliasts very clearly. I

The rhetoric attending these policies. is not difﬁtult ‘
,0 ﬁnd. nor are the ideas which have inspired and lepti- ’

rtized them. The optimism of Libya's agricultural policy .,
when has apparently been inspired since I969 by

north from the Our‘in which provide the foreword for a '
~ublieation drawing attention to achievements in the ::
lahal ul Akhdar coastal highlands: '2 1

ll'ﬂﬂlm I ”‘U'l

lo the name of God Most Gracious. Most Merciful '“ ,

It is he who sends down
Rain from the sky
l-‘rom it ye drink.

And out of it (grows),
The vegetatton on which

.saaaaaaaaii .aasassaaaa

 

aéuouuuuﬂn

“UUODUUU'HII

.gure 4. Est t ct development s rector 1962-19”
Y‘ [“6 3"” “""c' aFnd ”70-19%" 53m: Census and tathtiealwbepanmt 1911!:
With it He produces and Secretariat otPlannlng two.

l or ’1‘" coin. olives.
Date-palms, grapes.
And every ttnd of frtttt

was the reason for the poor agricultural heritage of the
revolutionary government is evident in statemenh nude
by the Libyan leader. ‘Our agricultural revolution ts

39

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
- I t which have proved to be Imus-u-.."
“' a ‘e' 3'” ‘“"- the resource potential of Libya's semi-arid coastlands.
‘ sectioﬁs the damaging

99"“? P‘W‘“ be M first wit
the Gefara Plain and secondly at)

liberated ll from our colonist intruders‘ (Moainrnar irrigated farming on
°' 13“?“ " the attempts to extend dryland fanning beyo

haft. quote in Executive Authority l’

itlar. l9? . p 5). Reinforced by the recognition of -

vulnerability of those who are not self-sufficient in minisohyet.

d—‘There is no inde ndcnce for those who secure

,tr food from ahro d' (Moamrnar Qathafi in EteeU- Intensify” Irrigated Agriculture in Coastal Libya

e Authority for Jabal al lthdar. l978. p. tin—and The twentieth century has seen P'O ssively higher

thiiscd by a romantic view of resources and potential dent: being made on the coastal water ources. ll

such "“5 ” "‘c “am“ “9'3““ °‘ “9““?“5‘ L‘ ,3” summer agriculture and a proportion of that in the Mill"

here the dreams of golden crops sleeping tn our hills depends on groundwater. In the days of traditional tee .
nology of animal-powered water lifting there was a limit
to the amount of water that could be raised and a limit
to the area in which irrigation could be deployed as
animals could not be expected to raise water much more
than l0 m. Irrigated farming was restricted to the strip of

aecnt to the coast where water

land immediately adj
ore than 6 in, The coastal irrigated

levels were at no tn
and than 3 \lm.

c gardens rarely extended further inl
m The arrival ot‘ ltalian colonists. with a dill’ereut
. tended the area of potential irrigation to
water levels

 

c.l rat-or -g & 9"
m" ° """"v A 40 km from the coasts where
\ 1-. a ’ we generally about over 30 in below the surface.
“Mussel (Wmﬂllw ‘2 HOW the“ C5 thte “1C Nﬂlcull'
\ ‘ ' ..~ conﬁguration of topography was such that water
to.» MM" , _ at or close to the surface even 20 km from the coast in
\ ”WWW" ! ‘ " l -~. { ' ' ' ts and farmers first began to
, . 1; make records of water resources at places such as Siwani
\ “Me. | ”i ‘ «r bin Yad'ttn. 20 ltrn tn the south of Ttlpoll.
J I r a The main strategy of the ltaliau settlers was to use
“‘ mm. = I "‘ i dryland farming techniqties. and severe restrictions were
' ' """‘"""—-: . " ; imposed on the extension of irrigated farming by the
' regulation of the number and spacing of wells. Never-
‘ resource was affected by the
thirty years

l
theless the groundwater
' (Allan. l97l. p. I73). The
. “ .

ltalian winning
‘ ri witnessed the .

 

0 " ’ JI I r l
“OIMOSMO’OHNﬂ
Meme 5 Department spending by sector l962-l9‘l‘l and torn: ‘
Somali Census and Statistical Department. l9'llh rattled by the Libyan
The ten years or so of British ooc patron brought (e
6 British policy uas marked by its e:

other indicators
The Italian colonial prescn

during the li0stiltties of t

uy til he“ llur-mns arising from
r l939. ltalian agricultu

lttdzth. in Executive Authority

the discus
(i). policies were initiated h
Second World War soon ai'te

‘lluh. letsltlt
Allidttr. 1973. p. l

ullllt \srtli
behind out
In! liihdl 3|

‘0

Nut OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USP. 0N! Y

development made little impact on eastern Libya as ownintereita no ug‘oymg did nothavethepoliti-
Libyan resistance continued very actively until l93l. cal stomach, in the pre- or poet-revolutionary years, to
and many ltalian farms were not developed and occupied implanent the eeaential water legislation.
until the late 1930: in Cyrciiaica. Most agriculture in the To; .mtitutionnliud and environmental impediments
eastern province was conducted according to dryland to the appropriate development of irrigated farming in
techniques. coastal Libya had reached such proportions by I979
The first decade of independence alter l95l saw little that the Libyan administration realized that only a
significant intensification of irrigated farming. There drastic reorganintion or irrigated farming could being
were some small government schemes such as that at thenecessaty integration of the control of water resources
Wadi Ki'arn and Italian farms were sold to wealthy and measures which would at the same time increase
Palestinian exiles who brought with them much sltill agricultural production. An interventionist role has
in citrus raising with related very high water using never been shirlted by the revolutionary government.
requirements. On the contrary there has been a progressive rationaliza-
It was not until the mid-19605 that the eﬁect of the tion of economic activity and property ownership
intensiﬁcation of groundwater use became very evident. since l969. such that by I979 almost all cumin]
By I969 the rate of decline had increased to l in per year and industrial activtty as well as housing and aervioea
3‘ ‘00“ pans 20 km from "It CON (Firm 5)- were controlled by government agencies. Theagricultural
The evidence available in I968 pointed to an increasing sector had been partiaily all‘ected by thia trend toward:
rate of decline and the policies. or rather their absence. public intervention through capital invested in culti-
in the early years of the revolutionary regime reinforced vation, irrigation and livestock. and indirectly through
the mainly privately instigated water using ventures. the control of the marketing of agricultural producia.
Additional public ﬁnance in the form of grants and The pgopoggls currently being contemplated are seen as
subsidies increased water using practices and ground- impablc if the irrigated farming of Libya‘s coastal
water levels did tall even more quickly in the early strip is to be based on viable agricultural units capable
l970s. The I970s witnessed a growing recognition of the of gupporting a Libyan family with no outside labour.
limited nature of the groundwater resource. and by l976 The economic. social and ideological implications are
there were clear signs that the government wished to immense while the opportunity which the
curtiil water use and if necessary agricultural production reorganiation would present for the rational manage
in the Gefara Plain. Resistrictions were placed on the ment of the crucial, and much impaired, groundwater
planting of citrus. tomatoes and water melons. all crops resource may be a last chance to reverse the trends in the
which use water heavily (Allan and McLachlan. l975. 'over-developcd'coastal strip.
p. )6). By I976 the rapid decline of water at points 20 km 11;: main stimulus to the reorpnintion of farming in
from the coast had reached 3 in per year and by l978 the coastal strip would seem to be a political will to
the annual decline had reached a dramatic S in per year give as many people access to a viable farm unit. The
at Bin Gashir (Womb and Obah. 1977; Floegel. I978). intent is to increase agricultural production by amalga-
In the summer of I979. lite water table of the upper mung uneconomically small farms, to subsidize those
aquifer at Bin Gashir was pumped to below sea level for larger holding; which require hired expatriate labour
the first time and the crossing of such emotive thresholds and to talte over under-utilized farms. whether under-
ﬁnally “ﬁnd“ "I036 MPOMib'C {of ““38“"! deVelOP- utilized ror reasons of their leisure and residence role for
merit schemes that the management or sustained agri- the owner or because of the pan~time nature of the
NIP-ire depended on the careful use 0‘ groundwater. owner‘s agricultural activity. The institutional and social
especially in €015!“ Libya. engineering involved in such reforms are consistent with
That emphasis has been given to the state of the water the political development of Libya in the past decade. with
resource rather than to the progress of agricultural equity in am, to personal income and local mpg.
producuon may seem excessive. but as already estab- tion in got-eminent (via popular committees) being the
lished,itisthe water resource s-hiehisthemajorconatraint basic domestic political issues. The proposed chains
on irrigated farming in coastal Libya. lts depletion has are also, however, consistent with gaining a greater
made it impossible to sustain existing levels of production measure of control over the use of groundwater upon

never mind further intensification. Agricultural produc~ which all irrigated farming in coastal Libya depends.
"on did increase in the I960; at the rate of between

2 a til 4 per cent per year but this achievement. though
innudt-iahlc Mas only achieved at the expense of at.

unregulated and no attempt was made to introduce

tuner cumcrving cropping patterns or irrigation prac-
liccs. The private user was bent on maximiration of his

41

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
_———-

projects such as that at Bir 'larfas and government
schemes have been initiated in areas with less than 200
mm average rains. It is not with the methods and success
of these schemes. however. that we are concerned here.
The Libyan government is committee to being self-
sumcient in grain (wheat and barley) and anticipates
that a substantial amount of such grain will come from
rain-fed areas in the Gefara Plain. In order to stimulate
production the government has been paying high prices
to farmers (Libyan Dinars ISO per ton in I978) in order
to stimulate production. This price is substantially
higher than the world price but probably only twice
the price of grain landed at Tripoli. The Secretariat
for Land Reclamation and Settlement has since I973
spent heavily on dryland schemes to the south of
Tripoli.

Farming in marginal arid areas is always hazardous
because of the years when rains are much below avr rage
in mounting the massive experiments on the sites in the
Gefara shown in Table I the Libyan Secretariat for
Land Reclamation and Settlement (since December I978
part of the new Secretariat of Agriculture) has taken a
considerable risk and the results of the experiment to
date are interesting and salutary. All the sites have
an annual average rainfall of less than 225 mm and some
have less than ISO mm. Since the start of the schemes in
the I973—I974 season. rainfall has been much above
average in 19734974. l974-I975, 1975-1976. and especi-
ally favourable in 1977—1978. but below average in
l976—l977 and especially unfavourable in l978—l979.
In addition to taking a risk with the environment the
agricultural authorities took the precaution of seeking
advice from a group of agriculturalists familar with dry
conditions and associated poor soils. A team of Western
Australian farm managers. technicians and research
staff has been participating in the management of the
cereal schemes since I973. This group has brought a
philosophy with accommodates the poor wheat yields of
low rainfall years. and makes provision for the build up
of soil fertility and supplementary production by the
introduction of a legume into the rotation. The legume
is medicago‘ an annual legume native to Libya which
grows well in alkaline soils in low rainfall areas. Com-
mercial cultivars have been developed in Australia from
Mediterranean collections and these were growing
successfully in the Gefara area (Allen and Ewing. I978,
p. I). By including this well-adapted legume into the
rotation. together with appropriate fertilizer applications,
cereal yields should continue to improve. in the years
when the cereal crop fails it can be let out for grazing
and even in low rainfall years the medic pasture will
provide grazing for livestock.

The main purpose of the experiments was to establish
if cereal production could be achieved in marginal
areas. Table I shows that production was useful in the
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Talk I. Gefava ﬂab «nab mane-1mm: an. m d M
_ﬁ____

 

 

Wheat
um um um — 76/77 11m
Am (heclatu) -
Al Htta 70 I I I I 2.000 2.” l
n... m afoot) 2.350 moo If:
Alan snatch 3.300 6.499 5.925 5.00 3.1!)
Bur II Ghnem 97) m “50 I” 3.4”
Wadt Alhd (M 6,“! I2.“ 7.” m
zanyaﬁhah .3 — 3.397 I230 Ll“
Wadi el Hai I.” :16: :25 If” 35“
?"l'.'m.i. ‘ "° ' ‘ ‘
at _
“on“... 500 #33 "1°” ‘1‘” ’i"
K hunts-Sawing": — — 657 m I.”
(0.036) (”.2“) (‘0.le (27.89” (24.827)
Ptotluetion (tons)
Big." rl’: m 61; e «o
l 4) B 377
Aha Shaybah l29 LS“ 1.30! 607 2.”
an al Chat-em )1 “5 LI“ — 229
Wadi Athet 45 m9! 3.393 -- no
Ahu Ayahah — .. an no no
mayut 22 416 Lost — m
Wadi el Han I3 I93 — — —
Nahtt -- I37 —- — —
Tathunah —- J I“ l ”2
AI Oatuhat 3 3 — - —
Khutm Sawfeutn — - II — -
(553) (5.960) (IMO) 992) (4,435)
Vi!“ W W (III)
313'" 3% f3: ’32 i ii:
I
Apu sum )1 no no we 625
But al Ghanetn 38 232 240 — 6‘
Wadi Allie! I0 I70 28I — ‘3
23‘3“” —2’ — 9 84 297 IOI
Wad: el Hat so 36 _w I 1”
Nalut — 2.5 - — '-
Tarhunah — I“ 396 J 77
Al 00le 65 24 — - —
Khunu-Saul‘eum -— _ l6l _ _
(42) (I37) (2") (36) (I79)
Rainfall at Axizlyah (mean ammo) is 210 m)
Octohet-Ma) 135 435 I98 m
243 w l“ ll9

(hoM-Fchmat ,

 

Scum: Ewing ( I978) and Metetologieal Beaumont. Tripoli.

)mu 0! uhme awn-ope nun. but very wti-tualy defuiem
m I970 I977 and was alm pot)! in IT’S-I979. (neat
sut'pttcntn «as hem]: ewtruul about the uahlltl) ul’
Wadi Atltcl. Iltt al (iltancnt and Ajaylat. all lytnr. in
«teas with mean annual tumfall hclou I75 mm. The other
schemes are able to produtc 'WIWCCI‘ 2m and 600 Lg of
wheat pet hectare in good nunl'ull yean. which though

‘3

' not a high yield showed the cereal scheme to be capable

of psotlucin; apptoxitnately 5,000 tons of grain pet
year.

An important effect of the interest in mdt‘mgo species
has been the promotion of the idea that extensive areas
of the Gefata with lees than 200 mm but men: than ISO
nun could be town with medic pastutee. Such pastures

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
sensitivity of the natural resources, and especially the
water resources to their casual management. The ground-
water upon which irrigated fanning depended was readily
accessible to technology available at costs ssell within
the competence of most individual farmers. Very soon
the rate of withdrawal was far in excess of recharge,
and accelerated as it result of the absence of regulation
on withdrawal. it was a situation reinforced by the
traditional approach to water use and by the wish of
government to encourage the private sector as a balance
to the otherwise inescapable inertia which oil revenues
promote. leading to a public sector monopoly of all
economic activity. Similar forces alfecied another natural
resource. not deall with in this paper. the semi-natural
grazing resources. These resources too were severely
degraded. in this case by the increase in stocking level
which vsas far beyond the carrying capacuy of the vul-
ngrs'ole Libyan rangelands (Ginizburger and Bayoumi.
l.

The political changes of I969 for a time brought a
very untimely acceleration in the rate of resource utiliza-
tion and writially a full decade passed before the revolu-

by implementing policies which caused irreversible
resource degradation rather than via a learning process
which involved the rational weighing of predecessors“
errors and the consideration of the available scientiﬁc
evidence The effect of the policies of the revolutionary
government was to cause groundwater Withdrawals to
average four times the rate of recharge in the Gefara
Plain as a “hole by the mid-2970s. and in the areas of
serious .iscrpumping. such as at Bin Gashir. the rate of
uiihdranal was eight times recharge

liy l9tt0 the very dillieult position of agriculture of
coastal Libya had been recognized and the government
turned its aiientton to the intractable problems of
resource and institutional engineering required to re-
arrange land tenure and create Viable farming units
raising crops \vith water-conserving irrigation systems.
Such changes \iill require a resolution in the perception
of resources and a revolution in attitudes to water use
and especially concerning its regulation at farm and
regional level. The past three decades of experience in
m1naging renewable natural resources in Libya has
unfortunately induced a complex of confusion which
has frequently emerged amongst those evaluating such
resources in marginal semi-arid areas (Amino and Wil~
son. 1973. p. 27). Renewable natural resources are
extremely Vulnerable to misuse. but it has been demon-
strated that unconventional resource appraisal and
innovative projects can lead to the viable long-term use
of such resources (Amiran. I978, p. l24). Libya‘s oil
wealth should make possible innovation and economic

44

have a useful carrying capacity (up to one ewe per
hectare) and can be generated at less than l0 per cent
of the sum required to establish perennial shrubs as
envisaged in a number of parts of Libya (Allen and
Ewing. 1918. p. 8: Halae, 1978. p. 6).

The al Marj Plain on the Jabal al Althdar has attracted
settlement and agricultural activity throughout history.
but has never managed to live up to the promise of its
apparently rich red soils and generally reliable rains.
Rains are usually above 300 mm at al Man itself. falling
to 200 mm towards al Abyar. Some harvests have been
remarkable. for example that of I978 when both of the
20.” ton silos at al Abyar and al Maij were ﬁlled or
almost filled. The I977-l978 season was one of rainfall,
however. with 530 mm at al Mari instead of the average
340 mm.

Experiments similar to those in the Gefara are being
conducted on the al Marj Plain to improve soil fertility
through medic rotations and phosphate applications.
Evidence is being assembled that the above average
yield of l-2 tons of wheat per hectare for the region
achieved in the good rainfall year in I977~ I978 should
be possible regularly. With attentive management of
sowmg it might be possible to move output to over 2
tons per hecta-e. Sustained production at this level will
only be possible if soil fertility is sustained. and
care should be talren in applying gross incentives such
as the very high grain price subsidy (Libyan Dinars
ISO per ton for wheat in I978), which will promote
increases of production possibly at the expense of the
soil resources. However. outputs of grain of $0.000 tons
per year are achievable from the farms on the Iabiil al
Althdar which was about 5 per cent of the Libyan annual
grain requirement in l980.

Resource Realities and Political Fantasy

The foregoing discussion of Libya's past thirty years
of agricultural deselopinent experience is particularly
interesting in that ﬁrst the economic and then the
political circumstances of the country changed. The three
decades. the l9505. the 19605 and the I970s can be con-
trasted; with the l95l- l96l period being one ofwonomie
and political dependence on the Western powers; the
l960s were years of increasing economic independence
but Libya was still in those years under the shadow of
Western oil and strategic interests. ﬁnally after the revo-
lution in I969. Libya took advantage of its economic
strength and gained the WI" to be economically and
politically assertive.

The renewable natural resource base was profoundly
aﬂ’ccted by the changes in the economic circumstances
after oil revenues began to be significant in the early
l960s. The reason that the impact of the new economic
circumstances was so great was not the scale of the
burgeoning investment resources of the 19605. but the

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
nth not feattble for those with more limited capital mm
retouteea. But Libya planner: should escape from the ‘ I,“ - we“: want ‘
notion that the country should heeorne green like coun- in 1.32%} (1978) o! mot-gr Mum':

tries in humid latitudes. and estets ngricultural develop- at. .--..m «at: We: (Now ’ 5. Vol- 3. No I

water Walling: Emu “”00.ng
A.l97l'€hangetlnthe use landtnth

Acknowledgments Amati, «(75935: “published PhD. My 0!

l s auld like to thank the Society for Lth).tn Studies 302 on.

for prowdtnt: the expenses for the Visit to Lthgu Much Alt-m. l. A.. McLaehlan. K. s and ham. h 7. (I973) um

enabled me to olherve the developments described here. i‘ﬂ'g'gzsmw 0mm" Wm" 0“- “MO”-

I am also indebted to stall of the Secretariat of Land Am... ,- A, tl ’Manan'nx mum“. mom“ in Li 3

Rec attrition and Settlement the Director or the Gerant tuning? item 1:: Yet. it "-27 b”

Cereals Project and the Western Australian stall led by "m“ " ‘- ”d. mum’h'x' 3. “97.5) um" '"i‘m‘m’
Mr. Mtlte Ewing; the Director of the Jabal ll Althdar $335 33113:?“ lnde V '

Authority. Mr. Bashtr Judah and his South Australian MMSM-WE‘M‘. M.A.ll97t)ktmm/0~mumrkm
advisers led by Mr. Bert Monet. in the Secretariat of “”‘Pm'mmwm"? 9"" Wm

. . . . I970.Mlnlatryo(Plann-n
Mr. Fttun Dcpals and Asxoctated UN staﬂ' Dr. Phtl- CM M gum Mum, (mfg, M, Am“
lippe l'allaa and Mr. H. Floegel. Fur secretarial and 19624971. Min‘ «Flaming. ‘rn' ’ w "'

cartographic assistance I am indebted to staﬂ’ of the cm‘s'ganngﬁmga s’“”‘"“’"‘“"”’-
School of Oriental and African Studiet. cam. and Sututeat ' t (l ) AMI-rt olSterIIea:
. . z: m

n- o
Evian. M. (I970) Report at I am: aim

the Director Mr. mm Hunt: and his stall’ especially Cm" ml Swim-l W532: ”'01"an 40mm

"ma CU M?
NO rtts mm: up: (1-59”! 701:". Watt Plain. Gefara Develop.
Aﬂltu’wrél 100mm tn rlm dl‘C \ ion include soi water. ' 9' ty " "

It" (Including skilled mintgrmnrl‘camal foe "walnut ﬁxative All or 1: ll AHlClr (I973) ”marl In dl

in land improvement. in water Iretotm'e nunanunent. and for W "' m." ’ 9’ “M'- CWW ’“ “M W500
tee-unto; tnnuts as wellat (or the rural inftatttuctute ottomnuniu- ”a Comtﬂtmon. Wt '27 99'

'“rwlﬁym IM mm”, m . ﬁgmyk. tl97l) rum». n» Dcnlmt .- um totem.

met 20 km at Tn li. Further n the eat it is diacotuin '
w I III“! ﬁtment?“ kh ‘ all. Around them Flt I. ll. (I978) Ito-'krantrm'e aw “Wm-titan "up It»

tum and Miwt . . _
or Sun a ' ture is ﬁnally aMcnt Fanning occurs in them-l '9 M7 f“ 0" m" "a w" "1 u” 64" km'm "f 0"“

Main o! it and on the hills of the nut al Althdar._‘l'o the 05363;: :mm& M. “977) 3‘00” o/ ,l,‘ I" “w

east ortheae Wandt there is temel) any potential for agriculture Mm,“ W mm. a, I,” U6 A “m,
treatise of low rainfall and tr ualily mater m. ' - m '
t m tm-tm plan u-aspg‘hugetl at . result or the mutt-o... Rm c«me- Nam! Rm maﬁa-an rr 9m.

' (1mm and int-elm have ken found to he basic to the woeaat of "3°"
.tarteultute tn dry environments mch at Western and Southern “harm “W "but” lo! 6. on
Australia The rtmnr or tulttt-mnean clover tTnIoIlut where w. ‘ “Plat-n" T - W ’x " W" '
tum-n) tn Amtrak; hot little relevance for the mainly alkaline wwg D Cocklanﬁ.’ "m.“ "at. B C "”0 Fermi
tools ol' the Mediterranean Batin. m. as it it adapted to htah - a; 30;,‘ wk”. ‘ I . In' - M.“ Mm?
rainfall acid soils. The ﬁrst nut/true to attract attention at ”WW ‘ ofA It JV“?! "M “' ntD' - '
Medina" Itttnrtulum studied at the Waite A cultural Mich Mm" "kt! mm mm” Watch.
Institute in South Australia in I910. The at: '

by accident into Atnlr'alla. and they have subsequently been re- Wm 03' W MlorAD' "’77) chtM" “11:93:?“

i
s

o.
lecay or plant midues or via awn] an'anu. In favounhle
mutt-turn on menu nwdt‘r \lJntl can increaae aoil nitrogen by
ll least 60-70 893%: in one season (Wehtcr a 0].. I976. 0. 2|:

45

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FORMATION. E'UNC‘I'IONING OP mm STATS: RELAT- DMIDPMAL TOPICS
London THE MAGHREB REVIEW in English V01 5, No. 5-6, Sop-Doc 1980 pp 91-98
[Article by Paulo de Man. university of Amsterdam "urination and two-timing o!

the Horoccnn State and Related Developmental Topic-t An Approach to linemen on
the Nahgreb"!

mm THE KABYLIAS _ . ,

MEDITERRANEAN SEA

Dew. .NOI
'|gul-I-“O' 'um
‘ ALGER “s A”! .- mm
' mm._.\_/m_" Hz} . 'M'¢\* ’5'
' r LNOuNe-I v4 .1
ouzou mm A a ,. omn- ,..e‘
G l K “‘0‘ ‘F
R E A 1' E a Milwo‘ I a .g”
Lou-dam 009'“- .A .. ' o
2.1:;"'- ° MW” .. “ e"
/l L 6 ~i
”W“ “' ”I «vi-fie“ KA
t f '
-¢ "“‘\
hit-805w"-
gin '
oSoullGhoalo-‘e
“WIN-An“
I ALGER Nat-one! camtu
o muouzou Wiley. cap-tat W“
H HIV"
am 0 to 20 so 40 on
MN.

The peculiu position of Knbylia within the Alcetiun
state Ind the particulu role which the Kabyles have
played in Algeria politics. both in the nelionalist move-
ment and since Independence. have new been subject to

06

FOR OFFICIAL USE WY
FOR "PICIAL USE ONLY

serious analysis. The weight of nationalist ideology. the
sensitivity of the question itself and superabundance of
other preoccupations have combined to inhibit candid
discussion and scientiﬁc investigation of the mattet. As a
result. the upheaval of last spring. the wave of demonstra-
tions and strikes which spread throughout Greater
Kabylia and as far aﬁeld as Alden. Setifand Paris, tool:
most observers as well as the Algerian government
entirely by surprise. It had been widely assumed that the
rebellion led by Hocine Ait Ahmed under the banner of
the Front do: Force: Socialism (RES) in l963 had been

theswan-songol'Kabyle particularism and that. but fora
handful of disgruntled eailes and intellectual (mines.
‘the political problem had been settled’. In fact. however.
Ait Ahmed's revolt was the swamng of the Kabyle
moguls. nothing more. Since then. the political problem
ofKabyliahasaoquiredaneotirelynewsocialbasis,
with profound implications for the Algerian state. Signs
of this change were already visible as long ago as 1974.
when a minor bttt explicitly ‘llerber'ist‘ riot tools place at
Larbaa n‘Ait lratlsen in central Kabylia. and were
unmistakable in the majordemonstrstion which occurred
during the football cup final in Algiers in the summer of
I977. in the light of the ”Tm Ounou Spring' of I980. the
question can no longer be evaded. But is it a Xabﬂe
question?

The Problem nf om . . . -
Many 0f the students In Tm Gum and Algiers

insisted that it was Berber lamina: IM_ culture in
general which was at stakc‘ and ”If“ this therefore
concerned the neruempeskins populations ottlie Mzab.
the Chenoua and. ofcouns. theﬁurgeevay bit as ma.
as the Kabyles. In this partway/3. re was no m
to stop at the Algerian frontier and the Berber; of
Morocco vilere also brought into the act, at least by
proxy! Other demonstrator». byeontrast. declared that
it was the government's Arabmstton policy which was .3
issue and that. therefore. their movemntrepm
the vast majority of Arabicspeslung Algerians as well.
in so far as the colloquial Arabic spoken in Algeria is
discriminated against no less than Berber by the oﬂeial
imposition of the literary Arabtcof the Middle Eases
Yetotherswentevenl'urthernnststtngthatltwm
simply oﬂlcial cultural policy which w in question but
theveryforrnofgovernmentttselfandthntthemof
their position was the demand for an end to dictatorship
and the establishment of a pluralist political W "4
all the democratic freedm‘

It is important to distinguish these three My”.
although the demonstrators rarely did so. for they have
very dillerent implications. The third one «may
subsumes the other two but neither the first nor the second
necessarily imply the third Indeed. the ﬁrst position i,
not even opposed to the Arabiution policy in principk'
but merely seeks othcial recognition of Berber as a

‘7

FOR 09!?an 088 am
second national language alongside Arabic. They have
two features in common. however: none oftheee positions
is explicitly anti-socialist‘ and they all express a reluctance
to deﬁne the movement in terms of speciﬁcally—let alone
csclusively—Kabyle interests.

1he hull: of French media coverage directly reﬂected
the movement‘s own somewhat confused self-image and
substantially endorsed its various demands. The Algerian
government. on the other hand. initially depicted the
unrest as the product of 'reactionary elements linked to
Imperialism” and its predominantly negative and
intermittently harsh response to the demonstrators got a
thoroughly bad press abroad. But even if we allow that
earlyoﬁcialreactionswerewellwideofthemarhand
that an alternative course was open to the Chadli reo'me
in itshandlingofthealfair.arewejustiﬁedinta|tingthe
demonstrators' claims at face value? For however far-
reaching their programme and however broad the
constituency in whose name they claimed to speak. there
is no gainsaying the fact that the movement was conﬁned
to Kabylia and its urban outlets and mobilized the
Kabyles alone. It fell on deaf ears elsewhere in Algeria.’
Why is this?

There is undoubtedly widespread public dissatisfaction
with the political system in Algeria but this still falls a
long way short of posing a substantial democratic
challenge to the regime: on the contrary. popular
discontent has focused upon such matters as bureaucratic
inertia and incompetence. arrogance and corruption—
that is. upon the shortcomings of the system. rather than
upon its constitutive principles. The demands which hate
generally been put forward have sought broader and
more effective popular participation Within the system.
not its replacement by another. Dissatisfaction with the
government's Arabiution policy is also widespread
across the country but. again. this eapreases resistance
not to the principle of the policy so much as to the
dogmatic way in which it has been conceived and the
inconsistent and insensitive way in which it has been
applied. Such criticisms are thus positive rather than
negative and. if heeded by the government. would
enhance rather than jeopardize the policy's prospects of
success.

Thus the fact that the demonstrators in Kabylia
should have raised these wider questions. in effective
isolation from the rest of the Algerian population. is to
be explained in terms of the speciﬁc political conditions
within which they were articulating their particular
concerns. But how are we to characterise these latter? If
neitherthefonnofgovernmentnortheprineipleofthe
Arabintion policy are. as yet. substantive issues at the
level of national political life. is there a Berher question
at this level?

As we have already seen. one tendency within the
movement of last spring sought to define its content in
these terms. and this was the deﬁnition most consistently

48

FOR OFFICIAL USE MY
NR OHICIAL USE ONLY

and thoroughly reﬂected in the headlines or the world‘s
press. 'ParieAlger: les Berberes sont dans la capitale'
and ‘Nouvelle manifestation berbére' nroclairned Libero-
tion on 8 and 9 April respec:ivei,. . .r culture berbere
reprimee' and 'Les etudiants berberes rnanit’. ttent a nou-
veau' echoed La 0on in its editions of 8-9 and to April.
while L‘Aurare spoke of 'L'irreductible fait berbere’ 0.3
10 April. a phrase repeated by L'£xpres.r in its edition of
26 April-S May. On 12 April Lutte Ouvriére spolte of
‘Les Berberes en lutte contre I'oppression culturelle‘
while a series of three articles in Le Quotidirn 4: Ports
on l7. l8 and I9 April was entitled ‘La Revolte des
Berberes'. Le Noun] Ohrenotew reported the “Greve
berbere'initle April iasneandrnminatedupon‘Le Fair
Berbere' the following week. Even Le Monde headed its
Bulletin do Farmer column of 22 April with ‘Alger et
le probl¢me berbere'. Nor was it only the French press
which presented the affair in this way. ‘Berber Riots
Challenge Algerian Rulers’ was the headline over the
Immanuel Herold Tribune's report on 24 April while
Newsweek advised its readers on 5 May that “Die
Berbers‘ Pride Threatens a Nation'. There was. however.
a curious dichotomy between these headlines and the
articles which appeared beneath them: none of the latter
wereabletoadducethesl' watevidenceofunrestin
any Berberophone region 0 Algeria other than Kabylia.
The uninitiated spectator is thus confronted with a
remarkable paradox: a social movement unequivocally
limited to Kabylia (and those towns with suutantial
Kabyle populations) but which is deﬁned by all and
sundry in terms which ignore its regional speciﬁty.

This is not only a matter of deﬁnition or presentation.
moreover. It is also one of interpretation. Two aplana-
tions or the recent unrest have enjoyed wide currency.
The ﬁrst postulates a general conﬂict between the
Berbers and their Arab—or. at any rate, unwarr—
rulers! The second. by no means inconsistent with the
ﬁrst. interpret: this conﬂict as age-old. traditional: thus
for The Times. the recent upheaval revealed that 'Algeria’s
Future (is) Threatened by its Past’.’ In particular. in the
Kabyle instance of this general conﬂict. the events or
I980 were widely regarded as a continuation. if not a
mere repetition. of the RES. rebellion of l963.

Both of these views are mistaken. There is no general
Berber question in Algeria. still less in the Maghreb as a
whole. The heroers may be regarded as a linguistic
category or as an ethnic group. but neither label neceso
sarily connotes ‘eornmunity' and there is. in fact. no
community of interest uniting the herbers as such. The
Berber populations of Algeria do not possess a common
territory or a common economic life and then are
numerous cultural and even linguistic diﬂerences between
them. As a consequence of their geomhical separation
from one another and the absence of both any sustained
commercial intercourse between them and of a written

49

FOR 0!?!an USE ONLY
language. there has been no tendency for their culture to
become unified or for the language to become standard-
ized in the course of their history. indeed. contrary
tendencieshavebeenatworlr.’ tuswhiletheymyeach
besaidtopossessadistinctive Berbacultnredhisia
notauniﬁedculture.‘lheoraltraditionofKabyliais
separate fromthatottheAures,foreaample.andthe
religious traditions of Kabylia and the Aures are entirely
distinct from that of the Hub and signiﬁcantly dilerent
from each other as well.u And. while t9v:.'. respective
cultures may be thought to stand in a men relation-
ship to the odlcial Arabo-lslarnieeult e orthetnodern
nation-smthereisnoreasontotssumematthe
variousBerberpopulationstalnsthesamevicwoi‘thia
relationship. Entire populations do not develop an intense
preoccupationwitirtheirparticularculttn'eforitsown
sake. More or less rootless intellectuals. in search of a
role in life. may do so. but that is another matter. lithe
Kabyles at me have become preoccupied with their
own culture and have begun assiduously to cultivate
their own peculiarities. this is because their present-day
material interests have led them to do so. And there is no
reason to assume that these material interest are shared
by other Berber populations.

Thus. while we cannot speak of a Berber question in
contemporary Algeria. there is a Kabyle question. This
remains to be described and accounted for. But it
should already be clear that there is little that is tradi-
tional about this question. The nature of the problem
and its political expression are substantially novel and
modern. in particular. it is not the parallel between
l963 and I980 which is signiﬁcant but the. contrast.n If
the movement which has developed in Kabylis describes
itself as ‘Berberist'." this reﬂects no more than the
stake which the Kabyles have recently acquired in the
status of their mother tongue and. apart from that, the
understandable ambition of the movement‘s leaders to
evoke support from the other Berber populations and
thereby rebut the charge of ‘regionalism'. For the time
being. this ambition remains a forlorn hope. Neither
among the Chaouia nor the Morabites nor any of the
other Berber populations of Algeria is a signiﬁcant
‘Berberist' movement discernible as yet For ‘Berberisrn'
as it exists today does. in fact. articulate a peculiarly
Kabyle interest.

he hes-t Per- ot the Kabyle Qasulsa
Thecruaofthexabylequestionasitpresentsitsel!
today is the demand of the Kehyles for oﬁcial recognition
ottheBerberlanguageasthesecondnationallanguage
of Algeria. on a par with Arabic. and the corollary of
this demand. Kabyle opposition to the compulsory.
nationwide Arabintion of education and public admin-
istration. This opposition to compulsory Arabiution is
not a mere byproduct of the dernsnd for oﬂlcial recogv

50

FOR onrcm USE crux
YOR onrcm 032 MY

nition of Berber. however. for it predates this demand.
Until recently. Kabyle opposition to Arabization es-
pressed itself in support for the maintenance of French
as the ell‘ective language of public life" and was therefore
abletomergewiththeoutlooltol‘thatsection ofthe
Arabophone middle claes which had undergone French
education and felt similarly threatened by the degalliciza-
tion of the administrative and educational apparatuses.
Gallophile opposition to Arabization transcended the
Kahyle-Arab dichotomy but elicited only middle class
support within the Kabyle community. Berberist opposi-
tion to Arabiestion is tending to isolate the Kabylea and
to unite them.

WhyshouldtheKabylesopposeArabiution?There
isnowadaysnoreasoninprindpleforberbersm
Berberstodoso. WhentheBcrhersofthe Moroccan Ril‘
rebelled in I938. one oftheir demands was not that
French should replace Arabic as the language of the local
administration. but that Arabic should replace French.“
The colonial administration ofthe Rifhad functioned in
Spanish. 1he incorporation of the Rif into a uniﬁed
Moroccoatlndependence putanendtothisstate ot‘
aﬂ’airs. The ellecu've choice confronting the Riﬁans was
between Aerithwhichtheyhadlongheenfamiliar.
and French. the oﬁcial languap ol‘the colonial admin.
istration in the rest 01' M°'°°°°' °f. Much they knew
nothing. “their material interacts Ihdlﬂled I preference
for Arabic. just as that _of .the Kelly!“ el the tune of
Algerian Independenceundteeled the PM“ 0PM"-
ne point is that these interesn were the product ofthe
speciﬁc histories of the popmuuom m question. the:
both Riliansaod Kabyleeefemmtmlmm
neither here nor there. Similellyi "'9” 5‘ 3° pmiﬁant
opposition to Arabintion among the Chaouta Berber:
of the Aurea The Ruby!“ hm 051°C!“ '0 Mbimion
because in the course of the colonial Period French
replaced Arabic is their second Insurer as a conse-
quence of the preferential access to French whooIing
which they enjoyed and. more important. the re-orienta.
tron of Kabyle migration away from the Arabophone
interior of Algeria to the factories of France. French did
did notreplaccAr-abicaathcsccondlanguageofthe
other Berberophone populations .of Alps-la, although
certain elements of these populauons acquired it as a
third language. not. while for the Chronic. as for the
Riﬁans in Morocco. Arabic may well constitute an
appropriate and acceptable vehicle for cultural develop.
ment. for the Kahyles it represents a most unattractive,
because less modern. alternative to French and is
increasingly recorded as a threat to the cultural develop.
ment which they have already achieved and the oppor-
tunities for social and economic advancement which go
with it.

In particular. the Arabiration of public administration
and of the educational system constitutes a major and
direct threat to the interests of the Kabyle middle class.

51

FOR OHICIAL USE MY
The cultural development promoted by the colonial
system produced a very substantial francophone intelli-
gentsia in Kabylia which came to dominate the teaching
profession across the country. In addition. the fact that
public administration continued after 1962 to be con-
ducted in French meant that Kabyles were able toseeure
totally disproportionate representation within the state
apparatus and the institutions of the rapidly «pending
public sector of the economy. Moreover. the commercial
traditions of the Kabyles. which date from the pre
colonial period. had generated a stzeable capitalist class
of Kabyle origin by 1962." These traditions had enabled
many Kabyles to prosper in the interstices of the colonial
economy. retailing the products of French industry in
many parts of the country. and to establish a strong
position in the expanding tertiary sector (hotels. cafes,
restaurants. and so forth). especially in Algiers. but this
Kabyle bourgeoisie also began to develop an agrarian
wing as Kabyle traders bought up estates abandoned by
poorer colon: in the course of the European exodus from
the countryside to the coastal cities which got under way
from the 19205 onwards. A manufacturing wing also
appeared. although it remained conﬁned to unalloscde
enterprises and light industry. Since independence.
private capital in Algeria has expanded in absolute
terms but its range of activities has been progressively
restricted. lts agrarian wing was prevented from expand-
ing by the nationalization of European land holdings in
l962—l963. and largely eliminated during the ‘2nd Phase'
of the Agrarian Revolution. the wholesalers of agricul-
tural produce were put out of business (except on the
black market) by the state take-over of agricultural
marketing in I974. the private retail trade has been
subject throughout to government attempts to enforce
price control and the once lucrative import-export
business has recently come under sentence of death with
the establishment of a state monopoly of foreign trade.
Even the industrial fraction of private capital has cause
for complaint: private entrepreneurs have tended to be
very eﬁicienr in the light industrial sector, but there are
legal restrictions on the scale of private enterprises and
the recent introduction of the ‘Srorur du hamlllevr'
(complementing. in its application to the private sector.
the earlier reform of industrial relations in the state
sector) constitutes a further limitation of the managerial
prerogatives of Algerian entrepreneurs. Thus the eapan-
sion of the state sector and steadily increasing state
control of the economy as a whole have relentlessly
reduced the freedom of action of private capital. The
most important area in which it has been free to develop
has been the construction industry. But such dynamism
as private enterprise has displayed in this sector has been
intimately connected with the expansion of the state
sector. for the state sector enterprises are the most
important customers of private building ﬁrms. which

52

FOR MICIAL US! ONLY
POR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

depend very largely upon public contracts for their
business. Ati these developments, then. have combined
to reduce the freedom of manoeuvre of private entries
preneurs in Algeria and to make . : extremely depen-
dent upon their representation in the state apparatus. for
licences of various kinds. for supplies of raw materials
and components and. above all. for contracts. Ann the
Kabyle bourgeoisie. which has hitherto enjoyed unusually
extensive representation within the administrative appara-
tus of the state. now faces the prospect of losing much of
this indispensable representation as the Arabintion
policy begins to bite.

Thus the Arabintion policy threatens all sections of
the Kabyle middle class—the teachers and liberal
professions." the civil servants and ofﬁcials and the
traders. proprietors. entrepreneurs and salaried executives
of the private sector. In contrast. there is no Chaouia
middle class. much less a Chaouia bourgeoisie stride
seam. to speak of. And. as one develops. the unshalten
predominance of Arabic over French culture in the
Sud-Constantinois and the Aures wﬂl mean that it will
develop as an integral part of the middle class and
bourgeoisie of the Constantinois as a whole and not
substantially distinct from it. just as bourgeois elements
from Lesser Kabylia (where Arabic inﬂuence was stronger
and French cultural penetration weaker than in Greater
Kabylia) used to be absorbed without difﬁculty into the
bourgeoisies of Setif and Constantine during the colonial
period."

Kabyle opposition to Arabitation is not a recent
development but it has undergone three important
changes in the last eighteen years. First, it is no longer
conﬁned to the middle classes as it was, arguably. in
I962. Family and wider kinship links still manage to
transcend class divisions within Algerian society in
general and within the Kabyle population in particular
and the expansion of the state apparatus since Indepen-
dence has given such networks a new lease of life as the
single most important avenue of access to the administra-
tion. whence all things ﬂow. Moreover. the substantial
economic development which has occurred in Greater
Kabylia since 1968 in the wake of the Special Develop-
ment Programme for the region begun in that year has
integrated the various districts of Greater Kabylia into
an economic unit. Thus all Kabyles now have an interest
in maintaining the Kabyle presence within the adminis-
trative apparatus of the state and. as the processes of
economic integration have transcended the older par-
ochial and tribal divisions. a common awareness of this
interest and a uniﬁed political behaviour based upon it
have been able to develop.“

Second. this opposition to Arabiution has shifted its
ground in the last decade. at least so far as the Kabyle
intelligentsia is concerned. in that the advent of modern
standard Arabic has weakened the pragmatic arguments
in favour of the maintenance of French as the language

53

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
(if public life. Kahyle intellectuals have therefore tended
to concede the nationalist case for degallicintion and to
oppose compulsory Arabiration on a new basis. that of
the claim for equal status for Berber. which. they argue.
is every bit as Algerian as Arabic and which is no longer
an unwritten language and is thus capable of being
taught in schools and employed in the conduct of
administration.

Third. the fact that it is now the speciﬁcally Berber
element of Kabyle culture which is being asserted in
opposition to compulsory Arabiution is enabling the
movement to ettpand beyond the conﬁnes of Greater
Kabylia and to incorporate the Berberophone region of
lesserKabyliaeastoftheJurjuramassilZDttringthe
colonial period. the Jurjura formed the boundary
between the administrative subdivisions (mm
mans) of Tin“ Ouzou. Bejaia and Aumale (now Sour el
Ghozlane). In the course of the Revolution. the military
command of wilaya III was initially based on Greater
Kahylia but expanded southwards to incorporate the
Kabyle population of the Bouira district and eastwards
to incorporate the Kabyle population of the Deiaia.
the Sountmam valley. the Biban range and the Gucr
massif as fat as the Oued Agrioun. For the ﬁrst time in
their history. the Berber-speakers of Kahyhe were united
under a single political and military leadership. At
Independence. the new wllaya of Tizi Ouzou retained the
Bouira district (and incorporated the largely Arabophone
district of Lalthdaria—es-Palestro—to the west) but the
regions to the east of the Jurjura were included in the
wiloya of Serif, together with the Arabophone part of
Lesser Kabylia to the east of the Oued Agrioun. Because
the it-ilayo administration functioned as the crucial
agency of state-directed economic development at the
local level. the Berber-speakers of Lesser Kabylia were
brought into intense and essentially harmonious contact
with their Arabophone neighbours within the wilayo of
Setii’. with Setif itself functioning as an eﬂ’eetive melting
pot for the two populations. The redrawing of the national
administrative map in I914 changed all that. however.
The Berber-speaking population of Lesser Kabylia was
excluded from the wlloyo of Setif and p'ven a wiloya of
its own. with its capital at Bejaia. The drift towards the
assimilation of the Berbers of Lesser Kabylia accordingly
came to an end as the administrative and therefore
economic reorientation of their region turned them back
on themselves but also brought them into far closer
contact with their neighbours in Greater Kabylia. Thus
the political unity of the Kabyles from both sides of the
lurjura which enjoyed a brief existence during the war
on the basis of their common interest in Algerian inde-
pendence is now re-emerging. with the unwitting com-
plicity of the national government. on the entirely new
basis of their speciﬁc identity qua Kabyles and their
common interest in the fate of their mother tongue. If
the movement of last spring started in Tizi Ouzou and

54

FOR current. USE ONLY
FOR OFIICIAL USE ONLY

spread ﬁrst to the rest of Greater Kabylia and to Algiers,
it also evolted vigorous support in the Sournrnam valley
of lesser Kabylia. There were riots at El Kseur and the
Algerian national ﬂag was public-q burned at Oued
Amizour."

It is these factors, then, which explain the rise of popu-
lar 'Berberisnt' in contemporary Kabylia. factors specific
to the region and of recent origin. But popular 'Berbcrisrn'
is only the present form whicn the Kabyle question has
come to assume. The question itselfrernains to be deﬁned.

The Nature of the Kahyle Quilts. and Its Installs.
From the middle of the nineteenth century onwards. a
profound process of national development got under
way in Algeria. National society began to replace
pre-national society in the countryside as the decay of
tribal forms of social organization enabled private
property to develop out ol‘ tribal-communal forms of
property and private producers ir. various parts of the
country to connect up with one another through their
incorporation into the expanding national market. The
Kabyle question has throughout been. and remains

. the uestion othow nation}! may want develop
13d labyliaqand whether this society V00“ 5% Algerian.
French. Arabo-Islarnic or Kahyle. . .

Prior to the colonial conquest. the preconditions or
national development m We“? beginning to appear
in Kabylia. In the central Juoun. amongst the populm
known locally as the lssytm. M in wt: of 1M
Kahylia (notably the “mortal Art Abhes tribe),
communal forms of ownershtp M0 “'96! begun to
give way to private property—dc [new in the cm of
arable land, dejvre in the case _of othet’ rncans of produc-
tion—and the private production of cralt manufacture.
forsalc haadevetopedtpldesmwythoutequalene-
where in the North African countryside.” With these
deteloprnents arose intense commercial intercourse
between the Kabyles and the Arahtwpeslting Wm
of the Algerian interior. and this intercourse was mturally
accompanied by a process of cultural aclnngs. Am
because the second language of the Kabyles whit. my
features ol‘ Kahyse culture were assimilated by their
neighbours to the south and. east. Kabyle tnttsauve and
enterprise were widely “mined. their archnecme and
settlement patterns were copied and. when a Mom
brotherhood. the RoMsaslyo. developed out of the cult
of a saint of the Jurjura. Sidi Mohamed Ben About“.
rnsne. in the course of the nineteenth century, this may
expanded along the trade routes frequented by Kabyle
merchants and pedlars" to achieve a dominant position
in Eastern Algeria. as the scale of the 187l revolt was
to demonstrate." _ 4 _ .

Had it not been for French colonialism. II it entirely
possible that this process of development would have led

to the emergence. in Kahylia. of a national society which

55

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
was speciﬁcally Algerian in culture and predominantly
Arabic in language. But. while the advent of the colonial
order undoubtedly accelerated the development of
national society in Algeria as a whole, it impeded the
further interpenetration of Kabyle culture and the
Arabic-whirled culture of the interior. Instead. the re',
orientation of Kabyle emigration to France and the
generalization of French throughout the rep'on gave rise
to the prospect of the development of French national
society in Kahylia. that is. the assimilation of the Kahyles
into the French national ensemble. This prospect also
proved illusory in the long run, but it was by no means
the mere hallucination of romantics. A veryaubttantial ele-
ment of contemporary Kahyle culture is of French orip'n.

The establishment at Independence of a regime em~
phatically committed to the promotion of an Arabo-
Islamic national culture in Algeria initially led many
observers and not a few Kahyles to expect that this
culture would develop in Kahylia as elsewhere. But.
despite the most assiduous etl'orts ofthe government. the
continuing transformation of social and economic
structures in Kahylia since l962 has given rise to an
entirely dillerent outcome. National society as .t his
continued to develop in Kabylia has not assumed an
Araho-lslamic character. Indeed. in its attempts to
induce it to do so. the regime has come to depend. for
the recruitment of reliable local intermediancs. on the
most backward features of Ksbyle society-the mrnbrin
and the old .roﬂ‘ political system"—and to inhibit political
development out of these traditional structures. Such
political development as has occurred ha. tor the most
pan, been 'aerherist' in content and this reﬂects the fact
m; the emerging national society in Kahylia has
assumed neither a French nor an Araho-lslamic but a
speciﬁcally Kahyle character. which suhsurnes Berber.
Arabic and French ingredients in a novel and unique
synthesis. This synthesis is by no means complete, hut it
is already coherent enough to give rise to a speciﬁcally
Kabyle collective interest and sentiment which can only
be described as national in their term and extent and
which are. in turn. strong enough to generate a speciﬁcally
Ksbyle political movement capable ol'mohilizing massive
and vigorous p0pular support throughout the region and
evoking the active solidarity of Kabyle communities
further afteld.

This movement is not nationalist, if by nationalist is
meant either separatist or autonornist. Kahylia possesses
no natural resources of signiﬁcance and has long been
dependent upon investments from outside the region.
Sincethediscoveryoi’oilintheSshara.ithasbeenclear
that economic development in Kahylia hinges upon
access to a share of Algeria's revenues through eilective
participation in the Algerian state. There is thus not the
slightest basis for separatism in Kahylia“ Nor is
political autonomy or self-government within the wider

56

FOR OYPICIAL US! MY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Algerian state an issue in contemporary Kabylia. It was
an issue in 1954. when. on the eve of the insurrection. the
leader of the Kabyle ntnquii. Belltacem Krim. insisted
that Kabylia should constitute a “Lye to itself within
the nationwide structure of the ELN. Since indepen-
dence. the wilaya system of regional government has
permtted the Kabyles a substantial measure of do [new
control over their own local affairs. within the limits of a
centrally planned economy and the one-party system.
Every wali (Governor) of Greater Kabylia since I962 has
been a native of the region. moreover; the same cannot
be said of any other wilaye in Algeria. But this is largely
beside the point. for it is not the way in which Kabylia is
governed which is at issue. but the participation of the
Kabyles in Algerian cultural. economic and political life
at the national level. Viewed in this contest. the essential

objectives of the Berberist movement can be seen to be
entirely assimilation!" in nature.

‘lhe Predicameat of Barberlst Asalmllationh

The Berberist movement articulates the refusal of the
Kabyles to be assimilated into the Algerian nation on
terms ’Udgcd desirable hy the Algerian government and.
simultaneously, their aspiration to be assimilated into
the same Algerian nation on their own terms.

In the history of colonial Algeria. ‘assirnilationism‘ is
the (nrguahly misleading) term used to denote the political
tendency within the Muslim community which sought
the integration of Algerian Muslims into the body
politic of the French Republic. The assimilationists were
violently attacked by the lslamic Reform movement of
Cheilth Ben Badis and their failure to extract any signiﬁ-
cant reforms from the French government eventually led
their most prominent leader. Ferhat Abbas, to espouse
a separatist perspective from l943 onwards. The failure
of the assimilationists has encouraged subsequent
observers to assume. With the questionable beneﬁt of
hindsight. that their project was doomed from the start
on the grounds that it failed to recognize the distinct
national identity of Algerian Muslims. This was the
substance of Ben Badis‘s critique. But if their project was
foredoomcd. it was the peculiar nature of the European.
rather than the Muslim. community in Algeria which
constituted the serious obstacle to their prom.

Individuals of non-European origin have regularly
managed to secure entry into the national community of
metropolitan France. The concept of nation which
developed in France in the course of the elghteetlh
century was a political. not a cultural or racial. concept.
The nation was the political community. composed of
free citizens of a democratic and secular republic. As
such. it was not at all unreasonable to assume that
neither the accident of Arab or Berber origin nor adher-
ence to the Muslim faith need debar an Algerian from
entry into this community. Such a view tools no account

57

FOR OFFICIAL USE MY
of that segment of the French nation which had deveioped
in Algeria.

The French community in Algeria was constituted out
of numerous elements of diverse origin and culture:
Frenchmen from France. Alsatians, Corsicans. Spaniards.
Italians and Maltese. to which were added. following the
Crernieux decree of I870. the indigenous Wish popula-
tion. What deﬁned this heterogeneous population as
Frenchwasnotsomuchthefactofcitiaenahipofthe
Republic. for their political life was substantially separate
from that of the metropolis so that citizenship of the
latter was a highly abstract matter. but. rather. the far
more tangible fact that they were not Muslims. The
concept of French nationality which mattered in Algeria
was a cultural. religious and tacitly racial concept. The
strategy of the Muslim assirnilationists was. in essence.
to invoke the intervention of (a somewhat idealized)
metropolitan France to induce a change in outlook and
behaviour on the part of the actually existing colonial
France. a strategy which gave primacy to constitutional
forms over social realities. But these same constitutional
forms ensured that colonial France was both strongly
represented in the metropolis and Virtually autonomous
of it when it chose to be. And the social realities meant
that the colonial French would invariably ignore or defy
Parisian liberalism when the very basis of their national
identity was put in question. as it could not. logically.
rail to be by the Muslim assimilationist movement.

All this is not entirely irrelevant to the Kabyle question.
Kabyle assimilationists have been facing much the same
problems as did Ferhat Abbas el al. An Arabist form of
Kabyle assimilationism has existed since Independence
but its eﬂ‘orts have been largely in vain. The Ben Bella
and Boumcdiene governments promoted Kabyle Arabists
to leading positions at local. regional and national level
but they have enjoyed little or no following in Kabylia.
Mohammedi Said” was a ﬁgure of fun ﬁfteen years ago
and the zealously Arabist wall of Till Ouzou from I914
to I979“ was cordially detested by his fellow Kabyles.
The Arabist variant of Kabyle assimilationism took no
account of the peculiarities of contemporary Kabyle
culture and got nowhere. The Berberist variant of Kabyle
assimilationism taltes these peculiarities as its point of
departureand isnowhavingtocometotermswiththe
peculiarities of the larger whole within which it aspires to
secure for the Kabyle community an accepted and
acceptable place.

How can Berberist assimilationism come to terms with
this larger whole? To put it the other way round. on what
basis can the larger whole be expected to accommodate
Kabyle partiwlarism? This is a thorny question indeed
and the Berberists themselves are divided into three main
tendencies on the matter.

‘CM W3 ‘A-axlgh Ravlvalhln‘ ad ‘Lalner-
Faire’

58

YOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL 082 MY

All tendencies of the Berberist movement deny that
Algerian society as a whole can be accurately described
as 'Arabonlamic‘ in culture. But how. then. is it to be
described? Before the events of la.. spring. the rumina-
tions of the various Berben‘st groom!“ on this subject
could be dismissed as of no signiﬁcance. They are,
perhaps. worth looking into now.

One tendency does. at least implicitly. accept that the
culture of the mjority of Algerians is substantially (as
opposed to merely formally or potentially) ‘Arabo-lslam-
ic'. ltisthereforeledtopostulateorasstmetheexistence
of two distinct ‘communities’ (the term 'nation’ is
carefully avoided) in Algeria.” although it prefers. for
reasons we have dismissed, to refer to the minority
community as ‘Berber' rather than ‘Kabyle‘. In position
is that the majority community should recognise the
minority's 'right to be dilferent'.” Accordingly. it is not
opposed to the government’s Arabintion policy except
in so far as this affects the minority community; it
contents itself with demanding oﬂlcial recognition of the
language and culture of the minority.

The main problem which this jpluralist' Perspective
runs into is that of how a state which. Pom a highly
centralized socialist economy adnunistmd bl! ! large
bureaucracy can be run on "I: M of cultural and
linguistic pluralism. Thil would 00! matter, of course. if
the Kabylcs were a mﬂ‘m' 870W 3‘" they are not a
marginal group. unlike “'9 other Mb“ Mulations in
Algcria. They have played ' “Palm” ”4 central part
in the construction and manningof the state apparatus,
There is no analogy with the Sowet lJnion. for example,
where the state machine .is vellum» of Russian
origin and cultural pluralism is menu-ﬂy a matter of
allowing a measure of cultural autonomy to the non.
Russian nationalities at the periphery. A proposal which
addresses itself to the problem is that made by [tam
Ali Yahia. who has suggested that senior gm_w
posts should alternate regularly between the two ‘com-
munities'. But this hardly resolves the issue. The question
is n0t one of government or even senior Idminiﬂnﬁvg
posts alone. It is the problem of how the administrative
machine of a unitary (as opposed to a federal) socialist
state can possibly function in more than one language.

Ali Yahia has been bitterly criticized by another group
or when”, who see his solution as analogous to the
system which operated in Lebanon before the civil war
(and arguably led to the latter). This group. which calls
itself 'L'Union all People Amaelglt' and publishes a review
entitled ‘Asroglicn/Llen'. rejects the very basis of the
'culturalopluralist‘ position. namely the assumption that
two distinct and coherent communities eaist in present.
day Algeria.” They insist. on the contrary. that there is
only one community in Algeria and that this community
is distinctively Algerian in culture. Moreover. they argue
that neither French not classical Arabic nor Islamic
elements in this culture are native to it. The deﬁning

59

P01! OIPICIAL USB OKLY
characteristic of this culture is its ethnic speciﬁcity. its
origin in a people descended from the autochthonoua
inhabitants of North Africa. namely the herbal. Since
'Berber' is itself a foreign term. the term 'mustgh'
(plural: magma-literally: ‘free man') is employed
instead. Thus ali Algerians are Imhen'some lmdghen
speak the old language (Imalghr). the others speak a
peculiarly Algerian dialect of Arabic which. so the
argument goes. is not to be regarded as a derivative or
hybrid or bastard form of classical Arabic. since classical
Arabic is no more than the dialect of the Quraysh tribe
ofMeaeafromwhichtheProphetcasneandthcArabs
who settled in North Africa and brought their language
with themwere notofthistribeand apoheotherdialects
which have since evolved in their own. unique. fnhion.”

Thus the project of the ‘Aniostglr revivalists' amounts
to an attempt to redeﬁne the cultural identity of the
Algerian nation in such a way as to render megititnate
the government‘s Arabiution policy on nationalist
grounds. in that it can be seen as involving the imports-
tion of a foreign language (Middle Eastern Arabic). and
to secure for the Berbers (sc. Kabylcs) a place of honour
in the nation as being those Algerians who continue to
speak the tongue of their ancestors.

The mundane problem of how the business of a
modern state is to be conducted in tamxlght or colloquial
Arabic. let alone the combination of the two. has not. so
far. been dealt with by this tendency. Moreover. the most
prominent of the ‘Anmtgh revivalist' poops, the Union
do Purple Amlgh. insists that riﬁmh. the cuneiform
script of the Tuareg. should be used for the purpose of
writing in (might instead of the alphabet devised by
French missionaries in Algeria” or the Arabic alphabet.
This doctrinaire preference for a most unwieldy and
antiquated alphabet on the sole grounds of its superior
pedigree is evidence of the fundamental utopianisnt of
this tendency which. as its publications admit. is almost
entirely Kabyle in membership. There it little sign that
Arahopbone Algerians are prepared to mobilize alongside
the 'Amoziglt revivalists' in defence of their mother tongue.
it would appear. then. that this tendency is not seriously
addressing itself to the larger whole within which the
Kabyles are to be assimilated. lt propoaea a view of how
the larger whole ought to conceive itself but does not
deal with it in its own terms. The same could besaid of
the Algerian government. of course. with the crucial
dill’erence that the government has been building on
foundations laid by the wartime F.L.N. (and by the Pan!
du People Algeria: and the Association des Oakmos
before it) and has possessed the means with which to
suggest its own conception of the national culture to the
Algerian people in a most unstained and forceful way.
'Amazigh revivalisrn‘. in contrast. faces an apparently
unbridgeable gulf between ends and means in this respect.
As such. it is to be regarded as expressive rather than
instrumental. It is not a functional political position in

60

FOR OHICIAL USE ONLY
ron ontcm use ONLY

the real world.

The third tendency within the Berberist movement
makes no attempt to describe or deﬁne the national
culture of contemporary Algeria. suit rest does it propose
to redeﬁne or refashion it. Its essential demand is for the
democratization of public life in Algeria. Its opposition
to the government's language and cultural policy is just
one facet of its opposition to monolithic dirigisme in
general. Unlike the ﬁrst tendency. the pluralism it
advocates is political rather than merely cultural and,
therefore. it need neither postulate nor deny the existence
of two distinct 'oommunities' in Algeria. for the case for
political pluralism and freedom of expression rests on a
quite different set of assumptions. those of the classical
European tradition of liberal-democratic thought. con-
cerning the rights of individuals on the one hand and the
good government of states on the other. ‘nms. with
regard to the characterization of the Algerian national
culture. this tendency is, by impliation. fundamentally
agnostic. With regard to the mode of development of this
culture, its position is ‘lurlircrg’aire'. it does not propose
that the government abandon its current cultural policy
for another. but that it abandon its claim to regulate this
sphere of national life altogether. The implication of
political democratization is that questions of language
and culture cease to be an affair of state and that the
evolution of the national culture should be determined by
the free play of social forces. mediated. perhaps. by the
state power but not directed by it.

To summarize: the ﬁrst tendency opposes the cultural
monolithism of the government with cultural pluralism.
the second tendency opposes the modernist and universal-
ist Jacobinism of the government with an atavistic and
ethnocentric (and toothless) Jacohinism of its own and
the third tendency opposes dictatorship in general with
liberal democracy. andcultnral dlrlglsnie in particular with
cultural kisser-fairs.

Thusitisthcthirdtendencywhichhasthemost
radical position and the most coherent one. It can
plausibly rebut the charge of ‘regionalism' incurred by
thetlrsttendencyandthechargesofethnoeentriamand
utopianisrn incurred by the second tendency. And there
isasensein which itcanevenrebutthechargeof‘ler-
berism'. As yet. history atfords no eaample of a socialist
economy combined with a pluralist-democratic polity.
Political liberalization, if followed through. would
almost certainly lead to economic liberalization in
Algeria before very long. Were this to happen. the
Kabyle boumoisie would no longer be so dependent
upon the extent of its representation within the adminis-
trative apparatus of the state. And. were the government
to abandon its control over the cultural sphere. it is
entirely possible that French would conserve its position
as the effective language of public administration. In
either eventuality. the Kabyle bourgeoisie would no

61

FOR OYPICIAL US! ONLY
longer have a material interest in the status of its mother
tongue. And there would no longer exist any substantial
linguistic or cultural barrier to the integration of the
Kabyle bourgeoisie into the Algerian national bourgeoisie
as a whole.

There is a case. therefore. for distinguishing the third
tendency from the other two on the grounds that its focus
is political. not cultural. The two variants of Bubsrist
assimilationisrn properly so called (“cultural pluralism'
and 'Amazigh revivalism') may be seen as responses to
the heavy-handed Arabist assimilationism promoted by
the government. responses which address themselves. not
entirely successfully, to the argtnnents of the latter. The
liberal-democratic tendency may be regarded as a variant
of political assimilationism, in that the concept of the
Algerian nation which it implicitly presupposes is a
political rather than a cultural concept. the political
community of all Algerian citiaens. ‘L’Algerle algerienne',
Which is to be permitted to deﬁne itself in cultural terms
as it evolves in the course of its history. instead of having
a cultural definition imposed upon it in an arbitrary and
a prior! manner by its rulers at the moment of its birth.
However. the variant of political assimilations which has
emerged most forcefully in Kabylia is clearly bourgeois
in its class content. The logic of its programme necessarily
opposes it. in principle, to the socialist organization of
the Algerian economy. Thus. if it avoids the charges
which may be levelled at “cultural pluralism’ and ‘Amzlgh
revivalism‘. it faces a diluent and possibly more damag-
ing indictment from the Algerian authorities.

Conclusion

The foregoing analysis has sought to identify the
political implications and social content of the various
tendencies within the movement which manifested
itself in Kabylia last spring. It has done this in relatively
abstract terms. In reality. these tendencies are yet to
differentiate themselves clearly from one another organ-
intionally or in practice. The movement of last spring
was fairly incoherent in its postive proposals but elfec-
tively united by what it opposed.

It would be premature and imprudent to forecast how
this movement will develop. But it would be even more
imprudent to assume that it will not develop. The
problems which it reﬂects have not been resolved. What
the practical. as opposed to merely theoretical. implica-
tions of Kabyle dissidence are for the future of Algerian
socialism remains to be assessed. in order to undertake
such an assessment. it would be necessary to consider
precisely why Kabyle dissidence has manifested itself at
this point in Algeria‘s political history. This is a subject to
which I intend to return in a future article.

NOTES

' Ll Maude. 9 April [9”.
Han-Francois Mongibeatn: 'u Reveille dea Demeter. Le

62

FOR (FFICIAL US! ONLY
'OR MICIAL USE ONLY

Quotidt‘ndcl’orit. l1 AMI l9”.
'UMmb~. ll April mo.
cwtumtdmmmmwuww
oftheuudeuuohheUMo‘Won’W Wit
Um.No.7.Meyl :Ien tnet
bytheCowt'M adudITixlOttmoo
*vmwmxmm r at mu
0 t e: u.- wu .
loyu‘. the“ ‘ “otherwispdmetmalpoﬁq
tyto manna-tam to u -.
‘See. fot mole. editorie! snide. each u
Obtcun do Néo-Colonilllum' yum l0 April 19”. and
'Les Magnet ”uncanny ' ZJAprillm.udetpeo-
telly medal-ration olthe UMNM d: lain-nu AW
(UNJA) (text; published in BMW 10 Audi 19”).
’Aut’tfmpttulfhatuymthuem o!
unmtinthe/tum. tbmutmmmmthkebylh
mkedemﬂxhofrqmtheﬂtﬂabulheUthyCamut
some (the administnttvo a ital ol the Anne) but tt My
”"mmmx'mﬂﬂ'w int): “I: ionotle “the
untu- at e t t tan
otttettomotttte Answer: Wm» Maxim
"Wilma“ NAMIn‘mAh-hm
metal Ifunctioooftheptmdwmthl Kebylem
tiettnt twotm

mm AW kahuna. 'Le Coup \‘o s.“ a
&:m“.atualrlqw. No. 296-297. 2 May 19”.

' 2 May l9”. . -

' wont. to the ludtte tendency o! 0.: “Inuit:

utf$mtn°733m WWI the inﬂuence at a. Mom

motemtulch)ledbylen_bdn:;dtnm. A.
't tan. them: Gunter Kenyans .31, MW by

" At Jeanne Fevtet Ml .
oath! to \viththemqtivetmoc F8.
37337.5..m tmn'n WWW. tn an... a“ M
Outta Maud. eta, Arab: and Mn W Mm.
197:). pp. 307-320. I Itgve resulted n 'W ”M

at the F.F.S. nvoIt vhtelt. m
- ht uti- tQQQ'PoﬂMDevﬂmthAbuhzote
$33.3: tater Kt ’ Dunn Olfotd UM, w 19”.

darted. ..
. dmmmwﬂﬂT'nOtm.“MhW,
ctmgeMmtomWhth-emh
urtoft'tetlperjgﬂhﬂ’ﬁﬂlonm

t ' . .. . .

"5.81133“. aMTﬂuzang? M%)M1Cae
.' Gellw M p09 «W . .0.
’*?«Trm mtmtdmnquauatulobgulm.

ctt.. cm" 6. _ _
""xatolet Mvebcu ptqnttoent tn the legal and Mia! m
Iowans at well u m donut».

'-‘ rot mole. Qt: mt 14m (El M) (Mo!
('t‘mutmnc. Ihith ts (my Ida! Alt it In: Kabylh by our,

"wrmnt lull sum-bout Went-Mum
the mmt‘u‘yoomcorbdtoumm
ltJ". The Mutta'nl when et the mejor SONELEC vhttt any
‘ltuOutmmdtbeSONl‘l'B‘plutuDr-eleam’w
um: mm" to the automaton end a m m
men-Wu cloud M0. the Getty-l Strike

"Tuna-«tembm Muhammad”
mm W tot W In that “when
cl: \‘oumiggAwig' PM ‘

‘ m . 09.x ., .

*1 am. op. cit.. m.

”The mililﬂy lad“ of "I. “7| rebellion. El Moan-u, In .
utenhetohhe kw enditwuvhentheﬂriudthc
mum. £1 Head-J: proclaim! the [and that the remit
became mined.

”I have dimmed the tale of “about: lane: to "In:
convection o! the Mnbtlu in Kebyﬁe'. to he on ' to him: a
Maya: a Maw. C.N.R.s.. Mn-en-Ptovence. In!) (at the
’Mﬁhtioa o! the ante-t. tee Bowls. mo. op. m, «It-tum

I .

to Thin it have the piece to 15!: that. come to wide.
toned Whom the nutter. the .rs. was In no M12; mu.

§
3
g
S

63

FOR MIC!“ USE ONLY
maWW.MMMmKnbﬁcmmm
ﬁmlhepocolanial
"We! immune-I951; comaicooosly optwd
COMFWFS mothbwinchdodhbothnuwwsl’omal
3m$$mww $96M...» 3°”:
q n m an
Wt Minds-cl. MWmvuymuchlhc‘totaI
Kubric' inlhclcnlenanm
”A u of W Unm. Mohamed (‘henf
name was-wowed Minister of 1500 in President
M'sﬁmubimonnlinunhio‘ NTm'Omoopouianh
N79. Windham! m bully waived in Kabylia. vim:
KWwammadfotN-mm ..mkhhhmothn

:Nﬂﬁzhumdnndlgmglm wawwmrm
I new" ouo
led idAli nthduthaMnNozA 'll919 It
'InmoﬂytthHUAAMgochimﬂu
hapoddulotovabomdooufmiou thwlidalposiuiomo!
thallium“

"maummAwu mummzamum.

:AIMMU“ 'Wwath
:0

UMNMWWMqumm
cm 1mmg comma to me

Berta hum l M bacon undo Moo Mamri in
his various editions of Kuhyk MM w

64
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
EFFECT OF VARIOUS VARIABLES ON THE 1981-85 PLAN REVIEWED
Paris MARC'RES TROPICAUX ET MEDITERRANEENS in French No 1877, 30 Oct 81 p 2748

{Text} Economic activity continues to be slowed down by
unfavorable developments.

Recovery is expected with the effective take-off of the 1981-
1985 plan

The Horoccan General Economic Federation (CGEM). at its general assewly 6 October,
went through its traditional fall review of prevailing economic and social condi-
tions. Those conditions show several signs which might augur a certain optimise.
CGEH': president. Hr Mohamed Anor. went over then in an introductory presentation.

on which CEDIES [Soc io—Econonic Research and Information Center” has reported. before
going in greater detail into activities in the major industrial sectors. An editions
budget has been adopted this fiscal year, one which is essentially the first install-
ment in the execution of the 1981—1985 3-year plan; and there was the promulgation

of the real estate investment code; the slight increase in credit to the econoay
tolei'ated by the monetary authorities; and the new flexibility introduced into overall
imports planning. as well as the elimination of the import deposit on certain goods.

Nevertheless, the Moroccan economy. already substantially affected by the consequences
of the drought. has also suffered from the negative repercussions of the still crisis-
strilten international economic situation. President Amor said on that point that
production of cereals had substantially declined, necessitating the importation of

some 35 million hundredweight. which only added to the growing weight of oil product
imports and weighed heavily on the trade deficit. which amounted to 5.2 billion dirhams
(i ditham = approximately Pr 1.05) for the first half of the year alone. or more

than 72 percent of the deficit for the entire previous fiscal year.

Or the domestic side, President Amor expressed concern about inflationary pressures,
not ing that the general index of the cost of living. which is an official publication.
fumed retail prices had increased 10 percent in the first 10 months of the year
3: HorucCO as a whole. and 12 percent in Casablanca. This skyrocketing of the cost
living. he said. is inevitable under present domestic and external circumstances.
. .my case. it is not due to an ex-z-cssive abundance of liquidity, since in monetary
:exms there has been no deviation from orthodox practice: The money supply grew
by only 6.4 percent in the first h-Hf—year, while the volume of credits to the economy

grew only 5.10 percent. cowared to 5.8 percent for the same peri..d of the previous
year.

65

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

As for industrial and comercial activity. it seems that the current trend is one
of stabilization. or even slowdown. if one can judge from the direction of a nuaber
of significant indicators such as: Industrial investment connitments made in the
first 6 months. which are barely at the sauna level as the year before. about 730
million dirhams. cowared to 694 million dirhama. most of it coming from the private
sector; energy consmption. which also showed a decline. as seen in the 2.6 percent
fall of industrial fuel sales at the end of June; and. finally. transactions on the
Casablanca stock exchange. which decline-l 38 percent in the first 6 months.

It is the sane for various branches of the metallurgical and electrical industries.

for public works. and. to lesser degree. for the building trade. judging by cour-
cial transactions on materials for use in those sectors. and for agricultural equip-
ment. It is the sane for automobile manufacturing and sales. cement and sugar consum-
tion. the latter being particularly hard hit by the decline in activity of various

of the obsolete equipment and a shortage of metallic containers. suppliers of the
later having been caught short. Other branches of activity. hiterto considered

relatively inane have also suffered from the current circmstancsa. Such is the
case with the pharmaceuticals. textiles. copper. paper and cardboard industries.

among others. and to a lesser degree with transit storage.

particularly apparent in the metallurgical sector and the machinery and electrical
branche. with the recent creation of the national engineering offices. which are
going to bring more and note local industries into participation in big public and
semi-public projects in the fields of sugar and phosphates.

66

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
DARFUR AGRICULTURAL PROJECT TO INCLUDE SAUDI, BRITISH FINANCING
Paris MARCHES TROPICAUX ET HEDITERRANEBNS in French No 1876, 23 Oct 81 p 2686

[Tex;l Among the large-scale Sudanese land development projects. the Western
Savannah Project brings together two old projects undertaken in the Derfur region:
the Savannah Development Project, undertaken in 1977 with joint IDA-Saudi Develop-
ment Fund financing; and the South Darfur Rural Development project, undertaken
with British Overseas Development Administration (00A) and Abu Dhabi Fund financing.
0f the total coat of $21.5 million for the new project. the IDA will finance $12
million, the ODA $1.2 million, the Saudi Developmnnt Fund $6.6 million. and the
Sudanese Government $3.9 million.

The most important of the actions undertaken within the framework of the two pre-
viously existing projects had been the creation of the Western Savannah Development
Corporation, which will remain the prime contractor for the new project.

The long-term aim of the Western Savannah Project is to improve the economic potential
of the west of the Sudan, stopping the erosion of natural resources and introducing
new tenant farming methods. Water supply problems will be dealt with, in particular,
by the restoration of numerous wells, abandoned either because they had run dry as

the result of heavy use, or because they lacked pumping equipment.

The different sections of this project will be among the most important: $2.9

million for the purchase of water supply equipment; $2.7 million for the purchase of
construction materials and equipment; $2 million for vehicle purchases; and $3 million
for foreign consultant and training budget payments.

The British organization Huntings has been chosen as the consulting engineering firm
for this vast project.

COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux et Cie Paris 1981.

943a
CSO: 6519/46

67

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SUDAN

BRIEFS

OLD SUAKIN PORT STUDY-The Italian company Bonifica has just delivered to the
Sudanese authorities the feasibility study concerning the Iodernication of the old
port of Suakin (01d Sunkin). Modernized, this port will acconmodate snall-tonnage
ships that trade only with the Red Sea; the capacity envisaged is 1.5 nillion tons
per year. It should be recalled that the execution of the project. costing $50
million, is being financed in part by the EDF. At the same time. the development of
a new port (New Suakin) is invisaged. [Text] [Paris HARCHES TROPICAUX ET MEDITERRA-
NEANS in French No 1875, 16 Oct 81 p 2618] [OOPYRIGBTL Rene Moreux et Cie Paris
1981] 9434

CZECH COOPERATION ACCORD--A cooperation accord, reached between the Sudanese Ministry
of Irrigation and the Czechoslovakian Hydrological Institute in the field of irriga-
tion, provides, among others, for joint studies in this sector and for the training
of Sudanese technicians. [Text] [Paris MARCHES TROPICAUX ET HEDITBRRANEENS in
French No 1876. 23 Oct 81 p 2686] [COPYRIGHT: Rene Moreux et Cie Paris 1981] 9‘36

INTERNATIORAL CATERIRG PIRH-The group Albert Aboulela International has just
opened an agency in Kartoun. This transnational group, which enploys about 16,000
persons. has, for irs eajor activities. the supplying of food to organisation: such

as hospitals, airports, large work sites, etc., management of hotels and camps. and
food distribution. It is recalled. in Khartoum, that while it the present time

there are no air catering companies in the Sudan, companies such as the trench firm
Peschaud supply companies carrying out large-scale works. [Text] [Paris HARCBES
TROPICAUX ET MEEITERRANEENS in French No 1876, 23 Oct 81 p 2686] [COPYRIGHT: Bane
Horsux et Cie Paris 1981] 9434

PRESIDENTIAL PLANE FROM FRANCE--In accordance with a contract signed last August,
the French company Dassault will provide the president of the Sudanese Republic with

a Falcon 50 airplane. to be delivered at the end of 1982. The amount of the contract

$11 million. [Text] [Paris HARCEES TROPICAUX ET MEDITERRANEENS in French No 1876,
23 Oct 81 p 2686] [COPYRIGHT: Rene Moreux et Cie Paris 1981] 9636

650: b519/46

68

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FORtOFFﬂﬂAl.USE(NNLY

TUNISIA

PORT EXPANSION AGREEMENTS SIGNED UITN FIG
Paris HARCHES TROPICAUX ET HEDITBRRANBENS in French No 1878. 6 Nov 81 p 2813

[Tex57 Tunisia and the Federal Republic of Germany signed in Tunis. on_29
October. two loan agreements for a total of 53.3 million German merks [Dg7 (about
11.7 million dinars).

According to the terms of the first agreement. the Reconstruction Credit Bank (KIN).
a west German bank for development and reconstruction, will grant to the Bank of
Economic Development of Tunisia (EDIT) a D“ 18.3 million loan (about 6 million
dinars), guaranteed by the Tunisian state and intended to foster small and medium-
size industries. The agreement was aigned:at the headquarters of the Directorate
General of International Cooperation of the Tunisian Foreign Affairs Ministry by
Habib Bourguiba Jr. president and director-general of the BDET; by Dr Drantner.
member of the If" board of directors and director general of that bank and by Ahmed
Dan Arfa. head of the Directorate General of International Cooperation.

The second agreement involves a loan of DH 35 million (about 7.7 million diners) to
finance the expansion of the port of Mahdia (160 kms south of Tunis) and to improve
the port's infrastuctures. It was signed by Ahmed Den Arfa and Dr Brantner.

Minister or Information Tahar Belkhodja chaired a meeting held at the Cooperation
Club of Hahdia which was attended by Dr Brantner and German Hauptmann. economic
adviser of the FRG Embassy in Tunis, and by a large group of officials from the
fishing and shipping sectors. During this meeting, the minister recalled that the
expansion project for the port of Hehdia goes back to 5 years. This project will
make it possible to triple the current capacity of the port. Hbrk will start next
March and will last 2 years.

The signature of the new loan agreements gave both partners an opportunity to extol
the successful development and import of the financial and technical aid vhich the
FRO has given to the development of Tunisia. Over the last 20 years, Tahar
Belkhodja said, the FRG has contributed a total of 260 million diners.

v)" his part Ahmed Ben Arfa rem’nded the audience that the financial agreements
just signed were based on the governnental agreement endorsing the work of the last
Tunisian-German Joint Commission which met in Tunis on ll and 13 December 1980.

A list of projects was submitted to the West Germans by representatives of the
Ministry of Plan and Finance. Ben Arfa explained that these projects, with an
estimated cost of DH «00 million (90 million diners), included, among others. an

69
FOI1OFFKJAI.USE(NNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

irrigation project for Ras-Jebel and Raf-Raf. a project to bring drinking water
to rural areas in Central and South Sahel and a development project for the

Siliana Valley.

We remind you that on 27 Hatch this year we published an article reviewing rela-
tions between Tunisia and the PRC (means TROPICAL!!! ET MEDITERRANEENS No 1866,

pp 830,831).

COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux et Cie Paris 1981.

8796
C50: 4519/42

70

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
VEGETABLE OIL PRODUCTION OUTLINE!)
Paris HARCIIBS TROPICAUX ET "animus in French No 1877. 1) Oct 81 p 2767

[Text] Hr Abderrahmane ‘rlili. president and general manager of the Tunisian National
Vegetable Oils Office. [ONE] was received at the palace in Carthage 22 October by
President bourguiba. He presented the president a report on vegetable oil production

this year. and received guidelines from the president on ssssures to increase olive
production.

In a press conference he held the same day at the ministry of agriculture. reported
in the daily paper L'ACTION. Hr Tlili said that Tunisian olive oil production for
the 1980—1981 season amounted to between 150.000 and 165.000 tons. clearly greater
than the yield of the past two seasons (see an of 5 December 1980. p 3332). The
ONH share. that is the tonnage collected by the Office. was 116,500-115,000 tons.
During the same season, om! gave advances on the order of 515 millimes per kilo to
oil processors. The Office made export comnitmsnts amounting to 76.000 tons. of
which 72.000 tons have already been couercialised and the remaining 4.000 tone is
to be exported next month. Hr Abderrahmane ‘l'lili also mentioned the fact that own
had for the first time been able to honor its export connitssnts without resorting
to the traditional middlenen. despite the problens the Office had with the European
Community countries.

In addition. a price increase of 9S millines per kilo was disbursed to all sellers
in April.

The 1981-1982 season is not as promising as the season just past. In fact. overall
production on the order of 100,000 tone is predicted. ONE will be responsible for
marketing 80.000 tons. This decline in olive oil production is basically due to
unfavorable clinatic conditions; the dry season has lasted longer than "normal."
Despite that situation. however. advances will be between 500 and 585 millimes. depend-
ing on the acidity of the oil. This. explained Hr Abderrahmane 'rlili. imlies that

the level of exports coming out of the current season should be at least equal to
last year's.

Rugarding the talks with the country members of the European Community. the ONE presi-
dent said a lasting solution. which takes into account the interests of both sides.
would be found in 1982.

71

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

On another subject. contrary to the rumors being spread recently about a possible
shortage of vegetable oils in Tunisia. ONE has a sufficient reserve stock to meet
consumer demands for a 3-month period. Hr Tlili added that the rumors in question

had no other purpose than to force distributors :5 stockpile their products. With
that in mind. the Office has decided to make the new olive-oil canning process begun
18 months ago generally available. Thus the plant at Sousse will go into operation
next March. or, at the latest. 1 June 1982. and will be capable of canning some 30.000
tons of olive oil. or 60 percent of consumption. In addition. the chaida plant

will supply 10.000 tons of canned olive oil. The oil office is also planning on
building another canning plant at Sfax.

0n the question of whether Arab markets are the only outlet for Tunisian olive oil.

Hr Abderrahmane Tlili said that those markets could absorb a portion of the nation's
production. but that the solution to the problem would lie in the conquest of new
markets. or in an increase in domestic consumption. Meanwhile. it would be prefer-

able to find adequate solutions with the EEC. However. that may be. 0N! has focused

its efforts on the Jordanian and Syrian markets. which are traditionally large consumers
of olive oil. Syria. for example. is going to import close to 6.000 tons of olive

oil during the 1981-1982 season. while several years ago the volume of Tunisian vege-
table oil exports to that cauntry was virtually nil.

Olive oil accounts for between 10 and 20 percent of the oil sold in bulk to Tunisian
consumers. and it is definitely not declining. said the ON“ president. Quite the
contrary. in some instances it is showing a tendency to increase. as was the case

in 1974. a year during which the Office had problems marketing lunisisn production

on the European markets. Hith the modernization of our installations. Mr Abderrahmane
Tlili concluded. we will be able to export almost all of the nation's production

in canned for bottled form.

COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux et Cie Paris 1981.

9516
080: 4519/61

72

FOR‘OFFKJAI.USEZONLY
UNITED KINGDOM'S HEATH ADVISES "EST ON SAHARA CONFLICT
Pmuzm London nu: was in English to Dec 81 p 10
[Article by Edward Heath: 'th we Must Intervene in This Desert War")

[Text] The Middle East is not the only part of the Arab world where a terri—
torial dispute has divided Arab states. endangered moderate leaders whose
survival is important for the West, and fomented instability. There is another
conflict where similar dangers are looming. It is the struggle between Morocco

and the POLISARIO Front, backed by Algeria, for sovereignty over the Western
Sahara.

This vast expanse of desert. formerly known as the Spanish Sahara, borders the
north-west coast of Africa and is rich in minerals, especially phosphate. It was
partitioned and occupied by Morocco and Mauritania immediately after Spain
formally withdrew its colonial administration from the territory in February 1976.
From the outse: the occupying powers were challenged by the POLISARIO a vigorous
and highly astute guerrilla movement determined to win independence.

After a fierce struggle Mauritania finally withdrew from the war in 1978,
following the overthrow of that country's leadership in a military coup. Morocco
was then left to continue the war on her own.

why should this little known conflict on the periphery of the Arab world be of
any real concern to the West? There are at least three reasons why I believe
the West should take a more constructive interest in its resolution.

First the position of King ﬂassan II of Morocco, who has long been a true friend
of the West and a staunch supporter of Western policy in Africa and the Middle
East, may be seriously threatened by the continuation of the conflict. The king
has thrown all his prestige behind a massive war effort which shows no sign of
producing a victory, which has resulted in the deaths of many hundreds, if not
thousands, of his soldiers and which he himself declares is costing the

:ountry 800,000 pounds daily. or 40 per cent of the national budget.

Second, any unsettling effect which the war might have on the position of

King Hassan could drastically alter the balance of power in the region in
favour of radical leader. and are opposed to moderate Arab regimes and to the
West. There can he no doubt that this would facilitate the fanatical purposes
of President al-Qadhdhafi of Libya and endanger the already difficult position
of the leaders of Sudan and Egypt.

73
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
IWJR‘OFFICIAL UShICNNLY

[he unnerving effect which these developments in turn would almost certainly
have on the vital oil-producing nations of the Gulf could only do further
damage to the security of the region and to the prospects of an Arab-Israeli
settlement. The Arab world is now emotionally, politically and ideologically

such a web that any radicalism or unrest can spread like wildfire and endanger
the position of moderate leaders elsewhere.

Support From Moscow, Libya

Third, the longer the war continues and the more expensive it becomes for both
sides, the more the POLISARIO may be forced to look to Libya and the Soviet

Union for support. Indeed, it is already believed to receive considerable
backing from these two countries.

It is a telling commentary on the short-term perspectives of our leaders in
the was: that few of them have ever acknowledged the potentially grave danger
of failing to seek an urgent political solution in the Sahara. Once again
they seem unprepared sericusly to confront a looming threat to our interests.

Two alibis are often used to justify this inaction. The first holds that since
King Hassan 11's aim to control the entire Western Sahara would have to be
abandoned in any negotiated solution to the conflict that now seems possible,

a diplomatic approach would simply hasten the threat to his position we wish to
avoid.

I cannot accept this argument. King Hassan is by all reliable accounts a
popular leader in his own country. If a compromise with the POLISARIO could
be found soon, he would be able to show his people a gain for their sacrifices-

something which will become increasingly difficult the longer the war is allowed
to drag on.

Since outright military victory for Mcrocco is almost inconceivable, the alterna-
tives to a negotiated solution are likely to be worse. The dangers of the first
of these alternatives--military dafeat-need no elaboration. The second-~s
series ot unilateral concessions by Morocco during the course of a continuing
war--could be almost as serious. Such a strategy might hasten defeat for Morocco

rather than postpone it because it will embolden the POLISARIO'a forces rather
than pacify them.

This indeed seems to have been the result of King Hassan' acceptance this summer
of a referendum for the Saharawis on the future of the territory, for this
implicitly conceded their distinctiveness as a people as well as being a clear
response to their military effectiveness. Yet, the third alternative-~in which
the two sides are locked indefinitely in a position of stalemate-~is hardly
more encouraging. The demands in lives and resources which this would make

of the Moroccan people will inevitably come to seem increasingly senseless to
them, and as a result any eventual compromise which the king is able to strike
with the POLISARIO will seem less and less of a reward the longer it is delayed.

The second alibi of the West for its failure to encourage an urgent and realistic
political settlement is that to do so might irretrievably endanger our relations

7‘

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
with Morocco. It is true that a diplomatic initiative by the Heat might generate
temporary strains in the relationship; but nobody has convincingly demonstrated
that the common interests and values which bind Morocco and the west together

are not sufficiently deep-rooted to prevail in the end and to assure the

continuity of our close cooperative relationship. In my view. there is every
reason to believe that they are.

Mediation and Source of Ideas

It would be impossible. and certainly undesirable. for the Heat to insist on any
particular solution or path to a solution. But we can be of crucial importance
as a mediator and as a source of ideas for a settlement.

Here, the EEC has a most important role to play. Both the new socialist govern-
ment in France and the ruling Social Democratic Party in Heat Germany have good
working relations with Algeria and a considerable amount of support for the
POLISARIO within their ranks. In addition, the governments of France and Germany
have a history of friendship with Morocco, to which they have extended a great deal
of military and economic assistance.

Britain, too, has excellent relations with King Haasan. Taken together. this puts

the European Community in a promising position for giving a lead in finding a
diplomatic solution.

The United States, by contrast, does not have such a balanced relationship with
the two sides. Nor are the POLISARIO, Algeria or Morocco as familiar with
America as they are with the old colonial powers of Europe.

It is, however, a prerequisite to any mediatory role for Europe in the Saharan
conflict that we should initiate a dialogue with the POLISARIO at the highest
official level. There is no convincing argument against doing so, either on

the grounds of constitutional principle or on the grounds of political expediency.
Europe is. after all. busily courting the PLO; some of our most senior officials
and political leaders have engaged in extensive talks with it. and we have
insisted that the PLO should participate fully in the Middle East peace process.

To talk to the POLISARIO would /not/ lslantlines denote boldface as published]
be to recognize the state over which it claims sovereignty. just as our dialogue
with the PLO does not recognize its right to sovereignty over the territory
which it claims on behalf of the Palestinians.

The incessant threat of turmoil in the Middle East should have alerted us to the
ptulound danger of allowing conflict in vital regions to smoulder unchecked

or of making ourselves irrelevant to their solution by a policy which eschews
talks with one side or the other. History would surely judge us poorly

if all the lessons which the Palestinian problem has so painfully taught us were
now to be lost in the increasingly stormy sands of the Sahara.

COPYRIGHT: Times Newspapers Limited. 1981

C50: 4500/66 END

75

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY