APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/00: CIA-RDP02-00080R0001 00030001 -0
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA—RDP82-00850R000100030061-0

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/8358
28 March 1979

TRANSLATIONS ON NEAR EAST AND NORTH AFRICA
(FOUO 11/79)

U. S. JOINT PUBLICATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100030061-0
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers. periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines. editorial reports. and material enclosed in brackets
[l are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item. or following the
last line of a brief. indicate how the original information was
processed. "here no processing indicator is given. the infor.
nation was sumrized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliteratrd are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.5. Government.

COPYRIGHT MRS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
HATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE TIMT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICU‘L USE ONLY.
3. Recipient‘s Acceuiua No.

   
  
 

LR N.

TMNSIA IONS ON HER MST AND NORTH AFRICA. (F000 11/79)

  

' pou no
28 March 1979

O.

O. Paola-m. Oman-nun Nun ul Mane l0. Prehet/Tull'wh Lea M.
Joint Publications Research Service

1000 North Globe ROM II. COMtKi/Guil No.

Arlington, Virginia 22201

 

   
    
     
   
 

l2. Spot-noun; Ocauuamea New end mm.

 
   
 
 

A- above

'3. Supple-neon" Nun

 
 

 

l6. About“! e

11m aerial report contains information on socio-econonic. government. political.
and technical developments in the countries of the Near East and North Africa.

I . Key ‘ocda and Occupant A-elyeu.‘ h- Denny."

Political Science _Inter-Arab Affaira __l.ibya __Sultanate
Sociology Lﬂorth African ’Juuritania of Oman
Economic: Affairs _X_Horocco ___Syrie
Culture (Social Sciences) _Afghanistan _People'a Deno- _1'unisia
Ethnology _Algeria cratic Republ ic _Unitcd Arab
Geography _3ahrain of Yemen Emirates
Technological _£gypt _Pcreian Gulf _Hcatern
Hilitary Sciences _x_lran Area Sahara

_Iraq _Qater _‘lcnen Arab

m. “'“ﬂﬂ"’°ﬂ*‘““ 7“" ___laree1 __Saudi Arabia Republic

__Jordan __Spaniah ﬂorth

_Kuuait Africa

__l.ebanon __Sudan

I'c-COSATvall/Cuup 50. SC. SK. 15

II. Ava-labgi-I, Stun-om
For Official Use Only. .
Limited Sunber of Copies Available From JPRS. m

on. one-u uo'eE'a-"m ”cove“ new”:

‘I’NS ’0!“ MAY IE RENOMCED

ll. 30. on PI‘O‘
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/E
28 Marc&

TRANSLATIONS 0N NEAR EAST AND NORTH AFRICA
(P000 11/79)

CONTENTS
NORTII AFRICAN AFFAIRS

Poltosrto's Tan-Ton Attsck Renown Algerian-Moroccan Tension
(MIC 16. 18 '.b 79) oosesseoosososesoeeooeosoosssgo

IRAN

Leftists Defy Rho-emu In Second Round of Revolution
(Georsss Mount; PARIS rim-ax, 2 Mar 79)
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

mm AFRICAN ”AIRS

POLISARIO'S nil-TN! ATTACK arms WAN-MECCA}! TENSION
Madrid M10 16 in Spanish is reb 79 pp 4849

[Text] The Algerian military now control the government
thanks to Colonel Chadli's election as president. The
Algerian cossaitment to the Polisario Front [People's
Front for the Liberation of the Western Sahara) and the
Saharan military successes against Ibrocco are increasing
the possibility of a direct confrontation between Algiers
and Rabat.

The process of electing the Algerian president took place against the back-
drop of the events of the war in the Sahara. The n-ing of sendjedid Chadli
to succeed Houari Boumediene shows the Algerian Arly's predoninance over the
other groups that were contending for power.

All the groups within Algeria's rm were agreed. however, in their support
of the Polisario Front in its struggle against Horocco. But madli's assup-
tion of the Algerian presidency as a representative of the army provided the
Saharans with decisive support at a time when the Polisario Front was launch-
ing its so-called I'liouari Bounediene“ offensive against Morocco.

The military actions ended with the Occupation of a Moroccan city—Tan-Tan--
in an operation in which the Polisario Pront used sophisticated weapons and
demonstrated extraordinary maneuvering ability. HorOcco placed direct respon-
sibility for the attack on Algeria and announced that in the future it would
exercise the "right to pursue' the guerrilla fighters into Algerian terri-
tory.

With Hauritania out of the Saharan War, the Algerian-backed Polisario Front
is now operating on a single front. Saharan leaders have also announced
that from now on they will take their actions "all the way into Moroccan
territory.“ This course of events sense to presage a further increase in
the danger of a direct military confrontation between ibrocoo and Algeria.

Ten days ago Algeria accused abrocco before the UN Security council of acts
of sabotage and of clandestine am ship-ents. The Polisario Pront's military

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

successes only increase the possibility of large-scale Horoccan action that
could force a reaction by Algeria. The point is that the political process
in Algeria now has a major protagonist: the Armed Forces.

Following a series of comings and goings, intense rmr caspaigns. and color-
ful interpretations by the Western press, and shortly after Algeria's Fourth
rm Oongress got underway on Saturday 27 January. the figure of mlonsl chadli
stood out clearly as the choice for successor to the presidency.

in the early hours of the deliberations. the participants had alined tha-
selves in definite caaps.

But poweruand even the delegates to the congress who were attending a party
meeting for the first tine knew it—was in fact in the hands of the 600 rap-
resentatives of the Armed rorces and the eight lee-hers of the Revolutionary
Council. All the military were dressed unostentatiously as civilians. Every
notable infomnt in Algiers had identified Chadii as the mst certain candi-
date for the presidency, not only because of his stand as a uoderate but also
because he was the army's strong man.

As cos-landing officer of the Oran Region for 15 years and aouediene's right-
hand officer--he had fought alongside Boundiene in the war for independence--
Chadii had become a key san without whom no decision would be sade.

And in the end, Chadii had to play that decisive role. The weight of the
military manifested itself when the tile came to reconcile the two trends
that had appeared throughout the sessions.

On the one hand. there was the group calling itself "pragutic.’ Observers
identified its leader as Abdslaris Bouteflika. Bounediene's minister of for-
eign affairs. And on the other hand, there was the I)!" radial group headed
by Col Hohaeused Yehiaoui.

Bouteflikana conrade-in-arus of the late Boundiene from the very first--

is seen by his political opponents as a I'reforuuist with pro-Western inclina-
tions.‘ And in fact, the uinister of foreign affairs had been the only one
after independence to succeed in winning General De Gauile's confidence and
establishing negotiating terns with France that were not entirely unfavorable
for the former French colony. Colonel Yahiaoui. according to his critics,

is “an extremist who advocates lslnic socialise.” a line in which he is
reportedly supported by Libya, Cuba. and the Soviet Union.

As a result, the only way to avoid a direct confrontation was to choose an
"alternative providing revolutionary continuity," which is what Colonel
Chadii offered.

But the army's position was not mnolithic, either, since the young officers
preferred Yahiaoui. In the end. the factor that decisively tipped the scales
in Chadli's favor was the colonel's prestige and the power he holds. Being

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in connand of the Second Hilitary Region means, in practice, having 65 per-
cent of the Algerian Army under his orders.

The choice of the man to succeed bomediene was not the only area of friction
and debate during the sessions. The most fiery debates concerned reform of

the structures of power and the shape of the new line that would characterize
the next stage of the Algerian Revolution.

A series of reforms eventually won the approval of the majority. and it was
agreed to implement a number of masures provided by the 1967 constitution,
one such measure being the appointment of a prime minister. The president
will also be assisted in his achinistration by a still-undefined number of

vice presidents. The final con-unique vaguely mentions "several' without
specifying exactly how many.

Chadli was able to defeat Yahiaoui's followers, who wanted to make the latter
secretary general of the party if he was not elected president, but their pro-

posal failed, and the post of secretary general retains linked to that of the
chief of state.

The Algerian media consistently placed more emphasis on the changes effected
within the party than on the actual choice of c‘hadli. The new makeup of the
Political Bureau, which has 26 matters. is a clear indication of the balance
that prevails. Neither Yahiaoui's radicals nor Bouteflika's liberals have
been excluded from it. That delicate balance would seem to contradict the
precipitate rejoicing noted in some allopean capitals. which saw Yahiaoui as
Moscow's man and viewed Chadli as a driving force of Algeria's 'Hesternisa-
tion.‘

Old-New Names

while the ma congress served to prove that power continues to rest almost
exclusively in the hands of the army. it also confirmed an old thesis upheld
by Boumediene: the party is the 'transmission belt.“ since the army repre-
sents not only the backbone of the nation but also its 'political soul."

A phase of collegial power is now beginning. with Chadli in the position of
top leadership and the Armed Forces exercising unquestionable tutelage.
Following the referendum of Hednesday the 7th. there is still a question
mark with regard tr. two key posts: assistant secretary of the rm and prime
minister. The latter might be chosen by the National Assembly.

Beyond the speculation about names, it became increasingly clear throughout
the sessions of the congress that no matter who the candidate was. 'the path
to socialism in Algeria is new irreversible." to quote Chadli's statuent
when he was proclaimed president. In the elmst 2 mnths since Bomdiene's
death, there has been nothing to indicate that there will be any important
changes in established policy on either the domestic or the foreign level.

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL l'SE OﬂLY

Chadli will have to try to hold on to the position that Bounediem had won
along the leaders of the Third World as a result of the momentum imparted to
the Moveaent or Nonalined Nations: he will have to renain an ideological ally
of the socialist bloc while simultaneously keeping the United States and
France as his country's principal conercial customers.

Also vital will be his role in the delicate balance of the mghreb at a tine
when. after 3 years of war in. the Hestern Sahara, a tew pieces are beginning
to change position.

Since the military coup that overthrew President Moktar Ould Daddah in July
of last year, Mauritania has not seemed disposed to continue its connitnent
to a war that it is in no position to pursue. since the unilateral cease-
fire decreed by the Polisario Front a few days after the coup, Huritania

has been engaged in dialog with the Saharan representatives in search of a

path to peace. at the same tine. the noroccan Any has had to withdraw the
9,000 aen it had stationed in Mauritanian territory at the request of that
country's government.

The Poiisario Front-«hoes Hinister of Internation Sale- Ould Salek was the
only foreign representative invited to the rm Conquer-last week presented
to the press the horoccan prisoners captured during the attack on Tan-Tan on
28 January. morocco tried at first to deny that the attack had taken place.
then downplayed its importance, and finally said that it had killed 200 near-
bers of the Polisario Front during the battle. Speaking to cum lo, a
Saharan representative rejected the noroccan claia, explaining that if it
were true, the 'hlawi regine would at least have exhibited the corpses.

that we can say. without as yet putting our money on either of those two
claims, is that Tan-Tan sens to have revived tension in North Africa and
renewed the friction between Algiers and ﬂabat.

WPYRIGﬂ': 1979 M10 16

11798
C50: 4410

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

IRAN

LBFTISTS DEFY KNOHEYNI IN SECOND ROUND OF REVOLUTION
Paris PARIS HATCH in French 2 Mar 79 pp 67. 81

[Article by Georges Henent: "I Have Seen Thousands of Fedayeen Defying
Khomeyni”)

[Text] It did not take long. The second round of the revolution has begun-
and much sooner than expectedu-between the Ayatollah's religious republic
and the lay and Marxist forces of the left. For one side. the revolution
is ever. since the Shah has been dethroned and the law of the Korea is

the law of the land. For the other side. nothing has been achieved. since
the state of society remains unchanged and the dictatorship of the pro-
letariat has not replaced the dictatorship of the tyrant. We have a dis-
metric contradiction. which threatens to produce, at any moment. a fresh
eruption. On Friday 1 saw the duel engaged. That morning the city was
shaken on its awakening by the atupefying news: "Pour generals were
executed during the night." They were the chief of Savsk. the commander
of the airborne troops and the military governors of Teheran and Ispahan.
the four most detested figures of the imperial regime. All the details

of the execution were revealed. it took place in the courtyard of the
school where Ayatollah is housed and practically under his windows. The
four generals were lined up facing the well. their wrists tied and their
eyes bandaged. A young moudjahid. chosen by the families of the martyrs.
approached them from behind and fired a bullet from a pistol into the neck

of each one. Then bursts of machinegun fire hit the bodies lying on the
ground. out we know practically nothing about the trial which preceded
the execution. He know only that the four men were seated under a sign
quoting a passage from the Koran declaring that he who has killed must be
killed. He know. too. that the tribunal was composed half and half of
religious and jurists. and that some of the parents of the martyrs were
present at the judgment. But how was the trial prepared? Did the accused
even have a defender? All of that remains a mystery. Which opens up truly
alarming horizons on the concepts of the Islamic republic in matters of
justice. In fact. these four summary executions had only one objective:
to calm the leftist opposition at least for a time. But. exactly the
opposite was to happen. Early in the afternoon a procession of 20.000
fudnycen crossed the city and headed toward the Ayatollah's residence.

5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Reading the procession was a portrait of the Iman. affectionately framed
with csrnations. But behind. banners announced their real colors: "Ha
want an army of the people.” "This army is poisoned.” For 4 long hours.
the demonstrators besieged General Khomeyni'a headquarters. Nothing dia-
couraged them. Neither the interminable wait imposed on them. nor the
black muzzlea of the machineguns which the Ayatollah's Praetorian guard
trained on them. From the crowd-~which included numerous opposition
officers in uniform-~rose slogans and increasingly virulent invectives.
People explained to us: "Khomeyni is always talking of the future. but

we must act now. we respect the Ayatollah as a religious leader. But we
demand the right to criticize him as a political leader. "is government
is composed of bourgeois and national capitalists. He shall never accept
the Bazargans and Sandjabis who are owners of factories. They executed
sane generals. but it was to shut their mouths.“ Stamping their feet. they
chanted: "He went to talk to the Ayatollah. Khomeyni must listen to the
people." Finally. a loudspeaker answered them: the Ayatollah cannot
receive them. He has been ill for the last 3 daya--which is a shameless
lie since a morning communique had announced that the Iman had just re-
celved a group of 180 person-but he gave them assurance that the Islamic
republic will respect all cpinione. In the meantime. they must realize
that this government is provisional and that its decisions are not binding
on the future. This waffle was received with jeers and catcalls. The
demonstration continued for a long time thereafter. but finally the demon-
strators dispersed into the night. Thefedayccnhad not seen the Ayatollah.
But they had achieved their real objective. The myth had suffered its first
blow. This sacrilegious show made a big impression in the city.

The next day. Saturday. was to be a test-day: it was the day set by the
Ayatollah for the return to work. Beginning early in the morning. the
Bazaar had resumed its usual folkloric appearance. The merchants were all
there. crouching over their stocks of food. carpets. or spices. amber
beads in hand. munching sunflower seeds while keeping an eye on the
customers. For them the revolution was over. It had had only one objec-
tive: to overthrow the Shah's government and the new class of businessmen
it had engendered. The Bazaar keepers had supported the revolution with
their money. And now they meant to recover their stake. To start things
going again. they were offering candies and pistachio nuts to passerbys.
And interminable lines stretched out at the doors of several restaurants.
where the owners had vowed to offer a free kebab to one and all in the
event of victory. Outside housewives rushed to buy fruit and vegetables
displayed in pyramids. The reappearance of shaving cream made the men
appear more presentable. after days of unkempt beards. But the level of
business remained low.

As the result of the general strike, the lack of wages was felt everywhere.
Yet the Bazaar could still create an illusion. In the major services.
banking. insurance. transportation. the doors remained closed. For techni-
cal reasons. it was stated officially: it would take several days more

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

to put the machinery back into operation. But in a number of factories
around Tehernn people had roundly refused to go back to work: there would
be no return to work until the government had clearly stated its int tions.
And in many places. the trade unions had tied their attitude to the :Eahr
ganization of the army. in the way the fedsycenwere demanding. And in
Abadan. one of the most strategic centers. oil production reeained at
700.000 barrels a day. that is to say just enough production to meet the
needs of the country. As for exports. the unions were demanding a complete
renegotiation of foreign contracts before turning the pump on again. And
to all of these uncertainties were added the convulsions which had been
felt throughout the week in several big cities of the nation. Such as the
one in Tabriz. where after fighting which had resulted in several hundred
deaths. the army was practically split into three sections: one which had
rallied to the Ayatollah. another which had made common cause with the
[edayeennnd a third which had taken to the marquis with its tribes who
remained loyal to the Shah. To this was to be added the insecurity pre-

vailing by the insurrection having resulted in an increase of banditry
of all kinds.

Such was the nation. ravaged. divided and threatened. where Yasir 'Arafat
was to land Sunday evening: an 'Arafat who had seldom been seen to demon-
strate his joy with such exuberance. It is true that the change in iran
represents an enormous asset for the Palestinian cause. The aoney from
Iranian oil might. in fact. permit the PLO [Palestine Liberation Organisa-
tion] to stand a little aloof from its usual "hard" or 'hmderate" financiers.
The problem now is to know with what camp the Ayatollah means to aline his
country. And there. too. the Iranian fedayeen will play a decisive role.
They have already chosen their camp: on Friday one of their leaders re-
vealed to me that the objective of the attack on the U.S. Embassy was to
exchange the captured hasricans for soae Palestinian prisoners held in
Israel. A bluff or a reality? In any case. as 'Arafat himself has said.
events in Iran represent for this already dangerously agitated part of the
world. "a real cataclyam" in the midst of which the dice are still rolling.
For the moeent the only winners in the affair appear indeed to be the
Russians. Moscow equally feared two things: the Shah's victory. which
would nave strengthened the American positions in the region; and his de-
feat. to the extent that it would have resulted in the establishment of a
power islemic republic. on the borders of Soviet Islam. whose nationalist
tendencies are becoming increasingly strong. Today. we see the Russians
winning on both scores at once. The Shah's government has collapsed and
the Islamic state is already demonstrating difficulty in ruling. From now
on Hoscow has only to wait for the third round. its own.

COPYRIGHT: 1979 par Cogedipresse. S.A.

8339
CSO: 4800

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MOROCCO

BR! BPS

ABU DHABI wan-4h: Abu Dhabi Fund tor Arab Economic Developncnt (FADEA)

on 6 February granted Horocco a loan of 1,875,000 diners, about 7.25 :11-
lion dollars. for a 3-year tern with interest at 3.75 percent, then 5.5 pct-
cent and 6.75 percent. The president-director general of the Moroccan Na-
tional Bcononic Development Bank (BRIDE) was in Abu Dhabi 4-5 February. [Text]
[Parts MARCHBS TROPICAUX E‘r mnmmews in French 16 Feb 79 p 442]

C80: 4400 - END -

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY