FOR OFFlCIAl. USE ONLY

JPRS L/10053

15 October 1981

Near East/North Africa Report

(FOUO 36/81)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books. but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Hords or name; preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.5. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAHS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
NEAR EAST/NORTH AFRICA REPORT

(POUO 36/81)

CONTENTS

INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS

UK Journalist Diacuaaoo Arab Gold Narkat
(David Harsh; FINANCIAL TIMES, 28 Sap 81) .................

AFGHANISTAN

Soviet Newman Term mjahedin Dandita, Auaaaina
(I. Andronov; PARIS HATCH. ll Sop 81)

IRAN

Anti-Regine Role of "Great hate". Laftiata Diacuaaed
(Ghazi Sarhane; APRIQUE-ASIE. 31 Aug-l3 Sap 81) . . . . . . .

Role of Religioua Peroonalitiea, lbouyni Analyzed
(Hedi Dhoukar; APRIQUB-ASIE, 21 Aug-13 Sol) 81) . . . . . . . . . . . .

Briefs
Ambulances Transport Minister.
FOR OF?1(1AI.IERE(NVLY

INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS

UK JOURNALIST DISCUSSBS ARAB GOLD MARKET

PH238131 London FINANCIAL TIMES in English 28 Sep 81 FINANCIAL TIMES Survey: Arab
Banking and Finance, p V

[Article by David Harsh: "Oil Countries' Demand for Gold Strengthening World
Bullion Price"]

[Text] A resurgence of demand for gold from the wealthy Arab oil producers has
been an important factor behind the recovery in the international bullion price
during the last two months.

Following the sharp drop from the peak price of $850 per ounce in January last
year to around $390 in early August, many of the private Arab investors who had
piled into the bullion market in the hope of making quick gains had good reason
to feel demoralised. One London precious metal dealer tells of disappointed
Telex messages sent to him this summer by a key Middle East client addressed to
"the big bear"-ref1ecting anguish at the constant news of falling prices.

Since then the mood has changed perceptibly, with the price regaining the $650
level by mid-September. Demand both from investor, and the jewellery industry
has Picked up as market participants came round to the view suddenly that gold
had been oversold. Some official Arab institutions which emerged as heavy buyers
in 1979 and 1980 have also shown revived interest.

Reflecting the solidity of physical demand. particularly from Saudi Arabia. many
jewellery fabricating factories in northern Italy-~the traditional supplier to
the Arab market--are reported to be fully booked until the end of the year. This
is a marked contrast to last year, when Italian jewellers were hard hit by a
slump in orders and heavy flows of dishoarded metal from the Gulf.

Pattern

The pattern of buying. however. seems to have shifted compared with the latter
half of 1979, when many Arab merchants and private sector consortia threw them-
selves enthusiastically into both the gold and silver market-and had their
fingers badly burnt when the price subsequently slumped.

This time the emphasis is far more on trading rather than one-way buying. Inves-
tors are careful to prevent their positions from becoming overexposed. A series
of quick-moving incursions into the market. buying at the lows and then cresmdng

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
INJRiOFF1C1Al.lEﬂZ(NNLY

off profits when the price moves up $10, now seems to be the preferred strategy
for many Gulf investors. "The Middle East has learnt that there is money to be
made by jabbing," says one Arab bullion dealer in London.

The extent of the turn-round in demand last year is illustrated by figures com-
piled by Consolidated Ghold Fields, the London—based mining finance house. These
show that total holdings of carat jewellery in the main Arab countries of the
Middle East were hardly changed last year after rising by about 115 tonnes in

1978, when demand was particularly strong during the run-up to the price explosion
of 1979.

Swing

when the whole of the Middle East is considered. the swing is even more dramatic.
If Turkey and Iran are included, total jewellery holdings in the area rose by
226 tonnes in 1978 and then dropped by nearly 90 tonnes last year, reflecting
large-scale dishoarding-—in particular from Iran.

This year the heavy dishoarding has stopped. But physical shipments to the Middle
East from the main gold trading centres in London and Zurich will still remain
modest in comparison to the boom year of 1978. One reason for this is that the
market has become a great deal more speculative and geared to short-term profits.
To assist dealing and quick disposal, many invest-ant consortia prefer to keep

stocks in bank vaults in Europe. rather than in their home base in Saudi Arabia
and the Gulf.

Additionally some private investors-and, most probably, members of some of the
Arab royal families who habitually trade in precious metals-like to maintain
holdings in stable places like Switzerland as a form of last resort insurance
against a change of regime or other political disturbance in their country. It
is significant, for instance, that at least two of the big gold-dealing entre-
preneurs in Beirut-the traditional centre of Arab gold dealing before the civil
war--have since moved their operations to Zurich. where they are by all accounts
prospering.

Although its significance as a trading centre has declined, Beirut is still an
important entrepot for Middle East gold. Much of the dishoarded supplies which
came back to Europe from the region last year were sent by air free the city to
Switzerland.

Dubayy remains an important shipment point for supplies of metal passing from the
Gulf and the Indian sub-continent to Europe and vice versa. Recently the Soviet
Union has shown increased interest in the possibility of selling small gold bars--
the most popular form of investment in India--in Dubayy for transshipment further
east.

The exception to the general pattern of lower physical shipments to and from the
Arab countries this year stems from the activities of central banks and other
official institutions in the area.

2
FOR 0F11C1A1.USE2(MVLY
Iraq and Libya have emerged as the two main Arab states which have shown great
enthusiasm about building up their gold reserves-partly on purely financial
considerations but partly too for political reasons. The United Arab Emirates,
Kuwait, Oman and Qatar have also operated in the market from time to time in
varying degrees. Outside the main oil—exporting group, Syria and Jordan have
occasionally shown interest.

Convert

Only in the case of the most powerful potential gold convert. the Saudi Arabian
Monetary Agency (SANA) has there been no sign of any official buying—-a1though
rumors abound that SAHA has in fact purchased gold at times through intermediaries.

Last year large-scale shipments of gold from Zurich to Baghdad were revealed in
Swiss customs statistics, providing the first confirmation that Iraq had emerged
as one of the biggest buyers of bullion in OPEC. The Swiss figures are no longer
published following complaints from the Swiss banks' clients that their traditional
secrecy was being violated.

But this year it is believed that Iraq. after selling some of its gold stocks at
a pricc of $550 to $600 per ounce, may have been back in the market to buy gold
again recently. Iraq has been much less financially hit by the war with Iran
than Tehran (which has also made large gold purchases through its central banks
over the past few years, but been forced to sell some recently).

Iraq's gold reserves have not been published for four years; they are classified

as a state secret. Other countries are more obliging, however. According to
statistics supplied to the International Monetary Fund (IMF). Libya's gold reserves
rose to more than 3.5m ounces as of May this year from only 2.7m ounces last
autumn.

Libya has been building up its gold holdings in Tripoli, mostly, it is believed,
through purchases on the London market.

Buying has been motivated particularly by the desire to maintain a stock of inter-
national asaets free from possible interference from the West. With the memory
still fresh of President Carter's action to block 50 tonnes of Iranian gold held
in tne New York FED in November 1979. and with the political temperature between

the Libyans and the U.S. freezing rapidly. Col al-Qadhdhsfi is in no mood to take
chances.

Similar but smaller purchases of gold have shown up in 1!? statistics for Oman,
Jordan, Qatar and the United Arab Emirates, although it is certain that the IMF
figures do not tell the whole story because of the proliferation of semi-official
reserve-investing institutions in these states.

SANA is still thought to he basically too conservative to make large forays into
the gold market. In a sense. however, the Saudi Arabians have already provided an
example for the other more adventurous Arab states to follow. During the 1970's,
motivated by the desire to be master of its own reserves. the Saudi government
transported all its gold stocks from the New York FED back to the security of
Riyadh.

COPYRIGHT: The Financial Times Ltd, 198)

C80: 4600/9

J
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

AFGHANISTAN

SOVIET NEHSHAN TERMS HUJAHEDIN BANDITS, ASSASSINS

Paris PARIS HATCH in French 11 Sep 81 pp 3-9
[Report by I. Andronov]

[Text] The very colonielistic reportage of LITERATURNAYA GAZBTA
in Afghanistan.

There have been many articles reporting on the Afghan people's
resistance to the Russian invasion. The text we are publishing
today is quite unusual in one respect: It was written by a
Soviet journalist and published in Moscow by the official
literary review, LITERATURNAXA GAZETA. What does a popular
uprising represent to a special correspondent who travels
through the country under the protection of the artillery

and tanks of the invaders. his fellow— country-en? How does he
explain the hostility of the people to the reforms imposed by a
government which itself is an emanation of the Kremlin? I.
Andronov's reporting gives the answers, even while he clails
only to be interested in safeguarding Afghanistan's archeological
treasures. A11 conquerors, builders, and defenders of colonial
eapires have been followed by chroniclers or reporters whose job
it is to sing their praises and discredit the resistance of
various "barbarians." The present article is no exception:
whatever the invaders may be, they present the-selves as
liberstors, and those who dare resist then are nothing but
frightful bandits, assassins, and incidentally enemies of
progress...

Not far from the Kabul-Peshawar highway, near the Pakistani border, a rapid inver-
vention regiment of the Afghan army is deployed. The regiment protects this arteryI
which has always been of exceptional commercial and strategic importance, fro: the
incursions of the "basmatchs" (Counterrevolutionary bandit during the civil war in
Central Asia 1917-1926). Since time imnemorial, caravans of aerchanta have traveled
this ancient road. Along the same road once passed the military cohorts of
Alexander of Macedonia, and the mounted hordes of various foreign conquerors fro-
India hurled over it. On three separate occasions, the legions of the British
colonislists followed this road to seize Afghanistan. Following in their footsteps
today, arned bands of Afghan rebels from Pakistan are erupting in the East. I had

14
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

joined up with this regiment of seasoned veterans who confronted them. I was some-
what hesitant about introducing myself for the first time to the brave officers

who conmand it, for I did not know how they were going to receive the modest but
rather unusual requist I was going to make: I wanted to ask them to find me a
guide to go visit the archeological museum near the village of Badda.

To justify my unusual request, I had intentionally brought tour guidebooks from'

Kabul, (now, alas, rather useless!) which cited among other Afghan historical
curiosities the unique archeological treasures of Hedda, which were described as

especially interesting. The digs carried out on the site had resulted in the
discovery of an ancient temple, in which the alcove of the altar was decorated with

an extraordinarily rare assemblage of sculptures of divinities: a Greek Heracles,
dressed in the skin of the lion he had killed and seated next to Buddha. Surrounding
the central temple was still standing a fortified monastery from the third century
before our era, containing several dozen sacred "stapes" and prayer rooms, full of
statues of gods belonging to the various Western and Eastern religions which inter-
mingled here-~Buddhism, Hinduism, and the religions of Greek antiquity.

A Protective Escort to Take Me to the Museum

This incomparable monument to the epoch of Greco-Bactrian civilization was built by
the descendants of AleXander of Macedonia's comrades-in-arms, who were allied with
the distant ancestors of the Afghans of today. This architectonic synthesis of

the various civilizations had produced such a magnificent masterpiece of sacred
architecture that for 7 centuries thousands of pilgrims came from all over to per-
form their devotions, even from India and China.

Later, the wild nomadic hordes who subdued almost all of Asia left the sanctuary
of Hedda intact. But just recently, alarming rumors from Afghanistan reached the
capitals of Europe: the rebels, it was said, had attacked Hedda and irreparably
damaged it.

So it was the veracity of these reports that I had come to determine, at the request
in the first place, of the department of foreign culture of LITERATURNAYA GAZBTA.

In the second place, finding myself in Kabul, I had an interview with an expert on
art, Azam Zariab, director of the department of culture in the ministry of informa-
tion of the Democratic Republic of Afghanistan, who told me the following facts:

Starting in 1965, Afghan archeologists carried out excavations at Badde, carefully
restored the sculptures, the has-reliefs and the frescos of the temple, and ended
up putting together a remarkable museum complex, which has become an object or
national pride for all our people. But last year, the "douchmans" (Afghan word
signifying bandit and hooligan, overall "rebels"), as we call the enemies of the
people's revolution, forced the experts to leave Hedda.

Since then, we have received information that the bandits may have destroyed most
of the sculptures of Hedda and stolen the most precious of the objects, reportedly
to be smuggled into Pakistan, where they were sold. Two months ago, we sent a group
of experts to Hedda to make a detailed investigation. But just at that very moment,
on the outskirts of Hedda, some fierce fighting with rebel detachments took place
and as a result our experts had to circle back and return to Kabul....“

S
roe OFFICIAL use ONLY
When I related this conversation to the staff officers of the regiment deployed about
10 kilometers from Hadda, my interlocutors gave me an escort and vehicle to get to
the museun: an armored vehicle arrived at headquarters. Along with it came nine
soldiers, a lieutenant commander, and three sappers equipped with a mine detector
and long poles, the purpose of which I did not understand.

The guide who had been assigned to me-Lieutanant Commander Abdul Baouf-explained

to me that the road leading to Hedda might have been nined by the douchmans who
traveled in the zone at night. They are currently receiving, secretly, from Pakistan,
special American mines, encased in a plastic substance against which mine detectors
were ineffective; thus we would be obliged to reconnoiter suspect sites along the
road with these "feelers" 5 meters long and pointed at the and. Before starting,
Lieutenant Raouf tried to reassure me:

"Don't be afraid! We will be seated on the top of the vehicle, and if we land on
a mine, the worst that can happen is a little free flight."

I tried to manage a carefree smile, but without too much success. The Afghans who
accompanied us climbed onto the vehicle along with me. He left the garrison behind
and were soon covered with dust. The dirt road we followed massed through fields
devoid of any signs of human habitation and bare. reddish hills.

I will never forget the first few kilometers of this journey : one's eyes were
fixed ahead on the road which stretched out in front, one scrutinized every spot
of loose dirt, every bump and pothole, expecting the fatal explosion at any moment.
The path zigzagged its way to the forest, then plunged into its depths, and we
suddenly found ourselves henmed in on evsry side by thick, dark vegetation. A
deathly silence reigned in the shadows. Even the birds, heaven knows why, were
also silent.

A Spectacle of Devastation Confirmed Our Pears

Finally, the leafy obstacles were behind us, the trees grew farther apart, and we
came out on the edge of a steppe. To the right, on a solitary knoll, stood the
cubical complex of the legendary monastery. Tb the left stretched a wasteland,
beyond which one could see the closely walled-in enclosure, and the worn soil, of
a small village. which seemed dead. No smoke rose fro. the rooftops, no voices
reached our ears. No sign of life. According to the leader of our troops, a man
of experience, that was not necessarily a good sign, and he deemed it preferable
not to allow the driver and the machine-gunner to leave the vehicle. Seven members
of the commando team fanned out rapidly and fell flat on the ground on the left
slope of the knoll on which the monastery stood. At the same time, three soldiers
testing the ground ahead of then with the feelers and the mine detector, went ahead
of us, the lieutenant commander and myself, toward the goal of our expedition.

The spectacle of desolation which greeted us confirmed our worst fears. Nothing
remained of one of the world's artistic wonders but the gutted cloister walls. The
vandals had burned down the celebrated museum. The roof restored by the archeologists
had collapsed. The pillars which had supported it were nothing more now than black-
ened stumps which protruded monstrously from a pile of ashes. All the sacred "stupas"
had been broken into pieces. All the sculptures had been literally evaporated. All
the has-relief murals had been shattered. The entire group of lythical divinities

I.

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of the undersea kingdom of the flowering lotus, a sculpture known throughout the
world, had been annihilated. Room by room, we found only debris from the past
splendor, fragments, rubble.

"He should take a look into the monastery's underground vaults," said Raouf, That
was where the gallery of frescos depicting the life of man from birth to death was
located. Perhaps they had been spared?

Alas. the entrance to the vaults yawned as wide as the entrance to a cave. Once
again, the sappers took the lead, as scouts, and we followed behind. The lieutenant
commander used his cigarette lighter to illuminate the stone vault. The little
tongue of light enabled us to glimpse a procession of Hellenistic figures garbed in
bright red, blue. purple, or silvery tunics and with gold diadems on their heais.
But their faces were completely gone: they had been lacerated by the blows of
bayonets and daggers. In addition. the gallery of frescos was dotted with bullet-
holes. To judge from the number of holes, the vandals had not tried to economize
on ammunition. A tragic and symbolic provocaiion: this is not the first time in
history that counter~revolutionaries machine-gun, slash, and burn to ashes works

of popular art.

This Monstrous Sacking of Hadda Has In No Hay Accidental

Once back out in the open air, we at once heard the crack of gunfire in the distance.
The sounds of the firing came to us from the Village. but fortunately we were not
the targets. Rsouf, who understood what was happening, explained it to me: ”The
village is undoubtedly occupied by the douchmsne. They are probably too few in
number to attack us. Those shots are a signal. They are asking for reinforcement.
I am under orders not to expose you unnecessarily to danger and to avoid any engage-
ments. So we are going to return straight back to the garrison. Tomorrow, we will
return here with a company that will rid Hedda of all that riffraff." A week later,
in Kabul, I had another opportunity to talk with Zariab, in his ministerial office.
I related to him my unhappy news. Even though there was nothing surprising in it,

. Zariab still spoke of the basmatch vandalism with bitterness and anger:

"This monstrous sacking of Hedda was in no way accidental, if you know the savagery
and religious fanaticism of the douchmans," said Zariab indignantly. Practically
everywhere those degenerates burn and blow up museums, schools, colleges. scientific
establishments, hospitals, and libraries.

"What they want is to destroy every source of knowledge and culture, to keep the
people in ignorance and slavery, and by fire and sword, to strangle the revolutionary
democratization of our society. Meanwhile, their admirers, in the West extol the
virtues of these murderers and butchers. whom they dtpict as "freedom fighters!"

But the reasons for which they fight, in truth, and with what reprehensible means,
must be made known."

The day of my visit to Hedda, I had the chance to see with my own eyes a wounded
douchman, captured by the man of an Afghan commando unit. He had been brought in
an armored transport vehicle to the regimental headquarters. Then, they changed
the dressings on his leg. which had been pierced by a bullet, before interrogating
him.

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The weapons that had been found on hin were displayed before me: an eutoaatic
pistol, a high-caliber Colt, e bandolero, and a razor-sharp saber. The bssnatch
had been taken on the outskirts of the nerket town of Gaziabad. during a skirnish
between the troops and a band of about 30 rebels. More than half of the latter

had been killed. sone had succeeded in escaping.

The wounded bandit was named Houdir Zarbab-khan. as said that before the revolution
he had been a rich landholdar. Subsequently. along with another wealthy proprietor
naned Kahfir Oul-khak, he had becole the leader of the band that had just been put
out of action. Bead hunched between his shoulders, shrinking like a beset caught

in a trap, the aouatachioed bandit. his hawk-like nose planted in the niddle of a
bony face, aade his statement in a aonotone voice.

"Our last mission was to liquidate Assif master, the president of the Geri-bad

agricultural cooperative. We laid an anbush for his on the road. near the village,
but we ourselves were spotted and surrounded."

"Who gave you the orders to comit this assassination?"

"A foreigner whose nane I do not know. who had been brought from Pakistm by one
of our confederates. After sending us off to the ﬂush, both of then left for
parts unknown."

"what about the foreigner?"

"He was an officer. He had white skin. He was dressed in a pee jacket and baggy
trousers. He spoke English, and also Pushtu. He participated in the raids we nede
in the districts of Chinvar and Tchaprisr. he was always telling us: "You are
struggling for a just cause; to punish the canine and their accomplices."
Chins-khan told ne, in secret, that the aission of this white officer who was sent
to us was to pull together our isolated detachIents."

"how many of your compatriots have you killed?

Silence fron the prisoner. He looked around hin, with a haunted expression. Patently
he had cleaned up, in hopes no doubt of escaping the punish-ant he deserved for his
mrders. As for the "white officer" of when he had spoken. the spy infiltrated

fron Pakistan, he was one of those swam of instructors training the basnatchs at
since: all douchnan bases south of the Afghan border. before ny expedition to

Hadda, I had attended a press conference in Kabul. held on the occasion of the

arrest of a terrorist, Vali HoukhaI-ed. He recalled the instructions given the
rebel-saboteurs at a training field near Peshawar:

The Rebels Tried to Divide the Populace

"The Anerican instructors teach us how to use their nines and explosives to destroy
governnent buildings. bridges. and any other strategic construction. The Anericans
also taught us how to burn down schools quickly and efficiently. They told us that
a single grenade skillfully thrown into a neeting convoked by the authorities could
terrorize the atheists enough that in future they would no longer want to attend
public neetings...."

8
FOR Ol-‘ﬂCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In Djelalabad, I saw with my own eyes the results of their work with grenades: the
attack was carried out at the municipal stadium during a soccer game. The toll:

11 dead, including a little boy 4 years old, and 17 seriously wounded. The douchman
who had thrown the grenade was taken unharmed, but he had been arrested. During

his interrogation. he said that he had acted on the orders of the Peshawar training
center.

Col Couliam Kadyr, commander of the Afghan division garrisoned near Djelalabad,
shared with me the information he had put together about the basmatch movement:
"Today. all the major armed groups of douchmans have been liquidated and dispersed

by lawful forces. Besides their military fiasco, the rebels have tried to divide

the peaceful populace, promising them to abolish agrarian reform, restore the govern-
ment of the semi-feudal oligarchy. and eliminate the program of popular education.
Now, the military and moral in otence of the counterrevolution has reduced their
terrorist activity to criminal banditry by small groups who are trying, through
assassination and pillage, to sow panic, disorder, and ruin.

"In the agricultural outskirts of Djalalabad, the douchmans blow up irrigation
ditches and bridges, they cut down the power lines, they burn the food storehouses,
they destroy the Soviet tractors, agricultural combines, and trucks we have sent
them. For the moment, these criminal vermin are still causing enormous damage
along the main highway linking Djelalabad and Kabul.“

"what is the role of the basmatcha along that road?"

"They pillage, torture unarmed passengers on the buses which serve the route," an-
swered Col Kadyr. "We man posts all along the highway. but it is practically
impossible to supply a military escort for every bus. The douchmans slip up to
the road under cover. and when the bus comes. they throw themselves into its path,
armed with automatic rifles. The driver is forced to stop.

A Cannibalistic Ritual of Head-Bunting

"Then. the assailants most often force their victims to line up side by side. All
the prisoners are meticulously searched. and their money and papers are taken from
them. The rebels use the papers to try to identify the members of the people's
democratic party and the revolutionary youth organisations. These people are
immediately tied up. An eyewitness has reported that these sadists cut off their

ears and nose, gutted them, and decapitated them. The heads were then stuck into
the opened bodies.

”These stories are not perhaps for people with weak stomachs. but all the same every-
one should know how these douchmans, armed by our foreign enemies, are treating
Afghans."

South of Djelalabad. in the mountainous Afghan province of Pektia. which borders
Pakistan. my journalistic calling enabled me to see the leader of these head-
choppers who for a whole year were engaged in these excesses on the roads surrounding
the town of Gardez. Now he has been stopped. 0n the eve of his sentencing. in the
prison, I found myself face to face with this predator in human form, who answers

to the name of Afridi Anatkhon.

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
H)" UFHCMI. USE ONLY

Along with his followers he attacked the local bus, and with his own hands
personally tortured to death eight local party militants and also killed some 20
peasants who refused to give their allegiance to the basmatcbs. His victins were
all decapitated. The bloodthirsty Afridi was here following the instructions of
Bourkhanouddin Rabbani, the leader of a sect of rebel conspirators, the "Djaniate
Islani," who introduced among his satraps a head-hunting cannibalistic ritual. The
heads are brought as trophies to Rabbani's well-guarded headquarters.

Afridi a Rebel "Under the Ring" of the Westerners

llis principal place of residence is in the city of Peshawar, in Pakistan. From
there, he goes frequently to Egypt, Iran, Saudi Arabia, and Western Europe.
President Sadat holds smtwus receptions for his; Former U.S. Secretary of State
Henry Kissinger is his secret mentor. The British press sings his praises until

it is out of breath: "Rabbani, an eminently respectable interpreter of Islam,"
"Rabbani is in no way a fanatic," "Rabbani, a Muslin professor of philosophy."

Not a word, mind you, about the fact that this torturer of Afghan patriots, as his
acconplice Afridi has now revealed, clandestinely receives on behalf of their
obscurantist sect thousands of dollars and tons of American guns.

"How did Rabbani reward you personally for the execution of your-conpatriots?" I
asked Afridi.

"Rahbani summoned me to Pakistan," declared Afridi, and told me: "The more of the
enemy you kill, the richer you will be. Keep their honey, their clothing, for
yourself, everything that belongs to then, their jewelry."

"And this is what you have done?"

"Yes . "

"Is this what Islam prescribes?"

"No . "

At the time of his arrest, they had faund on Afrldi a tobacco pouch containing two
dozen gold dental crowns torn from the mouths of prisoners. It was this gold, not
devotion to Islam or an ardent love of freedom, which drew Afridi into the rebel
camp. To my mind, in fact, it is not quite correct to call then rebels. They are
nothing but venal marauders, as vensl as they can be.

The unleashing of the douchmans' banditry has come back, as if by poetic justice,
to haunt all of Afghanistan's neighbors who were giving them refuge. In Peshawar,
the Afghan "Bachlbouzauks" are kidnapping women, selling them for harems and
sassacring the Pakistanis who try to protect then. In the Pakistani border town of
Queue, they have kidnapped children and demanded ransom of the parents. Not far
fro- there, in Paratchinar. they suddenly began firing into the open market and
robbed the frightened merchants. Near the Pakistani town of Nushki, they cut down

the trees, steal the livestock, gun down the shepherds, and have so persecuted the

local populace that the latter, in despair, called regular troops and tanks to their
rescue.

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Further east, in Iran, the parliament in Tehran is considering emergency measures
to expel the armed bands of basmatchs and Afghan smgglers who have infiltrated
into the country. A band of these smugglers was arrested just recently in India.
They were transporting drugs: opium, heroin, hashish. Seen from above, the Kunar
[river], which in sun-er does not carry much water looks like a yellowish-white
ribbon, when overflown from a border-post helicopter. The men at the post had
taken me on one of their helicopter reconnaissance missions. There, above the
unfathomably high banks of the river, 25 km from Pakistan, the douchmans were
pressing forward once again, having succeeded in infiltrating into the country.
But how can they be spotted, even flying close to the ground? During the day, they
hide in the rocky crags that border on the Kunar valley; they only come out at
night to carry out their brigandage.

The comnandet of the airborne Afghan forces invites se, however, to join him in
the completely glassed cockpit, points his finger to the ground, and says with no
hesitation:

"Douchmenl "

Below. I can see nothing, except the green grass that covers the steep banks of the
river like a tapestry, and the little parcels of cultivated land, covered with pink
flowers of striking beauty. I find it difficult to believe that the basmatchs

have turned their energies to horticulture.

"Those are opium poppy fields," explains the major, noting my astonishment. Opium,

and the heroin derived from it, are the object of the smuggling trade which brings

the a nice little second income. We. in the provinces of the Kunar and the Nsngarkhar,
can easily spot the bandits' lairs thanks to the areas sown with opium poppy. In the
central parts of Pakistan, where the Afghan counterrevolutionaries are entrenched,

they have established i-ense plantations and had a record harvest last year: 400
tons. They have equipped clandestine laboratories to turn the opium into heroin,

and have succeeded in monopolizing the Middle East black market in narcotics."

To whom do they sell this magical poison? That I learned last year in New York,
where I was then working as a correspondent for LITERATURNAYA GAZETA. ‘No big shots
in the American Mafia, and six of their accomplices, had just been arrested, and all
were accused of having snuggled back from the Afghan-Pakistani border a cargo of
heroin valued at $1.0 million.

At that time, acoording to the New York police, the Mafia was already supplying
about half the drug addicts of New York from a new source of heroin, and was
beginning to broaden its clientele to innocent schoolboys aged 14 to 16. Meanwhile,
the wiser of deaths attributed to this poison being marketed clandestinely leaped
up 77 percent over previous years. Naturally, the American public was indignant :
was the government incapable then of controlling the smuggling activities of its
Afghan puppets and preventing them from associating with the Mafia?

But precisely the opposite was the case. Thanks to the farce of release on bond,
all the Mafia dignitaries who were arrested with the heroin were free. The "Agency
for the Struggle against Narcotics Trafficking“-an agency of the government—dealt
very mildly with these Afghan suppliers of opium and heroin. "As time goes on,

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
they will probably have more need to obtain money by selling the opium harvests, to
buy arms to continue their struggle...," wrote the HASBINGTON POST, quoting the
agency in question. By encouraging local and oversees gangsters, the authorities
in washington are truly taking little account of their own people's best interests.

Hbrlds away from New York, at the Fort Alikheil border post, an old stronghold built
of masonry which dominates the intersection of three small roads which wind up into
the gigantic mountains with their blindingly white snowy cape, I remembered again
that New York was the epicenter of American narcotics addiction.

-Prom the towers of the fort, one could see the trail from the east head into Pakistani
territory. The other road headed toward the north, toward Kabul, and the third,
toward Kandahar. This strategic Junction is constantly beseiged by bands of basmstchs
coming from Pakistan. Each time, they are repulsed by the Afghan infantry reginent
holding the fort. Lt Haasoud Mirodjsn is a soldier in that regiment: he is a young
Afghan. If he went to New York tomorrow, he should be made an honorary citizen of

that American setropolis for the work he accomplished here today. In effect, he
told me:

"The government of our republic has given explicit orders to put an end to the
enemy's narcotics activities. But the orders are easier to carry out in the pro-
vinces of the lunar and the Nengsrkhar, where there are no mountains, then around

here. here, quite often, the traffickers make a detour so as not to be on the roads
and succeed in slipping by on footpaths that disappear in the mist-entire caravans
of mules loaded with packs of opium and hashish.

"we intercept them. but some succeed all the same in getting to Pakistan. The
unfortunate thing is, if one must believe the information we have been given, that
in the douchmsn bases far from the front, the resident Americans in the special
services have themselves acquired a taste for the profitable traffic in narcotics.
Under their hypocritical and secret protection, a real opium market is operating in
the Pakistani town of Landi hotel.

A veteran of the Judicial police, Moukhammed Aziz led me, upon my return to Kabul,
into a lane of stalls, called Chicken Street by the American tourists who used to
buy souvenirs there. Before the revolution, this street had two "dens" for drug
addicts-two holes-in-the-wall-where one could pass the night: the "Green" and
the "New-Baet-Life," both havens patronized by Yankee hippies attracted by the
moderate prices charged for the unusual guest services that could be obtained there.
Customers of "New-East-Life," for example, were surreptitiously given a piece of
paper on which the prices were indicated: ”Bed for the night-25 cents; dose of
heroin—-10 cents; dose of opiun--3S cents."

“I saw these Anerican drug—fiends, at the time!" moaned Asia with a touch of amuse-
ment. "We swooped down on them sometimes, to search their rooms. There we found
young people, dirty, dishevelled, sweating, sprawled all together on the straw
mattresses, in a state of semi-stupor. He confiscated their drugs and they began

to cry hysterically, to scream, to flounder around in convulsions. Under the law,
we should have put them in prison; but we preferred to send them out to various
clinics. The revolution shut down the Chicken Street joints, cleaned up the capital
city and purged the country of this imported scum; we are also going to expel them
from our border regions.

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Full (IFI'N‘MI. IINI'I ONLY

The illicit trafficking of the basnatchs, the Intending, the organized vandalism.
the assassinations, sadistic executions and torture--none of all that would still
take place, if the counter-revolution in its death-throes were not being resupplied
with arms and dollars by its foreign benefactors.

COPYRIGHT: 1981 by Cogedipresse S.A.

9516
cso: 4619/41

13
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ANTI-REGIME ROLB 0P 'GRZAT MUTB', LIPTISIS DISCUSSED
Paris AFRIQUB-ASIE in French No 247.31 Aug-13 Sap 81 p 30
[Article by Ghasi Sarhane: "The Brosion"]

[Text] In addition to increased repression, showing a weakness
in the present government. there is also a serious weakness
within the military.

After a stormy parliamentary debate, the cabinet of President Bajai was finally put
together. This governnent. presided over by a person niraculously saved from death,
consists of 22 ministers representing radical and conservative factions. In fact,
Prime Minister Javad Bahonar escaped just in time the boﬁing of 28 June which took
the lives of 7!. neahers of the Islanic Republican Party (me), when he left the
party headquarters a few ninutes before the explosion.

Though it is advisable not to draw hasty conclusions fron such a coincidence, it
does reinforce persistent rumors that attribute the attack to a settling of accounts
between rival factions within the IKP. In any case, because of this event. Debonar
could succeed Beheshti as leader of the IR? and then as head of state.

As soon as it was formed, the new cabinet tackled the problem of security. An
appeal was launched to step up the repression and bring new neaaures that would
"reactivate" the police force and Islaaic conitteee. The people were asked again
to denounce the "hypocrites" and "counter-revolutionaries.” Since the exile of
Bani-Sadr, the number of victims executed reached 600. aostly Hojahedin. Heurist-
beniniete, and Kurdish democrats.

In spite of the scope of this repression. there were also close to 2,000 arrests,
and attenpts on the lives of government officials, of meters of the Islamic co-it-
tees. and of Paadarans have also increased. These have escalated to the point
where an atmosphere of snoldering civil war is felt more strongly than the war with
Iraq or the breaking down of the economic situation (30 percent inflation and a
shortage of certain food products).

Diversions

'To the above were added the first sounds of alarm within the army. The flight of
Bani-Sadr and Hae‘soud Rajevi on an army plane, and with the help of officers, was
the first sign that the "great mute" is beconing nervous. A few days later, another

11;
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

plane, an Iranian army P 27 with 16 people on board, was diverted to Oman. while
three navy patrol boats took off in the direction of a port in the United Arab

Emirates. No doubt the most spectacular action taken was by General Aryani, a
former officer of the Shah, who diverted three French-made patrol boats on their
way to Iran.

"Azadegan," a comando of the Aryani movement, with the help of sons of the Iranian
patrol boat crew, seized a warship off the coast of Spain. Aside from further
inflaming Franco-Iranian relations, so strained since Banisadr's and Rajavi's exile
in Paris that the French government took the precautionary measures to bring home
alnost all its nationals from Iran, this is the first striking expression by the
Shah's supporters who were believed to have been discredited for good.

"By Any Means"

Today hostility to the Tehran rsgine is so great that even the former executioners
of the Iranian people dare to present themselves as a ”liberation movement"! In
any case. they proved that sone people in the higher echelons of the army remained
loyal to then, since there has been no serious purge within its ranks, the govern-
ment being mainly concerned with purging the left.

In this unclear context. former President Bani-Sadr who has smathizers in the
any and his ally Massoud Rajavi, leader of the Hojahedin who are also present in
the army rank and file in vigilance committees. seen to be in a delicate position.
One hopes that the appeal they broadcast on ll: August in Iran, calling on civilians
and military alike to organize /"by any possible neans"/ [in italics] resistance
cells and an arnsd struggle, will really succeed in rekindling the revolutionary
initiative of the masses against the reactionary despotisn in power and will also
prevent possible attewts at returning to pwwer supporters of the old regime.

COPYRIGHT: 1981 Afrique-Asie

9465
C80: (0619/39

FOR OFFICRL USE ONLY
ROLE OF RELIGIOUS PERSONALI‘I'IBS, m AMYZED
Paris AFRIQUE-ASIB in French no 267, 31 Aug-l3 Sep 81 pp 31-33
[Article by Hedi Dhoukar: "New Light Shed on moneyni"]

[Text] Many events in ancient Persia clearly showed the role
played by colorful, religious personalities. 1111s story,
still present in the country's collective nanory, sheds

new light on the character of the "leader of the revolution".

Hith sone apprehension, the world discovered less then 3 years ego a use whose nane
was wrongly (but not without reason) associated with the fall of a dictatorship
several centuries old. The nan, huholleh Rho-ayni, was then at the center of.
several events such as the one called the "Isl-tic Awakening" (the Mecca uprising),
the matter of the Andean enbassy in Tehran, the Tahoe nilitary raid undertaken by
Jilly Carter, and the war of the Gulf. For several eonths these facts helped
divert attention iron the increasing political assertion and concretization of

this ayatollah'e ideas, a hen now sinply celled "Sir" by his opponents of all
.persuasions.

Subject To Public Condemnation

now that the “leader" rules alone, supported by institutions he created, Iran has
begun to find. certainly at its own expense, a little-known religious nan surrounded
by the theories of nullahs and ayatollahs where the influence of the old religion
is not evident. The only dignitaries in whom one could find that influence were
ruthlessly renoved and reduced to silence. Such was the case of Madari, the highest

ranking ayatollah in Iran, who, moreover, had ordained Khoneyni as ayatollah in
order to prevent his execution by the Shah. Next to this Shiite figure, who stead-
fastly fought all plurality of political and religious functions, is Taleghani,
further to the left, for whoa "the real clergy does not accept either governmental
posts or such responsibilities," its place being along. and "not above the people”.*
and who was also renewed. Thus, iron the start, two different kinds of leaders,
Hadari the constitutionalist and Taleghani the spiritual father of the Hojahedin,
have clearly drawn the line with the fundamentalist current which seized power. Many
others, who according to the Iranian Shiite rules are higher ranking than moneyni,

-'* Teleghani intarviegwith Gilles Anquetil in ”The Earth Moved In Iran". aachette.

16

non OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLV

were also publicly condemned and are either in prison, like Tehreani, or in the
underground movement, like Hosseini.

The real issue is not a dispute about religious doctrine, since all claim to come
from the same Islamic religion. But one part of the clergy was quite opposed to
taking over the revolution, which was mainly one of the masses oppressed by the Shah
and who aspired to justice and economic change. Thus Hassoud Rajavi could say with
just cause that Khomeyni is one of "the Shah's legacies". This throws a new light
on the man now presiding over the destiny of the country that for centuries had been
subject to extremely cruel despotism.

Throughout its history, other important events have occurred in Iran, such as the
Constitutionalist Revolution or the Tobacco Tax Revolt, which brought religious
personalities to the fore. One was especially famous: the great reformer Jamalad
Din Assad Abadi, called "al Afghani," whose doctrine, founded on Islamic renaissance
based on modernism and science, was spread throughout the Islamic world at the end
of the 19th century. This movement was so strong that the Ottoman Empire, then well
on its way to being dismembered by the Hestern powers, wanted to use this doctrine
to accomplish an "Islamic union."* but the Emperor of the Sublime Door poisoned
Assad Abadi after one of the latter's followers, while putting an and to the despotism
of the Qajar kings in Persia, had assassinated Nassir ad-Din Shah in a mausoleum
where he was praying. This event, occurring tn the midst of the Constitutional
Revolution, had considerable political fallout and forced the new Shah, hurraffar
ad-Din, to promulgate the first Iranian constitution, modeled on that of the Belgian
monarchy.

Since then, the role of the clergy has become politically more important, for it is
in using hostile religious reaction to the constitution, represented by Sheik
Parloullah Nouri considered today a "martyr of freedom" by IR? [Islamic Republican
Party] papers, that, a few years later, the son of Hurzaffar ad-Din, Mohammad Ali
Shah, had the parliament building bombed and established the "minor dictatorship"
(Istibdad Saghir) for a period of 3 years. During this time the resistance of the
constitutionalists was organized. The revolution then took on such dimensions that
in spite of Tsarist Russia's support Mohammad Ali Shah had to flee. 0n the other
hand, his son Ahmad Shah, who succeeded him, showed so much respect for the constitu-
tion that the British, represented by Colonel Ironaide, pushed him into permanent
exile in Nice, while a Cossack colonel, Reta, later Pahlavi and father of the
deposed Shah, seized power (1925). In order to be crowned Shah during his prede-
cessor's lifetime, Reza had to face fierce opposition in parliament led at the

time by a religious person, a former worker on his estate, Ayatollah Hodarress. It
was during the latter's absence from the parliamentary enclosure that Base finally
forced Parliament to crown him. A few days later, two of his henchmen strangled
Hodarress. '

with the accession of Reza Shah, who was absolute monarch for 16 years, Parliament
ceased to play any political role whatever. But when Hohammed Rene Shah came to
the throne, the Iranian political situation, marked by the existence of many

* Home Pakdaman, "Jamal ad-Din Assad Abadi, called 'Afghani'", Haisonneuve et
Larose (Paris).

See also the excellent work by Yann Richard, "Shi'ism in Iran, Imam and Revolu-
tion" (Haisonnauve).

17
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
political currents and organizations, forced Parliament to become active again,
mainly after Dr Hossadegh became head of government supported by a strong popular
movement. Yet this nationalist had to count on the clergy, both within parliament
presided over by a religious leader, Sheik Kashani, and outside it, where an organi-
zation of moslem brothers, Pedayin Balam, started to attract attention when it
assassinated General Razmara, one of Hossadegh's predecessors to the post of prime
minister. The ideology of the Pedayine Belem was anticommunist at a time when
Hossadegh's opponents on all sides compared him to the "red peril" and wanted "to
restore medieval rule without a prince."*

Wrapped in Shrouds

Oil nationalism crystallized the rival tendencies, accentuating the special role of
the religious leaders. Though, at the time, the official Shiite hierarchy carefully
avoided involvement in politics. Sheik Kashani, as leader of parliament, motivated

it seems by his opposition to the British (who supposedly killed his father and

sent Kashani into exile in Palestine), supported the nationalist policy in the begin-
ning. But Kashani soon gave his allegiance to the Pedayin Belem, to the point of
becoming their emissary to Hossadegh, giving him their letters requesting the closing
of bars and making the veil mandatory for women. Slowly, Kashani joined the opposi-
tion, depriving Mossadegh of an important support at a time when attempts at coups
d'etat inspired by the Americans increased and the blockade of Iran by Hestern
powers was being set up. Also, at that time, after learning that the Shah planned

to flee, the reactionaries organized a demonstration in front of the palace, and
wrapped in shrouds they shouted that in order to leave Iran the shah would have to
walk over their bodies. Then for all practical purpose, Kashani and the Padayin
Eslsm made common cause with a party vaguely populist in ideology and supposedly
financed by the United States, the Labor and Workers Party (PTL) headed by Baghai.
the PTL and the redayin launched a virulent anti-Hossadegh campaign in the bazaars
where the head of state had most of his support.

"Victory, the country is saved," were the headlines of PTL newspapers, when the fifth
coup d'etat, organized by the CIA, succeeded in unseating Hossadegh and in bringing
back the Shah from his Roman exile.

Baghai still writes, apparently in a different vein, for the ISLAMIC REPUBLIC news-
paper, founded by the IRP [Islamic Republican Party]. The same thing happened to
Bassan Ayat. another deserter from the PTL, who became the ideologist of the IRP
until his death at the hands of the Khslq Hojahedin. In the case of Keshsni, though
this is not clearly substantiated due to a lack of historical documents on the
subject, religious authorities affirm that Khomeyni was one of his most ardent
followers and often wrote approving his anti-communist crusade. Yet one fact remains
quite clear: among the candidates at the last presidential election were two former
Fedayin Belem members: Cheibani and Owaldi.

Be that as it may, the fall of Hossadegh, immediately followed by the return of the

Shah, was the death knell for all opposition, including that of the Padayin, also
destroyed as soon as the Savak got organised and stretched its tentacles. At that
time, on the advice of Kennedy, the dictator wanted to win the support of a part of

* J.-F. Clement 'ihadings 0n Khomeyniem" in the magazine ESPRIT (january 1981).

18
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the population. He decided to launch the 'white revolution," promising in the
beginning since it was supposed to give property to many peasants and favor worker
"participation" in solving job-related problems in their firms.

The Inullah Khomeyni became known at that time, writing very respectfully to "His
Majesty, the Light of the Aryans," not to ask that he complete his social reforms
or to turn more seriously towards an oppressed people, but to ask him not to grant
women the vote and to take into account the role of the ulsmas, the Shiite legal
experts. His action was special, and will explain the Shah's anger, in that it
placed Khomeyni on equal footing with the Shah. The mullah could question with
impunity all governmental matters which could require the opinion of the clergy
for whom Khomeyni had become the spokesman from the start. in spite of his modest
standing in the hierarchy of the clergy.

When the Shah did not respond to any of the missives, Ruhollah Khomeyni raised his
voice accusing the king of "selling the country to the Americans and the Israelis".
From then on, Khomeyni definitely became part of his country's legend, and in quite
troubled historical circumstances.

0n 3 June 1963, the movement for the liberation of Iran, led at the time by Mahdi
Bazargan and Ayatollah Taleghani, called for a demonstration in Tahran which was
supposed to be disciplined and avoid any provocation. 0n the said day, corresponding
to the 15 Khordad in the Iranian Shiite calendar, huge crowds came to the demonstra-

tion, informed of it by pamphlets supposedly distributed by Ssvak itself. the crowds
were screened by the agents of this police force, recognizable by their shaved heads,
while at the same time there mysteriously appeared portraits of Khomeyni, and only
Khomeyni, to be distributed to the demonstrators. Then the Savak agitators began

to loot and burn everything, while the army, which lay in ambush, started to fire
into the crowd. Ihousands of bodies were then piled up by dulldorers and town dump
trucks threw them into the garbage dump at night.

Using this event as a pretext, the Shah launched a massive wave of arrests among

the opposition. the latter has since understood the futility of purely political
activity, which explains why a few months later guerrilla organizations were formed:
the Khalq Hojahedin and the Khalq Fedayin. As for Khomeyni, his life was spared
because of a fetwa (a religious decree) by Chariot Madari who ordanied him ayatollah.
Exiled first in Turkey, then in staf in Iraq, Khomeyni continued to show his
opposition to the shah in writings he managed to smuggle into Iran. But his voice
was only heard because of intense political activity within the ranks of the people,
men such as Taleghani, and progressive thinkers like Dr Chatiati, two famous
personalities who had been imprisoned and tortured many times.

That is why, on his triumphant return to Tehran on 1 February 1980, the face of
Khomeyni was recognized as that of the liberator. The peoplt only remembered his
duel with the Shah, and were favorably disposed towards him because of ideas on
social issues and Justice, that had been patiently spread by leading progressive
clergymen. That is also why the Shah's opponents in lay and university circles
enthusiastically Joined the people. They were all the more sincere since they
accepted in good faith statements made by Kh meyni when he was staying in Nesuphles-
le-Chateau, and which had been broadcast by the western media, thus contributing to
a great extent to turning the lean of Qom into a legend.

19
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
n his statements, Khoneyni in fact naintsined he was for free expression by all

olitical factions, including the "atheistic" Harriers, freedom for the press and

mu for uonen who, he said, could be "deputy, sinister, and president of the
'epublic". As for minorities, the ayatollah said that lslus favors sutonouy,

asphasizing the liberating nature of religion.

Pitiless Logic
arracks which brought about the flight of Chapour

f the Israeli enbessy, were two events, the last ones

he incident of the air force h
f the revolt against the Shah.

Bakhtiar and the “liberation" 0
really, that concretized the revolutionary nature o

They were eyents that favored the Ho
Harrist—beninists) .

he other, the university was closed down, the opposition
newspapers were banned, the underground novenant went back underground, the any

was charged with boebing the Kurdish population. Khalkhsli, who came out of a

psychiatric institution and who boasted of killing cats when a boy, has beools

Khoneyni's right-hand nan and head of Islamic law courts; Savak downents have

disappeared; the wonan was put in a chador. Supported by new institutions, all called
rdians of the revolution, and the

Islamic: committees, courts, gua party founded by
Beheshti whose ties with the CIA are known, the repression was unleashed against the

progressive left. The rest is history. All this was, however, included as the
germ of an idea in the pitiless logic of the first referend

people was asked to vote,
sent of an Islasic republic. It could not yet perce
victory over the Shah and his Western allies, that it was
a different color. The fact remains, hoVever, that the episo
of the Pahlavi dynasty is far from over. The dynamics of the people rena

regime exerts all its power

even though the present
off for a few more years the real liberation of the Iranian people.

Since then, one after t

COPYRIGHT: 1981 Afrique-Asie

91065
CSO: 66l9/é0

20
FOR OFFICML USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

IRAN

BRIEFS

AMBULANCES TRANSPORT MINISTERS-dormant! by the idea of another assassination
attempt (like those that have successfully eliminated Ayatollah Beheshti, President
Radjsi and Prime Minister Bahonar). the Iranian Islamic leaders now nova about only
in ambulances. This strategy is known to everyone in Tehran, and my doctors are
afraid that ultimately some terrorists will fire on a vehicle transporting sons
sick or wounded person [who is not a government official]. [Text] [Paris VALBURS
ACTUELES in French 28 Sep 81 p 24] (COPYRIGHT: [1981] "Valeurs actualles"]

cso: 4619/12 :

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MOROCCO

UNRBST IN RUEAL AREAS DESCRIBED
Paris AFRIQUE-ASIB in French 22 June-S July 81 No 262 p 24

[Text] The Hakhzens feel the winds of revolt; poverty and
nonopolies of land holdings are the cause.

Last year already (in January) a wind of revolt was detected in the rural area of
Beni-Hellal, where a large number of arrests had been nade, and it was learned that
a caurt had handed out sentences to 13 people of up to 3 years in prison.

This year it is in the regions of Taza, Harakesh, Fer, Pqih Ben Salah (near Beni-
Hellal), and Tisnit where the incidents are following one another. Local centers
of the USP? (Socialist Union of Popular Forces) were searched and rifled, arrests
were made, trials held, sentences passed. then appealed, and more arrests were nade..
What is the explanation for the new rash of probleas and repression in the provinces?

Drought

The days when the Moroccan countryside lads up the strength of the regime are long
gone. For over 10 years the penetration of capitalist interests has done nothing
but accelerate, bringing on strong tendencies toward large land holdings, and impos-
ing a coexistence between "nodern" and traditional agricultural sectors which is
constantly shifting. On one hand, there are very large holdings (600 of which are
bigger than 500 hectares, according to the nodest estinates of Moroccan primary
school textbooks), the export commodities (vegetables, fruits, avocados, flowers,
etc), and state-provided aid and technology. 0n the other-hand, there is the tra-
ditional peasant's world of very snall ferns, thin herds, and daaaging royal decrees,
like the one of last March forbidding, in the name of progress, any farm under-the
size of 5 hectares. The Horoccanization of the far-land (that is, the transfer of
colonial properties to the Moroccan upper middle class), has consequently created
dangerous zones where the richest landowners have the poorest peasants as their
innediate neighbors. This is the case with the fertile plains surrounding Fez,
Marrakesh, Agudir (towards the East, in the direction of the plain of Tadla, around
Beni-Hellal).

Two kinds of conflict can erupt. It may be between landowners, or rather their

Ianagers, and agricultural workers, poor peasants who have been dispossessed of
' their land and have been unable, unlike so aany others. to emigrate to urban centers

22
FOR OFFICIAI.US£13NLY
FINR(NHWCJAI.IERECNULY

or to Europe: these workers are paid between 6 and 10 dirhams per day. Conflicts
may also arise between owners and poor peasants of surrounding regions. Here, the
cause of the conflict is often use of the lands, trampled by cattle belonging to
the big local landowners. This happened several times over recent years, and even
more often during the last several months.

This year a second factor has come up: drought. It is prolonged (lasting all last
autumn and winter), catastrophic, and a killer. Many faﬁmers have sacrificed their
wheat to feed the cattle-then attempted to sell it at reduced prices (sheep went
for 50 dirhams each on the market). Hhen they were ultimately unable to find
buyers, the cattle were left to die on the parched land, or abandoned in market-
places to which they had been driven.

This year's agricultural balance sheet was a disaster, and, as is always the case
when poverty amongst the people is accelerated, the concentration of property is
also expedited.

The third factor is political. Those in power fear, and rightly so, flare ups in
the rural population, which this time has little to lose and no other alternative;
not even emigration, which for years acted as a safety valve for easing tension.
The agglomeration of the land by the Hakhzen, the local authorities, and the feudal
system remains strong. But will it be enough?

The opposition became aware quite late of the significance of the peasant popula—
tion: the latest elections, municipal or national, were a failure for the USFP,
which learned its lesson: a significant attempt was made to agglomerate holdings,

to create systems that could present a viable opposition to those of the authorities,
and even to eventually form a union for agricultural workers.

Militants in the small rural centers often have a different perspective from the
urban leaders. They are not confronted with parliamentary debates, negotiations with
the Palace, or diplomatic missions but rather with hunger, illiteracy, inequality,
and the impunitive injustices of the authorities and landowners. Under these cir-
cumstances rural militants become more radical.

we are currently witnessing a bid for power, aimed at bringing down the opposition:
an attempt to prevent,firstly, a structuration of land holdings through the political
parties, and secondly, attempts to eliminate the elements most accustomed to battles,
the most demanding, who make up the hardest core of the party.

Will those in power attain their goals? will they prevent the politization of land
holdings, and effectively carry out their policy of seizing land without causing
social unrest? Will they furthermore succeed in organizing an opposition the way
they wish, according to need, as has been so often done in the past, by murdering
and arresting the most hard-corn, by trying to corrupt or seduce the others?

A new aspect of the problem was introduced on 10 Hay, which will change the inter-
action of forces in Morocco, at least as regards the king and his opponents. Cer~
tainly Mitterrand's election will not put a time limit on the process of integration
of all Moroccan fields into capitalist production, much less end imperialism in

the west of Africa. Nonetheless, this election will still change many things.

23
FOR OFHCIAI. USE ONLY