APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/00: ClA-RDP02-00050R000200030037-0
Near East/ North Africa Report

No. 2058

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE
m

JPRS publications contain inforlation primrily fron foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also fro: news agency
trensaissions and broadcasts. leterials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and anterial enclosed in brackets
[l are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each iten, or following the

last line of a brief, indicate how the ori'ginal informtion was

processed. where no. processing indica'tor is given, the infor-
nation was sunsrized or extracted-

0

   
 

Unfamiliar nan'es rendered phonetically or ‘translitereted are
enclosed ‘in parentheses. Words or na-es preceded by a ques—
. tion earl: and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. 'l'i‘aes within ltens are as
given by source. ‘

The contents of this pub .cation in no any represent'the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.8. Governunt. .

nocumm‘wr' or mutations

ms publications my be ordered fro- the National Technical
Inforeation Service, Springfield, Virginia 22161. In order-
ing, it is recomnded that the ms lib-bet, title, date and
author, if applicable, of publication be cited.

Current JPRS publications are announced in Govern-est hearts
Announceaents issued semi-monthly by the National Technicalof
Information Service, and are listed in the lbn'thl Catal
_D_. 5. Government Publications issued by the- Superintendent off
Documents, U. 8. Govern-ant Printing Office, Washington, D. c.
20402.

Indexes to this report (bykeyword, author, personal naaes,
title and series) are available tron Bell a Howell, old
Mansfield Road, Booster, (bio 1.4691.

Correspondence pertaining to nattars other than procurement
nay be addressed to Joint Publications Research Service,
1000 North Glebe Road, Arlington,’Virginie 22201.
50171 -I -I

 

W ﬁgum‘mﬂ i' '00.? m- JPRS 14180 1 l MW'I Accession No
(Wan—sine. I. lop-ﬂ on.
NEAR EAST/NORTH AFRICA REPORT, “0. 2058 17 December 19 79

 
      
      
     
 
 
   
 
   
 

 

? WI) .- hdm mun-null Mn. N.

m Oman“... Ilsa-e and Mom

Joint Publications Research Service
1000 North Glebe Road

Arlington. Virginia 22201

IO. amt/hum. UM II

II. Mullet u 0101(0) n.

    

ummmanmumoum n. iwdhmtmcm

As above

It Wry tutu

 

It maﬁa-aw M was)

This serial report contains intonation on socioeconomic, government, political.
and technical developments in the countries of the Near East and North Africa.

  
   
    
   
   
  
   
    
     
   
  
   
     
    
    

 

)1. 0mm Morn“ a. om

Political Science _XInter-Arab Affairs __l.ibys __Sultsnate
Sociology _x_Nort-.h African __Msuritania of Oman
Economics Affairs Luorocco LSyris
Culture (Social __Afghanistan __People's Demo- ___Tunisia
Sciences) ._X_Algeris cratic Republic _United Arab
Ethnology _Bahrain of Yemen Emirates
Geography _Egypt: __Persian Gulf LHestcrn Sahara
Techological _Xlran Ares _Yenen Arab
Military Sciences _g(_Irsq __Qatar Republic
_XIsrael _Saudi Arabia
__Jordan __Spanish North
Kuwait Africa

-_x1.ebanon

   

___Sudsn

b. Imus/WW hum

    
  
   
 

:. own nut/cm. 51), 5C, SK, 15

 

  
   
   
  

 

«mm-no:— etude-cu
"lﬁt'lllwnitcnvailability “msmnm ' 152
Sold by N115 2.. mm 5.1.25.5...3'“ ' " i 5.7.“—
Springfield, Virginia 22161 UNCLASSIFIED
“5" ““4”" Ice mun- .- Rome OPDOOIAI. row m u—n-

(l‘ounedy ﬁlls-3'»
W at Con-M"
NEAR EAST/NORTH AFRICA REPORT

No. 2058

Conn-ms

HYPER-ARAB AFFAIRS

Gulf Oil Profits Become 'Internationalized'
(AL-NABAR m'mx HA AL-DUHALI, 21 Oct 79)

France Opens New T198 With Arab Gulf
(All-WW, 27 wt 79) uoooooaooooso-oocosooooooo

Briefs
Sudanese, Algerian Presidents' Talks

NORTH AFRICAN AFFAIRS

Moroccan Paper Carries AOSARIO 'Open Letter' to Tunis
Sumit
(113mm, 22 NOV '3) IOOIOIOOOIIDIOIOOOIIOICOI'OOOO

Briefs
ACSARIO Victories in Algeria.
AOSARIO ReJects Algeria's 'Representation'
'Berber Liberation Pront' Pounded

MEN

Paper Says U.S. Threat Not Confined to Iran
(Mitorialz MI'SHA'B, 28 NOV 79) cons-00000000009900

WTA-HFTU Joint Commique
(ml WARD, 10 sep n) IOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOQOOOOOOI

Foreign Minister Benyahia Statement to APB on lonelined

Sumit
(EL mum, 10 &p n) .0...DOOOOUOIOOOOOOIOOI...

-a- [III-NEGA-
CONTENrS (Continued)

Bun Bu-‘I 1a Supporter Criticizes Regimc's Treatment of
EX-I‘m:=lda-nt
(ernl mm; AL-MHAR AL-‘ARABI WA mmur.

11 NOV 79) o.0IOD.O0.0-0.00.000.lulu-00.00.000.00...

Ben Bella's lawyer Asks Chadli To Grant Her Meeting
With m-President
(AL-NM AL-'ARABI WA AL-DWALI, 11 Nov 79) .......

Party Coordinator Yahiaoui Discusses Clean-Up Campaign
(lbhamed Salah Yahiaoui Interviev; EL WARD,

7'8 581) n) o..00o00.0000...oooooo-asov-oooooooaooos

Finance Minister Speaks on Ties With IBSB
(ELMAHID, 12 NOV n) one...ousosooosso-oooeeooe

Briefs
Postponement. oi’ Minister's Trip
Economic, Trade Protocol With Bulgaria
French Weapons mrcmse

Islamic legal Basisaf nomeyni Rule Discussed
(mo Fayolle; AFRICA, NOV 79) essence-0000.00.00.00.

U.S. 'Sentimentality' in Iranian Issue Criticized
(Editorial; at. 810m, 29 Nov 79)

Student Split From Revolution Widens
(m, 9 mt B) OOI.0.00....OOOOOOOQIIIOIIICCOOOO

Judicial System To Be Revamped, Sadr Says
(Fathollah Bani Sadr; mm, 10 Oct 79)

Costs of Abolishing Judiciary Cited
(Azar Khadiv air; BAMDAD, 12 Oct 79) ...............

New Emphasis Placed on Domestic Industrial Development
(W, 12 NOV '3) 0.0.0000CIOIOOOOOOIOOOOOOIOOOOOO

Expansion of Domestic Production
Ban on Pbreign Companies

Plans for Independent Industries
Review of Foreign Connections
Departure of American Managers
land Reclamtion Project Pound Successful
(Gm mm, h NOV W) II.......-......QOOODOOOCOUO

Briefs
Technological Agreement With Italy
Rise in Nonoil Bitports
Industrial Bank Capital Doubled
Refinery Expanded
Chinese workers for Higmay

,./
Cooperation With Government on Settlements Policy Urged

(Editorial; wow, 28 Oct 19)

Stronger Measures Against Pm Terrorists Demanded
(mitorial; mom, 28 Oct 79)

Stronger Government Action, Not Change, Urged
(Yehudah Meir Abramovitz; mom, 26 Oct 79)

Negative Reaction to the Tehia Party Registered
(Eliezer Schulsinger; BAMODI'A, 26 Oct 79)

Gaza Mayor Fields Questions on Corruption, Israel, H0
(Rashad al-Shawa Interview; HA'ARBI‘Z, 2 Nov 79) ...

Continued Confiscation of Arab Land Condemed
(Editorial; AL-quns, 1': Oct 79)

Israel Criticized for Condoning Illeal Seizure of Arab
Land
(Editorial; AL-QUDS, 16 Oct 79)

No Clan in Israel's Policy Expected
sditoriai; AL-SﬁA'B, & Oct 79)

LEBANON

Junblat Cements on Tunisian Resolutions
(Valid Junblat Interview; mum mm, 3-9 Dec 79)
CONI‘EIH‘S (Continued)

Genayed on 'Nev Climate for Palestinian State'
(AminJunsyyil Interview; my mum}, 3-9 Dec 79)

Statement Issued by Lebanese wont
(L'QM'LE JOIR, 17, 20 Get 79) cacao-cocoaeooooo

Release Delayed
mrabitun Response

Report on Monetary Situation
(AN-mum ARAB Repair s m, 19 Nov 79)

Bank of Lebanon Publishes Statistics
(L'mIm-LE Jam, 7 OCt 79) cocoon-cocooooouoooooc

MOCCO

Boucetta Explains Morocco's Absence From Monrovia
(MP, 1‘ he 79) O...0.0IOOIOOOIOUCIOOOOOOOIIOOOI...

Foreign Minister Answers Questions on Moroccan Stand
(Rabat Domestic Service, h Dec 79) ................

Boucetta: Morocco New Views Sahara Issue as 'Strictly
Domestic'
([13 mm, 12 Nov D) OOOOIOOOOOIIIIOIIIDOIO00-00..

'MAP': Boucetta Expresses Total Support for Rilestinisn
Cause
(mp, 30 NOV n) 0.00.0COCOOOOIIOOOOOOIOOOOOOIOIOI'

Minister Attacks EEC Curbs on Trade
(AN-NAHAR ARAB REPORI.‘ & mo, 26 Nov 79) ..........

Briefs
Radar Steelworks

SYRIA

Support for, Solidarity Hith Iran Reiterated
(Damascus Domestic Service, 2 Dec 79) .............

Syrian People's Am Comander Receives CSSR Delegation
(SANA, 5 me '19) OI...I.000.0....OOOOOOOOOOQIOOOOC.
comms (Continued)

Briefs
Muslim Brotherhood mrder
Ba'th Party Elections

WESTERN SAHARA

Morocco Accused of 'Fierce Repression' of Sahmns
(Francoise Germain-Robin; L'mnm omens,
2!.-30 mt w) soc-loo...sooooonooooloooooooooooosoo

'APS' Interviews POLISARIO Secretary General
(m, 22 NOV W) 0......IOOIUCOOOOOI...0.0000......

Briefs
POLISARIO Attack on Bu Cm

Successes of POLISARIO Troops
GULF OIL PROFITS BECOME 'INTEINATIONALIZED'
Paris AIrIIAﬂAR AL-‘ARABI HA AL-DUUALI in Arabic 21 Oct 79 p 16
[Article: "6qu Oil Profits: Internationalization or Voluntary Bxile?"]

[Text] Almost daily since 1976, newspapers have reported the ups and downs
of the u.s. dollar. comparing it with gold. the German mark and the Swiss
franc. These same reports are almost always accompanied by a story about
some Arab financier selling or buying gold or marks or acquiring a new
hotel. The theme is always the same: money seeking refuge, away from the
dollar, away from a weak Arab economy and the Arab monetary market. away
from glutted Arab consumers or from an unstable political environment.

The list goes on and on, but the basic fact is that money is leaving the
Gulf for the security of better shelters elsewhere.

In the Arab Gulf . for exanple. neither the governnents nor the private
sectors can absorb the flood of money pouring in, particularly since oil
prices have begun to rise every 6 months. Having bought everything, there
is nothing left to buy. OPEC oil revenues this year alone will be $50 bil-
lion. 82 percent of which will go to the Arab Gulf states. It is certain,
however. that these revenues, as has happened automatically since 1974,
will leave the area. This strange phenomenon is unprecedented and has its
own, unique reasons.

The routine in which these funds are sent abroad is becoming more auto-
matic and systematic all the time. In only 6 years, foreign banks have
succeeded in recapturing and controlling the use of oil revenues. Petro-
dollars are used for investment in a variety of other currencies, in real
estate. and to a smaller extent in industrial development.

Since 1977, this phenomenon has been accompanied by the emergence of Arab
financial institutions specialising in loans which are recognised in the
international financial market. These institutions. now found in Bahrain.
Abu Dhabi, Saudi Arabia and, of course. Kuwait, provide capital investment
funds for European industry. Kuwait was the first to establish the Foreign
Trade and Investment Company and the Kuwait Investment Company. These two
specialize almost exclusively in investnent in Hestern countries. The
Kuwait Investment Company. which is 88 percent government owned. issues
international bonds in local currency, and often heads a group of foreign
and Arab banks specializing in foreign and Arab loans. This company also
heads the list of Arab financial institutions offering European bonds in
Kuwaiti dinars.

Although Kuwaiti institutions were the first to move in this direction,

the other Gulf countries were soon to follow with innovations of their own.
There was a rush to create local monetary markets even though the term
hardly applies to the Golf's banking system. Abu Dhabi established the
Abu Dhabi Investment Company and the Gulf International Bank. partly owned

by seven of the Gulf oil producing states, as well as the Abu Dhabi National
Bank.

Saudi Arabia, with help from the Saudi Monetary Agency and the Saudi Central

Bank, opted to reorganize the banking system. It acquired controlling
shares of all foreign banks. The new banks were renamed the Saudi-French.
Saudi-British, Saudi-Dutch. Saudi-American and Saudi-Arab banks.

Bahrain. on the other hand, held the door wide open to foreign banks. These
now number 51 and have combined assets of $24 billion, compared to only

$3 billion in their home countries. These banks. which specialize in for-
eign transactions. have acquired the bulk of their assets from the Gulf
states.

The growth of a local banking system was paralleled by a corresponding
growth of Arab financial institutions and branch offices in Europe and the
United States. The speed with which the foreign offices sprouted was pro-
portional to the rate at which Gulf oil revenues were growing overseas.
This phenomenon. referred to technically as “internationalisation." was
viewed in the Arab world as maturation of the Arab economy. In France and
England many social gatherings were held to acquaint the financial comp
munities with this or that Arab banking officer. These Arab institutions
and banks continue to multiply and are playing an ever larger role in Euro-
pean loan operations. The institutions include the Arab International
Investment Bank, a joint Arab-foreign venture; the Union of Arab-French
Banks; the Arab-Spanish Bank; the Kuwaiti-Libyan-Spanish Bank: the Arab-
Halaysian Bank; the Arab-International Development Bank; and the Morgan-
Arab Bank, a joint Arab-American enterprise. In addition, there are 36
other jointly owned institutions and banks in Hestern Europe, the United
States and Japan.

Is it reasonable to define this phenomenon of mushrooming Arab banks in

the international community as a coming of age or a maturation of the Arab
economy? Can we really refer to it as a process of internationalization?
It is difficult to equate this "coming of age" with independence. Accord-
ing to one Lebanese banking official, one must examine the history of these
banks to understand what is happening. Before this stage was reached, for-
eign banks opened branch offices in the Gulf states with one purpose in
mind--to take advantage of rising oil prices and to facilitate the financ-
ing of growing Gulf imports. These banks acted as a middleman between the
factories of the West and the Gulf states. The majority brought very small
capitals with them, relative to the volume of business they were expected
to do. Most of them had capitals ranging from $1 to $30 million. Their
assets now range from $300 to $600 million. At times. their profits ranged
from 30 to 1.0 percent. This stage was followed by "Arabization." when the
Gulf states acquired controlling shares of these banks. Their policies.
however. remained largely unchanged. the only difference was the appoint-
ment of Arab directors general. The foreign staff retained their positions.
Under the new system, foreign capital remained small. As a result of Arab-
ization. the parent institutions in Europe reaped a double benefit: their
capital contributions remained small and their share of the profits soared
as oil revenues increased. Meanwhile. according to Dr George Qaram. their
duties were unchanged.

The new banks maintained their Western policies and modes of operation.

The profitability of this system is largely responsible for the mushroom-
ing of these joint banking enterprises in Japan. Asia and most of the Euro-
pean countries. Their task is to channel Gulf money from the parent insti-
tution to these countries. Their branch offices serve as bridges between
the Gulf and capital hungry companies and industries in every money market.
particularly in places where the parent institutions formerly lacked the
necessary capital to finance their countries' exports in the face of strong
competition and declining profits.

Dr George Qaram added that branch offices are most frequently Opened as a
result of foreign initiative. As examples. he pointed to the Arab Bank
for Foreign Investment which was opened at the request of the French bank
Societe Generale, and the Union of French Arab Banks which opened at the
behest of Credit Lyonnais.

The parent institutions not only control and direct overseas financial
operations. but also they influence local transactions. Borrowers of
local currencies are most often industrial or Third World countries. Mex-
ico this year issued $1.2 billion worth of bonds backed by Kuwaiti dinars.
All this goes to show, according to Dr Qaram. that "whenever capital is in
demand. the financial institutions of the industrial world serve as the
middleman in the Arab market itself ." Kuwait. whose dinar is in demand
internationally. and whose [financial] institutions are well known on the
Eurodollar market, is the best example. Between 1976 and 1977, the Kuwaiti
Investment Company helped to finance 81.592.000.000 worth of bonds to the
benefit of the European countries. The total of all such investments by
Kuwaiti institutions in 1978 was 51.724.000.000. This is in addition to
the $1.2 billion invested in the Mexican bond issue. This is clear evidence
that Arab financial institutions are playing an important role in the out-
flow of Arab capital. The rate at which Arab capital is leaving is propor-
tional to the financial institutions ability to upgrade their technical
capability. Even though the size of these loans is small compared to the
deposits in international banksuthe so—called excess oil revenues total
$180 billion--one must ask whether the Gulf's financial institutions are
doing their job with respect to development. How does one justify their
performance and practices in view of a lagging economic development here
at home? Observers are apt to attribute the apparent contradiction to the
fact that the Arab narkets are saturated. But why do these institutions
lack the expertise and apparatus to study the local market and seek ways
to activate industrial develop-ent as their European counterparts do?

According to a French bank with branches in every Gulf state. "The strange
thing is that the oil countries which own the bulk of excess oil revenues
prefer to have large cash deposits on hand."

The oil countries' penchant for maintaining cash liquidity cane to the sur-
face during the most recent meeting of the Horld Monetary Fund in Belgrade,
.Yugoslavia. The oil countries opposed a proposal to establish a comma-
tory account for draining the excess dollars on the world market and replac—
ing them by special drawing rights based on a basket of currencies. The
proposal would have frozen a large umber of dollars for use by the World
Honetary Fund in granting econonic development loans. The Arab oil coun-
tries' explanation for opposing the proposal was their fear that their cash
liquidity would suffer. But, what precisely is cash liquidity? It is the
other aspect of the phenomenon of escaping Arab capital. i.e., the constant
change from dollars, to German narks. to gold. A West Gernan official re-
portedly described the situation this way: "If the Arabs stopped buying
gold, the price would drop to $70 per ounce."
FRANCE OPENS NEH TIES WITH ARAB GULF
Paris AL-MUSTAQBAL in Arabic 27 Oct 79 p 16
(Article: "Will the United States Counter French Advances in the Gulf?"]

[Text] Kuwait and the other Gulf capital cities are preparing to receive
French President Giscard d'Bstaing. Preparations are underway to compile
a complete file on Arab-French relations in general and French-Gulf rela-
tions in particular. In Kuwait. the Foreign Ministry has recalled its
ambassador in Paris, Mr 'lsa al-Eamad, to help with the preparations.
luediately upon his return, the ambassador met with hair Jabir al-Ahmad
al-Sabah and Prime Minister Sa'd a1-‘Abda11ah al-Sabah. He also had a
lengthy meeting with the Deputy Prime Minister and Foreign Minister Sabah
al-Ahmad al-Sabah, Finance Minister 'Abd al-Rahman al-‘Atiqi and Oil Minis-
ter 'Ali al-Khalifa al-Sabah. This flurry of meetings appear to indicate
that the Kuwaiti Government is attaching special significance to the French
president's visit next March.

Observers curious about the visit speculate that Kuwait has long recog-
nized France's special standing and importance among European countries,
particularly its role in the European Com-on Market. Kuwait, they believe.
has always recognized that Arab diplomatic relations with Europe have taken
a back seat compared to relations with the United States. This state of
affairs, they insist, dates back to General de Gaulle's presidency and has
continued unchanged through the presidencies of Pompidou and Giscard
d'Estaing. Arab diplomacy. they add, has focused its attention on the
United States in the belief that a peaceful solution to the Middle East
crisis rests with that country. This belief was encouraged and nurtured
by Egyptian President Anwar al-Sadat who, in a gesture of good will, gave
up 99 percent of his political cards, putting his faith in the United
States. while ignoring other political forces, especially the Soviet Union
and Hestern Europe.

Pros the beginning, Kuwait has recognized that this policy was not in the
Arabs' ultimate interest and that its consequences were bound to be nega-
tive in the extreme. Ignoring the other international powers. the Kuwaiti
Government believed, would once again bring the region to the brink of war.
This assessment was not buried in the Foreign Ministry's files; rather,
Kuwait actively set about to lake its viewpoint known in other Arab capi-
tals. The effort ultimately paid off , as these countries became convinced
of the necessity of dealing with Europe. particularly France. on a level
parallel to but independent basis with the United States. Kuwait believes
that Arab diplomatic relations with the United States should be kept dis-
tinct from their relations with Europe, and that the situation in the Arab
world calls for a new strategy, one that enables the Arabs to deal with
Europe freely, openly and with greater understanding. Convinced of this
viewpoint, the Arab states are turning to an Arab—European dialog and Gulf
States-European dialog. Joint Kuwaiti-European and Gulf-French working
committees have been formed. These comittees have net and continue to
meet in Paris or one of the Gulf capital cities. They have laid down a
framework for political, economic and financial relations between Kuwait
and France; the latter has also expanded its relations with Saudi Arabia.
Iraq. the United Arab Emirates and Qatar. Official French delegations
have visited several of these Arab capital cities. The result has been
better political and economic relations, evidenced by a growing volume of
trade. The increased trade, a good barometer of political relations, has
not gone unnoticed in Hashington, which is beginning to feel uneasy about
the ultimate consequences of the new direction of French-Arab relations.
Observers in Kuwait would not be surprised to see a American love aimed

at obstructing French advances in the Arab world. Should the French thrust
remain unchecked. Hashington fears, the United States may lose its attrac-
tion as the vortex to which all Arab currents flow. Such a tendency, more-
over, would not be easy to moderate, particularly in view of the fact that
no love or mutual interest is lost between the Arabs and the United States.
BRIEFS

SUDANBSE, ALGERIAN PRESIDENTS' TALKS--Honrovia, Dec 5, (SUNA)--chadli
Bendjedid, Algerian president, called today here on Sudanese President
Ja'far Nunsyri at his residence in the Liberian capital, announced Presi-
dent Numsyri's press adviser Muhammad Hahjub. Hr Hahjub said the two
presidents discussed the situation in the Arab world and Africa as well
as bilateral relations between Sudan and Algeria. Hr Hahjub added that
the two leaders' views were identical on all the issues they discussed.
President Bendjedid has accepted an invitation by President Nunayri to
visit the Sudan. The date of the visit will be fixed later. [Text]
[JN051816 Khartoum SUNA in English 1755 GMT 5 Dec 79 JR]

CSO: 5420
MOROCCAN PAPER CARRIES AOSARIO 'OPEN LETTER' TO TUNIS SUMMIT
L0051609 Casablanca LE HATIN in French 22 Nov 79 p 4 LD

[HAP report providing apparent text of "open letter from the Movement of
Natives of Saguia el Nambra and Rio de Oro to the Tunis summit")

[Text] Rabat, 22 November(HAP)-The Movement of Natives of Saguia el Nambra
and Rio de Oro (AOSARIO) has sent an open letter to the Arab leaders
gathered in Tunis. It has asked the Arab league secretary general to insure
its distribution among all members of the league.

Here is the text of this letter:

Gentlemen, in view of dangers threatening Arab unity and the split which
the enemy of Islam has managed to create among the ranks of a nation dear
to us all, especially by applying the carrot-and-stick method to certain
people, the AOSARIO urges Arab leaders to act with greater vigilance to
safeguard their independence from conflicts in which they are used to the
detriment of the Arab peoples.

Speaking on behalf of the liberation movements and political fronts against
the occupier which existed in Sahara before the creation of the "POLISARIO"
by Algiers in 1976-1975, the AOSARIO ventures to recall in this difficult
situation the mission accomplished by the Kingdom of Morocco, which has set
a vivid example for all by championing a common cause-~nemely, the cause of
Arab unity and territorial integrity--a mission which succeeded in defeating
attempts by French colonialism to make the Algerian National Liberation
Front support the fait accompli of an independence already enjoyed by the
Touareg people in Algerian Sahara.

At that time, the French authorities based their arguments on the fact that
so-called Algerian Sahara consisted of territories taken away from Morocco,
Hali, Tunisia and Niger and incorporated into what was at that time "French
Algeria."

Furthermore, the same arguments were used by French colonialism, which in
fact aimed at breaking up Arab territories, to support the claim that the
Algerian Touareg people inhabitating that region had no affinity and no
connection with the Algerian people as such.
As for the Arab nation, it is by no means able to understand the reasons
which have induced some of its leaders to deny this historical fact by.
among other things, refusing to recognise s right in support of which the
Moroccan people have fought--namely the right to their territorial integrity.

The AOSARIO deems it opportune to remind the Arab heads of state and govern-
ment gathered in Tunis thst they have a duty to exert pressure by using
their influence with s view to stopping a fratricidal war fostered by
governments which have found no use for the riches bestowed upon them by
nature other then fostering warfare, instead of using them for humanitarian
purposes.

Just like international opinion, the AOSARIO feels sure that history will
judge all those who, by fostering this fratricidsl war, must bear responsi-
bility for the desth of men, which leaves in its train widows and orphans
(in Nsli, Niger, Chad, Heuritanis and Algeria). Furthermore, it feels
certain that this responsibility will be shared by the governments of these
countries which, under the pretext of finding a solution to the unemployment
problem, shut their eyes to the enrollment of their citisens even though
they are sware that these men face certain death in the service of a crim-
inal cause.

Dated: 19 November; Signed by Ahmed Rschid on behalf of the secretary
general.

C50: 4400
BRIEFS

AOSARIO VICTORIES IN AMERIAHA statement issued today by the AOSARIO
[Association of Original Spanish Sahara Natives] announced that loo Algerian
soldiers were killed and scores of others wounded during a military Opera-
tion the AOSARIO carried out in southwestern Algeria. The statement added
that connsndos of the AOSARIO fighters laid an ambush for an Algerian con-
voy on the night of Wednesday and Thursday in the area of (Zegdou) and
Tinfouchy, which lie along the main road linking Bechar and Tindouf. Ten
out of the 50 vehicles in the convoy were destroyed during a battle that
lasted for lo hours. Pour members of the AOSARIO were martyred and five
others were injured. On Thursday, two trucks of the Berliet type, which
were carrying munition, exploded as a result of mines planted by the
AOSARIO members in the area between (Boubarnua) and (Shanashin) in Algeria.
The drivers of the two vehicles and two others were killed. This is the
second operation to be carried out by the AOSARIO inside Algeria. The
first was in the area 100 Ina east of Tindouf on 7 September. The target
was a'unit of the Algerian Army operating under the cover of the so-called
POLISARIO. The operation left a nutter of Algerian personnel killed and
scores of injured. [Text] [132100059 Rabat Domestic Service in Arabic
2000 GMT 2!. Nov 79 Lb]

AOSARIO REJECTS AWERIA'S 'REPRESMATION'--Rabat, Nov 24, (HAP)--‘l‘he
association of the natives of the Sahara formerly under Spanish rule
[AOSARIO] strongly rejects the resolution by which some countries. members
of the United Nations, tried to impose on the populations native of the
Moroccan Sahara formerly under Spanish rule a so-called will that the
Algerian Government personifies on behalf of the 7,000 sequestrated persons.
in a conamanique published Friday, the AOSARIO denounces this "masquerade"
and recalls that nothing the world. be it the United Nations, can weaken
the determination of a people who have decided to recover their rights.
The conunique finally states that despite the will of some imperialist
powers, who tried to manipulate to their own benefit the mercenaries, some
countries, such as Zaire (Katanga), Nigeria (Biafra) and even Algeria (the
Touareg Republic), managed to oppose the plots that aimed at Balkanising

their territories. [Text] [132101506 Rabat HAP in English 1218 cm 2!. Nov
79 Lo]

10
'BERBBR LIBERATIOR FRONT POUNDED—Diploaatic source. in the French
capital eaid that the first founding neeting of the "Berber Liberation
Front" [Jabhat-al-Tahrir al-Barbariyah] was recently held near Paria.
The meeting was attended by a nutter of intellectuals of Berber origin
as well no one Arab aabauador. The meeting was aimed at eetabliohing
the front'e general policies in the future, the fame of ita work, its
finance and the extent of linking its actions with one of the great
world powers. It appeara that the front will concentrate ite activity
during the preeent stage within Algeria and will try to revive the
idea of an independent national hone for the Berbere in the Arab
Maghreb. [Text] [31271956 Paris AL-HDS‘I‘AQBAL in Arabic 2b Nov 79 p 19 JR)

680: 41002

11
PAPER SAYS U.S. THREAT DIM OONPINBD TO IN
LDO60953 Algiers AL-SHA'B in Arabic 28 Nov 79 p 1 LD

[Bditorisl: "Dimensions of a Revolution and the Calculations of Its
Enemies" ]

[Text] President Carter revealed yesterday that the present caspaign
in the Western world against the Iranian revolution is not aimed
against what is known as the holding of the Anericsn hostages in Tehran
but prinsrily at striking a blow at this revolution which has destroyed
the imperialist powers' plans in the area and toppled one of the sain-
stays that protected their interests in this oil-rich part of the world.
Carter asserted that he does not believe "that the freeing of the U.S.
hostages will end the crisis between the United States and Iran." This
is a serious, though implicit, threat that exposes the aggressive U.S.
intentions toward this bastion that collapsed while those who were pro-
tecting it watched helplessly.

Washington would not allow its newborn creation to die at such an early
age. The Camp David agreements, by which the Americans believed they
had changed the geopolitical map of the area, went up in flames in the
midst of the store unleashed by the Iranian revolution. This happened
after the Americans thought that the defunct Iranian regime was one of
the basic guarantees of their inplenentation. Al-Sadat today is facing
isolation even among his own new friends, who are apprehensive about the
state of affairs in the Cairo regime. The self-rule project has been
rejected by the Palestinian masses. Carter's only gain since he cause to
office was the Canp David card, which he is now about to lose as he
approaches a difficult electioneering period.

The U.S. President's open hostility toward the Iranian revolution
clearly proves to the world that it is indeed a progressive revolution
and a great gain for the world liberation love-ant which he auat strike
at in order to reinstate his plan to which the shah was a party.

This makes it incudaent upon revolutionary and progressive forces, par-
ticularly in the Arab world, to coordinate their stands in order to

12
repel attenpts to abort the Iranian people's revolution and to fortify
it against the provocations of agents in the area who fear the collapse
of their regimes hostile to the people; aspirations as a result of the
revolutionary fever that has emanated froe Iran.

The Arab peoples fully sympathize with the Iranian people's revolution
and their stand will not change because of some circumstancial actions
that have been exploited by the imperialist powers' media with the aim
of distorting the image of the Iranian revolution—a revolution which,
as soon as it triuqohed. hastened to support the Arab destiny and broke
all the ties that the deposed shah forged with the Zionist adninistre-

tion in Tel Aviv.

It is regrettable indeed that the Arab leaders should ignore the sig-
nificance of the “.5. threats against the new Iran and refuse to
receive the Iranian delegation that went to Tunis to explain the
reality of the situation and the essence of the conflict, the nature of
which Carter revealed yesterday when he said that it will not end with

"the freeing of hostages."

We might have some reservations regarding certain methods of dealing
with events in Iran but this does not mean that the Arab world and the

world progressive forces should adopt a spectator's attitude, because
we would thus be turning our back on the liberation movement for which
resolutions and reconsndetions stipulate support.

The conflict today between Washington (in the first place) and the
Iranian revolution goes beyond the limits within which imperialist
propaganda is trying to confine it. He would be misleading ourselves
to believe that it is aimed at Iran alone. Rather. it is part of a
strategic plan for domination and iwosing influence so that the Third
World peoples will remain bogged down in problem which are the work

of those who used freedom as a slogan to deprive their own people of it.

C50: 6402

13
UG‘I‘A-HPTU JOINT COOIIUNIQUE
Algiers BI. MUNAHID in French 10 Sep 79 p 3

l'next] Algiers (APS) "Following the visit of a delegation of the World
Federation of Trade Unions [mu], led by its general secretary, Hr Enrique
Pastorino, the following joint communique was published on Sunday:

"At the invitation of the General Union of. Algerian Workers [UG'I‘A], a large
delegation of the World Federation of Trade Unions, led by its general secre-
tary, Enrique Pastorino, visited Algeria from 4 to 9 September 1979.

”While visiting Algeria, the delegation was received by Brother Mohamed Salah
Yahiaoui, a Political Bureau member and party coordinator of the National
Liberation Front.

“The WHO delegation held several talks with a UG'l’A delegation led by its
general secretary, Hr Demene Debbih Abdellah. The discussions particularly
concerned the various aspects of relations between the two organisations in
the context of solidarity among workers worldwide and support of just causes
for the national independence of peoples and peace in the world.

“The mu delegation visited various achievements of the Algerian Revolution
in economic, industrial, agricultural and social areas.

“The delegation visited the Arrow petrochemical complex, the socialist village
of 'Aures-El-Heida' and the regional trade union school at Tlencen.

"The delegation contacted trade union officials at the wilaya [governoratel
and production-unit levels.

"The WPTU delegation adnired the results and achievements made by Algerian

trade unions, workers and farmers in the struggle for development and pro-
duction and in building a socialist Algeria.

“In the name of its 190 million member workers, the mu delegation again
expressed its total solidarity with the Algerian people. It vigorously
condoms ilperialist pressures, reactionary scheoes and the threats of the
reactionary government of Rabat against the Algerian Revolution.

1‘;
”The UG‘I‘A delegation pointed out the HP'I'U's actions of solidarity and support
for the Algerian Revolution since the armed struggle for national liberation.
It appreciates the campaigns conducted by the em for consolidation of the
anti-imperialist, anti-Zionist and antiapartheid world front for the libera-
tion and equality of peoples and for peace in the world.

"During their discussions. the two delegations noted the agreement of their
views, particularly on the seriousness of the situation in the Middle East
and on the threats to the heroic Palestinian people following the Camp David
accords and the Washington treaty between Begin and Sadat under the control
of American inperialism.

"The two delegations condemn all forms of oppression and repression against
southern Lebanon, aimed at the massive extermination of Lebanon's progressive,
nationalist forces and Palestinian insurgents.

"The two delegations are of the opinion that there can be no lasting settle-
ment of the situation in the Middle East without the establishment of the
legitimate national rights of the Palestinian people under the leadership
of their sole representative. the Pm.

"The two delegations noted with satisfaction the progress of the Saharan
people's just cause, as a result of their many victories both in the armed
struggle and in international diplomacy. The two delegations hail the
courageous positions taken by the Mauritanian people and their leaders and
those of the Spanish Government. They applaud the just conclusions of the
OAU conference in Monrovia, recognizing the legitimate right of the people
of Western Sahara to self-determination and independence.

"The two delegations vigorously condemn the decision of the reactionary
government of Egypt to militarily support the invasion of the Saharan Deno-
cratic Arab Republic and reaffirm their full support of the Saharan people
and their vanguard, the Polisario Front.

”Both delegations express support for consolidation of active solidarity
with peoples struggling for their independence in Africa, particularly with
the peoples in southern Africa struggling against apartheid and racial
segregation. In this connection, they vigorously condemn the massive air
raids conducted by the Musorewa regime in Zimbabwe against the people

of Mozambique.

"Hhile congratulating each other on the brilliant victory of the Nicaraguan
people. the two organizations again proclaim their full solidarity with
people struggling against inperialism and reactionary attitudes, and against
fascist regimes, particularly in Chile and Uruguay and in other Latin Ameri-
can countries.

"Both organizations will continue to constantly oppose multinational corpora-
tions in favor of establishing a new international economic order and to con-
stantly lend their support to workers and trade unions in capitalist countries
in their struggle against the economic crisis imposed on them. They have
agreed to step up their efforts to end the arms race and nilitary expenditures
imposed by world imperialism and to work untiringly for the general progress
of all peoples.

”me-two entities sharply protest the arbitrary measures taken against imi-
grants in ﬁance and particularly against Algerian immigration. They vigor-
ously condenn the xenophobic and racist acts against imigrant workers.

“The two organizations note with satisfaction that their joint cooperation,
in mutual respect, is helping to strengthen the world trade union movement.
They have agreed to step up joint efforts in the interest of workers and,
in this connection, to strengthen bilateral relations between the two
organizations.

“The WPTU delegation has invited a 061“ delegation to visit it. The invita-
tion has been accepted with pleasure.

”In concluding their discussions, the mo expressed its sincere thanks to
the mm for its invitation and the warm welcome accorded 1t."
EOEBIGN MINISTER BEN‘IAHIA STATEMENT 10 APS ON WIRED SUMMIT
Algiers BL MOUNAHID in French 10 Sep 79 p 4

[Text] Drawing conclusions on the sixth emit of non-
alined countries, Political Bureau nenber and foreign
affairs minister Hohaned Benyahia, who participated in
that conference's proceedings, made the following state-
ment to the APS:

“the sixth conference of chiefs of state or governments of nonalined nations,
whose proceedings have just ended, was undeniably a great success, contrary
to the false predictions made well before the SUI-lit was held in Havana,
foretelling the nonalined mvenent's inability to deal with both current
problem and those facing the mvenent itself. On the contrary, the im-
portant decisions clearly apparent in the conference's final declaration
demonstrate the movement's dynamism and vigor and its ability to strengthen
its unity and to consolidate its ranks.“

loyalty to Ideals of Nonalinenent

“The clear reaffirmation of the permanent nature of the principles which
have always guided nonalined countries, and the definition of precise goals
in compliance with the aspirations of our peoples, are obvious proof of the
extent of the nonalined conunity's awareness and its ability to assume its
role in international relations. This denonstrates not only loyalty to the
basic tenets of the policy of nonalinenent, but also reflects loyalty to the
ideals which have made it possible to nobilize the energies of a large part
of humanity.

"Far from being an incongruous assewa of a growing number of countries,

in its diversity the movement derives its real strength from giving more
validity to its principles. This is what must be esphasized first and
foremost: the move-ent‘s basic principle is national independence in all

its forms and in all its aspects. It implies total expression of the nove-
ment's support for peoples struggling for their national independence, whether
in southern Africa, in Palestine, in Western Sahara or in other areas of

the world.
"with regard to the Middle East problem, the most notable point is the
explicit and unequivocal condemnation of the Camp David and Washington
accords, which signify, according to the resolution adopted, a total
abandonment of the cause of Arab countries, an act of complicity with
the occupation of Arab territories and a :viclation of the inalienable
rights of the Palestinian people.

"We condemation. which confirms and supports the decisions made in July
by African chiefs of state in Monrovia, induced the conference to request
an examination, at the next ministerial meeting of nonalined countries, of
the question of suspending Egypt from the movement. Thus the conference
wished to show its very clear disapproval of the Egyptian Government's
policy of compromise.”

Western Sahara Decolonization Process Incomplete

"With regard to the Western Sahara question, there again the chiefs of state
of nonalined countries expressed a very clear position. In examining every
aspect of this question, the nonalined countries, 94 nations from every con-
tinent, actually declared formally for the first time that the process of
decolonizing this territory has not been completed. Thus they expressed
support for effective application of the inalienable right of the people

of Western Sahara to self-determination and independence and endorsed the
recent decisions made by the Monrovia emit.

"The conference also condemned the extension of Horocco's armed occupation
of the part of western Sahara previously occupied by Mauritania. For the
first time, the conference mentioned the Polisario Front as an iuportant
party in settling the conflict.

"Thus after Monrovia, this is the greatest political and diplomatic victory
by the Saharan people in the international arena with such a broad consensus.
since only four countries expressed reservations.

"An exceptional event in an international conference should be noted: seven
countries, most of which are located thousands of kilometers from the occupied
area, made a point of expressing their support for the principles of freedom
of peoples and their solidarity with the national liberation movement by
recognizing the SDAR [Saharan Democratic Arab Republic].

"With regard to southern Africa, besides expressing the total, solid support
of nonalined countries for the cause of liberation movements in that region,
the most outstanding fact is the admission, after SNAPO, of the Patriotic
Front of Zimbabwe as a totally separate member of the nonalined movement.
This represents a unanimous scathing response by the nonalined community

to all schemes of those who wish to imose false solutions intended to deny
the peoples of Zimbabwe and Namibia their inalienable national rights.

“Economically, which represents the second important aspect of the agenda,
the decisions made represent a significant contribution to strengthening
cooperation and solidarity among nonalined countries as well as a definite
platform for these countries' demands for the establishment of a new inter-
national economic order. 1‘his is the context of the action taken by Algeria.
which actively participated in preparing every resolution and in formulating
the principal ideas listed in the economic declaration. Thus of the measures
taken by the conference. many were approved on the basis of the proposals sub-
mitted by the Algerian delegation.“

Algeria ' 5 Contribution

“This is mainly the resolution stipulating and broadening the program of
action for economic cooperation amng nonalined countries. Specific measures
regarding raw materials, and including energy, were proposed.

"Another resolution also submitted by Algeria and considered by the conference
proposed comprehensive negotiations between developing and developed countries
within the framework of the United Nations and with the goal of restructuring
international economic relations.

“The obvious success of the conference was largely due to its perfect organi-
zation. President Fidel Castro presided over the emit conference and the
debates with a devotion and objectivity which won the admiration of all
delegations.

"Finally. I want to take this opportunity to pay tribute to the members of
the Algerian delegation, who made a great personal contribution by going
without sleep during the 72 hours of the final phase in order to provide
Algeria's full contribution to the unity and enrichment of the movement
and to the political success of the conference.“
BB! BELLA SUPPORT!!! CRITICIZKS REGIKE'S TREATMENT OF BX-PRBIDENT
Paris AL-NANAR Ala-'ARABI HA AL-DUWALI in Arabic 11 Nov 79 pp 28-29

[Interview With Heater of International Coulittee To Defend Ben Bella by
Jamal Rawi; Ben Bella Supports Political Multi-Party System; Hhat Pate Is
Awaiting Ben Bella; Hill He Resume Bis Political Role; "hat Is His Opinion
of System of Government in Algeria; Arab Mother of Committee To Defend Ben
Bella Provides Answers"]

[Text] With the publication of this edition of AL-NABAR AL-‘ARABI HA Al.-
DUHALI. some change is supposed to have taken place in the status of Ahmed
Ben Bella, a former Algerian president. who has been under house arrest in
M'Sila since the loth of last July after having remained a prisoner in el-
Douirate jail since 19 June 1965, i.e. for nearly 16 years. making him

the political prisoner to spend the longest time in jail in the entire
world without trial.

A few weeks ago, there were successive reports that the Algerian leader
would be freed at the beginning of the current month on the 25th anniver-
sary of the inception of the Algerian people's struggle against the Punch
colonialism.

Without reviewing the history of Ben Bella who spent 22 years out of his
life in jails, both under the French rule and the national rule, it should
be pointed out that this an remained for long years the sydyol of the
heroism of an entire people. even the sydiol of liberation of all the
third world peoples.

But as of the moment of his arrest, Ben Bella has been subjected to an
unprecedented blackout campaign. Prom 19 June 1965 until 5 July 1979. the
day on which the report of his release was announced briefly in the offi-
cial newscast. Ben Bella's name did not appear in any official Algerian
source and it rarely surfaced officially in the world.

Despite this blackout, Bcn Bella has continued to live in the memory of
the Algerians. Since his transfer to H'Sila, his new prison has turned
into a pilgrimage ground visited daily by hundreds of people: workers.
farmers. old friends and sons of mrtyra who come from all parts of
Algeria to say to him: You are our father.

What now? Hill Ben Bella be completely freed? Hill he be permitted to
receive non-Algerians, to meet the press, to make political statements, to
move freely and to leave the country if he so wishes? What is the fate
awaiting him?

Freedom With Commitments

The sources close to Ben Bella find it unlikely, despite all the assertions
and all the rumors about his imminent release, that his full freedom will
be restored to him unless something lies behind such a decision. It is
illogical that Ben Bella's position will shift overnight from one of strict
surveillance to one of full freedom without commitments nde by the former
president-~conmitnents dealing with the limits and forms of his future
activity.

But all those who know the former president and those who have met him
recently insist that he will make no concessions. will undertake no com-it-
ments of any sort and will not agree to have his freedom shackled after 15
years of arbitrary imprisonment without being accused of any charge. His
departure from prison means to him. primarily, that he will be able to
speak after this long wait. Otherwise. his release will have no meaning.

A period of 14.5 years in jail is enough to change this run and sydiol who
is also subjected currently to an image-distorting caQaign by the Arab and
international aedia that have persistently ascribed to him for years. and
especially in recent weeks, positions with which he has no connection.

AL-NAHAR AL-‘ARABI WA AL-DWALI has taken a nuder of questions to an
Arab meter of the International Comittee to defend Ben Bella which has
its headquarters in Paris. This meaber. who has insisted on not divulging
his name, is considered close to Ben Bella, has had constant contacts with
Ben Bella's family and knows the details of what hm happened and is
happening to the former president since his arrest.

[Question] How did Ben Bella live in el-Douirate jail?

[Answer] Ben Bella remained a prisoner in an apartment attached to a mili-
tary barracks of the First Military Province in el Douirate from 19 June
1965 to lo July 1979 when he was transferred to Hessils. Throughout his
stay in el Douirate jail, he was only allowed to go to a very small yard
close to the apartment surrounded by barriers that block all view.

When President Chadli ordered on 22 March 1979 that the screen obstructing
the view from Ben Bella's apartment window be removed, Ben Bella stood in
front of the window for long hours while his wife was close to him, crying
and overcome by emotion. That was the first time that Ben Bella had seen
trees in 15 years.

[Question] Has there been a change in his situation since his transfer to
Hesaila?

[Answer] In Messila. he has been lodged in a huge villa that used to be
occupied by an Algerian bourgeois. Giving Ben Bella this huge residence is
intended to distort his image among his visitors who will notice the
splendor of the place in which the Algerian leader is living.

[Question] But it has been said that the villa in which he is residing is
the property of his wife's family?

[Answer] This is not true. His wife's family is poor and the family head
is a migrant worker who lives in a small apartment, which I believe is
rented. near the Algerian capital. The family has no other property.

Yahiaoui's Reason

[Question] It has been rumored that Mohamed Saleh Yahiaoui, the ruling
party leader, supports releasing Ben Bella. Is this true?

[Answer] No. Yahiaoui has always rejected Ben Bella's release for a well-
known reason. In 1962, Yahiaoui was wounded in the national liberation war
and asked Ben Bella to send him to Switzerland for treatment. Ben Bella
turned down his request. saying: You are one of tens of thousands of
wounded and we cannot send you and leave the others here. Since then,
Yahiaoui has been hearing Ben Bella a grudge which persists until now.

[Question] A lot has been written about Ben Bella's reading in his jail.
It is known that you are one of the people familiar with the books sent
to him in jail. Can you give an idea about what he has been reading?

[Answer] Ben Bella has read a lot of books in 16 years. Before his
marriage, he used to read an average of one book a day. The first two books
he asked for after 9 days of his arrest were the Koran and Lenin's com-
plete writings. They were delivered to him by Col al-Sa'id 'Ubayd who

was his jailer and whom Boumediene assassinated with his own hands in
December 1967.

[Question] What are the books read by Ben Bella?

[Answer] I believe that he read all the books that reached him aethodically.
He proceeded from subject to subject, beginning with "Revival of the
Theological Sciences" by al-Ghazali and the conplete works of al-Hallaj

and ending with the modern and contemporary intellectual currents. He has
read most of Karl Marx's and Friedrich Bngels' work and the complete works

22
of Michel Foucault and others. He also familiarized himself with the
modern schools of literary criticism, with higher mathematics and with
languages.

Moreover, Ben Bella has kept in close touch with all the political and
social transformations undergone by Algeria during his inprisonlent. He
has surprised all his interlocutors with his profound knowledge of what
has happened and is happening in Africa and the Middle East and of the
latest international developments.

[Question] It has been said that before his death, Boumediene had decided
to release Ben Bella. Is this true?

[Answer] Throughout 15 years, Bounediene rejected absolutely any talk
about releasing Ben Bella, especially from Arab and world figures. when
Lt Col Abu-Bakr Yunis brought up the issue with him in 1978, Bounediene
left the hall without any answer. But when he returned from Moscow on the
eve of his death. Bou-ediene experienced a crisis of the conscience in his
plane and began to weep before Bouteflika in regret for his treatment of
Ben Bella.

[Question] How does Ben Bella view the current Algerian leadership? will
he return to the political arena after his release? How does he assess
Boumediene's experiment?

[Answer] It is not unlikely that Ben Bella will return to the political
arena. But in any case, he will not engage in his future political acti-
vity within the current leadership. He criticizes strongly the over-
whelming majority of the wen in power. His wife points out in a recent
interview she gave the AP? that he does not approve of any aspect of the
policy followed by the regime since 1965, especially in regard to the
growing bureacracy in agriculture, the haphazardly industrialisation that
has produced no results and administrative corruption.

He also criticizes the Algerian diplomatic movenent, especially in Africa
where Algeria has failed to support the countries struggling for their
liberation.

As for Bounediene, Ben Bella considers hin, contrary to what is ascribed to
Ben Bella currently. a counterrevolutionary. He used to say that Boumediene
was a "catastrophe" not only for Algeria but also for the Arab world and

the third world in its entirety.

[Question] What is Ben Bella's position toward the phase during which he
himself ruled in the period from 28 September 1962 to 18 June 1965?

[Answer] During his imprison-ant, Ben Bella has engaged in comprehensive
self-criticism. He considers, for exalple, banning the Algerian Connunist
Party a fault. He is now against the single-party principle and criticizes
both the western capitalist system and the eastern communist system. He
believes that development of the Algerian revolution requires the implemen-
tation of comprehensive self-administration in all the popular circles.

He also believes that political multiplicity [multi-party system] and
intellectual multiplicity is a condition for the growth of democracy which
is, in his opinion, a condition for the success of the revolution.

[Question]. What is Ben Bella's present position toward Islam?

[Answer] There is no doubt that Ben Bella is a religious man who prays in
his prison. he was also religious before he entered the jail. But he was
and continues to be against Islamic religious fanaticism. he believes in
the right of all the religious and national minorities to determine their
future freely. He also believes in the right to disagreement in all its
forms.

Even though he admires the Iranian people's movement that toppled the shah.
he condemns the fanatic ayatollahs.

Worried for His Life

[Question] Sometime ago, Ben Bella's lawyer wrote that he had been exposed
to two assassination attempts in jail during the rule of Colonel Boumediene
and she expressed her fear that he may be assassinated. Are there any
justifications that actually call for concern for the former president's life
after his release from prison?

[Answer] The fears are present and they have their justifications. Ben
Bella's enemies inside and outside Algeria are numerous. The Algerian
regime. like most of the Arab regimes, has become accustomed to physical
liquidations. Between 1965 and 1975, more than nine political figures were
assassinated, including Mohamed (Kheider), Karim Belkacem and Ahmed
Medgheri.

In the fall of 1977, King Hassan II brought up with Carter the issue of the
imminent death of Boumediene and the possibility of Ben Bella's return
and they studied the ways to confront such a possibility.

It is certain that Kasdi Herbah, the former chief of military intelligence
and the current secretary general of the Ministry of Defense (i.e. the
minister of defense). is one of the fiercest opponents of Ben Bella and
that he does not approve Ben Bella's release. Hirbah is the person through
whom Boumediene liquidated all his opponents physically.

In any case. there is no shortage of scenarios in the mind of whoever

wants to kill. Ben Bella may be assassinated and it may be said that the
murderer is the agent of a foreign circle (Morocco, Iarael...), it may be
said that the murderer is insane or he may be killed on the spot. Naturally.
a huge funeral procession may be organized and led by the ruling crew and
Ben Bella say be thcn declared the revolution's martyr.

2h
[Question] How does Ben Bella view the treatment he is currently given by
the regime?

[Answer] Ben Bella considers his transfer from el Douirate to Hessila a
transfer from one prison to a less restrictive prison. In Hessila, be is
still surrounded by the military intelligence men who live in the first floor
of the villa which is surrounded by police and security men. There is
surveillance and bugging equipnent in the residence. The intelligence
agencies have even tried to sneak some people to spy on Ben Bella in the

new prison.

Some security men are stationed at the Villa's iron gate while a military
roadblock set up near the villa watches the visitors, checks their identity
cards and inspects then. Moreover, in all his movements inside Hessila,
the [former] president is always accompanied by tens of security men. Be
still cannot get telephone calls or cables and all his correspondence is
subjected to censorship.
BEN BBLIA'S LAWYER ASKS GiADLI m GRANT HER MEETING HIT“ EX-PRBIDDIT
Paris AL-NARAR AIr'ARABI HA AL-DUVALI in Arabic 11 Nov 79 p 29

[Article: "Lawyer Lafue-Veron to Bendjedid: Hhat Harm Is There in My
Contacting Him"]

[Text] Hrs Lafue-Veron, the French lawyer who has been defending Ben Bella
for 22 years. addressed on 12 August 1979 a message through the Algerian
elbassy in Paris to Algerian President Chadli Bendjedid asking that she be
permitted to meet her client. She had addressed another mssage to the
same effect to the Algerian President in April 1979 but received no answer

to it.

When 10 weeks passed on the dispatch of her [second] message without
receiving an answer, Hrs Lafue-Veron decided to publish the text of that

Following is a translation of the text which is published for the first
time:

12 August 1979

Mr President ,

I had asked you on Io April 1979 to permit ne to exercise my rights as a
lawyer and to contact my client. ear-President Ahmed Ben Bella, whom I have

not been able to contact for 16 years.

I have received no answer to this request of nine and I am today renewing
my request, keeping in mind that my client requested after his transfer to
H'Sila that I be permitted to meet him.

His status has undergone important deveIOpments since 4 July. He was moved
out of the grave in which he had lived for 16 years and transferred from
el-Douirate to Hessila under good guard-six police cars where following
the car that carried Ben Bella and his wife. Finally, the Inn intended to
turn into a living dead was able to see villages and fields again.
Today, the president and his family live under house arrest. As soon as
his Algerian friends heard the news of his release, they circulated this
news among themselves. As soon as they learned that he was in Heasila,
they hastened to visit him.

have the measures taken by your predecessor been abolished? Only a few.

and very few. of them have. Military security elements guard the villa
gate while others are stationed inside the refuge [villa]. Security patrols
still roan around the residence and in the town. At the beginning. the
visitors were asked to show their identity cards. But the president pro-
tested. demanding that these humiliating police measures be cancelled. A
visit to the president is still considered an act of courage. The police
has sumoned a nuwer- of Hessila residents and has interrogated and threatened
a number of people close to Ben Bella. But despite the hardships, despite
Hessila's remoteness and despite the stifling heat in this area. there are
still many visitors.

Motivated by the spirit of Islamic and Algerian fraternity, tens of people
come to visit, bringing with them f lour, vegetables. meets and sugar to
share a meal with this prisoner who spent the first 3 years in a prison
where his guards were ordered not to speak a single word with him. Yes, he
lived for 3 years without hearing a human voice, except for the infrequent
visits of his mother.

It has been quickly learned that President Ben Bella was freed on the con-
dition that he give no press interviews and make no political statements.
For further guarantees, he has been banned from contacting non-Algerians.
However, one of the correspondents of Channel 2 of the French television
has been able to contact Ben Bella by telephone. This contact was controlled
and made on permission so that a statement my be recorded and broadcast in
the president's voice--a statement in which he asserts his acceptance of

the conditions stipulated in return for his release. Except for this single
cmnication, contacting either of the villa's two telephone nud>ers
remains impossible. I have tried several times to contact these nuabers,
but to no avail. One evening, I succeeded in contacting Hessils after an
Behour wait. But a voice asked the French telephone operator for the name
of the person making the call and when I identified myself. the line was

cut off without any explanation.

Host of the cables, such as the one I sent on 5 July 1979 expressing my
joy at his release, do not reach him. His mail is censored and his letters
are opened and then re-sealed in a flagrant asnner and the villa is bugged.

lhere has been a definite improvement in President Ben Bella's condition.
The villa put at his disposal is very comfortable and I believe that this
new luxury, with which President Ben Bella had previously refused to sur-
round himself , is an expression of respect for the position that he had
occupied and is not intended to isolate him in a splendid villa or to show
the workers who visit him how far is the standard of the life he is living

27
from theirs. Moreover. Ben Bella can love around only in a no! car driven
by a chauffeur, and possibly bugged, and followed by police cars. Is all
this for security or for surveillance?

These leasures, Hr president. dilinish the value of the decision that you
have finally taken to put an end to a long injustice-an injustice so unique
that it has drawn the attention of the entire world to its victim.

I an only recounting these details because you are at the top of the
judiciary authority and it is difficult for you to follow up the manner in
which the authorities concerned iuplement your instructions.

Today I an renewing officially and publicly my request to be permitted to
contact and meet with uy client in accordance with the human rights charter
that has been approved by Algeria. "hat is the harm that could result from
my visit? If the Algerians prefer to be deliberate, then I an firmly bound
to Iy client's interests and bound to speed up coupletion of the phases
which my client has been promised for his full and real release. In any
case, the world public opinion will from now on focus its attention on the
fate of this nan who has lived under a ban for a long tine and there is a
desire now to be convinced that he is beyond this ban.

I do not believe, Mr president, that my work or Iy life contain anything
that could cause concern to the Algerians whose will for independence I
supported, in the name of justice and history, since the beginning of the
Algerian war. In 1955. I was registered in the Lawyers Union in Paris to
defend the Algerians and this caused as problems with-the judiciary who
were affected by the colonialist are through which my country was going.
Why do you deny me my right to neet a hunn being I have been defending
for 22 years?

I hope, Hr president, that I will have the honor of receiving an answer
this tine. I am confident of your political feeling for justice. Please
accept Ily deepest appreciation.

Madeleine Lafue-Veron

810910
CSO: 4802

28
PARTY COORDINATOR YAHIAOUI DISCUSSBS CLEAN-UP CAMPAIGN
Algiers BL mUWAHID in French 7-8 Sep 79 p 3
[Interview with PIN Coordinator Mohamed Salah Yahiaoui]

['nextl This is the couplets text of the interview granted
by Mr Horus-ed Salah Yahiaoui, a Political Bureau member
and party coordinator of the National Liberation Front,

to the Algerian Press Service:

QUESTION: The Revolution has begun a vast operation aimed at protecting
Algerian citizens and socialist achievements. Hr Coordinator. what is your
view of this operation's prospects and what is its political context?

ANSHBR: ”This operation constitutes a link in a series of measures taken by
the political leadership to mobilize public forces in the struggle for develop-
ment and to use all potential to assure citizens‘ prosperity and security.

Thus this is by no means an inprovised, tenporary operation.

"At the time of the democratic debates on the National charter, the people
showed great enthusiasm and total willingness to love forward toward broader
horizons through more intense and more comprehensive action. me people also
confirmed their loyalty to the Revolution's achievusnts and their rejection
of weaknesses and inadequacies. The people also shoved support for all mea-
sures which the political leadership might take to protect our people's revo-
lutionary enthusiasm, instilled by wonderful examles during the struggle

for liberation.

“Through the resolutions and recolmendations adopted, the debates of the
Fourth Fm Congress provided undeniable proof of the unshakable will and
persistent desire of party cadres and militants to decisively and equitably
end all forms of delinquency, regardless of their source and regardless of
the level of their perpetrators in the hierarchy of responsibility. Algeria,
which sacrificed its best sons and paid the high price for national liberty
and dignity, could not stand idly by in the face of external phenomena intro-
duced by fringe elements who have managed to take advantage of militant toler-
ance and modesty in order to hinder the progress of the Revolution and to
tarnish its reputation.“
Assure Vitality of Revolution

"The time has come to implement revolutionary texts and documents as well
as their related criteria and provisions. This action will require us to
have faith with every trial in performing our duty.

”Our patriotic duty must be assumed under the required conditions. We must
be loved by a self-critical spirit in carrying out our mission impartially.

"It is also our duty to instill in ourselves a revolutionary spirit by taking
action in accordance with the principles of order and discipline.

”In this context, Brother Chadli Bendjedid presided over a meeting during
which he gave precise, detailed instructions for permanently eliminating
every obstacle to the Revolution's progress, by mobilizing all structures
to provide for a better implementation of the directives intended to assure
the protection of the Revolution and citizens.

"Our revolutionary values and our devotion to our country require all of us,
wherever we say be, in the factories, in the fields or in any productive job,
to mobilize ourselves for this operation, which will require a 'lot of inspi-
ration' and which concerns the citizen, above all and in the final analysis.

”When we establish security and clean up our human and material environment
and when we consider that our responsibility as individuals and as militants,
we will then have performed a national duty which is part of the heritage of
our Revolution and our deep~rooted traditions.

“More than once, our people have demonstrated a high level of awareness and
an amazing ability to perform their duty every time that the Revolution has
called on them to mobilize and to swear allegiance to our glorious martyrs.

"The measures which the political leadership has begun to ilplement are aimed
mainly at protecting the Revolution and citizens and severely and vigorously
punishing offenders. In their political content, these masures go beyond
the struggle against apparent aspects.

“Them measures thus go beyond superficial characteristics. tending toward
radical elimination of these phenomena, and will affect all areas of the
country. The assigned goal is not siuply limited to the struggle against
delinquency and its eradication, but also to educating the citizen and
urging him to participate fully in the struggle for development in a climate
in which trust and security predominate. so that everyone will also know
that the Revolution is vigilant and that it is able to make investigations,
to demand explanations and to punish.

”The secret of the Revolution's vitality and the strength of its progress
lie in its own ability to reinforce itself, to defend its principles, to
mobilize its forces and to have a clear understanding of the people's
realities, aspirations and demands.”
Extend Operation to All Levels and Sectors

QUESTION: Security services are making great efforts and assuring that
practical measures aimed at protecting the Revolution and citizens are
carried out within an organized framework. Have directives been issued
to prevent mistakes and abuses?

ANSWER: “The great efforts made by security services are primarily aimed

at protecting citizens. Thus such efforts cannot result in any harm to

them. And if we consider the capital as the first area of application--
where the measures taken by the government are beginning to be implemented--
we note that citizens unanimously agree on the need to quickly and radically
put an end to the vagrancy, theft and assault prevailing in certain districts,
to such an extent that the citizen no longer feels safe, neither for his per-
son, nor his residence, nor for his family, and lives in fear of being the
future victim of those living outside the law. Similarly, we also note the
negligence, absence of sanitation and total deterioration of buildings and
accumulation of rubbish in the streets, to such an extent that our capital,
which in principle should be a bright showplace and an object of pride for
our country, is in a critical situation, about which no one can be silent.

“I do not wish to analyze here the underlying causes which have led us into
such a situation because, as everyone knows, the citizen and his material
and social environment form a whole which reflects its own particular

cultural features .

"Thus the citizen will be taught respect for order and for responsibility
and personal initiative and we will instill noble aspirations in him by
enabling him to perceive the limits of right and duty.

“Once all social structures have been unified. from the family to the school,
the mosque, the enterprise, the party cell, to connunication and information
media, we will then be able to isolate fringe elements, for it is better to
prevent than to cure.

"The action of security services is aimed at respect for order and moral
standards in accord with the principles of our Revolution and the traditions
of our society, which is known for its noble and earnest character and its
support of the weak and oppressed.

"President Chadli Bendjedid has issued precise, detailed directives to the
security services implementing these measures in order to avoid any excess
or error.

”Thus for example, foreigners will not be affected by this operation at all,
nor will they be in the event of an ordinary misdemeanor.

"And if an excess ever does occur, it will be rectified by the security ser-

vices themselves. It will by no means continue, for the operation was estab-
lished with the purpose of protecting the Revolution and its social, economic

31
and political achievements and to enable the citizen to live his life in
peace and security.

”And judging from the initial responses which have reached us through party
cells and information media, we note the degree of enthusiasm shown by all
social classes for these measures and their desire to see them continued and
extended to all levels and all sectors."

End Passivity and Negligence

QUESTION: How do you explain the satisfaction and support shown by the mass
of the people for implementation of the measures to protect the Revolution
and citizens?

ANSWER: "A true revolution is one which expresses the great aspirations and
daily concerns of the masses and which is able to deal with problems boldly
and effectively. The Revolution must not be afraid to punish those who have
become accustomed to fishing in troubled waters, to 'enlarging" problem and
distorting their meaning. and to working to retard the progress of the
Revolution.

"Time course of the Revolution will force them out, as it has routed their
predecessors in the past.

”President Chadli Bendjcdid has expressed the Revolution's determination to
assume its responsibilities, for an individual must be told: 'You have com-
mitted an offense, you must render an account and you must be punished accord-
ing to the offense committed,‘ just as a deserving citizen must be told: 'You
have done well and you must be rewarded according to the effort which you
have made. '

"Responsibility requires duties to be put before rights, as stipulated by

the National Charter and the recommendations of the Fourth PLN Congress.

Every militant and every citizen must assume his responsibility to his

country and to his Revolution. According to his level of responsibility,

he will provide for his own security, his own happiness and his own prosperity,
as well as that of his neighbor and of the country as a whole.

”The feeling of national pride and the development of the Revolution's achieve-
ments in production and service sectors must prevail from now on, and shirking
of responsibility, negligence and passivity will no longer be tolerated. The
'beylic' mentality must be permanently abandoned.

"In reality, these principles and moral values on which the Revolution of
1 November is based are rooted in our Arab-Islamic heritage and in our
social traditions.

"All Islamic precepts encourage hygiene, even acts of piety require hygiene,
for the mind, the body and for the environment.
"The true Hoslem is one Who tries to understand the Koranic verse which
states that 'God will not change the situation of a people unless they
change themselves. '

"In our present-day terminology, good citizenship in society, the responsi-
bility which each person has to his neighbor and which Islal values, is a
corollary of freedom, responsibility, civic duty and limits to rights.

"He greatly need to revive the ancestral traditions of our heritage and our
values so that they can be put into practice in our daily lives.

“Islam is the first religion which called for harlony bemoan faith and

action by not being limited merely to intentions," the party coordinator
concluded.
FINANCE MINISTER SPEAKS ON TIES HIT“ USSR

LDO31107 Algiers EL HOUDJAHID in French 12 Nov 79 p 3 LD

[APS report providing "full text" of speech by Algerian Finance Minister
Mohamed Yale at l0 November opening of fifth session of Algerian-Soviet
Intergovernmental Standing Commission for Economic, Scientific and Tech-
nical Cooperation: "Potential for Strengthening and Developing Relations
Between the Two Countries"--passages between slantlinea published in bold-
face]

[Excerpt] Algeria's policy in the domestic sphere and in the international
sphere constitutes an integral whole and thus it is quite natural that our
country should have been prompted to establish fire relations of friendship
with the states of the socialist camp and the USSR in particular, in the
same way that Algeria maintains very close relations of fraternity and
solidarity vith the Third World countries.

This means that essentially Algeria's policy is in many respects very close
to your country's in the international sphere and in particular as far as
everything relating to strengthening the anti-imperialist and enticolonial-
ist front is concerned.

Moreover, I would like to tell you that Algeria has never tried to avoid
its duties of solidarity with developing countries and that, despite its
difficulties and the exacting demands of socialist building, Algeria sets
aside a considerable part of its GNP each year for totally disinterested
aid to certain extremely underprivileged partners.

Indeed, we have always believed for our part that the idea of solidarity
could not be an abstract philosophical concept or a fantastic notion, but
something that gives meaning to life and the relations between peoples and
makes it possible to find specific solutions for certain specific situa-
tions. Furthermore, we are deeply aware of the existence of countries that
are richer than others and countries that are poorer than others, just as
there are nations that are "rich as a result of our Health" because they
have for centuries indulged in frantic exploitation of the Third World.
/ It is for all these reasons that we have always believed that the inset-
ialist states could not be sincere friends of the developing world/ and
that it is necessary to work ceaselessly for closer links between all
peoples and all countries that cherish peace. freedom and progress. We
know that those are the objectives assigned to the policy of cooperation
between our two countries, which, moreover, have an obligation to collabo-
rate increasingly closely to set others an example of solidarity that is
true, healthy, fruitful and beneficial to our two peoples.

In this connection great things have been accomplished together. and
Algeria can only express satisfaction at what has been done. However. we
can and must do more and do better since real opportunities are available
for increasingly broad. increasingly large-scale cooperation covering more
and more fields.

In this connection I am happy to say that Algerian-Soviet cooperation is
experiencing increased vitality because we have been able to keep our rela-
tions sheltered from the hsaarda of an international capitalist market whose
crisis is having pernicious effects on all the operations implemented within
this framework.

The eminently noble goals that we are seeking to achieve within the frame-
work of our cousisaion's activities--namely, the strengthening of solidarity
between our two countries and understanding between our two peoplesugive
the two sides a special responsibility in this sphere.

/I want to reassert the Algerian Government's firm desire to spare no effort
to further develop the traditional ties of profound friendship and mutually
advantageous cooperation that link our countries./

It was in this spirit that the Algerian delegation at the preparatory
meeting for our conission's present session. which was held 18 through
26 October 1979 in Moscow, submitted a complex of specific projects, ma-
bracing the main priority sectors of our economy. whose implementation
could be insured together in a very short time. This huge program, which
is also based on the Soviet side's real potential, would make it possible
to create the necessary conditions for harmonious and balanced development
of our relations provided that a suitable financial framework can be de-
termined by our two governments.

within the prospect of solidarity and complementary relations, every
opportunity must be investigated and catalogued.

Our two delegations have already started objectively assessing all our re-
lationa in the economic, scientific and technical, and co-sercial and
financial spheres.

Many agreements have already been concluded between Algeria and the Soviet
Union. The» form a solid foundation for relations and a secure guarantee

35
for their future. New agreements betueen our government. may be aigned

or elaborated during the preaent session. Thua an additional contribution
will be made to the enduring nature of Algerian-Soviet friend-hip at the
pronpting of the lenders of our two countries. which are equally conndtted
to pro-oting more equitable relations between developed and developing
countriea and atrengthening aolidarity among progreaaive forces in the

vorld.
BRIEFS

POSTPONBMENT 0F MINISTER'S TRIPnAlgiersuAlgerian Foreign Minister Mr
Mohamed Seddik Benyahia will not go to Paris until late January, it was
announced in Algiers on 27 Novedber. This trip, planned for early Decen-
ber, has been put back by canon consent because of a crowded calendar,
particularly for Algeria: The Monrovia meeting of the OAU ad hoc connittee
on the conflict in the western Sahara. local elections on 16 Decewer and,
around 20 Decenber. a session of the National Liberation Front Central Con-
mittee. However, it is not impossible that there are other reasons behind
the postponement. The file of Algerian-French relations is particularly
delicate and declarations made on this subject by President chadli Bendjedid
on the anniversary of l Noveﬂer 1954 have been assessed in various ways.
Many people believe that dialog cannot really be restored until Paris
adopts an attitude of "true neutrality'I in the Western Sahara conflict and
clarifies its intentions with respect to iuigrant workers. The Algerisns
are certainly disposed to "write a new chapter" in bilateral relations,
but opinions differ on the conditions which must be fulfilled to achieve
these goals. The postponement of Mr Benyahia‘s trip gives extra time for
thought on this point. This doubtless does not suit Paris, which wanted
to see the cycle of discussion and consultation envisaged at the time of
Mr Francois-Poncet's visit to Algiers last June begin before the end of
the year. [Daniel Junqua] [Text] [LDOSO907 Paris LE mane in french

29 Nov 79 p lo 1.01

ECONOMIC, TRADE PBDTOOOL HIT}! BULGARIA--Morocco and Bulgaria have signed
a trade and economic cooperation agree-ant covering the period 1980-86.
According to this agreement. Bulgaria will export to Morocco a plant for
the manufacturing of mechanical equipment and electrical and chemical
products. In its turn, Morocco will export phosphate, phosphoric acid.
nonferroua ore, fish, citrus fruit and olives to Bulgaria. The agreeasnt
was signed by Mr Aszedine Gueasous, minister of camera and industry,
and by Mr Khristo Khristov, Bulgarian minister of foreign trade. The
first trade agreement between Morocco and Bulgaria was signed in 1957.

In 1965, the two countries concluded an economic, scientific and techni-
cal agreement. [Text] [LD06lM0 Rabat MAP in Arabic 1300 M 6 Dec 79 LB]

37
FRENCH HEAPONS PURCHASE-Algeria is holding talks with France on the possi-
ble purchase of French weapons, according to a well inforned source in
Paris. The source indicated that Algeria is interested in buying Pouga

90 jet training aircraft, AHX-lo tanks and other armoured vehicles as well
as artillery. The Pouga 90 can be adapted to serve as a ground attack air-
craft. According to the source. the negotiations are due to the inprove-
nent in Franco-Algerian relations following the death of President Houari
Bounedienne. The French, the source noted, were hesitant because they are
anong the principal suppliers of arms to Morocco. which is at war in the
Western Sahara against the Algerian-backed Polisario Front. The Algerians
were understood to have replied that they did not link the purchase of eras
to the Saharan conflict. {Text} [Paris AN-NAHAR ARAB REPORT a MEMO in

English 26 Nov 79 p 3]
ISLAMIC LEGAL BASIS OF KHOHEYNI RULE DISCUSSED

Dakar AFRICA in French Nov 79 pp 100-101, 110

[ﬁrticle by Ed. Fayolle: "The Khomeyni Programi]

[Text] Is it necessary to read Ayatollah Khomeyni? Given the level
to which events have carried him -- the shaper of his own
policy and the model for practices -- it is more important
to see what he does rather than to know what he says in his
speeches. Nevertheless, we propose the experiment of reading
the few short doctrinal pages which follow, referring, when
it is a question of facts, to the practices of the Islamic
tribunals and other amenities of the regime. One will conclude
that behind the innocent remarks of the "good news." God is
very dangerous when his prophets organize the government in
his name. In all good conscience, the Kboneyni who wrote
"An Islamic government is not despotic.... The chief of
state is not a despot," would now reject the accusation of
despotism. He is just a very pious old man...but beware of
hypocrits when God is in command!

The Islamic government resembles no other government now in power. It is

not despotic. The chief of state is not a despot who plays with the goods
and lives of people and does with them what he wants, who kills whomever he
pleases and enriches or ennobles whomever he wishes, handing out the land

and property of the people right and left. The prophet Ali and the caliphs
never had those kinds of powers. An Islamic government is neither despotic
nor absolutist; it is constitutional, not in the usual sense of the word,
naturally, with laws being approved by people and a majority. Rather, it

is constitutional in the sense that its leaders are bound by a set of "condi-
tions" defined in the Koran and in the Sunna of the Prophet with respect to
the chief executive and the administration. These conditions are nothing but
Islamic laws, the very laws that must be observed and applied. In this

way, an Islamic government is the government of Divine Law over the people.

That which constitutes the basic difference between an Islamic government

and other constitutional, nonarchic and republican governments. another
cardinal fact, is that under these systems, the people's elected officials,

39
or the monarch are the legislators, while under Islam. the only legislator
is God, The Holy Legislator. No one has the right to make laws and no law
is applicable if it is not made by The Legislator. That is why under an
Islamic government, instead of having a legislative assembly which usually
represents one of the three branches of government, there is a planning
assembly whose role is to organise the different ministries in keeping with
Islamic laws and to determine, with the help of these plans, the way to
perform public services throughout the territory.

All of the Islamic laws found in the Koran and the Sunna have been accepted

by Muslims and the latter obey them. This facilitates the task of the govern-
ment, which thereby becomes the coordinator of the people. However, under other
constitutional systems, the majority of those who pass themselves off as

the representatives of the majority of the people approve whatever they wish

as laws and then impose them on all the people.

A government of Islam is a government of the Law. Under this method of
government. sovereignty belongs exclusively to God and the Law constitutes
God‘s order and decree. The Law of Islam. the Order of God, reigns in an

absolute fashion over everyone and over the Islamic state. All men, from

the Prophet on down to his caliphs and common mortals, are always subject to
the Law, which is sent by God and explained in the Koran and by the Prophet.
If the latter assumed the responsibility of the caliphate, it was upon God's
order. He is God's caliph on earth and not caliph acting upon his own initia-
tive with the intention of becoming leader of the Muslims. When risks of
conflict appeared within the community, given the recent nature of conversions
to Islam, God revealed himself to the Prophet and exhorted him to announce

the caliphate immediately. in the middle of the desert. Muhammad then
appointed Ali as caliph, obeying the Law. not because the latter was his
son-in-law or because he had rendered services, but because he himself had
received the divine mission to do so and because he was obeying the divine
order.

Under Islam. the government means obedience to the Law and only the Law
exercises its authority over society. whenever a certain limitation was
placed on the powers of the Prophet and the imams, it is the work of God.
Every time the Prophet expressed something or announced a law. it was in
obedience to the divine Law, the Law which everyone without exception must
obey, the government as well as those governed. Obeying the Prophet is
also an order of God which says: "Obey the Prophet." Submitting to the
government officials or the imams is also an order of God which says:
"Obey the imams who have come from you." The opinion of individuals. even

of the Prophet. has no power over the divine Law. Everyone yields to the
will of God.

An Islamic government is not royal, much less imperial. This means that it
rejects any system tending to master the lives and property of the people
or arbitrarily intervening in their affairs. Likewise, and unlike other
regimes, an Islamic government has no grand palaces or grandiose construc-
tions. no servants or stables or private court secretaries or any other

no
royal requirements that gobble up half of the national budget and more. You
all know the life of the Prophet as head of the Islamic state. You also
know that up until the pre-Omayyad period. his way of living and governing
was respected. The first two persons apparently imitated the character and
life of Muhammad in their private lives, even if in many other domains,

they manifested their opposition, which led to the great deviation of the
Ottoman period, a deviation that plunged us into all the misfortunes we are
now experiencing. At the time of Ali, the system of government was correct.
Although he reigned over a vast territory, of which Persia, Egypt, Hejaz and
Yemen were only provinces, he lived in the greatest simplicity. like a humble
student. It is reported that having bought two shirts, he gave the best one
to his servant Chanbar and then cut off the sleeves of the second, as they
were too long, and wore it as it was, without even having them hemmed. And
yet, he commanded a vast territory that was densely populated and very rich.

If this art of governing had been maintained, there would never have been
any domination, royalty, imperialism, oppression or looting. There would
never have been any stealing from the public treasury, any prostitution or
other reprehensible actions. Many of these forms of corruption are rooted
in the team in power and in the family of the despotic, capricious sovereign.
It is the sovereigns who create the places of corruption, prostitution and
drugs and devote holy goods to movie theaters!

If all of these costly receptions of the Court and this wastefulness did
not exist, there would never be such a huge deficit and we would never have
to bend down before America and England to beg for their aid and protection!
If we have become a poor country, it is because of this waste and theft.

Do we not have oil? Do we not have enough reserves and mines? We are

rich. but it is all the corrupt administration that has impoverished us.
If all that did not exist, he (the shah) would not have to go to America

to bow before the "nice man" (the president of the United States) and ask
for aid.

There is also all the superfluous administrative organization with all of its
bureaucracy and red tape so completely foreign to Islam and which cost the
national budgetsodearly, practically the same sum as the expenditures pre-
viously mentioned.

None of this has anything to do with Islam, nor does it give the people any-
thing but worry and a waste of time. The methods used by Islam, on the con-
trary, are very simple, practical and fast. Let us take the example of peti-
tioning for rights, the solutions of conflicts and the application of punish-
ments. When Islamic justice was followed, the judge, with his two acolytes,
a pen and inkwell, put an end to enmities and sent the people back to work.
Now. with the judicial organisation and the resulting formalities. God only
knows that they are endless and lead nowhere! All of these things make the
country poor and cause nothing but problems and wasted time.
Conditions To Fulfill To Become Head of Islamic Government

The conditions necessary to the exercise of governmental authority depend
directly on the nature of the Islamic governaent. Outside of the qualities
required of everyone — that is. reason and wisdom - two other conditions
are essential: knowledge of the Law and a sense of fairness. Even after
the death of the Prophet. when differences appeared having to do with the
choice of the caliph. all Muslims were unanimous in declaring that the
caliph had to be erudite and virtuous. The cause of the controversy had
to do with the choice of the proper person.

Since an Islamic government is the goverr-ent of the Law, knowledge of laws
is indispensable to the authority in charge of them. This also applies to
anyone occupying any post but in varying degrees. As the ravayat affirm.
it is obvious that the highest official must also have superior knowledge.
Our iaams have always advanced the same argument for access to the post of
imam. The objections which the Shiite ulemas have formulated to others
dealt precisely with the degree of knowledge. According to them. a caliph
who could not respond to a question about the law did not deserve the cali-
phate or the office of imam. Furthermore. 17' he did not act in conformity
with Islamic law. he was no longer worthy of the office of imam.

Therefore, a knowledge of the laws and a sense of fairness are. in the eyes
of Muslims. the conditions sine qua non of exercising power. Other aspects
do not count. For example, a knowledge of the nature of angels or the qual-
ities of the world's Maker does not have anything to do with the office of
imam. Even if he were the most learned man in natural sciences. even if

he were the best ausician on earth. a man would not thereby deserve to be
caliph and would no: outrank the doctors of Islamic law in cowetition for
the post. Hith respect to the caliphate. of which there was a great deal of
debate during the time of the Prophet and the imams. one must say that the
caliph must know Islamic laws above all. be a true jurist. and second. be
fair. a firm believer and have perfect morals. Reason demands this because
an Islamic government is a government of the Law and not an arbitrary
governaent under the authority of one or several persons. If the supreme
magistrate of Islam does not know the laws. he does not deserve to be in
government because if he copies from others. the power of the government
will wither away, and if he does not copy. he will not be able to govern or
apply the laws of Islam. It is obvious that: "The faqih govern over the
sultans." If the sultans are Muslims, they must obey the faqih and ask them
questions about the laws before carrying them out because the real rulers
are the faqih themselves. Sovereignty therefore officially belongs to the
faqih and not to those who. out of ignorance or a lack of knowledge of the
Law. are .‘orced to obey them.

Naturally, it is not necessary for all officials, border guards and civil
servants to be faqih. It is sufficient that they know the laws relating to
the office or post entrusted to them. This was so at the time of the Prophet
and Ali. Only the supreme leader must be endowed with the qualities pre-
viously cited. As for the others. they must go to him with questions when
they are still confused by the law.

102
The head of the government must have perfect faith and morals, be just
and not he tainted by sin. The person who must apply the penal code or
manage the public treasury and who receives from God the mission of repre-

senting Him in the administration of his followers must not be a sinner.
God does not give such powers to an oppressor.

If the head of the government is not just, he will not be just in giving
each person his rights, in collecting taxes or using th- or in imposing the
penal code. Ila will risk imposing his family, his relations and his friends
on society and misappropriating the public funds to satisfy his whims.

Thus, the position of Shiism toward the system of government and persons

in power since the disappearance of the Prophet and until the apparition
of the Imam of all times is clear: The imam nust know the laws and remain
fair in their application.

11.464
(:50: 4900
U.S. 'SEN’I‘IHEN’IALITY' 1N IRANIAN ISSUE CRITICIZED
PA072230 Bogota El. $101.0 in Spanish 29 luv 79 p 5 PA
[Editorial]

[Excerpts] No matter how the crisis between Iran and the United States is
solved, there will apparently be a fundamental breakdown in international
law and a reduced influence by the United States in its role as leader of
the free world.

The White House's handling of the crisis has been inconsistent and inde-
cisive. and this has revealed the lack of a guiding hand and the incapacity
of the present government to hold the reins of the country and to announce
policies that represent the canon will. For 3 weeks President Carter has
had the public opinion of the entire world, and to a lesser degree. of his
own country, on his side. During this period the opportunity to make
dramatic decisions was not exploited, and since then the intermittent U.S.
reaction has lacked coherence, that is, "direction." It is not known just
what U.S. policy pursues. The entire "negotiation" has revolved around

the problem of the hostages, to the sudden detriment of the national inter-
eats of the state. It would seem that to the U.S. mind world peace say be
endangered because of a threat to the lives of some U.S. officials. Although
by law and by logic the United States is right, this attitude belittles the
objectives of the western alliance. The United States does not believe peace
can be threatened by the political events of recent years which, in truth,

do seriously endanger it, but when the matter touches its society internally,
then there is a reaction out of proportion to the real dimensions of the
problem. The United States supported Somoaa until, in an obscure episode,

a U.S. newsman was killed in Managua. Then the great power of the north
reacted, changed sides in a political decision dictated by enotion and
accelerated the dictator'a fall. Now the U.S. attitude toward Iran is

is subject to the same personal ninutiae to which a foresighted and ear-

ious policy should be impervious.

Now, when an apparently similar situation has occurred, the lives of U.S.
citiaens in the Tehran embassy have emerged as the primary consideration.
He hope that in the final analysis decisions about war and peace in the
world will be based on basic considerations and not, as on other occasions,
on emotions and parochial sentimentality. Moreover, it would seem that the
U.S. public feels defeated and is in a state of isolation and what had
seemed to be an outbreak of national indignation against Iran that had the
virtue of uniting the country is being rapidly diluted and now the variance
of opinion makes decision-melting difficult.

(so: 3010 M
STUDENT SPLIT FROM REVOLUTION RIDERS
Tehran BAHDAD in Persian 9 Oct 79 p 2

[Text] Following an announcement by the prosecutor general of the Islamic
Republic of Iran based on the fact that no one has the right to depose or
install employees or to change or cancel regulations, the Society to
Defend the Respect and Rights of University Staff and Scholars, in an open
letter addressed to the prosecutor general, announced that the group
regards itself dutybound to bring the prosecutor into the midst of the
antirevolutionary activities which have been taking place throughout all
the universities, and especially the University of Tehran, which was the
guiding inspiration for the institutions of higher learning.

The statement said:

1. The temporarily appointed administrations of the universities, in
opposition to the wishes of the Imam, instead of performing during the last
7 months, have caused so much destruction in the universities, and so
destroyed their prestige, honor and reputation that it is unimaginable.
Illustrative of this matter are the articles of thinkers and writers con-
tinually complaining about university staff, recent protests by “is
Excellency Hehdavi Kuni, president of the Central Committee, printed in
Bandad, the sharp reprimands and criticisms of Hohandis Bazargan, and every-
thing else. Unfortunately, the administrations, with their antirevolutionary
activities, are daily increasing the split between students and the
revolution, and with the continuous announcements of discharges of a number
of researchers, professors, and investigators, some evidently religious
students have caused much negative sentiment concerning religion.

The administrati-ns, of their own accord, established staff investigation
committees or similar organizations in the universities and removed staff
members against all existing laws and regulations, and announced their names
publicly by means of organizational newsletters and thereby destroyed the
credibility and positions of those people and gave university personnel a
bad name and created in this group of researchers and scholars a pessimistic
feeling and a state of depression, mortification, despair, and disco-fort.
Keeping in mind what has been published everywhere, in the staff investi-
gation comnitteee of the universities. especially the University of Tehran
there are several clergymen present who confirm to what extent pessimism
concerning religion is found in the hearts of university employees.

2. For 7 months now, with complete disregard for all order, regulation and
law. many professors have been dismissed behind closed doors at the hands
of lay people with no information and without any right to a court trial,
and their salaries were cut without any justificiation. "It has been
revealed that in the staff investigation comittee of the University of
Tehran there were two Savak agents." Unfortunately there have been no
investigators to vindicate these university employees. and, unsalaried and
helpless, subject to persecution and Oppression, some of them have become
counterrevolutionaries and bullies while wearing the mask of the revolution,
and for the same reason they have gathered together the Oppressed sembera
of the university conunity and established a 100 percent unified organization
for the purpose of alerting responsible officials to the antirevolutionary
and revolution-destroying activities of the minus and destructive adminis-
trations and to become thanselves effective obstacles to activities and
practices Opposed to the people and their education.

3. The activities of the administrations are a kind of autonomous governsent
within a govermnent, because despite all protests, and especially the criticism
of Kohandia Bazargan of the reprehensible and incorrect practices of the
administrations, they continue to operate as before and pay not the
slightest heed to the orders of the government. Among the prine minister's
orders, which, according to the counsnd of the Imam, must be obeyed, and if
not it is a violation of religious law and the revolution, the prise
minister, in Circular No 12/998 dated 31 July 1979, which is presented
herein, detailed the unjust and imoral activities of the administrations
and plainly ordered that salaries be issued to the professors. Until now,
however, a month and a half since the issuance of the order, the temporary
university administrations, under the instigation of the temporary adminis-
tration of the University of Tehran, have not paid the slightest regard to
this order and continue as before to refrain from paying salaries to the
professors.

If the university employees are guilty, then prosecute them and take ven-
geance upon then, and if they are innocent, do not allow counterrevolutionaries
posing as revolutionaries to carry on with every kind of ugly practice, to

go about settling accounts and taking revenge in the name of the revolution

and thereby destroy the revolution.

The Society for Defending the Respect and Rights of University Personnel

and Scholars insistently demands of his Excellency that he issue an order

that anyone, under any conditions, who is guilty will be punished and the
events of the last 7 months will become clear. It must not be left unssid
that unfortunately with the practices of the administrations, the universities
have become empty and thousands have left the country. Only patriots rennin
to serve the country.

The Society expects the rights of professors to be defended, and the process
of disunity and the split between clergymen and faculty, which they deli-
berately created and continue to spread day by day, to be stopped.

931° , 1.6
JUDICIAL SYSTDI TO BE REVAHPED, SADR SAYS
Tehran KEYHAN in Persian 10 Oct 79 p 12

[Article by Fathollah Bani Sadr, president of the Supreme Court: "The
National Judicial System will be Changed"l

[Text] The President of the National Supreme Court, during a telephone
interview with KEYHAN's correspondent, discussed a plan for dissolution

of the provincial courts. the regional courts, the government employees
courts, the provincial prosecutors' courts. and the rural courts. and pro-
vided explanations in this area. He indicated that until the publication

of the complete text of the proposal in the official national newspaper

is approved, the courts will continue to operate as usual, and that this
dissolution would be contingen. on a 15-day tine lapse after such publication
and the establishment of a general court systea.

Pathollah Bani Sadr, president of the Supreme Court, in the matter of the
proposal for dissolution of the regional and provincial courts and other
Judicial institutions, which after approval of the proposal, will be changed,
stated: "The approved proposal related to dissolution of the provincial,
municipal, and employees government courts is not yet at the stage of
implementation and the courts are still being administered as before. The
proposal is now in the hands of the Justice Departaent and the minister of
justice and a study for its implementation is underway. At this time, the
task of selecting judges for the general courts and method of establishment
of this type of court is also under study, and when these studies come forth,
the proposal must be published in the official national newspaper and 15
days must pass after this publication. After the passage of 15 days from
the publication of the afore-nentioned law in the official national news-
paper, and the coming of a general court system, the proposal will be
implemented. On that basis all of the provincial courts, municipal courts,
governaent employees courts, hearings courts and provincial circuit courts
will be dissolved." The president of the Supreme Court then referred to

the issue of the general courts, saying: "The general courts are comprised
of three sections, the civil courts, the criminal courts and the general
courts, each of which deals with certain types of cases." In another

portion of his discussion, Bani Sadr said, with regard to the anticipated
power of the judiciary in the forthconing constitution: "The power of the
judiciary in the initial draft of the forthcoming constitution F1. oeen
taken into consideration. but what will be done is still not clear. and
this issue is still under study in the special co-ittees : f the Assedwly
of Experts. A definite opinion and discussion in this is still not out.
This matter is contingent on a plan for utters related to judicial powers.
and, studies of anticipated needs in this area are under way in the Con-
stitutional Study Omission."

Bani Sadr added: "what is certain is that after confirmation of the issues
and principles which have been taken into consideration concerning the
judiciary, and of course, after the Ian's approval, extensive changes in

the courts, the Supreme Court. and the current judicial systsl will be
brought about."
COSTS OF ABOLISHING JUDICIARY CITED
Tehran BAHDAD in Persian 12 Oct 79 p 5

[Article by Azar Khadiv Pur, Justice Department lawyer: "Before Abolishing

the Systen and Institutions of the Present Judiciary, Sufficient Attention
Must be Devoted to the Motives and Apparent Nonsuccess of the Courts"]

[Text] Every protester who has raised issue- against the court, against

this great house of justice, which is the outcome of the efforts and
struggles of past generations, especially the administrators and judges,

has believed and does believe that a truly strong, independent, and effective
court which is the home of justice and protects the rights of the people

and the social order is not effective without fundamental and basic
revisions.

The necessity for a revision of this institution, and purging and reforming
it in a way that is becoming to the circumstances c our present-day and
ever-changing independent Iran, with conpilation and capurg :ion of the
present laws and government regulations pertaining to it, is affirnable
without any doubt or hesitation. There are people also who have spared

no pains in the development and protection of this institution, but before
any steps are taken to abolish this tower of judicial machinery, it must
be pointed out that this is akin to playing with the tail of a lion. It
is necessary, before destroying this present system of judicia' apparatus
which is the result of the historical experience and scholarly effort of
50 or 60 years and is the true guarantor of social order and defender of
national security, that careful and sufficient attention be given to the
causes and apparent nonsuccess of the courts. Thus, when those who are
calling for reform of the judiciary produce more useful suggestions and
express their ideas in a more sophisticated way, it will be time to put
them into action. Otherwise, what a mass corruption and confusion will
arise cut of the void. The want of a judicial system will once again

constitutional revolution, just as at the beginning of the constitutional
revolution protest arose out of a lack of an impartial recourse for those
with grievances. Why?

“9
According to evidence found in the proud history of our constitutional
revolution, in the times of the Qajars and in the times prior to them
resolution of lawsuits and judiciary matters of the country were under-
taken in a court known as the "Shar' Court." which. for various reasons,
among them the lack of well-ordered and responsible institutions adhering
to common laws, the lack of cooperation and agreement in making decisions.
and the issuance of often-contradictory legal opinions of Shar' judges
based on different and numerous sources and events, created cause for social
unrest. Therefore, because of a failure to obtain uniform procedures for
dealing with litigations and claims, the nation rose up and demanded a
Justice department and a judiciary system based on order and secular laws
and regulations, and, as the history of the constitutional revolution shows,
they realized their demands through continual demonstrations.

A point worthy of attention is that always during a crisis of the judiciary
it is the common man who suffers. and basically, the imposition of tyranny
on the people is not possible without resorting to undermining the judiciary
and eliminating law and order. In actual practice, we saw that the agents
of the deposed regime, in proportion to the weakness of the judiciary,
increasingly brought forth their illegal and illegitimate recommendations
and proposals. and the more the sphere of influence and power of the
Judiciary was restricted, the more the sphere of power of the despotic
ruling group, which usurped the rights of the people, increased. Thus
motivated. they restricted the vitality of the judiciary as much as they
could. and day by day they weakened this institution.

In any case we now turn from the history of the judiciary in order to explain
the real reasons for the apparent lack of success of the Justice Department.
for the benefit of the government body which has taken on the enormous
responsibility of dissolving and renewing the courts.

Initially, it should be said that despite the many criticisms that have
been levied against our modern Justice Department and will be levied against
it, most of them either arose out of ignorance or self-interest, because
comparatively and relatively our justice system as it is currently reflected
is not without positive consequence. If we dispense with inadmissable
objections and criticisms and look impartially at the contributions and
accomplishments of this institution, taking into consideration the restrictions
of the former regime, and bearing in mind the obsolete ideas which were in
opposition to the development and fruition of this institution. and review
the positive and negative effects it has had in its short life of 50 or 60
years-we will acknowledge the distinguished position of this agency in the
previous despotic regime. Only if we persi<t in our narrow and prejudiced

thinking and unjust accusations can we deny the positive accomplishments of
this institution.
Proof for the claim of a higher position for the power of the judiciary
relative to the other political and administrative branches of the govern-
ment was the instantaneous creation of special courts. among them the
military courts, whose increased power we witnessed every day and every

hour as we witnessed the shrinking power of the courts of the Justice
Department, and the proliferation from all sides of slander and unjust
accusations. If the judicial institutions of the country had been in league
with the oppressive and despotic regime and its illegal activities and agents
and they had endorsed the desires of thoae who would trespass upon the
rights of the people, their power would certainly have increased and

there would have been no need to establish special puppet courts.

The most frequent complaint about the judiciary has been its slowness in
rendering justice, and both in appearance and in reality this is a justi-
fiable complaint, but the reasons for the slowness that prevails in the
administration of justice in the courts should be studied from two points

of view. First, the nature of the judgment process, which is directly
connected with the fate of one and all should be carefully, deeply, and
sufficiently considered, because so many times only one mistake has resulted
in the taking of an innocent human being's life, or caused someone irreparable
material and intellectual loss. Therefore, judicial decisions and the
issuance or just judgments are dependent on complete study, and though this
causes delay, it is better than an unjust and hasty decision against a person
without guilt.

Secondly, the slowness of the judicial process in the Justice Department
was connected with the overall policy and nature of organization of the
previous regime which absolutely stopped the process of increasing judiciary
power by implementing the legal authority of the Justice Department, and of
reinforcing the independence of the judiciary, and as we were obstructed

we were prevented from improving and expanding judiciary and administrative
staff resulting in a disproportionately small pool of legally trained and
administrative manpower on the one hand, and, on the other hand, an annually
increasing accumulation of backed-up cases arising out of a widening of
social, political, legal and econonic relations in society which slowed the
judicial process. This matter will become clear if one compares the
statistics of accumulated cases in the Ministry of Justice through the years
with the inequitably small number of judicial personnel. As a result, the
people, who are not aware of the judiciary's problems, through this process
have been made pessimistic and unsupportive toward this system, because
every regime that trespasses on the rights of the people and violates a
nation's freedom has feared the power of the judiciary and the power of a
law before which both strong and weak and rich and poor have equal responsi-
bilities and duties and from which bodily penalties neither rich not poor
can be exempted, even by paying 5 million rials gotten by cooperating with
the former regime, nor can one escape its punishment simply by changing one's
colors after years of big talk, bragging and flattery, and wishing well to
the Oppressors, supporting the regime, backing up traitors, and bolstering
the foundations of oppression and corruption.

 

with the hope that we will accept counsel from the experiences of several

of our political ages, and that we will strive to preserve the accomplish-
ments of our proud history.

9319
680: h906 51
lies}! The country's industries are under economic siege by imperialism;

however, in spite of rumors, the country's domestic production has not de

creased following the triumph of the revolution--rather, according to re-

search by experts in the Ninistry of Industry and Hines. the output of the
nation's industries has been 83 percent above that of l977.

Dr Ahmadzadeh Heravi. minister of industry and mines, in the course of a
special interview with KBYHAN in which he discussed this matter, held that
every kind of shortage in the country has been artificial and said "A num
ber of people have engaged in hoarding the country's output in order to
raise prices."

In tnis conversation, the minister of industry and mines considered the
shortage of cement a mere tumor and declared, "The country's current cement
production has increased by 3 percent relative to the six spring and summer
months of [977 in thirteen plants." The minister of industry end mines
then asserted that a number of people have proceeded to hoard cement and
have created artificial shortages in various fields as a result. The min-
ister of industry and mines then warned, on describing the country's econom-
ic progress and the problems which are facing the country's industrial and
productive units at the present time, "He will not allow a number of prof-
iteers end middlemen to lay the ground for a shortage in cement or any type
of requirement needed by the public through their plots." Once again,
Ahnsdzsdeh referred to the problem of the cement shortsge and pointed out,
"The cement producing.cepacity of the country's current factories in the
course of the past 6 months was 3,301,000 tons; at the present time 2,000
tons of cement are being produced and supplied on the market daily."
Ahmadzadeh then referred to the iron production and distribution system
and said "in general, we have tried to sell iron products to nunerous in
dividuals and class two and three bendors to avoid the emergence of a black
market in iron, so that we can also control the distribution of iron and
consequently provide the iron required by people in the market by prevent“
ing the hoarding of iron."

The minister of industry and mining stressed "A number of people are try-
ing to hoard iron in order to raise its price." In another portion of his
conversation, Ahmadzadeh referred to the efforts of the country's industrial
and productive units and said "in general, through the efforts of Iranian
workers, the level of output has risen. For example, the production capac-
ity of textile units in our country has increased 71 percent above the 1977
level. Of course one must not ignore the problems which foreign countries
have created for us at the hands of imperialism; our industrics' dependence
on the foreign world is one of the big problems we have not yet been able
to eliminate or bring to a reasonable limit.” He expressed the hope that
all such types of dependence on the industries of foreign c0untries would
be eliminated in the future and that we would attain self-sufficiency.

The sinister of industry and mining added "The foreign countries, at the
hands of imperialism, have placed us in an economic siege and have cut off
all their credits related to out industries. However, in spite of all
these problems, industries are active and possess considerable capacity;

I must state that we have had an 138 percent increase in the food process
ing sector, and tire and household appliance manufacture also shows a 67
percent increase." Ahmadzadeh then pointed out "The foreign countries have
cut off our credits because they think that the temporary governnent of the
islamic Republic of Iran does not have the necessary stability as they see
it. However, through our efforts, we have shown that we do have the neces-
sary stability and on the other hand we have replaced their credits with
our own and have allocated the sum of 80 billion rials to this matter, so
that we can purchase the primary materials for cash and inport them. We
have placed existing credits at the disposal of domestic industries with a
maximum of economization and we have tried to have most of these credits
take the form of foreign currency credits."

The minister of industry and mining them enphasized, "Another reason for
our dependence on foreign industries is the shortage of specialized man
power, because foreign experts and specialists left Iran with the triumph
of the revolution and in order to put pressure on us are refusing to re-
turn.” The minister of industry and mining then said "One foreign company
in the previous regime would receive 300 marks a day for one of its experts.
After the triumph of the revolution it increased this amount to 720 marks;
for us, this is unacceptable." Ahmadzadeh then announced "He have entered
into discussions on a long-range plan for the Krupp company, in which Iran
also has a share, so that we will be able to train the technicians the
country requires." The minister of industry and mining than declared
"Another reason for the recent high prices was the volume of currency in
circulation in 1973 and 1979 and prior to the revolution; all at once,
this volume of printed currency doubled--that is, it increased from £0 to
02 billion tomans. This is also affecting prices."

Ahmadzadeh Heravi added, "In the three sunmer months of 1979, 79 construc-
tion permits were issued for capital investment, machinery imports and the
erection of new factories. In this field capital investment was
1,:L9,300,000 rials, of which 912 million rials were allocated to the im-
portation and purchase of machinery; 304 million rials of the total per-
centage of capital were allocated to construction activities, 152 million
rials to the purchase of land and 500 million rials to operating capital."
The minister of indusrry and mining added "we have talked with the Bank
Melli and 5 billion tomans in loans approved by the National Economic
Council have been placed at the disposal of small industries. In addition
to this, Bank Sepah has also declared its readiness to pay 2 billion tomans
in loans to the country's industries."

Ban on Foreign Companies

Tehran KEYHAN in Persian 12 Nov 79 p 3

[Text] Yesterday afternoon the open session of the Council for the Final In-
vestigation into the Constitution net under the chairmanship of Ayatollah Dr
Beheshti and examined and ratified three principles of the constitution.

In yesterday's session the representatives presented their views and recom-
mendations upon presentation of the principles, and they were ratified by

a majority of the votes following their review. The principles which were
ratified at yesterday morning's session are as follows:

"Principle 24. The official flag of Iran is green, white and red in color
and hears the special insignia of the Islamic republic.’I

"Principle 32. The Oversight Council is in charge of supervising presi-
dential elections and elections to the National Consultative Council and
auditing the general and referendum votes."

"Principle 156.1. if material or moral damage befalls a person as a result
of an error or mistake by a judge on a subject or verdict on a private mat-
ter, the person at fault, in the event of the fault, will be held respons-

ihle in accordance with Islamic criteria."

In another area, a session of the final investigation into the constitution,
under the chairmanship of Ayatollah Montasari, was convened yesterday after-
noon; during that, six additional principles of the draft constitution were
ratified.

The text of Principle 13.1 is as follows:
"In accordance with the sacred [Koranig7 verse 'Turn not from those who

have not fought with you over religion or expelled you from your homes:
be generous with them and treat them fairly,’ the government of the Islamic
Republic of Iran, and Noslems, have the duty of treating non-Mosleua Lmrai-
ly and with Islamic justice and fairness and of looking after their hunmn
rights. This principle will be valid as regards persons who do not con-
spire or take measures against islam and the Islamic Republic of Iran."
This principle was ratified with 50 votes in favor, two votes against and
one abstention.

The text of Principle 84.1 which was ratified yesterday is as follows:

"The president must be selected from among religious and political men who
meet the following conditions: Iranian origin, Iranian citizenship, matur-
ity and experience, possession of a good personal history, trust and piety.
devotion, and belief in the laws of the Islamic Republic of Iran and the
official religion of the country."

This principle was ratified with 52 affirmative votes, four negative votes
and four abstentions.

The text of Principle 29 which was also ratified yesterday is as follows:

"The holding of meetings and unarmed demonstrations will be permitted on
condition that they not be prejudicial to the principles of Islam."

This principle was ratified with 51 votes in favor, two against and seven
ahstcntions.

The text of Principle 17.1, which was ratified, is as follows:

"On very important economic, political, social and cultural matters, the
actions of the legislative power may be carried out by a referendum and
direct referral to public vote. The request for a referral to a general
election must be ratified by two-thirds of the total representatives of
the Sational Consultative Assembly."

This principle was also ratified, with 54 affirmative and one negative
vote and five sbstentions.

The text of Principle 67.1 is as follows:

"In the public sector, the grant of concessions to foreigners by the gov-
ernmcnt to form companies and organizations for commercial, industrial,
agricultural or mining activities and services is absolutely forbidden."
This principle was finally ratified by 19 affirmative votes after two vote
tallies.

The text of Principle 55, which was ratified by the Council for the Final
Investigation into the Constitution yesterday, is as follows:
"The niscussinns of tne National Consultative Council must be open and a
full report nmat he published by the radio and the country's official
gazette for public information. In emergency conditions, in the event
national seturity considerations so demand, an open session will be held
on request of the prime minister, a minister, or l0 representatives.

"The ratified sccions of the executive session will be valid in the event
the session is held in the presence of the Oversight Council and the ac-
tions are approved by three quarters of the total representatives. The
report and ratified actions of these sessions must be presented for public
information after the emergency conditions have come to an end."

This principle was ratified with 52 affirmative votes, one negative vote
and faur abstentions.

In yesterday afternoon's session, Principle 13? was also presented, but it
was not ratified by the majority of those present. The text of this prin-
ciple is as follows: "The tax system must be in accordance with social
justice and the taxpayers' ability to pay and must be in conformity with
necessary general expenditures." The report by PARS News Agency parlia-
mentary correspondents on the Council for the Final Investigation into the
Constitution states that in a speech prior to the decree the Zoroastrians'
representative presented a petition with the signature of 200 Zoroastrians
stating that Zoroastrians have been considered second class citizens of

the country and that Zoroastrians are considered fire worshippers although
the object of Zoroastrians' worship is light, not fire. After this petition
was read out by the Zoroastriana' representative in the Council of Experts,
Ayatollah Montazari said "The rights of all minorities have been recognized
and we recommend that all our brothers and sisters observe the criteria

and connundments of Islam with regard to the rights of others."

Plans for Independent Industries
Tehran KEYHAN in Persian 12 Nov 79 p 1

[Text] The Conference to Guarantee the Independence of Iran's Industries
was held yesterday afternoon at the permanent Iranian International
Expositions site with the objective of announcing the Ministry of Industries
and Mining's policies to protect local industries and replace industrial
imports by local products; in attendance were the undersecretary of industry
and mining, a grOup of Iranian economic and industrial personages and
industrialists and interested persons.

Ahmad Yazdanpanah, the supervisor of the Iranian International Expositions,
said, "The losses Iran has sustained from assembly industries are economic,
social and political. The high cost of assembled goods for one thing is
due to the [act that factories must be planned on a broader scale and have
massive production-~however, massive production damages inperialism's in-
ternational market. As a consequence. production is below capacity and

the per-unit costs of installations become high. The government’s protec-
tionist policies are making the import supply of similar goods scarce and
costly. A significant portion of spare part accessories in assembly plants
are imported from abroad and the fact that there is inflation in the in-
dustrial world is causing the price of assenmly goods to increase. Another
matter is the presence of middlemen and the expense of transporting access
ories. Another reason why low-quality goods have an expensive ultimate
price is the fact that Western assembly goods are expensive, and this re-
sults from the fact that the mother country protects the export market and
Iranian skilled workforces are new at the job of producing industrial
goods."

The second speaker at this conference was Ardeshir Davar, industrial under-
secretary of the Ministry of industry and Mining, who said "After the coup
d'etat of 1953, when their spirit was to some degree relieved as far as
political dominance over Iran went, America, and the westerners in general,
as a result of the experiences they acquired in their relations with the
Iranian nation and the ohstinacy of the people in the face of the foreign
powers-oindeed, their essential perseverance against the foreigners and
their refusal to accept influence on Iranian culture--hit upon the idea of
not just satisfying themselves with political dominance but of also convert-
ing their dominance into the economic, cultural, and social dominance of
the society in order to alleviate their anxieties over the future. There-
fore, when the economic system of the Iranian countryside collapsed, they
created opportunities in the cities and laid the groundwork for migration,
so that they could deliver a big blow to the country's economy.

“Another matter one might discuss is that Tehran, Tabriz, Esfahan, Shiraz
and other big cities expanded unreasonably and acquired innense urban
problems."

He added that about 2 million people were working in the nation's ixdustries
and about 150 billion tomana' worth of manufactured materials were imported
from abroad every year. He said, "About 50 to 60 billion tomans have been
spent in constructing these industries. We see that the previous regime's
careful plan following America's political dominance in 1953 was only to
expand dependent industries.

"Unfortunately, industries are not being helped as they should and could

be and we are not measuring production capacity in terms of the volume of
shortages in the coyntry. As a_result, measures are not taken in a timely
fashion to import [materials in/ shortage and prices are going up. Unfor-
tunately, import and export regulations have not been reformed in the light
of revolution of the Iranian nation in 1979."

The fourth speaker at this conference, Kadivar, a professor at Bsfahan In-
dustrial University, concerning means for attaining industrial independence,
stated, "The Faculty of Science and Industry and the Polytechnic need two
stages to attain industrial independence and eliminate dependence; the first
stage is to draw technology for technical ability or scientific education
and the second is to proceed along a road similar to that which Japan has

57
taken." He added, "Regarding economic and industrial dependency, we also
need an economic and industrial revolution." He added, "It is inventions
and innovations which nourish industrial output. This is the way Japan
has followed and which our universities must follow also.

"My reconmendation is that we need a ministry for medium and small indus-
trial production so that industrialists themselves can assume the guidance
of this ministry and substantial progress can accrue to the industrialists
and the nation."

Review of Foreign Connections
Tehran W in Persian 12 Nov 79 p 2

[Text] In their revenues for 1978-79, 50 out of 110/: private sector
productive units lost 8.3 billion rials in all.

Statistics show that 30 percent of economic activities in the private sec-
tor sustained losses. All privileges for foreign participation in cowan-
ies in which foreigners were stockholders have been abrogated. According
to a proposed plan, the purchase of primary materials from monopoly organi-
zations will be broken up.

This uatter was addressed by Mohaen Ameli, general director of the Financial
Organization to Expand Ownership of Productive and Industrial Units. lie
added, "The government is a 20 to 109 percent shareholder in 11.1. productive
companies. The volume of the government's participation is 20 billion
rials."

Ameli then stated, "The owners of units of this type are refraining from
declaring losses, in order to avoid being included under the Law to Protect
and Develop Iranian Industries, in order to avoid being included in this
law. In connection with this, 50 of the 1M. productive units in existence
in the fiscal year 1975-79 had collective losses of 5.3 billion rials."

Regarding the departure of foreign currency, be said: "Only in one case
was the flight of .10 million rials in foreign currency per year in one com-
pany avoided. We are currently engaged in investigating this matter so
that the coupsny may be managed on the basis of justice and equal rights
of shareholders, be they domestic or foreign. To this end, a review has
been made of the bylaws of all convanies which were in partnership with
foreigners, and all stock privileges of foreign individuals holding shares
in this kind of convany have been abrogated.

"Similarly, in order to provide primary materials inside the country,
through the expansion of such existing industries as petrochemicals, we
will be able to eliminate the monopoly over materials of this kind by one
or several foreign countries."

Ameli then referred to the matter of industrial management and said "The
management in these industries is a fundamental issue. Good managers are
extreaely rare. After the law nationalizing industries, an absence of
coordination arose in the management of the major portion of these lol-‘o
units, with the incorporation of the related organizations; one must pay
attention to the need to establish full coordination, above and beyond the
question of ownership, since it must be said that these industries belong;
to the country and must be administered in a manner devoid of any kind of
organizational or personal fanaticism under rules and regulations which
will protect public rights.

"Use will even he made, in special conditions, of former managers of these
units who have remained in the country, have not fled and are prepared to
cooperate-mi course under the surveillance of the government."

Departure of American Managers
Tehran 1mm! in Persian 12 Nov 79 p 2

[Text] The managers of 200 American companies who resided in Tehran left
Tehran after the takeover of the American embassy. After the signing

of the $100 billion agreaaent reached between Henry Kissinger and Hushang
Ansari in the era of the deposed Shah, the Americans expanded their
conercial activities in Iran and set about establishing mixed companies.
although in reality all the shares in these companies were at the disposal
of American managers.

After this agreement was signed, the American government established two
comnercial centers in Tehran, which engaged in selling international
American products to lran. The American comrciai center in Tehran en-
couraged Iranian importers to purchase American goods by establishing an
international exposition.

Commercial relations between Iran and America were always one-sided; be-
cause of this onesidedness, the American companies always won big bid com-
petitions during the previous regime. Many examples of this agreesent were
to be observed in the history of Iran's commercial relations with America.
One cxaaple of these agreements is as follows--the agreement to construct
200 factories for the manufacture of prefabricated parts. The billion-
dollar agreement to sell connunications equipment, and construction of
1,000 kilometers of roads by American conpanies, are other examples of
these agreements.
BRI 38

1'8le STUDENTS IDEM'II-‘IE’D—dmons the "students" involved in the taking
of hostages at the U.S. hbassy in ‘reheran, [unspecified] Baropean in-

telligence services say they have identified sane Hands: Eedayeen leaders.
[Text] [Paris LE POINT in French 3 Dec 79 p 75]

C80: 4900
tND RElZlAMATlON PROJECT FOUND SUCCESSFUL

mam (131.1? MIRROR 1n ling]

Text I IN

the Arabian Gull where
petrodollars conjure up
images ot Cadillacs and other
titrrtueopias. Iraq is plough-
ing its oil revenues hack into
the earth

“is lelrisr stun: looks pew-
Iix‘ely austere next to its
retro-neighbours. But its
government is determined to
achieve it sell-sulficient state
by the time its oil reserves
slu'l to dwindlc.

Unlilte the desert otl states.
the-repeater emphasis is it
no industrialisation. Iraq iii“
lurrned a Ion -tcrm and cum-
prchcnsivc p an to develop its
.rcriotllurc.

Fertility

A in weeks ago the lust
min of tuilcy was ready [or
harvesting on a site known
ttitishtlustvcly 3“ "K3."
things haven‘t been so good
then.- tor almost a thousand
with:

the product ol‘ several
‘..II\ of labour by teams of
international consultants and
contractors. the harle har-
vest marlrsthe rctttrno fertil-
II! in the barren. semi-desert
lower Khalia region. And
l._.-ea tilornett for this mas-
sive irrigation and land
reclamation project. this ﬁrst
«on surpassed the expecta-
tions at everyone involved.
hunt the drttwinghoard to the
plum; .

The project. one at the his.
inst ul its luml in the world.

tab 6 Nov 79 p 33

maintains the 5.00» year old
heritage of imitation in Iraq
-- said to he the oldest in 'he
world.

in the earliest days the
inhabitants ol Mess) llamut
relied on the natural ontlsol
the rivers Eu rates and‘l’ig-
ris to water : -ir crops. Later
:t complex network of canals
was developed and the land

3;}0 that this stretch
-crtile Crescent was
rendered barren by a ﬂilltt‘nill
process which lclt the soil
ridiktl Villll dc its til salt.
.otvcr Khalis
protect is completed. ll vyill
bring high inten. 'ty irrigation
and mechanised agriculture
to 90.000 hectares ot land
between the Tigris and
Dlﬁlll rivers. an economi-
ea important arcairnrnedt-
ate north ottlnghdadﬁome
9,000 kilometres nl tield
drsms are to be constructed
in the area.

“line ﬁrst contract to start —
"l0." in l975 — involved
lhe «instruction of ”‘00

kilometres of lield drains. It is

not 90 per cent complete.
The net cultivable area or
"K!" is «.000 hectares. The
wind and third Ctmlmﬂs
(K! of 2‘30" hectares and
Kl nl ”.000 hectares) were
both started in 1977 and are
this over l5 per cent cont-
lc. The Iraqi goscrnrnent
- sprovided the £20" million

necessary for the scheme.

erhution

Britain's Sir M MacDonald
and Partners. who had car-
ried out aa initial leasihility
stud in l91l . were
appointed consultants to
dcst n and supervise the
not the newly-turned
Getter A ricultural Establ-
ishment. ir job over a
period at ﬁve years was to
develop a progressive uric-uh
lural plan based on cereals.
tndderern and ertriistruits
Sub-criminals tor agricul-
tural and sacral aspects are
llutllil'l‘ Technical Services
at Britain.

A major delay. and me
which is becoming common

to such pro' ‘C‘h the world
over. is that at land distribu-
tion and adrtttnistrution.
Some 70 per cent of the
land is still owned
cent nl its people.
pemmisnntsit .
more than . lll ilonurrts
(roughly l.2tlll hectares).

With its socialist strategy. the
Baghdad government duly
mused to confiscate all the
concerned and redistri-
batc it in mekages at It!"
dnnurm to the local larmers.
That has not happened
Resistance has come from
landowners. some in inﬂuen-

tial public positions. “thereis
aim the tact that the railincs
iii land tenure are complex.
although it is known that the
Eavernrncrtt ls ultimately

cen on utilising collective
and state twins. (iovcrnmcnt
imrml still come gradually . it
.\|I)‘!V.
BRIEFS

TECHNOLOGICAL AGREEMENT WITH ITALY-Nuovo Pignone, the energy engineering
subsidiary of Italy's state-owned hydrocarbons group ENI, has won a $200
million deal in Iraq which is being described as a big step forward for
3211‘s policy of natching guaranteed oil supplies with exports of speciali-
sed technology. Final details of the contract were being worked out as
this newsletter went to press by officials in Baghdad and Nuovo Pignone's
President Gianni Fogusi; first reports said however that the company would
supply a virtually complete gas-processing system. including 10 gas tur-
bines and 60 compressors, for a plant at Bassora, in the south of Iraq.
Nuovo Pignone has already begun supplying compressor equipment to china un-
der the tem of a licensing agreement concluded with the government in
Peking. This and other pending agree-ants are part of ENI's overall strat-
egy of concluding direct deals with governments in order to bypass the la-
jor international oil companies. 3101 Chairman Giorgio Hatzanti has recently
visited Iran, Mexico and Libya in pursuit of the policy. work on the Iraqi
contract is due for completion by early 1982. [Text] Paris AR-NAIIAR ARAB
REPORT 6 mo 19 Nov 79 pp 2, 3]

RISE IN NONOIL EXPORTS-41w value of Iraq's non-oil exports in the first
nine months of this year was ID 26,168,226 (about $81 nillion), it was an-
nounced last week. The quarterly average is about 16 per cent higher than
in the second quarter of 1978, the last period for which figures are avail-
able (An-Nahar Arab Report 6 Hemo, Novedaer 27, 1978). The Chair-an of the
State Organisation for Exports, Fund Abdul Hajeed, said non-oil exports
included industrial products, some chemicals and comodities; the chief ex-
port earner other than oil has in the past been dates, with cement running
second. Hr Majeed said that the organisation had fulfilled targets on sched-
ule. [Text] [Paris AN-NABAR ARAB REPORT 6 Into 19 Nov 79 p 3]

INDUSTRIAL BANK CAPITAL DOUBLED--Iraq's ruling Revolution Co-and Council
has decided to double the capital of the state-run Industrial Bank to ID

50 million ($169.3 million), it was announced last week. A total of 23
industrial projects costing an estimated ID 680 million ($1.62 billion)

were launched to celebrate this year's anniversary of the July 17 revolution.
(An-Nahar Arab Report 5 Memo, July 16). [Text] [Paris AN-NABAR ARAB REPORT
6W19Nov79p3]
REFINERY EXPANDED-The expansion project of an oil refinery in the north of
Baghdad was inaugurated last week by Iraqi 011 Minister Tayeh Abdel Karim.
The $150,000 project includes the construction of a refining unit that would
add to the refinery a capacity of 10,000 barrels a day. thus boosting the
refinery's capacity to 21.000 b/d. satisfying Iraqi needs for oil. [Text]
[Paris AN-NAHAR ARAB REPORT 6 MEMO 19 Nov 79 p 3]

CHINESE WORKERS TOR HIGMHAY-The Japanese construction company Fujita will
employ 600 unskilled Chinese workers to work on a highway project in Iraq
due to start next spring. An agreement to this effect was signed between
Pujita and the China Civil Engineering Corporation in Tokyo. The Iraqi
project involves construction of a highway between Baghdad and Hit. 122
kilometres north of the capital. The Japanese trading house Marubeni won
the contract as main contractor. China, it appears, is beginning to follow
the example of South Korea in exporting its labour to Middle Eastern con-
struction sites. The Chinese workers are to be paid 3300-600 per month over

the two-year construction period. [Text] [Paris AN-NAHAR ARAB REPORT 5
MEMO 19 Nov 79 p 3]

050: 5820
coopmuos wm com on swam-rs some! uncm
Tel Aviv mm in Hebrew 28 Oct 79 p 2
[mm-1:1: ”Maintaining settlement Policy")

[Text] The Government of Israel, which approved the establishnent of the
Blon Norah settle-eat and its location and against which the Supreme Court
has issued a decision, is obligated to find a way out whereby the decision
will not be underlined, inasmuch as it is the edict of a dauocratic authority.
and whereby the Jewish settlanent will remain in the region by moving its
location. The Suprue Court took its stand with statistics that were not
cleared beforehand so that a Judicial miscarriage night be prevented. Now
a lulu-dimensional prograa lust be designed in the region or ﬂablus and its
environs, equipped with the required resources. within the tranework of
which a solution can be found for Blon March as an urban center at that
location.

Settluent policy is a foundation stone in the Government's planning with
respect to Juden, Saaaria and the Gaza Strip. A policy which does not lose
sight or the problu of lands and or political circumstances. but whose
application because urgent during a tine of autonomy deliberations. This is
concrete evidence of our position in the Territories during a transition
period or autonany and of what is to follow it.

First and formost a proposal worthy of the name should be formulated. whose
principles include avoidance of confrontation with the law, and an expanded
possibility of implementing Jewish settlement in accordance with a planned
n.ps

The people non Norah. who are aware or the basic assunption that settleaent
worthy of its nane cannot be inplaaented except through the resources of the
government and with the help of the security forces, would do well to
deaonstrate understanding of rational proposals whose main purpose is a
Jewish presence in the hills of ﬂablus through a village and urban settlement.
Inhabitants of the country who support the establishment of Jewish settlements
in all parts of the land of Israel. would respect constructive cooperation

by the settluent pioneers with the government.
Any decision accepted in the government by the neJority should be sccepted
elso by the minority. The solution or this problem is the besis of the
govern-ent‘s policy end is vitsl to its very existence. heck of e solution,
which will ceuse greet opposition, will bring closer s govement crisis to
he followed by eerily elections. Those nore interested in e government with
en indivisihle land of Israel policy, end who ere lame to e leedership
which is name noise then ection. should be the ones to support with ell their

strength efforts to disemge from this complexity so thst e neptive develop-
ment my be avoided.

The people of Zion Moreh, ables-vent pioneers who ere inbued in their conceptuel
world with the cherecteristic of responsibility ere obliseted to lend s head
to the government in its efforts to develop s most positive progru. according

to which s conprehensive settle-eat up m be ilplenented in the region.
including non Moreh, within s. predetermined tile (rune.

8090
630: “805
SI‘ROIGEB MEASURE AGAIRST PID MOMSTS um
'ncl Aviv mzom in Hebrew 28 Oct 19 p 2
[Editorials "The PLO and Its Draggers-On"]

[Text] The two terrorists who have been sentenced to life imprisonment for
the masons which they cox-titted in the bloody bus on the Coastal Road
are typical of the no in its aavsgery. In their sntence. which points

up their very serious crime, it was said among other things, "hen while the
bus was burning they shot and tossed grenades into the doors of the bus in
order to cause death even to those who had some prospect of escaping from
the fire trap."

These hestial creatures who model their expertise to shed Jewish blood as

they have been trained to do by Arafat and his cchorts. who acted boisterously
even in the military courtrocm. were not sentenced to death for perpetratins
this massacre in cmideration of their young years. Israeli Justice
demonstrated great restraint in regard to these abominable criminals or the
Nazi type.

It should be noted that a military court in Ankara, Turkey sentenced four
terrorists to death by hanging for assassinating Egyptian enbassy personnel.

In the light of such Satanic murderers,PID trainees, the talk or "mderate"
PLO members is nothing but deceptive or misleading. The PLO is the en-y of
Israel and its Jewish citizens and must be fought to its destruction. 'Ihe
PLO in effect establishes the procedures or the Palestinian activists in the
Occupied 'Ierritories. Thq were even invited to the leftist nesting of the
New Outlook in Washington, but in accordance with the instructions of the
PLO. did not accept the invitation.

Il‘he Israelis who did respond to the invitation, people from the sum and the
MAP»! parties 'and a number of Reform rabbis in the united States who also
are participating in the meeting, must surely know that their propaganda for
the estdblishsent of a Palestinian state on the West Bank and in the Gasa
Strip implies a PI!) state, a state wherein murderers of the type of those
who shed the blood in the vehicle on the Coastal Road will rule lswlessly.

66
One or the lenders of the meeting, the editor of the periodical New Outlook.
snnounced that the purpose of the neeting woe to bring to the nttention or
the Jews in the Lhited Stntes the difference of opinion in this countu on
the question or the Pelestininno. "United Stntes Jewry met be convinced."
he ssid. "thnt it sbuld not be e rubber stslp for the Government of Isrsel."

The Jew tr:- lisifs who lost his wife end two children in the blood: bun and
whose legs were cut off, end who. in n broken voice veiled: ”It is s shone
that my country does not kill these two nurderers who hnve shed so Inch
blood." The voice or this bereeved tether and husband is directed to those
Israelis, buddies of the Pnlestinisns, who ere in effect polls of the PLO.
who sdvocste establishment of n no stete in the henrt or this country.

Were is the shone of those who perticipste in the neeting of the low Outlook
in Unshinston; end where is the shone of the people of the Pence llow

Movement. who left for Egypt to voice servility snd {lottery to the rulers

in Csiro a: their desire for n Peleetininn stnte; where is the chess of the In
from SKELI who hurried of! to Viennn to secept the Kreicb prize in conpsny
with s PLO activist. Is this whnt it hoe cone to?

Political sources in the Western countries who proclein the prnises of the
P10 are asking cslculstions of Arnb oil, or co-ercisl denings with the
Arsbs. But Israelis who ere sent-chine with cnndles for nllegsdly nodernte
Pm lenders. while disregnrding the slsughterous role of the orgsnisstion ere
{seed by the rennsnts of the bloody bus who cell out: Shae. she-e!

8090
080: £805
STRONGER 00W ACTIOI. NOT CHANGE. URGED
Jerusalem MDI'A in Hebrew 26 Oct 79 p 3

[Article by Rabbi Yehudah Meir Abramovitz: "The Govern-ent Must Inprove Its
Operations" ]

[Text] The Israeli nation. following during the past week the stormy events
in our land. has turned its eyes to the Knesset in anticipation and in hope.
It anticipates that steps will be taken to improve the situation in the
country and it hopes that this will be done by the current government. There
is a basic confidence in the current government and in its head. despite the
fact that not all that was anticipated was realized.

No events of the week. the resignation of the foreign ninister and the
decision of the Supreme Court. dovetailed into this deliberation. althouh
they are a sort of late addendum to the basic thae of today's deliberations.
He regret the departure of every capable minister fro- the government. but
we are confident that the government will not be danged as a result.

Blon Moreh, too. has risen to the top. The position of Agudat Yisrael on

this matter is known. The Court decision once again brought to light the
impression that the governnent does not always function on the matter of
settlements through foresight as to the development of utters, but rather
succumbs on occasion to pressures. At the sane tile it met be said that the
people or the Peace Now novsnent and the people on the Left that are day after
day inciting Arab slenents against the govern-ant. are erring grievoualy.

As stated, these are all issues which were appended to our day's agenda,
and it was impossible to ignore them. Now I shall return to the central
foundation in the no-confidence proposal: the situation in the econony.

A High Standard of Living. of Haste and Luxuries

Those opposed to the coalition existing today exaggerate in order to portray
a distorted picture of the condition of the econmy. There are, in fact,

great difficulties. there are coupler problens. but it is douth that in
all the history of the state there has existed this kind of period of high
standard of living, so great an ownership of vehicles and electrical
appliances, an enormous demand for luxury itas. and travel by hmdreds
of thousands abroad each year. Note how the world looks upon us, they are
simpr unable to understand us. and in truth it is difficult to understand.

The one that is truly in a difficult situation is not the individual in the
country but the country itself. Its obligations are piling up into many
millions of dollars. Today we are bearing the burden of the economic policies
of all of the governments of the past 30 years. not Just of the past 2

years. It is insane to cast all the blame for the current situatim on the
one who undertook a shaky economic situation of many years. and the obJectiwe
reasons made it difficult for him to find a quick solution.

There exists in the country a class of citizens in the lower rung of income.
whose situation is difficult. and such a class existed in the past as well.
and then as well as now we demand that the greatest effort be turned to these
citizens. Other citizens of the country enjoy the cost of living incresent
as well as the increase in real wage which more or less cover the drop in

the value of the Israeli pound.

For the weak class the only help may be rehabilitation. and if they cuplain
that not enough is being done. I accept that, because whatever is being done
is insufficient.

The effects of inflation are more in the psychological area than in the
practical. The individual citizen is much concerned about what tomorrow
will bring. but in the meantime continues to live. better than ever before.
Inflation must be controlled, but who knows the secret of how to do it? Is
the key in the hands of someone in the opposition? That another government
would bring instant relief to the country, I doubt. would another govern—
ment have the keys to new oilwells, which is today a world problem? Would
it have a magic rod to bring about a quick end to the negotiations with the
Palestinians? Could it speedily reduce inflatim to the European rates?
All of these are pipedreams. given the situation in our econow.

The Government -- A Chorus. llot Soloists

All of us can criticize. Bren I have criticism of the government and its
Motioning. But there is a long distance from that to presnting economic
facts in a totally distorted light.

Yehezkiel m1: (The Editor)

\hat is the criticism you have?

Yehudah Meir Abramvitz:

Listen.

1.2.: What kind of criticism could you have? According to you, this is a
Garden of Eden, this is the finest governmmt. What are you criticizing?

69
Y.M.A.: We have criticisn of the government.

1.2.: Guy on the subJect of abortion. but not on the subJeet of the
econau.

¥.M.A.: we wish you to stand up and be counted in a unified aanner. through
cooperation and harmony, through collective responsibility; that this be a
chorus and not a group of soloists. and then I am confident that with the
help of God you will be able to overcme the difficult problem. the economic
the political, the security. the social. etc.. etc.

Education for Jewish Values Basis of Our Existence

We wish the government to invest greater effort in the area of building and
solving the problems of young couples. Education for Jewish values is. in
our view. the foundation stone for the existence of Israeli society. Our

day of holiness is violated in the public thoroughfares. and the laws which
afford relief are trampled mder the feet of citizens who violate the
Sabbath. To our sorrow. we have not yet achieved full equality in the

status of Torah students as compared with the status of other students in the
country. of the individual or the public.

He wished and aspired to improve the quality of life. but until now these
matters have been pushed. to our regret. into a corner.

The slaughter on the highways is rsaptant and day after day there are many
victims. and the actions taken against this slsudzter are still insufficient.
It is true that the government was preoccupied and busy over 2 years in
achieving a peace with Egpt and thus was not able to give sufficient atten-
tion to other matters. And yet we still hope that in the 2 years remaining
to the current adainistration there will be remedies for what can be renedied.
and our situation in all areas will improve.

Government bed to Peace With Largest of Arab Nations

The critics lose sidlt of the fact that this govern-alt, headed by the
prime minister Hr Begin, during the current adainistraticn is the one that
brought us peace with the greatest of the Arab natimsuBgypt—sonething
which no previous govemnsnt was able to accomplish. And it is this
Government which is involved now in a process of negotiations whose pal is
to assure. with the help of God. the coating of the day of an overall
comprehensive agreamt in our region.

He do not accept the deaands of the opposition that now is the time to cease
all of this productive effort and to plunge ourselves and the country into
the turbulence of an election. A period of electims is always a period of
accelerated inflation. of exhibitioniaa and fraternal strife. and at the end
of it all the change taking place in the picture will be minuscule.
This governnalt mt continue to function, and is obligated to correct and
improve the nethods or administration and Motion. I am not ignoring what
demands correction. The prime ninister himself has proclaimed this quite
often. and I accept his promises that he will indeed act now to reorganize.
and to improve the situation. I also have cmfidence in the premises that
the government be given to our party on religious letters, and that it
will discharge an of its responsibilities in the coalitional agree-cut.

This government has demonstrated great understanding for the needs of the
observers of Torah and tradition. and is thus under constant attack by the
opposition and by the so-called refined people, who wish to acquire at very
low cost the affection of a small public of enemies of religious persons.

Funds Given to Torah and Educational Institutions. lot to Agudat Yisrael

Tomorrow, for example, the Knesset will deal with a controversial proposal
concerning the flow of mnds. allegedly, to the Agudat Yisrsel. A cock-and-
hull story. Ehpty phrases devoid of significance. The funds were not given
to Agudat Yisrsel. but to educational institutions. to religious elementary
schools and the holy Yeshivot [Talmudic acsdaies]. A deprived group of
Israeli children throughout All these years. citisens or the state. who have
begun to be recognised for equal rights—for this all of the fury of the
niserly enemies or religion has come forth.

At least 80 percent of the expenses of the universities in the country are
mnded by the gavernnent. low. even after all of the pvernment help to the
Torah institutions. the funding will be simscule. a small percentage as
coapared to others, and even on this “poor asn's lamb" the fury is being
vented.

And in concluding my marks. honorable Chairman, members or the Knesset. we
shall in the future as well not hesitate to criticise the activities of the

government constructively, nor will we refrain as well Rom describing with

g: atification and satisfaction the positive activities of the governsent.

If there is a need for any change at all at this tine, it is not in the area
at a change in administrations but rather in a strengthening and a renewal of
the govern-eat rm within. Thus we shell support both at the sane tine.
improvement or the functioning of the government and continuation of its
existence.

(Remake in the Knesset)
[NATIVE REACTIOI '10 THE TEHIA PARTY RmISTERH)
Jerusalem HAHOIJI'A in Hebrew 26 Oct 79 pp 3. 7

[Article by Blister Schulsinger: "The Tehia - Disappointment of the National
Religious Party")

[Text] During the intermediate days of the holiday of Sukkot there was a
clatter meeting. for the first time in Israel. of a “secular-religious"
party—~"The Faithful or the land of Israel" by the name of 'rehia. Prior to
the Sukkot holiday there was a giant advertisement in the press containing
excerpts tron "a call for the establishnent of the aovaent" on which were
signed "secular and religious" together. Side by side with Yuval lla'anan,
Knesset Member Moshe Shsmir, and MK Geulsh Cohen, were members or kibutsim and
yeshuvin with no contact whatever with Torah and Judaism. Comrades in this
movement also include the "elite" of the public which was educated in the

hem and bat movement of the National Religious Party, starting with hinder-
gsrten and ending with the Bnei Akiva in the secondary schools and in the
Reader, heads or the Reader talnudic academies and their pupils; students

m- nerhas Barav; the former Rabbi of Her Haroeh who recently competed for
but failed to attain the title or Chief Rabbi of Jerusalu; the son of the
founder of the Bnei Akiva talmdic academies. wearers of the knitted skullcaps
of the Guah munin and residents of all of the religious settlalents in the
occupied areas. In effect, all of the "east wall" and the choicest of the
Misrachi educated.

If there still rasained anyone who doubted that Zionism and Religious has
failed all along the way. not only in that they did not redeem the Jewish
nation physically and spiritually as they had proclaiaed. but even brought it
to a condition of despair and depression both among the nations of the world
as well as in the conomic, social, political. etc.. situation of the

state, this charter episode on which are signed those who aspire to "renewal
or the awareness or the Zionist mission or the state and in which they inform
us that since Zionism has to date totally failed and we stand "facing a
collapse which is steadily increasing in econuic, ethical and social

policy" and ”aanireatations ot the collapse are mature-there is but one remedy.
and that is "to begin everything anew."
All that the great minds of Israel foresaw at the establishment of Zionism,
and did not need three generations in order to be convinced of the sense that
Zionism would lead the Jewish nation to s nadir in every respect. now those
who were educated by it have come to adait it openly. The difference is only
that while the great minds of Israel with their penetrating foresight saw
this from the beginning, when they expressed their opinion publicly and
cautioned the nation not to be misled by these failing love-nests. whose only
goal is not a Land of Israel, but a Land of Israel and a nation with the aim
of uprooting religion. they were subJected to vilification and name-calling
by the very circles and groups who today stand and admit that Zionist failed.
and "it is necessary to start all over again while admitting that Zimism has
accomplished nothing whatever and has not brought in its wake to this very
day any benefit to the Jewish people.

Secularisr-Hith llo Religious Spirit

Yet, rather than arrive at the proper conclusion and return to the source of
the Jewish Nation which is our Holy 'ibrah they are instead proposing new-old
solutions which are devoid of anything but slogans that lack foundation and
basis. which in their totality are nothing but fantasies and flights of

fancy accompanied by exaggerated arrogance, denial of the Kingdom of Heaven.
their slogans and proclamations lacking mentim of the name of the Lord (not
even "the Rock of Israel and its Redeemer") nor the Torah and its comndments.
nor the words of our Sages, nor even a verse "for healing." but rather the
entire charter docunent is on a pure secular basis, so that there is no place
to err that we are dealing here with a party of any "religious”content or
background, but rather that it is totally secular with no camectioa whatever
to Torah and co-andments, and the bitter and painful fact emerges that the
"religious national" education served as a "bridge" even "to the best of

them" to pass decisively to a secular party. and even to abandon the "religious-
national"camp.

The charter document of the Tehia contains among other things: "To begin
anew means to ruove fences which have arisen between the caps called
"religious" and "secular" and to lay the foundation for a single camp, with
the belief that the unifying strength of the Land of Israel will enable us

to reveal that the walls are external whereas the goal has only one source-
resurrection of the nation on its land." So that the question arises: A
believing person who performs the cos-Inherits of the Torah because that is
the will of God. is the differmce between him and one who does not observe
the comandnents. but instead desecrates the Sabbath and violates the Covenant,
only an "external" difference? Is the difference between a believer and a
violator "external"? The very foundation and the source of the faith is
that observance of the Torah and its consandments is for the sake of the will
of God and His injunction, and not, Heaven forbid because of a pleasant
custom. or because it pleases the observer. so that whoever does not observe
them is not fulfilling the word of God. (Reference: ﬂsson Ish. Yoreh
Deyah. Chap. 119. Par. 2)
How then, can the hand which puts on phylaeteries sign a charter document

of this nature which in effect states that the difference between a "violator"
and a "believer" is merely an "external" matter? Doesn't this mean that
this is clear and incisive proof of what our holy Rabbi Elhanan Hasserman
defined that "national religious" is "pagan worship in partnership." is it
not apparent to the senses that here a generation has grown up that seemingly
observes a portion of the Torah and its amendments, and among these are
"heads of talmudic academies" and "educators" who lack the foundations of
religion and faith. And of this the rabbi of Brisk, of blessed memory.
expressed the opinion "that even one who in error is ignorant of the 13
Articles of Faith. he too is an atheist." Aside t‘rm all of this. if the
"head of the movaent"Uval Neunan had come forth and proclaimed that all
members of his mvasent would begin to observe Torah and its couandments
there is a poassibility of hope that the walls would be eliminated, but since
he did not proclaim this. how then will these walls be eliminated? The

wall between an observer of the Covenant and a desecrator of the Covenant

is created automatically, for if the Jew is a Sabbath observer he is
separate Rom one who desecrates it, and one who eats kosher my not sit at
a table with one who eats non kosher food. And one who educates his son in
religious education is different from one who educates his son secularly,

so that a life of Torah and precepts by and ofitself brings about a "differ-
ence" between a religious and a secular person. ﬂow that, will the walls be
eliminated between the religious and the secular at a time that the secular
have not proclaimed observance of Torah and its precepts! Shall we thus
conclude that the "religious" are preparing to divest themselves of the
burden of Torah and its precepts?

Fear and Harry of the National Religious Party

How, by their system, will the walls between the religious and the secular
be removed? "Unifying strength of the Land of Israel will enable us to
demonstrate that the walls are external." Deugoguery and a slogan devoid
of reason, basis and foundation. Jerusalem, Tel Aviv, Haifa and all the
cities of the country and its settlements under the aegis of the State of
Israel have not succeeded in bridging and nullitying the walls between the
religious and the secular, why should this take place when Hebron, lablus
and Jericho and their Arab populations will come under the rule of the
state? . . .

The leaders of the N8? are very concerned by this movement and criticise its
direction and its method even on matters of religion. mm expresses
the cry of crisis of the “RP: Hanan Pox-at. a member of Kfar Etzion, a
second generation of the settlers of Gush Etzion. an alumus of the Merkaz
Harav Talmudic Acadeny, did he feel restricted in the Bnei Akiva movement,
in the Pool Halizrachi, to define and implement his goals. what is it that
caused a Inn of Torah and Labor to abandon a religious pioneering aovanent
and to wander unto those who seek the Likud, secularists. who by the terms
of the partnership will be required to alter the religious status quo by

a specific percentage? And, mzorsa continues: "Aamg the signers of the
proclamation of the Tehia movement there is also Rabbi mieser Ualdman. head
of the Kin‘at Arba Talmudic Acadeay, an academy. as other academies, whose
students are alumni of the educatimal systan of the National Religious
Movement. where they were trained in Torah. What need can be filled for a
Torah educator by a "mixed" party with no strictly religious image? Hill
his students be educated by the rhetoric of Geulah Cohen?"

Tne surprise, of trainees of the m in a secular movement. is in effect

the answer. Trainees of the Mizrachi have always gone over to secular
parties. This process has continued for decades. men before establishment
of the State, one of the ideologists of the Hizrachi, Rabbi Amiel, the

rabbi of Tel Aviv, complained in his book. "The Spiritual Problems in
Zionism" anong other things: "He are surprised at ourselves because is it
not a fact that the schools of the lusrachi are not nurturing )lisrachi-ites;
the graduates of our schools go into all the parties but are absent from
the Mizrachi."

however, until now this process was within the framework of individuals,
while at this time the matter has become a movnent, the Misrachi movement
has gone along all these years in the manner of an ostrich and never stopped
to consider why this process was taking place.

"Religion" Subserviaat to "nation"

The answer to this is simple. It enjoyed the past of "religion and
nationality" all these years, for whenever religion and nationality conflicted
"religion" yielded to "nation."

All or the laws against the Torah of Israel which have been accepted in the
state were when the Mizrachi was the min and senior partner in the coalitions
and the governments; permission to work on the Sabbath. public transport on
the Sabbath, the autopsy law. the abortion law. who is a Jew. conversion,
conscription of girls for national service (althoug: the Chief Rabbinate
forbade conscription of girls categorically and similarly the National
Service. and despite this the up voted in favor of conscription of girls

and initiated the National Service Law, contrary to the view of the Chief
Rahbinate, and explained this by the statement that where the needs of the
government are concerned it is not possible to lend an ear to the voices of
the rabbis) and all of this was accepted while the HR? was in the government.
and always the NRP explained that matters of state take precedence and

there .‘s no alternative but to yield, and when the nap pursued this course

of putting "religion" subservient to "nation," and trained its students

that the "nation" occupies the primary position before that of the ”religion."
it is clear and simple that when the wearer of a "knitted skull cap" must
choose a party, after he has been educated that the "nation"end "the state"
take precedence, he will surely choose the "freedn" or another party in
which the nationalists are more capable or are adaptable at administering
the state than the aembers of the NRP.
At the start of the "(Os when the Ben Gurion-Lavon Affair rocked the nation.
in the elections that took place at that time MAPAI appeared under the leader—
ship of Dahkol. and W1 under the leadership of Ben curion. one of the
members of the religious kihbutz Sa'ad. Shmuel Bart. son of Ya'akov Bart.
sung the ideologists of the Mizrschi. turned with a call to the leadership
of the HR? not to present a list for election. and to vote ibr Eshkol in
order to defeat Ben Gurion. There was a storm. and scores of protests
reached RAZOR“ because of that proclamation: Is this to be tolerated?!

At the time I inquired of one of the leaders of the IIRP. why the storm? This
proclamation is a natural and clear process in view of the manner in which
you educated your youth, for isn't amnel Bart an alumnus who has passed
through all of the stages of education in the Misrachi and arrived at the
goal and at the "canpleteness of the thoudlt and the method" in that he

was a member of the "religious kibbutz." what then motivated him to this
proclamation? And the answer is clear. he was educated on the lap of the
Mizrachi that the state is more important than religion. so that according
to this direction the moment that he saw that the future and the existence
of the state depend upon the victory of Bhkol and the defeat of Ben Gurion.
certainly religion must yield and make way for the state.

Neither Religion nor Nation

The leader of the NRP. the late Haim Moshe Shapira, was much concerned that
the youth were turning to other parties; but instead of solving the problen at
its roots and deciding that the road is wrong and improper, he called upon a
number of young people and established the Young Generation in the IRP with
the hope that this group would bring youth in its wake. The HR? young people
in fact chose another way. and at the mment that they faced the. lost recent
elections to the Knesset for key positions they decided to invest the NRP
with a total "nationalist" characteristic. of "pioneering" and establishing
frameworks for the secular public to enter the NRP. And they failed
completely to stress the "religious"side. but stressed only the "national"
side. the "pioneering" and the idea of "completeness of the land. and indeed
they succeeded in this way and drew upon a large "pent of the public who
voted for the REF, thus this party won two additional Knesset members in

the most recent elections. However. this performance did not maintain its
position for a long time and a new rift was created. with establislnent of
Tehia, and again for the same reason.

Since the met recent elections the FR? has once again demonstrated that
matters of religion do not interest it. The HR? did not even once demand
preservation of any section of the Coalition Agreement pertaining to religious
matters. although without the HEP there is no Coalition or governnent at all.
All its threats and demands upon the prime minister were on matters of the
state. not on matters of religion. All demands on religious utters came
only from the Agudat Yisrael. and the HR? was satisfied to Join the Agudat
Yisrael in its votes. And if the Agudat Yisrael succeeded in passing a new
law of conscription of girls, which is by any useure the most difficult
section to iaplenent, then there is no doubt at all that it would have been
possible to pass the rest of the sections and to implement them. The IR?
continued in its usual way. and any matters of religion in the Agreement do
not interest it. although in effect the only thing the Likud emitted itself
to implement in the Agreement on matters of religion were laws that all vio-
late the religious status quo since the establishment of the State. [an
that were enacted when the NR? was a partner in the govemment on which there
was a possibility of restoring the religious situation to what it was at
least at the time of the establishment of the state. But to this day the IR?
has not demanded implementation of any section of religion in the Agreement.
Similarly in matters of "nationhood" when the HR? Joined with the voted for
the peace treaty and agreed to autommy and to the disamntling of settlenents.
it thus proved to its yomg people by their own view that even on the matter
of nationhood it yields. 50 there should be no wonder that the choicest of
the youth and of their alumni Joined the nationalist Tehia movanent. for if the
HR? does not possess either religion or nationality and the education and

the path during the course of these many years were that the nation is more
important than religion. what then is the wonder that the select Join Tehia;
this is an understandable and simple process.

'Ihe crocodile tears shed by the leaders of the 10!? and by mm and their
allegations need not be about Hanan Porat and Rabbi Eliezer waldman and
their colleagues in the Gush Banning they are not the proper address therefor.

Direct Outcome of HRP Education

The MR? itself is the address for that. its past and its method that the
"nation"precedes "religion." by which Hanan Forat and Eliezer Haldman and
their comrades were educated. As a continuation of this education they
chose Tehia; and while Hisrachi will continue on its way with a policy of
ostrich head-hiding and will avoid fundamental and in-depth thinking on
implementing and correcting the root of the problas, to observe correctly
that the path of religion and nation has suffered total failure and has
arrived at its peak at a tine when its chOice sons have abandoned it and
established an outstanding national-secular movement, for as lung as it does
not send its ways there is no doubt at all that there stand in prospect
for the NR? many surprises on the same level.

The generation of the knitted skull-caps were educated on the lap of the
sacred revolution on which the Misrachi movement was founded, with a
proclamation of revolt against the path of the great thinkers of Israel,
heads of Talmudic acadenies. master Bassidic teachers and rabbis. why,
then. should they complain about their revolutiomry sons?

There is a single conclusion: Religion and nation can not exist in the
same basket; whoever chooses religion cannot choose nation, and whoever
chooses nation does not choose religion. There is one single path. the
path of Torah and tradition which has been ours generatdon after generation.
of Moses receiving the Torah at Sinai and passing it on to Joshua, a
tradition of Torah transmitted from father to son, fr‘cn teacher to pupil—as
it was handed down at Sinai with no changes and new paths whatever, the

path of tradition which has held and sustained the nation of Israel through-

out thousands of years of diaspora, the path on which we shall travel and
move until the arrival of the Just Redeemer anon and in our day.
mu wuss Haws omissions on commros. 15am. Pm
Tel Aviv m'mm in Hebrew 2 Nov 79 pp 22-25

[interview with Rashad al-Shawwa: "The Controversial Gaza Mayor Is Still on
Good Tens Hith Israeli Authorities in Spite of his Open Support or the PLO"]
in Mayor '3 office, date not given.

[Text] The mayor of Gaza uses balanced, careml and calculated tactics in all
his actions and declarations. In the course or an interview with his, as

in his actions, he turns out to be an astute politician, well aware of his
position, the repercussions of his pronouncarents and the power he can wield.
he is in no hurry to respond to any question. tries to phrase his answers in
a delicate. sophisticated and somewhat ambiguous manner. his caution, the
contaplation before sounding any opinion. as if to feel out his listener—
are a matter of rule with his. “Tell me, please, what are the questions you
are going to ask ae'!" he asked on the telephone. When the author was sitting
with his: in his spacious office in the municipal building he was not happy
with the general explanation he had received before—he insisted on a detailed
explanation on the subJects he would be asked to address. he a veteran,
experienced politician, even when askeduhe says only what he wants to say,
even it it does not address the question. men he is interrupted. in order
to clarify the point. he listens, then nods, as if to say he understands,

and resuaes as before. He talks in long aonologues, like a lecturer in a
classroa. He talks quietly, defiantly, with authority. Even when the
question is provocative and liable to get one angry. He does not raise his
voice and is not likely to get angry. He makes strong, sharp state-ants,
using correct language, in Arabic. nixed in with English and Hebrew, without
getting excited.

Rashad al-8hawwa. 70, is an impressive nan. ' The authority he generated
cannot be ignored. He is confident because in his opinion he sees the
situation better than anyone else. He is convinced that his is the right way,
that his actions are correct, in short, that he is in the right.

It seems, though that there is no one more controversial than his in the
Gaza Strip. Just as there are those who follow his blindly. consider his
a leader of rare qualities and skill, so there are those who think he is the
rich nan exploiting the people of Gaza, and they are convinced that he acts
for his own benefit. not for the good of the people of Gaza. as he would put
it. his opponents. and there are quite a few of then. both within his clan
and outside. say bluntly that his power and influence eta frat his wealth.
because he saw to it to establish some organizations. which are. supposedly,
charitable institutions. but actually they are political entities which
accord him wide support of the public and considerable political clout. As
an example they cite a charitable institution that he established. which is
the only agency authorized to issue exit visas for the Arab countries for
the people of Gaza. Anyone wishing to go to an Arab country has to receive
a visa fram that institution. headed by its founder. Rashad al-Shawwa.
Issuance of which. the mayor's opponents add. costs money. The exact amount--
so they Stub-depends 0n al—Shawwa. Sometimes he charges 11.1 .000. sometines
1.12.00. an; the difference is food for thought. There are those who suspect
that he pockets quite a bit of this money and they add that they do not know
what he did with contributions he solicited in the oil rich Arab countries.
The mayor listens to all these charges. nods his head and says: "look here.
I am a public figure and I serve the public. I do not have, and I never did
have any personal demands. You talk about opponents who have maligned me and
I went to tell you that there is no public figure who has no opponents and
enemies. end they are not very careful about their words or ways. I have
opponents within end without w clan, but I do not think that they can
influence ny methods or actions. It seems to as that they know this too.

I would like you end others to know that I am a men of action. not words.
Ask all those who criticized me whet they have done for the people of Gaza."

Shat are your sources of power? May have you. in particular. become the leader
acknowledged by the PLO. by the people of Gaza. by Jordan end by Israel?"

notions]. Health

It is obvious that al-Shewws is uncomfortable with the

for a while. as if choosing these words. "I will tell ygfsﬁozil 33:21?
I have never used In! position for sw own benefit or for no material betterment.
I have always carried out my public missions-«including my present Jobs--
faithfully and honestly. without misusing public funds. without taking
advantage of personal connections. without discrimination. I have never
favored a relative or an acquaintance over a stranger. here has never been
a case where I favored a rich person over a poor one. LVeryone is equal as
far as I am concerned. Additionally. I am an honest man. I speak my mind
whether I talk to an Israeli, to a PLO leader or to a Case citizen. This
character of mine has caused me damage and quite a few problems--and may even
do so in the future. By nature I an ambitious. active fbr the good of the
public. My deeds speak for theaselns. Inch more so than I can. Another
thing deserves clarification: I an a volunteer savor. I do not draw any
salary. If I were paid I Should be receiving 11,500,000 a year. The money

I do not receive is my contribution to the city. Moreover. I gave up the
official car and the chauffeur. I drive my own car. Do you realise the
losses my business incurs because I an mayor? I estimate the: at more than
ILl.> million. All these are known to the critics you mtioned. As to the
complaints of ny opponents. I contributed a lot to the citrus industry in

79
in the Gaza Strip. I succeeded in convincing the Jordanian govemnent to
allow transit of citrus trucks through its territory to markets in Arab
countries and the Persian Gulf Bairates. Any truck going with passage papers
Has the charitable institution which I founded. encomters no problems.

Since 1968, when I first started on this, we have reached an annual income of
11.79 nillion. This is very inportant source of income for those in the
business, the citrus grove owners, the fruit pickers, the workers at the
packing plants and the drivers. A few words about the charitable institutions
for help to Gaza Strip residents. I established this institution with song
fru- contribution which I solicited. The large sum were put in a bank and the
interest is used for various proJects, such as sports clubs. hospitals,
welfare, etc. This institution is the only one authorised to issue exit visas
for Case Strip residents. Anyone wishing a visa has to pay for services
rendered. It is not true that I set the price according to the ability of

the person to pay. The fee is fixed. A man pays IL2,000, a wazan IL1,000 and
a child under 15 pays ILSOO. By the way, neither I. nor the institution is
paid. The prospective passenger deposits the sun in the bank. to the
institution's account. The bank issues a receipt,in two copies, one for the
institution, one for the payer. The institution then issues a visa-recoslalda-
tion, with which the person can travel to Allan. Upm returning to the Gaza
Strip he presets his receipt (the cow he received from the bank upon pay-
ment), along with the visa-reco-endation iron the institution. and on the
next day he gets a remnd in the amount deposited prior to the trip. Students,
for example, get a discount and only w 11.500. The institution enacted this
tax for two reasons. First to get people used to the idea that they have to
pay for services. Secondly, the interest that this tax earns goes to finance
cultural activities for the public. We built a religious institution with a
separate branch for women. We are now building a cultural center at the cost
01' I160 million. I hope that now, after this detailed explanation, things
look differently, i.e., in their true light."

"Did your wealth not contribute to your reaching high office?"

"I an glad you asked this question," starts Rashad al-Shswwa. "W wealth,
apparently, bothers many people. The time has cone to put things straight. '0
late father, ﬂaJ Sa'id al-Shawwa, was the largest landowner in all of
Palestine. he owned about 100,000 donuns in the Gaza and ne'er-91ers area.
In 19’18 Israel cmquered Palestine and or all the land we owned our ralily
was left with l£00 donum for the whole family. W share was 132 doom, and
please do not forget that I have 6 children. In addition to the land (orange
groves) I own a coanercial agency which I founded in 1963 (Al-Saar Trade
Agency). I tried to import General Motors cars to the Strip and to Supt,
but in 1967. after the war, everything cane to a halt. In 1968. together
with Ibrahim al-ﬂu'arabi, I established an orange packing plant. For 2 years
we were doing well until seven nore packing plants were established in the
Gaza Strip. Since then our packing plant has been going down md now
operates only 1 month a year. These are all Dy holdings," Mr. al-Shawwa
suns up and points out: "I an not wealthy, as they say. I an rich in soul,
good personality. good deeds. I sacrifice aw time. noney and enery for the
good of the people—ell these. in themselves are worth a fortune!“

His opponents see him differently. His goal is clear--so they say—he wants
to present himself as a public servant. a man who considers the wellbeing of
the public. the city. the Palestinians--but it is not necessarily so. he
does earn noney for each position, or else he would not continue. "There
are no real philanthropists!" said one opponent. "But there still are those
who have Vested interests. and they are acting." The point is obvious.

There have not been local elections in Gaza since 1916. When the Egyptians
came in 19108 they did not renew the old custon of holding elections. They
appointed their people. Israel did the same—it did not hold mayoral
elections. Thus the people of Gaza have not had the privilege of voting to
this date. In 1967. when Israel conquered the city, Ra'ab al-‘Alemi was mayor.
A short time later the governor decided to fire him, claiming he did not do
enough for the city. Since no one in Gaza was willing to take on this
responsibility. Uri Chechik was appointed acting mayor for about 1 year.
ﬂashed al-Shawwa claims that the city did not benefit from Chechih as acting
mayor and therefore people signed a petition. 10 m long. end asked him.
al-Shewwa, to accept the Job. "I was in no rush to accept it. but the
popular pressure increased. They submitted one copy of the petition to the
military authorities and one copy to me. In a conversation with Mr Dayan.
who was then defense minister. I made it clear to him that I would not accept
the appointment without the PID concurrence. Dayan said: "I did not hear
what you said." meaning that the matter (the PLO concurrence) would not be
official. After thinking it over and with the concurrence of the PLO I
announced my willingness to accept the appointment under these conditions:
That a couunique be issued stating that I am accepting the Job not as an
Israeli appointment but by popular duand and with concurrence of the PU);
that I consider the Gaza Strip to be an integral part of the Arab world and
that it be made clear that all my future efforts would be in the direction
of keeping this region Arab and looking so; that I would appoint the City
Council. I selected 12 comcilmen and submitted their names to the governor
who said: "According to procedures I should write that an official letter
of appointment. These are the procedures of the military authorities."

I told him: "I consider myself elected and appointed by the people. not by
you. The council. too. is not appointed by you. If you. the military
governor. were to appoint them. they would not accept. and I melf would
not." The governor understood and this is how I became mayor of Cass."

"th did you resign in 19732

"I would like to make a point that I did not resin. I was fired. The
military governor dananded that I annex the al-Slnti refugee ceap to the
municipal Jurisdiction of the city and I refused. I thought there was

a political reason behind it--and I opposed it. This is why I was fired."
"It I understand you correctly. it was your opinion that Israel wanted the

people of'al-Shati annexed and thus to change their status from refugees to
citizens.‘

"Precisely. It is in Israel's interest that the refugees cease to be
remgees."

"As a public figure who claims that he has the good or the Gaza Strip people

in mind. how could you refuse? Do you not think that by annexing the camp

you would have made life easier tort its refugees? Hould you thus not have done
a service to your remgee brethren in the camp?

Rashad al-Shawwa: "These are Palestinian refugees that you, the Jews, drove
into the Gaza Strip. 'ihey are in the camps. living in subhuman conditions.
because of you. Gaza is not their place and the Strip is not their home.
They neat to go back to their original homes. As a mayor I cannot agree to
turn Gaza into a refugee ghetto. There are £50,000 in the Gasa Strip today.
About 250,000 in Gaza proper. Rapulstion density in the Gaza Strip is the
highest in the world: There are l,h00 people here per square km. whereas the
world average is 1000. Do you really think that this area can be the solution
to the paian problem of the remgees? Instead of constructing settlements
for a handful of Jews from the center of the comtry. w 1 does Israel not set
up settlements for refugees? th does Gaza have to absorb them? I would
not be part of the Israeli conspiracy to erue the concept of refugees."

Haj Rashad al-Shawwa became wor again in October 1975. about a year-and-a
hald after being fired. In the period when he was not mayor no one could be
round to fill the position. Then the military authorities asked him to
accept. "I told the governor." stresses al-8hawwa. "that I did not leave,

I was fired. It you want me to be mvor againnyou have to rescind your
demand regarding the annexation of the al-Shati refugee camp. 'mey tried to
pressure me. but I refused. I accepted only when w demand was set."

Since then 1: years have passed and the city has not changed much. Gazs's
streets are filthy. Because of lack of sidewalks the corners near the houses
are muddy. ‘me city's streets are crowded and loaded with traffic. Travel
in the city is a very unpleasant experience. In the central city market,

a few meters away from the municipal building. it is impossible to not
notice the garbage piled up in the corners. and the sever water flowing near
the improvised vendor stands. What did the city do about this? bit it use
the millions of dollars contributed by the Arab countries?

The mayor makes it clear that Gasa has always been neglected city and what

was done for hundreds of years cannot be changed overnight. not even in 1:
years. "The people of the city. for decades and cmturias, were used to
receiving everything for free. without pqing. Today I actually have to
fight them in order to teach them that they have to pm for all services.
Anyone who wants water has to pay. Anyone who wants ditches or sewer line has
to pay. The mere idea of paying for services is like a revolution for these
people. Don‘t forget that Gasa grew at a staggering rate. In 1955 it had

82
only 30,000 people. Today its population is 2h0,000-250,000. The city suffers
from overcrowdedness, it has poverty problems, too many cars. an antiquated
sewage system, etc. These are all serious problas that we are tackling and
will continue to tackle. But we need time."

Threats of Palsehoods’.’

"Here contributions frat the Arab countries used for that?"

The mayor ignores the question again. He continues: "There is also a problem
or schools in Gaza. Just look at all these students--nmerous. We have no
choice. Our schools cannot accomdate all of them at the same time. so we
found a solution. We divided up the school day into two sessions. the

from 7:30 to 11:30, the other from 12: 30 to 15: 30. we are slowly solving
the city's problems. but we need time."

Again the nayor does exactly what he wants to do. He responds with what he
wants to say and ignores the uneasy questions. He reacts curtIy to a question
regarding his association with the military authorities. "This is a military,
conquering regime,"meaning that he does not like it. But his opponents claim
that he can deal with the authorities in a very clever manner. when this
author quotes those opponents aI-Shawwa smiles with obvious self satisfaction
and answers: "Do you know what, go and ask those extme opponents what I did
vr the n‘ew8--let us see what they have to say. This is all nonsense! I can
honestly claim that I deal cleverly with Israel whereas the others go with
posters, slogans and other means that are notional, not wise. Listen, when
Israel conquered the Gaza Strip the underground was active. It tossed grenades
at schools mtil they were closed by the military authorities. Does the
closing of schools serve our interests, those of the Gaza Strip people? I
formed ties with the underground and asked that they not toss grenades at
schools. I cannot dew that my request in this case coincided with Israel's
interests. Israel also wanted grenade tossing to cease, so that schools could
be reopened. But when I asked the underground to stop tossing grenades, I
did no service to Israel. but to us. Qice upon a time they also tossed
grenades at buses carrying laborers to Israel. I am against work in Israel,
but I understood that I could not prevent anyone from working for Jews if I
have no Job for him. Ehrery man wants to make a living so he can eat. I
went to the underground and told the: "Stop tossing grenades at buses.”
They said: "Are you cooperating with the Jews?" I said: "No, but it is
inposrible to prevent people from working if we cannot find Jobs for then
here. How will they asks a living?" They understood as. They realized that
I was not doing anything for Israel."

"Has the change in the PLO's attitude toward you Just because of your
persuas ivencss or also because of what you did?"

Al-S‘nawwa looks surprised and says: "I fail to understand the question."
"For example. at one time you hid a terrorist in your hone. Has the hiding
of this wanted terrorist not a deed that made the PID approve of you?"

It was obvious that this question was not pleasant for the nyor. "I don't
understand the connection between the two. This happened a long time ago.
I would not have mentioned it at all or thought anything of it."

"Nevertheless. could you explain why you are acceptable to the PLO?"

"1 proved to then aw loyalty to the Palestinian cause! I am an honest nsn.
I talked to them openly, Just as I do to Israel. I consult that on every
issue that I deen important."

"You met Arafat and other PLO leaders a number of tines. Here you asked to
orally deliver to them messages fro- Israel?"

Ha.) al-Shawwa looks embarrassed for a moment. covers his face with his large
hands, straightens his red tie and responds quietly: "I met Arafat at any own
initiative. I did not relay any messages to his."

Nevertheless, people who know al-Shawwa claim that it is not unlikely that
the nayor relayed to Arafat certain things that Israel t nted relwed to the
PLO leader. As proof they point out that the military authorities took no
disciplinary action against him when he came back. But, as mentioned above.
he denies the whole thing and refuses to add anything.

Recently people close to the nyor have claimed repeatedly that various
eluents have threatened his life because they suspect that he cooperates
with Israel. The mayor recapitulates: " Nothing is further from the truth.
Any talk that I support Israel is not true. Whoever claim it. should prove
it. Let him say what I did. I know that I an sore innocent than anyone in
the Gaza Strip. I u not the only one who knows it. either. The people who
spread these vicious rumors are my stamchest opponents, George asbbash's
people. They always spread false rumors. 'mey oppose se and hurt the cause
more than they help it. Vhen the rumors that I help Israel became too such.
I went to the PU). I sat down with the leaders and said: "What an I
accused of? I did it all for the good of the people. I want to continue for
the sake of the Gaza Strip people." The PLO understood that I serve the
people. not Israel. and that is it."

"And the recent threats on your life? Did you forget the assassination
attempts? Are you not afraid. following the assassination of the Imaa?"

"No, I am not scared. True. there were a few attempts on w life. In two
cases the conspirators were apprehended. in the other cases, regretfully.
not. As to present threats. these are but falsehoods. I am not afraid of
death. It is Allah who kills. not man."

His friends agree with him that rumors about threats against his life are
falsehoods. but according to the- the sources for these rumors, which were
published in the Arab press, started vith his very friends and were intended
to strengthen his position. "He loves to be in the center." one of his

Opponents explained.

Rushed al-Shawwa describes himself as a Palestinian Arab who maintains his
right for self determination and an independent state in his motherland. "I
insist on these demands clearly and stubbornly. It makes no difference to me
whether I get these rights fro. Israel or fra the lhited States. he P10

is the most skilled and appropriate organisation to represent se. There is
no difference in deaands or position between ac and then end therefore. ny
relations with then are good. Israel does not understand that it has no right.
and that no one empowered it to decide who will represent net It is the
Palestinian people who should decide that. and thq chose the Pm. This
organization is recognised today thromhout the world, even in the Uh."

Steps Toward a Solution
"How do you see the solution to the Palestinian problem?"

"Israel has to realise once and for all that its goal, as it sees it. not
mu will not be realized. but will eve: work against it in the future. You
cannot close your eyes and proclaim: 'Rain, rain!‘ when everyone spits at you.
'-‘-rne.l oucht to do the following for the solution of the Palestinian problu.
s... that peace will prevail in the region. The Palestinians should have the
right to decide their own destiny. An independent Palestinian state should
be established forthwith in the areas to be innediately evacuated by Israel.
israel has to convince the Palestinians that it will not try to overtake
their country ailitarily. econuically, politically, legally or in any other
way. Israel. especially its leaders, has to realise that if these conditiais
are not met. there is no ww for peace or coexistence in the region.
Consequently Israel will have to live with eras forever. Moreover. the
American administration, including public opinion there. understands the
Palestinian problem sore and mre. How long will the ad-inistration continue
to send Israel Phantosun. FlS's. n6':. PlB's or radar systems? 'ihere has to
be an end to it. It is possible that the present conditions will continue for
A few more decades, at the worst. But in the end thezre will be a change.

do. the Palestinians, have patience. He lost everythgng. We have no freedoa.
we live under occupation (even not, while I an talking to you two soldiers
may knock on ay door and ask me to accompany than to their Jeep and that is
it). 1 stress again. that Israel is the only party to lose if the condition
that I mentioned are not set."

'17».- nayor. who saintains unequivocably that any solution has to include all
terri tories, without exception, says he has no ties with more or other
prominent figures in Judea and Samaria. when he is pressed to explun this.
ne is evasive. claiming that "I an very busy with city business. They are
busy with theirs. But in spite of this our goal and theirs are one and the
same." Those who are faailiar with the background say that the reason for the
absence of ties stems m:- the kind of relationship between the Gaza Strip
people and their brethren in the West Bank. People in the West Bank consider
themselves superior to the Gaza Strip people. Their level of education and
developnent is higher. to the point that there is real alienation and even
hostility between the Gaza Strip and the West Bank people. as well as between
their leaders. In addition, al-Shawwa's personality is such more proninent
than West Bank leaders'. Al-Shawwa is a sophisticated sin, a diplomat who
knows how to say the aost difficult things in a clear and factual nanner.

In addition. he is more acceptable to the Israeli authorities than my
mayors of the West Bank.

In spite of all this. the lack of ties between Gaza Strip and Heat Bank
leaders, in al-Shawwa's opinim. the solution that is to include all
territories has to proceed in three anor stages. The first. an independent
Palestinian state in the territories. The second phase is to establish ties
between the Palestinian state and Jordan. The last step is the emergence of
a "Southern Syria." a large, strong state in the area of Syria. Jordan and
all of Palestine. This stage means a state with predominant Arab character,
which could accaaodate Jews, although as a minority.

Rashad al-Shswwa, the. gentlenanly person. is pragmtic. Otherwise it is
impossible to explain how he found away with the PLO, Jordan and Israel.
Although he was not elected, he believes that mat of the city's people. as
well as those of the Strip, are behind hin and support him in all his steps
and actions. His opponents. headed by It Kheidar Abd al-azafi. maintain that
if elections were to be held in Gaza there is no doubt that he would be
defeated. Al-Shawwa is taking advantage of the fact that there have been

no elections in Gaza. The authorities are behind his and not behind his
opponents such as Dr Shari, Zuhir al-Reis and others. who stand out as
extremist.

Those who are close to the military authorities cannot help but wonder how
long the man can sustain all this. Hill he be able to keep his position for
long'.‘ The prevalent opinion is that until he withstands the real test it is
impossible to assess his exact strength. He is still considered pro-Jordan.
This gave him the support of the Hashiaite kingdos. including the exclusive
right to grant transit permits in the name of the Jordanian government. he
told tne PLO leaders what they wanted to hear and thus he attained a position
of praninence and respect among then. to the point that they do not oppose
him. He also knows how to deal wisely with the military authorities so as
to obtain the necessary financial aid to let life continue normally. The
military authorities agree that time will tell where he really stands.

Mn.) Rashad al-Shawwa himself remses to participate in the autonomy talks and
does not consider himself as a potential representative of the people in

the territories or even those of the Gaza Strip. All tale of autonony of
self determination for the Palestinians are not to his liking. The solution,
as far as he is concerned, is an independent state. with all that this entails.
without any ties to. or intervention by another country that already exists
in the region. He opposes the autonomy plan that Israel presatted. He cannot
see himself part of it.

"Are you not willing to state any conditions to your participation in the talks.
such as the approval of the Pin?"

"No. we have a representative--the Pm. I an not enpovered to represent it.
Moreover, it does not seen to he that the Pm vill agree to it.”

This way or another, Rashad al-Shawa continues to maneuver very skillfully.
which even his opponents can see. and he maintains his precarious position
very adroitly. he still succeeds, as his n-ienu nintain. in walking between
the drops and rennin dry. He is careful of haphazard steps, and like an
experienced chess player he considers not only the next steps, but four steps
ahead. In spite of the unequivocal opinions he voices. it seessuso his
closest associates clain--that he has not said the last word. heryone is
awaiting to hear that when the absent of truth cones. and he has to make a
choice. Until then his ability to maneuver can only he adlired.
CONTINUED CONPISCATION 0P ARAB LAND CONDEHNED

Jerusalem AL-QUDS in Arabic 14 Oct 79 p 1
[Editorial: "The Tragedy of Confiscated Land")

[Text) The expansion of seven Israeli settlements on confiscated Arab land
will be the topic of discussion of today's cabinet meeting. It is expected
that the cabinet will approve a decision to confiscate more Arab land de-
spite the fact that such a step will escalate an alret.y dangerous situation
and make peace in the Middle East more difficult to attain.

It is now apparent that the Israeli cabinet routinely approves the creation
of additional settlements or the confiscation of more Arab land on the eve
of meetings by the three-government Autonomous Rule Committee. This commit—
tee is scheduled to meet tomorrow at Hertzelia to prepare for the next tri-
partite ministerial level session. It is evident that the Israeli action
is calculated to show the Egyptians and Americans that Israel is determined
to limit autonomy to the Arab inhabitants alone but not to their land. To
begin with, the proposed autonomy, as defined by Israel, scarcely satisfies
the minimal aspirations or responds to the legitimate rights of the Pales-
tinians. Thus Israel continues to ignore the fact that Arab land is not
subject to negotiations, and remains determined to subvert the essential
nature of the autonomy negotiations. It simply remains blind to the fact
that the Palestinian people inside and outside their occupied land has the
right to determine its destiny and chart its own future. Israel obviously
believes that the best defense of its indefensible position is to attack
these very rights by confiscating more Arab land. These measures also
strengthen the position of those who rejected the two Camp David accords.

The only alternative to the continuing tragedy of confiscated Arab land

is to find a binding. internationally guaranteed, peaceful solution. Such
a solution must be backed by a United Nations resolution protecting the
occupied land. the future of the Palestinians, and guaranteeing their right
to free self-determination, under the auspices of a neutral international
committee. This, of course, will require a radical review of the makeup

of the United Nations. It will require that the international body be pro-
vided with a standing, modern international military force capable of law
plementing UN resolutions. This is the only way to defend and safeguard
the rights of oppressed nations. restore world peace, and put an end to the
law of the jungle in international relations.

9063 ‘f
C50: 5802
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00880R000200030037-0
ISRAEL CRITICIZED FOR CONDONING ILLEGAL SEIZURE 0P ARAB LAND
Jerusalem Ab—QUDS in Arabic 16 Oct 79 p 1
Editorial: "Rewarding and Encouraging Criminals"]

[Text] Yesterday morning's Gush Baunim stampede and the creation on Arab
land of 65 additional settlements represents the biggest challenge to date
by that group. It is. however, a natural consequence of Israel's attitude
to that group in particular and to the settlement policy in general. The
lsraeli government decision to expand settlements on the Vest Bank at the
expense of Arab land is but one demonstration of that government’s policy
to reward lawlessness and to extend legal protection to criminal acts.

The fact is that all actions by the settler groups are crimes punishable

by law. The forcible expropriation of land, resistance against the author-
ities. and violations of rules and regulations are all punishable crimes
under Israel's existing criminal laws. All of the settlements recently
established by religious fanatics are illegal and in def’mce of govern-
ment regulations. which stipulate that any settlement begun without prior
government approval is illegal. The latest government decision. however,
was obviously designed to nullify previous ones and to give the most recent
actions an aura of legitimacy. The settlers' actions were illegal from the
start. and the government's decision will only help to encourage further
illegal land seizures as happened yesterday.

Whenever Israel declares that it plans new settlements on government land
it deliberately avoids defining what government land is. If we accept the
Israeli interpretation, all Arab lands outside the municipal borders of
towns and villages are government land. This is not so in fact and under
the law. which stipulates that mountains. pastures, woodlands, quarries
and other unused lands are for use by the people. Israeli legal experts
know these facts well.

The bewildering thing is that some Hestern nations have applauded the
Israeli government's decision as moderate and wise. when in truth the deci-
sion is far from either. The naticns which have praised the Israeli action
are not stupid or ignorant of the truth; their feigned ignorance is moti-
vated by a desire to avoid confrontation with Israel. a ploy that has long
contributed to our torment.

9063
C50: (.802
N0 CHANGE IN ISRAEL'S POLICY EXPECTED
Jerusalem AL-SHA'B in Arabic 22 Oct 79 p l
[Editorialz "No Israeli Andrew Young in Store"]

[Text] Yesterday we mentioned that Moshe Dayan is, as ever. faithful and
true to all Zionist principles and policies, notwithstanding the fact that
he constantly tries to find new tactics to cast Israel’s destructive poli-
cies in a more favorable light. particularly in dealing with the Western
world. Our interpretation of Dayan's propaganda techniques is based on
the belief that the Israeli foreign minister is more concerned with what
the United States can promise than with God's promise to the Jewish people.
The just resigned minister has been trying to separate himself from the
mythology department [Begin‘s cabinet] in response to the current oil and
geopolitical realities. without necessarily breaking away altogether from
the foundations of Israel's policies, which we have known for many years.
Dayan's resignation does not mean the end of Israeli policy. That policy
is still alive and well. "hat the resignation means is that Israel is
frantically trying to find new ways to extricate itself and cover its
failure to impose its self-styled "autonomous rule" [on the West Bank].

It is simply looking for new ways to legitimize its occupation and fulfill
its goals.

Aside from this, however, the resignation of the one-eyed minister indi-
cates that he possesses greater political foresight than his colleagues.

He managed to jump overboard Just as the ship of state was about to go down
in the face of economic. political and social storms. Furthermore, the re-
signing minister's failure to convince his government to tie its goals to
current realities. even in form only, shows how long the road is before a
real change in government can be expected.

while not denying that Moshe Dayan has resigned, let us keep things in

perspective. The fact is that Israeli policy has not changed. Dayan is
not our Andrew Young.

9063
080: 5802
WENT COHMBNI‘S 0N TUNISIAN RESOLUTIONS
B‘frut MONDAY HCRiiIEV'G in aiglish 3-9 Dec 79 pp 22-29

[interview with Hal id Junblnn, Lebanese leftist leader, by Lydia
data and p;=n:e nct. give-£7

[511,] Welid Junblett, a prominent Lebanese lel‘tist leader. told
Monday Morning last week that the November 20 Arab summit
conference in Tunis had done nothing to solve the South Lebmese
problem.

Junblatt, president of the Progressive Socialist Party, said the
summit's "vague resolutions" would do nothing but ”postpone the
ﬁnal outcome" of the Southern situation, that outcome being an
unknown quantity so far.

Junblett's statements were the ﬁrst Lebnese leftist criticism of
the Arab summit resolutions, and they underscored the chasm that
has opened up in leftist ranks.

The leltist leader made no effort to conceal the rift in the
country's major alliance of leftist parties, the Lehmese National
Movement, at which he is e member and was once expected to
become president.

"Maybe my opinion is quite different from the National
Movements." Junblett said, "because I think that the (Arab
summit) resolutions are just resolutions - as they here been
before... Apart from (the resolution which oiiered Lebanon 400
million dollars in annual aid for live years), the situation is
ambiguous. ltisa status quo situation that will stay like this for
some years.

"I don't know how the National Movement. or some parties in
the Nstional Movement, can view these resolutions as positive for
Lebanon... I'll have to ask them one day."

He added: "Nowadays, it seems that there are some basic
diﬂerencer (within the National Movement) on so many things, so
meny problems. We're going to sit down egein end. once and for
all. try to unite ourselves. But for the time being, I'm personally
not at all in a hurry to be elected president of this National
Movement."

91
The problem of Lebanon, Junblatt decla: ad, will not be solved
unless Israel is "conlronted" by e "clearcut Arab plan - military
as well as economic - combined with an international plan."

THE PALESTINIANS may have promised not to mount any
military operations across the Lebanese borders tor the time being,
but if Israel and the United States do not grant them their l’i’lt to
an independent Palestinian state, they will not ireeze those
operations indefinitely, Junblatt said, stressing that a permanent
freeze "would be unjust and certainly not in the interest at the
Palestinian cause."

Palestinian action across the Lebanese borders alone may be
unjust lor Lebanon, Junblatt agreed, but that was a problem that
must be put to the rest ol the Arabs, not the Palestinians.

To approach the South Lebanese crisis as e conlrontation

between the two parties, for the sake of both parties... There
should be a joint committee of Lebanese end Palestin’ens to
decide what can or cannot be applied in these particular
circumstances."

An understanding between Lebanon and the PLO "shouldn't be
difficult, because there are treaties between the PLO and the State
- the (1969) Cairo treaty. As far as the Palestinians are concerned,
their presence (in South Lebanon) is guaranteed (by those
treaties). And the presence at the Lebanese Army is normal -
more than normal."

7H5 NA TIONAL MOVEMENT militias would accept the
deployment of the Lebanese Army in the South, he added, it
Army presence "is not hostile to our presence" and ii the State
presented a plan to "eventually try to penetrate the Seed Hadded
areas" - the Southem border strip under the control oi l-ladded's
Israeli-backed militias.

This means, Junblatt said, that Army deployment in the areas
under National Movement control would not entail the withdrawal
of National Movement militias lrom those areas. "'I’ he Army is in
Ashraliyeh (East Beirut) and the (rightist) militiarnen are in
Ashrafiyeh too," he pointed out. "‘l'he State has accepted a kind
of compromise litere... When there are normal situations
everywhere, we will be ready to accept a normal situation in our
areas."

All oi which made it abundantly clear that Junblett, although
his views and the views of his leftist allies were at odds, was by no
means drawing closer to the position oi the rightist Phalengist
Party of Pierre Gemeyel and National Liberal Ptty of former
President Camille Chemotin.

the leftist leader, in fact, cited the riﬂitists‘ position as one of
the major obstacles blocking the disengagement of the Lebanese
and Palestinian problems:

92
THE RIGHTISTPAR TIES, he said, have so far "not been free"
to IeavethePalesthimissuealoneanddealwiththestanese
proﬁbrhn. in puzly Lebanese terms.

t ycou dothat,hasaid, " we
conipromise plan - and I said lam coimﬁmmw‘ .
parties in order to reduce the impact of the Middle Eastern crisis
on Lebanon.lsaidreduce,noteliminate, because as long as the

Palestinian problem remains unsolved thara '
solution for Lebanon." ' won ‘ b. W root

Does that mean that Walid Junblatt would be ready to attend a
roundvtebla conference with the rightist parties, of the type
suggested last week by the commander of the joint riditist militias,
Beshir Gamayel? ‘

It does not.

"i don't think Mr. Beshir Gamayel is the right intarlocutor to
represent the interests of the Christians - specifically, the
Maronites," Junblatt said. "For the time being. lwon’t meet with
him."

In tact, he said, none of the current rightist leaders can be
considered the real representative of Lebanon‘s Christiane, because
they have all lost their free will (to Israel) and are still seeking the
partition of Lebanon.

“Why should we speak to them? " he asked. ”Maybe Raymond
Edda would be the one - one day, maybe. Ihope so... Perhaps
there are other people, so far unknown and unable to express
themselves, because of so many factors."

eee

IT IS NOT TRUE, Junblatt added. that the Lebanese leftists
and Moslems have themselves lost their free will to Syria, and the
comparison between Syrian and israell involvemmt in Lebanese
affairs is unacceptable.

"Israel is planning to divide Lebanon, then divide Syria and
other countries to create instdsility everywhere in the regim. We
met, tor the time being, have normal relations with Israel. It is
impossible. Later, maybe. If one day there is an agreement with
Israel, that would be different. But we have to have normd
relations with our Arab neighbors. mainly Syria - forthesake of
Lebanon and for the sake of Syria."

But in answartoaquestion about hisandotherleadars’
inflexibility, Junblatt said: "It must be taken into comideration
that I am not always free to do what I feel like doing. Sometimes
there are obstacles - both local and foreign."

Furthermore, he said, "it I am to stick to certain principles, I
have to be rigid."

Junblatt listed five principles which he said must be observed in
any Lebanese national accord ionnula:

93
i. No dealings with Israel.

2. Recognition of Lebanon as a unified state.
, 3. Acceptance of a central authority, ”althoum we may latd
accept some kind of administrative decentralization. "

4. Development of ”a new political formula that will enable all
Lebanese to receive some kind of welfare. ”

5. A reduction, Woossiole/
state alien"

of “the impact of religion on

The full interview, which was cortdtietad 'at Englhh, blows:

The National Movement has hailed the
resolutions of the Tunis summit because
they deal with the South Lebanese
problem as one of Israeli weuion. As
an ally of the Palestinian Resistance.
what's your comment on the resolution
“taking note of the fact that the PLO
has stopped all military operations across
the Lebanese borders" while at the same
time reaffirming "the right of die
Palestinian Resistance to carry on its
struggle on all Ards fronts"?

The Tunis summit hasn’t solved the
problem. No summit will be able to solve
the current problem in Lebanon as long as
there is no clear-cut Arab plan - military as
well as economic - combined with an
international plan, to confront Israel.

Now certain vague resolutions that will
postpone the final outcome have emerged
from this summit. What the final outcome
will be. I don't know. But it seems that
everybody is waiting — the Arabs. Leba
non, and the Palestinians - for a solution

. to come from somewhere.

Of course, the Palestinians have improv-
ed their standing on the international scene
lately, with Yaeer Arafat's visits to Vienna,
Lisbon and Spain. This is all quite good,
but it's not enough to achieve the full
recognition Arafat wants from such special
parties as the United States and Israel. This
will take him time.

Arafat has decided to stop military
operations from South Lebanon for ' the
time being. This is a good move, apositive
move, especially for Lebanon and its
Southern population.

But then what? Does this mean that the
Palestinian problem is solved? Does this

91+

And what‘s your view on this contradict-

ion in the resolution which states that

the summit takes noteofthefactthattha

PLO has stopped militty operations

fromSouth Lebanonmdatthesama

time has therighttocarryonitsstruggla
on all Arab fronts? How are we to
interpret this in Lehman?

It's not a contradiction. As you said, the
summit took note of the Palestinian
resolution. Then it seems — I don‘t know,
because I wasn't there - that other.Arab
countries agreed to open their borders for
military actions against Israel, in order to
help the Palestinians. Well this would be

very good — if it happens. Nevertheless, it
is not sufficient. .

There should be a coordinated plan
among the Arab countries, or what is left of
the Arab countries on the eastern front, to
oppose future Israeli plans, ambitions or
attacks.

Do you have any definite information
thatothar Armstatashaveagreadto
open their front?

ldon’t know. I have no idea at all.

Winn you talk about a coordinated

military confrontation on the ustarn

front.youara including Lebanon?

Lebanon is included. Actually, Lebanon
is the only state taking part in this
confrontation with Israel. There should be
a front from Naqouraupto Again, it
possible. If not... well, that's something
else.

Am I to understand that, in general,
youropinlonon thaoutcomeoftha
summit is somewhat different from that
of the National Movement as a whole?

The National Movementhas reacted

positively to the resolutions, while you

say that they do not provide a solution.

Maybe my opinion is Quite different
from the National Movement's, because I
think that the resolutions are just resolu-
tions — as they have been before. The only
positive resolution may be that which
provides monetary aid to the Lebanese
government. Apart from that, the situation
is ambiguous. It is a status quo situation
that will stay like that for some years.

I don't know how the National Movement.
or some parties in the National Movement,
can view these resolutions as positive for
Lebanon. I just don't know. I'll have to ask
them one day.

Do you think the Palestinians will keep
their promise to stop military operations
from South Lebanon?

Keep their promise? Well, yes. But you
also have to consider Palestinian interests. I
mean that the Palestinians up until now
haven't been offered anything substantial
by the powers confronting them - that is
to say the United States and Inel.

If the Palestinians are offered something
substantial (and by substantial I mean a
state, recognition of their rights, recogni-
tion of the PLO as the sole representative
of the Palestinian people), well in that case
they can definitely freeze their military
operations once and for all.

But if they are not given this assurance,
why should we ask the Palestinians to stop

their activities? That would be unjust and
certainly not in the interest of the
Palestinian cause.

Yes, but at the same time, it is unjust for
Lebanon to be the only front, as you
yourself said before.

That is something else. That's something
that must be answered not by the
Palestinians, but by the Arabs. After all,
the Palestinian cause is an Art cause. It is
the Arab cause, the only one, I presume. At

least, I hope so. This is why the Arabs are
responsible for this cause... all the Arabs
together.

Since the resolutions have not provided a
real solution, as you said, and since they
have dealt with the problem as one of
Israeli aggression, do you think the
international pressure that the Arabs
have promised will lead to a cessation of
Israeli attacks on the South?

International pressure? What kind of

international pressure?

They have promised to use their good
offices with the United States, for
example, so that, in turn, the u.s. will
pressure Israel to stop its attacks. Do
you think...

I don't think we can use the term "good
offices“ when discussing politics. In politics
it's a question of power. Power politics is a
better term.

If the Arabs, who are patentially very
powerful, are ready to use this power
against those who are opposing the rights
of their people - well, why not?

The power I am speaking of is oil. And
up till now the Arms have not been using
their oil power. There are also other ways
to put pressure on the international scene,
but it seems that the Arabs are either
ineffective or unable or unwilling.

So if theygoon notusingthepower
they have, Israeli attacks on South
Lebanon will not stop?

I don't think they will stop. We also
have to be aware of and analyze the
internal Israeli situation from an economic
and Political point of view. It Is quite
interesting. There could be some change
from inside Israel.

There could be changes, but this won't
load, in the near future, to a basic change
of policy toward the PLO and the
Palestinians. I believe that, the Israeli
administration is up until now bargaining
on what it calls“seII-mle" which will one
day lead to selfdetermination of the
Palestinians that does not 'n'eEsarin
include the PLO.

Do you think that the summit resolu-

tions. by stressing the need "to regulate

the Paiestinians’ armed presence in

UNIF I L‘s area of operation," have defini-

tely linked the solution of the Palestino

ien problem with the crisis in South

Lebanon? if so, can they be disengag-

ed?

As i said before, there is no immediate
solution of the Palestinian problem, so the
presence of the Palestinians inside the
UNlFlLarea or outside of it is a very minor
problem. It's a tactical one.

It's a question of gaining time, of
helping UNIFIL and the UN. to stay in
Lebanon, to continue playing their role.
But it's not the main element in the
problem. So why should we discuss it any
longer? It is a trivial matter.

But the fact that theyhavesaid that-

Palestinian presence is going to be

regulated means that armed Palestinians

will remain in the South. So are we now
deﬁnitely depending on a solution oi the

Middle Eastern crisis? That is, can't we

hope for a solution in the South?

How can we? I don't think it is possible
now to separate the Palestinian problem
and the Lebanese problem, unless certain
parties in Lebanon - I mean the right-wing
parties, the Phalangists and the National
Liberal Party agree to dissociate
themselves from this issue and deal on
Lebanese terms. Up till now they have not
been free to do so.

But if they do, perhaps we can later
work out a compromise plan — and I said
later — to collaborate with these parties in
order to reduce the impact of the Middle
Eastern crisis on Lebanon. I said reduce,not

eliminate, because as long as the Palestinian
problem remains unsolved, there won’t be
any root solution for Lebanon. We are
speaking abOut reducing the impact. re-
ducing the losses and the damage lrcm
future Israeli attacks.

The Tunis resolutions also supported the
entry of the Lebanese. Armyto the
South. What’s your exact position on
this mm,ltddoyoustillddlmto
the National Movement demand that
Army deployment should begin in the
border strip?

Oi course. It's a question of principle.
The Lebanese Army shOuld go to the
South, should eventually control all areas
in the South: Tyre, Nebatiyeh, Marieyoun,
Naqoura, everything. And it should try one
day, it possible, to subdue the renegades -
like the phenomenon ol Saad Hadded -
put them on trial and iinish with this

secessionist movement. But i don't think
it's going to be an easy task.

ltisnotSaad Haddadwhoisopposing
the Lebanese Army; it is Israel. Is Israel

now willing to accept the Lebanese Army
there, at its border? I don’t think so.

And the National Movement as a whole?

There are some conditions placed by the
National Moverrwnt. There are some parties
within the Mowment that are not at
willing to accept the Army. They are
willing to stay as they are. They like the
VOI .

And of course, there are the Palestinian
interests. There shOuId be an understanding
between the Palestinians and the Lebanese
State. This shouldn't be difficult because
there are treaties between the PLO and the
State — the Cairo treaty. As far asthe
Palestin lens are concerned, their pmence is
guaranteed. And the presence of the

Lebanese Army is normal - more than
normal.
As for the National Movement, we will
accept the presence of the Lebanese Army,
if, first of all, this presence is not hostile to
our presence; and. second, if there is a plan
by this Army or the State to eventually try

to penetrate the Seed Haddad areas.

You would accept the Army in your
areas, but would maintain your presence
there as well?

Why not? The Army is in Ashrafiyeh
and the militiamen are in Ashrafiyeh too.
The State has accepted a kind of
compromise there.

But it is an abnormal situation.

Well, yes. When there are normal
situations everywhere, we will be ready to
accept a normal situation in our areas.

Once more, the Lebanese ae divided

between those who reject the summit

resolutions outright and those who
accept them, not to mentionthe official

"reservations" on the subject Do you

think a compromise between these

contradictory positions cart be worked
out?

Who should compromise? And why
should there be a compromise? There are
some resolutions. We have to proﬁt from
these resolutions. 8y ","we I mean the
State. That’s it.

But instead of having the Lebanese

dividal on this issue...

Well. the Lebanese are divided on all
issues. This is just one more issue.

You mean you believe that there is no
possibility of agreement on this subject,
even though it is vital?

Vital? No, i don't think the Tunis
resolutions are vital. As I said before, it'sa
question of gaining time, of trying to avoid
any radical confrontation between some
interests in Lebanon. We'll min-we'll see.

Do you agree with those who say that
the summit resolutions were more of a
victory for the Palestinians that for the
Lebanese, taking into consideration the

97

fact that Lebanon had to drop its initial

demand for a total Palestinian withdraw-

al from the South?

Well to begin with, there shouldn't be a
contradiction between Palestinian interests
and Lebanese interests. They should
consider the problem a joint venture
between the Palestinians and the Lebanese
for the sake of Lebanon and for the sake of
a future Palestine. When you just assume
that there is a contradiction between the
two parties, y0u are, in a sense, indirectly
playing the game Israel wants you to play.

But there are the facts. For instance.
Minister Butros and Abu Lotf clashed
openly.

Well, I am sorry ab0ut that, but maybe
they were both — l say maybe, becausel
was not there — in a very, very unusual
situation. They sh0uld have worked outa
joint plan before going to Tunis and
publicly clashing before the Arabs there.

They want there because they were

unable to reach an agreement here...

No, no. It's because there are no
relations, or some timid relations. between
the State here and the Palestinians. That is
what led to the Tunis situation.

When you say the Lebnese ltd
Palestinian positions should be the same,
how do you propose that this ideal
situation be reached? Each one must
take a step. Lebanon cannot concede

everythingand neither cart the Palestin-

ians. Do you have an ideal solution?

There are no ideal solutions. There
shOuId be an understanding to begin with.
Up until now there has been no under-
standing between the Palestinians and the
Lebanese State. They have so far been
avoiding each other. That's not a practical
solution. There should be another solution.
There should be further contacts. further
coordination between the two parties, for
the sake of both parties. If this doesn't
happen, I'm afraid that the future is not
going to be very bright. It will lead to a bad
situation for both parties.

Do you think that the resolution
stipulating theregulation of Palestinian
presence can set the guideline for such
an agreement between the Lebanese
State and the Palestinians?
Maybe. But there should be a joint
committee of Lebanese and Palestinians to
decide what can or cannot be applied in
these particular circumstances. The only
practical and valid resolution that l see lor
both Palestinians and Lebanese is to
achieve a kind of understanding and to lay
down a long-range plan that will establish
the platform for years to come so as not to
have contradictions between the parties...
assuming, oi course, that this is possible.

in the wake of the summit, there is a
general leeling oi disillusionment among
the Lebanese population, coupled with
a conviction that Lebanese national
unity is the only hope for Lebanon’s
salvation. What are you personally ready
to do to bring about this national unity?
i can do nothing. That's it. I can do
nothing. I’m sorry but it is out cf my
hands. it's beyond me.

Why?

Because it is beyond me. There are so
many powers at play in Lebanon. so many
interests and at the same time so many
obstacles to the achievement of national
unity.

And also. of course, there are some basic
principles that we stick to, as much as we
are able to stick to principles nowadays.
This is why up until now i don't have any
possible solution that might lead to a
Lebanese reconciliation or unity or what-
ever you call it. '

Do you man that the Lebanese cannot

sidestep those powers which are "at play

in Lebanon" and unite? Is that an
impossible task?

It hasn‘t been possible so tar. For more
than four years the Lebanese have been
living this crisis, and it seems that it is quite
difﬁcult tor them to overcome it.

Could you name the powers which you
say are "at play" in Lebanon?

Well, I’ll begin with our neighbors, those
who are helping Major Seed Haddad. lift
that enough?

But obviously you've got somebody on

the other side as well?

I know what you mean, but i think it is
possible to understand this “somebody" on
the other side. i think it is necessary to
coordinate with this somebody for his
interest and ours. This is what I said in
Paris, and this is what i mean.

lsrael is something different. Israel is
planning to divide Lebanon, then divide
Syria and other countries to create
instability everywhere in the region. We
cannot, tor the time being. have normal
relations with lsrael. It is impossible. Later,
maybe. ll one day there is an agreemmt
with Israel, that would be diiferent. But we
have to have normal relations with our
Arab neighbors. mainly Syria - tor the sake

1i LebanonendforthesekeotSyrie.
(lut'sa tact.

Could you clarify the comm-st you

made in Paris. that the Lebanese

Mosiems re disillusioned with the role

of Syria in Lebanon?

i didn't say that. l was misquoted. I said
that Moslems in Lebanon were always
being accused of not being Lebanese. But
they proved during the events and are
proving now that they are more Lebanese,
Me attached to Lebanon, to the unity of
Lebanon, to Lebanese independenceand to
the State and institutions of Lebanon, than
some "Christians” - put that in quotes -
or some Christian leaders who just chm
to create a loolish plan at secession, of
separation, of partition, of federalism, etc.
That’s what I said in Paris.

Going back to the wbiect of national
unity: althoudi you said it was a rernota
possibility tor now, Beshir Garnayel has
called for e round-table conference.
under the auspices oi the President, in
which the National Movement would
participate. Would you be ready to take
part in such a conference without pro
conditions?
i am not going to change certain
positions or avoid certain basic principles. i
don’t think that Mr. Beshir Gamayel is the
right interlocutor to represent the interests
of the Christians — specifically, the
Maronites.

Secondly, after having viewed the past
actions of Mr. Beshir Gemayel, and seeing
his present position and extremism, I don't
think it is necessary to meet with him. He
can meet with others, but for the time
being, I won’t meet with him.

You said he is not the right interlocutor.
Who is the right inserlocutor? Pierre
Gemayel has said that, for him, the
interlocutor is the Islamic Grouping. Who
do you feel would best represent the
Christian or rightist side?

From there? No, nobody. For the time
being there‘s nobody. It is impossible for
them to have the right representative, one
who can think about the future of Lebanon
and about the future of the Maronites.
They are still engaged in this plan of
partition, of separation. They are still not
free-willed. So why should we speak to

them? Wh,‘ should we sit with them at the I

same table?

Maybe Raymond Edda would be the
one — one day, maybe. I hope so. I don't
know. ?erhaps there are Other people, so
far unknown and unable to express them-
selves, because of so many factors.

But that applies to the Modem and/or

leftist side as well. There are many

people whose opinions differ from those

of the current leadership.

Yes. of course. But there are various
blocs here: the National Movement, the
Islamic Grouping, the National Front, the

Shiite group, etc. There are so many
groups. So far, no one has exerted any kind
of authoritarian rule on the other.

There are so many independent people
here too. Of course there are varying
degrees of influence. Perhaps the National
Movement is more influential that the
'others. Maybe. But nevertheless, everybody
is free, to a certain degree, to speak, to
express himself.

Over there, is is quite difficult. Yester-
day, I believe that Mr. Edmond Rizk gota
bomb under his car.

Do you link the two issues?

No, it’s just that some strange incidents
occur over there sometimes.

If, as you say, there's no leadership on

the Christian side. we must wait for

some leadership to emerge?

We'll wait. Nobody is in a hurry.

Yes. the Lebanese people are very much

in a hurry.

I am in a hurry, too, in a sense. But
what cenl do? Tell me what I can do. I
have proposed a peaceful plan. l have
proposed to settle armed disputes, to have
the State as an arbitrator, keeping certain
basic principles essential to Lebanon in
mind. But nobody has answered.

I have just said that a round-table
conference, under the auspiea of the
Presidenehas been suggested. But you
sayyouarenot willing to takepart.

No, not with these pe0ple who are not
even able to take a decision on their own.
No, not at all.

Your declarations in Paris, in which you
described Camille Chamoun as a "gangst-
er," Pierre Gemayel as "senile" and
Beshir Gemayel as "crazy" have puzzled
the Lebanese people, who are not used
to such remarks on your part. Could you
clarify or qualify those statements?

These were declarations in Paris. It’s

enough.

00 you stand by them? .
I said these were declarations in Paris.
For the time being, that is enough.

Many observers think that partition is
still a threat. They point to the usenals
of the different militias, the polarization
of the Shiite community after the
disappearance of Imam Sadr, the erIy
divergent positions of the Lebanua left
and right, etc. What's your view on this
matter? Under what conditions is the
National Movement ready to relinquish
its authority to the State?
Well. there are two aspects to your
question. First of all, the partition plan is
still being worked on. It could one day
succeed, or it could fail, depending on Arab
and international circumstances.

But there is a party which calls itself the
Phalangist Party which celebrated its
mniversary a few days ago. On this
occasion they displayed some tanks —
obsolete, useless tanks, it is true, but
nevertheless representing asign,a fact: that
those people over there are still not willing
to forget armed disputes, but plan to
continue their struggle, as Mr. Beshir
Gemayel said, "to liberate the Lebanese."
He says they want to liberate the Lebanese
from the Palestinians and the Syrians. but
he means from everybody that is not
willing to collaborate with them. And we
are not willing to collaborate with them.

You said that partition might occur
under certain international and Ari:
circumstances. Like what, for example?
Everything is changing. Nothing is fixed.
nothing is rigid in politics. Everything is
changing in the world.
But what would precipitate the partition
of Lebanon? Would the lack of a
solution to the Palestinian problem be a
factor, for example?

Yes. And so would any move on the
part of lsrael in the South. i am not afraid
of the Phalangist Party or the Chemcun
party. We're not afraid at all. We're just
afraid of lsrael —- afraid in the sense that
there is a power relation there. lsrael is the
only country or power that may be able
one day, if circumstances are favorable, to
establish this confessional ministate, the
Maronite state. And perhaps later, this will
lead to other confessional states in the
Arab world.

Under what conditions is the National
Movement ready to relinquish its au-
thority to the State?

Only if it is possible to achieve a
solution among the Lebanese and maintain
certain basic principles — mainly the unity
of Lebanon. Then. of course, it will be
necessary to find a certain political
program to develop the original one
established in 1943. I think it's time to
change.

The national pact?

Yes, don't you think so?

Do you met: a secular state?

A secular state? It’s a goal. It is the goal

of the Socialist Party, but i think it is too
early to speak of it.

You have given me the impression that

before relinquishing your authority, all

thesegoatsmustbeachieved.lflamnot

correct, when will you be willing to
relinquish your authority?

Here, we must repeat ourselves. First,
we do not accept to deal with lsrael.
Second, we insist on the recognition of
Lebanon as one state, a unified state. And
third, we require the acceptance of a
centralized authority, although we may
later accept some kind of administrative
decentralization - maybe (this is a small
detail). Fourth, we must develop a new
political formula that will enable all
Lebanese, not one class of Lebanese, to
receive some kind of welfare. Up to now,
only one group in Lebanon has been
controlling everything - the bourgeois
class. And finally, if possible, i would like

to reduce the impact of religion on state
affairs.

There is also a feeling among the "silent
majority” that young leaders, like
yourself, are no less rigid in their
positions thantha traditional leaders. Is
this feeling justified?

What do you mean by "rigid"?
I mean that they stick to their positions.
They are not ready to talk to each other
unless and until so many things are done.

Well, if I am to stick to certain principles,

I have to be rigid. I think that I have made
it clear which basic principles I plan to
adhere to. Then it must be taken into
consideration that I am not always free to
do what I feel like doing. Sometimes there
are obstacles - both local and foreign.

When you say "leaders"... maybe we're
leading only ourselves and certain groups
which follow us, but I don't think the
current leaders in Lebanon are leading or
can lead everybody. I don‘t think so. We're
here because we’re here, because of the
way things are - no more, no less.

But people are pinning their hopes on

the young generation, because they have

little hope in the older generation. I

think I'm conveying the feeling of the

majority.

Are you?

Ihope so. That's my job.

There's a difference between your job
and what the new generation is feeling. I
don't know what the new generation is
feeling, although I would like to. But I
think that 60 percent of the new

generation. left or right, is a little
indifferent. That's my feeling.

They can't be indifferent to the salvation
of their country. They look up to the
young leaders. Do you think the young
leaders are more capable of pioneering
national reconciliation than thetradition-
el leaders are?

It's not a question of national recon-
ciliation. It's a question of a political
solution in Lebanon - yet another political
solution, yet another compromise. Leba-
non is the country ol compromises. So far,
conditions have not been favorable for a
compromise. Maybe later. I don't know. i
hope so.

On "the Day of the Flag," the Lebanese
people expressed their desire to have a

united Lebanon - e Lebanon which
many of them accuse political leaders of
blocking in order to preserve their
leadership. Do you think we're very far
from the day when Lebanon's vtious
leaderships will be molded hto a norm!
democratic, multi-party system?

Multi-party system? There is an unusual

multi-party system in Lebanon now.

I'm talking about the democratic variety.

Maybe - when the guns are put away
and it- becomes possible to talk to people
normally. But as long as we continue to use
these instruments to express our political
opinions: or as long as ﬁve are forced to
defend ourselves with those instruments,
the situation is not going to be arteasy one.
The majority of the people will find it
difficult to elect new leaders, to be
represented by new parties. etc.

You once told this magazine that the
National Movement was in tlte'yM of
electing you its chairman. Whyhasn't it
done so? Is this an indication of the
looseness of the Lebanese left?

Yes, it is. It (my election) wasa plan to
be elaboratednand we were working on it
seriously, but nowadays,.it seems that there
are some basic dilierencee. .

Within the National Movement?

Yes. ' '

Relating to what, for example?

So many things, so many problems.
We're going to sit down again and, once
and for all, try to unite ourselves. 8th for
the time being, I'm personally not at all In
a hurry to be elected president of this
National Movement. I'm not so anxious to
be president. I'll wait. I’ve waited two,
three years. I can wait... 30 more.
(Laughing) It's a 30-year war.
Beirut MONDAY MORNIilG in English 3-9 Dec 79 pp 30-3“

ﬁnterﬂev with AminJunayyllof Phelan ist. Party's Political Bureau, b
Ciaudr: Khaury date and place not. given?

[fexg] Amin GmayeI, member of Parliament and of the tight“!

Phalangist lKataeb) Party's Political Bureau, says that an initiative
by Austrian Chancellor Bruno Kreisky toward Lebanese~Pales~
tinien understanding and Lebanese national entente "has not
been excluded." '

Gemaycl, talking to Monday Morning last week about his
September talks with Kreislty in Viennasaid that "the meetingsl
had with him were very positive and... might lead him to take a
more constructive and dynamic attitude toward the Lebanese
problem."

Should Kreislty decide to launch a peace initiative in this
country, Gemayel said, he would have the lull support 0! the
Phalaugist Party, because "we are available to help anyone who is
ready to rescue Lebanon from this chaos - specially Dr. Kreisliy,
tor whom we have a great deal of affection and respect."

Asked whether he had specifically requested the Austrian
leader's mediation between the Lebanese Maronite rightists and
the Palestine Liberation Organization, Samuel said he had told
Kreisky that a dialogue which had been started between the
rightist Lebanese Front and the PLO had run into dilficulties.

"I did mention to Dr. Kreisky that hemight possiblybeableto
clear the air and lead this dialogue to solutions which would on
the one hand ensure real sovereignty for Lebanon and respect for
its entity, and on the other hand help the Palestinians achieve their
national aspirations and recover the homeland they have been
dreaming of for so long," Gemayel said.

He added: "Dr. Kreisky is willing to do something. He is
willing... to help find solutions to the Lebanese problem... He met
with me and other Lebanese leaders to find out what the real
elements oi the Lebanese crisis were and what role he could play
toward its solution."

Among the other leaders Kreislty has met since Gemayel's visit

10?
to Vienna are Ibrahim Klailat, president of the MW
Nasserite Movement lMurabetoun), and Manuel Younes, former
MP and former presidential candidate.

Kreislty's major concern, hOwever, remains the Midde East
crisis in general and the Palestinian-Israeli problem in particular,
Gemayel said, adding:

”Concerted efforts are now being exerted by Dr. Kreislty,
important officials at the 0.8. State Department and the White
House, in collaboration with certain Arab officials and Palestinian
leaders, to promote an amendment of U.N. (Security Cauncil)
Resolution 242," which the Palestinians reject because itrefers to
their cause as a refugee problem and does not recognize their
national rights.

The Phalangist leader said there was a new climate in the world
today which favwed the establishment of a Palestinian state, and
he called on both the Arabs and the Palestinians to seize this
opportunity.

The Phalangist Party was itself interested in helping the
Palestinians reaiize their national aims, Ger-navel said. "We cannot
throw them into the sea. just as they cannot throw us into the see.
So we are working to realize the goal of the Palestinian Resistance,
which is to recover the Palestinian homeland.

"The more we help achieve this aim, the closer we are to
finding short-term and longilerm solutions to the Lebatesa
problem."

In the short term, Gemayel explained, helping the Palestinian
Resistance w0uld encourage the PLO ”to deal with us not as
enemies, out as triends," and in the long term, it would contribute
toward the establishmmt ol a Palestinian homeland. which would
in turn "accelerate the solution of the Lebanese problem."

The full interview:

What was the purpose of your visit to

Chancellor Kreisky?

The Austrian ambassador to Lebanon
(Herbert Amryl had visited me nere in my
office several times to discuss the Lebanese
problem in particular and the Midole
Eastern problem in general

Needless to say, I made my :‘JJSillOn
very clear to him: that ! believe there (an
be no peace in the Middle East without
peace in Lebanon.

During those meetings. we disc-used the
different aspects of the Lebanese crisis as

they relate to the Middle Eastern crisis asa
whole, ano we touched onthevarious draft
solutions in which international and Middle
Eastern public opinion seems to be
engrossed.

It was the need to find a solution to
those aspects of Our problem that prompt-
ed my visit to Dr. Kreisky, who seems to be
quite concerned about the Middle Eastern
crisis and anxious to find a peaceful
solution to it.

Dr. Kreiskv’s country is small and has
many things in common with Lebanon.
Austria has suffered as much as Lebanon, if
not more. Dr. Kreisky faced the same
problem before and during the Second
World War asweare now facing. So he is
capable of understanding the problems we
face.

Also, Dr. Kreisky is Jewish, and like
every other Jew, he would like to see a
genuine peace come to the area so that his
fellow Jem can live in the Middle East with
a feeling of peace and security.

And he believes that in order to achieve
this peace the framework of the Camp
David accords should be enlarged. If it is
not, he feels, the present Camp David
agreement will only lead to a deadend.

Were you invited by Dr. Kreisky?

There was no invitation. As I am not an
official, I cannot be officially invited by
the Austrian government. However, the
Austrian ambassador to Lebanon and I had
agreed that it would be useful if I were to
visit Dr. Kreisky, and the ambassador later
informed me that an appointment had been

arranged.

You spoke of "draft solutions." How do

you evaluate Dr. Kreisky’s reactions to

your draft and what do you feel were
the positive results of your visit?

Y0u know, the Lebanese rely far too
much on the good-will missions undertaken
by foreign countries. They cling to these
missions because they have lost hapc. But
they must realize that it is here in Lebanon
that we will find the solutions to our
problems.

No foreigner can bring us a solution.
The only thing a foreigner can do is help us
implement a solution which we ourselves
agree on. It is up to the Lebanese to create
a framework for entente between the
various Lebanese factions — a framework
within which we can remodel the Lebanese
State.

So, you see, one should not pin one‘s
hopes on visits such as these. However, it is
important that we explain Lebanon's
position to foreigners. There is little if any

understanding by outsiders of the problems
we face. The few who do understand them,
more or less, are not at all motivated to
take any action.

The Lebanese issue doesn‘t figure in the
books of the super powers or the Western
powers. The Palestinian problem figures in
the books of the super powers. The
problem of peace and security for Israel
figures in the books of the super powers.
But Lebanon's tragedy, which has claimed

the lives of 70,0“) innocent. apolitical
people, has so far motivated no one.

At one point during the war, the Arab
world offered to send material aid,
especially to the beleaguered South. Butthe
Shiites protested, saying that the problem
can't be solved with blankets and rice; that
the problem is essentially a national.
political one.

In Austria, I had the opportunity to
explain that there are serious problems in
Lebanon which are becoming more and
more dangerous and could threaten world
peace.

If the Lebanese problem is left unsolved,
the situation could escalate into a third
world war. There are major forces con-
fronting each other in Lebanon, such as
Syria and Israel. The Arabs back Syria and
the US. backs Israel. so the possibility of a
real war cannot be excluded.

This is why the Lebanese affair does not
concern the Lebanese exclusively, but is
becoming a threat to world peace. And as I
said before, there will be no peace in the.
Middle East until there is peace in
Lebanon.

My visit to Austria gave me the
opportunity to explain my point of view
and to try and induce Dr. Kreisky to adopt
a. dynamic attitude toward the consolida-
tron of the Lebanese State and Lebanese
institutions, based on certain conceptions
of the Lebanon of tomorrow whichl put
to Dr. Kreisky and which we had presented

to many other leaders of the Western and
Arab worlds.
It was :he imt mm mm Dr hr-s-Ay
had turned his utter-tier to tile Lt-‘,»‘.-'-:s-.-
problem. Previorslv. he Lt... not been
DalliCllIilfiy cont-:rnt-o, Wthi‘. : ml sur-
prising. sincc he's the Che-icel'u: or
Austria, not the Presititmtnr prime minister
0! Lebanon.

It was the ﬁrst time he ..ia Isa. with a
member 01 the Lebanese Fror: and l;.-.1ro
Our side of the story. "ll: “3;: ant-my
listened to Arafat's new; when the
Palestinian leader v:- t:.-:: VE-xm: -.'-5t July.
He had hﬁu"! the new; of Other Arab
leaders as well. Bu. MI: was (ht; first time
he had heard the view. ul' .. rr.-.2t-.~..‘le.' ot the
Lebanese Front

You Say‘ u”: as .am,’ as L.‘.t'.a.'.on's

problem is not soivcu, 'ns -\’--dd|‘-‘

Eastern problem wi!‘ not be st“: :etl. Did

0,, megs.“ utfﬂr ...‘.y suggests.» fOr a

SOIUIiO-ﬂ 0' 1:13. irlbdﬂ;,'-lf 1.3;, "0'." that

would in turn :ICCCICHHV l-‘n 3'9““

pfOCCSS in the Kidd-4'2 Edit.)

i explained to you t: .:l--.-r .5341 D‘-
Krcisky did “(1- ltlliy' tinlt-lr'sH-Hi li- l"n'
aspects of the Lunar-$9 WW” “ 7"" 'ad a
general idea. For --'t:et-n.~ 29 ms were
thattherewerc- rnr:.t-.itir... #2.! ...=;;-r.o'.
was similar in some --:: r. '» ,- ; .. .'ria, ..nd
that we. “used :c :-...; u .;.- .-:,-ene.~-.ls
communlty llfe ht: -:t-; :.n\,..:-r-:l. 8::2
Obviously, ltl: wts or: "swap: ,: t.'. 'nr-
elements of the r-rt';!'.-nr.
of the effects '2 ...t .r...-.n.- .
presence in ..eimnnn and ilrr: .:'osl::y
Lebanon is lilmti to '.l::.‘ lat-'11:: tit-stem
problem. -

We talked oi tll li’..’.' ,rr.-..-..-.

'II: ' ' :w. .ﬂ‘:

rucv ! ...r

length. We trtt": ‘,'.- {£2.35 , ,0
disengage all the ,te‘o‘uen: ' r - 7- t-zner
in order to meatn. m: -.-r:i.-mai
dynamics.

We explained new rlilr'rrz-rit ' -: was to
achieve becausl of the mass: tau-d
undisciplinrrl Palestinian ,u 5-“. .r 0--

midst — a presence wh- :il ~rtltrzme 1.
super authority wi: h n sum ".-'-)‘ «eight-.-
established at the exp'r-se of UN: Lebanese
sovereignty: Palestinian pollute P: 'estinlan
army, Palestinian' ..unals.

‘ Moslems

tlrllortttnateiy, there is a contradiCtion
between the democratic options at the
Lclmrnwe larmula and the revolutionary
content of the Palestinian Revolution.
There is a contradiction between a
drtnooatic state and a revolutionary
rum-..- ment, so that when those two concepts
cam-st, what you get is an explosive
urination - a Molotov cocktail.

We are paying a very high price tor this
sin-iation. The problem is not only between
Christians and Palestinians. Look at what is
taking place between Shiites and Pales-

tinians, between Sunnites and Palestinians
and between Sunnites and Syrians. The
problem is no longer one of Islamic-Chris-
::.m or lcltistrightist discord; it has gone
ceyonll these limits.

.For Instance, I was reading the minutes
of tht! Independent Parliamentary Bloc
run-sting (last week) under the chairmanship
of Kamcl el-Asaad. At this meeting, many
ouldid the Lebanese Front,
making Our attitude toward the Tunis
:Arét: summit) resolutions look moderate.
T he rr-ood was one at determination. and
i913 m-rnbers took a very firm position on'
our r:'-ccssi.v of sending the Army to the
San-H the necessity of disciplining the
Pai- -st- :tt'n Hes-ham: tn the South.tha
accent q or ustmnishing total sovereignty...

‘. tubules-ed all these points with Dr.

l .

 

' .tlirtiiy, to find a solution. to- the
Lu-n- we problem, one must find a
sr,:-:;«nn_ to the problem of the Palestlnian
pt'-'l.-i-‘: .-.-no are living in Lebanon. We
numb-t throw them into the sea, just as they

mute. throw us into the sea. 80 we are'

work m; to realize the goal 0! the
ranch-"nan Resistance, which is to recover
the Palestinian homeland. The more we
help acmeve this aim, the closer we are to
rintlinq short-term and longterm solutions
\0 tr. '.:bancse problem.

In the short term, our collaboration in
good will. with the Palestinians would lead
lire-m to deal With us not as enemies, but as
l-lends. And in the long run, it would help
them to reaaver their Own homeland,
which would accelerate the solution of the
Lebanese problem.

I felt a certain receptiveness on the part
of Dr. Kreislty when we discussed this
matter. Dr. Kreisky is an active member
and leader of the Second Socialist Inter-
national.

Many members of this group occupy
important posts arid have prominent roles
to play in their various countries. So at this
level, Dr. Kreislty can use his influence to
help bring about the realization of the
hopes, aims and aspirations of the Pales-
tinian people.

On the other hand, concerted efforts are
now being exerted by Dr. Kreislty,
important officials at the US. State
Department and the White House, in
collaboration with certain Arab officials
and Palestinian leaders, to promote an
amendment of UN. Resolution 242 This
resolution identifies the Palestinians as
refugees and does not mention their
national aspirations. The amendment
would lend to the recognition of the
3:9itintate right of the P.i:cstr.-.ians to live
in their own land. A direct consequence of
this recognition w0uld be the resumption
of negotiations relating to the West Bank
on another level, a level quite different
from that of the autonomy talks currently
taking place:

So there rs currently a very serious
trend, in which' Dr. Kreisky figures
prominently, to reconsider Resolution 242
and to create a dynamic international force
in favor of a Palestinian state.

Naturally, no one, either in the U.S.A.
or in Austria, would want to create a new
Hanoi in the West Bank or in the Arab
world. This «is 'why in the process of
creating a Palestinian state, it is possible, as
I gathered,
which are similar to the West German
formula, which restricts the concept of
severeignty in order to avert the rise of
another Hitler era. Any formula they

that formulas might emurge'

envisage for the creation of a Palestinian
state must have some safety factor to
prevent the Palestinian state from posing a
threat to the security of the Middle East,
and especially the scCurity of Israel.

The Arab leaders should take advantage
of this new clrmate which is beginning to
settle in. Before the Camp David accords,
the situation was stalemated. Now the
Western world is reacting more and more
favorably to certain theses. The important
thing now is for the Arab world to have the
courage to face reality and use its
potential effectively to induce the Western
world to come around to its way of
thinking and to pressure Israel into

accepting real peace in the Middle East.

All this is moving steadily deeper into
the realm of possibility, especially since
there are very receptive ears to these new
theses within Israel itself. For example,
Shimon Peres stated at the end of an
official visit to Egypt that his ideas were
closer to those of Mr. Sadat than those of
Mr. Begin He said that he supportedtrue
autonomy (in the West Bank) and more
recognition of the Palestinians' aspirations

Another ex ample is the resignation of
Moshe Dayan in protest against the policy
of Jewish settlement in the ocmpied
territories Dayan also .protested against
Israel' 5 decision concerning Nablus Mayor
Bassarn Shakaa
. So we are n0w witnessing a real
awakening in Europe, in the United States
and even in lsrael about the plight of the
Palestinians. It is important that the Arabs
don't miss this opportunity. The Arabs
must realize that the general atmosphere is
favorable and they must take advantage of

the present situation to achieve a realistic
solution.

The approach of Ahmad Said on the
"Voice of the Arabs" radio station and the
style of Ahmad Shultayri are now com-
pletely outdated. This was what led to the
destruction, the occupation, the division of
the Arab world If we continue to follow
this path on the Arab and Palestinian levels,
we will never reach a solution

it is very easy to fall back on Lebanon
. 5 so 3.2.5.... mo :3 .53

.. .12.. 5.: 22.. 8533 333:0:

. .... .hcmzim To... 95 5o

.. :5 99.39.... 33»: 83a :36
. Z... :29: .5: 350: 3 to:

A... ..............~.: 2530:: 0:: mix:
3.... .5: a .29.... 0. 3.3.5.3

n... $28.5 :3 .893.

5.. :2... 959583.. 83¢ .5.
LI. Ea 24.69;... 8 _ Ea
.c. _ .. 59.": 52 .6 3a....

2.5.5.. 31...: 5.. a: can 53 :3
. :63. 5:5: 5.9.5 o: :8

.. ....._.2 3m. 3536:? 3..
_ 3... ... 3.. :u .35: .3: :3
Who knows exactly what the causes of
the crisis are? Who knows the darker side
oi the Sadr case? Who knows the darker
side ol the Ain Remmaneh story? The
Palestinians themselves have said that the
Kataeb had nothing to do with that bus
incident in Ain Remmaneh in April, 1975
- although a whole campaign was launched
against the Kataeb bemuse of this incident,
which was considered the first spark of the
war, and we were accused of treason. On
several occasions since then, Abu lyad and
Khaled el-Hassan have clearly stated in the
media that we had nothing to do with the
Ain Remmaneh episode.

50 Dr. Kreisky knows the outlines of
the Lebanese problem. I tried to clear the
way so that one day, ii he decides to do so,
he can play a mere active role as a mediator

in Lebanon and in the Middle East in
general.

Do you believe that Dr. Kreisky will

succeed as a mediator?

The ,iroblem is n0t imposs-hle to solve.
ll their intentions are good and there IS
good faith among the parties, any serious
mediation can Succeed. ' -'c -.

President Sarkis himself could have
played the role ol mediator, and I Still hope
he will. Now his role has been made easier
by the fact that a certain national
consensus has taken shape around the
Tunis summit. We are waiting and hoping
he will take the initiative.

0! course. any contribution from Dr.
Kreislty or any other foreign leader can be
beneficial to the Lebanese. and such a
mediation would now be lacilitated by the

positive attitudes adopted by the various
Lebanese factions.

Why were y0u chosen to meet with Dr.
Kreisky? Is it because of your moderate
position within the Lebanese Front?

That might be one reason. But the most

important thing is to be open to mediation
because the chances are there every day.
And I have always been available for
dialogue. I have always refused to be
bogged down in positions which I consider-
ed lrom the beginning to be manipulated
by external and internal forces which are
against the interests of the nation.

I have always been available for
dialogue. I have always advocated a certain
Cartesianism lor the Lebanese problem -a
philosophy which could achieve a solution
of the Lebanese problem.

Lebanon has always been a country of
dialogue, a crossroads country. Lebanon
has always played a useful role on the Arab
level. Lebanon has a function, a role to
play in the area and we should by any
means maintain this role. And wacan if we
maintain a certain Cartesian level of
national thinking.

One day the truth will come out and
everyone wull know that Lebanon was the
victim of a machiavellian plot.

The day will come when the Lebanese
will have to meet each other, rise above
their animus-ties and the black periods we
have endured over the past lew years.
Because we cannot base political action on
hatred. We have to meet again onedayand
accept a modus vivendi which will be the
first step towards real coexistence.

. Was your visit in any way connected
with the visits the former presidential
candidate Manuel Younes and the
Murabetoun leader lbrahim Klailat made
to Vienna?

I don't think so. Their visits took place
long alter mine and as far as I know are not
linked.

Did Dr. Kreisky suggest a national

entente initiative in Lebanon?

I leel that the meetings I had with him
were very positive and that they might ma
him to take a more constructive and
dynamic attitude .toward the Lebanue

problem.
So there is the possibility of such an

initiative?

It has not been excluded.

And you would accept such an initia-

tive?

We are available to help anyone who is
ready to rescue Lebanon from this cheoe -
especially Dr. Kreisky, for whom we have a
great deal of affection and respect because
he cares so much about world peace.

DoyouplantogobeclrtoVienna?
The possibility has not been excluded.

Cm you tell us when?

I said the possibility has not been
excluded. My visit was informal, so there is
nothing to prevent a repetition of it.
STATEMENT ISSUED BY LEBARESE FRONT

Release Delayed

Beirut L'ORIENT-LE JOUR in French 17 Oct 79 P 3

[Text] Yesterday, at the conclusion of its weekly
meeting in the convent of St George in Aoukar. the
"Lebanese Front" published the political proclama-
tion whose release had been delayed for 2 weeks
because of the incidents in the north. By virtue
of its resolutions. the text amounts to a summons
of the government to take action to rid the country
of the double Palestinian-Syrian presence. The
"front" charges the authorities and more especially
the president of the council "with facilitating the
domination of the occupying forces." It rejects
the idea of a limited Lebanese-Syrian-Palestinian
summit as well as the possible additional renewal
of the Arab Deterrent Force's mandate. which expires
next January.

0n the subject of the army, the "front" criticizes the latest officer
promotions that it regards as a blow to the rebuilding of this institu-
tion. For the south, the "front" states that it is Lebanon's duty to
defend this area but the course of action must proceed from an inter-
national responsibility. Finally, the "front" expresses surprise at the
prolonged physical paralysis of the judicial system which, in its opinion.
is not justified. Apart from drafting this statement, the "front's"
meeting yesterday was devoted to the study of develop-cuts in the situa-
tion in the north and the front is reputed to have decided to draw up a
plan of action to deal with this matter in depth.

Resolutions

The resolutions proclaimed yesterday by the "Lebanese Front" are set up
as follows:

110
First: Submission

The government is following a policy imposed on it and one that it is

not molding itself. The proof is its stand regarding the law on defense
at the time of the debate in the house as well as its stand in relation
to the officer promotions or changes that are currently under investiga-
tion. There are numerous examples of conspiratory silence by the govern-
ment and its members in relation to the scheme to exhaust the Lebanese
rank and in particular the "front," by resorting in particular to inter-
nal killings in order to facilitate the occupying forces' domination
without the latter's having to have its soldiers' blood shed. what other
interpretation is there for the official silence in connection with the
Lebanese sequestered in Damascus, which finally has admitted the fact.

a silence that happens to corroborate the fact that they are putting
others' interests ahead of those of the people of this country?

Second: Ostracism

This will always be the case in official policy as long as governments
are formed which exclude those who have fought for Lebanon and which call
on those who fought alongside Lebanon's enemies.

Third: Rejection of the Palestinian Establishment

This will always happen from the moment people bury themselves more and
more in such a policy. to such a degree that the head of the government
has reached the point of talking about coexistence between Lebanese and
Palestinians, thus giving the latter the same title to national soil as
those under the country's jurisdiction and, item more serious still.
absolving them of any charge of aggression. A reassertion becomes
necessary at this point: The "Lebanese Front" rejects the idea of an
establishment of Palestinians in Lebanon, for any and all portions they
may dream of and under any and all forms. The "front" is of the opinion
that the mere presence of Palestinians in Lebanon, even unarmed and even
in reduced number, means the establishment or at least the desire to
carry one out. As far as knowing what may happen to the Palestinians
while they wait to return to their native land is concerned, the member
states of the Arab League. as a whole or individually, must divide up the
refugees. unless the latter appeal to the UN.

Fourth: A Limited Summit

However, the official statement continues. the head of the government is
working for the holding of a Lebanon, Syria, and Palestine limited summit.
aimed at preparing a working document bound to tie Lebanon's hands during
the enlarged summit, the other partners setting aside issues such as the
armed Palestine presence in Lebanon or the consequences of this presence
in the south. Furthermore, the "front,“ scalded by its past experiences,
must acknowledge that it is very reserved in relation to any Arab summit,
limited or not.
Fifth: Neglected People

All these attempts and maneuvers sined at impairing Lebanon's claim are
not affected by the unemployment, daily life, and water and electricity
crises, which continue to get worse as if there were no nation in whose
name the governments govern and for whom they are supposed to work.

Sixth: Liberation

How long will the delusion last regarding everything related to the
liberation of national soil? Is it so difficult to begin with Beirut in
the direction of the south via 'Ayn al-Rummanah, Harat Hurayk, Shiyah, Burj
Barajinah and Damur?

It must be pointed out here that wherever the Syrians withdraw, they are
replaced by Palestinian forces. the Sa'iqsh in the downtown souks, in
'Alayh and Bhamdun. Hence it is a matter of a transfer that is not to
Lebanon's advantage but to that of the occupant and aggressor. The
"front" reasserts its refusal to accept a renewal of the FFA [Arab
Deterrent Force], which is no longer an Arab but a Syrian force.

Seventh: The Souks

is it possible to agree to keeping Beirut's commercial center, once one
of the world's most prosperous. in its state of ruins entrusted to vul-
tures?

Eighth: The Army

Concerning the army, the "front" points out that the latest promotions.
carried out as they were, represent the point of the spear with which they
have tried to pierce the side of this institution in order to destroy
it. An equally powerful second blow to achieve the same purpose of
exhausting it consists of widespread solicitations in order to bring

the army into the south, as if those who hold the power to authorize

such a displacement also had the right. As if this army, which we would
have wanted to be strong and invulnersble, existed only by the grace

of someone else and solicitations.

Ninth: The South

Concerning the south, the "front," which supports the statements made
before the UN General Assembly by the minister of foreign affairs,
Fu'ad Butrus, on 4 October, reasserts the following:

—-The south is and must remain Lebanese territory.

--Its defense is Lebanon's duty but rescuing this area is an international
responsibility.

112
--Por this reason. UNIFIL must be given the means of enforcing resolu-
tions A25 and £26 amended by the Security Council, so that in coopera-
tion with the Lebanese Government. it may counter any act of aggression
no matter where it arises in order to reclaim this Lebanese soil and
establish the government's authority there.

It is elementary to recognize that the south would not have become such
a serious danger for Lebanon without the armed Palestinian presence and
its violence.

--The acute crisis of the south must be dealt with together with the
internal Lebanese crisis as separate problems.

Tenth: The Judicial System

The "front" does not see any justificiation for maintaining the paralysis
of the courts. which are essential for the application of principles of
law. Hence the judicial system, the third estate. must again put in an
appearance.

These resolutions were preceded in the text by an indictment expounding
the following themes:

--The attitude of the Mohammedan faction of the country "that is satis-
fied with sharing the advantages without working otherwise for Lebanon
is henceforth no longer acceptable."

--Similarly. the "front" no longer wants to hear people talk of "ending
the war" without putting an end to its causes. the major one of which is
the double presence of Syria and Palestine.

--The "front" is of the opinion. in connection with this matter. that
diplomatic relations with Syria must be established.

Murabi tun Response

Beirut L'ORIENT-LE JOUR in French 20 Oct 79 p 3

{Text} The Independent Nasirites Movement (Murabitun) yesterday pub-
lished an official statement responding to the "Lebanese Front's" most
recent manifesto regarding the latest developaents hithe situation and
the various proposals connected with the regional crisis and preparations
for the Arab summit. The Murabitun's communique claims that the verbal
escalation the "Lebanese Front" is devoting itself to is connected with
"the next phase of the scheme in which the "front" is participating."

The MRI [Independent Nasirites Movement] response communique then
expounds the following points:

113
"The political victories the "Lebanese Front" speaks of "remain within
the scope of a simple imbalance in the forces involved in the struggle."

«The legal authority is using its potential "to help" the "Lebanese
Front."

"The "Murabitun" reasserts its opposition to the establishment of Pales-
tinians in Lebanon.

«The Districts controlled by the patriotic forces are open to the legal
system, while the "isolationist" regions retain closed to it.

«The army must nove into all areas of the country and such a deployment
must be carried out in all the regions.

9064
C50: 6800

11h
REPORT OI META“ SITUATION

Paris AN-NAHAR ARAB REPORT s H1340 in English 19 Nov 79 pp 7-12

[Text]

lebanon‘s banks have been subjected to a severe credit
squeere since mid-I979 as a result of regulations by
the llank of Lehanun. In the following article. Nassim
Saliha. a member of the Banking Control Commission
of lehanon‘s Central Bank. explains why these
regulations were necessary.

At different times throughout I979. the Bank
of lehanon has talten monetary measures. most
signiﬁcant of which was raising the legal reserve
rcqmrctnent on deposits in Lebanese Bounds to IS per
cent. part of which would he coveted by Treasury
Bonds. Other measures included ceilings on credit in
Lehanese l’ounds to the private sector. which were
uttendcd to allow better control of expansion in general
liquidity. better serve the needs of the national
economy and support the exchange value of the
Pound. which was under heavy pressure earlier in the
year. The objective behind setting these ceilings on
credit to the private sector was primarily to put an end
to real estate speculation and reorient credit extension
to ﬁnance more productive sectors and tourism.

Although statistics are not available for the three
months that followed the imposition of the new ceiling
(lune. Jul} and August). a prelitninary assessment of
the effects of the Central Bank‘s measures can be
made.

The consolidated monetary positions of the
commercial banks in Lebanon (Table l) reveals that
domestic liquidity (money supply and quasi-money)
rose l8.7 per cent in the first 8 months of I979
compared to an increase of almost the same amount
for all of I918. The rate of expansion in domestic
liquidity has therefore increased. A word of caution is
necessary however: the increase in domestic liquidity
was largel} the result of a rise in deposits in foreign

currencies by residents. These amounted to LLI.6
billion in the ﬁrst 8 months of the year. 6| per cent
above the level for the corresponding period of l978.
The increase reflected the drop in the exchange value
of the Lebanese Pound. estimated at around to per
cent; the increase in the real value of transfers from
Lebanese Pounds to foreign currencies was close to
LLl.l7 billion and accrued because depositors are
keeping remittances from abroad in foreign currencies.
An encouraging sign was the fact that transfers to
foreign currencies were no longer being made out of
fear of a drop in the value of their deposits in local
banks in Lebanese Pounds as was the ease in "’18. but
rather to take advantage of the higher interest offered
on foreign currencies. notably dollar deposits.

The increase in deposits of foreign currencies by
residents represented savings invested by local banks
ab:oad without exerting pressure on domestic prices.
When these foreign currency deposits are transferred
back into Lebanese Pounds. domestic liquidity may
rise substantially and pressure on prices of goods and
services may result. Special care should be taken to
prevent the impact of this re-transfer from reversing
and largely offseting the effect of the monetary policy
that was being pursued at the time of transfer.

lf deposits by residents in foreign currencies are
excluded from our calculations. domestic liquidity
would have increased ll per cent in the first 8 months
of this year compared to 22.4 per cent in all of I978.
The increase in domestic liquidity will probably not
exceed l5 to l6 per cent by the end of the year. if
the growth in liquidity and credit operations in the
three months period from June to August of this year
is included. in addition to the effective ceiling on
credit.

One factor that has contributed largely to
increased liquidity is the expansion in credit extension.
motor vutattons

Domestic loans 22.2 I63 32.2 l8.6 1).)

to the private sector 5.7 10.6 23.9 [9.6 2L8

Domestic liquidity 5.2 27.8 l8.8 13.0 ISJ

Money Supply 11.9 3.2 2l.l 6.7 ml
- 6,8 45.1 l7.7 l6.3 23.2

   
  

cector. Credit
)in the ﬁrst 8 the next two

d 25.5 per cent

to the public

d local currencies
account. then the expect

edit in 1979 would
nt less than last year's rate.

' tered in July The more: cited above in into that the Central
Pﬁﬂle ”6‘01 VI“ Bank's restrictive measures one
extended largel five months of the year. achievement at one considers t
‘ Bank "“85“”! muictine extension before the measures were introduced The
Central Bank‘s credit Ceilittgx have actually brought real
and ttruttleted tlti:

whitlt ptompte
credit to the private sector.
that If“! “R estate (pretrial-on
ttletiort on the value in

Available statistics indicate
edverse effect of such spec

imposition of ceilings on credit to the private sector.
there showed a marked drop. Expansion in credit to “an“, of the Blanca: pom“
dit and its effect on

the private vector inthe period between lune and Apart from the “mug inc

Auras! tell to a monthly average rate of L3 per dent the level or doaleSlic liquidity. Table 2 indicates that
compared with 3.2 for the previous months: in net foreigt assets has also

per cent the L1. 1.4 billion increase
lantrary to May. . contributed to expo ' ‘ liquidity. But
Credit to residents ' he net foreign met: position has

foreign amend“ in 0‘9 the improvement int
ﬁrst eight months of the year rose 23 per cent. by in turn contributed
Ll. 223 million. moi

of In actual growth increase in deposits
in credit and the depreciation of ' d. which reduced pressure
Despite that. al credit in foreign consolidated helmet sheet! 0"
currencies sttl f total credit (Table 3) [events tint monetary rese
extended to the private sector. hanlu dropped from

extension (in foreign an
months of the current year increase

comwml with
Seventy ﬁve pereen
the private sector.

in

commercial benlts
net with the

LL10? billion by the end of
- . . ..— ..—- __—-_—

__.———..—

lahlr 2

Fault“ :tllrrlrttv. lirltrirlily
Willi-ms of LI.)

,‘hmtgt's ill liquidity

tlrrttey Supply
of whrelteurrcncy in
\ ureulutron

Qtt.r\t lvlrmt'y
ul' ultrt‘lt local forum
unrenry deposits

(hangs in [actors allectins
liquidity

l-nrerprt assets lnetl
Dntttcttts: Iruns
lo the tutltltt: stelot lnetl
to the private sector
Olltet ltuhtltttcs

’t—i— —..__.-_.—./

1973 to LL t 86 billion at the end at last August. The
ratio of reserves to deposits in bebanese Pounds in
eurruttereial banks dropped from 17.1 per cent in l9'ltl
to U 4 per cent In tlte ﬁrst eight months or this year
Bank holdings of treasury bonds were stable between
. 1hr drop in bank reserves is attributed
to the expansion of credit and the seepage of part of
thew reserves as ' '
tnt'reuw in the Central Bank's primary
Ctttttrnittrteuts. The balance sheet of the
lchauuu reveals that while currency in circulation
outside hanks increased trom Ll. 3.275 million at the
end of W“ to Ll.3.494 million by the end of last
August. primary liquidity dropped slightly as a result
of the decrease in currency with banks
deprisirs with the Central Bani:

I’rmur) liquidity is the main element that can be
reguluetl hy the Central Bank m the pursuit ot
rrrrureury policy obreetives. liorrowiugs by commercial
hunks from the Central llanlt lead to :n incredsc in
primary liquidity and so does :ttt increase in the
Central llsrtL‘s lure-5n assets Various facts)“ and
develupureurs may also rtrter.u:t to produce a net
-- I-.. r...“ m pmtuty limit-lit) Despite litmultttgi h)

/./__

7 6,17 71,78 7“"l‘ 79 73,-‘lllllhl 7“
3.128 1.800 1.283 3.296
U 56) 0.009) (414) (hill
— 355 556 5 209
0.0“) (1.731) 0.874) 0.074)
N3 59 966 l .626
3.123 1.800 2.21“ 3.196
2 .402 529 807 l.‘ l 3
l .263 2.737 “69 2!th
(49!) um) CM) (733)
(773) (1.9“) (L965) (1‘33)
438 -5l6 4583 -I ll.”

/

the public sector from the Central Bank in the ﬁrst
eight months of l979 that amounted to [L 682
million. primary liquidity fell by U. 30 million. This
was because the decrease in the Certtrall Barth's nct
foreign assets valued at ﬁtted exchange rates offset by
more than $200 million the eﬂect ol’ the increase in
credit to the public sector on urinary liquidity.

Besides the drop in the ratio ol’ the monetary
reserves to total deposits in Lebanese hung; the
imposition of a 15 per cent ital reserve rcqttirerttent
augmented pressure on bank liquidity although the
Central Bank permitted commercial bsnltr to cover half
of these reserves by holding: of Treasury ilonds; 2.5
per cent of these holdings should be in special
Treasury Bonds that are due lobe issued very won.
Table 5 shows the growtlrul‘ bank liquidity. Four
cent of commercial hank excess liquidity war
assumed to be in the form at nonnnonctary reserve:
(Treasury Bonds) instead of the 7.5 per cent decrees
by the Central Bank memorandum No 246 of Octohe
22. 1°19. This is attributed to two factors:

The failure of a number at banks to subscribe i
Treasury Bonds with maturities extending over a yet
with which they could have entered the 7.5 per cer
Table 3

Commercid banks‘ consolidated
balance sheet
(Millions of LL)
I976 I977 I978 lune 79 .Augtlt 79

Assets

Money Reserves l.074 1.898 2.066 [.75 um
Foreign Assets 4.535 5.770 6.058 7.306 7.657
la-ans to the government 10 47S 949 942 1.000
lawns lo the private sector 7.247 3.03! 9.919 “.874 l‘.‘.09tr
Total I 2.356 16.174 18.993 2| .747 22.448
,‘ bilities

[trinmd deposits 1.804 3.300 2.822 3.233 3.241
Savulgs and Tittle deposits 4.937 7.l95 8.867 9.328 9.368

‘ ' ' fo ei

szr'ccte‘skpmus m I m l.87| 2.594 2.653 3.619 4.279
Foreign liabilities 2.807 3.558 3.l lo 3.36! 3.221
loans from the Central Bank 165 ml 77 44 42
(‘apital account $83 6|9 656 739 784
Net other liabilities 779 807 808 Lil? LSIZ

’______________________._—’———

of monetary reserves allowed by the memorandum.
- Two and a half per cent of the reserves stipulated by
the memorandum were left out since these will be
covered by subscription to special Treasury Bonds and
will therefore have no effect on the banks‘ free
liquidity.

l-ree monetary surpluses remaining to commercial
banks not exceed 3.3 per cent of total deposits in
Lebanese Pounds. This relatively low proportion serves
the Central Bank's monetary objectives. Limited bank
liquidin is depicted more clearly if one notes that the
larger part of commercial banks“ free deposits with the
Central Bank is Ircldby a very small number of banks.
added to the fact that only half of Commercial banks'
frer: reserves (Ll. 150 millionl consists of cash.

The pattern of development of commercial banks‘
liquidity encouraged inter-bank lending. Limited
ltquldily pushed interbank lending rates up and
interest on bank loans and deposits followed suit. This
is exactly that the Central Bank measures were aimed
to do. namely to narrow the gap between interest on
the Lebanese Pound and the US dollar.

The monetary situation that prevailed before the
years of civil strife was made more complex by the
growing burden of development and reconstruction

costs being borne by the state. and called for a more
effective role for the Central Bank.

In anaddreq to members of the Lebanese Bankers‘
Association. Central Bank governor Michel Khoury
stated explicitly that this institution. in Cooperation
with commercial banks. would employ all means
available to it to carry out its duties to maintain proper
control of rhe banking sector.

Even though commercial banks have not been
accustommed to resort to the Central Bank in the past
to reﬁnance their operations because of their liquidity,
they now- had to adapt to the new reality. they
realised that seeking assistance from the Central Bank
does not impinge on their reputation and is no
indicator of unsound cottuttercial banking practice
Instead. by introducing closer control over the
commercial banking sector. the Central Bank has raised
Lebanon's banking standards to levels found in the
world’s advanced banking centres. By use of the
discount instrument the Lebanese Central Bank has

ensured the control of domestic liquidity at levels
commensurate with the real needs of the economy; it

has also succeeded in pegglng the rate of interest to
levels that serve objectives ol'its monetary policy.

There was a slight increase in the level of time
not; 4

 

Central Bank position

(Millions of LI.)

I976 I977 I973 June 79 Aug 79
Foreign Assets 4.957 5.872 6.674 6.569 6.584
Loans to tire public sector (net) 77 l03 485 696 l.l67
Loans to the private sector 45 33 76 86 83
Loans to commercial banks I65 ml 77 53 43
Total 5.244 6. l 09 7.3 l 2 7 .404 7.876
"my 5"PV'V . . . 4.229 4.151 5.384 was SJSl

Currency in circulation oumde

"‘e m"? (3.024) (2.729) (3.235) (3.332) (3.404)
Currency with the banks ' (198) (19‘) (384) (343) (2‘7)

Commercial banks deposits (930) (L795) (1.692) (L480) “.6'0)
Private sector deposits (IS) (33) (24) l 5 I9
Foreign liabilities $8 65 75 60 l
cwit“ I61 2:3 2l3 213 27»
Other “Ibiﬁﬁes 796 1.000 L640 2.0” 2.221

______—._——————-————'—

deposits in I977 which reflected a desire by
commercial banks to attract deposits based on hopes
that a large amount of money would be needed by the
private and public sectors to finance reneonstruction.
Renewed lighting in I978 checked all hopes that
money would be committed for reconstruction and
brought interest rates back to low levels.

Because of the costly liquidity of their positions.
anunibcr ot‘ banks had turned to real estate and
foreign currency speculation by the end of I978. This
continued through the early months of this year.
forcing the Central Bank to take measures aimed
basically at supporting the value of the Lebanese
Found. in addition. the Lebanese government provided
new investment outlets for commercial banks. notably
Treasury liontls with medium and short term
maturities at average interest rates approximating those
for itttct'lt‘aﬂk lending in WT! and 1978 these ranged
between I and LS per cent for loans maturing in 3
months. These rates prevailed until February of this
year. when the Central Bank measures were put into
cﬂ’ccl. Rates rose gradually after that in line with tlte
increase in legal reserve requirements and rules on
credit. forcing the slate to raise inlerest on its Treasury
llonds from 2.52 per cent to 3 per cent. then 5 per
cent. and finally (LIX per cent '

With batik liquidity chcckcd during the past tw-
months. intcr-battk llllt‘ls‘\l rates have risen rapidly.
reaching 7.5 pct cent for Itt.uI\ on when..." Jud I) l‘"
cent for loam with J tttuntlts' maturity. lint llllﬂs'hlltl
operations were limited to loans on collection.
reﬂecting the reluctance of commercial banks to
commit their funds in view of the repeated
readjustments in inter-bank lending rates. Because the
state failed to raise the interest on Treasury Bonds in
line with increases in the inter-bank lending rates.
commercial banks have shied away from these bonds.
in particular the most recent issues.

Rising inter-bank lending rates began only
recently to exert a slight effect on interest on debtor
and creditor accounts. Interest on blocked accounts in
Lebanese Pounds rose by only i or 1.5 per cent.
reaching 8.5 per cent in some banks. Interest on
creditor accounts rose by the same margin. The slow
increase in interest rates is a natural development. since
the larger part of deposits are in small and medium
tranches that are only affected slightly by changing
rates. Commercial banks are also unwilling to raise
interest on debtor accounts in order to keep thier
select clientele.

With the continuing liquidity crisis. slow but
regular increases are projected for interest rates for
Table 6
Pi unruur elm-gt uf \-l'tK' of LI. :rprirrst nerjr-r foreign currencies holster-tr cud I97“ and
June 6 ”79 and October 26 I979. with weighted change on thrnc slates.

June 6 I979

Change Weight
US 7.8 3.770
I 9.7 0.7 57
FF 1 .3 0. I40
DM 2.2 0.250
W 4.3 -- 0. l 76
SF 0.4 0.0] 7
BF 0. 8 0.024
ll. 2.8 0.42l
SL 0.4 0.“)6

October 26 I979

Charge Weight
I 0.9 5.629
".6 l .l 40

9.3 l .NO
l l.9 l .352
-8.0 0.928
7.7 0.329
10.4 0.3! 2
l0.8 0.947
6.6 0. l 02

._..__———_____‘______*

debtor and creditor accounts which would lead to a
narrowing of the gap between domestic rates and
interest rates paid on dollar accounts.

Thir. was one of the objectises of the measures
—_________
Table 5

Situation of the reserve requirement and of W
ﬂuidity in Oct I979

Millions of U.

I Fstirmtt- of the central average of LL
deposits subject to the reserve requirement

at the end of both Sept. and Oct. ”.225
2 . Reserve requirement (1596) 1.984
3 -- Reserve requirement under the form of

'lreasury Bonds (4%) 530
4 - Monetary reserve requirement 1,454
5 Conmtercral banks' deposits at the

l.7|3

259
2 50

509

Central Bank (20! WIDE)

6 C ommerctal banks' excess reserves
at the Central Bank

7 - Estimate of cash in banks vaults

8 - Excess liquidity in the vaults of the
corrunercial banks and the Central Bank

 

 

itnposed by the Central Banlr with the hope of
strengthening the Lebanese Pound. But it came at a
time when major industrial countries were raisin;
interest rates to ﬁcht inﬂation and support the value
of their currencies. In the light of this. it can be said
that the Central Bank rediscount rate, now at 7 per

cent. is not in line with inter-bank lending rates nor
With the Central Bank's overall policy. In fact. the
Central Bani: is expected to readjust its discount rate
in the near future.

Available statistics indicate that Lebanon‘s balance
of payments registereda suplus of $l87 million in the
first eight months of l979. The surplus was due to a
substantial increase of more than $380 million in the
net foreign holding of commercial banks. The
difference of ”93 million between net foreign
holdings of commercial banks and the balance of
payments surplus represents the net drop in the
Central Bank's foreign holdings. mainly due to
financing of imports by the state.

The larger part of the balance of payments
surplus was “Lined in tin suumer and that chiefly
because scores of Lebanese working abroad.
particularly in the Gulf. came home to spend their
vacations. Moreover. demand for foreign currencies was
slower in the summer. Undoubtedly. the Central Bank
measures were very effective in curbing the capital
outﬂow and ending real estate speculation. two
elements which increased the commercial banks' net
foreign assets. No matter what course monetary
developments follow in the last quarter of the current
year. the balance of payments is expected to increase
further since the year's end usually witnesses a siaeable
inﬂow of funds.

The balance of payments surplus projected for
this year exceeds last year‘s S ”5 million. although
last year's was the result of an improvement in the
Central Bank‘s net foreign wets, while this year's

120
8:22. a 52.. 9.32.9.8... 3...??? 5 5n :3.
=5... 32...... .2... £2 .227. :5 as... ea .2. 2.9.0
B... .63.... 222.8. 382.28... 2.2.53.2. S :3
cm 9...... .2322... v5.2.2; 52 1.2...0... 02.2..
382:2 .o 82.2. :8 2:25..

.25 568...? 3 =3 9...... 9.... 0.. 53......
an .8... «223. 2... :5 an: 2. 22... «a. «toning:
8.42. .0 563.3 :3 5.5 o.. ...o vac-.88 12:...
:99...“ 272 2.33.2 2... 2.8.5.8... w. 33.8.5»
3.2 ... :3 .332..." 32.3. 12a 2.. not... :222.
a 2:32 no.2...» ... ...n 5.5 cs :5 .2538 10......
(2 3.322. 8.5:: =3 2... 0.. 2.3 2... «2... Fan.
(:2. :3 3:2 33 3222. E. :3. .2... a:
3:37. :5 32... 05 ...n £022....“ 82...... 55......
1...... ....o=o.. ...o 313...» 32.8. 2... 3.8.. .222.
c: ..o=2 .33.: i=8... . 8.23.5.3
.Svaﬁao... 5 ...o .2... o.. .223. o: .58.... ...
r3330 13......

I...» «32.3 328.2 .53 5:22. 3. :5
62:2. 9.... o: .56 m 0.. :5 <2. 5...... 3.3.. :8
6.5 5 2.23.6. 2. :5 .2333 was... .o E. u...
8 =5 3...... a...“ 3.0 (8 0.33. 39......2

.fisnrii .rl Lil. 1.5:». in :F ..?.. .> n. ..... r!
BANK OF LEBANON PUBLISHBS STATISTICS
Beirut L'ORIEﬂT-LE JOUR in French 7 Oct 79 p 9

{Text} Yesterday the Bank of Lebanon published its bimonthly balance
sheet dated 30 September and which, when compared with that of
15 September, invites the following remarks:

1) From one 2-week period to the other, paper currency shunda deline
of 8 nillin LL, dropping from 3,666,523,722 LL to 3,656,258,473 LL on
30 September.

At the same time holdings in gold and foreign exchange (the factors
covering the pound) decreased by 5 million LL, settling at 2,928,063,581 LL
on 30 September as against 2,933,168,630 LL.

2) Similarly, deposits held in the bank of Lebanon for Lebanese banks
fell 36,577,522 LL, from 2,360,733,977 LL on l5 September to 2,306,156,656 LL
on 30 September.

3) This resulted in a decrease in the money supply during this period
on the order of 66,862,772 LL. The latter fell from 6,005,257,700 LL
on 15 September to 5,960,616,928 LL on 30 September.

6) The entry "other deposits" likewise increased, rising from
1,226,962,102 LL to 1,320,222,028 LL.

5) The Bank of Lebanon's other assets also increased, settling on
30 September at 3,986,298,733 LL, against 3,929,260,828 LL.

6) Advances to the public sector did not record any change. Re have
printed below this balance sheet just as it was transmitted to us by the
Bank of Lebanon:
ASSETS

1)
2)
3)
4)
5)

Gold and foreign currencies
Advances to the public sector
Advances to the private sector
Advances under law 28/67
Other assets end debtor
accounts

0n 30/9/79
LL

2.928.013.581.20
931.144.111.08
61.725.899.84
913,395.35

3.986.298.733.02

 

7.908.095.720.49

0n 15/9/79
LL

2.933.148.630.58
931.144.111.08
61.841.731.26
5,144,567.58

3.929.260,828.44

7,860.539.868.94
BOUCETTA EXPLAINS WROCCO'S ABSHUCB FROM WROVIA

1.0061622 Rabat MAP in Arabic 1300 CHI 6 Dec 79 Lb

[Excerpts] M'hamed Boucetta, minister of state in charge of foreign

affairs and cooperation, held a press conference at the ministry this
morning to explain the reasons which prowted Morocco to not take part
in the work of the co-ittee of sages in Monrovia. The minister began
this conference with a statement in which he said: [begin recording]

You are aware that the most important event attracting attention today
regarding our region is the nesting of the thtee of sages [words
indistinct] today in Monrovia. You may be aware of Morocco's stand
toward this meeting.

As you know, President Hilliam Talbert visited Morocco from

3 to S Nave-her. During the meeting he had with his najesty the king,
the topic of Morocco's participation in the meeting of the co—ittea of
sages in Monrovia was raised, the meeting in which Morocco was strongly
determined to take part. On this occasion our country clearly expressed
its pride in taking part in this meeting on the ground that this par-
ticipation would take place within the framework of studying (?our recent)
proposal connected with the convening of a su-it conference, including
presidents of the countries bordering on the Sahara, for the purpose of
enabling them to turn their disputes into cooperation and to work for
harmony instead of conflict, estrangemsnt and quarreling. This proposal,
as you also know, was made clear in the royal message of 28 August 1919
sent to President Tolbert in his capacity as president of the OAU. Thus,
President Tolbert was aware of the Moroccan stand and the aims of the
royal proposal, which was supposed to form a framework for the expected
meeting.

However, what do we see today? The main aim of the meeting finally has
been abandoned, this meeting that was supposed to provide an opportunity
for the first beneficial gathering in search of an end to the causes of
tension in the region.

12‘;
Precisely on the second day of President Tolbert's visit to Morocco,

that is, 7 Noveaber 1979, the Republic of Mali, which is a nenber of

the conittee of sages, chose an openly hostile stand toward our country
and adopted an extremely partial policy. On 7 Nave-bar 1979 the repre-
sentatives of the so-called POLISARIO and the alleged Saharan Republic
were warnly welcoeed in Banako. The Republican Guard saluted then at the
airport and they were received by President Mousse Troure in the presence
of mbers of the govern-eat and party. Following this sleting with the
Malian president the latter, in a statenent to the national radio service,
in its broadcast at 1300 on 8 Rove-bar 1979, affirned support for the
representatives of the Saharan people who are fighting for their inde-
pendence. This is what was stated by the national radio of the Republic
of Mali on 8 Noveaber 1979.

As for Tanzania, which is also a neber of the consittee of sages, it
did not linit itself to recognizing the so-called Saharan Republic but
also strove further in its biased and hostile stand toward Morocco by
giving weapons to the POLISARIO, weapons which it is using in its
aggression against our country. In ly view, it is of no use to dwell
on the stand of these two countries, which is not befitting the role
which a member of a cousittee of sages takes upon hiuelf. Are not
iwnrtiality and neutrality the two conditions which should be enjoyed
when taking part in such a codttee’l No one can be a judge and an
adversary at the sane tine, nor a reconciliator and an adversary at the
sale tine.

Moreover, the govermaent of Liberia, which was aware of our total rejec-
tion of any participation by the mercenaries of Algeria in this nesting,
has invited (2their group) to cone to Monrovia. The dangers of this
initiative are not obscure: it not only exceeds the nandate of the
comittee of sages, which was rejected and disputed by Horocco, but also
constitutes a dangerous political action.

All this, as you will note, is renote free the atnosphere distinguished
by clarity and calls which President Talbert took upon hinself during his
latest stay in Rabat to give to this nesting.

In any event, I stress here Horocco's determination to defend its rights
and to contribute to the establish-ant of peace with all the calmess
and patience it possesses. (end recording]

CSO . 6602

125
FOREIGN MINISTER ANSWERS QUESTIONS ON MWCAN SfAll'D
1.0050026 Rabat Domestic Service in Arabic 2000 GMT 4 Dec 79 L0

[Excerpts] Minister of state for foreign affairs and cooperation, M'haaed
Boucetta, held a press conference at noon today at which he explained
Morocco's stand toward the meeting of the cosnittee of wise men in Monrovia
and the reasons why Morocco has refused to take part in it.

At the end of this preanble. M'hsmed Boucetta replied in Arabic to the
questions put by the press in Arabic and in French to questions put to his:
in French.

Follows a full recording of all the questions and answers in Arabic.
[Begin recording]

[Question] Ahmad Atsyah of West German Television. should Monrovia fail
to be the site for an exchange of views among you, Algeria and Mauritania,
do you see in the very near future any scope for discussions with the Arab
countries in North Africa?

[Answer] As you know, and no doubt you have followed all the recent steps.
particularly those coming from our Arab brothers for exerting efforts to
remove tension in this region, Morocco's answer to these initiatives were
always positive. It has always welcomed them, because Morocco considers
that this artificial issue in our region is not objectively in the supreme
interest of the Arab causes which we must pay attention to first and fore—
most and for which all efforts should be exerted for their sake: The
question of Palestine, the question of replying to Zionism and the question
of backwardness which we are experiencing in our Arab nation so that we may
overcome our problems.

Therefore Morocco has always rushed to welcome all Arab initiatives. to
accept them and to do everything required for the creation of a climate so
that a meeting could take place between Morocco and Algeria. He followed
this pattern since the beginning. since the first Amgals, when important
units of the regular Algeria Army of more than 2,700 were in the grip
[Qibdat] of thr. Moroccan Army. The first Arab initiative at that time was

126
from Iraq calling for understanding in this region. lbrocco's reply. as

I said before. was positive from the beginning. The Algerian armies.
which were in the grip of the Moroccan Army, were able to return to Algeria
safely. Another initiative cue from the Arab countries. the latest of
which was the efforts aade by President Babib Bourguiba and by Saudi
Arabia for a meeting to be arranged between Morocco and Algeria. Morocco
weldomed this initiative, too, but the rejection came from the other aide.

Morocco is prepared to attend any dialog that would remove tension in this
region, a tension which I described as artificial and created for reasons
which do not serve the major Arab cause.

[Question] Moroccan al-Bayan, certain press quarters in Morocco say that
the question of the Moroccan Sahara is a question between the East and the
West and that within its retrieved borders Morocco is experiencing a con-
tinuation of the crusade. what is your stand, minister, towards this
analysis? In fact the tour of the secretary of state for foreign affairs
can be considered one of the attempts made by Morocco to prevent the inter-
nationalization of the Moroccan-Algerian dispute. “hat is the volume of
success of the Moroccan-Algerian dispute. what is the volume of success
of Horocco's attempt in this field, and then what are your expectations of
the conflict assuming the nature of a conflict between the East and the
west, or to be precise between the socialist bloc and the Western world,
bearing in mind that Morocco is not alined to any of these blocs.

[Answer] The fact is that the conflict in this region can be explained
from a number of angles and considerations. First and foremost Morocco
says that this issue is a national one.

Morocco, and this is not a secret, is firstly an Arab [halim country pre-
pared to defend the values it inherited from this Arab Islamic culture.
Secondly, it is a nonalined country within the true sense of the word.

It wishes to maintain with all the countries and the blocs good relations
of mutual benefit and interest. It is no secret that for example, with
the Soviet Union we want to maintain strong and good relations despite our
differences over ideological issues or over facts which we could possibly
disagree about or over actions in certain areas. But we always endeavor
to maintain relations, for instance, with the socialist bloc and with the
Soviet Union itself, of mutual benefit and interest. The best proof of
this is the important agreement which links us economically with the Soviet
Union. [Sentence indistinct] Therefore by giving all these facts I would
like only to emphasise that as far as Morocco is concerned and as far as
this issue, the issue of the Sahara, is concerned. Morocco is prepared to
meet all kinds of trends: Firstly to defend its right and secondly to
defend its values and existence.

[Question] Editor of LIBERAI‘ION; how far. from the military aspect. will
the Uhud operation go in the event of Algeria remaining intransigent and
continuing to render its military and political assistance, particularly
the establishment of bases for the POLISARIO mercenaries on our land?

12?
[Answer] As to the Uhud operation perhaps you have noted the recent state-
ments made by his majesty the king in this connection. This operation is
above all an operation of purging and cleansing the region from the conse-
quences of the sabotage which used to take place at one time from the
Mauritanian or the Moroccan borders and the building of arms caches for the
rebels in this region. This operation was aimed, first and foremost.

at cleansing the region and at securing it fron the military and security
points of view. It began to yield results. Moreover, Horocoo, which
always proved that it does not want war and that it would never be the
aggressor, left its defensive forces in their classical form: An army
which will defend the country whenever it is confronted by an outside
force or army. The defense of the Saharan areas and the confronting of
this aggnession in whichever mner such aggression takes place. requires
us to transform the form of our forces and our weapons. A large part

of this has been accoqlished and will be finally completed in the next
weeks or months. [End recording]

That was the full recording of the Arabic part of the press conference held
this morning by H'hamed Boucetta.

C50: (.602
BOUCETTA: POROCCO W VIWS SAHARA ISSUE AS 'STRICTLY WESTIC'
LD031337 Casablanca LE HAHN in French 12 Nov 79 pp 1, 7 LD

[Unattributed report: "Hr Boucetta: Let the Hercenariea' Recent Setbacka
Be a Leaaon to Our Neighbore”)

[Text] An ordinary Ieeting of the Iatiqlal Party National Council haa been
taking place since Saturday under Secretary General H'haned Boucetta'e
chairmanehip and in the preaence of nealben of the party'a Executive Con-
nittee.

The Saturday eeeeion waa marked among other thinge by an important opening
speech made by the secretary general and by reporta on the party‘a partici-
pation in the government in the paet 2 yeara aubnitted by Iatiqlal niniatera.

Our readera will find hereunder a eyntheeia of the main ideaa developed by
Mr Boucette in his opening epeech.

Hr Boucetta firat referred to the eituation in which our country haa found
itself as a reault, m3 other thinga. of the aggreeeion and var inpoaed
on ue. He then enphaaized our people'a determination and their nobiliaation
with a View to achieving our territorial integrity following hie najeaty the
king's appeal and in accordance with the teatanent of the liberation leader
Allal El Faeei.

Referring to the atagea which have led to the recovery of the Sahara and

to Horocco'e efforta to thwart plota hatched by the adveraariea of our unity
and territorial integrity--efforta nade poaaible by the reeietance and de-
termination of all citieena-onr Boucetta emphaaiaed the aueceaaea achieved
in the field by our brave Royal Armed Porcea. to when he paid vibrant
tribute.

Aa for the eecalation which her taken place recently. the aecretary general
recalled that the Royal Armed Forces have been able to repulae fierce attacka
mounted by thouaanda of nercenariea poaaeaaing huge anounta of heavy and
aophiaticated equipnent and expreaaed the hope that theae aetbacke will be

a laeaon to thoae who are reaponaible for the exiating tenaion and that the

L99
people involved will at last realize that they will never be able to
achieve their objectives at Morocco's expense.

Further-ore, Hr Boucetta added, our resistance has begun to bear fruit.

For instance, he stated, our Royal Arasd Porcea have now sufficient ans
and manpower to crush any aggression against our country.

In the diplonatic aphere we have reached a new stage and adopted a new
style of action which consists of believing and proving that the Sahara
problem has definitely been resolved, that it is strictly a dooeatic latter
and that, consequently. there is no longer any need to set Horoccan plans,
views and theses against Algerian plans, views and theses in international
organizations. For the first time, Mr Boucetta added. only Algerian draft
reaolutions. views and theses will be subaitted for either adoption or re-
jection.

Consequently, fraternal and friendly countries will have only two poasi-
bilities open to thew-they will have to decide whether they are for or
against Morocco. that is in favor of peace and cooperation advocated by
Morocco or whether they want to oupport advocatsa of hagaoonisn and destruc-
cion.

Hr Boucetta denied rumors spread by certain circles according to which the
Sahara war is at the origin of the difficultiea faced by the country. For,
he explained, Horocco'a nilitary expenditure is not unusually high.

Hr Boucetta also stated that some inortant changes will soon take place in

the country, changes which will give a concrete content to the principle
of the elinination of social inequalities.

CSO: 61:00

130
'MAP': BOUCET‘M EXPRESSES TOTAL SUPPORT FOR PALESTINIAN CAUSE
1.03013an Rabat MAP in English 1240 GMT 30 Nov 79 L0

[Text] Rabat, Nov 30 (MAP)--0n the occasion of the celebration of the
international day of solidarity with the Palestinian people, M'hamed
Boucetta, Moroccan foreign affairs and cooperation minister, reaffirmed in
a statement, Morocco's total support for the Palestinian cause.

Boucetta, namely, said that "in conformity with Morocco's policy which con-
siders the Palestinian cause as the cause of every Moroccan as it was under-
lined by King llassan II of Morocco. We are working and will still work

for the liberation of Palestine and the holy city of al-Ouds".

"Morocco, the minister went further, which considers the Palestinian people's
issue as a [word indistinct] one, and which brings and will bring its total
support to the struggle of the Palestinian people for recovering their legi-
tinate rights and for reintegrating their mother land, once again reaffirms
its conviction that the Palestinian question constitutes the heart of the
Middle East problem, and that peace cannot be achieved in this region with-
out granting to the Palestinian people, through their sole and legitimate
representative, the Palestine Liberation Organisation (P10), their national
and legitimate rights, and without associating the PLO to all efforts dis-
played for establishing a just and lasting peace in the Middle East."

The Moroccan minister added "we consider that the situation prevailing in
the Arab Maghreb and the tension which results from the aggressions against
our country, is opposed to the Palestinian issue and to the Arab cause, as
long as the efforts and energies which Inst serve Palestine, the Palestin-
ian people and the Arab nation in general, are scattered and lost". That
is why we are opposed to any attempt of disintegration of the Arab nation
by the creation of puppet states, which are but an obstacle to the Arab
nation's aspirations," concluded Boucetta in his statement.
aha-us I. .t. 1.5.5.11‘ IIIIIIIIII ﬂ. 4 I

3%.: <2: 3 ass—on 8.3 8 9.8.x. _. 9.385
3.3522. .:u. 955.” yogi 3:52.: .o :5 man.“
9332. >525... v5.5 :5; £8 713 52. 3
Samara £9.32 means: «at»: 2. 2:: 5a
sizes—3 :3. 9!... so «:3: :53 2.2:; 2:—
3:55. :— 3533 58 3:28... d: 62. is .35
75:3 3.5. £25 35.53 tin: .3 582:2—
:E. :3 man. 3 26 {082° 23 4.55.. so
can—=3.

I. 9.38.: S... can 5:: 0“ man 2202835
:8 u :8" .339. m: 5% 62:33 20308 2...
mic—x. a!“ 3.93 a. 2:8: .a .53. a... £3 9:
8 «do 32:2. 3 :5 RE: 0.. 2225 382.5 m:
3.; 2:. I: 2:323 .o _.-= «a: 3.92 .o 2.3.:
38 3.52. m: .30. 9: 22.8.3; 53.5% 2:... :8
EH :3 58:. 8 .533» 23 :33 $32.: $3..
938. was”: 2:. 25::— 33 2.5:...“ 8 mun
33629.... 7.. 3:38.: 3:.

$31...“ 3:... 3603 .o 30:83 2» 22:.
«08. 2.... 91:5 :30 :3 .3333 £2.22. .3. 95

2:2 5&3 3:33 3 =8 .35. 0.. 3283..
32:1?! .5 "3.5... 31:... 3.5:» “on :5 02...!—
Moron-In exports to Britain were worth 133.6
million ($10.5 million) for the ﬁrst nine months of
this year and consisted mainly of phosphates and
agricultural produce. This WI) l0.2 per cent higher
than for the first three quarters of I978. when exports
were worth 1.’ 30.5 million ($63.l million). Morocco's
exports to Britain for all of I978 were worth £44.!
million ($92.6 million).

Mr Guessous said Morocco was seeking to bypass
EEC curbs on trade by seeking new markets in the
(‘OMECON bloc but that adapting products to these
new markets was a costly business and Western Europe
remained Morocco's most natural trading partner.
One-third of Morocco‘s oranges were now being sold to
the Soviet Union, Mr Guessous noted.
BRIEFS

NADOR STEELHORKS--The Moroccan govern-ant has given the final go-ahead for
construction of a steel-Iaking conplex at Nader, in the northeastern region
near Melilla. Trade Minister Azeddine Guessous announced in London last Heek.
The project was first proposed in 1958. Mr Guessoua said construction work.
estimated to cost $2 billion. would be spread over seven years instead of
three years as originally planned. A British firm. H S Atkins, is the con-
sultant for the Radar coupler. [Text] [Paris AN-NAHAR ARAB REPORT 6 MEMO
in English 26 Nov 79 p 6]

C50: 6420

13k
SUPPORT FOR. SOLIDARITY RITE IRAN RBITBRATBD
JNOZISbb Dassscus Domestic Service in Arabic 1215 GMT 2 Dec 79 J8
[Unattributed connsntary]

[Text] Syria has once again affirned its support for and solidarity
with the Iranian revolution against u.s. imperialist threats and prove-
cations and the Canp David partners' open inatigatione against the
Iranian people and their triusphsnt revolution.

By reaffirsing its support for the Muslin Iranian revolution and the
brave Iranian people in their steadfastnsss and defiance of the aggres-
sive and provocative forces, Syria is in fact expressing the feelings
of the Arab masses and their appreciation of the Iranian revolution' s
liberation stands and firn support of Arab rights in line with the
world liberation novenente' struggle against imperialism, Zionisn and
racisn.

Syria realized right fron the beginning that inperialisa, Zionism and
their agents. who are the enemies of progress and freedon, will not
renain silent over the victory of the Iranian revolution, which uprooted
the lost intractable dictatorship-~which linked its fate with that of
Zionisn and 0.8. inparialiss and dedicated itself and all Iran's resources
to the role of the imperialist police-an in the Gulf area against the
interests of the Iranian people and the Arab nation.

It was because of this very reason that the Zionist and iaperialist
forces have adopted a hostile and rancorous attitude toward the Iranian
revolution and its natural alliance with the Arab nation and Arab rights.
By intensifying its hatred against the Iranian revolution and its provo-
cations against the Iranian people to the point of threatening to use
force and intervene nilitarily. U.S. isperialien is trying to avenge the
collapse of its strongholds in Iran and the Gulf. 0.8. iaperialisn, the
Zionist Israeli ene-y and the trsitoroue al-Sadet regise are trying in
vain to turn the clock backward.

135
It was the U.S. administration which began this hostility and hatred
against the Iranian revolution and people when it hosted the ousted
shah, the eneny of the Iranian people. and when it persisted in defying
the Iranian people's feelings and national will. By exploiting the
issue of the hostages to love its fleets in the Indian Ocean and the
Miterranean, the u.s. administration shows the extent of its hostility
to and hatred for the Iranian revolution, world liberation novennta
and all attemts at national liberation and freedom from injustice.

when inperialisn, Zionism and the traitorous al-Sadat regine united
against the peoples of the region represented by the Arab nation and
the Iranian revolution, they in fact chose the path of aggression and
evil were. They have compelled the peoples of the region to rise in
defense of their destinies, freedom and peace and security in their
countries. Such evil intentions cannot go unopposed. The Arab nation
and the Iranian revolution, against which the provocations and hostile
military movenents are directed, will not remain silent. They will
certainly take all the necessary measures to face the aggression and
provocations.

If the 0.8. administration insists on pursuing the course of force.
military intervention, blackmail and provocations, it will prove to the
whole world that it has not learned its lesson from past experiences
with peoples who fought for their freedon and has not benefited from
the defeats suffered at the hands of those struggling peoples.

while affirming its support for and solidarity with the Iranian revolu-
tion. thereby expressing the sentiments of the Arab nasses, Syria warns
against the danger of using force against the Iranian revolution,
because this will definitely push the region to the brink of a con-
flsgration and gravely jeopardize world peace and security. Hhile
affirming its solidarity with the Iranian people, government and leader-
ship, Syria is certain that the Iranian revolution will triumph in the
end. Just as it is certain that the Arab nation will triuqh in its
battle against inperialisn, Zionien and the traitorous al-Sadat regime.

C80: 6802

136
SYRIAN PEOPLE'S ARMY WEI! RECEIVES CSSR DELEGATION
31051433 Daaascus SAM in Arabic 1255 GMT 5 Dec 79 .13

[Text] Damascus, 5 Dec--At his office this aorning, People's Army
Con-ander Huhansd Ibrahim al-‘Ali received the visiting Czechoslovak
delegation led by Lt Gen Vaclav Horacek, Czechoslovak Com-mist Party
Central Co-ittee “er and chairman of the Czechoslovak Union for
Cooperation With the Army.

After welcoming the visiting delegation, Comrade al-‘Ali discussed the
strong friendship linking the two peoples and parties. Conrade al-‘Ali
gave a detailed report on the Syrian People's Army, its fornation,
duties and role in the October Var of Liberation.

Conrade al-‘Ali affirmed that the vicious colonialist onslaught to which
the Arab nation, particularly Syria, is being subjected necessitates the
concentration of all available means and potentials in confronting
inperialisn, Zionism and their agents.

Conrade al-‘Ali said that the Camp David accords and their consequences,
which were hatched by imperialism and Zionis- and inlenented by
al-Sadat, are only a facade to this colonialist onslaught. Al-‘Ali
added: Thus, Syria, which has struggled in the past against all form
of imperialism and colonialism, will continue its struggle with increas-
ing determination, under Cosrade Hafiz al-Asad, Arab Socialist Ba'th
Party secretary general and president of the republic, in order to
abort all plots and achieve victory for our just cause.

Lt Gen Vaclav Horacek expressed his thanks to Conrade al-‘Ali for the
information given his, saying: We greatly appreciate all the strong
ties between us. Vaclav Horacek affirmed that the Czechoslovak stand
against Calp David is a principled one.

Lt Gen Vaclav Horacek added: Re are very proud of Syria, which is lead-
ing the Arab struggle, and history will prove the correctness of its

stand. He added: Our support for President Hafiz al-Aaad's policy

[words indistinct] derives from our conviction in the justness of the
cause that the Arab nation is defending.

137
Lt Gen Vaclav Horacek arrived in Damascus last night on a 5-day visit

to Syria. lie was set on arrival by Conrad: Ibiza-ad Ibrahim a1-'Ali,
high officials and officers in the People's Am and by the Czecho-
slovak advassador in Damascus and eﬁasay staff.

080. 10802

136
BRIEFS

MUSLIM BROTEEBBOOD MURDER—The Voice of Lebanon correspondent baa learned
that Muslin Brotherhood gun-en in Syria have nurdered Antoine Barakat.

an enployee of the Syrian presidential palace, while he was on his way
hone by bus. Hr Barakat did not use his car so as not to reveal his
identity to any attackers-warticularly since he had previously received
death threats. The Muslin Brotherhood is the cause of the tense atnoe-
phere prevailing in Alepo. Latatia, lions and Ila-ah. [Text] [116041325
Voice of Lebanon (Clandestine) in Arabic to Lebanon 1215 cm lo Dec 79 NC]

BA‘TH PARTY BLECTIONS--Delsscus-It has been decided to begin the elec-
tions in the Arab Socialist Ba'th Party branches on 8 December. prior
to the convocation of the seventh ordinary regional conference of the
Arab Socialist Ba'th Party later this month. [Text] [JNOSlS38 Dansecua
Doneatic Service in Arabic 1215 GMT 5 Dec 79 Jill

050: 4802

139
PDROCCO ACCUSED 0P 'PIBRCB EXPRESSION' OF SAHARANS
Paris L'HUHANITE DIMANCHE in French 24-30 Oct 79 pp 2-23

[Article by Francoise Germain-Robin: "The Story of a Saharan Deputy in the
Moroccan Chamber of Representatives"]

[Text] During the raid of the Western Sahara Liberation
Forces on Shara, a deputy in the Moroccan atauber of
Representatives joined the POLISARIO Front. Francoise
GerIain-Robin was there to get her report on the war
and the situation in )brocco.

The story of Mohamed Ali Ould Sid Bl Bachir. Saharan deputy in the Moroccan
Chamber of Representatives who joined the POLISARIO Front during the battle
of Snare, is all the sore interesting because he appeared to enjoy the con-
fidence of the kingdom's leaders. Thus, he frequently saw the nusber two
man of the government, the highly valued adviser to the king. chief of his
aides-dedcaap. Colonel-Hajor Dlini. hisself said to be of Saharan origin.

He was also a sewer of the Foreign Affairs Cos-ission of the broccan
Chamber of Representatives responsible for "borders and usurped territories."

The manner in which he was elected to parlialent was particularly strange,
however. Called in 4 months before the elections by the minister of the
interior. he was informed of the order by the king to run as the lstiqlal
Party candidate in Sears Province.

He further stated that, once elected. he was never able to address the
sessions of the Chamber of Representatives. and neither were any of his
collegues. supposedly representatives of the Saharan populations.

lie justified the slow nature of his joining up with the POLISARIO Front
by the fierce repression which the Royal Armed Forces [FAR] have imposed
upon the Saharan territories which they occupy. The exalples which he gave

during his meeting on 13 October with the international press are terrifying.

"The repression began with the arrival of the Moroccan occupation forces in
1975. Colonel Lansrti, head of the first forces which had penetrated to

1&0
Smara, captured Si Saharan citizens. all activists, at Lemseid. He had
a ditch dug, buried then alive and ran bulldozers on top of them.

"He took six others and gave them 'as compensation' to one of his officers

whose brothers had been killed by the revolutionaries. He executed them in
a brutal manner.

"At Amgala. six Saharans were led, tied like cattle, into a helicopter and
thrown overboard in mid-air. Colonel Benathane. who succeeded his and is
now a member of the royal Staff. took nine citizens in the area of Smara
and had them burned to death with their livestock. A woman and her two
children were sliced open like goats. That happened at the beginning of
1976. Thirty-seven children who were tending flocks were arrested. im-
prisoned and tortured.

"All of this was directed primarily against the nomadic peoples. After
having finished with them and having forced them to collect in the towns.
they gathered together the tribal chiefs and gave them lists of people to
haVe arrested. They threatened to shoot the shaykhs if they tried anything
to defend these people. who were all activists. or to help them escape.
From the start. 176 persons, men. women and children were arrested. "hat
these people went through in prison was so terrible that it was difficult
for them to survive. Many died, some were let go, seriously ill or dying,
after several months, and nobody knows what happened to the others. That's
how the occupation of Smara started."

Talking next about the catastrophic military situation. he told how Colonel
Dlimi himself characterized the stages through which Morocco passed in the
Sahara. At each of these stages, there was a change in the chief of staff
of the southern forces. In succession came colonels Dlimi, Kasso. Breitel.
Driss Ben Aissa, Benami and Abrouk, the latter still stationed there at
present but who will probably soon be replaced by Colonel Loubariss, the

same one who distinguished himself at the head of the Moroccan forces in
Zaire.

First stage (the one where he took command): Total occupation of the Western
Sahara, with vast rounding up campaigns to eradicate the POLISARIO.

Second stage: No longer able to control the roads and trails cut by the
POLISARIO. the FAR moved into the towns. They were soon forced to abandon

the smaller ones, where they were endlessly harassed, and withdrew to the
large centers.

Third stage, that of the "iron triangle" of Boucraa, £1 Ayoun and Smara,
inside which the royal forces can still move about.

Fifth stage [as published]. the POLISARIO is concentrating its forces against
southern Morocco. And this is the same process as in the Sahara: the

civilians and the military were soon dislodged from the small towns and
took refuge in the larger ones.

ihi
"The last stage. that's labouirate. After that. on 17 September. DJ imi told
me: 'lrle're a laughingstnck... I requested the king to release me from
further participation in the royal army. because I no longer have any honor
in it. lie replied to me: 'And me, who will release me from being the
commander of this army?‘

"The people who make up the higher command of the army are traitors and in-
cumetants... Given the present situation of the army, the king has decided
to call in foreign officers and experts to try to straighten things out by
changing strategy. Because if we let the Saharans do as they like, then
we'll have problems with the other southern tribes. the Berbers. the
Riffians...'"

The Saharan deputy then recounted how he had actually seen two delegations
of foreign officers and experts in El Ayoun on 27 and 28 September. "The
first one included between 17 and 20 Frenchmen. The second, 25 Americans
and Egyptians who had arrived together. They were accompanied by D] imi and
Loubarisa. Thirteen of the Frenchmen went to Smara with Colonel Abrouk a
week before the attack and stayed there almost 5 hours. They were in
civilian clothes. But Abrouk himself told me who they were. 0n the other
hand. they're presently specially preparing a hotel in Goulimine to house
Egyptian officers."

Mohamed Ali then related what happened at the two meetings of the Commission
on Borders and Usurped Territories which he attended. The first took place
after the Tan-Tan attack and was chaired by the King himself. hassan ll
talked for an hour and a half. lie said Morocco had been shaken by Tan—Tan.
"The Horoccans have now learned that there is a real war on. This war." he
said. "is costing us a lot. It is a war of attrition. conducted by mercen-
aries. and one which has put our army out of condition to meet a real attack.
In addition. it has given rise to so many debts-—which are now coming due--
that it is impossible to do more. In the event of attack. it is certain
that the enemy will have many more resources than we do, because there is
not only Algeria and the POLISARIO but also Libya." That's a sumary of
the king's statements.

The second meeting. which took place after the attack on Birenzarane (which
followed the occupation of Dalthla on 5 August), was chaired by the prime
minister. He talked about the military situation. which was had. and about
relations with Mauritania after its withdrawal from the joint agreement.

Yasri. deputy of the Socialist Union of Popular Forces party [USFP], spoke
“How could it happen," he asked, "that the 2,500 mercenaries who attacked
Birenzarane. according to your communique. were able to come unseen from
Tlndouf? And how could it happen. since you said that 500 were killed, that
the other 2.000 could leave again, taking with them 175 prisoners, whom the
POLlSARIO showed to the press, while we have not been able to show even a
single one?" He brought his speech to an end by stating that the occupation
of Dakhla had been an immune and useless act. The minister explained that
it was necessary to occupy Dakhla. a town close to Mauritania, because ["1
we had some complicities going on in that country which we could thus more
easily manipulate."

lh2
The Saharan deputy than talked about attempts to create an internal front
to mobilize the populations of the south. It involves nomadic populations
gathered together south of Agadir who are collected and organized into en-
camments'in the border zone between Horocco, Algeria and the Sahara. "The
men have received weapons and have been for-ed into amd groups which they
try to stir up against the POLISARIO Front to provoke a counterattuck by it
against these people. But it has not worked."

Hith regard to the general situation in Morocco, he said that the nation was

in total crisis. "The Moroccan people are suffering a lot. The king has

said that he was going to transforl the Sahara into a green paradise. There
were a lot of plans. promises and ministerial delegations. And that's been
going on every year for 6 years now. They appointed mayors to plan the de-
velopment of each town, even those which are completely empty. like Angela

or 'i‘ifar. They've collected a lot of Ioney from the Moroccan people supposedly

for the Saharan populations. But when I left Shara. nobody had yet seen a
dime of it."

9550
(ISO: 4400

113
'APS' INTERVIEWS POLISARIO SECRETARY m1.
[.0231920 Algiers APS in French 2008 GMT 22 Nov 79 Lb

[Excerpts] In an interview to APs, Mohamed Abdelasis, secretary general
of the MLISARIO Front, spoke, in the light of recent maneuvers of the
Moroccan nonarchy, of his pessi-isn as regards the "peaceful intentions"
of King Bassan at the next su-sit conference of the OAU ad hoc cosuittee
on 6 and 7 Decedaer in Monrovia.

Question: Hill the SDAR be represented at the suit of the OAU ad hoc
cosaaittee on 6 and 7 Decoder in Honrovia?

Answer: Yes, the SBA]! will be present. He have received an official invi-
tstion from the chainan-in-office of the OAU to take part.

Question: What will the work agenda co-ittee be?

Answer: The agenda is known. It is the text of the resolution of the 16th
OAU sunnit held in Monrovia. The comittee [word indistinct] by the African
heads of state can discuss only the application of the resolution of the
16th suuit, which stipulates that the return of peace to the region [words
indistinct] of legality. The restoration of the rights of the Saharan
people [words indistinct] any other agenda will be rejected by SDAR repre-
sentatives because we want to remain within the strict linits fixed by the
OAU.

Consenting on the possible presence of King Hassan in Monrovia, Mohamed
Abdelaziz said:

"there are two strong chances that he will go there, no so much out of
respect for the OAU and the states of our continent, but the world (2knows)
how Hassan despises our organisation and its representatives (Tan-Tan
conferences, etc....) Hassan will go to Monrovia under pressure iron the
United States [words indistinct], the latter to facilitate the military and
financial aid which it gives to Morocco, insist at all costs on reestablish-
ing the bridge between Haasan and the OAU. They do not want openly to stand
on the side of a regime that is totally isolated from the African continent,

1M
the ON), the nonalined countries and from all international [word indis-
tinct] comitted to justice and legality throughout the world. This ad
hoc conaaittee meeting will in fact be the touchstone for [word indistinct]
Hashington's intentions. (ﬁt) the United States really wants to concur
with the reestablishment of peace, it will help in respecting the resolu-
tions of the United Nat ions, the OAU and the nonalined countries."

As for the attitude of the Rabat regime, "Knowing the procedures adopted
by Horocco's king, we are inclined to believe there will be a new abusive
maneuver by the king of Morocco to divert the application of the resolu-
tion of the 16th OAU our-it. [Words indistinct] to receive all the U.S.
military aid that is expected, to promote Morocco's development toward
peace, and to rally somewhat the pardon of the OAU, which it [word indis-
tinct] slighted. and [word indistinct] new war dispositions in conplete
contradiction to the [word indistinct] of the international cmnity. This
conduct 7(correaponds) to the attitude (?dictated) to it by Haahington, to
the memorandum recently distributed to African chancelleries, intending to
present Horocco as no longer being a state in political and economic de-
composition, which in reality it is."

Question: 50 it is the United States which is directly and openly leading
the Moroccan gaae?

Answer: For the most part, yes. It only remains for ﬂassan to put his
stamp on this procedure. Here are some verifiable facts for understanding
that Horocco‘s presence at the work of the ad hoc committee is nothing but
a maneuver: [Passage omitted: History of llassan's crimes]

Question: What is the iQact of these tactics and what are their limits
within the OAU comittee?

Answer: They perpetuate destabilization in the region. slow down its
economic progress and threaten the security of the African continent. To
the OAU the case is clear and precise. None of the neighbor countries de-
mands any kind of sovereignty over Hestern Sahara or any part of it.
Mauritania, with whom he have signed a peace agreement, is favorable and
wishes to speed on the return of legality. The entire world knows what

the frontiers of our country are and the only invader today is Morocco,
whose armed forces occupy a nuber of positions in our territory. Finally,

the decision to reestablish the rights of our people is clear and precise.
Could one wish for a clearer case?

Question: 30, the issues for the return of peace in Western Sahara are
still the same for the SDAR?

Answer: Absolutely. Let the expansionist Moroccan forces withdraw from
our territory, let our people in exile and in the Moroccan prisons return
to their homes; then peace will be in every mouth and in every heart.
For (?it must not be) thought that we are melting war only for the pleasure
of proving the strength and determination of our people. We seek peace,
security, fraternity and mutual international assistance. We do not harbor
hatred against anybody; neither against the American people. which ir a
witness to the injustice which its government is emitting agaim‘ us.

nor against the French people, whose "Mirages" are tearing our children
apart, and even less against the Moroccan people, whose misc ‘y, fears and
submission to the police force eatabl ished by the king we deplore.

Question: King Hassan has ordered his armed forces to occupy Rio de Oro.
Hhst does this new maneuver mean, considering the Royal Armed Forces are
(?incspable) of protecting their own territory?

Answer: "This decision is indisputable evidence of the Moroccan king's
adventurism. The (?invasion) of the Rio de Oro has a double objective:
The first is to try and exert direct pressure on Mauritania, to divert it
from peace by placing on its borders armed units capable of seeking out
and attacking vital north-Mauritanian settlements. The second objective
complies with the king's overriding need to calm the anxiety of the coun-
tries which support him and of the Moroccan people."

Question: Does the king have any chance of succeeding in this attempt?

Answer: (?He has none), for it is precisely in the southern part of
Morocco that we are preparing to hit deepest into Morocco. The latest re-
sults achieved by our fighting units needs no cosanent, and the Royal Armed
Forces now hold only three defensive positions, which will fall soon.

Question: [Words indistinct] intermediary of (?the OAU) maintains con-
tacts with the POLISARIO Front?

Answer: The only contact was that of [words indistinct]. There have never
been any other contacts. If there have to be political contacts, it will
be only within the framework of the OAU and within the strict confines of
the decision taken by the OAU. In the meantime we offer it every day
several military contacts. But it does not appreciate those at all.
BRIEFS

POLISARIO ATTACK 0M BU CRAA--Hestern Sahara: A fresh military operation
by the FOLISARIO Front against Bu Craa has taken place. A communique
issued by the Saharan Defense Ministry says the attack enabled our com-
batants--I quote--to storm several positions occupied by the Moroccan
tro0ps. The operation resulted in 32 dead and some 40 wounded among the
monarchist armed forces. The operation, says the communique, had been
particularly directed at the forces guarding the conveyor belt of the Bu
Craa mines. Other operations have also been mounted by the Saharans in
the last few days, particularly against Louinet. Lensid and Guelta Zemnnur.
[Text] [LDZBIOOO Algiers Domestic Service in French 2300 GMT 27 Nov 79 Lb]

SUCCESSES 0F POLISARIO TRO0P5--The special reporter of the paper AL-SAHRA'
AL-MURRAH says that for the last 3 days the Saharan fighters have encircled
the Moroccan garrison in Najab on the southern bank of Oeuad Draa south

of Morocco. The reporter adds that the Moroccan batsllion is paralysed

and the garrison is being subjected to a barrage of artillery uud machine-
gun fire. The Saharan journalist says the four Moroccan batallions BCL'
tioned temporarily near Adsah, which is at least 20 km from Najab, could
not move towards the encircled post because of floods on the river bra and
the fact that all roads are under the control of the POLISARIO Front forces.
The reporter goes on to say that the royslist troops refused to fight,
especially after the shooting down of the two F-l aircraft of the Moroccan
forces. and that the fall of the town of Mahbes to the Saharan fighters
completely destroyed the morale of the Moroccan soldiers. The reporter
says that lag, the biggest Moroccan military base in the south of Morocco.
has also been encircled for 3 days by the forces of the Saharan people's
army and that the encircled Moroccan forces in Zag have not received any
relief forces in the past 10 days. [Text] [LD30103S Algiers Domestic
Service in Arabic 0001 GMT 30 Nov 79 LD]

650: £600 END

1M7