APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/00: ClA-RDP02-00050R000200030006-1
Near East/ North Africa Report

Nb.2053

Fans FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE
NOTE

JPRS publications contain infatuation prinrily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also froa news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material 'enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by ms. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original inforamtion was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was si-arized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed n parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

‘lhe contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the u.s. Government.

PROCU'RMNT 0? PUBLICATION

JPRS publications may be ordered from the National Technical
Information Service, Springfield, Virginia 22161. In order-
ing, it is race-sanded that the ms masher, title, date and
author, if applicable, of publication be cited.

Current JPRS publications are announced in Covert-tent Reports
Announcements issued semi-monthly by the National Technical
Information Service, and are listed in the )bnthlz Catalog of
0.3. Covert-ant Publications issued by the Superintendent of
Documents, u.s. Government Printing Office. Hashington, n.c.
20402.

Indexes to this report (by keyword, author, personal names,
title and series) are available from Bell 6 Howell, Old
Mansfield Road, Wooster, Chio M691.

Correspondence pertaining to nnttsrs other than procurement
may be addressed to Joint Publications Research Service,
1000 North Glebe Road, Arlington, Virginia 22201.
IMHO

NEAR EAST/NORTH AFRICA REPORT. NO. 2053 ‘ December 1979

 

 

 

 

 

1. M l. m M“ last. '00
..--..~...............~....~ m
Joint Publications Research Service
1000 North Glebe Road In. cum a mm m
Arlington. Virginia 22201 .0
m
'12—;omnWNu-oum Ia!muﬁiwc;«

II. Suede-mm

 

_—__.—__

it. “not! (now M“

This aerial report contains intonation on aocioecononic, governnent, political,
and technical developments in the countries of the Near East and North Africa.

I]. Dorm Mun-I 0 MW
I P--lit ical Science __x__1nter- Arab Affairs __Libya ___Sultanate

 

 

Sociology _ﬂorth African ___Hauritania of Oman
Economics Af faita Jﬂorocco ___Syria
Culture (Social __Afghaniataa _Peopla'a Deno- __'runiaia
Sciencea) JAlgeri a cratic Republic __United Arab

Ethnology __aahrain of Yuan hirates
Geography _Bsypt _Persian Gulf _x_weatern Sahara
Techological Juan Area __Yenen Arab
Hilitary Sciencea 41!“! _Qatar Republic

_Iarael _Saudi Arabia

_Jordan __Spaniah North

__luvait Africa

___bebanoo __Sudao

u mun/Mm Vanna

c. mum SD, SC. SI, 15

_ --._———. ..———__.— .___.—_ _-.. _..__T _ .._-...-. .._

n. M an. an. nus-m u. no. u n..-
“Uh II t valllbility MMSSIHED 65
Sold by NTIS '_——_— ﬂ ' 7.;-
Springfield, Virginia 22161 "mu‘é'a‘ia"? "
menu-nan. ~Mum WWW-“MW”

UM M”)
worm
NEAR EAST/NORTH AFRICA REPORT

No. 2053

CONTENTS

INTER-ARAB AFFAIRS

PAGE

Success of Palestinian Diplomacy Said To Abrogate Need for Violence

(Editorial, Fu'ad Matar; AL—HUSTAQBAL, 27 Oct 79) ..... ..

Pm Political Office Chief Discusses Palestinian Question
(Abu Latif Interview; AL-NAHADI-IH. 26 Oct 79)..... ......

AWERIA

IRAN

IRAQ

Ait Laoussine Calls for Regulsr. Planned Increases in Oil Prices

(AN-NAHAR ARAB REPORT 6 11250.5ro 79).................

Khoneyni's Son Enters Embassy, Gives News Conference
(EITBIA'AT, 6 Nov 79)

Esfahsn Prosecutor Accuses English Hospital of Espionage
(Km, 11 NOV 79)-ooooooooos-sssoonoosnoo-oo-oosoooess

Currency of Rumors Against Revolutionary leaders Deplored
(Ayatollah Hsksren Shirazi; KEN. 8 Nov 79). . . . . . . . . . .

Revolutionary Council Member Poresee; End of Big Landownership
(Ayatollah Dr Bahonsr Interview; mm'n. 10 Nov 79)..

Ayatollah Nontazeri Attacks Iraqi 'G-zndsme Policy'
(mm, 3Nov 79)......................................

Foreign Minister Discusses Iraq's Policy
(Ss'dun Hansdi Interview; AL-THAHRAH, 21 0:": 79).......

1

11

ll.

16

18

21

210

29
CONTENTS (Continued)

MOROCCO

Students Release Communique Protesting Aggression. Expulsions
(ALPﬂUHARRIR, 20 Oct 79)................................

Arrest Campaign Against USFP Activists in Algeria Denounced
(ALPHUHARRIR, 24 Oct 79)................................

WESTERN SAHARA

Interview With POLISARIO's Nur-al-Din Ahmad 'Ali
(Various sources. 10. 18 Oct 79)........................

Military Situation, Nur-al-Din Ahmad 'Ali Intervlew
Mediation Efforts, Nur-al-Din Ahmad 'Ali Interview

POLISARIO Representative in Spain Raps Spanich Stand on Sahara
(Ahmed Boujari; HUNDO OBRERO, 12 Oct 79)................

Former Moroccan Deputy Said To Have Good Information on Sahara
(Felix Rayon; EL PAIS, 16 Oct 79).......................

Background. Current Sahara Situation Reviewed
(Qusayy Salih al-Darwiah; ALPDUSTUR, 8-1& Oct 79).......
SUCCESS 01' PALBST'J‘IAN DIPLOMCY SAID '10 “MAT! NEED FOR VIOLENCE
Peril WUQML in Arabic 27 Oct 79 pp 26-27
[Editorial by l’u'ad Hater]

[Text] Diplolecy end diplmte have fallen to the lot of the Paloetinian
revolution, and thie diplonacy in recent nonthe hae nade aono eparkling
achiev-ente. with nore ahead to be achieved.

The thing that in helping Paleetinian diplonacy to lake theee achieve-ante
ie that ita non are activiata on behalf of a najor ieeue, not to nation
being participate in faahioning Pnloetinian policy. not neroly the onee
who carry it out. Their being participate in deciaion-nalting givee

the- fleribility in give-and-take and etrencth in negotiation.

hrthernore, the nethode of the Paleetinian revolution'e leader, Yeeeer
'Arafat. in dealing with the Arab nationa hae elininated through Palatinian
diplonacy the reaervatione of the world'e nations. on whoee doore the
Liberation Organization in knocking. requeeting reconeideration of a
poeition or poaitione. Auetrie was not upeet by the fact that ite official
reception of Yaeeer 'Arafat caused the Arab natione to be anry. nor wae
Spain opeet either. Hhen 'Arafet viaite France. the French nation will

be confident that all Aral-e. excepting Preeident Anwar Sedet. will be
pleaaed by ite reception of Abu 'A-ar. m French doore are opened to
the leader of the Paleatiuian revolution. other doore will open in Europe.
and everyone will be conﬁdent that they will not thereby provoke dieeen-
eion between the Arab natione and the Paleetiniane.

‘lhe noderation of theee countriee upon whoee doore Paleetinien diplonacy
haa knocked, or the conntriee whoee doore will be knocked upon in the
future, night not be an plentiful ae the Palestinian epoheuan favore,
bot theee conntriee prefer thie nethod of give and take to the nethod of
liatening to the Paleetinian voice through operationa in the air or on
land or eea. This does not mean that the neth to which we refer hee
not achieved ite goal. 0n the contrary, it wee one of the Ieene of
applying pressure which was useful in opening those doors cloud to
Palestinian diplonscy and which led through give and take with it to the
situation's new substance and conclusions.

Just as the goal of Arab diplonocy was to persuade the United States to
reconsider sooe things in its policy regarding Israel. the goal toward
which Palestinian diploaacy strives is to get the Ansrican adninistration
to acknowledge the right of the Palestinian people to deteraine their own
fate and to establish their own state. He do not know whether the result
of the Palestinian effort with respect to this nattor will he the one
result toward which the Arabs are heeded. The Anorican pouition is so for
still not what the Arabs want; it only takes into account Israel's
security and Israel's danands. The reason for a lack of radical change in
the Anerican position night he that the Arch oil weapon has not been used
as e ooans to force the berican odninistration to reconsider its position
as the Arabs would like.

The inportance of the Palestinian diplonatic activity is that it allows
the Palestinian revolution to converse directly with others instead of a
dialogue through a third party. It can talk with Austria directly in-
stead of an Arab party undertaking discussions with Austria. and it can
reach an understanding with Spain on broad outlines instead of an Arab
quarter being delegated to do that. It is dealing with ‘Iurkey instead of
through a third party.- and it is in a dialogue with Prsnce. the nation.
directly. instead of the dialogue being through an Arab party or through
French friends of the Palestinian revolution or french political forces
allied with this revolution.

we say this while taking into account that the third party. who was a
proxy for the Palestinian revolution in the dialogue or conversation or
give and take. was sincere and did that out of zeal for the Palestinian
revolution and not with the sin of defuing this inego. however. there
are judg-onto which the third party cannot consent to without consul-
tation with the Palestinian revolution. whereas the direct contact guar-
antees saving tins, or rather conserving efforts.

It night he said that the power of Arab diplonacy is concealed in the
fact that it possesses a weapon which strengthens its ergusnts and logic.
and helps to inpose certain conditions at tines or to obtain any duonds
at other tines. The weapon that we neon is the oil weapon which sons
have. the nonetary weapon which sons others have. the weapon of strategic
location which others have. and the weapon of support of the Soviet Union
which a considerable “her have.

Saying soosthing like this is realistic. but Palestinian diploeacy in
turn has an effective weapon like the oil weapon. the nonetary weapon. and
the rest of the various kinds of weapons possessed by Arab diplolocy. The
Palestinian weapon that we noan is the weapon of violence represented by
the operations which were the object of resistance of sons countries and
which despite their legality and the Palestinian'a right to carry the-
out, were suspended tnporarily. since no one should need further evidence.
‘lhe suspending of these ailitary operations does not seen that the
Palestinian revolution has got to the point of wearing a riding coat and
velvet gloves instead of e checkered kaffiyeh. and carrying dossiers in
its hands instead of e kaleshnihov. Because that is not the supposition.
it is sufficient to say that the decisions of the diplonetic initiative
are debated in the nilitary operations rooe. i.e.. that this roan is
continuously ready for every contingency for which it was established in
the first place.

Returning to carrying out military operations. objected to by the nations
at which the Palestinian diplonatic initiative is einsd. the nonetary
weapon. the weapon of strategic location. and the weapon of support of
the Soviets in the area. It is certain that the nations which have begun
a new era of diplonetic dealings with the Palestinian revolution will
nova as quickly as possible. in the event of the Palestinian revolution's
being forced to return to the use of that weapon. to see that that does
not happen. At the present tine. the effort would not he conparable to
the effort which would acco-peny sons of the oil netions' alluding to the
use of the oil weapon. But with the expansion of its area, it would be-
cne like that.

Furthermore. reliance on diploeatic effort on the part of the Palestinian
revolution would of itself constitute an experinental situation for the
revolutionary leadership on the pursuit of diploaatic activity, aside fron
achieving a requisite balance in the present stage. Bow?

Let us take as an exanpla what one of the nost proninent ailitary leaders
of the Palestinian revolution did a few days ago. He lean Ahu Jihad. who
for a 2-year period during the Lebanese war led operations of satrens
inportance. A few days ago. froa ‘reheren where he was visiting, Ahu
Jihad n-oned the directors of the no offices in .the Gulf states to

'reheren and held a nesting with th-. (xviously that was as if Cyrus
Vance went to Athens, s_oned the United Statee' enbessadors in the
Middle East and held a conference with thn to discuss certain inportent
issues before waking sons decision or other. 0: it was also as if the
French foreign ainister or the Japanese foreign ainister or the Chinese
foreign ainister did the sens thing.

(bviously the natter is being' done without sensitivities. which Insane

that what Abu Jihad did was supposed to be done by Abu al-Letif. Such
sensitivities as these continually arise when the dipluacy is traditional.
Since the Palestinian diploeacy is revolutionary diploeacy. all of the
leadership is able to stay clear of bureaucracy and the peculiarities of
positions, became it is sealous in its goal, especially since the returns
of any success is ultilstely for the revolution and not for a person.
hperinents such as these are necessary as long as the story of the
Palestinian state increases and crystallizes with each success achieved
by Palestinian diplonscy, and as long as "revolutionaries" becoee trans-
forned into "statesnen."

This is the experimental aspect. As regards the question of balance, it
can be said that diploeetic effort achieves a flexibility and neutrality
that is inpossible for nilitary effort to achieve. with nilitary effort.
the revolution can only deal with those who supply it with assistance and
arns. But with diploeatic effort. it can be active in reaching those who
are not only not giving assistance but also those who are taking positions
against the Palestinian revolution. As an maple, in the sphere of
nilitary effort, the Palestinian revolution could be inclined toward the
Soviet Union, the socialist countries, and certain friendly nations. But
with diplonatic effort. it can be active in a direction which gains
positions in countries opposed to it, such as the United States and certain
European nations.

A siniler problsn rensina regarding usees, about which the following
question could be raised: What is it that prevents the Palestinian revo-
lutionary leaders froe appearing with non-operational nanes?

Operational nanes such as Abu Jihad, Abu s1~Lstif , Abu el-liasan, etc., were
dictated by the circuestances of revolutionary nilitsry activity. But in
this stage of diplonatic effort, it would not danege these leaders a bit
to appear with noraal nsnes and not with operational nanes. especially
since they as diplonats will not put the checkered kaffiyah on their heads.
nor cartridges and pistol around their waists. nor will they carry a
nachinegun in their hands.

There is a basic sission before Palestinian diploescy. and we believe that
it is capable of it. It is to convince the ale-ants of the revolution
that the solution lies not only with the nouth of a rifle. but also with
diplonatic flexibility free: which co-uniquss are not issued but only joint
state-ents, press statements. and recognitions.

He say this on the basis that there is sons tacit constraint prevailing
over these elusnts. and a little explanation should enable Palestinian
diplomacy to continue its efforts until victory.

7005
cs0: 6802
PM) POLITICAL OFFICE cam DISCUSSBS PALESTINIAN QUESTION

London AL-BAHADITB in Arabic 26 Oct 79 pp 23-29

[Interview with Abu Latif (Paruq al-Qsdduni), chief of the political
office of the no. by Badi al-Bueayni in Paris. date not given]

[Text] Abu al-Lstif (Psruq al Qedduni), holds the post of Palestinian
foreign ninister, although his official title is chief of the political
office in the Palestine Liberation Organization. He conducts hinself on
this basis, especially in his repliee and the selection of his words.
Ahu al-Latif spent only 26 hours in Perie, while returning fro- havane
and the United Nations. enroute to Beirut or to "the nation" to use his
ten. timer. he did not neat with a single French official, except at

the United Natione. he did neat with the French foreign sinister, Francois-
Poncet. who told hie that France was very interested in finding a solution
for the Lebanese problaa. Rather, he esid that his French colleague
insisted on telling his. during the nesting of the two in New York. that
France was studying the adoption of decisive and pro-pt action to solve
the lebeneee crisis.

AL-WADITB net Abu al-Lstif in Paris and put sone questions to hill about
the talk and speculation in diploaatic circles meaning the stages through
which the Palestinisne are passing in attaining their desire of a
Palestinian state. This was the dialogue:

[Question] the Austrian chancellor. Bruno Kreisky. suggeeted recently
that a confederated state between Palestine and Israel was the only
solution to the Middle last question. Do you consider this a step back-
ward by Kreisky fron his previous positions?

[Answer] Pron the beginning we have stressed that we want n independent
Palestinian state. Therefore this is not the problna. The prohl- is the
withdrawal of Israeli forces froa occupied Palestinian and Arab land.

This is what we think.

[motion] But the independent Palestinian state which you damn would
inevitably be an open-border state with Israel!
[Answer] An independent state scene that it has in fact the right to
enact the laws and regulations it wishes. As long as it is independent.

it has the right to do this. and those who run this state are responsible
for its relations with all the other states.

[Question] There are those who dsnand a desilitarized Palestinian state,
end sane who say that Israel is afraid that this state would becone a
Soviet base. The Anerican President Carter stated awhile ago that sons
of the Arab leaders do not want a Palestinian state.

[Answn] All the "words and speeches" said in the U" by the Arab nations
stressed the necessity of establishing an independent Palestinian state.

'ihis refutes what President Carter said. Undoubtedly it is the right of

such a state to have the any it wants.

As for it's becosing a Soviet base, the PLO is of the view, and there is
absolutely nothing that would influence it, that we consider the Soviets
as our friends, just as we consider non-aligned states, African states.

and others.

[Question] There are contacts underway between Palestinians and Israeli
officials: Moshe Dayan. the foreign ninister, net with certain PLO
supporters along the Palestinian personalities on the West Bank. Also
it was reported that contacts took place abroad. what is the purpose of
these contacts?

[Answer] Re have no infornation regarding contacts underway between
Israelis and Palestinians outside the borders of our occupied land. As
regards internally. undoubtedly our people there are under occupation and
are unable to say no. However. these contacts. according to the responses
of the Palestinian brothers who undertook thu. were clear and called for
an independent Palestinian state. the right of self-deternination. and
rejection of the two Celp David agreenents.

[Question] But a few days ago a seeting took place in Bone. during the
"Peace in the Middle East" council, between Pm representative Dr Abad
Sidqi al-Dajani and the Israeli delegate Yuri Afniri?

[Answer] No "direct nesting" has occurred between PLO senbers and Israelis.
I have no knowledge of it. In any case, such a neetiu as this never
happened. Al-Dajani has denied such contacts as these.

[Question] What has been the reprecussions and effects on world public
opinion froe PLO head Abu 'AI-ar's visits to certain European nations?

[Answer] Certainly they were positive political steps with regard to
our relations with the European nations. They had a good effect in the
international arena and in world political circles.
[Question] In your view, will France, the state. refuse to invite Abu
'A-er to visit it?

[Answer] The case is not a case of rejection. but it is a question of
ties. Hhen could such a nesting take place? This is the basis for that.

and there is no other. especially rejection.

[Question] It was reported that the seating of French President Valerie
Giscard d'Bstaing and Abu 'An-ar will take place in Kuwait during the

French president's visit there?

[Answer] There is no objection to brother Abu 'A-ar and President d'Bstaing

nesting anywhere. This would be one of a series of neetings which we hold
in several Arab countries whenever sone western friends visit Denescus or

Kwait or Saudi Arabia or Iraq or any other country.

[Question] But will Abu 'Allar accede to the French Co-Iuaist Party's
imitation and visit France?

[Answer] He hes not so far decided this question. but it has been accepted
in principle. It has been left to tins to make an appropriate decision.

[Question] Sons say that if Abu 'Anar conplies with the French Co-unist
Party‘s invitation, he will lose the support of a large part of French

public opinion.

[Answer] Every nan has an opinion regarding that. but as I said nothing
has as yet been decided. This question is still under study.

[Question] Let's turn to Iaebanon. The United States through its secretary
of state is talking about the need to end the Lebanese problem. Also
France. How do you see the Lebanese problen being solved?

[Answer] The solution to the Lebanese question will cone firstly through
Lebanese accord. There is no doubt also that it is up to the Arab states
and all the Arab brothers to share in solving this bloody crisis. The
caning Arab su-Iit conference will discuss the Lebanese question. in

addition to other cases.
[Question] Other cases. such as the Western Sahara issue for sample?

[Answer] I don't know if the Sahara case is on the conference agenda or
whether sons of the nations will raise this issue.

[Question] Do you believe that it is possible to hold an Arab emit
conference. or in the possibility of its success. especially since the
bilateral disputes along the Arab nations are intensifying?

[Answer] It is true that Arab disputes are worsening and nultiplying,
but this is not the only tine in which Arab disputes prevail. For my
years past there have been disputes such as these, and Arab su-it
conferences were held successfully to acne degree.

[Question] Have you set with any French official this tine?

[Answer] I an in France for only 2‘ hours on ey way to Beirut. I have
not set with any French official. However I did neat the French foreign
minister, Prancois-Poncet. in haw York during the UH session. The basic
conversation between us centered stand the Lebanese probl- end around the
positive political developmentsmhich the Palestinian case has encountered.

[Question] Please clarify this further.

[Answer] the basic French views and concerns are aimed at the necessity
of offering s specific end proept initiative to solve the Lebanese crisis.

[Question] "111 you cooperate with France in this regard?

[Answer] This scene France is the basic elensnt. then the Arab nations.
He will help, within our capabilities, to offer the necessary assistance
for that.

[Question] You stand at the side of the Iranian revolution. "Abu Jihad"
soeetine ago told AL-IIAHADI'I'B: "we will defend the Gulf oil." It is
well known that the new regine in Iran has begun to threaten to "occupy"
none of the Gulf states. how will you, as the PLO. arrange your positions
so as not to dalage one of the two parties?

[Answer] Ayatollah Khoeeyni is the Iranian revolution's nuber one leader.
Fe has not nade any such statanants as these in the past. but rather he
has stressed at every opportunity his strong feelings that this gulf
should he an Islamic gulf. We have not heard fron him personally any
stat-ants about annexing eons of the Arab portions to Iran. Without
doubt. not-mi ia the chief official and is the policy aeker in Iran. he
is the first and last authority, and we only rely on the words and state-
seats of Ayatollah moneyni.

[Question] But, regarding the gulf. he insists on calling it Persian.
[Answer] 0n the contrary. he has called it the Islamic Gulf and is

"opposed" to calling it the Persian Gulf. he did that in order to avoid
crisis.

[Question] But his foreign sinister, Ibrahin Yasdi, insists that the gulf
is Persian.

[Answer] I have not heard that! I have set his foreign ninister and
heard no such thing froe his.
[Question] th have you not approved entering into mediation to put an
end to the continuing war in Kurdestan. although it is said your relations
with the Kurds are good?

[Answer] we do not interfere in the internal affairs of any country if
it is a brother or a friend.

[Question] Are you still betting on the success of the Iranian revolution?

[Answer] There is no doubt that the Iranian revolution is a successful
revolution. but it needs tine to stabilise. All revolutions in the world

have faced the sane difficulties and obstacles.

[Question] now do you interpret the Soviet Union's recent position when
Chaimn Leonid Brezhnev announced. during his visit to East Ger-any. the
withdrawal of 20,000 troops and 1000 tanks?

[Answer] It was an initiative on behalf of world peace and a lessening
of tension in the world. No doubt the withdrawal of these forces free
Europe will lessen the degree of tension in Europe itself.

Moreover, that will be reflected positively on cube. because the United
States has escalated the crisis of Soviet forces in Cuba. knowing that
these forces were there for years and are few in number.

In fact, after that, President Carter stated: "Let us forget the question
of Soviet forces in Cuba."

[Question] "hat is your view of President Carter?

[Answer] If we were allowed to talk about Carter's policy. we would say
that it is s vscillsting policy. we gauge that with respect to ourselves.
Frequently he has sada autumn and then changed th- by other state-
sents. Ba has taken stands and then changed than with baffling speed.

[Question] Do you think it is possible for hie to he reelected?

[Answer] I don't know, but it is certain that there is a struggle within
the United States among the Denocrats thnselves on the one hand. and
between the Duocrsts and Republicans on the other. The toning nonths

will show who will be the «meat candidate for the Aaericen presidency.
0

[Question] Has Ahu 'Ansr's Iediation between Morocco and Algeria failed?

[Ansmr] Ahu 'A-ar has not undertaken any ssdiation between Algeria and
Horocco. Beaver. we were constantly ready. because we are nediators
between any two "quarreling" Arab factions. In any case. I don't know
whether there is nedistion or not.
[Quostion] Bvoryono in Morocco says that it in privato nodiation, and
that it cano aftor Egypt announced giving military support to Morocco.

[AnoworI Prooidont Sadat statod that he would oftor am to Morocco.
Thio is all I m. Howovor, I havo no infomtion as to whothor Aha
'A-aar has undertakon any oodiation bstwoon Algoria and Morocco.

[Quostion] “hot is the stotuo of tho invostigation rogarding tho nurdor
of Zuhoyr Mohson‘!

[Answer] It in still undorway, but I havo not how infomd about it.
bocouoo I havo boon away fro- "tho nation" for ooro than 40 days, during
which tino I was in Havana and thou Now York.

7005
680: 10802

10
AIT LAOUSSINE CALLS FOR REGULAR, PLANNED INCREASES IN OIL PRICES
Paris AN-NAHAR ARAB REPORT 6 MEMO in English 5 Nov 79 pp 11, 12

[Text] Nordine Ait Laoussine, former Secretary-General of Algeria's state
hydrocarbons group Sonatrach, has for several years been arguing the need
for regular, planned increases in the price of oil. In its simplest form,
the argument runs as follows: the alternative to planned price rises is

to let the market dictate; this will mean a scramble for supplies every

time there is a supply shortage, sudden and iamaging jumps in price. fol-
lowed by periods of glut during which the real price will decline. Sudden

jumps in price hurt the consumer nations, while the erosion of their oil
earnings hurts the exporters.

In a paper to the Vienna OPEC seminar. Hr Laoussine reviewed events over
the past two years, since he last attended such a meeting and advocated an
annual rise in oil prices of 5 per cent in real terms, "As you know, the
market approach prevailed and won," he said. "The glut we created, pur-
posely or inadvertently. did its job... That level of price which was
laboriously set at Doha in December 1976 lasted in fact two years... At
the end of 1978 the real price of oil, expressed in 1976 dollars, had been
allowed to fall well below the $7 per bbl floor price which the IRA itself
claimed back in 1975 was the minimum level required to encourage the
development of additional non-OPEC energy supplies."

The first effect was to incite the consumer nations to relax conservation
efforts and the search for alternative energy sources. The second, Hr
Laoussine implies, was that the consumers allowed stocks to dwindle, so
that when the Iranian disruption began in late 1978, there was a scramble
for supplies. "The combined effect of a severe winter. unusually low
inventories and uncertainty over Iranian production sparked the upward
price spiral." There was also the "inevitable temptation (for producers)
to divert contract oil supplies onto the spot market and capitalise on
higher prices. In less than six months, prices increased by 60 per cent.
Looking at historical differentials, the real marker crude, assuming there
is still one. is well above $20 today."

11
The turmoil of the past year "is the result of the simple law of supply
and demand." Hr Laoussine states. If the market is allowed to continue
operating what he terms "this futile cycle of apparent surplus followed
by supply crises," the result will be "an awkward series of falls and
jumps (in price). always demonstrating the efficiency of the market sys-
tem in responding, after the event. to a foreseeable problem."

The market, he asserts, "is nothing more than the expression of the balance
of power between producers and consumers" at any given moment.

Authoritative sources have already predicted a glut for next year and it is
not hard to see why. The 60 per cent rise in prices over a very short
period will mean renewed conservation efforts and lower economic activity.
This will of course dampen demand. Growth in demand between this year and
next will be at most 2 per cent, Hr Laoussine predicts. bringing world
demand to 65 million b/d; non-OPEC gas and oil production is likely to

rise from 35 to 36 million b/d, leaving OPEC with a production share of
about 29.5 million b/d.

Moreover, the consumer nations have virtually replenished their stocks and
can start drawing on these early next year. OPEC, which is currently pro-
ducing about 31 million b/d. would be able to cut output to about 27 million
b/d by mid-1980, he states.

This is why it is important to exercise "production restraint." Hr Laoussine
says. If market forces are allowed to operate, falling demand will first
affect the producers of the higher-priced oils, setting in motion a price-
slashing war. Producers can only be expected to cut output if their real
earnings are protected. which is why the price of oil auat at least be
maintained in real terms after the end-of-year OPEC meeting in Caracas.

In conclusion. Hr Laoussine states that oil prices must be at least main-
tained in real terms, that price differentials must be realigned, OPEC must
agree now to coordinate production restraint and the consumers must refrain
from putting pressure on OPEC for a price freeze.

But. he goes on. these are merely the strategies to face up to a short-term
problem. In the second half of his paper, Hr Laoussine discusses the

requirements for a "smooth transition to the essentially coal-based economy
of the let century."

His premises are, he says. uncontroversial: that the development of alter-
native energy sources implies long lead times and heavy investment; con-
ventional crude pricesarewell below the replacement cost of other energy
sources, and therefore oil prices will go on rising. Since economists
agree that it is the speed of oil price rises, rather than their magnitude.
which damages the economies of the consumer nations, a "common strategy"

is needed for the transition period.

12
The first step, Mr Laoussine asserts, is to link price and production so as
to eliminate the wide variations in OPEC output such as those experienced
after 1976.

The second is to plan increases in the price of oil until it reaches the
equivalent of that of replacement fuels. Mr Laoussine admits that it is
very difficult to assess this level--he suggests $30 a barrel in today's
dollars for synthetic crude--but points out that the price will differ for
the consumer and the producer.

“If OPEC countries are to justify to themselves a higher production rate
than that required to balance national expenditures. they should be expect-
ing to receive its:full replacement cost. The figure of $30 a barrel 1
have quoted earlier only applies to developed, industrialised countries
who have the technical, financial and human resources to manage these huge
and complex projects. For the majority of OPEC countries, the real cost

of replacing our oil reserves is going to be much higher."

A compromise must be reached between the lead times required to develop
the alternative sources and the depletion of OPEC's resources. Here, Hr
Laoussine suggests taking advantage of periods of high demand for crude

to raise prices so as to remove the temptation for OPEC members to increase
production.

Hr Laoussine concludes that a "common strategy" is necessary. because the
oil producers "are as guilty as the consuming countries in dealing with
world oil prices solely in terms of short-term political and economic
expediency." OPEC. he goes on, "cannot just sit and react to external
events such as inflation. currency depreciation and market conditions...
(it) should lead rather than follow the historical process uhich will
determine the shape of the oil market for the rest of the century.“

680: 5620

13
KHWEYNI'S son sums WASSY, GIVES NW3 CONFMNCE

‘l‘ehran amu'n in Pereian 6 Nov 79 p l2

/§rticle_:_ "American Induetriee in Iran Enrich Have Not Been Nationalized
Must Be?!

/_'l_'ex_t_/ At 1550 houre yesterday Hajj Seyyed Ahmad Khomeyni, the eon of
Emam Khomeyni, entered the American embaaey coupound and war received by
the atudenta. In their Proclamation No 9 Hoelem atudent followere of the
emem who had occupied the American embaeay the previous Sunday invited
Hojjatolealam Ahmed Khomeyni to join the atudenta in order to become in-
formed about the etete of effaire ineide the embaeey. Hajj Seyyed Ahmad
Khomeyni accepted the invitation and entered the Americen embeaey yeeter-
day afternoon.

At firat Hejj Ahmad Khomeyni waa to enter the enbaaay site from the much-
ern door, but wee obliged to go in through the eaatern door beceuae of the
extreme congestion of the crowd.

Inaide the embassy, Hajj Seyyed All-ad Khomeyni wae received by the atudenta
end Hojjatoleelam Hueevi Kho'eyni, who had been ateying with the ocCupying
atudente eince the day before.

Hojjetoleelam Seyyed Ahmad Khomeyni participated in a preee conference in
the American embaaey yeeterday afternoon end eaid: "I came here by invita-
tion of the brothare who follow the emam'a policy but I have not yet held
a diecuaaion with them."

He wae aaked about the emam'e meeeage to the atudenta and aid "The emem
declered hia meaaage in a meeting with the group which went to eee him to-
day.“ Concerning aupport for the etudente' meeaure of taking over the
Americen eebaeey, Seyyed Ahmad ntomeyni eaid "All the people of Iran eup-
port thia act."

Aeked if the em hed hed any knowledge of Mr Bazargan'e meeting with

Brzezineki, Ahmad Khmeyni eaid "Hot at all. and what the government epokee-
man haa atated in thie regard goee for Dr Yandi‘e meeting with the em."

16
Seyyed Ahmad Khomeyni added, "I was also present at the minister of foreign
affairs' meeting with the amen. Dr Yazdi just raised some matters concern-
the indisposition of the deposed Shah but there was no talk about bezargan's
meeting with Brzezinski."

Seyyed Ahmad Khomeyni refrained from expressing an opinion on the future of
Bazargan's govermnent. In answer to a question on whether American in-
dustries which have not been nationalized will be nationalized after the
recent events. he said "of course these industries mat be nationalized."

He was asked whether he had any previous information on the students' step
of taking over the American embassy in Tehran and said "no, not at all."
Asked about the purpose of. the trip by a high-ranking Iranian political del-
egation to Algeria, Seyyed Ahmad Khomeyni replied "what is to be taken for
granted is that the emam knew that the prime minister had been invited to
Algeria to take part in the celebration of the anniversary of the beginning

of that country's revolution and that Hr Bazargan would go to Algeria. Ba-
yond this, the seam knew nothing."

Regarding Iran's relations with America, Ahmad Khomeyni said "If America's
role in its relations with Iran resembled those the government of Austria
has with Iran, what harm would there be in it?" lie pointed out, "informa-
tion has been received that agents from the CIA and the Hossad (the American
and Israeli intelligence organizations) intend to take over other embassies,
such as those of Syria and Britan, but I can stress that no other embassies
met be occupied-mot even the British one." Concerning the students'
measure following the emam's policy, he said "In my opinion the students'
measure is not to be considered one of occupying the American embassy;
rather, our brave youths have taken over a nest of espionage in order to
throw out the occupiers "

Ahmed Khomeyni was asked "Has Iran supported Palestine sufficiently" and
said "The emam has defended Palestine l00 percent. The emam's support is
so great that he has eaplicitly recomended that everyone met unite. join
hands, extirpate Israel and replace it with Palestine. The other countries
only mention this recountndation on Palestine as an organisation when it

is raised under certain conditions."

11357
C80: 6906

15
BSPAHAN PROSECUTOR ACCUSBS ENGLISH HOSPITAL OF BSPIONAGB

Tehran WK in Persian ll Nov 79 p l

IZrticle: "Declaration by Bsfshan Revolutionary Islaeic Public Pgoeecutor:
The English Hospital in Isfahan "as a Base for Western Espionsge_’_'/

llexy' In publishing an announce-ant and listing the reasons for the ex-
propriation of the Christian Hospital in Bsfahan, known as the English
Hospital, the Bsfehan Revolutionary Islamic Public Prosecutor declared
that this hospital had assumed the guise of the West's best espionage base.

In the Bsfshan Revolutionary Tsianic Public Prosecutor's statement, it was
declared that: "On 31 October, after repeated warnings to hospital of-
ficials, the Bsfahen Revolutionary Islamic Court held a meeting in absentia,
and, with sufficient cause and documentation, exproprieted the hospital and
the movable and innovable assets connected to it."

A suumary of the evidence the Bsfahan Revolutionary Islamic Court presented
is as follows: .

"According to existing evidence and witnesses, the Christian Hospital was

a nest of espionage for the benefit of foreigners against the nasses of

Iran. Supporting this view are sheet 17 of the file bearing on the hospital,
concerning the use of bugging equipment and eavesdropping on telephone con-
versations, and sheet 68 of Bafahan Savak file number 6,327 stating that all
hospitals and churches were used by the 'intelligence service.‘

"2. The hospital was a center for training and a 'diasecting room' for in-
experienced doctors and foreign students, more than a treatnent center, and
people very often lost their lives at the hands of these individuals. This
is high treason and cannot be pardoned by any logic.

"3. Following the fall of the regime, the hospital's Iranian euployees
were not prepared to cooperate with the foreigners. For this reason a com-
mittee of guardians consisting of the representative of the Islamic Revolu-
tionary Court, the Public Health Department, hospital euployeas, the office
of the governor general and highly respected persons from the neighborhood
took charge of administering the hospital's activities alongside the other
eqloyees.

16
"lo. The hospital building, and other buildings connected to it, were con-
structed by Iranian individuals whose eepionage and subservience have been
irrefutably confirmed and established by existing documents, and the prop-
erty of most of these people has been expropriated on behalf of the down-

trodden. The murals and mosaics of the hospital support this view.

"5. Three and a half million tomans were received in aid from Public
Health, and about the same amount from the municipality, the Oil Coupeny,
Dr Eqbal and Farah, for the construction of the new section. This aid
shows the connection between the agents in charge of the hospital and the
previous regime and it also establishes how they spent millions of touans
on a private institution while our poor masses had other fundamental needs.
It also states the fact that the hospital was built through the budget of
the downtrodden people of Iran.

"6. The activities of the agents in charge were not only contemtuous of
Christ---on whom be God's peace--the hospital also developed into a center
of anti-Islamic activities and wee transformed into a base for the corrup~
tion of our Hoslem youths.

"7. Bad supervision of the hospital resulted in huge sums being spent from
the budget on poisonous anti-Islamic propaganda, the construction of un-
necessary buildings and the purchase of luxury accessories for the personal
use of hospital agents-mot on the purchase of necessary equipment for out-
fitting the hospital."

The Esfahan Revolutionary Islamic Court's statement added "In the light of
the above evidence, the former Christian and now Islamic Revolutionary
Hospital, with all its movable and immovable assets, such as the Iran-tour
Hotel and the Sons of Islamic Lew lands, including the related housing and
the rest, is being expropriated on behalf of the downtrodden, and its for-
eign staff, and the staff connected with foreign countries, are being re-
moved. The board of trustees is charged with providing responsible, mana-
gerial persons who believe in the Islamic revolution to administer its
affairs.

In this statement, with respect to hospital land, it was noted that "since
people received millions of rials from a non-profit organization, and spent
large suns from the hospital workere' retirement fund, according to per-

sonal statements by Bishop Dehqeni. the hospital land is also being ex-
propriated."

In the concluding portion of the Bsfahan Revolutionary Court's statement,
it was said that "In honor of Christ (on whom be God's peace), who was one
of the major prophets, the name of the hospital is being changed to Jesus
son of Mary Hospital."

11837
080: #906

17
CURRKNCY 0? RUMORS AGAINST REVOLUTIONARY LEADBBS DSPLORED
Tehran KZYRAN in Persian 8 Nov 79 p ll
lzrticle by Ayatollah Hakarem Shirazi: "So Say This Country Is Not Human!?7

liexp7 You will find no individual in any class, group or society who

doesn't heve one or several big (“question marks") or "buts" behind him in
which some kind of attribution or charge is hidden.

Nowadays, until someone becomes involved in an action, he is a good man, a
fighter, a holy warrior, a revolutionary, a Hoslem, aware.

However, as soon as he becomes the source of the action, different types

of arrows of accusation are fired against him, the "Savak" and "counter-
revolutionary" files and documents on his "treason and sabotage" are brought
out of hiding places, and people at least accuse him of inadequacy and in-
conpetence in terms of the necessary qualities for undertaking the job
which has been assigned to him, drawing up a "but" or several "buts" on
everyone. Bazargan is a good man, devout, a combatant, plainspoken, "but"
he lacks sharpness!

Qotbzadeh is sharp-~"but" he is a tough man a dictator!
Dr Yazdi is a fighter but they say he has American tendencies!

Banisadr is a fighter and a thinker but he is "westernized" or, in some
people's opinion. "easternired!”

Che-ran is a brave man and a holy warrior but he has an unknown, mysteri-
ous (ace!

Hadani is decisive and courageous but he is very stubborn ani inflexible!

Baheshti has a thinking mind and he is a fighter, but he never went to
prison or into exile!

18
Sadeq Tabataba'i is a fighter and is plainspoken but his mouth still gives
off the odor of mother's milk'.

The enam's son is frank and sincere and has always followed his father's
course, but people say that he is friendly with some groups which are not
on the em's course! And so on.

Thus you will find no individual in any class, group or society who doesn't
have one or several "buts" behind him in which some kind of attribution or
charge is hidden.

In this context I have absolutely no concern with the personalities of the
abovenentioned persons or others; I do not want to defend anyone or, God
forbid, accuse anyone.

I just went to open a small door here to a general principle and frankly
express a danger which I feel with all my being is facing this revolution,
since I see that this hurling of accusations does not involve one or two
individuals but has, rather, developed a general aspect.

Is this particular situation a calculated plot by the enemy?

Do people with the aid of their agents want to exploit the special psycho-
logical state of our people, who have tormenting wounds from all the sources
of their past experiences hidden within themselves, and imdiately sneer
every personality who is a source of action in this country, whatever group
or body he nuay be from (it makes no difference at all), sticking patches
they had previously prepared onto him in order to prove that this country
just has no substantial, blameless people at all, that one cannot find a
worthy, useful men in it, that everyone has a toxin and a poison?

It is in this way that these people spread seeds of despair and pessimis-
in everyone's uinds, causing everyone to lose hope for the future, through
the same role they have carried out in other areas of the world, with con-
pletely effective results.

Or is this the special phenomenon of a society showing the lack of maturity
of "a group" of us people who have not yet been able to grasp the fact that:

One, in these moments wten the ruler-mills and the runor nerket are over-

heated and the enemy is in this nanner engaged in conspiracy, we nust not
allow him to succeed in reaching his goal by broadcasting and relying on
various rumors.

N, we should know that no one in the world is without faults or defects
(except for prophets and the Innocent Ones) and that no one does not have
thorns alongside the roses of his lofty qualities. what is inortant is
that when grading-tine cones, he should get a good grade, should not flunk
and should not have a poor grade in any subject.

19
Three, with this situation we have found ourselves in, we are proving in
the practical sense that this country has no one to administer its institu-
tions, and, since that is the way it is, we are condemned to perish and
must die, or can only survive by going back under the umbrella of the for-
eigners! "hat a painful latter this is.

Pour, we are seeing today that as a result of these very issuer-and oth-
err-terrible rifts have been created within the ranks of the revolutionar-

ies, that every group is denouncing others, and that revolutionary “onions
in one town have even for-ed several groups and each one has a complaint

about the others, presenting them as nonrevolutionary or even comitting
treason against the revolution or, considering that this is still the start
of the job, do not realize what a great anger is threatening our revolution.
'nhat a terrifying, heartrending situation this is.

In this situation, where are we going? where? God knows.

11387
CSO: 10906

20
REVOLUTIONARY CWNCIL WEE FORESBES END OF BIG WHIP
‘l‘ehren mm'er in Persian 10 Nov 79 p 11

[Interview with Ayatollah Dr Bahonar: "Big Landowner-ship Hill Come to an End
in Iran")

[zesty Ayatollah Dr Bahonar. member of the Revolutionary Council, declared
in an exclusive interview with smu'A'r'u uewsnen: "New projects in the
field of agriculture will be presented." ﬂu stated "In the new Revolution
ary Council project, land will be placed at the disposal of the farmers who
work it." Dr Bahonar pointed out "Large landholdings will come to an end
and farming and processing units will ceese to be in the hands of big lend-
holders: groups of farmers will manage theue units."

This interview wss held Thursday afternoon at the Council of Rxperts during
en intermission in the council's discussionn. The text of the interview in
as follows:

/§uestio_n-/ It has been said that some cabinet ministers of the teqorary
government are to be seen in the current makeup of the Revolutionary Council.
Will these ministers also take part in the future composition of the council?

Dr Bahonar: The presence of ministers in t 1e Revolutionary Council repre-
sented e special pheee in the relationship 'netween the Revolutionary Council
and the government body. In reelity, they were repreeentatives of the gov-
ernment body in the Revolutionary Council I‘ll not official members of the
Revolutionary Council. Therefore vhen the ;overnment body resigned, natur-
ally their responsibility, which was that of representation in the Revolu-
tionary Council, also came to en end.

Therefore the curren: makeup of the Revolutionary Council will include
people who were members of the Revolutionary Council before the five people
from the government E)ody joined it; in any event, there will basically be e
reshuffle in the cursent makeup of the Revolutionary Council. This reshuf-
fle will be certied nut concurrently with studies into the nature of degree
of Revolutionary Council involvement in executive matters.

21
Breakdown of Revolutionary Council Members

I§uestionl In its future composition, how many members will there be in
the Revolut ionary Council?

Dr Bahonar: The level usder discussion is approximately the same 15 per-
sons; however, that is not an absolute number and it could be increased.

Condition of Agricultural Lands

lguestionl In view of tie fact that the tesporary government has approved
drafts in certain utters and some of these drafts have met with objections
(for example, the land omership bill was esentially drawn up contrary to
the policy of the Islamic revolution of Iran), will the Revolutionary
Council declare these drafts null and void, or will they be brought to the
iwlementation stage aft er a review?

Dr Bshonar: Of course we will have new drafts in the field of agriculture.
At the very beginning we were not able to provide a helpful review of all
the drafts which had previously been presented, and one of the subjects in
the agenda following this change of governnent status will be an examina-
tion of agricultural aat:ers.

The goal is to have people who work on the land be the owners of the land
and the possessors of the land--in fact, to have the major portion given
to those farmers. Unused land also will be placed at the disposal of per-
sons who can work directly on those lands and if capital should also be
needed in order to revive these lands, this capital must be placed from the
public budget at the disposal of farmers who tbs-selves work on the land,
as provided for. '

Regarding large land ownership and extensive lands which are in the control
of individuals, the council's goal and the orientation of its activity will
be to aansge gradually to place these lands at the disposal of the people
who work on then. However. how this bill is to be drawn up, in terms of
its stages of implementation, is something for which a bill must be pre-
pared, in the light of available resources. however, the orientation of
activity in the area of solving agricultural problem will be one where we
will be able to place land at the disposal of persons who work on it.

of course, since it is possible that it be difficult for isolated individ-
uals acting independently to administer small plots. cooperatives will be
formed so that people who do won small plots will be able jointly to create
nore extensive units and increase the possibilities for providing tools for
production, tractors and the like and obtaining markets for the sale of
their crops. Therefore it is possible that we say establish broad ferning
and processing units, in a fare. however, whereby they will be not at the
disposal of one farmer but at the disposal of a group of people, each of

22
whom is in fact the owner of a plot of land or at whose disposal that plot
of land is. 01’ course this group will form a cooperative coupsny together
so that they can function better in managing it, raising its output level
and improving the distribution situation.

Relations with the Superpowers

l§uestion7 In the new situation, how will relations with the inperialist
countries develop? Hill we cut off relations with those countries, the
main one of which is America?

Dr Bahoner: Our action is based on the fact that the nature of our rela-
tionship with Hestern countries or any superpower must not be one of domin-
ance and submission, but not be the relationship of a superpower to a con-
demd man. We do not intend to break relations. 9e do not want to iso-
late ourselves in the world--this is not essentially equitable and is not
in keeping with any bgic. Severing relations or isolating ourselves is not
an option for us, unless the severing of powers or the severing of relations
is relevant in some area, in which cese we will have no choice but to cut
off relations. The severance of relations has stages. A severance may be
conplete or it can be a cutoff of cultural or political or conercial rela-
tions-~or the extent of the severance of relations can very, or sometimes
be a change and shift in the kind of relations. or a change in the type of
relations.

that is iwortant for us, though, is that our relations with other countries
be equal and reciprocal, between two individuals neither of whom has the
upper or lower hand in any way, in which neither will establish dominance
in agreements or establish relations of master and servant. If this is the
way it is, we can consider expanding our relations with many countries in
various fields.

l§ueetiog7 will the cabinet members remain in their positions?

Dr Bahonar: See, it is not a matter of having all ministers leave. of
course if a number of them are prepared to cooperate in the new plan. along
with and in solidarity with the policy which governs the new conditions,
they will remain in their positions. The sense of change in the situation
does not entail the dismissal of all ministers and undersecretaries. It is
possible for some of them who are prepared to cooperate and be in solidar-
ity to be able to continae their jobs.

Question; will the council elect these numbers?

Dr Bahonar: Yes. all the ministers have not resigned; that is. we are not
now responsible for any of these individuals. It is very possible that we
will, in the course of new elections among individuals, elect some of these
persons who through their efficiency have been able to play a useful role
in their working environment.

I 1887
650: 6906

23
“Aroma non-tun: ATTACKS IRAQI 'cmm POLICY'
Tehran mum in Persian 3 Nov 79 pp 1, 8

[Bxcerpta] Yaaterday, Ayatollah Honcazeri, the official reciter of Tehran'e
Friday prayer ceranony, led hundred thouaamla wide awake Iranian believera,
in crowded and orderly rows, on the lam of Tehran Univeraity. The cermny
was attended by several ministers, religion», and govern-en: officials.

TWWiwmdmtmmwmmm
Wmmmmm'maywimm Ileaaidz'ltia

Wimofmmmmlymofmmgmmaem
ubdﬁmmcattammth. mwmamam
ammmmymmmwmwu,m,
unmatoperaung. Marsalaoetartsmu-eetpemlediffmtly.m

W12. mm'uahjo " warm“
dtleofaboakmm'm'aaaymgs m'alim:'mﬂuitymi
poaitimareaheedmgromdfarm.‘ 011wa attahuapoaitmn

210
m
mm

25

Ifywwiahtobeimnetranthemnies,tlm1ran‘s self-mfficiauyis
parmmt. Mmlmadﬁsvesaelf—sufficiaacyinaums,mmn
stopebeingmexclusivelymcmmuy,themhecanbeinmmetothe
Watchman! Jive quite freelyandcanfa'tably. Mcolaualist
policyofthednh'sregmmistedinmnsfomingkaninboam
mmbyiuportmgriceandﬂmttmthewmsmm,mtfm
Australia,mdotlaritanstmnotlnrcomtriee. 'nntmamistalmam
uni-people's mncy‘dﬁchmmcmuuytonan's potential.
mmmmmuntmmmtho£m1oo
nmmwusareas,mlyl7werebemgused,whﬂeﬂemtm
beimmted. Hewimilddmam,withamopriabebedmmm,prevmt
ﬂamtageofrim'water. Mmtimaxﬂulegovmumtmtmtland
inland. Yestexday, atﬂteprogranot 'Eyd-e chban [madam-121m],
Immmmttomglecttmir studies. It's 0.x. toclnntyaur

slogans, but do you: has migrunents, boo!

smu,wamedmmgiestoadﬁeveself-mtﬂciencyinmof
mm. Yurtadcistoshﬂyinordueoheoanmilblamsmﬂ
reagents. “Nunavut-yaw, classesarebeimcloeedam
mmuﬂtadmlawmmtcause.ﬂﬁsmtstop.

13m “Waterlooincideswiﬂithemimmyofﬂnatudcm
Merﬁmitybymeuoqxofﬂnmiamregmwthealmghmr
ofatleastSOshﬂmts. Mamdaycoimideswithﬂzebanidmmtcfun
leaderoftbliwolutim,ammu,tomrkey. Wearemdgaﬂnred

mummtammefmmtum,wcaneatmtmm
twice tofimpcrteditueodarelopuu'ml

'closedwithﬂadnntingofalogam agaimtmia

E.
E

27
www.mﬂematimofmrtyrsofthewtfwdaysm
Sudasht. Atﬂepmgran'sclooeparticipantslishaudhoﬂempm-tofa
mmmmmammmmmm ﬂnwcasimof

13AM [4W], adamleftﬂulamof'mkmnmi varsity.

8291
($0: 4906

28
routes umsm DISCUSSBS IRAQ'S roucy
Baghdad AL-TBAWRAH in Arabic 21 Oct 79 pp 3,7

[Interview with Iraqi Foreign Minister Sa'dun hasnadi. date and place
not given]

[Text] In this interview, Foreign Minister Dr Sa'dun
B-sdi talks about the sain Arab and international
issues a: present, and presents a conprehensive and
clear picture of the disensions, horizons and leanings
of the foreign policy followed by the 17-30 July
Revolution on both the Arab and international planes
--a policy whose principles, values and bases are
derived free the progres and principles of the
Socialist Arab Be'th Party.

[Question] Bow do you view the relationship between the current session
of the United Nations and the Sixth Nonaligned Su-it Conference which
set in Havana on 3 Septeeber?

[Answer] The Bavsna conference confined the nain principles of the
nonalignnent novenent. These include, first of all. that the nonaliguent
novesent is a novenent which stresses independence in foreign policy-
the exact leaning of independence being independence free all foreign
influences. Another of the novuent'e principles is that it is a pro-
gressive nova-eat. which means that it has a position vis-a-vis the
international currents and social and political syet-s which exist in
the world. In addition. the novenent is hostile to isperialisn in all
its four-both the old colonialist inparialiss and the new inperialiel
based on econoeic eeploitstion by indirect neans.

The nonaliznnent lovelent is dienetrically opposed to Zionist. the racist
regines in Africa and all forms of racial discri-ination. All of these

principles are now reflected in the positions of the Third World states
on the issues submitted before the current session of the United Nations.

Of course, this does not mean that all of the Third world states have s

29
completely unified position on these issues, but generally speaking and
on the whole these states take a stand along those lines. For the United
Nations is no longer an organization controlled by the Big Powers as was
the case in the past. And when I speak of the role of the Third World
states and the role of the nonaligned states. I seen, to be exact. their
role in the General Ass-bly and not in the Security Council, for well-

known reasons .

Specifically, the sixth conference of the Nonaligned Summit cond-nad in

no uncertain terms the Cap David agreements and the Zionist-Sadat accords.
It also condenned the Sadat regime and put the manbership of this regime

in a doubtful position in the movement. I noted that the effect of this
important decision was felt in the other states of the world which do not
belong to the movement. by an initiative from the Arab bloc. the nonaligned
states are now preparing a draft resolution to condemn the Camp David
agreusents on these bases and is urging the General Assembly to vote for

it.

[Question] How are the nonaligned states working to put the Havana
conference resolutions into effect?

[Answer] After issuing the important document in Havana, the nonaligned
states are now working through the UN General Assembly and the connittees
which spring from it to present resolutions which are in keeping with the
Ravens conference decisions on the main political problems and the other
econonic and social problems. The nonaligned bloc forms a large segment
of the Third world states and an important percentage of UN Isa-bare. The
bloc held a nesting in New York in which it studied the most inportant
issues, and it reached agreement that its action would be unified and
directed toward inplsnentation of the Havana sunsit resolutions. This
activity will not be restricted to the current session of the General
Assenbly, but will extend over a longer range than the present year and
will be reflected in all the other activities of the United Nations.
including the activities of its specialized organizations.

[Question] What are the most important setters which are drawing attention
in the current session of the United Nations?

[Answer] First of all. one thing which must attract attention is the fact

that the resolution of condennation of the Canp David agreements has
received a significant and wide response from the European bloc--by which

I nesn the bloc of Genoa Market states. It sens to as that the bloc of
European states has now become convinced that the greater part of public
opinion in the Third Uorld opposes the Camp David agree-ants, and that
opposition is no longer linited to the Arab comtries and the Isl-sic
states.

Another thing is that Pope John Paul II's speech in the United Nations
did not touch on any specific issues except the rights of the Palestinian
Arab people, Zionist aggressions against South Lebanon and the issue of

30
Jerusalem. This fact indicates that the Vatican. ae well, has been
influenced by the largeecele opposition which the Zionist entity is en-
countering in the world. as reflected in opposition to the Camp David
agreements.

The third thing is that econoaic affairs have begun to occupy an iaportant
place in U! deliberations. Thus. the 77 statee held a neeting at the
United Nations during the eeaeion. The majority of the delegationa'
rmaarke reflected the economic crisie which the Third World is undergoing
becauee of the inflation exported by the industrialized atatee. and the
economic and financial troublea which the capitalist industrialized etatee
are causing for the Third World atatea.

There is a widespread conviction of the need to ram the Parie conference
negotiations and begin a world dialogue on economic affairs within the
framework of the United Nations in order to impluent the deciaions of the

international organization's two special seesione on economic probleme.

[Queetion] Do you believe that there has been development in the poaition
of the Co-eon Market etatea on Arab issues?

[Answer] Yea, I do believe that there has been development in the position
of the European bloc etatea. The reasona for thie development are a
combination of varioua factors. including an awareneee of the importance

of the Arab homeland economically, the relative potential for Arab views

to create a united front in the wake of the Baghdad suit conference, and
the Burepeana' sauce of the importance of independence from the his

Powere in foreign policy.

Naturally, this development is not alike in all the states nor is it clearly
defined. but rather it is relative and diaeimilar. ibis development is
reflected in the official atatmeente of a number of officials of the
European bloc states.

We in Iraq. of course. welcome and encourage this development. and we
offer everything required to help further it within the limits of our
capabilities.

Marcus other Third World states have also observed thie development.
and the Zioniat entity and Sedat'e regime are not pleased with it.

[Queetion] What is the truth about the American plan to hold a conference
to deal with the situation in South ubanon?

[Answer] This plan hee not been announced. We heard about it indirectly.

American Secretary of State cyrus Vance nede it known to some Arab
delegation which met with hin.

31
The idea snpecre to be hslf conceptual. But in general it originates
free an evil intention which ultimately con only serve Anericsn politicol
purposes end Zionist sins.

[Question] Do you hsve a conent on the econooic utters in the current
session of the UN General Ass-bly‘l

[Answer] Irsq'e position on economic issues hos bocone cleer. But some
co-ents not he node on the ettenpts currently underwoy to force the
oil~producing stereo to begin a dielogue with the cepitoliot industrial—
ised states on the subject of energy for the echo of solving the industri-
olired stetoe' problus end insuring their needs.

Por the most part, this goal is clocked in glowing words and eppoals to
the non-oil-producing developing stetee aimed at winning then over. One
thing which is rogrottoble is that none of tho ihird Horld stereo soy be
responding to such ett-pts, end ease have slreody done so.

1he speech node by Mexico‘s president at tho United Nations needs to he
studied end enslyzsd. Hhutover tho purposes of this speech were, we
still believe that tho welfare of tho developing nations lies in their
initiating a colprehenoive international dielogue on ell tho oconooic
problem. not just on the energy issue. Ono thing thot should he pointed
out is that new initiatives ore being brought out at the one tins thot
the Paris conference hos cone to s holt end the industrialized states
have tacitly rejected the UN resolutions in the two epeciol sessions I
mentioned previously.

Us have already expressed our dissatisfaction with Mexico's proposole in
this regard, for ultinetoly they do not serve the interests of the devel-
oping stotes, rogsrdless of the intentions.

[Question] How do you view the pope's visit to the United notions. and
how do you assess the speech which he delivered before the General
Assembly?

[Answer] In general. the pope's speech at the United Notions was positive.
I woo pleosed that he nentionod the rights of the Paloetinien Arab people
explicitly and dealt indirectly with what the Zionist entity is doing in
the Arch region. Another thing thot pleased no in the speech woe the

clear discussion of the difference between the rich and the poor. which

is now the conspicuous phenomenon in the capitolist world. Noturally.

the inpact of the Vaticon is a spiritual one, but it is on impact which
should not be underestinoted.

[Question] "hot is the role of the Arab bloc in this session. end how
does the Arch bloc coordinate its poeitior s?

32
[Answer] As in previous sessions and international conferences, the
Arab bloc is acting in a well-coordinated leaner by holding a neetim of
the entire Arab bloc at the ministerial level and adopting clearly defined

positions on the Iain issues. but not on the secondary or controversial
ismes.

This is the secret of the success which the Arab bloc achieved at the
“unaligned Su-it Conference in Colosbo, the novasnt‘s foreign Iinisters'
conference in Belgrade and the Havana aux-it conference. By this I seen

its success in concentrating on the main issues instead of the secondary

issues. and on the noncontroversial issues instead of the controversial
issues. ‘lhe nest important of these issues is the Arab-Zionist struggle.

This year, Iraq celled for this nesting to be held. and there was unanimous
agreement that a resolution condemning the Clip David agreements sililar
to the resolution adopted in havens will he presented in the current
session.

A working cos-ittee for drafting, making contacts and directing activity
was for-ed, with Iraq as one of the senbers, and this nominee is contin-
uing with its work. In addition, the Arab delegations are allotting
assignments pertaining to asking contacts with the delegations of other
states. Each delegation or group of delegations undertakes to contact a
number of delegations from the other states according to the quality of
its relations.

[Question] "hat is Iraq's role in joint Arab action during this session?

[Answer] Iraq's role is as I said: It called for this nesting, suhnitted
the draft resolution as a concept, conferred with the other Arab delegav
tions active in this area and reached agree-eat with th- on the tactics
necessary for the resolution to succeed. It also perfornsd its obliga-
tions with regard to contacting the other states.

This is not all. Iraq node many more contacts than it was assigned. and
our delegation has clear instructions to cooperate within the working

co-ittee. I believe that Iraq has a great burden in this area. and we
accept the fact that we carry the biggest responsibilities based on our

national responsibility .

[Question] how do you view Arab-African relations (alluring the levsna
st-it conference?

[Answer] At the Ravens conference. it bec-s clear to us that despite
pest efforts which hsve been made to strengthen Arab-African relations.

we are still lacking in this area-decking in the area of toning a web
of bilateral and collective relations with the African states--and I seen

33
econoaically. politically. culturally and oociallywand locking aloo in
our undorotanding of African thinking. Por inotance. there were eone
African loadero whooe poeitiono we would hear about indirectly. whoreoa
we lietened to thoae leodero directly at the Bavana conference. There
wao a big difference between the two caoeo.

I an happy to coy that we were given an opportunity at the hovana confer-
ence to hecoee faniliar with the views of tho African leadaro. I, per-
eonally, went out fro. the havana conference convinced that there io Inplo
opportunity to otteuthen cooverotion between the Arab countrieo and the
African etatea. and between Iraq and a great nunher of- thoao otatee. To
be specific. I can eay thot in this conference our relotione were otrongth-
oned and we hocano hotter acquainted than before with tho leadoro of
Mozanhique, Zanbio and Tanzania. to none ooeo axe-plea.

[Question] Bow doeo the Iraqi delegation act during tho General Aaoenbly
oeoeion?

[Anuor] Tho Iraqi delegation note on the basic that it it represented
in all tho co-Iitteee, io present at General Aooolhly debateo. cooperateo
with tho Arab delagationo. ie in continuouo contact with tho active
delegation of tho nonaligned etatoo and that it has opecific and general
duties. The opecific dutiea are tho draft resolutions which Iraq wanto
presented in the current eaoeion, the tract important of which ia the
reoclution I aentionod earlier concerning conduction of the Cap David
agreuento. The goneral dutieo include taking well-defined poaitiona

on the detailed items on the agenda. that io, the cotton uoually die-
cuaaod each year.

The Iraqi delegation aloo proparao care than one report on the eaoeion
it attenda.

[Quootion] What are the coat important contacte which you have node
during the current oeooion?

[Anower] Every year. we uoo the convening of tho aoooion ao an opportunity
to echo a large nulher of contacto. By thio I noon coating with the
foreign niniatera who are in New York at thia tine.

Theee contocto are of two kinda. Pirot. the kind that we roqueot. and
theae are planned prior to the convenina of the eoooion in accordance
with Iraq'o concerno. The oecond kind is in reoponee to requeote for
neetinge which we receive froe othero. Thia year. we gave the notter

of contacting foreign niniatoro of the African etotee epociol inportonco.
eince we not with a large nunbor of African foreign niniotero. oa well

oo the secretary general of the United Rationo.

Ae for oeotinge with foreign niniotere of the Arab countrieo, they occur
alnoet on a daily haeie. In theee neetingo, we ueuolly diocuoo bilateral

36
relations, the Arab issues for which we want to obtain the support of
the state concerned, and anything else that either side wants to discuss.

we must also mention the meetings which are held by the blocs. such as
the Arab bloc, the 77 bloc. the bloc of nonaligned states, the bloc of

Isl-1c states and so on.

[Question] Do you have something to say about the speech methodology of
Iraq before the Gnnaral Assembly?

[Answer] Since I began attending meetings of the General Assembly, I
have observed that a large masher of states follow the traditional
methodology in writing their speeches. This methodology is based on
defining the state's positions on all the international issues one by one.

Because most international issues do not change substantially and unex-
pectedly froe year to year, speeches based on the traditional methodology
are semi-routine and repitious. Moreover. such a methodology has a ten-
dency to mix up the important setters with the unimportant matters. For
this reason, we have for several years followed a somewhat different
methodology based on concentrating only on the main issues. Positions
on the other international issues are stated by Iraq's representatives
in the various cosmittees.

This year. the main issue in Iraq's speech was a clarification of the
dangers of the Camp David agreements.

[Question] During the last period. the subject of the Gulf-European
dialogue was raised. “hat is our position in Iraq on this plan. and
what is our position on Arab-European dialogue in general?

[Answer] We are in favor of any rapprochement between any two Arab
countries or within any group of Arab countries. but we do not feel that

it is proper to establish long-term Arab blocs because this tends to
create bloc-oriented feelings among other Arab sides, and bloc-oriented
feelings are usually negative feelings toward Arab unity.

He feel that dialogue must take place between the Arab countries and the
European states. If I wanted the dialogue to center around the subject

of energy, still it must not be confined to the Arab countries overlooking
the Persian Gulf , because there are other Arab oil-producing states which
must participate in this dialogue.

with regard to the Arab-European dialogue, as is generally known we
support this dialogue and believe that it should be both econoeic and
political at the same time, and a long-range dialogue rather than one
restricted to an unusual period of tine.

These views did not receive a total response from all the European
states at first-I mean the ideas that the dialogue should be both

35
political and economic and long-range rather than short-range.

These ideas were not completely accepted by the European states in the
beginning, but a develop-eat has been noted recently, which is that these
ideas have begun to be accepted sore than in the past. This is a positive
develop-eat which we welcose.

[Question] What is Iraq's position on international alliance and blocs,
and how do you view the Aaerican, Onani and Iranian novea in the Persian
Gulf?

[Answer] Iraq's position on international alliances is clear. We are
against alliances and blocs of any kind. I would be very glad to see a
world in which all alliances were dissolved. Hith regard to the saves in
the Persian Gulf area, the United States and the colonialist states have
been trying for a long tine to force the states overlooking the Gulf to
create sone sort of alliance to protect the oil interests of the colonialist

states.

We regret to say that the governasnt of Onan has always been the initiator
in proposing these ideas on behalf of its original nasters.

This occurred during the days of the shah when the issue of Gulf security
was raised and the Huscat conference was held concerning it.

The position of Iraq was the main factor in thwarting this attempt. Now
the Quasi government is again proposing the ease ideas in an indirect
technical manner by calling for the creation of a systea of control over
the sealmea.

The United States is now working openly on the military preparations

necessary for nilitary intervention in this area, as is indicated by a
succession of official “statute. The policy of the shah was based on
hegeaony over this area. and we wished countless times that this policy
would be eliminated after the new situation arose in Iran. However, it
is clear that this has not occurred as of yet, and this is regrettable.

The Arab countries will resist the policy of heganony from whatever
direction it comes. It should be pointed out that Iraq's foreign policy
does not just spring free the welfare of Iraq as a country. but fro. the
Arab welfare-nespecially where the security of Arab territory and the

Arab character of the Arab countries are concerned. Every Arab issue is
an issue which concerns Iraq, and this is something we want Iran to
understand in its new era.

[Questior] As the appointed date for the convening of the Tenth Arab
Su-Iit Conference in Nova-bar approaches, what do you see as the coat
iaportant utters which will be placed on the conference agenda; and will
the conference he pronpted to reexamine the nininun resolutions reached
at the Baghdad conference to confront the Camp David agree-eats?

[Answer] I do not believe that anyone is considering asking for a reexam-
ination or reconsideration of the nininun which was approved at the

36
Baghdad eta-it conference and the previous Arab summits.

He believe that the real task for the coming summit conference is to
concentrate its attention on the Arab internal situation, not on the
foreign relations and matters which lie outside the Arab hoaelend. By
this 1 mean that attention should be centered on the neens of increasing
Arab autonaous power and on nothing else. What I mean by Arab auton-
onous power is political power--including relations with others-~eco-
nomic power. and military power. l'or to the extent that Arab auton-
ooous power increases. the power of the Arabs vis-a—via the enemy will
increase, and we will draw nearer to the proper solution to the problem
of the Arab-Zionist struggle.

we must not dream. and we must not be deluded. for it is impossible for
the Zionist enemy to agree to Arab claims unless it is forced to do so.

There is ample opportunity to work on strengthening Arab autonomous

power now, but talk about what international public opinion will accept
or not accept is conceptual talk and a waste of effort. Political action
is important. but only when autonomous power is abundant.

859 1
CSO: 10802

37
STUDENTS RELEASE COMMUNIQUE PROTESTING AGGRESSION, EXPULSIONS
Casablanca AL-HUHARRIR in Arabic 20 Oct 79 pp 1,3

(Article: "In a Comunique By the Executive Comittee of the National Union
of Horoccan Students: the National Union of Moroccan Students Thinks that the
Time Has Cone to Begin a People's War of Liberation which Hill Put an End to
the Recurring Aggression Against Our National Territory; It Calls For the

Inmediate Annulment of All Illegal Expulsion Decisions Taken Against Hundreds
of Students"]

[Text] The executive committee of the National Union of Moroccan Students
[UNEH] has released the following communique:

The nation is witnessing grave developments on all levels, and particularly
in the matter of our territorial integrity and the challenges that have made
our land a theater for repeated assaults that have recently taken the form of
open war which is being waged by mercenaries arned with the latest weapons.
This confirms the feebleness of the "liberation movement" claia being propagated
by Algerian propaganda. These assaults have been resolutely resisted by our
steadfast arned forces. If the UNBH is in harnony with the position of the
popular masses and their progressiVe forces, and in keeping with the directive
of the 16th National Congress it is believed. more than ever, require the
mobilization of the popular masses to plunge into a people's war of liberation
to put an end to the recurrent aggression against our territorial integrity.
officials in this country contrary to the will of the nasses have not ceased
to take a number of radical measures which create difficulties for the popular
masses in general and for students in particular, which by their nature are
harnful to the atmosphere of the mobilization which is required.

within this framework, the measures which have been taken by the country's
rulers-—and particularly the officials in higher education--at the beginning
of this year have done nothing but aggravate the educational situation by con-
cocting numerous problems which are manifested in the decisions of collective
expulsion taken against hundreds of students and hinting at the intention to
retreat on the principle of general distribution of the stipends instead of
increasing their amount, and shutting the door to higher education in the

face of persons who hold the baccalaureate.

38
Believing that poor university adnission must lead to a poor academic year,
the UNEM puts on the officials the burden of the results of the measures they
have taken during this university admission. At the same time it considers
itself duty-bound to bring to the attention of national public Opinion these
measures which have been taken by the officials to obstruct the normal pro-
gress of the academic year. Among all these measures which have been taken
are the following:

The wave of expulsions which this year has touched all the higher institutes
in addition to the faculties in a way unprecedented in the history of higher
education in our country. Hundreds of students have thus been expelled [from
the following schools]:

The Hasan II Institute of Agriculture and Veterinary Science
The National School of Farming in Heknes

The National Institute of Statistics and Applied Economics
The Mohanmedia School of Engineering

The National School of Metal Work

The Preparatory Year In Higher Agricultural Studies

The medical faculties and the Faculty of Science in Rabat.

The expulsion decisions have included all levels from the first year to the
third and fourth year and even the sixth and final year. This is considered
a loss to the efforts of the masses who alone pay for the cost of training.
Does it make sense for the expulsion decisions to include hundreds of
students in technical and scientific fields of specialization--among them
some who are about to graduate-while our country suffers a gap in the number
of the technical and scientific cadres necessary, inasmuch as our country
does not have more than 600 scientists and engineers for each million
inhabitants? This is a very poor ratio even in comparison with the minimum
determined by the Arab Scientific and Techological Conference in 1976 and
calling for the obtaining of 2,000 scientists and engineers for each 1 mil-
lion inhabitants, and at a time when the nation's needs demand increasing
the capacity of the technical institutions to accomodate 3,000 engineers
each year. Do we need more than this to demonstrate the extent of the in-
consistency of the expulsion decisions which have been taken and the state-
ments which assert Morocco's need for technical cadres?

Uithin the same framework the expulsion measures have also included large
numbers of medical students while we are desperately in need of one doctor
for every 3,000 citizens instead of one for every 13,000 currently.

The officials have not been content to expel hundreds of students at the
beginning of this school year, but have pr0(eeded to put a number of new

39
obstacles in the way of the students. This has led to a large number of
holders of the baccalaureate remaining without a seat in higher education
despite official statements and constituents. A 1979 baccalaureate has been
made a prerequisite, the "registration pe riod" has been liaited. and a com-
petitive system has been imposed in the school of medicine. All of t..ase
measures are obstacles for the purpose of solving the problem of equipping
and preparing the cadres at the expense of the children of the popular
masses who with great effort have obtained the baccalaureate.

Hhile persisting in aggravating the educational situation the officials have
begun on every occasion to hint at an open about-face on the principle of
making stipends universally available, and there has been talk about imposing
"new standards" for obtaining a stipend. This is happening while the popular
masses are urgently requesting an increase in the amount of the stipend which
has become insufficient in the face of the frightful increase in the cost of
living because the overwhelming majority of the popular masses come from
economically deprived classes and bear the responsibility for their families'
material needs. in addition to rent prices, which rose by 300 percent between
197!» and 1977 only and which consume more than 50 percent of the student's
stipend.

In the face of the gravity of the situation to which higher education has come
and the challenges which are aimed at destroying the gains made together by
the student and mass movement the executive conittee of the UNEH calls
attention to the communique issued by the administrative board in its first
regular session on 19 September 1979 which was followed by a number of con-
tacts at all levels, and it congratulates the student masses on the gains
that had [previously] been taken away—-the reopening of registration in the
Faculty of Arts in Rabat, the liuhalmnad I University in Cujda, the Qadi 'lyad
in Harrackech and the law school in Casablanca, and the ordering of the
rescission of the 1979 baccalaureate prerequisite which was being applied by
the officials without any legal basis. It also calls for increased mobili-
zation and unity in the ranks to confront the challenges surrounding the
student movement, and preserving their gains chief among which is the right
of every student to obtain a stipend and an increase in its amount to satisfy
the students' needs.

The UNEH executive connittee calls to the attention of student and national
public Opinion the gravity of the higher education situation as a result of
the measures and decisions taken by the off -cisls since the beginning of the
year. It places full responsibility on officials in the government apparatus
which considers education expenses a heaVy burden while the popular masses
must pay them.

It demands the follow: 1. The inanediate annulment of all the illegal ex-
pulsion decisions taken against hundreds of students in the Faculty of
Science. the School of Medicine, the Hasan 1]: Institute For Agriculture

and Veterinary Science, the National Institt te for Statistics and Applied
Economics.the National School for Farming it Heknes,the School of Metals. the

Hohamedia School of Engineering and the 0:! er institutions.

100
2. Registration of all students, who hold the baccalaureate. in [instutions
of] higher education.

The executive committee emphasizes the readiness of the student masses to en-
gage in serious and responsible dialogue. It announces the recruitment of all
students to defend these urgent demands and to be ever ready to confront all
projects which seek to destroy the gains of the student and people's movement,
foremost among which is the right to education and a stipend.

The executive committee of the UNEH 18 October 1979.

9123
030: £402

41
ARREST CAMPAIGN AGAINST USP? ACTIVISTS IN ALGERIA DBNOUNCBD

Casablanca AL-HUHARRIR in Arabic 24 Oct 79 pp 1,8
[Article: "Arrest Campaign Against the USP? Activists In Algeris"]

[Text] We have learned that the Algerian authorities haVe begun a broad
arrest campaign against USP? activists who live in Algeria in order to
pressure then into adopting a position hostile to our people's struggle for
its territorial integrity.

Brothers, Ibrahim Kamal and Hustafa al-‘Ammari, who have lived in Algeria since
1963, have been arrested. They have been detained in the offices of the A1-
gerian military intelligence without any clear charge other than that they
refused, and still refuse, to support the separatist tribalist theses being
defended by the Algerian authorities under the cover of the right to self-
determination of our Saharan territories. It is well known that the activists
Ibrahim Kamal and Mustafa al-‘Ammari are the activists from Piguig who know
very well how, shortly before independence, vast areas were detached from
Moroccan territory. It is also well known that brothers Ibrahin Renal and
Mustafa al-‘Annmri were among the senior editors of the newspaper LIBERATION.

If arrests such as these confirm the patriotism and steadfastness of Moroccan
political exiles in the face of all kinds of pressure and temptation, we take
this opportunity to report that for years the popular masses have not ceased
demanding the pardoning of political exiles so that they lay participate with
the rest of their brethren in establishing the principles of democracy and,
the truth, and in the fulfillment of territorial integrity.

9123
CSO: 4402

62
INTERVIEH HIT“ POLISARIO'S NUR'ALPDI“ AﬂMAD 'ALI

Military Situation

Beirut AL-NIDA' in Arabic [0 Oct 79 pp 6-7

[Interview with Nur-al-Din Ahmad 'Ali, political bureau member and foreign
relations official of the POLISARIO, by Ahmad 'Ayyash; date and place not
given]

[Text] "POLISARIO," the Western Sahara Liberation Front, has begun a
campaign in the Arab world to clarify its political position with regard
to the latest developments in the Sahara region. Hhile it is undertaking
this campaign, its revolutionaries are continuing their heroic actions
against the Moroccan regime and inflicting upon them huge losses in men
and equipment. The latest of these heroic actions was the liberation of
the city Semara, the second largest city in Western Sahara. AL-NIDA' met
Nur-al-Din Ahmad, member of the political bureau and head of the foreign
affairs department in the Front, who is currently visiting Lebanon. He
showed in detail that the struggle against the Moroccan monarchy regime
is part of the struggle against the region's supporters of Camp David,
since Hasan II regularly receives weapons from Sadat in order to suppress
the POLISARIO Front revolutionaries.

Nur-al-Din Ahmad does not expect to arrive at a political settlement of

the Hestern Sahara problem in the near future. Right now he is Currently
visiting Lebanon after first having made a visit to Jordan, where he met
the minister of information and the deputy foreign minister, and then going
to Syria, where he met with the Baath Party Regional Command's head of
foreign relations and members of the Progressive National Front in Syria.
His last stop is now Lebanon, where he meets various groups from among

the patriotic ranks of the Lebanese and Palestinians.

At the same time there are delegates of the POLISARIOHho are touring the
Arab countries in order to explain the position of the people of Hestern
Sahara. Nur-al-Din Ahmad speaks with bitterness about the attitude of the
Arab countries which are still hesitating to support this just cause. He
explains that out of a total of 32 countries, only 2 have supported western
Sahara's independence, and they are Algeria and Democratic Yemen.

43
here is the interview in detail:

[Question] what is your opinion about the efforts which are now surfacing
in the direction of arranging mediation between Algeria and Morocco

concerning the Hestern Sahara problem?

[Answer] Our view is Lnat any mediation, whatever the source and whatever
the integrity of the person undertaking it, if it does not take into
consideration the principal party involved in the conflict, which is the
people of Western Sahara, led by the POLISARIO Front within the framework
of the Democratic Sahara Republic, then it will fail just as previous
mediation failed.

The Military Situation

[Question] Could you currently give us a picture of the military situation
in the Sahara, especially after the famous Lebouirate battle in which
ﬂasan II's army was defeated and which had repercussions inside the

Moroccan army itself?

[Answer] As far as we are concerned, the Lebouirate battle was just an
ordinary battle like others before it and after it. There were battles
before Lebouirate, [such as] the Bir Enzarane battle which resulted in

175 dead in the Royal Moroccan Army, including a lieutenants, and in the
capture of big quantities of weapons and ammunition. And as far as the
length of the operation is concerned, the battle lasted from 5 A.M. to

a P.M., and 11 Moroccan airplanes took part. In spite of this the result
was the capture of large quantities of weapons and a great number of soldiers
were taken prisoner. This battle came after [sic] the battle at Lebouirate
which is considered one of the most important Moroccan army bases and which
is 100 kilometers inside Moroccan territory. In that battle we destroyed
6S tanks, mined and blew up 39 military vehicles, and took 92 Moroccan
soldiers prisoner, including a group of officers.

There was also the lag battle which resulted in 40 prisoners taken and the
capture of large quantities of weapons and ammunition plus a large number of
vehicles. There have been battles smaller than these, but because of a
boycott by the Arab press you have not received any news about them. The
Western press sees the prisoners. After every operation, foreign
journalists come and see the prisoners and the booty. It is the respons-
ibility of free Arab writers to transmit the truth to their Arab readers,
the truth about an Arab revolution to Arab citizens.

The Details of the Lebouirste Battle
[Question] Could you give our readers an in-depth description of the

Lebouirate battle which took place in the Sahara and which aroused the
interest of the whole area?

44
[Answer] The battle started at 6 A.M., and it lasted one hour, although
the base is one of the Moroccan monarchy's largest bases. In it there
were 65 tanks and about 1.00 vehicles, in addition to there being a
concentration of troops on the base. Also there were large quantities

of weapons. There were Egyptian weapons, from the Eastern bloc, twin
23-millimeter [gun] batteries, launchers with Strela rockets, and most of
the soldiers were armed with Eastern bloc and American machine guns. In
spite of all this, our Landrovers were able to pursue the tanks and
destroy them. he tank col-sanders were even jumping out of their tanks
and fleeing, which shows that morale in the Moroccan army has hit rock
bottom. In this battle we captured 139 vehicles, including 50 016's, 105
tons of amunition of various kinds, and ground-to-air and ground-to-ground
consnunications equipment. In addition to this [we captured] a large number
of water and fuel storage tanks and about 80 Landrwers. The number of
our soldiers who fought was not even one-fourth the number of the [Moroccan]
king's soldiers. The base cmander, who was executed by the Moroccan
monarchy, had been in Rabat 2 days before the battle took place, but they
held him responsible, making him the scapegoat, in order that the Moroccan
regime justify its losses and picture the problem on a personal level.

Re have all of the telegrams which were sent back and forth between Rabat
and the base, particularly since the deputy base commander is one of our
prisoners, and he has already been photographed by the press. He also
seized all the base documents that have appeared since the base was
established, in addition to all of the instructions issued by the king.

1'.'.e King Is Preparing for a Military Adventure

[Question] Do you expect Hasan II to undertake a large military advanture
in the Sahara area?

[Answer] He is always promising this, and all of his actions are suicidal

in the Sahara. [Look at] the troop concentration with which he attacks us,
using weapons from various countries. As you know, Morocco has raised the

cry of pursuit, and claims that it has issued orders to pursue the Polisario,
but our answer to Morocco is that instead of pursuing us in Algerian territory,
let them pursue us instead inside Morocco, where we have deeply penetrated.

[Question] What is your opinion about Hasan II's formation of what is cal led
the "Aosario" Front, and has it so far undertaken any action worth mentioning?

[Answer] This reminded us of 1974 when we were fighting Spain. The
Moroccan monarchy created a movement, calling it the Morehob movement, and
asked it to issue a commnique about every operation that we undertook.

One time there was an occasion international in scope, and they were asked
to prepare a military conmmnique about an operation that they were under-
taking, so they resorted then to organizing an operation in the area (Batih).
This area (Batih) is located in Moroccan territory, is under Moroccan rule,

and the Moroccan army is stationed there. ’i'ae Moroccan press ridiculed
this operation.
[Question] So Hasan II has done this sort of thing before?

[Answer] Re is an expert at creating fictitious organizations. He began
this during the war of attrition against Algeria. But this reminds me of

a speech made by the late President Boumedienne. In Khartoum Boumedienne
said: "We can give people weapons and money, but we cannot make people want
to die. Morocco can give money and arms, but it cannot persuade people to
die or not to die. Therefore. organizing a movement hostile to Algeria

is an operation which will fail."

The Role of France Against Us

[Question] Could you explain the reasons that led Mauritania to make peace
agreement with the Front? And are the latest political developments in
Mauritania connected to the peace made with the Front?

[Answer] 1 do not think that the latest developments in Mauritania have
any connection with the peace treaty with the Front. We should bear in
mind, though, that the former president, Mukhtar Ould Daddah, was a
reactionary figure with ties to Morocco. But the reasons which led
Mauritania to retreat from its previous position with regard to western
Sahara are to be found in the great losses which were inflicted upon it
militarily and economically. During its war with us Mauritania lost more
than 30,000 men who were killed, wounded, or missing in action. Also, its
mines were at a standstill, and this had a repercussion even on the French
economy. For this reason, at the beginning, French planes resorted to
pursuing our revolutionaries after every operation which was carried out
during the day. So we changed our methods and organized night raids. It
was because of this change [in tactics] that France's ability to help was
hindered.

Morocco ls Very Hell Armed, But Its Morale ls Low

[Question] How do you currently assess the balance of power in Hestern
Sahara?

[Answer] In terms of numbers and arms, our arms are not equal to one
thousandth of the arms of the Moroccan monarchy. As you know, America
and France pour arms into Morocco on a scale which the human mind cannot
imagine, and lately Sadat [has started doing this]. Up till now 2 ships
and ll plane loads of weapons and ammunition have gone to the Moroccan
monarchy. And there are Egyptian military advisers for drawing up
military plans for confronting our revolution, sent by Sadat to help
Morocco.

But in terms of morale, during the last 4 years of fighting we have been
able to greatly wear down the Moroccan army and to bring its morale way
down. This has caused it to show no resistance to our courageous operations
which, up till now, have resulted in [our taking] 2,000 prisoners, and

46
this is the best proof of the victories that we are achieving over forces
which are armed to the teeth and in great nusbers.

Our Cause Is Just

There is also another factor, and that is the factor of justice, the justice
of the cause. Our soldiers are fighting for the sake of their established
right to return to their lands and to have their families return to their
homeland. This is a basic incentive and a stimulating factor, such that
either they are victorious or they will be martyrs for the sake of their
rights.

As for the Moroccan army, it is an invading, occupying army, and has no
incentive at all and no drive or stimulus to fight.

[Question] There is an assessment according to which Morocco is heading
toward a military defeat in the Sahara, the indication of this being the
fact that it has lately been asking the Egyptian regime to supply it with
weapons. Also it has threatened to join the Camp David group in the area,
as a countermeasure to redress making up for its expected military defeat.
Hhat is your opinion about that?

[Answer] There is no doubt that an unjust war waged by any regime, against
a people for the sake of usurping their rights, will be a failure like all
other wars [of this type]. The examples of Vietnam, Portugal in its
African colonies, and France in Algeria, are the best proof of this. And
Morocco will fail because it is waging an unjust war.

The large-scale operations that we are engaging in are the best indication
of the Moroccan monarchy's future failure in Hestern Sahara. And the
military defeats are having repercusions on the political and social
situation inside Morocco. Hasan 11's seeking aid from Sadat falls within
the framework of breaking up Sadat's isolation and creating a breach in
Arab solidarity, especially since Hasan Ii is the standard bearer for
Jerusalem. This constitutes the vanguard of a reactionary trend which is
rallying around Camp David, American policy in the area, and world Zionism.

[Question] Are there any indications that the Arab League wants to intervene
in the Western Sahara issue? And do you expect to arrive at a political
settlement with the Moroccan regime in the near future?

[Answer] Concerning what you said about a settlement of the issue with
Morocco, we have already called upon Morocco to follow a policy like that
which Mauritania is following in Western Sahara. [Mauritania] made a
permanent peace agreement with the Front and put a permanent end to the war.
This is the model for a settlement, and if that is the basis, then our doors
are open. Every day we are appealing [for Morocco] to follow the example of
Mauritania, considering that Morocco's pretexts concerning Western Sahara
are the same as those of Mauritania.

47
[Question] Do you expect that a political settlement is unlikely at the
present time?

[Answer] The Moroccan monarchy is still demonstrating a degree of obstinacy
as a result of the dollars it has been receiving from some Arab sources,

to support it in this war, in addition to the weapons it gets from America
and others.

[Question] And finally a personal question concerning you. Could you tell
us something about, for example, your educational background?

[Answer] I grew up in Western Sahara, and I have been involved in this
revolution since 1973. Many of my comrades graduated from various universities
in the world and then joined the Front, but all of them then had to graduate
from the university of revolution and conbac in Hestern Sahara. I have a

good comand of Spanish and French in addition to Arabic.

Mediation Efforts
Beirut AL-SAFIR in Arabic 18 Oct 79 p 10

[Interview with Nur-al-Din Ahmad 'Ali, political bureau masher and foreign
relations official of the POLISARIO, by Salih Qallab; date and place not
given]

[Text] Mur-al-Din Ahmad 'Ali, a member of the political bureau of the
Polisario Front who is presently visiting Beirut, denied that any Arab
authority was engaging in any contact with the Front within the framework

of what is being constantly talked about concerning Arab mediation in finding
a peaceful solution to the problem of the Sahara conflict. In an interview
with him done by AL-SAFIR he said: "These efforts at mediation are like
previous efforts at mediation since 1975, all of which have looked at the
problem of the Hestern Sahara from the point of view of the Moroccan regime,
that is, considering the conflict in this issue to be an Algerian-Moroccan
border conflict."

"Since these mediation efforts do not look at the core of the problem, from
the point of view of the Saharan people's right to self~determination on the
basis of decisions made by international organizations, the UN and the
[Organization of] African Unity, and [on the basis of] non-alignment, then
they are bound to fail."

He went on to say: "He hope that those who are making efforts to mediate
will follow Mauritania's example for seeking a solution, bearing in mind
that Mauritania, Morocco's partner in war, invasion, and in the Madrid
agreement, has shown Morocco the way."

"He hope that all mediators will be serious in seeking a just and peaceful
solution which will restore rights to those whose rights and borders have
been violated. He are prepared to cooperate just as we cooperated with
the Conraittee of Hise Men which visited the Sahara, Morocco, Mauritania,
and Algeria."

"And we have proven our sincere desire to bring about a just peace and to
eliminate the danger of a war which would envelope the whole area."
Concerning the attitudes taken by Algeria and Libya toward these mediation
efforts, he said: "As far as Algeria is concerned, it has assured the
mediators that there is no conflict between it and Morocco, that the
conflict is between the royal Moroccan regime and the people of Hestern
Sahara, and that Algeria will not follow the example of Sadat who put himself
in the position of speaking on behalf of the Palestinian people." And he
added: "As for Libya, our Libyan brothers are always assuring us of their
respect for the right of the Saharan. people to determine their nwn future,
and they never [assume the right to] speak on behalf of the Saharan people."

Mur-al-Din Ahmad 'Ali summarizes the POLISARIO‘s position with regard to
the political actions taken toward solving the Sahara problem by saying:
"He consider that the Western Sahara problem is a question of liquidating
colonialism, and requires a political solution. We have made an appeal for
this solution a number of times and have continually called on the Heat
[Morocco] to renounce its fanaticism, not to follow a policy of war, and

to pursue a policy of peace and of removing the spectre of war from the
whole area. This can be done by entering into direct negotiations with the
Popular Front for the Liberation of Rio de Oro and Saguia el llamra, in its
capacity as the basic party concerned in the conflict and as the sole
representative of the Saharan people," "If the Moroccan monarchy wants

to extricate itself from its involvement, then it has to recognize the
rights of the Saharan people and follow the example of Mauritania, its
former partner in war."

"Mauritania, under the leadership of Ould Daddah, fought against us for

3 years, but finally recognized the rights of the Saharan people and the
futility of the war. Then it pursued the path of direct negotiations with
the Front, and the result was the peace agreement between Mauritania and
the POLISARIO, in accordance with which Mauritania withdrew to its former
borders of 1960."

"If the Moroccan regime can overcome its vanity complex, then the door is
open and we are ready to forget the past. But if it chooses to continue
waging war, then its fate will be no better than that of Ould Daddah, and
the truth will triumph just as it has in Vietnam, Algeria, and everywhere
else."

No Algerian 'l'roops

In reply to Morocco's accusations that Algerian troops are fighting in the
ranks of the POLISARIO Front, Rur-al-Din Ahmad 'Ali says:

"we have already been fighting against the Moroccan regime for 4 years,
and challenge the Moroccan regime to produce even a single witness who
could prove that foreigners are fighting in the ranks of the POLISARIO."

“1he Moroccan regime used to claim that we were a group which the Spanish

set up as their successors, then it claimed that we were agents of Libya,
then it said that we were mercenaries for Algeria, and then we were described
as Cuban and Angolan agents. Finally it said that were were a group of

Mauritanians ."

49
Concerning Morocco's statement that the Saharan people do not have the
capability to continue a large-scale war on a high technological level,
he pointed out that Sadat, when he tried to invade Libya, claimed that
it would be 50 years before the Libyans had the technical ability to use
the advanced weapons that they had.

"At that time Sadat talked about Soviet and Cuban advisers that were active
in the ranks of the Libyan armed forces. This was a justification for his
aim of invading Libyan territory."

2 ,000 Prisoners

He continued, saying: "Right now we have approximately 2,000 Moroccan
prisoners whom we have shown to journalists. "by is it that the Moroccan
regime cannot point to even one foreigner among those that it claims are
fighting in our ranks, although the conumniques which it issues talk about
the thousands of Saharans killed and taken prisoner?"

We Are Not Part of Morocco

In reply to opinions which have suggested that the POLISARIO needs to
declare the Sahara area a liberated part of Morocco in order to get the
Moroccan opposition parties to rally around it, he said:

"We are part of the Arab nation, Lat we are not part of the Kingdom of
Morocco, and it is not possibl: for us to allow the Moroccan opposition to
impose its nationality on us so that it can cooperate with us."

He denied that the POLISARIO Front had any connection with the strike
organized by the Moroccan opposition, but he indicated a connection with
some secret groups inside the army as well as with some organizations whose
activities are forbidden inside Morocco.

Also he denied the existence of any Moroccan soldiers in the ranks of the
POLlSARIO Front, and said: "Up till now we have not been in need of any
military assistance, either from Moroccan parties or from Algeria or Libya."

He assured us that victory for the revolution in Western Sahara will
strengthen progressive forces in the Arab Rest [Maghreb] and will be a
victory for progressive forces in Morocco, Algeria, Libya, and Mauritania.

'lhe Moroccan Oppos it ion

The member of the POLISARIO Pront's political bureau violently criticized
the legal Moroccan opposition, saying that it has made itself a tool of the
Moroccan regime, both on the military and political plane. He predicted

that the Moroccan king would resort to making the opposition responsible
for the defeat which it will suffer in the Western Sahara war.
He said: "Even if the Moroccan opposition does consider the Hestern Sahara
to be part of Morocco, does this mean it should put itself in the king's

lap..?"

"Logic compels it, if it is seriously in opposition to the '..ng and his
regime, to utilize the opportunity, deliver a fatal blow, and set up a
progressive regime which would make it easy for us and tor them to solve
the Sahara problem."

In conclusion he emphasized the fact that 21: countries recognize the Popular

Democratic Saharan Arab Republic, of which only two are Arab countries,
namely Algeria and the Democratic Republic of Yemen.

91068
CSO: 4402

51
POLISABIO WT!“ Ill SPAIN MP8 SPANISH STAN) a seam
HedridlﬂlbOOEﬂiOlnSpanish120ct79PZ

[Statesent by POLISARIO representative in Spain Ahmed BouJari ssde in
Barcelona; date not specified]

[Text] ‘nae Goa-mist proposal to recognise the POLISARIO Front as the led.-
tinate representative of the people of Sahara was reJeoted at the Wednesday
session of the Congress of Deputies by majority votes of the centrists and
nenbers of the 001) Denocratic Center Union]. he Spanish delegation attend-
ing the 0.1!. World derstion of bade Unions issenbly nde a notion on the
Saharan question in which it proclained the Staten people's inalienable
right to eelf—deternineticn and independence. Ahmed Mari. the POLISARIO
Front representative in Spain, discussed the significance this action could
have for his people with the editorial staff of mo 03330.

'Pcr us," BonJari said. ''it is of concrete inpo'. .mce since it etc. from
an initiative of the Spanish branch of the Association 0' Friends of the
United Nations. his is logical and natural and is of concrete inpcrtance
fron our point of View to the extent the: there is penanent and continuous
solidarity anon; the different Spanish political forces. W11, it is
also of widespread importance since there are sole United latims reports
that concretely reocmise the Saharan people' a right to independence and the
more these resolutions, which take note of the legitimate clan of a people.
areextendedand-depublicthencretheyhelptheSahu-anpeopleintheir

struggle."
Relations Seculd Improve

Lined m3»: severely criticized the Spmish Government's position on the
Saharan question: '...ths Spanish Govecmsent persists in its policy of not
wishing to essune its responsibility in the Saharan issue and not wishing to
officially recomise a reality that is being recomired tlu'onghcut the world.
I think that relations between the POLISMIO Front and the Spanish Govennent
should improve. All the conditions required for then to inprove exist,
especially when we consider the situation realistically, inasmch as it is
not a very friendly gesture to nerely offer the Saharan people the bdrid

57
tripartite agreement in order to then request of then privileged reletions
without edoptine m positive position on the conflict until it cones to

an end, a: this pleying field,” Boujnri went on, "I believe Spedn hes the
bell end history beers witness to the eotu of govern-outs. But let Spein
um responsibility for e decision, in one direction or another. Since it
hes blackened the pest, the present is very grey end, if it oontimes to
remin so, I believe thet the ﬁxture holds no hope for cooperetion end
friendship between these two peoples, united by s cocoon history end oulturel
reletions. We have devoted 3 yeere to offering the hend of friendship. I
believe that up to now we have not received en eppropriete response.

"the lbdrid tripertite agreement," the POLISARIO Front representetive in
Spain seid, "hes legalized Morocco end Heuritenie's war of euression sainet
the Salute-n people, Denuncietion of the spout is important beonuse only
inthiewsycentherebepssoeintheerea. However, theSpenishGovernnsnt
hes not yet denounced it end that constitutes e serious matter,"

Referendum in Sahel-e

The chief requirements for e just solution to the conflict ere considered in
the doaanent presented to the 0.1!. World Mention of ll‘rnde Unions Asseebly.
It stetee that the essenbly of the various unions proclaims the Sehnren
people's right to self-dcteninstion end independence, so well no to respect
for the inviolebilit'y of the colonial borders.

In the sens wey. the Spudsh notion petitions the government to ensure the
characteristics of the ﬁnish Stete es en edninistrstive power, with ell
the consequences perteinzng thereto, which ilplies: 1. demmoietion of
the Mrid ease-ate: 2. recogaition of the POLISARIO Front; 5. negotia-
tions designed to achieve self-deteninet on; 4. oondemetion of Home
for its ennention of Sehere.

Jointly with Greet Britein, the Spenish d-vlegetion requests tint e referendum
be conducted, with the easement of the United lotions, end the prior with-
drewel of Moroccan troops. The document recognises "the legitinscy of the
struggle carried out by the Seheren people egsinst Moroccan note of violence
and the legitimate ridlt of the [two] stezes to provide then with sid in

the event they should request it.’I
WWWHDWSADNMVEGOODWWOHW
lhdridBLPAISinSpanish 16 Oct 7992

[Article by special correspondent Felix mom 'mhaned Ali, deputy for
Snare in the Moroccan Pariirnent: 'Horocco Uses Egyptian Rig-17's in
Ssh-3"]

Li‘ert Tinduf (Algeria)—Vhile the Horoccans were recently accusing the

01.15 R10 of using mbans and hat Gemns to com its troops, the POLXSARIO
Front called a press conference including a dozen reporters froa various
countries to put Mohamed Ali Uld Sid El Bchir, the horoccan Parliamt
deputy for Saar-a who recently defected from Morocco to Join the Saharan
refugee camps in Southern Algeria, on display. hohansd Ali aade a mnber of
disclosures on foreign participation in the Moroccan Army. he said tint
there are Baptian and Ansrican experts and confined the presence of the
French, which last bit of information has been knoun since a snll goup of
special correspondents had an opportunity to gain access to broccan ailitary
documents that had fallen into the hands of the POLISARIO after the battle
of nebuirat. Also, several Horcccans taken prisoner during the battle of
Shara have confined what the ex-deputy said about the presence 1n the fightp
ing of Soviet-ads Hie-17's that allegedly reached 110ch by way of Egypt.

Since last week, the Saharan refugee camp: in Southern Algeria have a new
resident, hchaned Ali Uld Sid Kl nachir. Up until a few days ago, W
Ali had one after another held a long list of political offices of reuonal
importance in the Horcccan Governnsnt: deputy for Snare, nyor of the
abandoned city of Anbala, delegate of the Interior Hinistxy, delegate of the
Horoccsn Red Half noon (equivalent to the Red Cross)...

Hohaned Ali's political and adainistrativ-I influence goes back a long way.
nearlyasthefinalyearsoftheSpaniahcolonialera, hevorhedforthe
El iaiun Department of Labor Supervision. Up until a few days ago when,
at the sane tine the battle of Sara was in progress, he decided to defect
to the POLISARIO, Hobs-ed Ali was apparently a aan who had access to the
ixmernost circles of horoccan politics. Judging from statsnents he ads
last Satuday to a group of reporters from different parts of the world,
Hohaned Ali also enjoyed great freedom of nave-sot. His Isabership in

51;
the horoccan parliamentary Foreign Affairs Committee also kept him supplied
with good infcmticn on the course of the Saharan war.

With w own eyes,” ”chased Ali said, “I saw a delegation of American and
Egyptian soldiers in El laiun at the end of last month. Before and (hiring
this year, there have been three or four more American and French military
missions in El Aaiun. In addition to the Byptian-American delegation, a
group of from 17 to 20 French soldiers could be seen in El Aaiun. Snortly
before the Saharan attack on Shara, there was another Preach military dele-
gation, this time composed of 13 men.”

a: the some Saturday we spoke to hehamed Ali, we also had an opportunity to
interview a group of Moroccan prisoners captured during the battle of Sluts.
Among the aircraft that hastened to defend the city, some of them noted the
presence of "a group of black planes that we had never in our lives seen.‘

'Ihese "black planes" were probably the Hir‘l'l's (Soviet planes presumably
soldthrooalkypt) thatﬂchamedAlisaidbetochadseenathaiunAib
port. "me His pilots were not Horcccans." Perhaps ﬁne pilots were Egyp-
tians? "I don't know," Hohamed Ali said, "but what I do know is that they
were not Horoccans.’

Raving kept his eyes open in connection with his political contacts, Mohamed
Ali said he had seen Colonel Dlimi, the military right arm of King Haeean ll,
shortly after the battle of Lebuirat. 'Dlimi told me he had submitted his
resigtation to the king and that the latter had replied: "If you submit
your resignticn to me, to whom can I, wh) am the ccnander-in-chief of the
Armed Forces, submit it?"

According to Mohamed Ali, he recently was able to engage in several more
conversations with Colonel Dlimi, who admitted to his that "there was already
no area in Sahara that was safe for the Marceau," that, "if it loses Sahara,
Morocco runs the risk of possible Bit and Berber independence movements"

and that 'Horoccan superior officers are traitors and it would be necessary
to set up a mixed general staff, composed of Horoccans aid foreigners.“

The former Horcccan deputy also said that the parliamentary Foreign Affairs
Conittee, whose meetings he attended, he! described the occupation of Dajla
(formerly Villa Cisneros) after it was abandoned by the maritanians as
”improvised. "

Mohamed Ali also disclosed that the ibroczans had begun to concentrate part
of the candle population of the area south of their original borders,

where they are receiving weapons and military training. According to what
an important Saharan leader told us, Moro :cc could try to exploit old tribal
differences to get the nomads in the scutmern part of the country to take
part in the var.

11,466
cso: 4410

U!
U!
BACKGROUND, CURRENT SAHARA SITUATION REVIEWED
London AL-DUSTUR in Arabic 8-110 Oct 79 pp 20-22

LArticle by Qusayy Salih al-Darwish: _"Has the King Seized Tiris El Gharbia
To Give It Up in Exchange for Peace'ﬂ/

L'rext7 Hauritania's withdrawal fron the conflict over
Hestern Sahara has led to substantial new developments
in the parameters of this issue. Some of these
developments affect the situation between lbrocco and
Algeria in the wake of the Rabat government's bold
annexation of ‘l‘iris Bl Gharbia. Others affect the
situation in the region of the Arab Haghrib. Still
others affect the Arab situation in general, following
Sadat's expression of readiness to offer military
assistance to bbrocco in its war against the POLISARIO
and Horocco's acceptance of this offer. The latter
nay represent a break in the isolation which the
quptian regine has experienced in the Arab world
since the signing of the separate peace accords.

The following is a special report to AL—DUS'IUR
presenting the background up to thc- present nonent
in the Heatern Sahara conflict.

The battles which have recently occurred in southern Horocco and the serious
casualties which have been inflicted on the Moroccan Royal Arny indicate
that the Sahara problen has arrived at a dangerous threshold where all
possibilities have becone thinkableufroa an all-out war in the region to

a series of new nilitsry uprisings in the neighboring countries involved
in the Sahara problan.

Although fro. the fornal standpoint Morocco appeared to have won a victory-
or a progressive step of the same inportancom-by annexing the region of
Tiris Bl Gharbia (that portion of the Sahara joined to Mauritania in
accordance with the trilateral Madrid Agreement which decreed that the
Sahara would be partitioned between Horocco and Mauritania, with Spain's
consent). the tone and statennts of Moroccan officials point to an

S6
anxiety-filled situation. In this connection, diplomatic circles friendly

to Morocco confirm that the Moroccan leadership has come across no alternative
to imposing its control by force on the Tiria El Gharbia region, having

found itself in an unenviable position following the signing of the peace
agreement between Mauritania and the POLISAKIO prior to last month. This
agreement was signed following the resumption of negociations between the

two sides after Col Mohamed Khouna Ould Haitalla took over as Mauritanian
prime minister and in the wake of concentrated diplomatic activity in this
direction. This activity included the part:cipation of Algiers and Libya.

and reached its climax in a meeting between President Chadli Bendjedid and
Colonel Maidslla in Monrovia. According to the recent Mauritanian-Saharan
agreement. Mauritania is to withdraw from the entire problem--thus relinquish-
ing its share of the Sahara--in the interests of the right of self-determination,
which forms the POLISARIO Pront's main slogan.

In effect, this agreement has reshuffled the cards for the sides involved in
the conflict. For despite the severe defeat which Morocco suffered with

the fall of Mokhtar Ould Daddah's regime on 10 July 1977 and the arrival of

a group of young officers sympathetic to thr POLISARIO Front, it was able

to regain its breath when its supporters on the Military Committee for National
Salvation [ﬁﬂsﬂj were successful in removing the young officers from the
government. The crowning of this success Came when Col Ahmed Ould Bouseif
took over as prime minister and amended the CMBN charter. stripping its
president, Col Mostefa Ould Mohamed Salek, of all his powers. Bouseif's
success was seen at the time as a victory fur the policy of self control

and quiet diplomacy pursued by the government of King Massan II. Indeed,
Bouseif repeated all the steps which he had taken during his tenure in the
previous government as minister of fishing. After reshuffling the cabinet

to remove individuals opposed to Moroccan policy, Bouseif elminated their
supporters from other sectors of the state, especially in the information and
local administration sectors. He also released the ministers who had been
arrested with former President Mokhtar Ould Daddah, and pursued those
individuals who had been forced either to d.sappear inside the Sahara or

flee outside the country. Nevertheless, Ou'd Bouseif was unable to back

away from what was termed the call for peace and create a new dynamism to
achieve it, although in spite of this he pressed particularly for a strategic
alliance with Morocco, France and Senegal, and granted Mauritanians who

were friendly to these states special distinctions. These included the likes
of Smail Ould Oumar, former director of the Mines COmpany and personal friend
of Rothschild. Prior to Bouseif's arrival as prime minister, Smail had
called for Mauritania's eventual union with the region of Northwest Africa.
which would units into an area subject to F"ance, as an alternative to
Mauritania's historical membership in the Arab Maghrib. Moreover. he urged
Morocco to launch an offensive war against Algeria in order to end the
Saharan problem. This policy strengthened Morocco and weakened the position
of the Saharans. However, the death of Colonel Bouseif in an airplane accident
near Dakar moved things back to the starting point, after he had left the
Mauritaniana, Saharans and Algerians with a new conviction of the seriousness
of allowing the Mauritanian position to remain paralyzed.

57
Who Killed Bouseif?

Before examining the development of conditions at greater length, it is
necessary to dwell briefly on the death of (olonel Ould Bouseif. That is

to say, his death does not provide a conplett outline of the situation. in
spite of all the changes it produced. The official statement which was
announced in Nouakchott and corroborated by Dakar spoke of how the military
plane boarded by the Mauritanian official crashed just after a storm blew
over the coast of Senegal. however. AL-DUSTUR has obtained documented
information which confirms that the plane crash was not by fate and divine
decree as announced, but was a planned operation to assassinate Ould Bouseif.
Informed Mauritanian sources add that the plane's pilot, who was a captain,
had intended to make a parachute drop and leave the plane carrying Bouseif
and his companions to crash on its own, but for one reason or another he

was unable to make the drop and was killed along with the others. This
belief is reinforced by the report from Dakar that the Senegalese police had
discovered two bombs at Dakar Airport around the time when Bouseif's plane
was expected to land. If this information is accepted, one must wonder about
the possibility that an organized agency directed the planning of the airplane
accident. Informed Mauritanian agencies deny this, however, and feel that it
was an individual operation, with a possibility that one or more individuals
in addition to the captain who piloted the aircraft carried it out. These
agencies justify this view by saying that the majority of Mauritanians were
not satisfied with Ould Bouaeif's policy, which would have kept Mauritania a
setting for a war between other sides. Morvover, this view also takes into
consideration the evident family and tribal sympathies the Mauritanians have
with the Saharan population, as well as the.r historical fear of Morocco and
its intentions-—intentions which some Moroctan politicians continue to express
and which are presented by the idea that Mauritania is a part of Morocco and
must inevitably be rejoined to it.

For these reasons, the same 10 July Movement had remained prevalent despite

the expulsion of their leaders, and no soonrr had Ould Bouseif died than

Lt Col Maouya Ould Taya was nominated for the Mauritanian prime ministership.
Ould Taya bowed out, however, preferring to remain in the military wing of
government out of fear of a repetition of the tragedy of Jiddou Ould Salek,
who carried out a revolution and was exiled after leaving the army and taking
over the Ministry of Interior. It is worth mentioning that Lt Col Ould Taya-
and this fact is published exclusively by AL—DUSTUR--resigned fro. the previous
military committee and government in protest of the explosion from the
administration of the so-called "elements sympathetic to the POLISARIO."

which included Jiddou Ould Salek, Mohamed thdih Ould Breideleil and Sidi

Ahmed Bneijara. Maouya Ould Taya thus becase the first minister to resign
from the government in the history of indepundent Mauritania. After

Maouya's rejection of the prime ministership, Col Mohamed Khouna Uuld Haidalla
was elected to this office, which became thr top position in the government

and the state after the CMSN constitution, vmich had been amended by Bouseif,
restricted the role of the president of the CMSN to directing committee meetings
only--in other words, to purely formal and protocol-related duties.

58
'oward Agreement

ly was appointed president of the 016“,
d commander of the National Gendarmerie, which

Ihile Lt Col Mohamed Ould Lou
the internal situation in

.t Col Ould Taya was appointe

t and training. haidalla attempted to

1d Mohmed Salek had done before him. In other words,

gain time as Mostefa Ou
o the friendship of

he continued to raise slogans of peace
intaining some formal contacts with the POLISARIO Front. waiting

for Morocco to find a solution satisfactory to all sides. However, Ould

Haidallah was surprised with a change in the psoition of the POLISARIO, on
the one hand, and that of the Moroccan Government on the other. The POLISARIO

began demanding that Mauritania make the discussions between the two sides
public and establish a clearer position 0

n the problem. in this connection.
the POLISARIO publicized the details of discus

sions which had taken place
between its representatives and a Mauritanian

delegation in Tripoli, as
t which was reached between the two sides. This
itanian Government before Morocco, and it was forced
The POLISARI

embarrassed the Maui:

to deny the report of the meeting. 0 Front was then prompted to

announce the lifting of the ceasefire on the Mauritanian border which the
1y Movement in Mauritania.

front had imposed unilaterally during the 10 Ju
the new Mauritanian

As for Morocco, it did not hide its misgivings about
leaders. while prompting its officials to demand specific guarantee pertaining
to the Mauritania ndoubtedly hastened tne develop-

n position. This situation u
ments which comelled Mauritanian officials to make their ultimate decision.
by agreement with the Saharans, for the resolution adopted

which was to vote
by the DAB conference in Monrovia. This decision led to a meeting between
ld Haidalla in the same city, and this was

President Chadli Bendjedid and On

followed by a series of statements by the Mauritanian ministers of information
and foreign affairs concerning Mauritania's wish to withdraw from Rio de 0ro,
generally known as ‘l‘iris El Gharbia, and its support for the right of self-
determination. This brought about increased tension on the Moroccan front.
especially since POLISARIO fighters began to intensify their operations on

this front. In the meantime, while passing through Paris on its way to
tion under th

Algeria. 8 Mauritanian delega
h Lt Col Ahmed Ould Abdelkader. Abdelkader

Ahmed Salem Ould Sidi net wit
ff icers during the Bouseif era.

had been considered one of the strongest 0
After Bouseif‘s later of education, a post which had

death, he resigned as min
been entrusted to nd fled from Nouakchott. seeking

him by Ould haidalla, a
cco, although the Moroccan Government

refuge first in Senegal and then in Moro
known that Ould Abdelkader and Ahmed

denied it at the time. it is generally

Salem Ould Sidi are linked by a strong bond of friendship, and it was this
bond which proapted Abdelkader to come to Paris to meet with Ould Sidi. At
the meeting. Abdelkader propos hat a military action be staged
which would gain the support of the Moroccan forces stationed in the area,

but the delegation head excused himself from this on the pretext that the

situation in Mouakchott was not conducive to suc
action in which Morocco participated would :e

59
on the part of the Mauritanians. Nevertheless. he did promise that they would
take a positive stand on any move which was made provided that he not have an
active role in its execution. He then continued on his way to Algeria to sign
the peace agreement with the POLISARIO. It appears that Haidalla chose

Ould Sidi personally for this mission to block him from taking any other
position. since he had been 1 protege of the Bouseif-Abdelkader group.

The Surprise

The signing of the agreement was a surprise to everyone, including Algeria.
It cast Morocco in the role of the victim and Mauritania in the role of the
killer. Amidst the throng of conjectures and the media outcry which followed
the agreement, Maidalla headed for Morocco to meet with Hassan II and explain
the reasons which had compelled him to take this position. Many people
believed that this meeting would tend to modify the Mauritanian position,
which had been governed by a phobia of either Morocco or Algeria since
Mauritania gained independence, and some did not think it unlikely that
Haidalla would retreat fron what had been accomplished as his predecessor
lbstefa Ould Mohamed Salek had done before him. Mauritanians who know Maidalla.
however, ruled this Out completely. Because as they put it. Haidalla is not
only courageous but courage-Ins to the point; of "folly" when he is provoked.
This is, in fact. what occured. After listening to a harsh speech from the
Moroccan monarch, Haidalla became even more firm in his position. This
caused the go-ahead signal to be given to Lt 001 Ould Abdelkader to call a
press conference in Rabat in which he criticized Algeria‘s agreement and
revealed the existence of a group of free Mauritanian officers who opposed
the existing regime. This press conference prompted Prime Minister Baidalla
to cancel an official dinner and leave Mora-.co that same night, thereby
cutting off any possibility of repairing thu bridges between his government
and the Moroccan regime.

This began a new page in Moroccan-Mauritanian relations, which had remained
strained from the time of Mauritania's independence until the signing of

the trilateral Madrid Agreement with the regime of Mokhtar Ould Daddah, whose
downfall was one of the direct results of this agreement. As one young
Mauritanian put it. the phase of quiet diplonacy by the Moroccan monarch in
his relations with Mauritania ended after he finally lost hope that any
internal change in his favor would occur in the short term. For Ould Haidalla
was successful in purging the army of a group of colonels which was the cause
of the 10 July Movement's deviation from the goals it had set out to accomplish.
and he also locked CMSM members likely to be supporters of Morocco into

formal and ineffective positions. Outside the government. certain right-wing
individuals, especially among businessmen, were arrested, while other
individuals, including Snail Ould Oumar. were placed under house arrest.

In addition. Ould Daddah's ministers who had been released by Bouseif were
returned to prison.

60
The Only Hay

Now, after Morocco's occupation of Rio de Oro and the Moroccan monarch‘s
censure of the Mauritanian leaders, these leaders no longer have any choice
but to strengthen their relations with the POLISARIO and Algeria--especially
since Morocco is now attempting to move the battlefield far away from the
Algerian-Moroccan border and in the direction of Mauritania and Rio de Oro.
Moreover, Mauritanian officials are busily engaged in an effort to rectify
the economic situation in order to head off their oppoents. Colonel Haidalla
has halted construction on the palace which Bouseif had started and has
imposed comprehensive austerity measures on various state facilities. In
addition, he has cancelled the prosecution proceedings against nationalist
elements and asked some of them to participate in the government. In fact,
Sidi Ahmed Bneijara has been appointed governor general of Nouadhibou Depart-
ment, which is the most important department in Mauritania because of its
position as the foremost economic center in the country and site of the port
from which minerals are exported. Bneijara had previously been dismissed
from the Ministry of Finance on the charge of sympathizing with the POLISARIO.
It is reported that other important government positigns will be entrusted to
Maj Jiddou Ould Salek and Ould Zamel Bin Breideleil Lao published; writer
probably meant Ould Zamel and Ould Breideleill. Meanwhile, the Mauritanian
Government has agreed to the nomination of Ahmed Belouafia for the position
of assistant secretary general of the Arab League. Belouafia is generally
known as one of Mauritania's young and active individuals, and was among the
civilian planners of the 10 July Movement. The political forces, meanwhile.
have challenged one another to form a quasi-front among themselves, to include
supporters of the 10 July Movement, the Ba'th Party and the "Kadihine" who
had opposed the regime of Ould Daddah. The front has also won the support

of the Nasirites. 0n the other hand. those known in Mouakchott as the
"Toilers of Maryam" (with reference to Ould Daddah's wife) are attempting

to goad C’MSN President Ould Louly into demanding a change in the charter and
broader powers for himself. It is generally known that Ould Louly is a
conservative individual who still has a certain amount of presence, although
formal, in the government, and his conservatism has reached the point that
he takes along his shroud wherever he goes for fear of death.

As for the POLISARIO Front, it has succeeded in enlarging the scale of the
fighting inside southern Morocco.. Moreover, its agreement with Mauritania
will not only permit it to neutralize that country, but Mauritania will become
a rear base for the front, and possibly was the front's source of supply for
new volunteers, be they Mauritanian position will also increase the degree

to which southern Morocco's inhabitants sympathize with the Saharans because
of the kinship bonds which connect the Saharans and the Mauritanian tribes.

0n the diplomatic plane, the POLISARIO feels that it has achieved a series

of victories represented by the resolutions of the Monrovia conference and

the resolutions expected to be adopted at the Non-Aligned conference. Moreover,
there is the recognition of the Saharan republic by both the island of
Grenada and Ghana, besides Spain's new position which was recently reiterated
by the Spanish foreign minister, who asserted that the Saharan provinces are
still international territories and must be granted self-determination, and
that his government recognizes the Popular Front for the Liberation of Saguia
El Hours and Rio de Oro (POLISARIO) as the sole legal representative of

61
the Saharan people. As for France, the leftist forces there affirm their
support for the front, and to their numbers can be added groups within the
rightist majority which were the main reason behind the French Government‘s
declaration of support for Mauritania, as if thereby giving its blessings

to the agreeaent that was signed with the POLISARIO Front, among other things.
Hhile Algerian diplomacy congratulates itself on its achievementr-inasmuch
as Algeria finds itself in a strong position following the release of

Ben Belala and the granting of permission for Algerian oppositionists to
return inside the country--the Horoccan Govern-eat finds itself in the worst
of situations. For aside free the loss of its ally, Mauritania-which may
turn into an adversary-ﬁts loss of the support of Spain and many of the
African states, and the neutralization of France, the fact that lbrocco felt
compelled to occupy Rio de Oro will increase the nilitary and diplomatic
burdens it has to bear. In fact, the recent battles in southern Morocco,
which could recur at any time, reveal the difficult situation into which

the Moroccan Government has gotten itself. It has been forced to change

the tone of its reports of the fighting, such that for the first time
officially it has spoken of indirect accusations against some Moroccan Army
officers-4f not of collusion with the enemy, at least of slackness in
carrying out patriotic duties. It appears that Moroccan leaders are now
pushing toward a new policy based on keeping the battles away from the
Algerian border unless military considerations related to the balance of
forces, hence international political considerations, take this inpossible.
In both his speech and his press conference, it was noted that the king did
not concentrate on Algeria but centered his attack on Libya, instead. The
Moroccan press followed this up with accounts of Algerian—Libyan disagreements
over the Sahara issue. For eaaaple, it published reports stating that the
POLISARIO's military co-and had moved to Tripoli, which had begun to assume
all the front's expenses following a withdrawal of assistance by Algeria
which thought that the facilitations it had been providing were sufficient.
The Moroccan Government also took up other themes, including a certain amount
of indirect praise for President Chadli Bendjedid. as in the Moroccan monarch's
renark that the possibilities for agreement and meetings are lore favorable
for success than they were during the time of the late President liouari
Bounediene. Pbreover, lbrocco declared what it termed its readiness to offer
concessions to Algeria, including granting it a Moroccan pot: on the Atlantic
Ocean and a corridor connecting the port with Algerian territory. The
Moroccan Government's final these was a report about Cuban fort-1.: within

an international detachment fighting in the POLISARIO's ranks. The Moroccan
aonarch termed this detachment the Cuban destabilization forces in Africa.

However, Algeria did not respond to Morocco'a offers. The Algerian press
asserted that the Horoccan regime had gotten the wrong address, and all it
could do was go and knock on the door of the POLISARIO. the only side concerned
in the aatter. The press followed this up with a violent attack on the Moroccan
Government and the Horoccan king personally, as if to prove that any attemts
to bypass the POLISARIO Front were futile.

Be that as it may, there was no more talk of the FOLISARIO as larcenaries of

Algeria as the Horoccan press had been calling them. Rather, the Horoccan
king announced that POLISARIo's fighters are Mauritanians. and their seizure

62
of power in Mauritania is an internal Mauritanian problem. Some Moroccan
circles, however, began criticizing Morocco's position on the POLISARIO, one
of the effects of which has been to push the POLISARIO toward fighting in
the provinces, as well as the Moroccan position on Mauritania, which the
Moroccan regiae has not treated well.

Today. a new situation has been created in the region. The Moroccan regine
now nust not only defend Seguia El Maura, but Rio de Oro and Southern Morocco,
as well. Sone say that the burden has not changed, since Morocco had taken
on the additional duties of defending Mauritania, but those who hold this
view forget that the Moroccan forces were in territory considered friendly--
at least fron the official standpoint-whereas they are now fighting in
unfriendly territory, despite the state-ents nade by the Moroccan press to

the effect that it was the inhabitants of Rio de Oro who requested protection,
declaring their Moroccan identify and acknowledging the king as the sovereign
responsible for then and over then. However, the fact confined by my
observers and visitors is that the Moroccan forces will encounter great
difficulty in dealing with the inhabitants of the province, despite the noney
which has been and will be showered on their leaders and prominent personalities.
They recall the residents of Saguia Bl ﬂanra who took what they got but have
not as of yet cooperated with the government in spite of the urgent need for
them in the fighting because of their knowledge of the land and climate. But
even the Moroccan regine itself does not trust then. Some Moroccan soldiers
stationed in the city of El Aaiun gave this example: "The inhabitants of the
city are of two types: the type that buys and sells in purely material trans-
actions, but without exchanging any kind of friendly conversation, and the
type that rejects even these connercial dealings.“ Naturally, this is one

of the complicating factors for the Moroccan officials. And now, with the
king calling for a sumait conference of the states adjacent to the Sahara in
order to produce a peaceful solution to the Sahara probles, does he actually
expect that the problen will have positive and new horizons? In that case,
what could he offer? Has he seized Rio de Oro in order to give it up to the
POLISARIO in exchange for peace. on the assumption that he previously acknowleged
the Mauritanian identity of this portion of land. and on the other hand
acknowledged the Mauritanian identify of the POLISARIO? And if he nade this
offer, would the front accept it? In an interview with AL-DUS‘I'UR, one nenber
of the front's political office asserted that this is absolutely unthinkable,
especially since the front is in a position in which it does not need to
offer any concessions, and even if it did need to it would not do this.

After the fighting in the south, the ball is still in Morocco's court. The
matter is tied to the position of King Hassan, whon sone see as having the
courage to reaove the Sahara problem from the realn of nationalist one—upnanship
in which the Moroccan parties have lost themselves—especially since the
consequences of nilitary escalation are not assured, whatever the outco-e of
the fighting.

8591
C80: 6402

63