APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/00: ClA-RDP02-00880R000200030044-0
Near East/North Africa Report

No. 2060

FBIS FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE
- m

JPRS publications contain infatuation prinarily fro. foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also fro- news agency
;transni'asions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
‘ sources are translated; those fron anglish- language sources
are transcribed or. reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

‘ Headlines, editorial reports, and a'aterial enclosed in brackets
'. [l are supplied by Jns. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each iteln, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original infor-tion ms
processed. “were no processing indicator is given, the infor-
nation was subariaed or extracted.

Unhailisr nan'es rendered phonetically or transliterated. are
. enclosed -in parentheses. ward. or names preceded by a. ques-
tion ua'rlt and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the

.‘original' but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical note's within the body of an
iten originate with the source. ri-es- within items are as
given by source. - - ‘ -

its contents of this publication in no my represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the U. S. Govern-ant.

.Psocusmnr 'op' PUBLICATIONS

ms publications my be ordered from the National Technical
Information Service, Springfield, Virginia 22161. In order- .'
ing, it is recon-ended that the JPRS nunber, title, date and
author, if. applicable, of publication be- cited. ,

Current JPhs publicitions are announced in Marine nt- ReErts
Announcements issued senivnonthly by the’llational m: n cal
Informtion- 'Service, and are listed in the Manual: Catalog of‘
U. s. Goverment Publications issued by the Superintendent of .
Documents, 5.8. Govern-ant Printing Office, Hashingt'on, D. 0., _
20402. ‘ ‘

Indexes to this report '(by keyword, 'author, personal nines, ,
title and series) are available fro- Bell a Howell, Old ~
Mansfield Road, Rooster, (bio 184691. _ A

Correspondence pertaining to mtter's other than procurement
13y be addressed to Joint Publications Research Service,
1000 North Glebe Road, Arlington, Virginia 22201.
LYN-Hm

NEAR EAST/NORTH AFRICA REPORT, No. 2060

7. M

 

i-m OW In. an “In.

random-mu.

a. am on.—
20 December 1979

I.

I0. WITH!“ W. 'b

Joint Publicationa Research Service

1000 North Clebe Road
Arlington. Virginia 22201

It. WWII-none“

As above

III-Sum?!“

{I— MAM “Hr. no “I

 

".mumm
IC)

(C!

 

nmdmamMnQ"

This aerial report containa intonation on aocioecononic. governaent. political,
and technical developments in the countries of the Near East and North Africa.

|

 

II. Dorm-van mu 0 W
| Pulirical Science x Inter-Arab Affairs

 

_Libya x__ Sultanate
Sociology North African _Hauritania of Oman
Economics Affaira _liorocco _Syria
Culture (Social Afghaniatan _Peopla‘s Deno- ___‘l’uniaia
Sciences) Algeria cratic Republic _United Arab
Ethnology _Bahrain of Yale!) hiratea
Geography Lngypt _Peraian Gulf Lﬂestern Sahara
Techological Iran Area _Yelen Arab
Hilitary Sciences _Iraq _Qatar Republic
3 Iarael LSaudi Arabia x Islamic Affairs
_Jordan _Spaniah North —
3 Kuwait Africa
_labanon LSudan

t Indium/W loo-ta

mount-mm. 51), 5C. 5K. 15

"Untim-th Availabi lity

Sold by NTIS
Springfield. Virginia 22161

“MI.

 

IMMHMM

uncusggrm

 

UNCLASSIFIED
a. M a Donna

nan-acumen.»

21.8? d nan

32.77.:

m m m 0""
GM mm
NEAR EAST/NORTH AFRICA REPORT

No. 2060

Conn-341s

DEE-ARAB AFFAIRS

Interview With Madrid PM) Chief
(nmzir mam: Interview; £1. ms, 1!» Oct 79)

Salim lavzi Looks at Iran as Defender of Islam
(min 133213 Ml'mmm, 2 NOV 79) ecoceoooeoeoo.

Salim Lawzi Views Meetinian Influence in Arab Oil-
Producing Countries
(Salim mm; mammm, 9 Nov 79)

ISLAMIC AFFAIRS

Islamic Precedents for Diplomatic Inmnity Studied
(mun: Rodinsou; LB MONDE, 25-26 Nov 79)

Draft of Islamic Constitution Prepared
(Mustafa 1mm waan; AL-m'wAn, Oct 79)

mm ‘

U.8. Sufports Egyptian Military Strategy
Ze'ev Schif; mm, 31 Oct 79)

Egyptian, Arab Reaction to Diplouatic Ties Viewed
(Ze'ev Schifi BA'ARm, 29 wt 79) coco-00.0.0.0...

ISRAEL

Chief of Intelligence Reviews Lebanon, Iran, Islamic
world

(Yehoshu'a Sagi Interview; mrar mm,

7 me n e0000.000o.I.aooooaoaaooeoaeoeeeoeooeoooe
WAIT

United States Hill Exploit Iran Crisis for Its Own
Interests
(Editorial; AL-RA'Y AL-‘Am, 9 Nov 79)

American Iack of Understanding of Middle mt Decried
(mnorm; AL-RA'Y mama, 8 Nov 79)

'AL-SIYASAH' Warns of Iranian Crisis' Fbtential for
Disaster

(mm-m1, Ahmad u-Jaranah; mamas,

11 "av 79) IO...IIOOII000IOIOOOOOOIIOODIOOOIIOOO

Editorial Speculstes on Khomyni's Role
(Blitorial, Armd sl-Jarallah; AIrSIYASAn,

.12 NOV 79) .0IO...OI.III..IOIIIOOOOOIOOOOIOOIOOO

LEBANON

Briefs
Ssrkis To Visit Moscov, Washington

SAUDI ARABIA

King Reaffirms Support for mlestinisns
(AL-“STAQML, 10 Nov 79)

Contract for large Fertilizer ProJect Signed
(Al-Bali'li All-Rm, 8 "0V w) 90.000.000.00...

Briefs
Airport Construction
South Korean Troops

SUDAN

Ousted First Vice President works Agninst Regime
(AL-mm, h-lo NOV 79) onseooeooooonoeeeoou-o-
com-Burs (Continued)
SULTANATE or own

First, 3 Years or 5-Year Plan Show Good Results
(‘W’ 1-8 “0v n) toss-on-close-lo-ounoosoolooon...

WSW

POLISARIO'B Abdelaziz Reviews Struggle Against. Lbr'occo
(Mohamed Abdelaziz Interview; m. newsman,

1‘ RC 79) 0000.0v.osooooooooso-nnosuoovontosooscnoos

Saharan 'Prime Minister' Inmine Gives Interview to
Algiers Rper
(Hobs-ed mine Ould Aland; EL nouwum, 12 Nov 79)

Briefs
Attack on Moroccan Base
Village Attack Repulsed
INTERVIEW WITH MADRID PLO CHIEF
Madrid El. PAIS in Spanish lb Oct 79 pp 19-22

[Interview with Munzir Dajjani, PLO delegate in Madrid, by Soledad
Alameda; date and place not given]

[Text] The Palestinians who were children in
I968 are 35 or 100 now. since that time, many of
them have known nothing but wars and refugee
camps. Many of then have been and are guerrillas.
Many have died. The youngest adults were already
born in exile or as refugees. Munzir Dajjani was
one of that era's children, but for many years
his fighting name was Abu el Baa. lie now holds
the post of head of the PLO delegation in Madrid.
He speaks to us today in these pages, and what he
says is similar to an X-ray view of himself, his
people and his country.

[Question] The concept of fatherland is less passionate, less
present in European countries, for example, than in countries in
which liberation struggles are going on, Nicaragua, to cite a
recent case. How do Palestinians, how do you yourself, feel about
your fatherland?

[Answer] European, African or Asian citizens who live in their
own countries devote their attention to work and family and to
pursuing facets of life and feelings that are cos-son to free when.
when they are asked about their desires or hopes, they will naturally
say that they want more money, a better job, greater family harmony,
a brilliant future for their children. But when a Palestinian is
asked that question, he replies without hesitation that what he
wants is to return to his homeland, because it has been 30 years
since he lost it and because he knows perfectly well what he is, that
he is an exile. I think that this lack, this loss of identity
definitely makes hin sad and prevents him from devoting himself to
love, to happiness and to the normal work that most men do. I would
any that Palestinians are very much in love with their land precisely
because they are separated from it, and as happens with all passionate
love affairs, it extends to everything that their land produces, even
poisonous plants. Palestine determines everything in my life, even
my attachments and social relationships. To me, to us, Palestine

is simply the past, present and future.

[Question] At what age did you realize that you were an eaile,
that your land had been occupied?

[Answer] I was b years old when England, the United States and
the Zionist movement brought in hundreds of thousands of European
and Arab Jews to Palestine, despite the opposition of my people to
that policy. My father and my uncle, a pharmacist and surgeon,
respectively, had a hospital in Haifa, the best hospital in the Near
East. The entire family had to move to Gaza, where my mother had a
small house and a garden. It was clear that the Palestinian people
had to pay the region's price 'sr the Second Horld Bar, and they paid
it with their land, their sovereignty and their economy. In 1908
the Palestinian people were like strangers in their own land,
subjected to all sorts of terrorism and massacres, expelled and
living in refugee camps. I was going to school in Gaza in I955. It
was the last day of the school year, and it was on that day that I
had my first encounter with death. The Israelis bombed the city, and
all of us students ran out. A close friend of mine and I each went
to our houses. The next day, this friend, whose name was Jaled,
didn't make it to school; he had been killed by an explosion. I did
not know what death was; I was quite young. But I had a strong
feeling that it was something like permanent absence. I also found
out that the bombs were Israel's present to our school commencement
celebration.

[Question] This is your first recollection of death. "hat was
your first encounter with a weapon?

[Answer] In I956, after a bombing run that also scattered white
sheets of paper calling for the surrender of the Palestinian people.
My brothers and I had taken refuge underneath a tree, where we hid
for the entire day. when my mother allowed us to come out, we headed
home, and I saw an Egyptian soldier throw a rifle under a tree. I
picked it up. It was a British rifle. I hid it on the roof of my
house. A long time passed before I told my father anything about it.
It was like a secret that I wasn't sharing with anyone. I often went
up to take a look at it and clean it. Soon thereafter I became a
member of the Association of Young Christians of Gaza. At that time
I was very fond of listening to older people. They spoke about
Palestine, about how long we had been living under the occupation,
about Arab unity, about Nasser. They sat down and kept on talking.
Meanwhile, my rifle was still in hiding, and I didn't even really
know why I was keeping it. Perhaps I was waiting for my elders to
say something in this regard, but they said nothing.

[Question] llow did you make contact with Al Fatah?

[Answer] During a vacation at my sister's house. My brother-
in-law, who was an engineer at some oil wells near the Red Sea, had
a small, thin, dirty magazine. For the first time in my life I saw
in print that Palestine had been betrayed. It said who the
Zionists were and recounted the treason of the British and of many
Arab regimes. The magazine was called OUR PALESTINE, and it was
put out by Al Fatah. A year passed (I really don't know why) before
I spoke about it with my beother-in—law. Shortly thereafter, I
entered university to study engineering, 350 kilometers from Cairo.
Around that time I began talking more or less every day with my
companions about this, about Al Fatah. but neither I nor the
others really knew what the organization was, although most of us
agreed with what they were saying. He decided to run in the
university elections to establish relations with Al Fatah later on.
We were elected and we contacted the organization. He were put in
charge of organizing the movement in the university. I have to say
that from that moment on, as far as I was concerned, the university

a only a cover for my work in the organization. No one discovered
us, despite the secret services. and in I966, before leaving on
vacation, they entrusted me with buying weapons and getting ready
several men who knew the road from Palestine to Gaza. I got a
revolver, a machine gun and two grenades and I made an agreement
with two companions to entrust then with missions later on.

[Question] How important were university students at the outset
of the PLO?
[Answer] University students have played an extremely important

role in the organization. This is absolutely certain. Even Arafat
and all of our comrades in the leadership started their work as
students. You can obviously do more when you're better prepared, no

doubt because consciousness-raising is easier for a person who is
prepared.

[Question] Hhen did you meet Arafat?

[Answer] In I964, at an underground meeting in Cairo. He was
with comrade Faruk Kacdumi, who is in charge of the organization's
foreign affairs today. I met him again in 1968, coming back from a
mission in Jordan. On that occasion he sent me to southern
Palestine, and when I protested that I was used to working in crowded
cities (because I was being sent to the countryside), he told me in
reply that the invader was everywhere and that we had to go in search
of him. lie went on to say that unfortunately the enemy understood
only the language of force and that we would be victorious because
we were in the right.

[Question] Would the PLO have been the same without Arafat?

[Answer] The organization's leadership is collective, and the
process of succession is too. Arafat is unquestionably the leading
figure, but if he died or fell, it would not mean the death of the
revolution. His replacement has already been prepared, in fact.
because, as I said, our work is collective. 0f the nine comrades who
began the revolution, five have fallen (at the hands of the Zionist
forces or Arab regimes), and the revolution has moved forward.

[Question] To what degree have relations between the Palestinians
and the other Arab countries deteriorated because of the revolution

that you are fighting, and what consequences could this have if the
war ends sooe day?

[Answer] The Palestinian people, who are spread throughout many
Arab countries, unquestionably identify with the struggle, and they
back or oppose the regimes in these countries to the extent that they
«upport the Palestinian struggle. But we cannot speak of
deteriorating relations between Palestinians and other Arabs, just
certain Arab regimes at a given moment. Relations between the
Palestinian people and the Arab peoples are excellent. I could cite
for you so Isny cases that confirm what I an saying...Por example,

I can tell you that the first time that I went into Jordan, I reached
A-an with a mission. There, I went to look for my uncle, whom I
didn't know and who was a cabinet minister. lie gave me refuge in

his house for 3 days, offered me an arsenal of weapons that be kept
hidden and took me in his official car to the meeting with my comrades.
But, above all, this man sincerely cried when I told him of our
struggle, what we were after, why we were struggling. And this is a
very little compared with the Iothers who are willing to sacrifice
their sons, with entire families who risk their lives by hiding
Fedayeen.

[Question] How did your uother react when you joined the armed
struggle?
[Answer] When the six Day Her (1967) broke out, we received

instructions from the organization to join the struggle in full force.
He left from Cairo airport for Damascus. There were 22 of us, and we
were armed. My mother came to say good-by to me; she didn't ask
me anything. The only thing that she said was: “What‘s going to
happen with your studies?" I told her that I would complete my
studies when we had a land and a house to hang my shingle. Soon
thereafter we traveled to the training camp that Al Fatah had near
Damascus.

[Question] You were a political cosnissar at this camp. what
did you do?

[Answer] We gave talks about the revolution, about why we were
fighting, against whom, how to do it. In addition, every afternoon,
groups of us headed for occupied land on operations through the
Jordan and the Golan Heights. we took special suitcases containing
weapons, explosives and books to be handed out among our people.
Other groups headed for recently occupied lands to pick up arms that
the Arab armies might have left behind while retreating.

[Question] Haven't you at times wanted to live a normal life,
like a person not involved in'a war?

[Answer] I believe that a person like me, like Palestinians in
general, without a fatherland, without an identity, is a warped

person and that we will not develop, in the normal sense of the word,
until we return to our fatherland. This is the case both individually
and as a group, as a coil-unity, as a people. But I think that this

is difficult to understand for a person who has not experienced what
we have. You could even say that this is a defect of ours, but it

is not a defect that stens from Palestinians themselves, from their
makeup as a people. It is a painful and artificial eleuent that

has been atttached to, superimposed on the personality of Palestinians.
But I think that this is a defect that will be corrected by returning
to our fatherland.

[Question] And how does this defect show up, especially in a man
who has been a guerrilla, like you? What do you lack? what do you
miss?

[Answer] I would smarize it in one word: my land.

[Question] How has the struggle affected relations between people
who love each other?

[Answer] A normal couple can determine the kind of relationship
they want to live with, in accordance with their own feelings and
circustances. They can marry, live together, begin and end
relationships, have or not have children. A Palestinian can never
think about a relationship that way. Before all else, he thinks about
whether the relationship will fit in with the struggle, whether his
love will enable him to continue in the struggle or not, whether

it contradicts the struggle.
[Question] And how do you feel about the idea of death?

[Answer] I take it for granted that we live in an abnormal
situation, and therefore, it is hard for me to imagine how I would
feel about death if I were a normal, regular man. Death is something
quite different to me and my family. To begin with, as head of

the family, I am not afraid of what would happen to them if I
passed away. My family is so bad off that my death could never
worsen their situation. Of course, no one totally loses his fear
of death. But I think that from our viewpoint there are expensive
and inexpensive deaths, some that are worthwhile and others that
are not. When a person dies for something sacred, for a principle
or the fatherland, his death is unquestionably worthwhile. Re have
a scale of values. I have values. It is not the same thing to
die suddenly as to die struggling. Nor is it the same to die
struggling against the enemy inside our homeland as outside it. To
die while struggling and to die in Palestine comes first on the
scale as far as I am concerned.

[Question] mm: problems are these feelings that you call
abnormal, this warping, going to cause for your people in adapting?

[Answer] There will be no problem. It is like a person who
has a tumor and, suddenly, he is operated on, it is removed, and
he perks up and regains his health. I think that when we return to
our homeland we are going to be happier and enjoy everything that
we cannot now.

[Question] You realize that there could be repercussions...

[Answer] I am convinced that on a psychological level everything
has repercussions and also that we will have to resolve these
"warpings." I also know that it is not going to be done overnight.
The Palestinian people will need some time to regain psychological
normality, to have "normal" reactions. But I am sure that it is
going to be very easy because the joy of living in our own land will
help us.

[Question] There are two factors that are perhaps causing the
most trouble: religious fanatacism and violence...

[Answer] Obviously. Some of our people have become exasperated
with false promises and feel great mistrust, especially towards the
great powers. Under these circumstances, some people have backed
out and turned to God for want of anything or anybody else, in
search of confidence. At the opposite extreme, others have turned
to violence. These two issues will unquestionably have to be dealt
with when the Palestinian people return to their land. There will
be religious fanatacisl, but not among a majority, and there will
be violence to take care of. These are reactions triggered by the
situation in which people are living.

[Question] Nationalism, religious fanatacism and violence
usually bring on fascism. This could happen with the Palestinians,
as some say it has with Israel's Jews.

[Answer] There is a difference. Spanish, French or American

Jews live inersed in a society and carry on a normal life within it.
when the Zionist movement took them to Palestine to become part of
Israel, it did so at the cost of uprooting them frm their

customs, the society in which they lived, their past. And in

Israel they came face to face with a mixture of people from many
different societies and with different outlooks and customs. This
created complexes in many of them that have led to the Israeli
Government's current attitude. The exact opposite happened with the
Palestinian people, who were homogeneous, with the same customs and
circumstances, and in whom all of the warpinga and abnormalities that
we are cementing on were caused precisely (don't doubt it) by

their dispersion into many different countries. Thus, Palestinians
will be normal again when they return to their land, when they

regain their place as a group. In contrast, I think that the
citizens of Israel will regain their normality only when they return
to the society from which they came. This is a distinction that

we ought to be very clear about. Don't forget that they speak more
than l00 languages in Israel.

[Question] And do you think that Palestinians who were born in
exile and return, let's say, at age 50 are also going to adapt
right away? Hon't their case be more difficult?

[Answer] A Palestinian child born in a refugee camp and returning
to his land, as you say, at age 50, has grown up, from the very
moment of his birth, iaanersed in the question of Palestine. As soon
as he opena his eyes after birth, his father, following an ancient
custom, puts water, or sometimes earth, from Palestine on his
eyelids. And when he is 10 or 5 years old, his father takes him by
the hand, takes him outside the army tent where they live in the
refugee camp and says to him: ”You see that land a few kilometers
from here? Well that's where we had a better life and were happier."
This means that or explains why a Palestinian will be happy when

he returns to his land, no matter what age he is, because he has
finally gotten to where he dreamed of all his life.

[Question] Do you hate an enemy when you struggle against him?

[Answer] You lose your hate. I lost it one day when several
comrades fell during a mission. I couldn't explain it to you; I
think that only a person who has experienced it can grasp it. I
felt as if those dead brothers were growing inside me. and I also
felt that I no longer hated the enemy. Perhaps that's why later
on, during a mission on which we were supposed to destroy a factory
that produced heavy water for a nuclear powerplant, we didn't care
about running risks to prevent the bomb that we had set from
exploding when the factory was full of civilians at work. Re
preferred to bury ourselves up to our noses in sand for ID hours,
while the Israelis looked for us, rather than kill civilians and
have aore time to get away.

[Question] It nust be easier to kill when you feel hate, mustn't
it?
[Answer] There comes a time when you cannot forget that the

enemy has a wife and children and that he is no doubt an innocent
fellow who was brought in under the illusion that the land was
empty, uninhabited.

[Question] But tell me, is it more difficult to continue
killing when your hate is gone?

[Answer] A person at times does things very much against his
will, very much so, things with which he does not agree psychologically.

[Question] And this creates a conflict in a person's head, in
yours, for example, doesn't it?

[Answer] Hell yes, there are conflicts. A person's homeland
at tines forces him to do things that are at variance with his

way of being or his feelings. This has happened to me. In mid-I969
I felt completely drained and was sent to London for treatment.
After all of the necessary examinations, the doctor told me that
my illness was due to an internal conflict caused by the will to
do certain things and the body's ability to do then, to hold up.
According to what the doctor told use, this is such a typical and
clear-cut illness that it only occurs in wars. The internal
conflict between what I had to do and what my conscience dictated
could have had very serious consequences if it had not been treated
in time. The treatment consisted of getting away from everything,
from the struggle; I remained a year in drydock.

[Question] Does the struggle make you harder, more understanding?
[Answer] I think that a person who struggles for a just cause

becomes more human, more understanding. When the struggle is
unjust, a person becomes inhunan, harder, and I think that the
conflict must be greater. Just look at the American soldier in
Vietnam. he was not convinced about his own struggle, and the
upshot was a great deal of crime and violence when he returned to
his own society and country. And let's not talk about internal
crises. We do not know of a single similar case of crime and
violence in a Palestinian soldier.

[Question] The Jews in Israel are having problems because of
their low birth rate. Exactly the opposite is the case with your

people; you are reproducing incessantly. Is this a "weapon," so
to speak, or is it simply a longstanding custom?
[Answer] In I948 there were l50,000 Palestinians in Palestine.

Today, the statistics of the Israeli Government itself show that
there are 600,000 of us. The fact is that Palestinians in
occupied land had their reasons to have more children: they were
convinced that they were being subjected to a war of extermination
and that they needed a lot of children to survive. Golda Meir said
in connection with their situation that it was a time bomb against
the Jews, and when she said that the Palestinians didn't exist,
their reaction was to bring more children into the world.

[Question] And don't the motives of survival coincide with the
lack of birth control methods? Because you would also think that
in a situation like the one that the Palestinian people are living
in, in refugee camps, etc, it would be better not to bring children
into the world. Perhaps that would be how a very educated person
would react.

[Answer] No one wants to see his children suffer from hunger and
calamities, without a chance to get an education. Palestinians would not
have been so prolific, I assure you, ifthere were not reasons that

I would call war-related.

[Question] when a person has fought for his entire life, like
you, what do you feel life or the struggle has taken away from you?

[Answer] I think that we have not passed through the decisive
stages of adolescence and youth and everything that it is normal to
know and experience during those years. 'I have spoken about this
with a number of comrades, and we mentioned, for exemple,that we
did not have sexual experiences during our youth, as would be normal.
But when you're involved in the struggle, the fact is that you don't
have the time to think about this, and you don't even try to. Some
psychiatrists recon-end that parents keep their teenage children
occupied so that they don't think about all these sex-related things.

Well, our parents didn't have to worry about this; it was taken care of
for them.
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000200030044-8

[Question] You have also missed strolling in the moonlight,
reading, going to the movies...Do you regret this?

[Answer] I miss not having been able to continue my studies as
far as I would have liked, and, sure, other things, like reading.
But now, at age 35 and at this point, I have come to the conclusion
that what I did, what we did, was the best thing that we could have,
and I also think that the books that we read or the struggle that
we pursued enriched our experience. I have not acquired the
conventional culture, but I unquestionably have a different sort of

Culture, one that I have acquired over many years of guerrilla
warfare.

[Question] For some time now you Palestinians have been hijacking
fewer planes and launching fewer indiscriminate attacks. Your
struggle is becoming more political than combative.

[Answer] I have two things to say about this. First, the PLO

has never been in favor of these overseas operations or plane
hijackings. But there is another parallel concept. Previously, the
voice of the Palestinians was not heard in the world, and a number

of Palestinian groups, fortunately in the minority, wanted this

voice heard in the world and utilized the means that you have mentioned
to accomplish this. Brroneous means, obviously. Nowadays, thanks

to this struggle and the political struggle, carried on in parallel,
the world listens to us and with increasing attention. At last we

no longer have to resort to other than a strictly political struggle.

[Question] Everyone feels fear some time, even a hardened fighter
like you. When did you feel most afraid?

[Answer] In I97]. We were in northern Jordan, surrounded by

the Jordanian Army. It was the last stronghold, the final
escalation of the developments of September I970. We had reports
that the army was going to launch a general attack on our last bases.
It was a combination of personal fear and fear for the revolution.

[Question] As far as you are concerned, what is the relationship
between revolution and personal future?

[Answer] Without any doubt many of us could, with our degrees,
lead or make normal lives, but that doesn't interest us. To me,

to talk about the future is always to talk about the national and
political future of all of us. My future and the future of the
revolution are one and the same thing, something inaeparably joined.
Perhaps this is not easy to understand, because the relationship
between a man and his people, his land only comes out when the

land is in danger, when he does not possess it.

10

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: CIA-RDP02-00850R000200030044-8
Notes, Memoirs and hemories

During Yaasir Arafat's recent visit to Spain, Marcelino Oreja asked
hin in one of their talks whether he was planning to write his
nemoirs. "I could, I might, as soon as I have the time," the PLO
leader replied. Be went on to say: "We Palestinians have a very

good memory; we meticulously file every political and military
situation. But if our memory fails us, if we fall during the struggle,
I reco-end to my people that they carry a small diary to jot

down daily events and their reflections on them." Arafat then showed
Oreja a small notebook with tiny handwritten notes.

Hunzir Dajjani ie the head of the PLO's diplomatic delegation in
Madrid. He also keeps a small notebook and hes a memory that is
long in tine and extensive in events, one of them tragic. During
his adolescence and youth he even tried to change the. course of
some of these eventa. Travel, the desert, death and exile have been the
constants throughout his life. He came into contact with the PLO
while at university. Shortly thereafter, he was the organization's
university representative. Later on, for several years he also
held the post of political co-issar at an Al Fatah camp near
Lebanon, with incursions into occupied territory. He thus became
a Pedayee, an outstanding Pedayee who held poets of the highest
military responsibility in Egypt, Syria and Lebanon.

He has now held a diplomatic poet in Madrid for the last 6 years.

"1 night stay here and I might also be sent back to the organization's
eilitary apparatus. He Palestiniana are willing to come and go
wherever we're needed. The organization trains us to work in all

of the facets of the revolution. You could call it a veritable
transfer system." Hunzir Dajjani has four children. The eldest's
name is Eu, after his father's name in the underground and which
hie comrades still know him by: Abu e1 Eu. Arafat's, for example,
is Abu-Amsr. Hunzir Dajjani was born in Jerusalem 35 years ago.
with his sad eyes that see- to look inward, weary and somewhat
timeless eyes, he still says today that the revolution and his
personal fate are indiviaible, inseparable, so much so that he could
not imagine what his life would be like if the revolution were to
fail, because it would make no sense then. But the international
stand on the Palestinian issue has changed, and therefore, the
notion of a Palestinian homeland has begun to gain momentum.

11

SAL!!! LAHZI LOOKS AT IRAN As DEFENDER 0P ISLAM
London AL-IAHADITH in Arabic 2 Hov 79 pp 28-29

[Article by Seli- Lawzi: "Can Iran Take the Place of the Otto-an State in

Filling the Role of Protector of the Sanctuary of Isis. Throughout the
World?"]

[Text] The 500 years of Otto-an rule over the lslaaic countries. including
the Arab countries, are justified in the eyes of history by the fact that
the Otto-ans were the protectors of Islam in the face of the invasion of
the Crusaders. Indeed. the Turks were the east heroic of the Islnic
eleaents in the war against the European attackers against Jerusalea. And
because they filled the role of protector of the sanctuary of lsl- against
Islam's eneaies, their state renained well-loved by Hoslens, and even Arabs,
until the last days of Otto-an rule. By no scans did the Iajority of Arabs
support the outbreak against Turkey during World War I. After mentioning
liusayn ibn 'Ali's revolution against the hub, sole Arab colonists would
follow this reference to the fighting sherif with stinging criticise. In
Egypt, for exaqle, the revolution against the Otto-an state is considered
to have been based on an erroneous position which caused har- to the Arabs
and served the influence of the western powers which inherited the Otto-an
rule.

One who reads the stateaents of the de facto officials in the Iranian
revolution-manly, the leaders of the leaders and the ninisters of the
ministers-motes that Iran is now seeking to fill the role of protector of
Isles and is taking its place as successor to the Ottoman state. The
struggle for the liberation of Jerusale- made the Turks nasters in the past,
and this sane struggle is appropriate to asks the Persians nastsrs today--
at least in the Gulf.

But can Iran rightfully assune the capacity of protector of the sanctuary
of Islam in this region?

The difference is that the Gulf is new governed by fanilies which protected
before they ruled. The deputyship or trusteeship which is in their hands
charges that with cowating the threats emanating from the countries
surrounding the entities or societies--or Arabism, as it is now called. The
Sabah, Khalifa, Thani, and Nuhaysn families, among others, became the leaders
in their societies because they wore the sword of protection and represented
the Arab purity of origin going back to Bedouinism. If the ancestors of
these rulers could be asked now which description or name they would prefer-
that of ruler or that of protector—they would probably chooee the latter.
While it is true that they protected the Gulf against other Arsb's on
occasion, they also protected it from non-Arabs. Thus Kuwaiti history,

for exanple, records the near reverence accorded to the battle of al-Jahrah,
which was led by the Sabah family.

However, the quintessence of the struggle waged by the Gulf families was
the defense of the Arabian of the Gulf. For the Sabah family is still in
Kuwait, and the Khalifa family is still in Bahrain. 0n the other hand, the
shaykhs of al-Huhammarah from the Khaz'al family and the shaykhs of Basra
from the el-Naqib family are pure Arabs who have been overtaken by time.
The Khaz'al family was destroyed by the force of the Iranian victory, and
the al-Naqib family disappeared as a natural development. A long time has
passed since the days of ancient glories when popular poets in Basra said
of Talib al—Naqib: "One-third is for God and two-thirds is for Talib, and
God's third is claimed by Talib." The current fear for Basra, the Shatt-
al-Arab, the islands, and the entire Gulf is now centered on Iran, in
contrast to the days when people feared for Iran's safety from the shaykhs
of Basra, the cavalry of the Shatt-al-Arab, and the attacks of the Qaslme.

It is not easy for Iran to fill the role of protector of the sanctuary of
Islam, whether in the Gulf or elsewhere, even though Egypt's absence from
the Arab arena has encouraged all other powers to assume larger roles.
Khomeyni's standing grew in importance after the role of the rector of al-
Azhar diminished. For Khomeyni is an exceptional man, and there are no
exceptional men in Egypt. After Israel succeeded in taking possession of
parts of all the Arab states surrounding it, the might of all Arabs weakened,
not just that of the Egyptians. Nevertheless, the Arabs continue to hold
the privileged position among Hoslems, because in the final analysis Islam
is Arab, and the Arab countries are the richest of the Islamic countries,
have been most often in the mainstream of coupon universal history, and are
the most important of the Islamic countries strategically, both in military
and nonmilitary terms.

It is not permissible for a non-Arab power to use the Arabs' reversal to
diminish their role, as Iran is now doing. For if Khomeyni loves Jerusalem
and Palestine, then he as an imam is in keeping with the teachings of his
religion, and this act does not entail any benevolence or reward except

the reward of God in heaven.
The shah fell because he went against Arab national feelings. and out-
bidding is the counterpart of opposition in terns of throwing salt in

the wounds and offending sensibilities. The Palestinians have the first
right snong Arabs and Hoslens to reap the fruits of a revolution which.
beyond the slightest doubt, they had a part in asking. They would be
neglectful of theeselvea and their cause if they failed to interest freely
and coqletely with the Islanic revolution in Iran—especially since the
Palestinian revolution itself also developed in an atnosphere of Islamic
revolutionary ideology, and the success in Iran is a success of the one
ideology. not just a success of nilitary and political cooperation.

However, despite the Palestinians' right to be proud of the Iranian
revolution, they still have a duty to resin realistic and nationalistic
in their dealings with the Arabs, and in particular with the Gulf states.
The people of the Gulf, on the other hand, must understand balance, for
every side retains its full right. The Iranians, the Palestinians, the
people of the Gulf , and all other Arabs and Hoslens have their rights.

The rulers of the Gulf are highly skilled in nsintsining balances, and
they are unlikely to sake a mistake in this regard. If they avoid such

a mistake, and if the Palestinians and in particular the Iranians do
likewise, then the balance will continue to serve all sides. But if this
does not happen, the cost will be high. The struggle will not be ended

easily, ouce it has begun, and the revolution which is a hope today could
turn into a curse tonorrow.

If Israel wanted to create a conflict which would rid them of the Arabs.
the best place to do it would be the Gulf. Pros an objective standpoint,
the conflict in the Gulf is an Israeli conflict, even though Israel itself
is renote fron it. Thus the failure of a three-way balance along the
people of the Gulf, the Palestinians, and the Iranians would be Israel's
nost significant victory. In fact, it would be nothing short of being the
nost significant conflict on the Israeli-Arab border.

An avenue to the failure of this balance exists at the present tine in the

Iranian ambition to fill the role of protector of the sanctuary in the
Islamic region!
SALIH LAHZI VIEWS PALESTINIAN INFLUENCE II M OIL-P30000113 COUNTRIES

London AL-HAHADITI! in Arabic 9 Nov 79 pp 20-21

[Article by Salia stzi: "Conference of Understanding and Communication
Between Gulf Rulers and Khomeyniites. Arranged by the PLO and Supervised
by Abu 'Amar!"l

[Text] If Qadhdhafi and Abu 'A-ar have a disagree-ant, which one of them
will win the loyalty of the Palestinians who comprise 30 percent of the
military strike vanguard of the Libyan Army? Does the iaportance of the
Palestinian revolution lie in its growing military strength. estimated at
250,000 fighting men. or in its potential for aggravation and penetration in
Arab and Islamic countries-«specially those countries of the Arabian
Peninsula and the Gulf that contain oilfields?

Is the cautious position of the Gulf rulers regarding the Iranian revolution
merely the result of fear for their oil?

Most people I met during my recent visit to Kuwait and Bahrain asked me:

What is the nature of the alliance between Khomeyni and Arafat? Is it a
strategic or a tactical alliance? How long can it continue? Is it true

that Khoneyni is trying to use his alliance with the Palestinians to confront
the demands of Arabistan?

These and other questions contain suppressed concern that the Palestinian-
Iranian alliance will be reflected in difficulties, problems, and currents.
For there is a fear in the ainds of Gulf rulers that the Palestinian revo-
lution's rapproschment with the new Iranian regime is taking place at the
cost of aggravating the historical problems which continue to exist between
the Arabs and the Persians—problems concerning the identity of the area,
the nature of the geographical boundaries, and the quality of relations.
These relations must be good and strong, without deceit by either side, and
without either side having strong supreaacy, whether this supreaacy is
alloyed with Islamic slogans or not. Therefore, my answers to the questions
posed to as did not generally satisfy the questioners. I was content to
reply that whether the Palestinian-Iranian alliance is strategic or tactical.
the two sides benefit from it, and it will continue to exist as long as the
benefit remains mutual!

16
This smarization was intentional. For I know that the Gulf rulers' fear
of Iranian aiss predates the arrival of the oil era and is t .d on specific
hues and geographical factors that can be terned nationaJ .stic, territorial

or sectarian. But they are absolutely not naterial factors based solely on
oil.

Moreover, it would not have been easy for as to give a lecture on the nature
of the alliance between Khoneyni and Arafat when the feeling in the Gulf is
that any approach which the Palestinian revolution lakes toward the Iranian
regine without taking the view of the Gulf residents into consideration is
an indict-ant of their joint national and Arab bond with the Palestinians.
One Gulf leader told Ie frankly: The Palestinian revolution is entitled to
have all other revolutions and revolutionaries in the world rally around it—
and especially all Hoslen revolutionaries—but with one condition: that this
does not happen at the expense of the Arabian of any other Arab region. For
when they reach out to the Iranians. their hearts mat continue to beat for
the Arabian of the Gulf as well. In Iran, there are extrenist elenents
within the Iranian revolution which proceed from a position of hostility

to the Arabian of the Gulf. These elaents fern a nucleus of deep nisunder-
standing between the Iranians and the people of the Gulf. The tragedy is
that the Palestinians find the-selves swept up. with or without their
knowledge, in a deepening of this nisunderstandingl

During the atom stirred up by Ina Khoneyni's son-in-law, ﬂujjah-al-Islan
'Ahhas al—Hahri, in Kuwait and by Ayatollah Sadiq Ruhani in Bahrain, a
press conference was held by the Iranian albassador to Kuwait, Dr Ali She-s
Ardkani, to soothe Gulf apprehensions about Iranian anhitions. The sins-
sador related what the Iranian revolution had given to its sister nove-
Ient, the Palestinian revolution: "Iran lost $750 nillion worth of oil
which Israel did not pay for because we dared to cut off relations, although
in practical terns we are not in a state of war with Israel. We cut off
our relations with Egypt after the signing of the Cap David agreenents.
without concern for the debts Egypt owes us, which asounts to $2 billion.
We threatened to cease our dealings with Turkey unless it cut off relations
with Israel, because the ins- believes'that any Islanic country which deals
with Israel col-its a sin against its religion."

The ambassador also said: ”Moreover, the new Iranian constitution includes
a provision which lakes the Arabic language conpulsory at all stages of
education. fron elenentary school to university. This is the first tine
anywhere in the world that a state has included in its constitution a

stipulation cospelling its citizens to learn a language other than the
official language of the country."

Dr Shana revealed that a large contingent of responsible officials in the
Iranian revolution participated in the Palestinian resistance struggle. Dr
Hostafa Shanran, the current ninister of defense. is the co-ander of the
Iranian group that fought in the Palestinians' ranks for 5 years. Their
headquarters was located near the city of Sur (South Lebanon).
I went to see one official in the Gulf and found him with the statement of
the Iranian ambassador to Kuwait in front of his. He had underlined certain
passages in red to indicate their isportance. when the ambassador says that
the Government of Iran halted its shipment of oil supplies to the Philippines
because of the Philippine Government's oppression of the Islamic ninority,
and that it warned Turkey to sever its relations with Israel, this confine
the remarks nade by Dr Sa'dun Has-ladi in an interview in New York: "There
are Iranian attenpts to interfere in the internal affairs of Iraq. The
group acts on the basis that the Iranian revolution is a world revolution
ready for export!"

Offering ne a photocopy of the interview with the Iranian asbassador to
Kuwait, the Gulf official asked:

«Have you read it?
--Yes.
-Do his words inspire confidence?

I tried to use all my diploaacy in order to reply tactfully.

--I do not believe that these words were directed at the rulers. The

Tranian revolution, and in particular its representatives in the Gulf . nost
of when are from Inam Khoseyni's group, are trying to speak to the people

in a way that will win their hearts. The statenents about the bonds of

Islam, the liberation of Jerusalem, the triunph of the Palestinian cause,

and the severing of relations with the Zionist enemy—"because the inan
believes that any Islamic country which deals with Israel comits a sin
against its religion"-are words which delight Arab ears and awaken responses,
dreams, anxieties, and stirrings in the depths of Arab souls!

He asked irritably:

—How will all of that be interpreted? If Iran believes that it has the
capability to export difficulties to us, then are we also capable of exporting
difficulties to then?

-I don't believe it would be wise for you to allow things to go that far.

1 net with Abu 'Amar in Beirut before casing to the Gulf. and he told se
that the Khoneyniites are their allies and they are in a position to contain
the fires with case if they are ignited. So why don't you call on the
Palestinians for help?

At this point the official's nervousness increased, and he said:

«He do not need the Palestinians or anyone else. We are capable of con-
fronting this by ourselves.
In an effort to call htn down, I said:

"Frankly, I don't see the reason for this sensitivity. for in the final
analysis the Palestinians are your friends. Hhen it cones to a choice

between Arab welfare and Iranian welfare, it is well known which one they
would choose.

I concluded:

—Isn‘t that better than turning to the Syrians for help and thus arousing
the sensitivity of our brother Iraqis?

I do not recall his reply exactly. Officials in Kuwait and Bahrain label
Syrian aediation "co-endable efforts." But just by posing the question

I realised that Gulf rulers prefer to deal with the Iranian revolution on

a sectarian basis rather than on a revolutionary basis. In the first case
there is a potential for exploiting sectarian differences, while in the
second case there is linited roon in which to asneuver. For although there
is a sectarian relationship between al-Assad and Khmeyni, the relationship
between Kho-eyni and Arafat begins with Jerusales and the position on Israel.
and extends to hostility toward the A-ericans and ailitary cooperation.

I asked Yssir Arafat when I act hi.- on the eve of ny trip to the Gulf:

-—lave you read the palphlets issued by the ease noveaent in Arsbistan‘l
They say that you are the ones who train Khoneyni's militias known as
"al-Jarik," or the Revolutionary Guard.

Abu 'Amr replied:
-This is not a charge. We really do train the Revolutionary Guard!

I also asked Abu 'A-sr about a story I had read in a diploastic report
concerning an incident which took place during the l Septeder celebrations
in Libya. The story says that a noted Arab personality was beside Abu
'AI-ar when Soviet T-N tanks—which are among the lost advanced tanks in
the world and are called by sons military men "steered fortresses"-passed
by, folloeed by squadrons of “10-23 aircraft and ﬁssile-carrying vehicles
of every kind and description. The quality of aodern weaponry which appeared
in the celebration was fantastic and iqressive. The Arab personality
whispered in Abu 'A-lar's ear: ”Is it plausible that Libya has nilitary
experts capable of using all this weaponry?" Abu 'A-sr sailed and said:

"Between 50 and 60 percent of the sen driving the tanks. planes, and eissile
carriers are Palestinians!"

Abu 'A-r corrected the inforIation in the diploaatic report: "I did not
say 50 percent. I said about 30 percent!"

19
Naturally, those who read this story posed the question: If Qadhdhafi has

a disagreement with Abu 'Aanar, who will win the loyalty of the Palestinians
who make up this high percentage of the Libyan Army? In exactly the some
way, Gulf rulers pose the question of the organic alliance between Khomeyni
and Abu 'Amar, which has reached the point that the Palestinians have taken
over the training of Khomeyni's militias, known as the "Revolutionary Guard."
The information available on this military force, which the Revolutionary
Council under Ayatollah Husein Hontszeri has decided to increase to 1

million men, indicates that Khomeyni's intention is to transform these
militiamen into a force equal in strength to the Iranian Army. The theory

responsibilities. For if the Islamic revolution finds itself compelled to
seek help from a professional army-an army whose loyalty is above all to
its military principles, aside from the fact that most of its leaders were
schooled in concepts which differ from those of the Islamic revolution led
by Xhomeyni—and if it uses this army to confront disturbances such as
those which are cropping up in Kurdish and Arab regions, then the army's
hold will inevitably become stronger and its influence will increase, as is
always the case in such instances. If this occurs, the army could easily
be induced to seize power, making the Islamic revolution a cover for mili-
tarism, rather than remain a suppressive tool in its hands.

Of course, the process of forming the Revolutionary Guard is still just
beginning. However, this does not keep the battles which the guards are
fighting with Kurdish revolutionaries and those demanding independence in
Arabistan from accelerating the process of formation or from working to
fuse the guards in unity and to make their needs readily perceived. It
was recently decided to furnish the Revolutionary Guard with armored cars
and APC's in addition to setting up its own organizations for domestic and
foreign surveillance. Palestinian experts who oversee the Revolutionary
Guerd's training in fighting street battles say that the importance of this
Islamic army—if this label is permissible--lies in the fact that it believes
in its ideology and is devoted to its spiritual leadership. Moreover, this
army does not have fixed levels of pay, but rather each volunteer receives
what he needs for himself and his family, regardless of whether he is an
ordinary individual or has a high military rank. They call this pay a
"stipend!"

One informed Arab asserts that one of the reasons why the Americans and
Israelis have moved quickly in seeking to remove Egypt from the Arab arena

is Egypt's acceptance in recent years of ample numbers of Palestinian students
in high military academies, including both the naval academy and the air
colleges. Now, all of a sudden. the Palestinian revolution is making up for
its losses in Egypt with important gains in Libya and Iran, to the extent

that the Israelis are now saying that if a Palestinian state comes into

being, it will have a military force of 250,000 fighting men.
Of course, it is to Israel's advantage to exaggerate the size of the Pale-
stinian revolution's military force in order to try to show the dangers to
peace that the existence of a Palestinian state would create. The objective
assessment, however, is that the iQortance of the Palestinian revolution
does not lie in its growing military strength so much as in its capacity

for aggravation and penetration in the Arab and Islamic countries, especially
those countries of the Arab Peninsula and the Gulf that contain oilfields.

When Fulbright was chairman of the U.S. Senate Foreign Relations Co-ittee.
he had a Jewish side who was constantly saying: "It is impossible to bring
about a secure solution for the Gulf and the Arab Peninsula unless the Middle
East problem is solved. And the Middle East problem cannot be solved
without a solution of the Palestinian problem!" Thus for more than 10
years--that is, ever since Britain announced its decision to withdraw its
military forces from areas east of the Suez--maintenance of the security

of the Gulf has occupied an important place in the thinking of policymakers
in the United States. Although American strategists used to advocate
reliance on its two main allies in the Gulf, Iran and Saudi Arabia, Dr Henry
Kissinger planned for the shah's regime to be the sole rock upon which the
United States would build its defense system in the Gulf. This was done

for various reasons, one of which was the widespread notion among American
military leaders and politicians that the shah's regime was stronger, more
stable, and more powerful than any other regime in the Gulf area—a notion
which has since been proven false. Another reason was the secret and open
cooperation, if not to say alliance, which existed between the shah's

regime and the state of Israel. Now, after the Iranian rock has been
smashed and the system for the defense of the Gulf and its oil is exposed and
even in dnager of collapse, what country will form the new rock?

The inability of the United States to control events in the area, and the
Carter administration's inability to oppose the Soviet Union's penetration
of and increasing activity in the Gulf states, have brought about a whole-
sale reshuffling of the cards. a reversal of alliances, and the development
of axes. Saudi Arabia has turned its back on Egypt and moved toward Baghdad,
and an alliance has arisen between Khomeyni and Arafat in place of the
alliance that once existed between the shah and Israel. Even more serious
than all this, however, is the whetting of the appetities of all those who
demand change to become active in the area and ride the wave of the Iranian
revolutionua movement which is allied with the Palestinian revolution,

considered by itself to be the fuel which ignites the feelings of the Arab
masses fro. the Atlantic to the Gulf.

What can the Gulf states. or even Alerica itself, do to counter the effects
of the Iranian upheaval? Talk of special military forces ready to carry
out military operations patterned after the Israeli action in Uganda known
as the "Bntebbe operation" is idle conversation, by the admission of
American military leaders theaselves. For the era of direct military inter-
vention has ended, and its only importance is as a bargaining chip in the
gene of dividing up interests and influence. The United States has

21
realized that the Achilles heel of security in the Gulf is its connection
with the Arab-Israeli struggle. However. the United States continues to
avoid facing this fact for reasons related to Jewish influence, and is
making an effort to continue posing hypothetical dangers which are still
in the invisible reala, such as the repercussions which will ensue from
the cosing of power of Shiite clergynen in Iran, the dangers cf the
alliance between the Islamic revolution and the Palestinian revolution,

and the instability which could bring about a rise of military regines in
place of conservative regimes!

One Gulf ruler asked ae about the truth of a story ascribed to Yasir Arafat—
that he is using his alliance with moneyni to catch the rulers of the Gulf
in the sane way that hunters use a falcon to catch bustards when they go
hunting in the desert. I said:

-Bven if Arafat didn't say that, it undoubtedly reflects a possibility that
has been raised. The listake is that Gulf rulers are not asking use of
this alliance, but rather are fearing it or attenpting to encircle it!

I added:

----I suggested to our Palestinian brothers that they organize a conference
under the powerful slogan of former Prise Minister Sa'ib Salsa, "Understanding
and Commication," which would bring Gulf leaders and Khoseyniites together
and would be supervised by Abu 'A-ar hisself. At this conference, all

the cards would be laid on the table in order to create the least pos-

sible amount of aisunderstandingl

He said: But we have not heard about this idea.

I said: It is still in the talking stage. And it's up to Abu 'Anar to
give the word!
ISIAHIC mans FOR DIPIDIATIC WHY mill)

Paris LB ms in French 25-26 Nov 79 p 2

[Article by Maxi-e Rodinson, Director of Studies at the Boole Pratique
des llautea Etudes: "‘l'he Immunity of Diploma in Inslam end the Prophet's

Example”]

[Tout] The states of the noel- world in the classical era, as in any
other, were necessarily obliged to negotiate with foreign powers. No nego-
tiations without rules to safeguard the negotiators, that has been recog-

nized since prehistory. 1

The vest corpus of ideal norms called Hoalem law barely goes into this
problem. It talks of the rights and obligations of believers or of the
cor-mity of believers. but there were rules derived from pre-Islamic

Arab cuetoes and confirmed by Islam according to which a believer could
give real or potential non-Hoslem enemies safe-conduct, protection ("awn").
Diplomatic envoys automatically enjoyed "slain."2

Like any Moslem rule, it was justified by the Prophet's example. Here is
the interpretation of a "hadith," "a prophetic interpretation," a nort-tive
account found with slight variations in several collections of traditions.

In it, it is said that the ”false prophet" Hosaylima, a rival of Hobs-d
in the central part of Arabia, then called Yeas-e (not to be confused with
Yemen), had sent a letter to Mohamd to suggest to his: that they divide
the Arab territories between them. Under the concepts of Islam the heading
was blasphemous: "From Hosayliea, the envoy of God, to Hohend, the envoy
of God.” No messengers delivered this letter.

"A sheik of the Ashja' (the author of the oldest traditional biography of
the Prophet, Ibn Is'haq who died about 150 Adi. [after the hegira], 767
A.D.) tolde me that according to Sala- Ibn has'oud Al-Ashja'i who heard it
from his father No'aym (an esteemed companion of the Prophet-mote by Maxims
Rodinaon): "I heard the envoy of God tell those two emissariee: "And you,
what do you yourselves think about it?" They replied: "We say the same as
he does." He (Mohamed) then asserted: "By God, if it were not for the

23
fact that one does not slay envoys, I would have beheaded both of you..."
This happened at the end of 10 A.li., that is, at the beginning of 632 LB.3

"1 Do Not llold anoys"

Among others, this account is found in the collection of traditions ("sunsn")

compiled by Dari-i (died in 255 A.H., 869 an)" and in that of Abou Daoud
As-Sijistani (died in 275 A.li., 889 A.D.).

These two traditionalists turn this example of the Prophet into a norm
which the very pious and extremely venerated companion of the Prophet,
Abdallah Ibn Mas'oud, applied in an exemplary fasion at the time he was
administrator of the city of Koufa in Iraq some 10 years after the Prophet's
death and the repression of the revolt (which came soon after) against the
new Moslem government of the Banou ﬂanifa tribe. This tribe in fact fol-
lowed the "false prophet" Mosaylima who was a member of it. It was reported
to Abdallah Ibn Mas'oud that some of the Banou Manifa tribe were extolling
Mosaylima as God's envoy in a place of worship ("masjid," literally a place
for prostrsting oneself, a 'hosque"). lie had the guilty ones brought before
him, exhorted them to repent, then pardoned them with the exception of one
'obeda Ibn Al-lierih, known as Ibn Rowaha, whom he had beheaded. To those
who were amazed at this different treatment, Ibn Mas'oud explained that

this ibn Nowaha was one of Mosaylin's two messengers mentioned above who
had refused to disavow the "false prophet." Mohamed had not had them
executed since at that time they were protected by their status as ambassa-

dors. Now things were no longer the same and the Nowahs deserved to die
because he was s "renegade."6

The learned and pious contemporary Moslem writer, Mohammad Hamidullah, in
his "Life of the Prophet,"7 cites two other cases. During the Prophet's
first campaign against Mecca, a Moslem negotiator was held by the people of
Mecca and a rumor spread that he had been assassinated. During this time
Mohamed in his encampment was succeeding in concluding a truce with nego-
tiators from Mecca. lie retained them until his own ambassador had been
returned to him. In another case, an ambassador of DIM-re to the Prophet
was touched by Moslem grace. He wanted to retain with his new coreligion-
ists. But Mohamed refused to allow him to stay. "I do not violate pacts,"
he said, "and I do not hold envoys. If you continue to think as you now do,
you say come back (to us)." The man in question, a Copt, it would seem,
returned to Mecca. Then, no longer having the status of ambassador, he

did come back to the Prophet at Medina and embraced lslsm.

it is seen that for the islamic religion also the Unity of diplomatic
missions is a norm regarded as sacred.

2;
l.

2.

3.

’0.

5.

6.

7.

W38

See Ragnar Nunelin, ”has Originas de la Diplomatie," Paris, Planarion,
1945.

See the article "Ann" by J. Schacht in "L'Bncyclopedia de l'Islsn,"
second edition, Volune 1, Paris (6. P. liaisonneuve) and Leiden (Brill),
1960, p 661 ff.

lbn Is' haq, "Vie do l'anoye de Dian (Sirat rasoul Allah, published by
Hustenfeld, p 965; published by M. H. Abd Al-liamid, Cairo, 1365/1937,
Value «‘0, p 272).

Book 18, chapter 60, "On the Prohibition to Kill Envoys," Danascus,
1349/1920/1931, 2, p 235.

"Sunan," Book 15, chapter 154, "Concerning anoys (Messengers, Albasoa-
dors)," published in Cairo by A. H. Al-‘l‘azi, undated, l, p 636.

Cf Baladhori, ”Kitab fotouh Al-boldan," published by De Goeje, 1866,
p 87, published in Cairo, 1350/1932, p 97, translated by Ph. K. Hitti,
"The Origins of the Islamic State," New York, 1916, p 133.

"Le Prophete de l'lslan," Paris, Vrin, 1959, 2 volumes, Vol 2, p 649.
DRAFT 0? ISIAH'IC CONSTI'N'HON MPARZD
Cairo AL-DA'HAH in Arabic Oct 79 pp 22-24 and 61

[Article by Dr Hustafa Kamal Hssfi, vice-president of the [Egyptian]
council of state]

[Text] If there has been any reason for not applying the Islamic
religious law, as some say, it has been the shortage of Islamic scholars
who are capable of preparing the Islamic constitution. This, then, is
the draft of an Islamic constitution which is just about complete.

What is needed after that? This Islamic constitution insures that it

is possible to establish God's law isnediately if intentions are good.

The Draft of the Islamic Constitution

In 1977, the mnference of Islamic religious scholars, which took place
in Cairo, issued a resolution that al-Ashar University should prepare the
draft of an Islamic constitution to be consulted by any goverment that
wants its constitution to be Islamic.

A committee, called the Higher Con-ittee for the Draft of the Isl-11c
Constitution, was formed at Al-Azher, and there were some subcamnittees
under it. I had the honor of being appointed to this Higher Consittee,
but circunstances prevented me from attending its meetings.

"hen this conmittee was finished with the preparation of the draft, the
late lamented imam Shaykh 'Abd-al-Ealim Malnud, shaykh of al-Azhar, had
the kindness to send the comittee's draft to me so that I might express
my observations in the form of a draft. I did so, and submitted it to
the subcomittee, which resolved to submit my draft to the conference
as a scholarly treatise because the appointed time for conducting

the conference has approached and there was not time enough to review
the cameittee's draft.

The convocation of the conference was postponed sine die because of

the state of affairs at that time, and then I found no objection to
submitting my draft to Islamic public opinion, praying to God for guidance
and success.

The draft consists of an introduction and 78 articles, followed by an
explanatory discourse.

26
The Text of the Isl-1c Constitution

mm
The Islamic World

Article 1. The Hoslus are one nation.

Article 2. The state may unite with another Islamic state in a form which
is consistent with the interests of Islam, and the state will act toward
bringing about economic integration enong Islamic states.

Article 3. To defend and support Isluic minorities and to act toward
their liberation is a duty enjoined on all Hosleus.

The Form of the State

Article 6. The stats of.. ..is an Islamic state. The suprane authority
in it is God, when we extol and to whom we pray, and He is the source of
sovereignty. Islamic law is its suprsae jurisprudence, and its supervisor
is an inn-I who will exercise authority in the land. lie will be assisted

by the consultative body and will have jurisdiction over the policy of
Islamic law.

m
The Basis of the Islamic Society

Article 5. Belief in God almighty, unity in accordance with the Islamic
creed, and solidarity among the Moslens and between the people and the
authority is the basis of the society and the way of life in the state.

Seeing that the nation adheres to the Islamic belief is an Islamic
duth which will be performed by the individuals and by the state by all
means, and the Hosleme are earnestly desirous of it.

Article 6. The Islamic law is the fundamental source of legislation.
Islam is the religion of the state. The Arabic language is the official
language in the state. The hegira date will be used in correspondence.

Article 7. The Hoslens will perform those duties which are enjoined

on them in the sacred writings and will carry out their public duties

of enjoining those things which are lawful and prohibiting those things
which are unlawful, instituting the Islamic religious law. keeping harm
from the people, and upholding the lawful public interests and the public
expenditure. 1n. state will guarantee that individuals may do so, oblige
the to do so when they are raiss, and do it (for them] when they are
unable to do so.
Article 8. The public governance is concerned with the interest of the
coauunity, protecting religion, individuals, posterity, intellect, and

proper ty .

Article 9. Since there is no appropriate specification in the sacred
texts or in the Sunnah and there is no 'norn, [the following] will

be observed in all public and private actions, instrments, executions,
and planning: preserving the necessities, then that requirements, then
refinements in matters of religion, then the individual, then posterity,
then the intellect, and then property.

Article 10. The quest for knowledge is a religious duty, and instruction
is the duty of the state and the religious scholars. Religious inculcation
is a basic curriculun in all stages of intstruction.

9mm; Three
Rights and Liberties

Article ll. Rights and liberties are social functions whose exercise is
carried on in accordance with the Islanic religious law. The service of
legitimate interests is observed in then before all else.

The exercise of rights and liberties will be done within the limits of
Islamic religious law, and every guardian is responsible for his flock.

Article 12. The covenant of protection of the Hoalens is one, and the least
of them will work toward it, representing the conrnunity of the Hoslems

in whatever public freedOm he undertakes to exercise in accordance with

the provisions of the Islamic religious law.

He will institute the claim for reckoning in defense of the Islenic public
welfare.

Article 12. Protection of self, honor, and property is a right of

every Hoslem and of everyone who is legitimately present in the territory
of the state, and is considered a basis for the rights of the individual
and Islamic legal judgments.

Article 16. Non-Hoslens as well as Hoslesns will observe the provisions
of Islamic religious law.

Article 15. The expression of opinion, so far as it is consistent with
Islamic religious law, is a duty which the state will enjoin and toward
which it will set all necessary means in motion.

There will be a conic-ant to the opinion of the najority in whatever
is in conflict with Islamic religious law.
Article 16. The state will guarantee to all of the individuals all of
the freedoms that the Islamic religious law permits, and it is not

permissible to infringe on than, curtail that. or regulate them in
contravention of Islamic religious law.

Anyone who is treated unjustly may seek redress in accordance with the
provisions of Islamic religious law.

Article 17. Every aggression on personal liberty or the liberty of

the personal life of the citizens and other rights, such as the rights
and liberties which Islamic religious law guarantees, is a crime the
criminal or civil action arising from which will not be dropped on account
of limitation, and the state will guarantee just restitution to anyone
against whom the aggression occurs.

Article 18. The state will guarantee freedom of possession and property
rights and their inviolebility, and public confiscation by any means
whatever is not permissible. Private confiscation will not take place
except by judicial ruling. Territory of countries which have been taken
by force will be the private property of the state, which may distribute
it to individuals for then to exploit by heritable tenure. The territory

of a country which was taken peacefully will be property of its owners
in fee simple.

Article 19. Ostentation, and likewise all that is contrary to the Isl-1c
cumnands. prohibitions, and proprieties are forbidden. Islamic public
sentiment should be guarded by all means from debssement.

Q22“; Four

The Islmnic Economy

Article 20. The Islamic economy is based on the Islamic religious law
so as to insure legitimate interests. Whatever economic laws are
established to be sound may be considered to be nong those things

which are lawful, and resource may be had to modern economic means
within the limits of Islaaic religious law.

Article 21. Freedom of trade, industry, and agriculture are guaranteed
within the limits of Islamic religious law.

Article 22. Transactions involving the giving or taking of interest
are prohibited. This means all interest in which any dealing is done.

Article 23. The state will concern itself with promoting the economy
in accordance with Islamic religious law.

Article 24. Anyone duo is in need may obtain that which will satisfy his
need by all legitimate means.
Article 25. Considerations of solidarity and the realisation of

legitimate interests will be heeded in the econmnic efforts of the state
and of individuals.

The Nation

Article 26. The nation consists of the religion scholars and the generality
of the Hoslems. The people and the authorities in it will be two
cuplnentary elements which will assist each other mutually in acting

on the sovereignty of the Islamic religious law.

Article 27. The body of religious scholars is the religious scholars of
the nation according to the dominant sects in the territory of the state.

Article 28. It is the duty of every Hoslem, whether he is one of the body

of religious scholars or of the generality of the Hoslu con-unity, to

be a member of the mosque of his quarter or village, praying there,

performing as much as he can of the five religious duties of Islam,

and concerning himself with the affairs of that mosqueto the extent that

he will not fail to attend it except when excused fraa doing so. The
principals will be appointed with the consent and approval of the congregation.

Article 29. It is not permissible to conduct the Friday prayer in a mosque
except by official permit from the appropriate quarter, in the largest

and foremost mosque in the city or metropolis. The local administrative
chief in the city or metropolis must perform the office of the imamate

and deliver the sermon. The sermon will be addressed to the current
problems and will be discussed after prayer.

Article 30. The principals in the city or metropolis will be appointed with
the consent and approval of the members of the Friday mosque.

Article 31. The mosques will have a legal entity and a special inviolebility.
and will be represented in their contracts, in the custody of their

property, and in statements made in their name fore judges and other

quarters by whomever the administrators choose.

Article 32. The principals in each mosque will organize the affairs of

the quarter, village, city, or metrOpolis, collect the necessary funds

for doing so, establish the legitimate public interests, bring about
conciliations among the people with the counsel of the official authorities.
and represent the people of the quarter, village, city, or metropolis in
all of their public affairs. The principals of the mosque will supervise
the waqfs and expenditures and the collection and distribution of slms in
the district and the administration of the necessary local services for the
city or metropolis.

Article 33. The principals of the mosque will pay the duties of homage to
the im- on behalf of those whom they represent, and [engage in]

30
consultation if the imam and the local chief asks for it. They will also
have the duty of establishing Isl-:ic religious law, public instruction
in religion, Islamic missionary activity and exhortation, and upholding
morality and condemning i—orality.

Article 34. The generality of the Hoslmne will undertake to perform

the duties of giving support end advice to the imam, of public expenditure,
of befriending the poor and week, of upholding morality and condemning
inorality, and of performing all of the duties of capability and the
public interests. Furthermore, each of them will have the duty of paying
hanage to the immn on his own behalf.

Article 35. The general plebiscite on lawsuits will be conducted through
the showing of hands. The matter will be brought before the mosques after
a previous announcement in the manner which the law determines, and every
Hoslmn will express his opinion on the subject of the plebiscite or be
content with the vote of the ahinistrators on it.

Article 36. The principles of Isl- and the religioua Observances are
conunity social duties which may not be set aside.

Article 37. Religious heresiea may not be formed within the territory of
the state.

The inam will be informed of any heresy, and it is his duty to adopt all
neans to conciliate, to discover the errors which led to its fornetion,
and to correct its errors. Those errors will be eradicated as soon as
they appear.

No one will be penitted to exercise an opinion or perform an act which
violates the Isl-ic creed [which prevails] in the country.

Article 38. It is forbidden to form political parties with a positivistic
policy.

ﬁnger Five
The Inn

Article 39. The state will have an imam who must be obeyed, even though one
should disagree with him in opinion.

Article too. In any matter which has been determined to be in violation of
the Islmic religious law, no abedience will be rendered to any creature,
even the imam himself, in disobedience to the Creator.

Article 101. The tenure of the office of the imamste will last throughout
the lifetime of the inn except in case of separation for a reason which
is legally pemisaible.
Article 62. The same qualifications which are stipulated in a judge
are stipulated in a candidate for the imamate.

The nomination for the office of the imamate is made from among those whom
the supervisory council nominates, those who nominate themselves, or

those whom the imam nominates, provided that they are not from among

his heirs.

A standing list of candidates for the imamate will be prepared after it has
been ascertained that they have fulfilled the conditions required for

the office. This list will be entrusted to the higher constitutional
court, and, on the termination of the tenure of the inn, his successor
will be chosen from it.

Article 63. The [new] imam will be chosen within 2 weeks from among

the candidates by a pledge of fealty by the principals on their own

behalf and that of those whom they represent and then by a pledge of faulty
by the generality of the Hoslus, each on his own behalf, when the pledge
of fealty [by the principals] has resulted in the general consent for

his assunption of the imamate. The law prescribes the method and rules

for nomination and pledging fealty in accordance with the provisions of
Islamic law.

Article 64. No one will be called to account for expressing disagremaent
with the pledge of fealty before it is made.

Article 45. The imam will be subject to the judges and will have the
right to appear [before them] by proxy.

Article 66. The imam will enjoy all of the rights that [any other] citizen
enjoys and will be under the same obligations as [any other] citizen.

The financial regulations which the law defines will be in effect with
regard to him.

Article 67. The imam will be considered a delegate from the conanunity
of liosleaas in all that is considered legitimate policy for the country,
and he will delegate some of his functions to the ministers, governors,
subgovernors, and judges. The law sets forth the regulations which
pertain to his doing so.

The imam will be responsible for leading the army to the jihad, safeguarding

the seaports, and concluding major comprmnise treaties. The imam will
deliver the Friday sermon, lead the Friday prayer, and preside over
every assembly at which he is present.
Chapter Six
The Judge

Article 68. The judge has the general authority in disputes which arise
out of canaerce, compensations, and everything that pertains to ownership
of property, usufruct, marriages, family ties, and crimes, whether between
merchants and others or between the public authority and individuals.

Article 49. The people are equal before the judge. No person or group
may be treated with preference in special courts and no special courts
may be created or any litigant be deprived of his conventional judges.

Article 50. Rulings will be issued and executed in the name of God the
Merciful and Benevolent. and the judge in his court will be subject
to no law but Islnic religious law.

Article 51. The state will guarantee the independence of the court,
and any infringement on its independence is a crime.

Article 52. ‘lhe maximum penalities under Isluic law will be applied
for the crimes of fornication, false accusation, theft, looting, drinking
alcoholic beverages, and apostasy.

Article 53. A higher constitutional court will be created which, in
addition to what is specified in this constitution or the civil laws.

will concern itself with decidint to what extent the civil laws and
ordinances are consistent with the Islamic religious law and the provisions
of this constitution.

The civil law will define its other competences.

Article 54. The bureau of canplaints will concern itself with judging
cases of assault and battery, whether on the part of the public authority
or of individuals, and, in these cases, it will have full authority to
impose appropriate penalties, to restore the previously existing situation,
and to exact compensation. The bureau will also concern itself with

the accounting and compensation of the ministers, governors, subgovernors,
and agents. Its decisions and rulings will go into effect imediately

on their issuance. Its organization will be equipped with the means of
this execution, and it will have the right to make use of all means of

proof. It will judge whatever complaints are brought before it as soon
as possible.

Chapter Seven
Consultation. Legislation, and Supervision

Article 55. Whatever learned and legally skilled persons the imam selects
will engage in deliberations on debatable questions. The ministers,

33
governors, and subgovernors may be among those who engage in these
deliberations. The imam is not obliged to follow what the persons
who engage in these deliberations recommend.

Article 56. A body of senior religious scholars, celled the legislative
body, will undertake to enact laws, in accordance with the principles
of individual judgment in legal matters. The constitutional court will
select them, on the basis of the nomination of the principal scholastic
bodies in the land, in the manner which the law prescribes. The laws
and legislations which the legislative body enacts will be effective
immediately on their issuance by that body.

The by- laws of the body will define the procedures of the issuance of the
law and in what it should familiarize itself with the Opinions of the
appropriate learned and technical quarters and consultants.

The gate of independent judgment in accordance with Islamic religious
law is open to the legislative body and may not be closed.

Article 57. A council called the supervisory council, which will be chosen
from amom those who pay homage to the imam, will undertake to supervise
his actions and those of the public authority. This council will consist
of one member from each city or metropolis, to be selected by the people

of the principal mosque in it.

The constitutional court will base its selection of them on whatever
change occurs amongst them. Its meeting will be in the city.

The by- laws of the council will determine the times for the court to
convene, how it is to be called together, how it is to be closed, and
its inviolability. It will be entirely independent of the imam and the
public authority, and they may not intervene in any of its affairs.

There may be no overlapping among this council, the deliberative body, and
the public offices.

The imam and the supervisory council will obtain the opinion of the legisla-
tive body in affairs of Islamic religious law; if they do not do so,
his decision will be invalid.

He will also obtain the opinion of the quarters concerned in scientific
and technical questions.

Article 58. The supervisory council will concern itself with the
establishment of the general policy of the state, the general plan of
social growth, the general budget of the state, and everything that
leads to the comitment of the public revenue, all in conformity with
Islamic religious law. The by-laws of the council will regulate the
procedures which should be followed in this connection and the veto
of these decisions by the imam.
Article 59. The members of the Islamic legislative body and the supervisory

council will exercise the supervision of the compensation and allowances
which the law prescribes.

Article 60. No financial charges or duties may be imposed unless the
sacred writings or the Sunnay approves, and within its limits, or unless
the sects agree on them unanimously. When the supervisory council has
expressed its opinion of the appropriateness of these charges or duties,
they will be imposed by a law which the Islmnic legislative body shall
issue. It is the business of the imam to impose them when such events
as catastrophes, calamities, and famines occur.

Article 61. The law will set forth the basic principles for the
collection of taxes and the disbursement of the revenues therefrom.

Article 62. The draft of the budget will be submitted to the supervisory
council on the dates and in the manner which the law specifies.

A law for the budget will be issued and will be in effect for the duration
of the fiscal year.

Article 63. The final accounting of the budget will be submitted to the

supervisory council within not more than 1 year from the date of the end
of the fiscal year.

Furthermore, the annual report of the office of accounts, together with its
cements, will be submitted to the supervisory council. The council will
pass the report on to the bureau of canplaints to verify whatever accusations
are contained in it and to render a judgment concerning them.

Article 64. The imam, the ministers, the governors, and the sub-
governors will be responsible to the supervisory council, and each of

the members of the supervisory council will have the right to address
interrogations to the ninisters, governors, and subgovernors.

Article 65. If the supervisory council decides to withdraw confidence

from the prime minister, another cabinet member, a governor, or s subgovernor,
he will be obliged to leave his post.

The prime minister will submit his resignation to the imam if his re-
sponsibility to the supervisory council is established.

Chapter Eight

The Goverment

Article 66. The goverment will be considered empmvered in its actions
by the imam. Its mubers will be considered manbers of his council. The

goverment will not take recOurse to the method of direct administration
except by dint of necessity.
The government will consist of the imam and the cabinet. The prime
minister, deputies for him, and deputies for the [rest of the] cabinet
members may be appointed. Furthermore, the administrators of the regions,
the governors, and the subgovernors will be considered [members] of

his government, and they will all be considered [members] of the council
of the imam.

'i‘he imam will supervise the actions of the government.

Article 67. It will be stipulated of anyone who is appointed minister
or deputy minister that he be (nationality mentioned) an adult Moslem. . .
Hijri year, of full competence.

Article 68. A minister will be considered authorized by the imam in the
affairs of the ministry. He will be responsible for outlining the
policy of the ministry within the general limits of the state and will

undertake to execute it. The [responsibility of] the minister may
not be for execution only.

Article 69. The minister, during the tenure of his post, may not
pursue an independent profession or s comercial, financial, or
industrial activity, or buy, rent, lease, sell, or claim any property
of the state.

Article 70. Any minister who has been indicted will cease his activity

til a decision ha been reached in his case. The termination of his tenure
will not prevent the institution or continuation of action against him.

The trial of the prime minister, the cabinet, and their deputies will

be conducted before the competent courts, and these courts will expound

the law and the procedures and guarantees of the trial without infringing
on the competence of the bureau of cowlaints.

Article 71. The territory of the state will be divided by law into regions,
and the cities and metropolises will be designated. The imam will appoint
a governor over each of the regions into which the country is divided

and a subgovernor over each of the cities or internal metropolises in

each region. An agent may be appointed over a group of villages or
districts belonging to the metropolis or city, and each of these agents
will concern himself with carrying out the orders of the Islamic law

policy which are not left to the individuals within the limits of his
jurisdiction, and will supervise the individuals and comple them to

look after the interests of the Islamic law.

The governor will be considered a deputy of the imam in all of his actions
and competences.

Article 72. The governor will inform the imam of the conditions of the

region at least once each month, and the subgovernor will inform the
amir of them once each month. They will both refer urgent matters to

36
the imam as soon as they occur. The imam may abrogate any actions of the
governor which are contrary to the Islamic religious law or which he
considers unsuitable. The governor may also do so with regard to the
subgovernor. The governor may also do so with regard to the subgovernor.
The governor and the subgovernor will act i-sediately and in complete
conformity with the Islamic religious law til an order and a ruling counter-
manding their actions are issued.

Article 73. The powers of the governors may vary according to the
distance Eran the capital and the variety of the people of the region and
their particular circumstances.

The law will designate the principal powers in each region for the
governors and subgovernors and the instruments of local government. Each
region will have a council for supervision and a body for legislation,

and the governor or subgovernor may select a local consultative body to
assist him.

The supervisory council in the region will refer to the imam and the state
supervisory council whatever violations the governors and subgovernors
may con-nit as they occur.

sugtgr Nine

General and Transitional Regulations

Article 76. The city of....[two words unintelligible; perhaps a line
of text is missing] from the date of its execution, and it is not permissible
to return in criminal questions and financial obligations.

Article 75. The laws will be published in the official newspaper and two
of the newspapers of general circulation within 2 weeks of the date of
their issuance, and will become effective after 1 month from the day
after their date of publication unless some other date of effect is ap-
pointed for them.

Article 76. The imus, the supervisory council, the body of religious
scholars, and the legislation will request the amendment of one or more
of the articles of this constitution in accordance with the conditions
which the by-laws provide for the supervisory council.-

Article 77. All of the rules which the laws and regulations had
established before the issuance of this constitution will remain valid

and in effect unless they are repealed or amended in accordance with the
principles and procedures which have been established in this constitution.

Article 78. This constitution will be in effect Eran the date of the
announcement of the approval of it in the plebiscite.

C80: 4802
11.8. SUPPORTS EGYPTIAN HILITAH STRATEGY
Tel Aviv EA'ARBTZ in Rebrew 31 Oct 79 pp 9, 10

[Article by Ze'ev Schif: "Analysis of New Trends in the Egyptian Military
Strategy"]

[Text] A few weeks ago red lights flashed at the intelligence service
after a trifling report appeared in one of the intelligence agencies. The
report described how co-ando troops stormed a police station in Cairo in
order to free the wife of the troop's calender. She had been placed under
arrest. In addition to this, there are rulers of unrest in the Egyptian
Army and the discharge of any officers. while in Egypt I suggested that
the tension between an in the co-ando unit and “era of the State
Security Division (equivalent to our intelligence service). which is res-
ponsible to the Interior Department, is not confined to this solitary
incident. Neither are the army dismissals rare occurrences.

The incident with the conandos had a vague beginning, but it developed
into soaething quite threatening. It began when a nadaer of the State
Security Division stopped a car being driven by a woman who happened to be
the wife of the co-ando officer. At the tine, the security officer had
no knowledge of this. He nde advances toward her but she replied with a
stinging insult. In revenge he arrested her on a vegrancy charge. when
her husband learned of this he and some of his fellow officers went to
rescue her. They threatened to store the police station if the woman was
not released. According to the report. there was sons violence. “hat is
truly important. but not publicized. is the fact that the co-ando troops
planned to stage a demstration with vehicles and tanks before the presi-
dential palace as a protest to the lack of regard for the any. The latter
reached the ears of the stay leaders and thanks to explanations and per-
suasion the entire idea was abandoned.

Had this occurred in any other Arab state it would be fair to observe that
this is how a revolution develops. Actually, Egypt is different. However,
there are observers who say that in spite of the sensitivity over a gratuitous
insult to the wife of a senior officer this is proof of a sentinent felt

in various Egyptian arny circles that the status of the army has been

38
eroded. As a consequence, the Security Service Division. which is respon-
sible to the Interior Department, has gained a preferential status at the

army's expense. The net result is the creation of an atmosphere of ten-
sion and jealousy between these two groups.

Egyptian observers have told me that this state of affairs is in no way
due to Sadat's loss of confidence in the army. He in well aware that as a
group the army supports him, especially the official staff. Since the
onset of the peace process and the opposition it evoked in the Arab world.
it was decided to put stronger emphasis on internal security and the safe-
guarding of the regime. The fear of underground activity and of confronta-
tions instigated with the assistance of Libyan, Palestinian. Iraqi or
other agents. dictated the preference of the Security Service.

Even in the army, General Ali. who has a strong background in intelligence
work, has replaced General Gamassi, one of the outstanding heroes of the
October war. This is not all. It appears that during the past year scores
of senior officers have been discharged from the Egyptian army. The senior
cowsnd is very alert to the slightest sign of opposition, and they react
immediately with preventive measures. Those in charge will not countenance
the slightest sign or hint of danger. Anyone who is suspected of opposi-

tion to the peace process and to Sadat's conduct in the process is 1.1:-
diately discharged fron the army.

There is: an account of a group of senior military personnel who during the
month of Ramadan this year made the customary pilgrimage to Saudi Arabia

to observe their religious precepts. As is customary in a situation like
this, the Saudi defense ninister presented then with various gifts. ‘mis

was enough to cast suspicion on them. Upon their return. they were all dis-
charged fron the army.

In contrast to this, I heard of an occurrence which is exactly the reverse
of the incident with the Egyptian Army personnel. An Egyptian officer

was a candidate for the position of editor of a new Saudi Aruy periodical.
The first question asked by the Saudi minister of defense was whether the
candidate had at any time taken part in peace talks with Israel. beginning
with the talks at Km 101. He explained that anyone who had shaken hands
with the Israelis was ineligible for the job. Another Egyptian general was
discharged because an article he had written had been published in a Lebanese
newspaper which opposes the peace process. Knowledgeable observers say

it would be wrong to conclude from all this that an oppositional sentiment
is crystallizing in the Egyptian Army vis-a-vis the peace process. Rather,
it indicates a readiness and vigilance to stamp out any deviations. Suuing
up, the opinion today is that Sadat's control over the army is complete.

If there is any dissatisfaction in the Egyptian Army with anything related

to the peace process it is not in essence the concept of peace with Israel.
It is rather the keen disappointment that the process did not produce the
expected fruit which the Egyptian military had anticipated. After a

39
protracted period of stagnation in large acquisition deals and putting up
with sporadic purchases from the Heat, many senior officers hoped that
salvation by the United States would come i-ediately after the peace. Now
many are complaining about the scanty supplies the Egyptian Army is receiving
f roe the United States and the slow rate in which even these are being
received. They hoped that Hester-n weaponry would quickly replace the out-
moded Russian equipment. They demanded the sale relationship and privileges
that are accorded to the ID? in the purchase of sophisticated weaponry in
the United States. Israel. of course, thinks just the opposite. The
feeling in Israel is that the sale of attack weapons to Egypt, such as
Phantds planes and armored troop carriers, is proceeding too rapidly.

Whatever the case may be. the fact remains that the great expectations

were not fulfilled with the desired rapidity. Egyptian generals admit that
in actuality speed was not essential in supplying all the needs of the large
Egyptian Army. Clearly, the complete replacement of Russian equipment with
American and Western weapons is not being considered. Such a plan would be
wasteful and cost staggering amounts. Furthermore, it would take years to
accoqlish. The proposed American plan contains a practical concept appli-
cable to a major portion of the Russian weapons systems now in Egypt's
possession. It is a giant plan of parts replacement and substitution wherever
this is efficient and productive. The day after Beer Heisman, our defense
minister, was honored in Egypt by a ceremony staged by the Egyptian general
staff, an agreement was signed at that very sane place by the Egyptian
defense minister and the American assistant secretary of defense to create
and develop a plan along these lines. AI. ABRAH rightly considered it
sufficiently important to warrant a headline.

The concept to transfer and substitute parts is well-known in the 101’.
When it is no longer possible to acquire modern equipment in sufficient
quantity to replace the present equipment which still retains a useful
life. a restoration process is begun. Vital parts are replaced with later
model units. This is exactly what we did with the Sherssn, Centurion and
captured Russian tanks. The cannons were made mobile. The same procedure
was applied to the planes, e.g. a Sky llawk motor was substituted in a
French Mystere plane. This is what the Egyptians will do now, with Ameri-
can aasistance. to some of their Russian weapons systems. He may assume
that they will replace the Russian motors in their tanks with more modern
American ones. The cannons may also be replaced. In a similar manner they
will try to replace the engines in the Russian Higs. This replacement and
substitution plan will result in significant employment in Egypt.

The Aaerican military assistance plan will not stop with the renovation of
old weapons systems. It appears that the creation of a wise range of wea-
pons systems is being considered besides parts and armament. Other items

being considered are the mnufacture of various types of electronic equip-
ment. new classes of arms-eat and antitank weaponry. In Cairo, I was

told that the American Government has already certified the hereon Co. to
set up an sssenbly plant for the Thor missile to be used by the Egyptian

Army.

150
The plans for equipping the army are but one facet of the search for s new
Egyptian strategy in the face of the peace agreements with Israel. 'Ihe
crystallization of this strategy will determine how the Egyptians will
rebuild their armed force and where the emphasis should be placed. ‘Ihe
formulation of this strategy is of great interest to Israel. He can

learn what the Egyptian intentions are and whether we should take their
word at face value. It appears to me that the Egyptian general staff has
erased the name of Israel from its list of potential threats against Egypt.
He nust repeat and emphasize that this cannot be interpreted as sufficient
reason for Is:ael to erase Egypt from its list of future potential threats.
Egypt is convinced or inducing itself to believe that following the peace
agreement Israel will no longer initiate a threat against it. Israel has no
intention of doing so. 'Ihe expectation that this may happen in the fore-
seeable future is close to zero no matter how the regime is constituted.

Prom Israel's standpoint, the situation is understandably different. There
is the fear of a sudden turnabout in Egypt or as Butrus Ghali the foreign
minister has stated: Cairo will definitely decide that its defense treaties
with other Arab states supersede the peace agreement with Israel.

The potential threats that are presently apparent to Egypt will probably
crystallize from radical Russian elements in Lybia or the Sudan or an inter-
nal underground movement. At first glance it appears that the Libyan bor-
der presents the most serious threat. 'Ihis because a ruler like Qadhdhafi
is cooperating with the Russians and is amassing great quantities of arm
far beyond his needs. He has in his country military advisers and pilots
from all the extremist states.

Actually. the real threat to Egyptian interuts will probably develop from
an entirely different direction if and when the extremist segment gains
control of the Sudan. It is situated at the source of Egypt's water supply.
Any objectionable or inimical action in the Sudan brings an imsediate and
vigorous reaction in Cairo, (we shall return to this subject in article
describing a visit to the Aswan Dam).

We have already discussed the internal danger. The answer obviously lies
in a greater emphasis on the efficiency of the state's internal security
organization. As for threats along its land borders. it is quite clear
that it has no need for the large army that has been maintained previously.
provided we can believe it has no designs on the Israeli front. All pre-
sent signa in the area indicate it intends to decrease the forces in the
future. However. this is a slow process and will take a few years. At
present, its intention is expressed by zero growth in the army. Gaps are
being left unfilled. Another significant indication is the fact that
hundreds of officers are permitted to take off their uniforms and enter
civilian life. Essentially, the difficulty lies in finding proper esploy-
ment for these new entrants into civilian life. It appears that many have
benn discharged, and not only from the senior echelons. In summarizing,
the intent is clearly to decrease the number of soldiers in the army but not
the nusber of regiments. The plan is to modernize the armyuto make it
mobile with a high degree of preparedness.

hl
Accordingly, In the l'rnnevork of the new strategy the Egyptians will seek
to develop an ability to intervene militarily in various spots in the

Arab world and at greater distances. The plan is not for massive inter-
vention but rather for the ability to deliver a rapid reply and to supply
inediate help. For this reason, Egypt nust build a long arm conpriaing
adequate air power. may efficient transport planes, the ability to air-
lift specific weapons system and the reinforce-eat of special forces units
in the Egyptian Arty. Judging fro- the readiness of the United States to
sell Egypt quantities of Hercules planes we say infer that Hashington is
aware of this Egyptian objective and does not oppose it. It recognizes the

old Egyptian striving to bees-e a significant military factor in the Arab
world.

8995
(:50: 1.805

he
EGYPTIAN, ARAB REACTION 10 DIWTIC TIES VINE!)
Tel Aviv HA'ARBTZ in Bebrew 29 Oct 79 p 9

[Article by Ze'ev Schif: "Tensions Heightening as the Moment for the
massadorial Exchange Approaches"]

[Text] In order to judge the changes Egypt is undergoing and the varying
atnosphere in that great and populous country, I can advise nothing better
than periodic visits every few months. One has the opportunity of remwing
old friendships as well as meeting new people. The visitor has a chance
to compare the present answers with views he has heard in the past. Today,
significant changes have surfaced in Egypt. They are immediately apparent.

More so than in the past, there is evidences of new building construction.
Many buildings are in various stages of construction. Some of them we
renewer seeing in their initial stages. Clearly the progress is slow. but
the work is continuing space. Near the airport. a new Sheraton hotel has
been opened. In the city's center, finishing touches are being put on a
new Hilton hotel. the Rameses. Nearby, a super highway has been built
leading to the big October Bridge over the Nile.

After years of a boycott (due to the establishment of a bottling works in
Israel) Coca Cole is again being sold in Cairo. Pepsi Cola no longer

enjoys an exclusive market. Month by month. the American presence is
becoming increasingly felt. Clearly, the American diplomats are setting the
tone for the city. They are more knowledgeable about the Egyptian Army than
anybody else. In addition to their active military attachls, there is a
coordinator in the military aissz‘ .on who is engaged in military assistance.
Hhereas the nilitsry attache is directly accountable to the intelligence
unit in the Pentagon, the coordinator for so- strange reason is account-
able to the U.S. military cone“ in Europe.

The presence of American tourists has become more apparent in various
parts of the country. Different Western types have taken over the places
in the casinos and at the roulette tables that were formerly occupied by
sheikhs froa the Persian Gulf kingdoms. Among these Hesterners it is

not unusual to find many whose pockets are overflowing with $100 bills.
The great American Essay in Cairo has adapted to the Egyptian and Hualin
reality. Some time ago, it was decided to keep the ediaasy offices open
on Sunday; traditionally. the day of rest for all Western amasssies. The
ewassies are closed on Friday. the Hoslem day of rest. The weekend for
American diplomats has changed. and the embassy has adapted itself to
Egyptian Government activities.

The Egyptian press, as in the past. is extensively engaged in the subject
of Egypt's relations with the rest of the Arab world, the ID? withdrawal
from the Sinai and the grandiose development plane of President Sadat.
The tragedy in Cambodia receives scant notice. Hany important Middle
East issues do not receive adequate coverage in the Egyptian press. It
is evident that in the framework of its relations with the srab world,
Egypt is approaching a crucial moment similar in importance to the Camp
David agree-ants and the signing of a peace agreement. By that I mean
the day in February 1980 when an Israeli adiassador is scheduled to arrive
in Cairo and the first Egyptian aabassador will arrive in Tel Aviv. This
will mark a significant crossroad in Sadat's relations with the Arab
world. President Sadat has stated that he is inalterably deterained to
follow through with the diplomatic exchange.

There are those in Cairo who say that another isportant event will precede
the ambassadorial exchange; that is, the mount when Sadat arrives at Saint
Catherine's to lay the cornerstone at Mount Sinai for a mosque, a synagogue
and a church. he religious element is not too happy with the projected
spectacle. It will be interpreted in Saudi Arabia as further proof of

the scorn in which he holds it and the Arab world.

The religious fanatics say that Islam teaches tolerance for aonotheistic
religions, Judaism and Christianity, but this can never be interpreted as
meaning aid and assistance to other religions. This is how they view

the spectacle of the erection of a synagogue and a church in conjunction
with a mosque. This explanation is not widely accepted. Others say that
the sore point with the Saudis is the return of Jerusalem to the bosom of
Islam. To them, everything else is marginal. whatever the case may be,

it is already clear that the ceremony planned by Sadat will not be a grandi-
ose as originally planned. It will be diminished into a syﬁolic gesture.

There are differing opinions about the wisdom of the conjunction of a
mosque. synagogue and church, but there is a unanimity about the gravity
of the day when the Israeli aﬂmssador arrives in Cairo. Staff meters
are convinced that new steps to punish Egypt will be decided upon at the
upcoming Arab sun-tit meeting. They have already calculated the most
likely hostile move--a nutter of the Arab states will expel a significant
umber of their Egyptian workers. This nay entail some disruptions in
their work force. but they cannot afford to countenance the presence of an
Israeli ambassador without a retaliatory move. The editor of an Egyptian
daily told me that their sin will be not so mach to punish President
Sadat as to hurt the Egyptian people as a whole.

uh
Everyone with whom I discussed this subject is convinced that Sadat will
not suf fer this blow quietly. He will certainly resort to a new Egyptian
nationwide poll to support any steps he may be considering against the
other Arab states. he Americans. of course. are the ones who will be
most concerned over this deterioration. They believe it was possible to
prevent a heightening of the antagonisms in the relations between Saudi
Arabia and Egypt. It is interesting that they blame President Sadat for
this deterioration. lhe Americans feel that Sadat lacked sensitivity and
was not properly deferential in his relations with Saudi royalty. lie
insulted them and only subsequently did they reply. The American diplo-
mats, first Bilits and now Atherton, have tried to persuade Sadat to be
more circu-pect in his dealings with the Saudis.

Clearly in Sadat's case. it is not merely a matter of proper deference and
respect. Some say that the Saudis angered him when they pressured King
Hassan of Morocco to break off diplomatic relations with Egypt and to join
the rejectionist front. At this point Sadat saw red in his relations with
Saudi Arabia. The story does not end here. ‘lhe Egyptian Government con-
tinues to be irritated. Egyptian intelligence is convinced that the Saudis
are attempting to influence Sudanese President Numayri to sever relations
with Sadat. and are using their money for this purpose. It appears that
they would like Nuuyri to stage an anti-Egyptian demonstration at the
moment the ambassadorial exchange takes place between Israel and Egypt.

There is widespread speculation in the Egyptian capital as well as in
Israel as to who will be the first Egyptian ambassador to Israel and also
as to where the Israeli Massey will be located in Cairo. “No names are
being mentioned; Hassan ‘l‘ohami, a presidential assistant who is currently
a vice-premier. He is a religious mystic. He initiated the original
meetings with Dayan in Morocco prior to Sadat's arrival in Jerusalem. The
other is “mah Hagdov, a general on leave. Since 1974 he has coordinated
military contacts with Israel. He also acted as advisor to the Syrians in
the negotiations with Israel for a cease-fire. At present. he is an suns-
sador at large and in the foreign office he is the administrator of the
'normalization' project between Israel and Egypt. Others feel that the post
will go to a professional diplomat and that neither of the above-mentioned
officials will be chosen.

Who the first antassadors are is of small consequence. Clearly, the
normalization process will not develop along the lines many Israelis
expect. This coming February amassadors will be exchanged, but the rela-
tions between Israel and Egypt will not be as normal as one would expect
between two states who are co-on neighbors. Formally. they will conduct
themselves according to the agreements. However, they will not waive their
trump card of 'nornlization' in just a few months. I have no doubt they
will do all they can to slow the rapprochement. For example, I have been
informed that El Al planes will not inediately be permitted to land in
Cairo. The fact that diplomatic relations have been established between the
two states does not imply that they will inediately begin to develop sir
air connections. In this initial stage, the Egyptians would choose not

to see 21 A1 planes landing in Cairo. They would prefer charter or
similar arrangements.

The Egyptian slowdown in the normalization process stem from inter-Arab
causes and fro. sole tactical considerations vis—a-vis Israel. An Ameri-
can in Cairo who is privy to everything happening there explained that in
this situation the Egyptians are very apprehensive. It is very much like
the young man who has decided to marry the ugly daughter of his wealthy
employer. The wedding ceremony has been arranged and the dowry has been
promised. The moment has arrived for the groo- to be joined to the ugly
daughter. This is the price and the Egyptians do not know how to adapt to
the situation. It is a picturesque illustration and not very flattering
to Israel. I have no doubt that any Egyptians feel this way.

whatever the case may be, from Israel's standpoint it would be unwise for
us to appear overly anxious to embrace somebody who recoils fro- m. There
are more inportant things in the process of normalization—the exchange of
adaassadors and cultural relations. There are matters of lesser importance.
It would be foolish for us to set an inflated figure on something whose real
value is insignificant. Host certainly, we Inst be careful not to allow
Israeli tourists and sharp businessmen to engulf the Egyptians. This can

be accomplished by limiting the licenses and exercising care to confine
trade matters to the respective governments.

8995
cso: #805

106
CHIEF OF INTELLIGI'CB REVIEUS LBBANI', IRAN. ISLAMIC WORLD

TA071505 Tel Aviv YEDI'OT AHARWOT in Hebrew 7 Dec 79 pp 1. 28 (Weekend
Supplenent) TA

[Interview with Chief of Intelligence, Maj Gen Yehoshu'a Sagi, at his
office, by Bytan Haber—tine not given]

[Text] Question: It has been reported in the media this week that 1.000
Iranian volunteers may arrive in southern Lebanon. will such a thing
happen?

Answer: In this period of instability which we are facing, even if I
cannot confirm such reports then I can say that radical developnents nay
take place. without any advance notice. We are in the midst of a process
in which new alliances are being created and joint interests are being
found between countries which could not see eye to eye in the past. 0n
the other hand. there is a freeze and even a decline in the relations

of countries which we used to regard as allies.

Question: Do we have any evidence of the iuinent arrival of the Iranians?

Answer: To the best of my knowledge. there is no evidence for this in the
field. however, I cannot rule out such a possibility. The Iranians may
indeed send 1.000 or 2,000 well-equipped believers to southern Lebanon
tomorrow.

Question: Are the Syrians interested in such a development?

Answer: I do not think that at this point the Syrians will be happy to
see Iranian volunteers in Lebanon. The introduction of 1,000 Iranians
means that a new element will arrive in Lebanon which will incite the
southern area. since this area is inhabited by Shi'ites. I assume that
Kinneyni will not send his Sunnis to Lebanon. One oust understand: 1,000
or more Iranians in Lebanon will constitute an element of force pressuring
the PLO to act. A conference was held in Tunis not very long ago. What
was its main topic? Its main topic was the question of how to stop the
PLO activities in southern Lebanon. The Lebanese only and unanbiguous
deeand of the conference was: stop the PLO's activities. It will be
possible to remove the Lebanese stay to the south and gradually and slowly

1‘7
achieve the reunification of Lebanon. An Iranian presence in Lebanon will
stir up the area. The significance of such a development is, in fact.
that the struggle does not favor President Sarkis today.

Question: Do PLO activities in southern Lebanon need the Syrian
President's approval?

Answer: I would say just the opposite. Had Al-Asad not been interested
in their activities, they would not be carried out.

Question: Only in Lebanon?

Answer: Certainly not. The sane thing applies to the Pm in each and
every site in the Riddle East and concerning its activities in Europe.

The PLO receives all its supplies and ammunition from Syria. Its training
bases are located in Syria. The headquarters of the terror organisations
are in Beirut. which is under Syrian control. The PLO is not as flexible
and free in its activities as it used to be until not very long ago.

Question: Does it seen that the Syrians can also decide to massively
step up terrorist activities against Israel? And if so, when is it going
to happen?

Answer: This could happen if the Syrians decide that the present situation
in the arena is uncomfortable. Why? Because of hundreds of reasons. Do
you want a good reason? On 26 January two-thirds of the Sinai will be
returned to Egypt. The Egyptians can then present this as an achievement
to the Arab world. However. what can the Syrians say? On 26 February

the Israeli anbassador will present his credentials to the Egyptian
President. Is this a good enough reason? Egypt presents achievenents
while Syria, in its own way, has not accomplished anything.

Quaticn: In his present condition, can Al-Asad allow himself to carry
out nassive activities against Israel?

Answer: Here is another good reason: Al-Assd is facing difficult domestic
problems. He needs, perhaps, to show some action. Against when? Against
Israel. Public figures and other people are killed in Syria. Syria's

prestige has recently declined first and foremost among the fighting
Arab front. Syria stands isolated.

Question: And who is replacing it?

Answer: Iraq is striving to achieve a defense pact of the Persian Gulf
states against Iran. If it succeeds, the inference on Syria is clear.

Question: At one time we used to say that, for example, the introduction
of a foreign element into Jordan would constitute a reason for war. In

your opinion what should Israel's nilitary reaction to an Iranian presence
in Lebanon be?
Answer: It depends on its composition. If 1,000 volunteers arrive
equipped with light weapons. then we will have 16,000 terrorists in
southern Lebanon instead of 15,000. However, if an Iranian armored

brigade or a mechanized brigade or a co-ando brigade and its cal-antlers
moves into Lebanon. then we will have a problem!

Question: And how can this problea be solved?

Answer: I do not think this will be the situation. I believe that an
organized group will not arrive. At the most, 1,000 Iranian volunteers
will arrive. They will join the existing terrorist force in southern
Lebanon. And what about us? We better not delude ourselves. Activities
from Lebanon have not stopped, they have only grown sore silent--not

only because of Arab pressure but in the wake of our successes.

[TA071522] Question: Is it possible that we night see Iranian troops

in the front in the next war? will the next war be against the entire
Muslin world?

Answer: First of all, at the ao-ent there is no Iranian regular army.
Out of the entire army existing during the shah's rule only the navy
can reasonably be put into action. Today. there is hardly any general
in the Iranian Army who also served as a general during the shah's rule.
The present generals are people who were expelled fron Iran and who sat
in exile for 25 years, detached from any military activities. The
qualifications currently denanded of Iranian generals are: religious
devotion. loyalty to Khomn‘. and nothing else.

Question: What about other Muslim countries? Will they participate in a
war?

Answer: Along with Syria, Jordan, the terrorists in Lebanon and Egypt—
which may have gotten out of the war circle--there are other countries

in the region which we assure will participate in a war. such as Libya,
Algeria and Kuwait.

Question: What about those countries which did not fight against us in
the You Kippur liar?

Answer: If the Muslin wave gains strength other Muslim countries which
did not fight against us in the past may join the war. However, I do
not think that this wave will gain strength for the time being because

the Muslim-Shi'ite wave is already encountering a restraining opposition
from the other faction of Islam, the Sunni Muslims.

Question: where is the other kind of Islam awakened?

Answer: There is an awakening in Saudi Arabia. Iraq has carried out
several operations, as well as certain countries in the Persian Gulf.

l‘9
I think that something is also taking place in Syria despite their rap-
prochcnent with Iran. One should remenber that Syria is ruled by the
Alawite minority of the Sunni majority. These operations and activities
constitute a red light to the Shi'ite wave. Therefore. this is ‘-e

reason why I believe that the Syrians will not allow more th'.. ..000
Iranians into Lebanon.

Question: Is the Middle East on the threshold of a new era? Hill
Khomeynisa spread to other Arab countries?

Answer: The upheaval in Iran has created a new situation in the Middle
East. First of all, the military-strategic balance which existed for many
years between the shah's army and the Iraqi army has disappeared. The
balance of forces has disappeared and operational capabilities have been
reduced. The enormous influence which a superpower such as the United
States enjoyed-with which Iran cowletely identified as an ally-~has
disappeared. There were other countries in the Persian f‘ulf whose
security pol icy entirely relied on the U.S. forces. whatever happened

to the neighboring countries. This situation did not stand the test

in the shah's case. The image of 11.8. strength deteriorated. When such
a thing happens to a country which relies on the United States, than it
has a trausatic impact on other countries as well.

Question: Where. then. will Khoasyniss lead? Hill the other countries
give in to hin in a domino process?

Answer: The rise of religious regines has an influence on some of the
Persian Gulf countries, particularly on Iraq. Forty percent of the
Iraqi population is Shi'ite. The domino process can also work in Kuwait
and Bahrain where there are many Shi‘ites. There are not many Shi'ites
in Saudi Arabia. However. there are many aliens (1 million Yenenites.
200.000 Palestinians) who constitute a potential force for such acti-
vities. the rule existing at the time of the Roman Eapire "If Sulla
can. I can too" holds true in this case as well. If Khomeyni could
make it in Teheran. why should I not do the same in Saudi Arabia and
get rid of the royal family? Now one can also notice the rapprochement
between Syria and Iran behind Iraq's back. I would not be surprised to
see Iranian delegations arriving in Syria and vice verse. I would not
be surprised if Iran gave economic aid to Syria. Why would Iran be
interested in it? So the Syrians keep the Iraqis occupied. The Iraqis
are the force hovering over Iran's head.

Quest ion: What are the relations betewen the PLO and Khoneyni?

Answer: There is a stock exchange of terrorist organizations whose head-
quarters is in Beirut, mainly because the PLO has an advantage over the
other groups. The PLO has physical bases in the field. Even before

the shah was deposed the PLO had trained several hundred Iranians. The
PLO provided them with arms even before the beginning of the disturbances
which brought about the collapse of the shah. There are reports about
Palestinians who currently surround Khomeyni as his guards. 'Arafat
himself patted his back in the first moments after Khomeyni's rise to
power. As will be recalled. 'Arafat was allowed to have a representa-
tion there. A carpet was layed down for him, the same huge carpet which
was woven for Hitler. That carpet made its way to Europe. was later

purchased by the Iranian Jewish community as a present to the Israeli
Embassy.

Question: Is it possible that the Palestinians helped the Iranians take
over the u.s. Embassy?

Answer: In my opinion. the Palestinians are walking around the place. Who
invented the trick of taking over enbassiea? However, it will also be

true to say the PLO does not have a dominant influence on Khomeyni if

their conceptions clash with those he holds. This influence did not

work when 'Arafat asks him to concede on the issue of the shah. Why?
Because we are not dealing here with a regime which recognizes world
customs, diplomacy, a regime which differentiates between good and evil.

[TAO71561] Question: Can Khomeynisl influence the chances of peace with
Egypt?

Answer: The phenomena accompanying Khomeynism could have an impact. The
Middle East could find itself in a chaos of rivalries, regional wars

and fighting arenas. why? we may find ourselves in a chaotic situation
where the Iraqis could try and iapoae a regional order. the Soviet Union
could interfere and perhaps. the United States would have something to
say. This state of affairs could create new situations which would
affect Egypt.

Question: And will Al-Sadat fall from power?

Answer: In my opinion, so long as Al-Sadat remains the same persons and
no new situations are created forcing him to make a choice between having
peace or the collapse of his regime or an economic collapse he, as the
Egyptian president. will continue to follow the same line L has taken
so far--and he is not doing that badly!

Question: As chief of intelligence. do you ever wake up in the middle
of the night bathed in cold sweat and think: To hell with it, perhaps
all this is an unprecedented far-reaching camouflage plan?

Answer: 1 wake up in the middle of the night not necessarily covered by
cold sweat but usually when the telephone rings.

Question: You have visited Egypt. Is it the same Egypt you imagined
from the intelligence papers and reports?

Answer: Yes, to a certain extent. We have left several bases [in the
Sinai]. that of Umm Khushayb being the largest and the most famous.
ironically enough, those bases--and not others-~we have recently given
away were the ones in which we invested vast sums of uoney over the

years. How much money? Billions of Israeli pounds! And Israeli pounds
having the value of these days!

Question: Does the harm to our alert systee add white heirs to your head?

Answer: It does not wake black hair grow. However, it is important
to note that inuediately after Al-Sadat's visit. about 2 years ago,

we began to plan the infrastructure for a new alert systel. Therefore.
today. we are in the midst of a process and not at its beginning.

Question: Is the eastern front considering war?

Answer: In my opinion. in the present conditions of a Jordanian-Syrian.
Iraqi coalition the chances of war have decreased. However. this does
not scan that war is not possible. A credibility crisis exists between
Syria and Iraq. However, at the tine. during their process of rapproche-

nent, an infrastructure was built which can be renewed in a very short
mrmdoftum.

Question: Excuse me for the rude word. Is this not a "conception."

Answer: No! This is a factual description! I emphasized that the
existing infrastructure sakes it possible to act in a very short
period of time.

Question: The military infrastructure?

Answer: Both political and military. An infrastructure of roads. ports
and contacts. These elements have recently been undergoing a process

of disintegration. However. I repeat: This coalition can wake up again
in a very short period of tine. This does not look unreasonable in the
present circumstances. However. one should ask what will happen if one
of the countries-—Syria, for example--sets out to war on its own. What
will happen then? Hill the other countries abandon it to its own fate?

Question: And what is your answer to your own question?

Answer: I believe that the other countries will not abandon it. He lust
take into consideration that in spite of all the hostility between Iraq
and Syria. Iraq--and Jordan--will come to Syria's aid.

Question: Hill Syria set out to war with Israel on its own?

Answer: A limited war with short-term targets could be possible perhaps
with the intention of raising the problem. just as Egypt did in the
Yom Kippur War.

Question: And what will Egypt do in such a case?

52
Answer: Egypt will then be faced with a problem since it has not revoked
its signature on the Arab autual assistance agreement. Egypt will
certainly be asked to join the war. I assume that it will not participate
in practice and will reluctantly make do with statements and condeana-
tions. It will have to act in some way. This is the reason why I have
frequently said that peace has to be put to the test of time and it

should not be accepted as Hoses bible. One cannot say: From now on

this story is over.

Question: Is the eastern front prepared for war?

Answer: Indeedl Syria alone today has over 2,000 tanks compared to
1,500—l,600 tanks it had in the Yom Kippur Har-and I am not talking
about quality now. In 1973 the Syrians had two armored divisions.

today they have four. The Jordanian Army was a defensive one mainly
relying on infantry and armored units for counteroffensives. Today. it

is a full offensive army, with mechanized and armored units and possessing
excellent U.S. arms. Just as the IDF. the Jordanian Army is assisted

by mobile artillery and anti-aircraft equipment. All these under an
umbrella of batteries of ground-to-air missiles which did not exist in

the past. Today they also have a small but very effective air force.

Question: And the Iraqis?

Answer: They had six divisions in the Yom Kippur War and today they have
2 divisions. Iraq has doubled its army and strength. The Iraqi Army has
a fleet of carriers making possible the strategic movement of armored
forces from Iraq on a very short notice. Iraq would today threaten us

at least to the same extent as Jordan.

[TA071559] Question: Can a war start on the eastern front by pushing a
button?

Answer: I do not believe so. if the reference is to a war of the eastern
coaIition--namely. Syria, Jordan and Iraq. If the reference is to Syria
alone then the answer is positive, on certain forms of war, such as aerial

fighting.
Question: Is the Syrian Army the most dangerous one?

Answer: The Syrian Army of the Yom Kippur War and that of today are two
different armies. For example: If I am not mistaken, in the You Kippur
War they had 300-400 "T-62" tanks whereas today this tank is present in

all the armored divisions. They also have several dozens of tanks even

more sophisticated than the T-62's.

Question: Do a few dozens of T-62's have any significance in the battle
arena?

Answer: Yes. This is a sophisticated tank with a different quality of
cannon and body. I also want to draw your attention to the deal Jordan
has made on receiving 275 Chieftain tanks. which means that an excellent
tank is introduced in the arena. Let us return to the Syrian Army: a
vast part of their armored divisions is equipped with "B.H.P." troop-
carriers which do not only carry personnel. This is a vehicle also
equipped with a cannon. They had only 100-200 vehicles of this kind in
the Yom Kippur Her. not to mention the Syrian Air Force which is today

formed by MIG-21's. Sukhoi-22's which did not exist then and MIG-25's
as interceptors at high altitudes.

Question: Hill the terrorists appear as an army in an additional war?

Answer: I do not think so. In the internal arena. [sentence apparently
dropped] terrorists in other numbers. It is more dangerous to us if
they appear in small units.

Question: Will it be true to say that there has been a significant
decline in terrorist activities?

Answer: I do not think so. In the internal arena-«both in the territories
and in Israe1--the security forces have been more successful in averting
terrorists acts and that is why it seens as if there is a decline in their
activity. There has been no decline in sabotage acts carried out from

the sea. On the contrary, there have already been four maritime opera-
tions since the terrorist act in Nahariya in April 1979. One should
remember that in the past there were longer intervals between maritime
operations. Several years have gone by since their landing at the

Tel Aviv beach in March 1975 until another unit landed in Tel Aviv's

marine and another group reached the coastal road.

Question: What does the terrorists' navy look like?

Answer: Naval units train in Lebanon. They have boats, both notherships
and rubber boats, kayaks and even air—filled mattresses. Anything that
floats serves them as a vehicle. They also learn their lessons and try
not to repeat the same errors. Their targets have also changed. Their
purpose is no longer to take hostages. but to kill and kidnap.

Question: The fact that the PLO wants to put 'Isam Sirtawi on trial
because he accepted a common award with Arye Bli'av--does it indicate
the existence of a moderate PLO and of differences of opinion within the
PLO between doves and hawks?

Answer: So far, I have not succeeded in locating a moderate PLO. On the
other hand. I have spotted their intelligence in conveying their message
to the world. Please notice how they only talk about the establishment
of a democratic state without saying a word that it is their intention

to set up such a state on the entire territory of Brett Yisra'el. The
PLO has not softened its positions, it has only formulated them in a more
sophisticated way. We conducted an analysis to check whether the PLO had
undergone any changes and we did not find any appeasing tones.

5h
Question: There was a junior lieutenant Sinan-tov in the You Kippur War
who sounded the alert. As chief of intelligence, could such a nan make
his way to you today?

Answer: By the way. that fanous lieutenant Sinan-tov was reared by ne.

I taught hin when I served as intelligence officer in the southern co-Iand.
As for your question: when it comes to issues of assessment, every
officer can make his way to us. Hhoever has any reservations as far as
assessment is concerned reaches ne. There have been cases where junior

officers reached ae. This custon was introduced when shlono Cazit served
as chief of intelligence.

Question: Does the image of a weak and unstable Israel provoke any ideas
among our enenies?

Answer: The image of a weak and unstable state any indeed constitute

a bait and a consideration in the decision-ﬂaking process of the Arab
countries.

C30: 10805

55
BRIEFS

1111311?me SITUATIONnThe demand for workers in November 1979 has
reached 27.000—1.000 less than in November 1978. The eaployment service
says that there is still a denand in Israel for more than 5,000 workers.
compared with a demand for 10,000 last year. Labor and Social Betterment
Hinister Yisra'el Rats has told our correspondent Yig‘al Ros that this
data does not merit talk about a wave of disnissels. and added that
unemployment is distant. In November 1979. only 1,050 people received
unemployment payments. Minister Yisra'el Jets made these statements
during a tour of the Bat Shemesh Engine Company. [Text] [TA061723
Jerusalai Domestic Service in Hebrew 1600 GMT 6 Dec 79 TA]

INCREASED INTEREST RATES-4n 15 days. on 9 December. the bank interest will
be increased 15 percent. Then the interest for unapproved overdrafts

will be 130 percent. The banks' decision to raise the interest rate has
been made in light of the recent steps taken by the cabinet. About 10 days
ago, on 15 November. the interest rate was increased 10 percent. The

basic conercial interest has now, after the increase, reached 80 percent.
but one should add lo percent cmission for allocating credit. All in

all, the basic interest will be 86 percent. The banks have also decided

to raise the interest rates for extraordinary overdrafts by a further

15 percent. In other words, in addition to the basic 84 percent, there
will be an additional 65 percent interest rate on unapproved overdrafts
instead of the 30 percent demanded currently, in total. 130 percent.

The banking system currently suffers a 6.5 billion pound liquidity

deficit. The fines which the banks currently pay for exceeding the

volune of credit given thu by the Bank of Israel have in effect reached
250 percent, so that the banks are interested in moderating the demand

for credit. [Excerpt] [TA231207 Beni Baraq. Tel Aviv stl'm' mum
in Hebrew 2.! Nov 79 p 3 TA]

NEH SETTLEMENT HOUSINGuAccording to the Jewish Agency Settlement Depart-
ment there will be about €0,000 families in Judaea and Samaria at the

end of the 5-year autonomy period. I learned about this yesterday from

the settlement department's chairman, Hatityahu Drobles. About 5,000
apartments will be constructed in Judaea and Samaria this year. According

to Drobles' plan, the apartments will be built by private contractors who
will receive political guarantees from the government against the possibility
of a change in the status of the area. The government will also buy from the
contractors all the apartments that cannot be sold on the free market.

Drobles also proposes that the government give the contractors about 30 per-

cent of the cost of the project as an advance payment before beginning work.
(“281214 Tel Aviv 'AL WISHHAR in ﬂebrew 28 Nov 79 p 1 TA]

CSO: 4805 56
UNITED STATES HILL WIT IRAN CRISIS FOR ITS OWN INTERESTS
Kuwait AL-RA'Y AL-‘Am in Arabic 9 Nov 79 pp 1, 19
[Editorial: "0.8. Elbassy and Gulf"]

['l'ext] It is certain that the potentials projected by the new Iranian-
0.8. crisis bear within their folds dinensions that are difficult to deter-
mine now and that do not seen confined to the franework of an enbassy and
the release of hostages but that will go beyond this framework to effect
the situation in the Gulf area generally.

The Iranians know definitely that the denand for handing over the shah in
return for evacuating the enbessy cannot and will not be net for several
considerations. the first being the fact that a country like the United
States will not per-it its prestige to be tranpled in this Ianner even
though it knows that any condenn its foreign policy altogether. and
particularly in the Middle East.

Therefore, it must be that this Iranian denonstration is seeking to achieve
realistic goals behind the occupation of the enbassy. Perhaps these goals
are connected with the donastic Iranian conditions and need such a big
stone [sic]. It is east likely that the Iranian leadership's fears
intensified after the shah's transfer to a New York hospital for treatnent
and that the Iranian nenory recalled the possibility of restoring the

shah to the peacock crown, as happened in 1953.

The appeal which Inan Khmeyni has addressed to his people in a live broad-
cast and in which he told then "do not fear" is interesting. This indicates
that there is concern over mysterious events that will take place as a
consequence of the embassy seizure.

Naturally, the United States will not let this issue pass without trying
to exploit it in its interest at the level of the entire Gulf because
this issue nay provide it with the pretext to clail that Iaatters in the
Gulf. which is considered one of its nost vital interests, as it always
says. are not as well as they should be and that, therefore. arrange-ants

aust be nade to enable the U.S. fist to nova and to strike lore swiftly
and precisely.

57
It is most likely that the 11.8. ears are fully attentive to the Israeli
advice in this regard. Perhaps the film "Bntebbe Operation" will be shown
anew and other similar stories will be repeated. However. those who find
it unlikely that the United States will enbark on direct military action
concerning the embassy issue do not find it unlikely. and even assine,
that as a result of this operation [embassy seizure]. the Hashington
administration will push the Gulf situation to the brink. Many believe
that Washington has been waiting for an occasionuperhaps like this one--
to embark on such an effort.

This is why sone say that Washington "has permitted" the shah to get sick
in New York so that events may follow one another in quick succession and
so that the door to the crisis may be opened.

This is fundamentally Kissinger's way of leading crises toward the explosion
point and of then moving to make new arrangements.

Perhaps all the current moves concerning this issue and revolving around it

bear in their folds the features of a crossing toward a new situation which
is still ambiguous.

At best. it is inevitable that what has happened—-in the light of the

development of events and of the future consequences-will project equations
and will produce convictions and visualizations connected with the calcu-
lations of all the forces in the area.

The Americans, especially in cases like this one, never ask anybody about
carrying out their decisions. In this regard, Kissinger says in his
memoirs that when the 1970 events in Jordan and the Syrian nilitary
intervention were discussed, it had been decided that an Israeli military
move would be staged to counter the Syrians. when sone people said that
King Husayn's opinion had to be explored, Kissinger's opinion was: "We
should not risk King Husayn's position by asking his a question he cannot
answer. He may approve that which he can never ask for."

This means that the U.S. policy planners make assumptions that serve their
interests and carry out these assumptions on the basis of fait accompli

on the one hand and the basis that the other side approves these assumptions.
without asking for them, on the other hand. In the light of this theory.
the U.S. policy can be understood and then anything can be expected.

8494
080: 4802
”ERICA“ LACK OF UNDERSIWING 0P MIDDLE EAST DECRIED
Kuwait AL-RA'Y Arum! in Arabic 8 Nov 79 pp 1, 19
[Editorial: "Occupied United States and Palestine"]

[Text] If there is a benefit in occupying the 0.8. hbassy in Teheran and
threatening the life of its workers, than this benefit is owned up, at
least, in having the Asericans taste occupation, even if it is only the
occupation of their embassy, and feel, both as rulers and citizens. the
gravity of havim the life of some of their citizens threatened. They say
thus understand the leaning of the occupation of a honeland, evicting its
people and threatening the lives of thousands of its citizens. i.e.,
understand the neaning of the occupation of Palestine, of denying its
people their right to their honelend and their sovereignty over it and of
denying its citizens a guarantee against threats. terrorization and nurder.

It is nothing lore than an esbassy and several dozen Anericans. However,
the latter constitutes in its deep sense soae kind of occupation of

0.8. territory. This calls on Washington to understand truly, or at least
logically, the rejection by peoples, including the Palestinian people. of
the aggression co-itted against then. It is an opportunity for the
United States to learn how to deal with and how to reach people through
mutual respect and through recognition of peoples' rights and not through
plotting, oppression and the backing of oppression. Nobody is by nature
an ones, of the United States. The United States itself creates against
itself all these enaies who are justified in their hostility because they
possess nothing other than this hostility with which to defend themselves.
their rights and their honelands.

Perhaps the strangest 0.8. theory, despite all the facts to the contrary,
is the ludicrous stataent made by Barold Sounders, one of the top 0.5.
officials, on the goals of the U.8. policy in the Middle East. He has
said: "The goal of our presence in the area is-verbatin-to help its
states to preserve their independence against any foreign intervention."

"he can believe such words when he sees quite the opposite and when he sees
that the "foreign intervention" that threatens the independence of the
area states enanates more free the United Statee--and with its Israel,

its spearhead--than froa any other country?
How can we believe such a claim when we have been witnessing daily through-
out the past 30 years that the usurpation of Palestine took place under the
0.5. patronage and that this usurpation is still growing and escalating
under this patronage and through the u.s. weapons delivered to Israel?

Moreover, what are these "independenoes" that are "protected" by the
United States and how can they continue to be "independences" as long as
they need the u.s. "help?"

If Washington were truly working to provide this help. it would have
prevented Israel from occupying territories, it would have stopped support-
ing and adopting the Israeli espansion and would have withheld from Israel
weapons that cannot be countered and that can shoot down Arab aircraft from
a distance of 10 kilometers.

Despite all the potentials of danger, we cannot but support whoever reminds
the United States that a certain tree could not reach its God so that this
Anerican tree may perhaps resenber and learn that Palestine is under no
condition less important than its enhassy in Teheran and that the Anericsn
hostages held there are not lore important than the Palestinian people who
want nothing more than their hoselsnd and their right to life. sovereignty
and freedom-mothing more.

But despite this, we do not believe that the United States will reuse-her,
not even if it is true--and we hope that it is truer-that the PLO will
mediate with the ‘i‘eheran authorities to release the 0.3. citizens. This
is because we are certain that even if the PLO lights its 10 fingers

and covers its face with all the cosmetics in the world, the United States
would still not want it unless the PLO agrees with the wishes of the

States, i.e.. none of Palestine [for the Palestinian state]. Ultimately,
the issue is connected with two antitheses: The United States, for

countless reasons, cannot be with us and with right. Therefore, it is
against Palestine, the PLO and the Arabs.

Therefore. dealings with the United States are no longer subject to
multiple choices. It scene that those who have taken the only choice,
though being the desperate choice, are the ones who have succeeded and
triumphed.

8694
080: 6802
'AL—SIYASAH' WARNS 0P IRANIAN CRISIS' POTENTIAL FOR DISASTER
Kuwait AL—SIYASAH in Arabic 11 Nov 79 p 1

[Editorial by Almad al-Jarallah: "Emorbitant Price That world Hay Pay
for head of Man Who Is About To Die"]

[Text] Internationally. what has happened in Iran cannot be accepted
because it constitutes a violation of international traditions and usage.
especially since the official Iranian adninistration blesses what has
happened, namely occupation of the 11.3. Embassy. It has been customary
for such a violation of diplomatic traditions to come from irresponsible
circles and for the crisis to be then settled through cooperation between
the local authorities and the victimized party.

The issue here is not one of testing the Iranian strength against the

0.5. strength. The cosparison is not valid and has no foundation because
the circusstances are different. Iran on its part continues to be

capable of moving in any direction it deens fit. even if it violates inter-
national traditions and usage and the logic of international relations
whereas the United States cannot, on its part. move except through the
rules of the sequence of authority through the Congress, the intelligence,
the any class [establishent] or the white house experts.

It is true that Teheran's and Washington's conditions are different insofar
as the degree of flexibility of each of then is concerned but there is no‘
doubt that the ultimate loser is world confidence in the Iranian policy which
will not realize, regardless of what it does, its desand of having the

shah handed over-~not even if a third world war erupts. Handing over the
shah by a democratic country. and by a country like the United States in
particular. is something that goes through channels which everybody knows
are complicated channels. Any simple political thinker understands before
hand that the end will not be this simple. Those occupying the 11.5. Embassy
have not demanded the handing over of the shah from an African state or fro-
one of thee states whose dictionaries contain a thousand and one hundred
meanings and justifications for the phrase "public interest." In the

United States. there is no such a thing as public interest as long as the
law is clear and its controls are apparent. Therefore, Iran will be the
losing side in the dangerous gene. Carter has already initiated his plans

61
to Invltc the 0.5. public opinion against Iran and to put the Congress under
a national pressure that allows him to act flexibly and in freedom from

the legislative authority's pressure. The shah's issue any turn into

a challenge under which Carter finds himself facing local U.S. pressure to
keep the shah in the United States. having conducted a campaign to arouse
sympathy in the shah's interest. It is enough now that there are demonstra-
tions in the United States against the current Iranian regime. These
demonstrations are different from the ones staged a few months ago in support
of what had happened in Iran and demanding that the shah be refused asylum

in the United States. The situation has now changed in favor of the shah.

0n the other hand. there may be other arrangements which involve the elements
of a challenge between the 0.5. strength and the Iranian strength and which
may move matters toward the dangerous phase. This is what the Iranian

regime should realize so that the world may [not] find itself compelled

to pay an exorbitant price for the head of a man who is about to die.

The issue is ultimately one of principles. In years past, Algeria was
destroyed because the French ambassador had been insulted at a meeting
with the ruler of Algeria. Yes. the situation is dangerous insofar as all
the potentials are concerned. The Iranian regime is supposed to reconsider
its calculations not to push danger away from itself but to maintain the
trust it enjoys as a state in the international community.
EDITORIAL SPECULATES on WI'S ROLE
Kuwait AL-SIYASAH in Arabic 12 Nov 79 p 1
[Editorial by Allied al-Jarallah: "Hint If Khomeyni Disappears Now"]

[Text] It is evident fron the interview given by outgoing Iranian Prime
Minister Bazargan to the Italian paper (ORLANA FILACCI) that the situation
in Iran is governed by a general feeling song all those who helped the
revolution or those who danced and cheered for it that any one of then has
the right to hold the reins in Iran. This is a feeling that even the
revolution leader finds difficult to restrain.

Before coming into existence. the Iranian revolution needed alternative
cadres to take control of affairs so that power may not be divided among
nunerous blocs, each of which believes that its theories are the beat and
that it is the bloc close to Khoneyni, the revolution leader. Even though
the Iranian leadership feels that all are inportant, getting matters under
control will continue to need a position that clashes with extrenely
delicate sentiments and feelings. Getting letters under control will have
to inevitably be at the expense of some factions that have found in the
revolution a gain that may not be material but an emotional one—a gain
whereby some people are content to be able to raise their voice calling for

the shah's death or perhaps for dragging Carter and confronting the United
States.

Insofar as the domestic Iranian situation is concerned, Bazargan's interview
contains a succinct summary of what all. including the leadership itself.
are suffering. There is no doubt that the Iranian leadership truly desires
to set matters aright. But the ecstasy of the situation whose events have
blovn on Iran swiftly continues to intoxicate any people who cling to their
weapons and find pleasure in shouting against the shah—even though he is
no longer an issue-and against Carter, the United States and imperialists!
These are people who have been whispering their sentinents for 30 years

and who have now gotten a sudden opportunity to raise their voices. These
people cannot be guided easily now. The situation will be critical if

Khoneyni disappears from the stage of the country whose people are still
intoxicated by what has happened.
BRIEFS

SARKIS 1'0 VISIT H0800", UASﬂmGTal—Lebanese front information sources have
said that President Ilyas Sarkis will visit the United States, the Soviet
Union and acne European capitals to explain the situation in Lebanon and
the need to preserve its safety and independence, because any failure to
do so would constitute a danger to the security of the area and the world.
[Excerpt] [13071625 London AL-SIIARQ AL-AHSAT in Arabic 1. Dec 79 p 1 LD]

050: £802
KING WINS SUPPORT FOR PALESTINIANS
Paris AL-HUSTAQAL in Arabic 10 Nov 79 pp 15-16
(Article: "King Khalid and the M Palestinian Positions"]

[Text] In the course of 10 days. King Khalid ihn 'Abd-al-‘Aaiz placed
on record two positions which mean a great deal for the Palestinian
cause. The two positions originate from the same conviction.

The first position came in some remarks which the Saudi monarch eade to
pilgrims on 27 October. He said: "The Islamic nation is firmly resolved
to regain our occupied lends. especially the exalted city of Jerusalem.
and obtain the return of the legitimate rights to our Palestinian bretheran.
‘and we will use all possible means to achieve these goals."

The second position appeared in a telegram which King Khalid ihn 'Abd-al-
Aziz sent to the "Horld Conference of Solidarity with the Arab People and
and Its Central Cause. Palestine." In this telegram. the king reiterated
Saudi Arabia's support for the Palestinian people's struggle to regain
their homeland and their rights--especielly Jerusalem--and indicated that
the resources of his country will continue to be dedicated to the service
of the causes of Arab destiny.

It is interesting that King Khalid's telegram to the conference. which was
held in Lisbon, was read along with similar telegrams of support from
Brezhnev. Tito, King Busayn, King [lessen II, President Hahib Bourguiha
and the leaders of Bulgaria, Czechoslovakia and Greece.

It is also interesting that King Khalid assigned the Saudi ambassador in
Madrid to go to Lisbon and read the telegram in person, rather than al-
lowing it to be read by proxy.

In the context of Saudi concern for the Palestinians, the PALESTINE NEWS
AGENCY (HAPA) stated that Saudi Arabia has decided to give the PLO a dona-
tion of $2 million to complete the final phase of construction of a home
for children of Palestinian martyrs and activists in Syria.

This home. which will be named after the Kingdom of Saudia Arabia, will cost

a total of $5 million. The kingdom paid $1 million when construction on the
home began and will pay the additional $2 million soon.

8591
cso: 6802 65
CONTRACT FOR LARGE FERTILIZER PROJECT SIGNED

Riyadh AL-RIYAD in Arabic 8 Nov 79 p 2

[Article by Sultan al-Bazi'i: "Signing of $300-Hillion Contract for
Fertilizer Project; Methanol Project Contract To Be Signed Within 3
Weeks With Construction To Begin in Early 1980"]

[Text] During the first week of December, a contract will be signed between
the Saudi Basic Industries Company (SABIC) and the Chinese Fertilizer Com-
pany for a joint fertilizer project which will be established in al-Jubayl
and will produce 500,000 tons of urea annually. Construction on the proj-
ect is expected to begin during 1980. AL-RIYAD has learned that the proj-
ect will coat $300 million.

This information came in a statenent to AL-RIYAD by Engineer 'Abd-al-‘Aziz
al-Zanil. vice chairman and appointed menber of SMIC's board of directors.
The entire output of the project will be for export, and the Taiwanese
partner has pledged to buy 60 percent of the project's production for use
in Taiwan.

In addition, Engineer al-anil told AL-RIYAD that the contract for methanol
production project approved between SABIC and a Japanese group will be
signed within 3 weeks, with construction to begin in early 1980. Eight
Saudi engineers have completed training periods in Japan ranging from 1 to
2 years. They will participate in the work of the project from the begin-
ning. It is worth mentioning that the project will employ a lazin- of
180 workers. According to Engineer sl-Zamil. this will facilitate the
process of placing Saudis in these jobs after they have undergone training.

The project will have a production capacity of 2,000 tons of synthetic
methanol per day. The cost of the project is estimated at 900 million
Saudi riyals. Construction is expected to take 3 years with production
beginning early in 1983.

The substance methanol is used in my manufacturing industries. It is
converted into methyl chloride. which is used in the production of synthetic
rubber and substances used in the cosmetics and drug industries to prevent
water absorption. It is also used as a substitute for starch and in paint
products and adhesives. and is converted into acetic acid which is used in
the manufacture of plastics and adhesives. In addition. ethanol is con-
verted into for-aldehyde which is used as a glycerine substitute. in the
nanufacture of synthetic sponges, in the eanufacture of adhesives for the
construction and wood products industries. inthe nanufacture of plastics
used in the electric industries and in household utensils and paints.

and in the soil inprovenent industry.

Meanwhile. AL-RIYAD has learned that a meeting will be held in Decenber
between SABlC and Shell Oil Coepany officials to deal with aoee details of
an agreement whereby Shell Oil Coepsny will participate with sum in the
construction of a petrochemical complex to produce ethylene. styrene,
ethylene dichloride. crude synthetic ethanol and caustic soda.
BRIEFS

AIRPORT CORSTRUCTION—Some 316 million riyala will be spent for the con-
struction of new buildings and lounges at the Jiddah. Dhahran and Riyadh
airports. These facilities are needed to improve services at the air-
ports in view of the constant increase in the number of travellers to the
kingdom. Meanwhile, the General Administration for Civil Aviation is ex-
pected to complete the first phase of the new Jiddah International Airport
soaetime next year. in addition to constructing international airports

in Riyadh and Dhabran. Contracts for the preparation of studies and plans
for the latter two airports have already been awarded. In the same field,
small airports have been constructed at Hs'il, Badanah and Abha 'at a total
cost of 628 million riyals, and the development of the al-Qasin airport
is expected to be completed soon at a cost of 113 million riyals. In
addition. construction has been completed on new buildings and passenger
lounges at the al-Ta'if and Tabuk airports at a cost of 87 nillion riyals.
and the necessary studies are now in progress for the construction of new
airports at al-Ta'if, Tarif. al-Khafaji and al-Qaryat. [Text] [Jiddah
'UKAZ in Arabic 13 Oct 79 p a] 8591

SOUTH KOREAN TROOPS—The number of South Korean "workers" in Saudi Arabia
has topped 100,000, and this figure is expected to reach 250.000 as the
1980's begin. These South Koreans live in special camps and are not
allowed to mix with citizens. Their companies provide them with private
means of transportation. Some sources say that these South Koreans are
merely substitutes for the hundreds of thousands of Arab workers who con-
stitute an "ideological threat to the regime." Other sources assert that
these Koreans have connections with security and are none other than
trained troops ready to intervene and protect imperialist interests in
Saudi Arabia and the rest of the Gulf. Their activity has apparently been
on the increase recently. Sons high-ranking officers and military advisora
have been attached to the troops. and the South Korean conpany Shin Ban
International has recently received a $178.4 million contract to oversee
the construction of buildings for the King 'Abd-al-‘Azia Military Academy.
which will be located hundreds of kilometers nothwest of Riyadh. The con-
tract was signed with the Saudi Ministry of Defense and Avaiation. [Text]
[Beirut AL-HADAF in Arabic 10 Nov 79 p 31] 8591

C80: 6802
ousm FIRST VICE PRESIDENT wears AGAINST REGIME
London AL-DUSTUR in Arabic 6-10 Nov 79 p 19
[Article: "Power Struggle in Sudan"]

[Text] Before his disnissal from office. Abu al-Qasim struggled with
several different sides. from al-Sadiq al-Hehdi on the one hand to
al-Turabi on the other. and imagined that as first vice president he was
in a position to play a larger role in the Arab sphere. lie was constantly
launching attacks against one or the other of these two individuals in
order to destroy the points of contact among Nuayri. al-‘l‘urabi and al-
Sadiq al-Hehdi.

The struggle grew to the point that Abu sl-Qasim felt the regime was on
the verge of collapse, and so he chose to step up the pace in order to
escalate these struggles and settle them in his favor. Ile exploited the
issue of civil service reform and wage increases to get the workers and
civil servants on his side. irrespective of his ability to fulfill his
comitlents. which ran as high as 50 percent. lle knew that the regine
could not afford such an increase, but he was seeking to adopt a position
which was more political than econoeic. Nuayri undoubtedly refused to
put this reform into effect.

Another struggle took place between the first vice president and the old
Hay Revolutionists. Khalid Hasan 'Ahbas and Ha'mun 'Awad Ahu Zayd, in
addition to a struggle with 'llmar al-Tayyib and 'Abd-al-Hajid Ila-id
Khalil. Through all these stages, Nuayri was unable to control the
fighting. lie was plagued by vacillation in his position caused by his
personal weakness and the ease with which he could be influenced by any
side.

While this struggle was escalating in this manner. another struggle was
going on in the streets among the masses. They bypassed the organisations
which traditionally supported the regime, such as the Teachers Union, and
submitted their problas to the regime. In its general assembly, the
Doctors Union headed by Harith lined. a Nuayri supporter. adopted a
position which opposed the regime on union and political issues. Similar-
ly. the Federation of Farmers in Sudan bypassed the official cadres

69
friendly to the regime. while in the labor cadre. movements arose which
were remote from the official representatives. These examples indicate
that the masses have bypassed the obstacles of the official unions and

have raised problens and issues directly.

As a result of these pressures, Nunayri attempted to offer sacrifices and
victims. He made a direct attack on the Socialist Union in one of his
speeches. and then removed Abu al-Qasim from power in order to make the

people believe that. as secretary general of the Socialist Union. Abu
al-Qasim was responsible for everything.

Shift of the Struggle

The struggle shifted into a more practical phase when Abu al-Qasim began
fighting with Rashi al-Tahir, Yahya 'Abd-al-Hajid. and the successor to
Kawjali Hasan 'Abidin. Amal 'Abbas--prominent personalities whom Abu al-
Qasim had used as extensions of himself within the Socialist Union. Thus.
Rashid al-Tehir joined 'Umar al-Tayyib and Hasen al-Turabi in an alliance
against Abu al-Qasim. in spite of the existence of mutual conflicts among
the three men. The practical nature of the struggle manifested itself

in the confrontation between the Federation of Sudanese Labor Unions and
the regime following 6 years of silence and complete disregard of labor
issues as a result of the federation's former blind loyalty to the ousted
first Vice president.

However, this move is interpreted as an attempt to adopt a heroic position
and brandish the strike weapon so that the opposition labor lenders would
embrace it and be ousted politically or arrested. and the federation could
enter the elections without competition. The other obvious goal is to
express Abu al-Qasim's feelings toward the regime in order to weaken and
slander it. However. Numayri was able to abort the strike action by
directly threatening those responsible for it. He threatened to expose
the leaders, who had amassed excessive wealth and used public funds for
their own personal interests, before their base of support and the people.
The federation responded to this sort of pressure and lifted the strike
unconditionally.

He can say that Rashi al-Tahir. the foreign minister and secretary of the
organizations, is in a position to strike at the labor leadership which
supports Abu al-Qasim. Al-Sadiq a1 Mahdi. on the other hand, is unable to
exploit this opportunity. He was surprised by the dismissal of the first
vice president without his having found the means to influence subsequent
decisions of Numayri and win him over to his side--despite the fact that
al-Sadiq is constantly being proposed by himself and others as a potential
replacement for president of the republic. compelled by his personal
ambitions as well as his foreign connections. But al-Sadiq lacks a firm
foothold both at the popular level and within the regime because of his
dissociation of himself from his base of support. how that the regime

has dismissed him from the Political Office. al-Sadiq wants to reestablish
close ties with the Ansars in an effort to reconsider his old political
position. In Jazireh Aha. the spiritual capital of the Ansars. al-Sadiq
attempted to bring the Ansars together with their principal leaders in
order to offer himself as their imam. however, the death of the mother of
Ahmad al-Hahdi. a1 Sadiq's uncle, as well as the basic opposition to such

a step on the part of the Ansars themselves. forced him to change his
plans.

The Opposition

The opposition movement is represented by the recent series of strikes.
which bore the stamp of coordination in their raising of nationalist

issues that were far removed from such narrow class issues as the lowering
of prices and civil service reform. There is a trend for the opposition
forces to meet in coordinating committees. as was done recently at Khartoum
University. and propose a formula for an alliance joining all the forces
into a single front against the regime and the Hoslem Brotherhood. This
alliance has assumed practical forms. and its first result was the begin-

ning of a loosening of the Brotherhood's control over the university in
Khartoum. - '

There is also an alliance within the ranks of professionals and civil
servants, as well as in the workers cadre. The aim of this is to join
opposition forces into a single front to strike at the regime forcefully
in one thrust as opposed to scattered actions. At the political level,
rapid efforts are being made to join opposition forces into one central
leadership doaestically and abroad. and work is underway to make this
leadership successful and bring it into the practical realm in view of
the international struggles which are enveloping Sudan from all sides.
FIRST 3 YEARS OF 5-YEAR PLAN SHOW 0000 RESULTS
M 'IMN in Arabic 18 llov 79 pp 22 and 23

[Test] After the develop-out council was established in 1976 under sul-
tanic decree no. bl of 1974. one of its first acts was to adopt a resolu-
tion. on 9 February 1975. designating the goals and policy of develop-out
in the sultanate. that is to say. the long-tern strategy. The authoriza-
tion of this decree and the issuance of its full text were done in the
docunent of the first 5-year develop-eat plan.

The long-tern strategy my be described as a collection of goals with a
general character which defines the directions toward which it is desired
that the novaent of econoaic develop-eat should progress as: which can
be arrived at through successive short-tern plans. or 5-year plans, which
will be. as it were, a detailed translation of the long-tern goals and in
keeping with the temporary circmstances of each of these plans.

Now that 3 years, 1976, 1977, and 1978. have passed since the authoriza-
tion of the first 5-year develop-en: plan and the fourth year. 1979. is
wing to an end. work has begun in earnest on the preparation of the

the second 5-year developeent plan. for the years 1981 to 1985. and. as
is the case with the first 5-year dewelouent plan. the goals and policy
of the second will be derived fro- the long-tern goals and devoted to then
in such a nanner as to be in accord with the existing possibilities or
those possibilities which can be found during that period and with the
priorities which are appropriate to it.

The Principal Goals and Accolplislhents

The first 5-year plan included ways and neans by which it is possible to
achieve the goals which were set forth in it as a step toward achieving
the long-ten goals. Free the reports of the follow-up of the execution
of the first 3 years. 1976 to 1978, it can be said that the results which
have been achieved have been satisfactory and that the aovenent of devel-
op-ent is following the desired direction and making necessful strides
toward the achievement of the long-tern goals.

The following text is a brief review of the accouplishaents which have
been nade during the first three years toward the attaiment of those
goals.

The first goal is to work on the developeent of new sources of national
incone besides the petroleun revenues, with which to replace then in the
future. In fact, the proportion of the petrolem sector dropped to about
6 percent of the gross national product in 1978. as conpared with about 7
percent in 1975, whereas the relative importance of the rest of the eco-
nonic sectors increased to about Mo percent in 1970. as conpared with
about 33 percent in 1975.

The second goal is to increase the proportion of developeents which yield
revenue. especially in the fields of industry, lining. agriculture, and
fishing. in fact. this goal is considered bound up entirely with the pre-
ceding goal. and indeed it nay be said that it is not possible to achieve
the first goal without achieving this one.

The third goal of the plan is to distribute the develop-eats geographically
in a sanner which will be advantageous to the several regions of the coun-
try and to all of the people in then and so that it will elininate the
disparity in the standard of living of these areas. with the elinination
of special priorities for the least advanced regions at the present tine.

The fourth goal of the plan is to support and develop the existing centers
of population, preserving then fro. the danger of lass nigrations to the
dense centers of concentration of populat ion, and to preserve the envir-
event.

The fifth goal is to devote attention to water resources by considering
them a vital elenent in the continuation and course of econnnic activity.
This goal is confined to two principal elements: providing water for the
inhabitants in all regions of the sultanate.

The sixth goal is to devote attention to the development of doeestic Ian-
power so that the people can undertake their roles fully in the national
econony.

The seventh goal is to coeplete the fore of the basic structure. In this
field, during the first 3 years of the plan. the govemnent has undertaken
to carry out developeents totaling 260 nillion (bani riyals. The effects
of these developeents have been reflected in the following fields:

Roads: The length of the first-class asphalt roads was 1,587 kiloneters
in 1978. as conpared with 708 kilometers in 1975. and the length of the

second-class graded roads was 12,151 kiloneters in 1978 as conpared with
5,695 kilometers in 1975.

Harbors: During the period of 1976 to 1978. the n. of 26 aillion riyals
was spent on widening and deepening the existim harbors. especially Qabus

73
and Raysut harbors. work is in progress to inprove Raysut harbor by dred-
ging deep anchorages. and the completion of it is expected in 1980. The
capacity of Qabus harbor is 1.5 nillion tons per year at the present tile,

and that of Raysut harbor is expected to be 600,000 tons per year when
work is completed on it.

Air fields: During the period fro- l976 to 1978, the sum of 12.1 riyals
wee spent to enlarge the air fields of al-Sib and al-Salalah and provide
tho with the lost aodern equip-em. Al-Sib international airport began
to accoQodate 27.300 flights in 1978. as conpared with 15,000 in 1975.

Electricity: The production capacity of the electrical power stations
throughout the several parts of the sultanate increased from 91 negawatts
in 1975 to 206 negawatts in 1978. Work is in progress on the village
electrification project. and 26 electricity stations have been built in
the various towns and villages of the sultanate. as have also the distri-
bution systeas in then. The Man National Electricity Conpany has been
for-ed to adninister and operate a lumber of these stations.

water: The production of water in the region of the capital and Salalah
was about 1,744 nillion gallons in 1978. as compared with 359 nillion
gallons in 1975.

Posts and telephones: The m of post offices and substations was 46
in 1978. as compared with 27 in 1975.

The eighth goal is to support donestic nercantile activity and to elici-
nate the difficulties of transportation and storage and the various obsta-
cles that curtail the adequacy of the Iarkets. Many acconplislnents have
been aade in this field. The expansion of the road network has resulted
in the clinination of difficulties in internal transportation. and the
enlargesent of the harbors and air fields has led to the elimination of
obstacles in the way of the move-cut of foreign trade. The gross imports
registered increased froa 264 Iillion riyals in 1975 to 327 million
riyals in 1978, whereas the exports other than petroleu increased during
the sane period from 1.1 aillion to 3.3 nillion riyals.

The organization of the banking system in the sultanate and the increase
in the ntnber of active banks also helped to support the domestic trading
activity. The quantity of bank credit for internal nercantile operations
aaounted to 9.7 aillion riyals in 1978. as compared with 8.5 million riyals
in 1975. and the credit for export operations amounted to 92.4 million
riyals in 1978. as compared with 40.0 nillion riyals in 1975.

There were 3,161 colpanies and establish-ems registered in the sultanate
of Onan and operating in aercantile activity from 1976 to 1978. and.
according to the statesents of the aercantile register. the capitsl of
these companies mounts to 49.4 aillion riyals.
The seventh goal is to conplete the requisites of a free national econon
centered on the activity of the private sector, on the basis of a free
competition rather than monopoly, by way of establishing appropriate tax
incentives and exceptions. offering loans to production projects on rea-
sonable conditions. and investing in the capital of vital conpanies in

a reasonable proportion of the revenues which are available to the state.
In this field. the following acconplislnents have been eadex

l. The gross developments of the private sector during the 3 years of
the plan from 1976 to 1978 amounted to about 222 Iillion riyals.

2. The investeent of the govement in the projects of the private sector
amounted to about 16 nillion riyals during the sane period.

3. The Development Bank of Dean began to pursue its activity in 1978, and

is expected to becoee a principal support of the developent of the private
sector in Dean.

4. Moreover, the government is offering Iany incentives for doeestic pro-
duction. including tax and custoss emptions, if the case warrants them.

The ninth and last goal is to raise the coepetence of the adlinistrative

apparatus of the state. In this field, the followin steps have been
taken:

1. On 28 June 1975, sultanic decree no. 27/75 was issued pertaining to
the issuance of the law for the organization of the adsinistrative appara-
tus of the state. The law was then anended by sultanic edict no. 13/76,
issued on ll April 1976.

2. The introduction of a number of regulations which led to the develop~
nent of the national financial administration regulations was done, and
the financial supervision becase more stable. Furthermore. a new system
was followed for the stabilization and accounts. resulting in raising the
efficiency of these apparatuses.

3. The procurements council was formed, and projects began to be put to
public auction. This resulted in opening the field wider to competition
and afforded the goverment the opportunity to get better offers.

14. The institute of public adninistration was created, which undertakes
to organize training courses and classes for state officials on all
levels, with the goal of raising the efficiency of adninistration in the
various govern-out apparatuses.

The Gross National Product

The gross national product. reckoned in current prices, amounted to about

75
892.8 million riyals in 1978. as compared with 726.2 million riyals in
1975, which was the preceding base year for the beginning of the execution
of the development plan. That is to say. the gross national product
increased by about 168.8 million riyals at the end of the third year. or
at the rate of 23.3 percent.

The national product of the agricultural and fishing sector anounted to
27.1 million riyals in 1978. as compared with 20.2 million riyals in 1975.
an increase of 6.9 nillion riyals at the end of the 3 years. or 36.2
percent.

The national product for the petroleu and minerals sector anointed to
698.6 million riyals in 1978. as compared with 686.6 million riyals in
1975, an increase of 11.6 nillion riyals, or 2.6 percent.

The national product of the industrial sector amounted to 11.2 million
riyals in 1978, as compared with 2.1 million riyals in 1975. an increase
of 9.1 nillicn riyals. or 33.3 percent.

The national product for the building and housing sector amounted to 85.3
million riyals in 1978. as compared with 80.8 million riyals in 1975. an
increase of 16.5 aillicn riyals. or 20.5 percent.

The domestic product of the transportation and co-unications sector
mounted to 33.2 million riyals in 1978, as compared with 23.5 million
riyals in 1975, an increase of 9.7 riyals. or 61.3 percent.

The national product of the electricty and water sector aaounted to 8
million riyals in 1978. as compared with 1.8 million riyals in 1975, an
increase of 6.2 nillion riyals. or 366.6 percent.

The national product in the domestic trade sector amounted to 72.2 million
riyals in 1978, as compared with 38.5 million riyals in 1975, an increase
of 33.7 riyals. or 78.5 percent.

The national product in the hulking sector amounted to 16.5 nillion riyals
in 1978. as compared with 9.8 riyals in 1975. an increase of 6.7 million
riyals. or 68 percent.

The national product in housing rentals anounted to 21.8 aillion riyals
in 1978, as counted with 9.3 million riyals in 1975. an increase of 12.5
nillion riyals. or 136.6 percent.

The national product in services and other sectors aaounted to 10.2 nillion
riyals in 1978, as conpared with 8.6 million riyals in 1975, an increase
of 6.8 million riyals. or 81 percent.

Developments: The value of the development projects which the government
carried out during the 3 years from 1976 to 1978 amounted to about 68.8

76
million riyals. and the developents of the private sector during the same
period aacmted to about 222.2 million riyals. That is to say. the total

of the developents which were carried out by both the govern-exit and the
private sector aaounted to 913 aillion riyals.

The gross developments carried out during each of the 3 years represented
a rise in the gross national product anountin; to 31.5 percent in 1978.
35.3 percent in 1977. 38.8 percent in 1976, and 35.6 percent in 1975. a
level which is considered satisfactory. This reflects an effort in eco-

noaic developaent which is considered to be anon; the highest of the
levels exerted in the developing countries.

The distribution of the govern-eat developments anon; the various sectors
developed in such a newer that the goods sectors began to assu-e a more

adequate share of these developents. This is a healthy phenomenon, which
is in keeping, with the econoaic development goals. Mthernore. the eco-
nomic sector st ill claims the largest share of the total of the goverment

developments. for the need still exists for the completion of the projects
in it.

Finally. it will be observed that the private sector has begun to turn
toward developments in industrial projects. and this is a good sign.
POLISARIO'S ABDELAZIZ REVIEWS STRUGGLE AGAINST MOROCCO

LDO71633 Algiers BL MOUDJAHID in French 10 Dec 79 p 6 LD

[Interview with General Mohamed Abdelaziz, Polisario Front secretary
general. by APS: "0n the Eve of the (MU Ad Hoc Connittee Meeting": "The
Moroccan General Staff Is Run by Foreign Experts"--in the Saharan Delo-
cratic Arab Republic (SDAR)--no date given]

[Text] SDAR--0n the eve of the OAU ad hoc committee meeting on the Heat
Sahara question in Monrovia (Liberia), Polisario Front Secretary General
Mohamed Abdelaziz granted an interview to APS in which he explained the
Polisario Front's victories, denounced U.S. aid to Baasan ll's regime.
launched an appeal to the Moroccan people to rise up against the injustice
to which the Saharan people are subjected and condemned the monarch's dis-
astrous policy.

[Question] The Saharan People's Liberation Army [SPLA] is sweeping away
all the monarchiat garrisons in its path. To what can the resounding
victories at Tan-Tan, Lebouirate and Mahbes be attributed?

[Answer] The SPLA has indeed liberated the whole of Saguiet al Hamra and
is now operating in the Moroccan anti-Atlas mountains. To understand the
major victories won by the SPLA you just have to consider the vast quan-
tities of weapons and equipment captured from the Moroccan occupiers after
each battle. For example on 17 January we captured 63 trucks loaded with
weapons and munitions from the enemy at Linseyed. We did likewise at Len—
guab where we captured 167 trucks and other venicles. He immediately use
all these vehicles. heavy weapons and munitions against the monarchiat
colonial forces. Consequently it is only natural that the volume of SPLA
actions is becoming impressive and the results much better than before.

[mestion] Therefore the SPLA owes its victories to the equipment it uses?

[Answer] Only in part, since the weapons do not explain everything.
Account must also be taken of the low morale of the monarchiat soldier,
worn by defeat, isolation and the violence of war. These soldiers do not
put up any resistance against our units when they attack.
The seizure of major Moroccan bases invaded by our fighters has had a pro-
found effect on the Moroccan soldier's morale. Furthermore he no longer
has to face rifle fire but the same weapons that he uses, which we-have
captured from his compatriots. Another factor which deserves consideration
In the fact that the Saharan fighters know they are fighting for a just
cause--to liberate their country and save their people from colonialism

and genocide. The monarchist soldier on the other hand has had confirma-
tion that he is waging a war which is bound to be lost and that his death

will not benefit his country arhis family. That inevitably produces his
behavior and his refusal to fight.

[Question] Could the new weapons which President Carter's administration
has promised the Rabat monarchiet regime change the course of the war?

[Answer] The United States has never stopped supplying weapons to Hasaan Il's
regime. Ever since our revolution was launched, we have been capturing
American weapons in all the enemy garrisons we invade. However, whateon-
cerns us is the U.S. political decision to support a totally isolated
regime-—a monarchy condemned by all international bodies, by the United
Nations. the OAU and the nonalined movement.

[Question] Morocco frequently speaks of the internationalization of the
Saharan problem. Is this a real possibility?

[Answer] The possibility of the Heat Sahara question being international-
ized is raised only by the Moroccan press. The Saharan people have enough
weapons and determination to liberate their country themselves. They have

no need of military support in the field and will never ask for such sup-
port. 0n the other hand you can see how Morocco. without initially admitting
it, internationalized the decolonization of the Rest Sahara by accepting
military aid from Spain and then from France and the United States. So who
is internationalizing the problem if not Morocco?

The United States and other countries are not content to supply tons of
impressive weapons to the monarchist regime. They are supplying radar.
guns. vehicles and aircraft, which we capture or destroy every day--not to
mention the military technical aid provided in the field. Superior officers
from several foreign countries frequently inspect a1 Ayoun and Semara. The
Moroccan general staff itself is run by foreign experts. For 2 months now
there have been signs of the systematic replacement of Moroccan cadres by
foreign cadres in Morocco. This is probably being done to "save" what can
still be saved of their sick ally.

[Question] In what framework of international relations can the ties between
Morocco and the countries providing it with military aid in the West Sahara
war be placed? '

[Answer] The ties are clear. They are the ties which link world imperial-
ism with lsrael's interests. Hassan II knew of the link between Begin and
and al-Sadat as early as 1975; hence the aid and support given to Morocco
by both Israel and al-Sadat's Egypt. These two countries themselves repre—
sent v.5. interests and since the consequences can be seen in the field, the
circle is cosplete. Hassan II would like nothing better than to see the

three countries take complete control of Morocco. In any case their
technicians are already doing so.

[Question] The Saharan people are preparing to start their 5th year of

national liberation struggle. What is a word for the Saharan people
[apparent line drop in original]?

[Answer] Our revolution is stronger than ever. we have human reserves to
continue the struggle for a long time. The equipment which the Saharan
fighters have is cospletely satisfactory. We have already liberated Saquiet
a1 Hamra completely. Our rearguard units are dealing with Senara. Bou Craa
and al Ayoun. The bulk of our forces are operating in Morocco itself and
they will continue to push forward right into enemy territory until our peo-
ple's rights are restored and until Morocco heeds the voice of reason dic-

tated by all international organizations and our continent's organization
in particular.

[LD071435] [Question] Before your departure for Monrovia do you have any-
thing to say to the Moroccan people?

[Answer] We have constantly appealed to the political courage of the
Moroccans, at least those who are still outside the monarchist prisons.

We still hope that they will pull the-selves together and oppose the dis-
astrous policy of the "shah" of Morocco and struggle openly against injus-

tice and against obscurantism and that they will heed the appeal for the
freedom of peoples.

He still hope that they night take this opportunity to anticipate peace for
they know that the Saharan people are determined in their mission to regain
their independence. If the Moroccan people remain passive they will inevit-

ably bear sons of the responsibility for the disaster, chaos and world
inperialisn's control over Morocco.

C80: #400
SAHARA“ 'PRIHB MINISTER' LAM!!! GIVES INTERVIEI m ALGIERS PAPER
1.0300809 Algiers BI. WARD in French 12 Nov 79 p 5 L0

[Tsyes Belghiche interview with Saharan Demcrstic Arab Republic Prime Minis-
ter Hahn-ed Lamina Ould Lined: "A POLISARIO Front Delegation Will Go To
Honrovis"—date and place not specified]

[Text] 13!. HOUDJAHID: Hr Prine Minister. you have just left Mali where you
net with President )busss 'I‘raore, who. as everybody bows. is a ader of
the OM! ad hoc co-ittee on the west Sahara. The conittee is due to nest
in Honrovis soon. Has your trip to Mali connected with that nesting? Hill
you go to the Liberian capital and what do you expect free the co-ittees '!

Hobs-ed Lanine: Mali is a country friendly to the Saharan people and night
itself becoae a victim of Horocco's territorial deunds. Our relations with
this fraternal country existed before the nonarchist forces invaded our terri-
tory. Mall is a Ienber of the ad hoc co-ittee and we visited that country
for two reasons. Our visit took place in the context of efforts, first, to
strengthen relations between our two peoples and. second, to infers Mali
officials of the situation in the Heat Sahara on the eve of the ad hoc con-
sittee Ieeting. That conittee has a duty to uphold 0A0 decisions and in-
sure that they are ilplenented. President Trnore assured us that lhli will
take action and enter discussions to help the Saharan people recover their
usurped rights. That is the hope of the Saharan people as an African people.

I believe that the days in which the future of peoples was discussed in their
absence are now over. That is why a POLISARIO front delegation will go to
Monrovia to express the Saharan people's viewpoint. He think that unless the
OAU acts more quickly to find a solution to the Heat Saharan problea it is
likely to find that it has been bypassed, especially now that King lasssn II
is trying to internationalize the problen, which will for- a dangerous prece-
dent for the African continent as has already been the case with regard to
the invasion and division of our territory. The 0A0 has never been ansccoa-
plice of colonialisn nor of expansionist: and the subjugation of peoples.
Otherwise [if the 0M! does not act are quickly] we would witness a radical
change in Africa's geopolitical asp.

81
31- HOUNAHID: According to 0A1! Chairman Hillia- Tolbert King Massan II will
go to the ad hoc co-ittee meeting whereas he did not go to the Monrovia "sum-

nit” despite announcing his participation. How do you interpret this new
naneuver by Rabat?

Mohaned Lanine: The King lied to ‘8 African heads of state when he announced
his intention to take part in the last OAU "emit" in Monrovia. lie has now
proaised to go to the Liberian capital to attend the ad hoc co-ittee meeting
just when his foreign minister is asking statemnts reaffirning that Morocco
will never abandon its expansionist policy thereby rejecting the OM! resolu-
tions on the west Saharl- Alsost all the African heads of state think differ-
ently from King Hassan II. The African heads of state have to choose between

their line, which is that of justice, and the King's line, which is based on
expansioniss and aggression.

BL mUDJAHID: King Eassan II has proposed a conference of countries bordering
the Sahara. What do you think of that proposal?

Mohamed Lanine: First, Morocco does not border the Sahara. The countries
which do (Algeria, Libya, Niger and Mali) have already held neetings in Ouarla,
Algeria, and Niamey, Niger, and they are holding another aeeting soon in
Bauhaus meeting which the POLISARIO front has asked to attend for the sinple
reason that the Saharan Demcrstic Arab Republic is also a country bordering
the Sahara. The Moroccan govern-cat’s proposal is an attenpt to find other
ways of gaining support for the annexation of our country. The broccan
government has always tried to legitimize its occupation of the Heat Sahara
but those attempts have always been rejected by the United Nations. the 0M!
and the nonalined countries. The Mauritanian-Saharan peace agreement totally
destroyed the nonarchist claim. That is why the King is now trying to gain
support for his clains by pernicious maneuvers.

EL MOUDJAHID: Here you not surprised by Spain's abstention during the vote
on the Rest Sahara resolution at the UM political cos-ission meeting? And
were you surprised by Saudi Arabia's negative vote?

Mohaned Lanine: The Madrid authorities have a historical responsibility to
defend the right to existence and freedo- of a people against whom Spain coa-
nitted an unforgiveable crime. Its abstention is an unfriendly gesture.

He hope that the Spanish government will be capable of effacing Spain's be-
trayal of the Saharan people—~s betrayal written in history. The Union of
the Denocratic center, which is the party in power [in Spain]. officially
recognizes the POLISARIO front and the Saharan people's right to self-de-
ternination, it also recognizes that the West Saharan problen is a problem
of incomplete decolonizstion. The Saharan people do not understand the
flagrant contradiction of this abstention, which merely encourages Moroccan
expsmionisn.

As for Saudi Arabia, which is a Muslin country housing Islsn's holy places
and whose fundamental role is to defend the life of Malina, it is supplying

82
Morocco with money and weapons intended to exterminate a Muslim people. The
Saharan people ask a simple question: Why did Saudi Arabian kings receive
Saharan pilgrims as independent delegations from 188‘ to 1975? Today that
country refuses to accept Saharan pilgrias. Further-ore Saudi Arabia, while
clearly alining with Morocco. pretends to be nediating in the conflict--a
nediation which is distorted free the start since it disregards the Saharan
people. the fundamental element in the problea. In addition we can only

strongly regret that in this affair Saudi Arabia is siding with Al-Sadat and
the Zionists.

[LD300811] EL MOUDJAIIID: "hat is the present position on the Madrid Tri-

partite Agreeaent after the peace agreenent between Mauritania and the
POLISARIO Front?

Mohamed Lamine: For the Saharan people the Madrid agreeaent was null and
void right from the start and was nullified in practice not only after the
Mauritanian-Saharan Peace Agreaaent but also after Spain's recognition of
the POLISARIO Front as the Saharan people's sole legitinate representative.

EL MOUDJAHID: Do you think that the supply of 0.8. weapons to King Massan II
promises by the Carter adninistration could influence the course of the war?

Mohamed Lamine: The Carter administration's decision to strengthen the Inn-
nrchist regime with weapons is based on subjective arguaents. The nilitary
reinforcement of Morocco is an attenpt to boost the Moroccan arny's norale
which is impossible since that any is waging a colonial war. what is strange
is that the Carter administration says that in supplying area it is trying to
help Morocco to negotiate. However the vital question is negotiations between
which parties? The King has responded by threatening to use one of "his
rights" which he is constantly asserting. Therefore what is the 0.8. posi-
tion on the Saharan people's right to self-determination? The Americans them-
selves fought for many years to obtain that right. Does the Carter adminis-
tration not see a contradiction between the American people's national ideals
and the supply of arms to a regime which denies a people's right to exist.

Furthermore the Moroccan army does not lack area but aotivation, which it
cannot have because it is involved in a colonial war. As always those weapons
will certainly fall into the hands of the Saharan fighters.

EL MOUDJAMID: Morocco has given great publicity to the launching of a
"stopping-up operation“ in the Heat Sahara after which King Massan II has

stated that "calm will be restored in the Sahara in a few months." “hat is
the real truth about this operation?

Mohamed Lamine: A regime which is incapable of insuring security in its own
territory cannot be in a position to insure it outside its borders. More-
over when Morocco says that it is going to "lop up" the POLISARIO Pront's
bases in the Heat Sahara it is denying its own allegations that those bases
are to be found in Algeria. In a few months tine the Moroccan army will
question its King about this "mopping up" operation.
31- WUDJAHIN The Psrisisn weekly LB Rm OBSERVATEUR hss rmslod that
s delegation of Isrseli Iilitsry exports visitod Morocco. love you say in-
formation on this subject?

Hons-ed Latins: Kine Russo II clearly nintsino mount relstions with
the Zionist lcsdcrs.

He or. not surprisod that they src sending his I111-
ury experts. It would he s historic looting botvocn Zionist, Baptist: and
lbroccan exports.

(:80: “00
BRIEFS

ATTACK 0N MOROCCAN DASE--Saharan Democratic Arab Republic (liberated terri-
tories). APS-The Moroccan military base of lag, south of Dad Draa, was
attacked by Saharan fighters on Friday, according to sources close to the
Ministry of Defense of the Saharan Democratic Arab Republic [SDAR] as
quoted by the Saharan Information Ministry. The attack launched against
the (Rouse al-Ouj) approach to Zaq resulted in substantial losses to the
Moroccan troops of aggression which were forced to withdraw from several
advance points such as (Rouse al-Ouj) ad (M'seirigs). The communique of
the SDAR information Ministry points out that 25 soldiers of the Royal Armed
Forces were killed and 30 wounded. are two armored vehicles and two 106
cannon were destroyed. It says that Zaq is still under seige. {Text}
[LDO90007 Algiers APS in French 2030 GMT 8 Dec 79 L0]

VILLAGE ATTACK REPULSBD--A communique fnlntha Ministry of Information: A
detachment of Algeria's mercenaries yesterday morning. 6 December 1979.
attacked the village of Zaq from two directions in the east and southeast
of Zaq. The village was bombarded by the mercenaries from 1845 until 1030
[times as heard] in the morning. Our Royalist Armed Forces confronted the
attack with their known bravery and drove away the aggressors, destroying
several enemy military jeeps. The enemy left 60 dead in the battlefield.
The Royalist Armed Forces captured a quantity of arms and munitions. They
lost 2 martyrs. and 11 soldiers were wounded. [Text] [L0072136 Rabat
Domestic Service in Arabic 2000 GMT 7 Dec 79 L0]

C50: 4402 gun