FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10473

21 April 1982

Nedr East/North Africa Report

(FOUO 17/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

NR OFFKJAL USE ONLY
JPRS publications contain infornation primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also fron news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials fro- foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and nterial enclosed in brackets
[) are supplied by ”RS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original inforution was
processed. were no processing indicator is given, the infor-
nation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Horde or nenes preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. “times within items are as
given by source.

‘ihe contents of this publication in no way represent the polio
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.3. Government.

COPYRICH'I LABS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING WHERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
0? THIS PUEICA‘IION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
NEAR EAST/NORTH AFRICA REPORT

(POIJO 17/82)

Cou‘reurs

IRAQ

Positive Us: Developments Predictsd
(Mn-"Am AL..MI. 12-18 y.b &)soossssssssssssssssssosoo.

Hsr Progress. Syrian hdatton Discussed
(AL‘HAM “VJMI, 15-21 J“ &)sssssssoossssoosoosssooss.

Minister of Industry Oo-snts on stelopnsnt
(Tshir ‘rsvftq Intsrvisv; AL-WA'rAN AL-‘AMBI. 12-18 Feb 82)..

JORDAN

Dsctsion To Send Volunteer Troops to Irsq Anslyxsd
(Ma-VAN AL.'MI. 5‘11’235 82)so...osoososssossssssssssss

Amy's Strength, Bffsctivsnsss Evaluated
(AL'WAM “4"MI' s-u reb 82)soossssssssossbsoosssssssss

PEOPLE'S DWTIC WLIC 0? ml

Briefs
nosds Hit Country

16

22

26
rostnvr m 9mm Panic-rm
Paris mam AL-‘MI in Arabic No 261, 12-18 rob 82 pp 25-26

[Text] Arab voluntesrs are pouring into Iraq. The Iraqi military position is
sound. . Saddas Hus: -.yn says that Iraq is stronger today than it was at the out-
break of the war rd will be stronger still in 3 nonths. However, there are
still sons Arabs whose hands and tongues are stained with the blood of the
Iraqis.

"hat is the nilitary situation along the Iraqi-Iranian front?

The nost significant develop-ant in the war is the battle that the Iraqi
forces are waging in the southern sector of the front to seisa the al-Besatin
position. This battle follows a lightning attack launched by the Iraqi
forces last Saturday. Battle reports confirs that the Iranian advanced posi-
tions fell to the attacking forces within a few hours after the attack began
while the confrontation continued with light weapons and interlittent air
support in an effort to gain the renaining positions.

The Iraqis assure any visitor, guest. and eager questioner that the position
is sound and that they are still there in Iranian territory despite all the
Persian counterattacks and the claiss of the western press. They say they are
capable of advancing further at any tine.

The Iraqis tell you that. for understandable reasons, the western newspapers
want to raise the broken norsls of the Iranians. if only on paper. Thus, they
ascribe alleged victories and new gains to than. That is to say. the individ-
uals who are behind the control of these nawspspers do not want an Arab any
of the sire and mortance of Iraq's any to win because a victory would raise
the norale of the Arabs, thus weakening Israel and forcing it to attach
importance to a large and battle-prover: any.

President Saddam Busayn says that Iraq is stronger today than it was when it
entered the war and ”will be stronger in 3 aontha.” He says that the Iraqi

forces recently occupied nsw Iranian territority in the central sector and that
the Iranian leaders know this.

If the Iraqi nilitary position is sound, then why is Iraq asking Arabs to fight
in support of it?

MWWONLV
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Iraq is extra-sly sensitive on this point. It feels that the war is not just
Iraq's war but rather an Arab-Persian war. It is fighting and sacrificing not
nerely to defend Iraq but to defend its Arab honeland and nation against the

new Persian attack—cloaked in the ruents of religion--on the Arab character

a

of the Gulf and the national unity or ‘ re Arab people there.

The regular Iraqi army consists of nearly 300,000 troops and officers baclad
up by the nearly 600.000-strong Popular Aray and special nissions brigades.

There are plans to raise these nusbers to a coabinad total of more than 1.5
nillion Iraqis under arms.

Therefore, several thousand Arabs fight alongside the Iraqis. While these
troops may not be of auch consequence, they are sufficient to stimulate the
Arab conscience and express the Arab sense of honor and gallantry in fighting
the cannon eneny and maintaining solidarity together for better or for worse,
to use the Iraqi president's terns. As far as the Iraqis are concerned, they
are sufficient to let then know that the Arabs are with than in the sane
trench-~the Arabs who have never failed to respond to the call of duty on any
Areb battlefield and against any enemy.

On this basis, the Iraqis salute the position taken by the king. people, and
Government of Jordan. For not only has Jordan offered Iraq logistic aid. but
it is now hastening to join the battle by sending its sons to the battlefield.

Jordan has officially taken an open stand in support of Iraq. Other Arab
officials are calling for a siailar position. It appears that other Arab
states, led by Morocco and the Yenen Arab Republic (North Yemen) will offer to
take practical measures to nanifeet their partnership with Iraq in the con-
flict.

There are currently 12,000 Arab recruits fighting alongside their brother
Iraqis or training in preparation to go to the front. The prevailing belief
here is that this number could be multiplied by several tines in the near
future.

0n the other hand, there are still soae Arabs who recite slogans supporting
Arab nationalism and Arab solidarity and then backstab Iraq and attemt to
thwart every Arab effort to aid it. During one period. the Libyans contacted
Barazani's defeated supporters and Qadhdhafi's voice was raised in support of
then while the Iraqis were paying a blood tax on the Persian front. And on
top of this. then cones news confirming that the Syrian regime is training
Iranians in sabotage operations behind the Iraqi lines. In fact, official
Daaascus considered King Husayn‘s announcement opening the door for Jordanian
volunteers tantamount to a "provocation" of it.

The funny but sad fact is that those who shoot off their nouths about Arab

nationalists are in the sane caIp-wittingly or unwittingly—with Israel, which
is araing Iran, and with the United States, which persists in issuing warnings
of the disintegration of Iran's unity, advises the Jordanians not to wage war
alongside the Iraqis. and pressures the Gulf countries not to offer logistical

2

FOR OMCIAL USE ONLY
aid to Iraq. And then while on a tour through the Gulf. American Secretary of
Defense Casper Heinberger insists on claiming that herica is maintaining
"neutrality" in the war and refuses to provide any weapons to the Iraqis,
preferring to help Egypt and Sudan rather than Iraq, "which has a long history
of hostility to the United States."

The Iraqi newspaper AL-JMURIYAB responded to this Anerican "neutrality" by
calling for a boycott of Ansrica, the destruction of its interests in the

region, the halting 0! oil exports to it. and the withdrawal of Arab deposits
fron its coffers.

The United States expresses its hostile position to Iraqi practically. For
example, it has proceeded to "punish” Jordan since Jordanian relations with
Iraq improved. Statistics provide the best indication of this. The United
States has halted its economic aid to Jordan, which used to be more than $100
million per year, and nilitary aid has shrunk tron $110 million in 1979 to
only $102 million last year.

In any case. there is no escaping history. It is the best recorder and wit-
ness. The Iraqis do not reprova the Americans for their position of hostility
toward than. America's history of hostility to the Arab nation is well known.
Rather, they reprove their "brothers." whose hands and tongues are stained
with the blood of Iraq—blood shed in defense of its Arebian and its nation.

COPYRIGHT: 1981 AL-UA‘IAN AL-‘MI

8591
680: “06/305

MOMCIALUSIONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

IRAQ

UAR PROGRESS, SYRIAN HEDIATIW DISCUSS.
Paris AL-HATMI AL-‘ARABI in Arabic No 257, 15-21 Jan 82 pp 21, 22

(Article: "Baghdad to Syrian 'Hediation': Stop Supporting Iran, and He'll
Talk About Liberating Golan"]

[Text] In his speech on the eve of the celebration of the co-emoration of
the satabliet-ent of the Iraqi any, Saddam husayn dropped the veil of Arab
solidarity from the Syrian “nediation.” and said with a logic not lacking
in strong arguent that if anyone wants the liberation of the Golan and the
participation of Iraq in confronting Israel, he must stop assisting the
enemies of the Arab nation.

What is the real ailitary position on the front?

The war began with an Iraqi thrust all along the border line, content with
entering al-lhhsuars without occupying the min cities. This was followed
by a war of battles lasting about a year, including an Iranian attack last

February in Susangard (Khafaj iyya). which ended in disaster for the Iranian
forces.

In September the Iraqis reorganized their lines and took up positions beyond
the Karun river in the southern region on the hills of 'Abadan.

In the latter part of last November the Iranians tried to carry the battles
to the middle area of the front. They launched a wide attack on the region
of Basitin for propaganda purposes, since it is the Iranian area occupied by
Iraw that is closest to the canon borders of the two countries.

Lieutenant General 'Abd al-Jabbar Shanshal, Iraqi chief of staff, talked
about the battle of Khafaj iyya-Bseatin at the tine. and said that the
Iranians poured huge nuabera of nen into the battle and flooded some of the
road junctions with river water to prevent the advance of the Iraqi forces,
and plunged headlong along six area. But the Iranian raids crumbled, and
there remained only one remaining access for the Iranians to get to Basatin.
The Iraqi leader estinated their losses in that battle at 6.000 dead and
260 tanks.

1.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
With the beginning of the new year, the Iranians launched a massive attack
on the region of Heat Kaylen and Sumar in the province of Iermanshah, with
the goal of regaining control of the Iranian border city of Qasr-e Shirin,
situated on the Tehran-Baghdad road. This was the third Iranian attempt

in this region; it was preceded by two similar failures last April and
September.

In the first 2 days of the attack the Iranians were able to occupy two small
areas, though the Iraqis launched a counterattack on 5 January in which they
recovered them, after surrounding the Iranian forces and cutting off their
supply line in that rugged mountainous region. Iranian losses in that failed
attack were estimated at 1800 dead, while their losses since the intensifi-

cation of fighting on 7 December were estimated at 20,000 dead all along the
front.

It is obvious that the Iranians are relying on their numerical superiority
(3:1) by pouring large numbers of their reserves in the attacks which they
launch. Iraqi television continued for several days to show scenes of the
large numbers of Iranian dead and prisoners in the various parts of the
front.

Iraqi President Saddam Busayn affirned that Iraq will never allow Iran to
cross into its territory. He said that the outcome of the war will remain
in the hands of the Iraqis.

The large celebrations commenorating the sixty-first anniversary of the
founding of the Iraqi army was an occasion for the Iraqis to express their
attachment to their president, their stay, and their fighting forces. After
Saddam Husayn's speech on this occasion, Baghdad and other Iraqi cities
witnessed spontaneous rallies in which citizens shouted their request to
enlist for the fight with their brothers.

It is well known that the Iraqi arny is one of the oldest modern Arab armies.
It was founded with the founding of the modern Iraqi state in 1920, and its
history contains radiant and noble pages testifying to the Arabness of Iraq
and its national aspirations. The revolution of July 1957 worked to recover
its evolution, support and construction in such a way that it played gigantic
roles on the Syrian front in 1973 and in eliminating the Irani'n-supported
Bsrzani revolt in a nountaincla region of rugged roads. Today in battle

it gives proof of the sacriiicial Arab spirit in the Iraq of Saddam nuaayn.

It is worthy of note that with the intensification of fighting on the Iraqi-
lranian front, Israeli planes resumed their activities and attenpta to vio-
late Iraqi skies. In less than a week, Israeli planos attempted to violate
Iraqi air space in the region of Hekr al-Na'am (note the name-"The Cunning
of the Ostrich"), a stormy desert region 65 kilometers from the western
borders. The second attempt took place on Sunday, 3 January, i.e. during
the Iranian attack in Rest Kaylan and Sumar. It appears that the Israelis
wanted to divert Iraqi planes from resisting the Iranians.

5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
In any case, radar surveillance played its role in detecting the Israeli
penetration in both attenpts; Iraqi jets soared into the air. but the Israeli
jets chose to withdraw to where they cane fron as soon as their penetration
was detected. The incident confirne that the Iraqis have backed up their
air surveillance network with force following the Israeli raid on the Iraqi
nuclear plant last 7 June.

If the Iranians were able to pour large nunbera of forces into the battle,
relying on their nunerical superiority over Iraq, the Iraqis also affirn

that they have no lack in that area. The nest recent thrust fron the forces
of the people's any which reached the front in the first days of the year
contained Arab fighters fron Egypt. Syria, Palestine. Jordan, labenon, morocco,
Tunis. the Sudan. and Eritrea. Hr Teha Yasin Ramadan, deputy prine ninister
and leader of the people's eray, said in his farewell to these forces that

the Arab forces are always able to conclude the battle in their favor "what-
ever force the opposing eneny throws at us."

Whatever the case. Iranian attuapts at confusion, supported by attempts to
disregard Iraqi nilitary strength in the Western press, do not neet any
interest here on the popular level, and the Iraqis in the sixteenth nonth
of the war appear confident of the ability of their arned forces and their
political leadership, and of the truth of its statements, especially when
Saddan nuaayn said to then on the eve of the anniversary celebration of the
founding of the arny that Iraq is close to a decisive victory.

At the sane tine as the Iraqis effiraed their readiness to pursue the war

if Iran did not respond to their denands. they also affirn their deternina-
tion to continue the battle of construction and increased population. The
Iraqi president urged this in a nanner that aroused interest in all the words
that he spoke in the last few weeks, as an enbodinent of Iraq's dual goal
with which the nilitary proceeds.

Proe here also observers estinate how much effort the eneny has expended to
impede the production battle in Iraq. Classified in the framework of these
hostile efforts is the denolition of the pipeline which conveys Iraqi oil

to the harbor for transport to Tripoli in lebenon within a few days of its
re-opening following an interruption of about 6 years. Then the explosion
of the pipe which carries Iraqi oil through turkish lands to the Hediterran-
can. It has also been noted in both denolition efforts that they took place
in close proxinity to the Syrian border: the first in the village of Tel
'Abbas, which is only 3 kiloneters fron the Syrian-Lebanese border, and the
second in the Hardin region, facing the Turkish-Syrian border.

Iraq's affirmation of its deternination to pursue the fighting does not
nean that it is not ready to accept initiatives toward peace. but the
Syrian initiative circulated in the Arab nedia in the last two weeks does
not neet any serious interest here on either the popular or official level.
due to the lack of confidence in the truth of Syria's official intmtiona

toward Iraq.

6

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Then he added in a significant allusion that "some quarters say a lot about
what is called national nobilisation and Arab solidarity against the Zionist
eneny, and praise Iraq for its share in this solidarity. Iraq did not discuss
Arab solidarity with words, for the Iraqis were always at the forefront of
those who fought for Ialestine and supported their brother Arabs in their
liberation battles in the East and Heat. and it has always been a true con-
frontation state."

Saddas ausayn picked up on the weak point in the Syrian "mediation," which
is Danascus' official partiality toward the Persian side against Iraq.

He said, "Whoever talks about the Zionist entity's annexation of Golan and
wants to truly liberate it and wants Iraq and the Arabs to participate in
resisting the Zionist aggression, lust first of all stop supporting the
enenies of the Arab nation, and liberate itself froa the designs to which
Iraq and the Arab nation are exposed...Arab territory is equal in value."

From a national standpoint the Iraqis do not understand Syria's official
position of supporting Iran in its aggression on Iraqi land and waters.
Saddas Busayn says in this regard, "whoever agrees to assist foreign occupa-
tion of any part of Arab soil cannot be a defender and propagator of the
protection of another part against other foreign ambitions...“

Iraq's bitterness at the Syrian attitude reached its peak in the Iraqi
president's words: "The Arab brothers know who has helped Iran against Iraq,
and who has worked in collusion with it and placed its lands and its skies

at the disposal of the Iranian air force to bomb specific targets within
Iraqi territory, and who has concentrated its army with Iran at the beginning
of the war on the borders of Iraq, then after that amassed it on the Jordan-
ian border.”

Iraqi doubts in the Syrian "mediation" to and the war, than Damascus'
initiative to raise the banner of Arab solidarity after Israel's annexation
of the Golan while it is up to its neck in supporting Iran...does not mean
that Iraq is against any hcnest and sincere effort to achieve peace.

As Saddam Busayn said, Iraq is not imposing any illegal conditions and has
no ambitions in Iranian territories; all it wants is an explicit and legal
acknowledgesent of its historic rights in its territory and waters. Baghdad
has confirmed by decisive proof that Iran is the one who is obstructing

arrival at a just solution.

Some observers here attribute the Iranians' desperate efforts in launching
attacks on the front line to the deterioration of the domestic situation in
Iran. whenever the domestic situation deteriorates further, the Iranian
leadership pushes new forces into the oven of battle. It wants to continue
to occupy the army in the war with Iraq, and it secondarily wants the war

to be a justification to suppress the people and deprive then of their basic
needs.

Ieheran news coming to Baghdad reports that official terrorisn has reached
its peak, and the Iranians exchange frightful tales of terrible, barbaric

7

FOR OPPICIAL USE ONLY
torture in the prisons, where the eyes of prisoners have been plucked out and
their tongues cut out before driving them to execution courts. hoseyn 'Ali
Hontazeri, Khomeyni's deputy, admitted to the torture of prisoners, and called
for its "nitigation" in order to preserve Iran's international reputation.

The latest development in Iran is the attack on the mdeh Connoist party,

a client of Moscow, after a 3 year cooperation and alliance with the regime
of the Ayatollshs. The authorities launched a sudden purge in the govern-
ment administration which dealt with about 1,000 upper-level fmctionaries
and managers of the public sector, especially in the area of industrial plants
and wire and wireless comaunications. They are all members or supporters

of the Conunist party.

hoseyn muvi, president of the government, paved the way for the purge with
a propaganda campaign in which he said that all Marxists must be brought down.
It is believed that the campaign will continue, so that it will deal with
thousands of Conunists who have penetrated the body of the administration
since the establishment of the Khouyni revolution under an unwritten notto
of alliance between the Ayatollahs and the Tudeh party.

The prevailing belief is that the goal of the campaign against the Commists
is rapprochement with the West to obtain arms and loans, in spite of the

fact that that will expose the regime of the Ayatollahs to the wrath of
Moscow. which still gives a show of official love for the Iran of Khoneyni.
If the Ayatollahs' goal of pleasing the 11.8. behind their cenpaign sgainst
the Tudeh party is not achieved, Iran's isolation will increase its loneli—
ness, after rbscow is added to the list of "the enenies of Islam."

COPYRIGHT: 1981 Al-Hatan Al-'Arabic

9397
080: “04/250

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
HINISTHHR OF INDUSTR! CKlIIENTS on DBVELOPHBIT
Paris Al-HAIAN ALP'ARABI in Arabic No 261, 12-18 Feb 82 pp 55-57

[Interview with Iraqi Minister of Industry and Minerals Tahir Tawfiq: "Tahir
Tewfiq: Development Accomplishments Compete With Her Victories"; date and
place not specified]

[Text] The Iraqi-Iranian war was, in reality. two were: a
ailitary confrontation on the field of battle and a develop-
mental confrontation in the interior. Both of these are
inseparable. Those who have accompanied Iraq in its develop-
mental explosion before and during the war and have followed the
reports of the war day by day have come to realize how the
internal front supports the battlefront with a continuous and
heroic production impetus. This is a race between develop-ant
and steadfastness in an experience never before known by Arabs.

The following interview with Tahir Tewfiq, Iraqi Minister of
Industry and Minerals and member of the Revolution Col-end
Council, revealed the development victories and proeised
lore. In the language of statistics. the Iraqi minister
explains the rates of technical and technological progress
and traces the horizons of the new phases that will achieve
Arab economic integration in interaction with the Iraqi and
Arab needs of the future.

[Question] we would like you to sketch a picture of the industrial progress

that Iraq has achieved under the 17 July national socialist revolution. "hat
is Iraq's position among the developing states and when will self-sufficiency
be achieved in a number of strategic industries?

[Answer] I would like to say that prior to the blessed 17 July revolution.
the industrial sector was a neglected sector. It was in the same shape as
the rest of the national econoaic sectors at that ties. There are actually
specific indicators and figures that show the extent of the develop-en: that
occurred after the revolution. while the accumulated capital totaled no sore
then 185 aillion diners on eve of the revolution in 1968. the revolution in-
vested more than 6 billion diners from 1970 to 1981. On this basis. you can
see the tremendous difference in this category and a comparison is basically
inconceivable.

FIHI()FFIC1Al.lﬂBEi(HVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USP. ONLY

The Iraqi industries were insignificant and peripheral and were incolpatihle
with the potentials of our country and our resources, which the corrupt
regimes were unable to exploit nationally.

with regard to the second part of the question, Iraq belongs to the group of
developing countries, but there are differences among these countries. They
differ from one another considerably with respect to their political regimes,
their natural ec-momic resources. their financial and human resources. end so
forth. Iraq is considered one of the front-ranking of these countries that
liberated their natural wealth from the foreign monopolies and followed an
independent political path which serves the national interest of the country.
The revolution adopted a series of integrated policies to achieve a rapid
industrial resurgence based on the exploitation of the abundant natural re-
sources in the country. The industrial map was changed during the years of
the revolution. The industrial products were extended to all governoratee
of the country. He began establishing industries that rely on advanced
industrial technology. Because of this, the country became one of the fore-
most among the developing states in which the industrial sector plays a
prominent role and a role that is beginning to expand and develop as time
goes on.

With regard to the part of your question pertaining to the achievement of self-
sufficiency, the material resources of the country and the capacity of its
market does not permit it to achieve self-sufficiency except with respect to

a limited nutter of goods, taking into account the traditional economic
calculations for evaluating costs and benefits. Among the most important of
these goods are certain construction materials such as cement and oil
derivatives, certain basic petro-chsmicals, fertilisers, and a number of food
and textile products. Actually, the country achieved self-sufficiency with
respect to most of these goods within the recent past or will do so within

the near future. However, Iraq's policy calls for national self-sufficiency
in a number of goods, especially those that are strategic in nature or have

a relationship to Arab national security. This is out of keeping with the
methods of some foreign agencies which. by circulating the slogan of complete
self-sufficiency in all the industries within the developing countries, are
seeking to waste time, cause the developing countries to lose opportunities,
and block their way toward progress by forcing them into a nanny-branched mass.
This is shown by the entry of some of the developing countries into many fields
of industry under the slogan of "self-sufficiency" when they really do not
have either the subjective or the objective conditions necessary for this.

Foundations of the Mining Industry

[Question] What about minerals in Iraq? what is the ministry's plan to
stimulate exploration for minerals?

[Answer] It is a well known that the nining industry in Iraq. in the modern
sense of the word, is based on the revolution of July 1968. Prior to the

revolution, this industry consisted merely of quarries for raw materials for
construction exploited by the private sector. Then we initiated scientific
work in this industry. A specialised state organisation was established and

10

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
charged with this task. This industry went through different phases that
ranged fron general and on-site geological surveys and mineral exploration to
extraction and conversion industries in the field of minerals.

Despite Iraq's lack of experience in the mining industry, this industry has
becone an actual and advanced reality. This industry has been built with the
efforts and sweet of Iraqis and they have succeeded in making it an experience
to be proud of. Our mining industry has gained expertise that has enabled us
to provide benefits to our brother Arabs.

Iraq has nany mining projects at the present time. One such project is the
sulfur project which produces purified sulfur, sulfuric acid, agricultural
sulfur, alum, and filtration clays. Another example is the saltvorks project
which produces salt for industrial purposes and human and animal constmlption.
There are also many projects that produce raw construction materials according
to established technical specifications. These projects, which are distributed
throughout all areas of the country, produce products such as graded gravel,
building send, building stone, marble, and narble slabs as well as supplying
the glass, ceramic, and white canant industries with their mineral product
needs. As for the phosphate and phosphate fertilizer project, it will produce
crude phosphate, phosphate fertilizers, coup und fertilisers, and a number of
other products as by-products of phosphate processing.

In the field of mineral exploration, the ministry has pursued two parallel
courses through its specialised organisation. The first of these is detailed
exploration for mineral ores discovered in the geological surveys and the
second is the implementation of a general geological survey project for the
country, which we hope will be completed in 1983. One of the effects of this
survey will be a complete evaluation of sources of mineral wealth by type and
site.

I would also like to say that the ministry is providing geological and mining
services to meet the purposes of other development sectors. These services
include the evaluation of groundwater sources for a number of areas, the
provision of studies pertaining to uses of land for agricultural purposes,
forests, and irrigation, and the preparation of naps and geological information
for construction purposes. These functions are being carried out by the
specialised organisations in the General Organization for Minerals.

Development and ”er Together

[Question] The Persian aggression against Iraq is aimed primarily at destroy-
ing the booming economic development now being achieved in Iraq. has this
aggression succeeded in having a reel affect on the continued inlamsntetion
of these plans, particularly those pertaining to industry?

[Answer] The leadership realized this matter regarding the purpose of the
Persian aggression. Therefore, Iraq drafted plans and decision ained at

continuing the development plans under the circumstances of this aggression.
But this is not all. He achieved increases in growth for funds allocated in

POROFFICIALNBONLY
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the investment program fron 1980 to 1981. This rate of growth was 29 percent
and a total of 5.26 billion diners was allocated for the developnent plans in
all sectors combined for 1981. Our country is now in the process of announcing
the plan and allocations for 1982. These allocations will be calculated on
the basis of development and actual need within the framework of the central
goals of the 1981-1985 five-year plan.

[Question] "hat is the ninistry's plan for the coning phase?

[Answer] Before discussing the ministry's plan for the coming phase, which
falls within the scope of the national development plan for 1981 through 1985,
one must explain some of the special considerations we applied in inlementing
the general structure of this plan. These considerations and the objective
circumtances that our country is experiencing had to be taken into account in
the overall development process along with ensuring the requirements necessary
to isplement the industrial projects. For this reason, priority in inlementa-
tion was placed on those projects that rely on domestic raw materials for their
production with the aim of exploiting the national resources and utilizing
them in the optimum fashion. Those projects related to the urgent consumption
needs of the citizens are sharing these resources equally in the inplemente-
tion process.

The trend in the industrial plan for the coming phase was toward eliminating
the bottlenecks, adding certain units to existing projects with the aim of
achieving better utilization of them. and acquiring and accumlating technical
expertise inooperating the projects. In addition, we have employed the
vertical expansion process in the existing projects and have introduced modern
mechanization with the aim of saving manpower. because we are presently
suffering from a shortage of manpower in our projects despite the fact that
our projects have employed and acconodated a large number of Arab and foreign
workers who have come into the country.

In the coming phase, there will be a real transformation in our entry into
many strategic industries which will form the material base of our national
industry and the balanced economy of our country. The first step in this
phase will be the manufacture of motor vehicles and agricultural machines.
Perhaps the distinguishing feature of our plan in the coming phase consists
of the processes of transferring and nationalizing modern technology and our
goal of building men who are capable of absorbing and developing this
technology. The latter will be sccosplished by establishing centers for study
and research and cooperating with the specialised organizations in the Iraqi
universities and institutes. as well as by ewhasising the establishment of
training courses inside and outside the country, the establishment of training
centers for the various industries. and the utilization of international
sources of expertise that have preceded us in technical development.

Industry of the Arabs

[Question] How do you assess industrial relations between Iraq and the
countries of the Arab homeland? Are there joint industrial projects between
Iraq and sons other Arab countries? What resources and efforts is Iraq de-
voting to Arab industrial integration as one of the main pillars in the

building of unity among the Arabs?
12

FOR OFFICIAL (BB ONLY
[Answer] In its dealings in this area, Iraq proceeds from its fundamental
belief in the necessity of Arab unity in the future. Based on this principle,
we are moving in the direction that will lead to unity. Re are acting within
the scope of tun principles: bilateral cooperation and cooperation through
joint Arab organisations. without a doubt, industrial integration is a
significant goal which will achieve for us the firm material base for the
larger goal. The importance of this integration becomes clear when we consider
the tremendous resources that God has given us, since these resources are
depletable. For this reason. this particular Arab generation has a big
responsibility that makes it incumbent on us to utilise these resources as a
means to achieve industrialization and other economic activities so that wa
can ensure the future of our countries and our coming generations. This is
our view on the matter of industrial integration, which will raise the level
of Arab industrialization and help eliminate the disparities in resources

and development processes among the Arab countries.

For our part. we say that the current state of industrial relations with the
other Arab countries gives evidence of some basic steps. but it does not
measure up to our ambitions. Therefore, the Arabs are in need of greater
efforts and more extensive steps. Our hope may lie in the specialized Arab
organizations-such as the Gulf Organization, for example-to achieve the
basic and important steps to build Arab industrial integration.

In the context of joint industrial projects, there are in fact several
important projects undertaken through the specialized organisations. including
the aluminum plate bending project in Bahrain, the railroad car manufacturing
project, the plate glass project. etc. With regard to what Iraq provides in
this area, our country is an active member in the organizations I have already
mentioned as well as the Arab Organization for Mineral Health, the Arab
Mining Company, the Arab Iron and Steel Company in Bahrain, and other Arab
nining companies. The resources that Iraq has provided to many of the
specialized Arab federations provide confirmation of our belief in the
importance of all forms and types of Arab cooperation. Baghdad is presently
the headquarters for the Arab Industrial Development Organization. the Arab
Industrial Investments Company, and several specialised Arab federations such
as the Arab Food Industries Federation, the Arab Federation of Engineering
Industries. and the Arab Federation of Paper Industries. We provide 50
percent of the budgets of these organizations.

Support of the Private Sector

[Question] The private sector in Iraq has begun a new revival and is helping
the socialist sector with many of its tasks. what bounds has the ministry
placed on the private sector and what is the role of the private sector in
the ministry's plan?

[Answer] In actuality, Iraq gives private industrial activity--which we call
it here because it is not linked directly with the official organizations-~s
specific importance and a well defined role so that it is one tributary in

the development plan. Therefore, we in the Ministry of Industry and Mines--
through the General Organisation for Industrial Develop-ant, which is directly

13

FOI‘OFTIC1A1.lEI!(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL L3”: ONLY

concerned in this matter-oformulate the investment plan for this activity.
The Amended plan for 1981 included new projects involving this sector based
on an important fact, namely. that the socialist industrial sector is charge:
with big and strategic responsibilities in the industrialization process and
we d) not want to add to it a large number of responsibilities that are small
from the stamdpoints of productivity and investment as that we would be re-
quirud to divert large amounts of manpower that we need in the strategic
industries. It is not in the interests of the socialist sector for it to
direct the petrochemicals industry along with the small factories for the pri-
duction of plastic devices used in the home, for example. Therefore we con-
centrate on the strategi: industries that demand big investment and advanced
technology.

As for the bounds placed on private activity, these were announced in the
amended plan of 1981 pertaining to this avtivity, which exhibited extensive
development over previous plans inasmuch as we gave free scope to the private
industrial projects with respect to the sire of investment. Because of this,
the Amended plan achieved an increase of 128 million diners, providing for
190 nillion in total investmlnt volume as opposed to only 62 million diners in

the past. The total investilnt volume was distributed among 989 projects.
These projects were extremely diverse. including construction industries pro-
ducing products such as tile, brick. readquixed concrete. and concrete blocks,
as well as food industries, textile industries, and chemical industries.

Through the industrial bank belonging to our ministry, the state provides
loans and incentives to private sector industrialists ranging from 50 to 60
percent of the size of the investment. An exception to this is the brick
industry. which is given special attention and therefore receives loans
amounting to 80 percent of the investment.

We Are a Rich State

[Question] With regard to the role that the private sector will play in the
future of Iraqi industry and the incentives that the Iraqi leadership will
provide in this field, the minister of industry said:

[Answer] On more than one occasion, President Saddam Busayn has stated that
the private sector is the eternal traveling companion of the socialist sector.
we cannot conceive of building an inosing and prosperous country without the
participation of the private sector.

We have taken earnest stzps toward the dzvelopment of laws and regulations to
support and encourage the private sector and expand the scope of its responsi-
bility. The coming period will bring net laws to support this sector and
enable it to achieve great progress.

As you know. we are a rich state. No ma.ter how much the socialist sector
expands, it will not tale up more than a smell and limited area compared to
the big investments thal the state ensur s in the strategic industries.

[Question] Concerning the expanded confzrence which Saddam Husayn called for
to discuss the role of the private sector, the minister said:

14

FOR OFI1C1AL.USE(NHLY
[Answer] This big nesting will take place next week and will include
officials in the political leadership and representatives of the private
sector. He will discuss with then the possibility of their participation in
the building of Iraq and possible nethods of providing means of support for
then.

This conference will be a reel takeoff point for the private sector in Iraq.

The minister praised the foreign colpanies working in Iraq, which have
continued their activities without a break. even at the beginning of the war.

He stated that the Arab private sector has the sane privileges and rights as
those the Iraqi Govern-ant provides to the Iraqi private sector.

Collapse of the Persian Dream

[Question] "hat projects hes the ministry approved during the war and what
is their total final cost?

[Answer] when we say that Iraq has not been affected negatively by the war.
the figures and the neasurea taken in this linistry and the other ministries
are the practical proof of the correctness of our slogan which was raised
during the war. This slogan was. "Continued development side by side with the
operations to defend the eastern flank of our nation." During the period of
the war, the ninistry authorised more than 60 projects encolpassing nany
industries, particularly in the fields of construction and the generation.
distribution, and transmission of electric power.and in certain projects in
the engineering and food industries. The cost of these projects totals over
1.18 billion diners, which is equivalent to $3.896 billion. I think that
these figures demonstrate the great responsibility of our revolution with
regard to the industrialization of our country. They also indicate our rapid
pace in the process of develop-ant and show that we are beyond the reach of
the aggression and were contenplated by Persian racisn in an effort to destroy
our country. While we were preparing plane for the purpose of developing

and advancing our country, the lhoeeyni regine was contriving a war for our
people ained, along other things. at destroying our econoeies, our develop-
mental accouplishnenta. our traditions. our religion, and our Arab reality.

COPYRIGHT: 1981 AL-HATAN AL-'ARABI

8591
CSO: 6406/305

15
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
DECISION TO SEND VOLUNTEER TROOPS T0 IRAQ ANALYZED
Paris AL-VA‘I‘AN AL-‘ARABI in Arabic No 260, 5-11 Feb 82 pp 20-22
[Article: "Jordan Enters Qadiaiyah Battle")

In an notional tone, King Husayn announced Jordan's decision to enter the
battle at the side of Iraq. While thousands of Jordanian volunteers are going
to volunteer centers to register their asses. Israel is expressing its fears
about the revival of the Eastern Front. meanwhile. Syria considers the
Jordanian announcenent to be a provocation, and Anerica is hastening to
repeat its "advice" to Amen not to becona embroiled in the fight. AL-HATAN
AL-'ARABI assesses events fron Allan and Baghdad, as a result of the Jordanian
decision, which has revived sentiments and rmeved possibilities to unite
capabilities to serve the battle against all the Arab Nation's enaies.

This report that AL-HA‘IAN AL-‘ARABI received from [man discusses Jordan in
the aftermath of King husayn's announce-ant about entering the battle on
Iraq's side, analyzes the reasons that conpelled Jordan to take this step,
and reviews the bases of the close relations that bind the two countries
together. as well as the Arab and foreign teactions.‘

Fifteen volunteer centers have opened in Jordan to register the nuaes of
those wishing to fight alongside their Iraqi brothers to‘ stem the Persian
attack. Despite the fact that less than a week has passed since these centers
opened. officials estinate the umber of registered naes at 30,000, including
active officers and nco's. others in the reserve. students. young men and

of ficiale.

Jordanian officials say that the rush to volunteer exceeded expectations, since
it has exceeded the number vented for the first batch of volunteers. The
general thinking was that this group would nmber some 15,000. from which the
host combat-experienced would be chosen. In any event. all Jordanians are
considered trained, as young Den have been subject to 2 years compulsory
training since 1976.

The forces going to Irag will be called the Yarnuk forces. after the battle
that the Arabs won against the Byzantine araies at the end of the 7th century.
fought around this river in northern Jordan, led by the hero. Khalid Ibn
al-walid. A follow-up connittee has been for-ed, headed by Prise Minister

16

FOIOFHOALUSEONLY
IV‘ VIIOMO- --~ Ve‘h‘

hudhir Badran, to dnonetrete the official interest in this setter.

King lusayn considers hinself to be the first volunteer. he says that he will
go to Iraq at their head. The fact is that the notional speech that the
Jordanian nonarch ends to his people on Thursday, 28 Jemary, had a far-reaching
inpact on the Jordanian people.

The king said that Jordanians had been with Iraq free the outset. he extolled
the Iraqi sacrifices in defense of the Arab Nation against the Persian foe.

He stressed that the Arabs were one nation, end said that if a part of it was
threatened. all of it was threatened, especially when the challenge was against
the Arab identity and people. he referred to the fact that Jordanians are not

like those who told their partner: ”Go thou and thy lord, and fight ye two.
while we sit."

The Jordanian nonarch discussed what he had seen on his recent visit to Iraq
and about its steadfastness in the face of the Iranian ens-y, who is supported
by Israel and other en-ies of the Arabs. he then asked: "If the Arab people
do not stand heart. soul and blood with Iraq, how can you expect the Iraqi
people to stand by the states of the Gulf and the Arabian peninsula, or any
Arab state that one day feces danger. evil and aggression on behalf of the
Arab Nation?"

lie went on to say that Iraq has always sacrificed, and that we are indebted to
Iraq. which sacrificed during the great Arab revolt and in all the Arab Nation's
battles in Palestine. Jordan. Sinai and Golan. If the Nation had adopted a
collective stance, as it should have, the fight would have ended before now.

The King said: "Re have cha-pioned the right and have been with Iraq since the
beginning. However, it was Iraq's dignity that caused it not to complain
about its pain or to be a burden on anyone. taking into account our
circusstencea in confrontation along the longest line. Nevertheless, can our
role only be confined to enotional participation?”

At the end of his speech, he declared the door opened to volunteer in the "Arab
Jordanian forces, the Yernuk forces. naned after the i-ortal nans and the
heroise it eyebolisee. I personally have the honor to announce that I volunteer
for these forces. as a Jordanian soldier to perforn the neat honorable and
sacred duty on the land of the Nation's battle."

Independence of the Jordanian Political Decision

Jordan's detersination to enter the Qadisiyeh battle at Iraq's side reflects
its view and analysis of the Arab situation. They concentrate on one principle.
shared by Iraq, that it is all one Arab battle, whether along the confrontation
line against the Zionist enuy or to etc the Persian attack against the
Arabian of Iraq and the Gulf.

The new Jordanian decision expressed the elphetic Jordanian wish to follow a
sore strongly independent line then ever before. a line in concert with its

17
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Arab sisters that supported its position regarding the late Egyptian President
al-Sadat's initiative and the Camp David process.

Jordan feels the frustration of a profound hope regarding the West's positions,
and especially the United States, regarding the Arabs' rights and aspirations.
For its part, it has been careful to remain aloof from these positions. to

the extent of announcing a basic dispute with the Carter administration over
the Middle East question. and it staunchly resisted all the pressures that
Hashington exercised. in order to get it to adhere to the Camp David line.

The Jordanian position became set. after King Husayn considered his analysis
of the situation to be correct from all aspects. Be made sure that Jordan's
position was clearly in contrast to that of the American administration, and
in harmony with the general Arab position that was crystallised at the minimum
summit in Baghdad-in 1978, which agreed to reject Camp David and al-Sadat's
actions in the pan-Arab cause.

King Husayn, in his position, has relied on his long experience and expertise
in Arab policy and issues. His opposition to the Camp David process and the
American role decreed for Jordan had a great influence on Jordan's avoidance
of the problems and pitfalls that were destined to lead to disaster.

AL-HATAN AL-‘ABABI's information indicates that just as Jordan received
American "advice not to get involved" in the Gulf war. However, today Jordan
--king, army and people-~want to give practical expression to its commitment
to its Arab loyalty, which goes beyond the sentiments of solidarity and enters
into the fateful battle itself.

While concentrating on the "Jordanian entity" and the "Jordanian family“ in
the 50's and 60's, it has now accepted in the 70's and will accept in the 80's
an emphasis on the Arab affiliation. Arabism today, in Amman's view, is a
strong, unifying deterrent against all enemies, and in seating all circum-
stances, difficulties and challenges.

There is a Jordanian connection with the Arab Gulf, represented by some 300,000
Jordanians who work there, including hundreds of officers and military and
security advisers spread throughout the Gulf states. They are trusted by

the Gulf rulers and officials. Consequently, Jordan has a self and pan-Arab
interest in the continuation of the Gulf's security and in protecting its
Arabism. Its military participation in the war there embodies this concern

and is in direct defense of this identity. It is a reaction to the Iranian
plots recently uncovered in Bahrain. Kuwait, Qatar and elsewhere.

Therefore, Jordan joins with Iraq, Saudi Arabia and the Arab Gulf states in an
unwritten alliance to defend the security, Arabian and independence of the
Gulf. or a "silent alliance" as a senior Jordanian official told AL-HATAN
AL-‘ARABI. Jordan's participation in the battle is only an embodiment of this
alliance and a statement of it.

Jordanians who know that war is not all bad, say that the confrontation with
Iran will ultimately be one factor in unification, sharpening resolution and

18

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
|‘Vl\ Uffd\.ll\e. was. V.\hI

spreading the spirit of Arab steadfastness in opposing outside challenges.

The significant point here is that the Palestinians. who constitute nearly
half of the Jordanian population, have begun to better understand the Jordanian
position supporting Iraq. and the need to repel the Persian attack against
Gulf Arabian. The reason for that is the increasingly frustrated Palestinian
hopes for the Khomeyni regime and the belief that he is openly hostile to the
Arab Gulf states, especially Iraq, which is diverting the Arabs from their
fundamental confrontation with the Zionist enemy, exhausting their energies,
squandering their material resources and fragmenting their unity. Moreover,
his revival of sectarian feelings among Muslims is increasing the Arabs'
fragmentation and tearing them apart. with the claim that the Arab call is
incompatible with Islam.

The Jordanian decision reflects the close ties which bind Jordan to Iraq, and
the support that Iraq receives from Amman in its opposition to the Persian
attack. Jordan has thrown all of its weight behind Iraq since the first days
of the confrontation. King Bussyn has repeatedly visited Iraq since that time
and has bluntly announced Jordan's support for its brother state. declaring
its readiness to militarily participate when Baghdad requests that.

It is rumored here that a joint, supreme military command was formed during
the first months of the war. which includes President Saddam Busayn, the
Jordanian monarch Lt Gen Zayd Ibn Shskir, commander in chief of the Jordanian
armed forces, and Lt Gen 'Adnan Khayrullah. the Iraqi minister of defense.
This has not been officially announced.

The fact is that the disturbed relations between the two nations in 1958 began
to stabilize during the early 70's. when the fighting broke out between the
Jordanian forces and the Palestinian organizations in 1970 and 1971. Iraq had
a military force in Jordan, estimated at 1&,000 troops, stationed there since
the 1967 war. However, Iraq condemned the fighting between brothers, and did
not become embroiled in it at all.

Iraq welcomed King Hussyn's recognition of the PLO, at the 1974 Rabat summit,
as the sole legal representative of the Palestinian people. The Jordanian
position opposing Camp David was also received with a great deal of support
in Baghdad.

Nevertheless, bilateral relations were greatly improved when President Saddam
Husayn assumed full powers in Iraq in 1979. Be hastened to offer aid and
substantial financial assistance to Jordan, since the Jordanians were in
extremely difficult financial circumstances. This assistance was given
directly through bilateral relations or within the framework of Arab support
for the Confrontation States.

AL-HATAN AL-‘ABABI is able to state that Iraq pays Jordan $186 million annually
of the original $1.25 billion that was decided on at the minimum summit in
Baghdad in 1978 as Jordan's annual subsidy. Iraq pays this regularly, while

a state like Libya has defaulted on paying its share, despite the fact that

is was the most vocal both within and Outside the conference.

19

FIHI¢HHHC1A1.USE(NVLY
In 1979. Jordan received fron Iraq financial assistance estimated at $700
aillion, permitting it to eliminate the shortfalls in its balance of payments
and cover the deficit in the budget, which at that time amounted $1.75 billion.
As a result of this aid, officials' salaries were increased by 20 percent, and
the development plan was financed.

The Iraqi support included financing Jordan's raarmamant program. Informed
Jordanian sources say that Iraq has paid $1 billion within this context.
including a Chieftain tank deal with Britain for some 200 tanks, and an
aircraft deal with France for 36 P-l Hirages.

In addition, $120 million was also allocated for various joint projects, and
$130 million to develop the Jordanian port of a1-'Aqabah and to improve the
road network that connects this port with Amman and Baghdad. A joint
transportation company was established. with a capital of some $25 million.
The total value of this assistance had reached 81.5 billion by the end of 1980.
and by means of it, Jordan has been able to reduce its dependence of western
aid, in terms of financing and armaments, and has helped it to pursue its
independent Arab policy.

The most important point is that this assistance has enabled Jordan to develop
its public amenities, and to offer Iraq extremely important logistical
assistance following the outbreak of the armed conflict with Iran.

The port of al-‘Aqabah is considered a vital example of the value and
importance of this assistance. Iraq has become greatly dependent upon it,
since the closure of its ports along the Arab Gulf due to the war. There are
estimates that indicate that Iraq, this year alone, will import through
a1-'Aqabah 2 million tons of material, goods and equipment, i.e., one-third of
its total imports, while the total weight of its imports in 1981 was 1.5
million tons and about 300,000 tons in 1980.

The closeness and stability of the bilateral relations reached a point that
encouraged the Jordanians to prepare a project to brine the waters of the
Euphrates into their country across the Iragi border. The Iraqis warmly
welcomed this project and expressed their willingness to participate in it.
This will help to solve the water crisis in Jordan up to the end of the
present century.

In the Jordanian concept, a pipeline can transport the water from the
Euphrates, after it crosses the Iraqi border, to the Jordanian city of
al-Hafraq, a distance of 600 kms. Pumping, water treatment and storage
stations will be built along this line.

The Negative Syrian Position

The courageous Jordanian decision to join Iraq in resisting the Persian
attack had dissimilar effects and reactions. 0n the Arab level, it helped
to revive feelings of Arab unity and solidarity. It emphasized the Arabism
and independence of the Jordanian position, uninfluenced by traditional
Western pressures.

20

F0! OFFICIALlﬁssileY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

It goes without saying that the Jordanian decision caused slate and anger in
Israel, which considers it a practical revival of the Arab eastern front,
after the suspension of the disengagement agree-ants in the Golan. Ariel
Sharon, the Israeli minister of defense, expressed his government's fear of
any military coordination taking place between Iraq and Jordan, even to the
point of considering the presence of Iraqi troops in Jordan or Syria as being
tantamount to a declaration of war, which would compel Israel to intervene
rapidly.

Nevertheless, the Jordanian decision met with a clear understanding in the
Gulf states, which have recently intensified their media campaigns against
Iran, following the exposure of Iranian espionage plots in Bahrain and
elsewhere. It was received negatively by both Syria and Libya.

The Jordanians say that the opposition of the Syrian and Libyan regimes to
the Jordanian decision to enter the battle goes hand in hand with the military
and material assistance that they are giving to Iran against Iraq. The
Jordanians recall that President Hafiz al-Asad mobilized his forces on the
Jordanian border last year in an attempt to pressure Amman to reduce its
aid to Iraq. Perhaps he intends to repeat that, especially since signs point
to a desire to fabricate a crisis with Jordan. beginning with armed clashes
on the borders, and the explosion of a series of bonbs in supermarkets in
Amman, with the knowledge and planning of Syrian Intelligence. The Syrian
regime considered the recent Jordanian decision as tantamount to provocation
against it.

It is clear here that the Jordanians are determined to ignore any attempts
by Syria to lure them into side battles. They regret that President al-Asad
did not listen to the advice of the Gulf states, which he visited recently,
to improve his relations with Jordan, cease his support and assistance to
Iran. and to stop his harassment of Iraq.

COPYRIGHT: 1981 AL-HAIAN AL-'ARABI

7005
C50: 4404/332

21
FOR OFFKJAL.USE(MVLY
ARMY'S STRENGTH, smcrrvmss EVALUATED
Paris AL-HATAN AL-‘AIABI in Arabic No 260. 5-11 Feb 82 pp 23-26

[Articlez "Jordanian Army Leads the Arab Armies in Effectiveness and
Training")

[Text] Jordanian volunteers are going to Iraq, but what do the Arabs know
about these troops? What is their armament, training and history? This is
the subject of this report. which AL-HAIAN AL-‘ARABI received last week from
Amman.

The Jordanian armed forces are considered the most efficient of the Arab

arsed forces. despite their small number and armament. They have a strong
nilitary tradition. excellent training and discipline, and their combat morale
is high. Their officers and leadership stay clear of political activity,
which convulses other Arab armies, and concentrate their skills on their basic
mission.

Semi-official information estimates the armed forces at 75,000 officers and
men, distributed among five divisions, and possessing 1,500 tanks, 700 artil-
lery pieces and about 100 aircraft, in addition to about 35.000 officers and
men in the reserves, who can be called up very quickly.

The Jordanian forces did use a volunteer selection system for years, but it
began to apply a conscription system in 1976. Young men are subject to 2
years compulsory service. The normal armed services' budget is estimated at
$350 million annually (25 percent of the nation's budget), in addition to

a rearsasent and training program that at times is financed through Arab and
foreign assistance.

The Jordanian army is a harmonious mix of Jordanian Arab and Palestinan
officers. both Nuslie and Christain. Sane of the officers are from the vig-
orous Circassian stock, who have been settled in Jordan for scores of years,
as a result of their flight from Russia in the early part of this century,
due to religious persecution. However, the majority of the enlisted men are
from the desert Bedouin tribes, whose Arab roots are deep in the past. and
who are scattered around the deserts surrounding Jordan.

The bedouin were the backbone of the Arab army that formed the first nucleus
of the present-day Jordanian army. They were famous for their bravery and

22

P0! OMGAL USE ONLY
I‘Vl vtflt one. a...» VI‘LI

trlbal loyalty, and then exchanged their loyalty for the Hashemite throne.
They proved that during the fighting against the armed Palestinian groups in
1270 and 1971. They have always been less influenced by political movements
and trends than city dwellers.

The Jordanian army could be described as a land army, adapted and suitable
for Jordan's desert conditions and security. The land forces are composed of
about 60.000 officers and men, distributed among four military divisions,

two of them armored and the other two mechanized infantry. In addition, there
are reveral special forces battalions, well-trained for city combat. There
are also two artillery brigades.

Nevertheless, Jordan stands on a confrontation line with Israel, extending

some 700 kms. Its limited manpower and meager material resources has prevented
equipping a greater number of troops. Moreover, Arab assistance has not been
of the size or consistent enough to permit recruiting young men in this small
Arab country, whose population does not exceed 3 million people. At the

same time, the active Israel army numbers close to 175,000 troops, and can

be raised to 450,000 troops during the first days of the outbreak of war.

As for firepower, armament and equipment, the two cannot be compared. Israel
has 3200 tanks, 2500 artillery peices and 600 aircraft of the most modern
types, with exceptionally qualified pilots. Suffice it to say in this regard
that the Jordanian Arab army did not exceed 6500 officers and men when the
year of disaster. 1948, approached. The British comand had deliberately
reduced the number from the 8,000 officers and men in the army during World
War II. Nevertheless, its number had risen to 10,000 officers and men by

the end of the first Arab~Israieli confrontation. They were contending,
along with 15,000 Iraqi troops, 10,000 Egyptians and 3,000 Syrian troops

in Palestine, against an Israeli force of an estimated 120,000 armed men that
formed the first nucleus of the Israeli army.

Host of the Jordanian tanks are old or middleaged. There are about 200
British-made Chieftain tanks, which are lightly-armored. However, in the
confrontation with Israel, they proved their effectiveness, thanks to their
highly trained crews. They are equipped with a 105 mm gun and two machine-
guns.

There are 320 American-made H48 tanks, whose design goes back to the end of
World War II. They move at a speed of 60 kms, and are equipped with a 60 mm
cannon. Jordan also has about 15 modern American H60 tanks, equipped with

a 105 mm cannon.

Jordan has about 900 armored personnel carriers, suitable for use in recon-
naisance operations and internal security protection, in addition to 600
amphibious personnel carriers for the same purpose.

Infantry personnel are armed with American H16 assault rifles, which are
considered superior to the Soviet-made Klashnikov.

23

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Tho Artillery Corps has 88 mm cannon, with a range of 12 kms. Jordan also
has various artillery pieces of the 203 and 205 mm variety. It also has
American 81mm, 107mm and 120mm mortars.

The infantry forces have a large number of American 10" anti-tank missiles,
with a range of 3.7 kms. They can be mounted on a Jeep or fired from a tank
or helicopter. They are also equipped with American H47 Dragon anti-tank
missiles, which are fired from the shoulder or a tank and have a range of 1 km.

The Jordanian Air Force is limited and cannot be compared either to the air
forces in Iraq or Syria. It is composed of 6650 officers and men and about
100 aircraft, including 60 American P-S fighter-bombers, armed with two 30mm
cannon and various missiles and bombs. There are 18 P-106 Starfighter
interceptors, armed with Sidewinder missiles.

Jordan has a Hawk missile anti-aircraft network. One of these missiles
weighs 580 kgs. Jordan also has smaller missiles, which are shoulder-fired
against aircraft, with both low and medium-range. In addition, there are
200 60mm anti—aircraft guns; these are Americanqnade and operate without
radar guidance.

The naval forces are limited and basically include 10 patrol vessels, whose
mission is to protect the port of al-'Aqabah and surveillance of the
surrounding waters.

Nevertheless. Jordan has an ambitious armament and training program. and wants
to diversify its sources of weapons. It is said that it is trying to purchase
250 British laser-guided Super Chieftain tanks, and also that it submitted a
bid to the United States to buy 200 M-60 tanks. However, it decided against
this when Iraq provided it with 35 tanks of this type that the Iraqi forces
had captured during battles with Iran.

It is said that Iraq is financing an aircraft deal that Jordan made with
France some time ago. It includes 36 P-l Mirage fighter bombers. Jordan has
also submitted requests to the United States for F-S aircraft and Bell
helicopters.

It is well known that Israel always obstructs Jordanian arms deals with the
United States. Therefore it is looking to diversify its sources of weapons
and has recently bought quantities of Soviet arms.

The establishment of the Jordanian army began with the establishment of the
Emirate of Transjordan in 1921, under the British mandate. At that time, it
was called "the Arab Army" or the "Arab Legion," and was commanded by the
British officer, Captain Peake. When the British General John Bagot Glubb
took over in 1939, it only had 1350 officers and men, including 1000 troops
who formed the police force in the desert emirate.

Glubb Pasha served in the Iraqi desert from 1920 to 1930, when he was
transferred to duty in the Jordanian desert, where he came to know the bedouin.
He lived among them. became proficient in their dialect and was known by the

24

FOR(NHHCJAL.USE(MNLY
FOR OFFICIAL lFSl-Z OMS

name of Abu Hayk, because he had a bullet wound in his neck, close to his ear,
which had left a very noticeable scar.

One of the ironies of history is that the Jordanian army, which is preparing

to enter the Arab Nation's battle against the Persian attack on Iraq, was once
compelled, under the leadership of Gen Glubb, to accompany the British forces
sent from Palestine to Iraq across Jordan to thwart the Rashid 'Ali al-Kaylani
movement in 1941. Nationalist officers in the Iraqi army took leadership away
from the martyr Salah al-Din al-Sabbagh and his colleagues. The dual force was
able to fulfill its mission, as a result of the Iraqis cleaning their own
house.

This rapid success encouraged the British to use the Arab Legion in an
operation to "liberate" Syria from the forces of the Vichy French government
loyal to Nazi Germany. The troops smashed their way across the desert from
Jordan to Tudmur and then to a confrontation at Hons.

In the last year of World war II, the Arab Legion's forces totalled 8,000
troops, most of them tribesmen from Jordan. They were deployed in strategic
posts in Iraq. Syria, Jordan and Palestine.

Despite the 1946 agreement that ended the British mandate over the Emirate of
Transjordan, and made it a kingdom, the British remained in control of the
Arab Legion in the person of General Glubb. At the same time, they
deliberately reduced its number. When the Palestinian war broke out in 1948,
their strength was about 6500 officers and men, while the force that the Jews
mustered at the beginning of the war was 66,000 men, and which reached 120,000
by the end of that year.

However, General Clubb's methods in leading the army caused the Jordanians to
resent him. In his memoirs, entitled "Soldier Among the Arabs," he personally
recounts the story about when his government advised him to accept the
ceasefire, King 'Abdullah. the grandfather of King Husayn, summoned him to a
meeting at the palace, attended by members of his government, headed at that
time by Tawfiq Pasha Abu al-Hadi. The king attacked him, saying: "If you are
not prepared to loyally serve us, then there is no need for you to remain
here."

However. General Glubb remained in his capacity as head of the army, until
King Husayn, who succeeded his father King Tallal in 1953, was able to dismiss
Glubb in 1956, and told him to leave the country within 2 hours. That was the
act that liberated the Jordanian army from the last traces of the mandate, and
restored it as an Arab army-men, officers and command.

In a few days or a few weeks, this army is going to enter the battle of honor,
at the side of the Iraqi forces, defending the Arab Nation and it identity
against the Persian attack.

COPYRIGHT: 1981 AL-HATAN AL-‘ARABI

7005

cso: «404/332

25

INDR‘OFFICTAI.USE(3NLY
BRIEFS

WOODS BIT COUNTRY—Adan. 6 Apr (amen-menu 500 people have died and at
least 10,000 have been made homeless in the worst rains and flooding in 60
years in South Yemen, a cabinet statement said today. It estimated the loss
to property and corps at 32!. million dinars (about 950 million dollars). and
appealed for international help to ease what it called the new heavy economic
burden on the country. The floods killed about 50,000 head of cattle and
destroyed vast agricultural areas as well as irrigation wells in the provinces
of Lahej and Abyan, north and east of. the capital. Aden. Roads, telephone and
power installations in Aden were also damaged or destroyed. the statement said.
‘South Yenen, with a population of about 1.9 million people, has very natural
resources and is heavily dependent on foreign aid and remittances from thou-
sands of nationals working abroad. mainly in the Gulf. [Text] [JNO61713
London REUTER in English 1652 GMT 6 Apr 82]

080: 4400/206 END

26

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY