FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10152
2 December 1981

Near East/North Africa Report

(FOUO 44/81)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[) are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. "here no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.8. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
NEAR EAST/NORTH AFRICA REPORT

(P000 44/81)

. Comeu'rs
INTER-ARAB AFFAIRS

Calls for Assassination of 'nrafat Discussed
(AL‘WATAN W'MI' 9.15 Get 81)oeeaeeoeeeoeeoeeooeooeecoo-a

Report on Arab Econouy Published
(ALPWATAN ALP'ARABI. 11-17 Sep 81)...........................

Briefs
Pro-Palestinian Radio

Plan To Assassinate 'Arafat
AlGERIA

European Aid Stresses Research. Education
(HARCBES TROPICAUX ET MBDITBRRANBBNS, 16 Oct 81).............

Briefs
Japanese Loan
Cement Plant Contract

EGYPT

Interviews with Egyptian Opposition Figures
(Khalid Huhyi-alooin, Rif‘at Sa'id Interviews: PANORAHA,

26 Oct 81)OOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOODeO0.00.00.00.00ooeoeooeooaa

IRAN

Khoneyni Expected To Fall in Months or Even Weeks
(Bouzid Kouza: APRIQOE-ASIE, 12-25 Oct Bl)...................
FOR OFFICIAL 083 W

LEBANON

Tensions in Cease Pire Period Described

(AL-HAT“ AL-‘ARABI, 25 Sep-l Oct 91)........................ ,

LIBYA

Oppositioniet Exiles Plan Trial of. al-Oadhdhafi
(Ian Black: '1‘!!! GUARDIAN, 6 Nov 81)..........................

SYRIA

Latest Overture: to Soviets Reviewed
(AL-.ARABI, 2'8 mt 81)eeeeeeeeeeeeeeoeeeeeeeooeeo-ooeeoaaoo.

TUNISIA
Sixth Agricultural Plan Sees Growth in Peru Revenue, Ample Seed

Supply
(HARCHBS TROPICAUX ET mrmms. 16 Oct 81) .............
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

INTER-ARAB AFFAIRS

CALLS FOR ASSASSINATION 0F 'ARAPAT DISCUSSED
Paris AL-HATAN AL-‘ARABI in Arabic No 263, 9-15 Oct 81 pp 27-30

[Article: "The Question Is Dangerous and the Destiny of the Resistance Is
up in the Air; Who Put out Contract on 'Arafat?"]

[Text] There is no other explanation for what is happening in west Beirut.
There is a contract out on the head of the Palestinian Resistance. The
number of cars that were blown up by explosives between Tyre and Sabra
exceeded 10 in less than 2 weeks, and the number of innocent Lebanese and
Palestinian civilians who were victims of these incidents is now
approaching 1,000 dead and wounded. Every street in the Lebanese capital
has been seized by a phobia, until further notice.

Information available to AL-UATAN AL—‘ARABI from well-informed sources
indicates that there is a contract out on Yasir 'Arafat himself. This is
because, first, he symbolizes the Palestinian Revolution; second, he sym-
bolizes the independence of the Palestinian decision; and because he is not
sufficiently “restrained" in dealing with a few Arab parties.

The major attack with explosives on the offices and leaders of the
Palestinian Resistance and the Lebanese National Movement came at a time
when the so-called "autonomy“ talks were being resumed in Cairo. They came
at a time when Tel Aviv was launching a new trial balloon around a formula
for a Jordanian-Palestinian confederation. ”hat is actually being prepared
for the PLO, and who is behind these preparations?

AL-NATAN AL-‘ARABI asked Abu Jihad, the military official in the organiza-
tion, this question. It was presenting the possibilities that were being
presented and discussed in diplomatic and political circles, besides an
interview with al-Shaykh Bashir al-Jumayyil, commander of the Lebanese
forces. In that interview aI-Jumayyil discussed a Syrian position. a
Palesrinian position. a variety of government positions and possibilities
for the future.

For several months political observers in Beirut and Damascus have been

relaying reports about lukewarm Syrian and Palestinian relations. In some
cases these relations reached the point of a confrontation In general and a

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
F0!:0FFKJAL.USE(NULY

confrontation between President Hafiz al-Asad and Abu 'Ammar, the chairman
of the PLO Executive Committee. Some sources of the Lebanese National Hove-
ment affirm that the Soviets informed a number of movement leaders that
they were extremely anxious over what they called "the deterioration in
Syrian-Palestinian relations" and "the existence of plans in a few Syrian
agencies to settle their accounts with Fatah in general and with Abu 'Ammar
in particular." “It is inevitable that in return there be Palestinian pre—
cautions to ensure an appropriate series of reactions." 0n the whole the
matter was quickly approaching "the brink of calamity."

It is noteworthy that throughout the past period this information was being
circulated in whispers behind the scenes. However. about 3 weeks ago.
especially after the assassination of Louis Delamare, the French ambas-
sador in Lebanon. the information was made public and brought out in the
open. Louis Dela-are, was the one who played a principal role in
arranging the meeting between Claude Cheysson, France's minister of foreign
affairs, and Yasir 'Arafat. The meeting took place in the home of Shafiq
al-Hazzan in Beirut. and it was followed by a series of car explosions in
the western area of the Lebanese capital. especially near the offices of
Fatah. These incidents had been veiled in mystery, raising numerous ques-
tions comprising everything conceivable about relations between these explo-
sions and the leadership of the deterrent forces and some of the influen-
tial positions within that leadership as well. The leadership of the deter-
rent forces are controlled by the special forces (the Red Knights). and
they are immediately subordinate to Rif'at al-Asad, commander of the
defense companies.

The Independent Decision

Observers concur that the central point of the struggle is concentrated on
the extent of what is called "the independent Palestinian decision" upon
which Yasir 'Arafat insists on both the Arab and international scene.

The struggle is taking place between two specific positions: the Syrian
position which is based on the premise that its relative power in the nego-
tiating process. currently underway behind the scenes and revealed by
Philip Habib, President Reagan's envoy to the area. is based on the fact
that Hafiz al-Asad controls both the Lebanese and Palestinian hands [in the
game] for bargaining purposes. Accordingly, the liberation organization
would have to exercise strategic and tactical restraint in any action it
takes on the Lebanese. Arab and international scenes in the context of

what Damascus decides. considering the fact that Damascus is "aCtually in
command and has the final word." The [other position], the Palestinian
position. which was articulated by Yasir 'Arafat. either in statements he
made or actions he took, is supported by most of the principal Palestinian
leaders. That position states that the Palestinian decision cannot be dic-
tated to the organization by outsiders whose interests are not those of the
Palestinian people and their revolution. It is imperative that a
Palestinian decision take the Lebanese equations into primary consideration
and that this be done in a comprehensive. national Arab context. not just
in the context of Syria‘s view, apart from the view of the rest of the Arab

IND! OFFIC1A1.USEZCNVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

forces. Second, Syria has no right "to veto" the PLO's relations with any
Other Arab country or the organization's right to take political and dip-
lomatic action on the world scene.

witnesses who took part in some of the recent meetings of the Follow-Up
Committee in Beirut relate that the Syrian-Palestinian dispute broke out
between 'Abd-al-Halim Khaddam, Syria's deputy prime minister and minister
of foreign affairs, and Yasir 'Arafat. The two exchanged angry words after
"the veiled threats that Khaddam made in the course of his discussion."
The point that brought the dispute out in the open revolved around the
question of who was to bear the responsibility for the lax security in
Beirut in general and in the national areas in particular and for the
rising transgressions and violations.

Each party held the other party responsible. However, the matter did not
stop there: Khaddam hinted that the leadership of the liberation organiza-
tion was exceeding its political boundaries and capabilities and risking
the entire cause."

'Arafat replied, "The Palestinian Revolution makes its independent deci-
sions by itself. It does not take risks because risks are not part of the
revolution's nature. The revolution is daring, and it challenges others
via direct and indirect procedures so as to attain its rights."

Witnesses explained this argument by saying that it was actually about the
organization's direct dealing with the matter of the cease-fire in the

recent Palestinian-Israeli war last July. The organization had dealt

directly without consulting with Syria and with UN Secretary General waldheim
on the one hand. and with the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia on the.other. Provoked
by Abu 'Ammar's statements Khaddam exclaimed angrily as he left the

meeting, "He shall see, Abu 'Ammar, how these procedures will let you

attain these rights."

The New Tune

Observers notice that government circles in Damascus and circles in Beirut
that are loyal to them are now strongly harping on the tune that "Abu
'Ammar is leading the organization into a settlement with Washington via
Saudi Arabia.“ They are saying that "Abu 'Ammar must be stopped and the
organization must be delivered from his dictatorial grip." Some leaders

of the Lebanese National Movement have affirmed that Damascus is measuring
"the patriotism and nationalism of every active movement in Lebanon" by the
amount of its ”public criticism” of Abu 'Ammar.

It seems that events which have been piling up in the context of Syrian-
Palestinian relations have led these relations into a crisis that cannot
be resolved unless the organization, under the leadership of Abu 'Ammar,
accepts the Syrian conditions. These conditions insist that President

al-Asad have the freedom to act on the Palestinian question on both the
Arab and international scenes. Since this is impossible, the Syrian plan
requires that Abu 'Ammar be separated from the organization. That step

INJRiOFIﬂCJAL USEZCMNLY
FOR‘0FFHJAL.USE(NVLY

would constitute a preliminary threat to Fatah. If it does not succeed. the
plan would proceed with an attempt to destroy Fatah from the inside, even
if that were to lead to the physical liquidation of a few leaders.

Observers report that the events began with what is known as "the Syrian
missiles crisis in Lebanon." It was later established that this operation
was merely a deceptive operation intended to distract attention away from
the principal operation of bombing the nuclear reactor for which Israel

' was making preparations. When the Palestinian-Israeli war broke out after-
wards and the Palestinian Resistance displayed superb courage and ability
in resisting the Israeli attack from the sea and from the air, causing the
Israelis to turn back and inflicting heavy losses on them in the field and
inside lsrael itself, Israel turned to the use of its superiority in the
air in intense air raids [against the Palestinians]. The Palestinian Resis-
tance asked Damascus for help: it asked Damascus to use the missiles it had
set up in Lebanon. But Damascus said that it would not be able to use the
missiles so as not to expand the range of the war at a time when it was not
prepared for such an expansion. Damascus also said that it was working
through its negotiations with Philip ﬂabib on getting Hashington to apply
pressure on Israel to stop the raids.

when the Resistance urged Damascus [to deploy the missiles], the reply that
came from Damascus was this: ”The Soviets are tying our hands as far as the
missiles are concerned." The Resistance turned to the Kremlin on this
matter, and its reply was, "Syria is the only country that makes the
decision whether or not to use the missiles." One of the leaders of the
Resistance described this situation as "a new Tal al-Za'tar" with a few
differences. "In the first Tal al-Za'tar," he said, "we were surrounded by
Phalangists who were protected by Syrians. In the second Tal al-Za'tar the
Israelis are bombing us from the air after they failed to shell us from

the sea and the land. [Meanwhile], the Syrians stand by and watch even
though their missile batteries were set up under the pretext of protecting
the Lebanese and the Palestinian people from the wanton aggression of the
Israeli air force."

The Advice of Damascus

The cease fire resolution reached by the liberation organization and Israel
in the context of the war that had broken out between them on Lebanese
territory followed. Both Kurt Haldheim, UN secretary general and Saudi
Arabian diplomacy exercised directly in the United States directly and
through U.S. envoy Philip Habib played an active part in bringing about
this cease fire.

The cease fire proposal had come about under the pressure of the losses

which the Palestinian Resistance had inflicted on the Israeli side. These
losses led to the evacuation of residents from 37 settlements in the nor-
thern part of occupied Palestine for the first time in the history of the
Arab-Israeli struggle. The number of evacuees amounted to 11,000 Israelis.
The liberation organization, under the leadership of Yasir 'Arafat. began
considering the cease fire proposal. Damascus advised the organization to

4

ETHIGDFFTCJAI.USEZCNVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

reject the proposal. but the organization declined to take the advice,
seeing that the cease fire was limited to the direct war on Lebanese ter-
ritory. The organization thought that the will and the interests of the
Lebanese people, as expressed by the Lebanese National Movement. must be
taken into consideration. The cease fire did not mean that the Palestinian
Resistance would suspend its actions inside occupied Palestine. The fact
that for the first time Israel was seeking a cease fire was considered a
victory for the liberation organization and for the entire Arab nation,
strengthening the organization's position on the international scene.

When Syrian authorities learned that the organization was likely to accept
the cease fire. it urgently requested that Abu 'Ammar come to Damascus,
even for a few hours of meetings and deliberations with President Hafiz
al-Asad, before making the announcement.

However, Abu 'Ammar was quick to announce on behalf of the organization
that "If the enemy honors the cease fire and declares it," he would comply
with the appeal for a cease fire which was made by the UN secretary
general. It was reported that 'Arafat made a point of taking the initiative
and announcing the decision from his office in Beirut to emphasize that
"the Palestinian decision is independent." Therefore. he did not comply
with the request to delay the announcement until after he had met with
President al-Asad. He die that to refute entirely [any charges] that the
"Palestinian decision was subject to the wishes of Damascus."

President Hafiz al-Asad strongly rebuked Abu 'Ammar later when he met him.
Al-Asad told Abu 'Ammar, "You are going way over your head." Abu 'Ammar
replied. "Hy acceptance of the cease fire signifies in practical terms that
1 know precisely what my capabilities are and what the capabilities of my
allies are. In general, we have all won with this decision."

The major political victory that the organization won in the international
community as a result of its accomplishments in combat, which forced a
cease fire on Israel, caused as much irritation and anger in Damascus
especially after Damascus tried to prod some factions of the Resistance

to violate the cease fire. The forces of the organization and of the
Lebanese National Movement fiercely opposed Damascus and forced it to abide
by the independent resolution of the Palestinian leadership. Ever since
that time "the new crisis of confidence" between the organization and Syria
became deeper. and Syria felt that it was no longer capable of manipulating
the Palestinian hand at will. This was the prevalent impression at inter-
national gatherings.

The Saudi Hand

The crisis worsened as a result of a feeling in Damascus that Saudi Arabia
had succeeded through quiet diplomacy in opening an "invisible" channel of
communication between the liberation organization and the United States

of America. There were two principal indications of that.

The first [indication] was in the fact that for the first time Prince Fahd
announced a peace initiative in the area. It is based on the reformulation

FOR OFFKJAI.USE(MHLY
FOR1NHHCJA1.USEGDNLY

of a few UN resolutions, and it rests on two central points: the first

is the establishment of an independent Palestinian state with Arab
Jerusalem as its capital; and the second is a guarantee of security and
peace for all the countries of the area. This means actual if not official
recognition of Israel. The organization, especially the leadership of
Fatah, represented by Abu 'Ammar and Abu Jihad. welcomed what was called
some of "the positive aspects" of that initiative.

The second [indication] was evident in a documentary presented by the well-
known American NBC Network. It was a documentary about the PLO, and it
showed the organization for the first time objectively and sympathetically,
affirming by visual evidence that the prevailing U.$. view that the PLO is
a terrorist organization is not accurate. The PLO is an organization that
is striving for legitimate national rights. It brings together the integ-
rated economics. Cultural. educational, health. administrative and civil
service agencies of the state that is being established. In addition, it
has its own security forces; all that it lacks is the land.

The straw that broke the camel's back came recently, according to one of
the ambassadors of the socialist countries in Lebanon. That was the mee-
ting that took place in Beirut between 'Arafat and Cheysson, France's minis-
ter of foreign affairs. Syrian authorities had urged Yasir 'Arafat after
the first signs of a French-Palestinian crisis had loomed on the horizon
regarding the protocol for this meeting-whether it should take place in
the home of the French ambassador in Beirut or in the office of the general
commander of the PLO's revolutionary forces--to hold the meeting in
DamaSCus during the visit of the chief of French diplomacy to that city.
However. Abu 'Ammar, supported by Louis Delanlre, the French ambassador
in Lebanon, insisted that a compromise over the crisis that had developed
over the location of the meeting be found sc that the meeting would take
place in Beirut and not in Damascus. Syrian circles viewed this as a ploy
to undermine Syrian clout in the area. a ploy in which both Abu 'Ammar and
the French ambassador, who lost his life a few days later in a premeditated
attack that was attributed to unknown persons, were participating.

Closing the Sea

Observers are holding a close watch on Syrian reactions to Abu 'Ammar's
statements and actions in which he insists on "the independence of the
Palestinian decision" and on his freedom to act [independently] throughout
the Lebanese scene and throughout the Arab and international scene as well.
So far observers are watching a number of these actions that are marked by
extreme candor.

The first among these reactions was Damascus's sudden change of heart about
the measures it had previously agreed to in the meetings of the Arab Fol-
low-Up Committee. The measures had been proposed to achieve security and
stability in Lebanon as a first step toward getting out of the crisis of
the fighting and the civil war and relieving the PLO of the burdens of this
fighting. Syria's representative in the Arab Follow-Up Committee had

FOR OFFTCJAI.lEﬂE(N§LY
FOIIOFFKJAL.USIIONIN

accepted the declaration made by al-Shaykh Bashir al-Jumayyil to President
Sarkis that dealings with Israel had ceased. He considered that declaration
satisfactory. But Damascus raised this issue again on the basis of the fact
that "it was a mere verbal statement that did not give adequate assurances
that relations with Israel had been cut." Instead, Syria asked that the
ports and the shores which were under the control of the Phalangist party
be watched to ascertain that the relationship had been cut and that lsraeli
weapons were not reaching Juniyah.

Observers say that the Syrian regime knew beforehand that this demand could
not be met unless the observation included the entire coastline of Lebanon.
This is exactly what the Follow-Up Committee had concluded in its resolu-
tions. Damascus intended to close entirely the sea route by which
Palestinian weapons were directly imported so that the liberation organiza-
tion would have no other recourse but to import weapons through Syria.
Damascus would thereby regain its hold on the organization "whose clout had
grown beyond what was necessary." Damascus would regain control over

Palestinian decisions; it would determine their directions and the scope of
their actions.

The second Syrian reaction was manifested in thrusting the Palestinians
into a difficult situation that would cause new conflicts to develop
between them and the public wishes of the Lebanese people regarding
security and getting out of the maelstrom of war and its destruction. That
reaction was manifested in Damascus putting its clout behind the resolution
of the Follow-Up Committee to form a committee that would monitor and
prevent the importation of weapons to Lebanon by any Lebanese or non-
Lebanese group other than the legal forces of the state. This forced the
Resistance--and that was the purpose of this reaction--to declare its oppo-
sition to that resolution and to ask that it be exempted from implementing
it because it was a liberation revolution and because its battle with
Israel required that it confront Israel continuously and reinforce its
weapons constantly. Lebanon's president was also forced to reject the
resolution because its implementation would mean in this case no more than
the formation of an Arab committee to watch over the arming of the
Phalangist party.

The third Syrian reaction was manifested in the fact that Damascus set
out to hurt the Palestinian faction that supported the independence of
the liberation organization within al-Sa'iqah and to replace the leaders
of this organization with others who had been subdued. That followed the
arrest of Mr Majid Hasan and his placement under house arrest.

The fourth Syrian reaction manifested itself in making the Syrian military
organization. which was operating in Lebanon under the name of the National
Confrontation Front. the military alternative to al-Sa'iqah Organization
after changing its name to Arab Knights. This military organization would
be furnished with modern weapons and well-trained military personnel. Hr
Rif‘at al-Asad. the brother of the Syrian president and commander of the
defense companies would be charged with the task of overseeing, directing
and planning the operations for this organization. This organization with

FOR‘OFFK]A1.USE(MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

its distinctive uniforms has recently been deployed in sensitive areas of
west Beirut. its members were well armed with heavy weapons. and they were
stationed behind strong fortifications. One concludes from statements made
by some members of this organization that it is making preparations for
playing a major role on both the Lebanese and Palestinian scenes. They say
that work is underway to turn this organization into a powerful "rival" for
Fatah to fight against Fatah and other organizations of the Palestinian
Revolution when that becomes necessary. The purpose of that would be to put
the Revolution in its place and to force it not to go too far in playing
the game of "the independent Palestinian decision."

The fifth Syrian reaction which is currently being implemented by more than
one means is the attempt to pull the Lebanese rug from under the feet of
the liberation organization in Lebanon. A number of leaders of the Lebanese
National Movement told Abu 'Ammar and other leaders of Fatah in confidence
that they were being subjected to severe pressures from Damascus to support
its position on the question of the independent Palestinian decision and
what is called "Abu 'Ammar's dictatorship" and "his playing with fire with
Saudi Arabia and with the Americans."

It is in this menacing and volatile atmosphere that cars headed for the
buildings and offices of the liberation organization and Fatah in the
western area of Beirut are exploding one right after the other in an
alarming, unprecedented manner.

Although lsrael is being blamed for this, observers--even though they are
not exonerating israel--are raising numerous questions about the fact that
car explosions are confined to the centers and locations of the deterrent
forces and Red Knights and to Palestinian locations which are believed to
be the locations of those supporting the liberation organization.

In a discussion that took place last week in the capital of Lebanon between
a number of local diplomats and politicians, the ambassador of a European
country that has close relations with the PLO said, "Hy government has
information that there is a contract out on Abu 'Ammar."

A Lebanese politician commented, "Uhat is new about that? Israel has been
trying to get Abu 'Anmar and his colleagues since 1965."

The ambassador smiled wryly and said, "Yes. but what is new here is that
Israel is no longer the only country that is calling for Abu 'Ammar's death
today."

Those who were assembled asked, "Who other than Israel is calling for the
death of Abu 'Ammar?‘

The ambassador was silent for a moment, and then he replied, "That is the
question. Look for an answer to that question on the Arab side. Don't con-
fine your search to the Israeli side."
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The question is a serious question, and the answer is even more serious.
Not only is it serious for Abu 'Arlnar in person, but it is also serious
for the existence and the destiny of the entire Palestinian Revolution.

Copyright: 1981 Al. HATAN AL ARAB!

8592
C50: 41.04/86

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

INTER-ARAB AFFAIRS

REPORT ON ARAB room PUBLIS-
Paris AL-WATAN AL-'ARABI in Arabic No 239. 11-17 Sep 81 pp 60, 61

[Article: "A Dismal Situation Despite slogans and Exaggeration: the Arab Boon-

omy Reflects Deepening Fragmentation and Development of a Sense of Provincial
Loyalty"]

[Text] Inter-Arab trade accounts for only 6 percent of total Arab exports and
10 percent of total imports.

Trade statistics and trends in economic cooperation do not reflect the Arab po-
litical zeal and slogans expressed in the exaggerations uttered by Arabs. In
the 1970's, industries were established within a narrow provincial structure.
The gap between the progress of the oil-producing countries and the backwardness
of those that do not have oil is increasing. All suffer from inflation and de-
creasing agricultural production.

A report by Dr 'Abd—al-Huhsin Zalzalah, secretary general of the Council of Arab
Economic Unity, on econonic progress and develop-ant in the Arab Nation during

the 1970's, is marked by optinian with regard to development. It says that the
past decade saw a tangible and fundanental correction in the price of the region's
natural resource, oil, which resulted in the energence of the Arabs' economic
clout throughout the world.

According to the report, the decade of the 1970's afforded the Arab econony an
excellent opportunity to consolidate great accmplislnents in developnent and to
achieve a neasure of self-reliance through improved productivity and technical
capabilities, increasing control over resources and putting them to good use
locally.

The Arab view of the dimensions and nature of dsvalopnent problems and challenges
crystallized during the decade of the 1970's into priorities and goals for local
and pan-Arab development to put the Arab econony on the right path toward curing
development problems. During the past decade, the nest important challenges
which still must be confronted in the 1980's were defined.

Nevertheless, the accomplishents in development which were realized during the
1970's were not in keeping with the efforts that were nade, the options svail—
able, nor pan-Arab aspirations. The Arab econoay still suffers from fundanental

10

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

problems. Preeminent among these problems are those brought about by the frag-
mentation of the Arab Nation which has led to economic fragmentation.

Despite abundant conditions conducive to achieving an integrated Arab economy,
the results of efforts that have been made in this direction are still small.

The Arab economy still suffers from slow progress toward an integrated economy
and scant attention to the achievement of Arab economic unity. This makes it
imperative for the Arab political will to enter as a decisive impetus to increase
attention to these goals. '

A summary of the report of the secretariat general of the Council of Arab Eco-
nomic Unity, which was published in the latest issue of the organ of OAPEC, pre-
sents the features of Arab economic progress and the accomplishments of Arab de-
velopment. It includes the following indications on the Arab economy.

The Arab countries achieved a real growth rate in local gross national product
of only 7.3 percent in 1979, as well as in 1980. However, these growth rates
include the large discrepancy between the oil-producing and non-oil-producing
countries.

The relative weight of the GNPs of the oileproducing countries to the GNP of the
Arab Nation as a whole rose from 71.6 percent in 1978 to about 76 percent in

1979, and to approximately 82 percent in 1980. This reflects the emergency of

the Arab oil countries as an important influence in Arab and international affairs.

The relative importance of the Arab mining sector in the GNP rose from about 68.6
percent in 1978 to about 53.7 percent in 1979, and 60 percent in 1980. The share
of the manufacturing sector in the GNP fell from 8.8 percent in 1978 to about 8.1
percent in 1980.

The share of the agricultural sector in the GNP fell from 8.6 percent in 1978 to
about 7.1 percent in 1979, to less than 7 percent in 1980.

Arab foreign trade has been marked by a decreasing proportion of inter-Arab trade
compared with total foreign trade with the non-Arab world. This reflects the
tenuousness of inter-Arab economic ties.

The statistics indicate that the value of Arab exports to Arab countries was only
6 percent of total Arab exports in 1980, while the percentage of Arab imports
from Arab countries was only 10 percent of total imports by the Arab nation as a
whole in the same year. This is in addition to the rise in oil revenue which
made up about 88 percent of the value of Arab exports in 1980.

The balance of trade for the Arab countries as a whole showed a surplus of $56
billion in 1979 and $90 billion in 1980, compared with $22 billion in 1978.

This increase is attributable to the large surplus in the trade balances of the
Arab oil-producing countries, which amounted to $66.6 billion in 1979 and is es-
timated at $105 billion in 1980.

The Arab countries showed a balance of trade surplus in 1979 estimated at about
$69 billion, compared with $9 billion in 1978. The non-oil-producing Arab

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

countries showed some improvement in their total balance of trade inasmuch as
the deficit fell from $9 billion in 1978 to about $8 billion in 1979 due to in-
creased remittances sent home by citizens working abroad.

The level of Arab agricultural production has decreased in comparison with world-
wide agricultural production. While average world grain production yields 1.9
tons per hectare, the average Arab yield is only 1.1 tons per hectare. With re-
gard to wheat in particular, average yield in the Arab world is 1 ton per hectare,
while the average worldwide yield is 1.7 tons.

In 1980, the shortfall in grain production amounted to about 3.6 million tons,
despite the fact that the Arab world includes areas considered to be sane of the
finest soil in the world for agriculture and grain production. The wheat short-
fall is a disappointment to the hopes for plugging the gap in Arab food security.
This shortfall amounted to about 8.8 million tons in 1975 and will rise to 19.2
million tons in the year 2000 unless the Arab countries take upon themselves the
task of financing huge wheat and grain production projects in the Sudan, Syria,
Horocco, and Algeria.

Arab industry is characterized by a local outlook. The industrial framework is,
to a great extent, devoted to the consumer industries which still comprise more
than 50 percent of the total Arab manufacturing industry. Intermediate indus-.
tries make up about 25 to 30 percent of total Arab manufacturing production,
while industries which manufacture finished products comprise about 5 to 15 per-
cent of Arab manufacturing production.

One result of this industrial situation is the low Arab share of world industrial

output. Arab manufactured goods account for only 8 percent of all Arab exports,
while there is a clear increase in the Arab world's importation of manufactured

goods, amounting to 65 percent of total imports.

All the Arab countries suffer from periods of inflation, the effects of which '
have hit the least developed Arab countries the hardest because of the rising
costs of imported goods and because of other economic difficulties from which

they suffer.

The inflation rate in the oil-producing countries was about 11 percent in 1979,
while it was about 16.8 percent in the non-oil-producing Arab countries.

COPYRIGHT: 1981 AL-HATAN AL-‘ARABI

9123
C80: 4404/62

12

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

INTER-ARAB AFFAIRS

BRIEFS

PRO-PALESTINIAN RADlo-The question of a pro-Palestinian "independent radio"
[transnitting station] in France has cons up. Sons eaissaries of [Libyan chief-of-
atatel Qadhdhafi are said to have offered 200,000 francs to the anti-Zionist
leftists who are ready to use it to "counter" Radio J, the Jewish connunity's

transnitter. [Text] [Paris L’EXPRESS in French 23 Oct 81 p 1001 [COPYRIGHT: 1981
s.a. Groups Express]

PLAN TO ASSASSINATE 'ARAPAT-Non—Palsstinian sources have confirmed that prior to
his departure for the Far East. 'Arafat told the Fatah Revolutionary Council that

he had reliable information about a plan supported by the Syrian security organs.
particularly the defense squads headed by Rif‘at al-Asad. to assassinate Fatah
leaders. The assassinations to be perpetrated by Abu Nidal. 'Arafat was quoted as
saying: If I am to be assassinated, the responsibility will rest on the shoulders
of the Syrian. He added: The so-callsd Front for the'Liberation of Lebanon Prom
Potelgnersl which recently carried out several bonbinga in Lebanon against Pales-
tinian offices and leaders, is receiving direct nilitary and financial aid from the
Syrian intelligence (2). [Question mark as published]. [Text] [JN281056 Paris _
AL-WATAR ALO'ARABI in Arabic 23—29 Oct 81 p 21] (COPYRIGHT: 1981 AL HATRN AL ARABl/

CSO: 4504/120

13

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ALGERIA

EUROPEAN AID STRESSBS RESEARCH, EDUCATION
Paris HARCHES TROPICAUX ET MEDITERRANEENS in French “01675, 16 Oct 81 pp 2615, 2616

[Text] Early in October. the EEC member states decided in favor of a commitment to
finance two programs with Algeria as the beneficiary.

1) A Program of Scientific Cooperation with the ONRS [National Office for Scien-
tific Research] and a Teacher's Training Program (a grant of 4.3 million ECUs [Euro-
pean currency unit] or some 26.2 million French francs)--The Algerian Government
considers that access to science and technology is a basic factor in the process of
economic liberation. The national policy in the field of research, already formula-
ted in the early 1970's. is based on three pivotal points: the Algerianization of
research. the integration of research activities into the economic development, and
the planning of research to achieve the highest degree of cohesion between the ob-
jectives of research and those of the economic and social plan.

The National Organization for Scientific Research (ONRS) was created in 1973 and
since then efforts have been intensified in that field particularly in three direc-
tions--energy, agriculture and housing. In the sphere of energy, the ultimate pur-
pose is to master nuclear technology, to study renewable sources of energy (particu-
larly solar energy), to develop and process hydrocarbons. In the sphere of agri-
culture, the aim is to secure a scientific base for the process of agricultural
development mostly by means of studies on arid zones. Hith regard to housing, the
priority goes to rural and urban planning, programs of "socialist villages,“ and so
on.

The project is thus intended to increase the country‘s potential in scientific re-

search and to train higher education teachers following an integrated action which

envisages scholarships in Europe to train research workers and teachers for higher

education (for the latter, there are provisions for 26 scholarships at postgraduate
level); exchange of research workers involving Algerian and European research cen-

ters and dispatch of experts; supply of scientific equipment such as fluorometers,

ionization chambers. measuring and analyzing equipment for hydraulic laboratories.

for water treatment or for soil analysis, thermodynamic engines and so on.

Five research centers will be the recipients of the BEC's cooperation: the Nuclear
Science and Technology Center, the Center of Agricultural Studies and Research, the
National Center for Research on the Arid Zones, the University Center for Research,
Studies and Achievements and the Solar Energy Station. Three-month research scholar-
ships will be granted to some 160 trainees from these five centers. The purpose of

14
FOIIOF11CLALIJSElDNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

exchanging researchers is to achieve mutual participation in the research work done
in the countries of the Community and in Algeria thus laying the foundation for a
genuine scientific cooperation. As for the purpose of sending experts, it is to en-
courage field activities, mainly activities involving new research, and to organize
training seminars.

Since the supply of equipment requires that this equipment be adapted to local condi-
tions (as in the case of the multichannel analyzer), there will be an international

call for bids in the EEC but the supplementary equipment will be the object of re-
stricted discussions.

2) Training of Agricultural Managers (a grant of 4 million BCUs or 25.4 million
French francs)--The purpose of this program is to train managerial cadres for the
state-controlled agricultural sector (self-managed farms). This program is part of
the reorganization of Algeria's agricultural sector which the government decided to
carry out to boost production. The 2,000 existing holdings will be regrouped to
create 6,500 new farms, each managed by an agronomist. Under this program, the A1—
gerian authorities will be provided with educators and technical means required to
train these managers.

The future managers will be recruited primarily among agricultural engineers recently
graduated from the Hostaganem Institute of Agricultural Technology. Prior to being
assigned to the production units, these engineers will attend a 5-month training pro-
gram: 4 months devoted to theoretical and practical studies and 1 month of practic-
al work in a farm. The training program has already been tested on a 6-month exper-
imental basis since December 1980. The outlined program forcusses on a management

and includes management of personnel and equipment, of supplies and buildings, pre—
paration and implementation of the farm‘s development plan, financing and accounting.

The basic training will take place at the centers of Skikda and El Khemis in two an-
nual sessions, each for a group of 200 engineers. The training program requires the
recruiting of experts in the fields of agronomy and management and these experts will
be Algerians as well as Europeans. The project also involves the supply of copying
machines and documentary materials which will be purchased after restricted consulta-
tion.

COPYRIGHT: Rene Noreux et Cie Paris 1981.

8796
cso: 4519/27

15

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
F!“l(ﬂﬂﬂ(1Al.lEﬂE(ﬂVLY

BRIEFS

JAPANESE LOAN-The Export-Import Bank of Japan has signed a contract with the Algerian
company SONATRACB [National Company for the Transport and Marketing of Hydrocarbons]
regarding a loan of 13.36 billion yen granted to that company to purchase Japanese
goods and services for a project to improve a natural gas field in the district of
Zarzaitine near the Libyan border. The project is intended to improve productivity
in the Zarzaitine oil fields by recovering the gas to extract the heavy hydrocarbons.
processing 4 million cubic meters of gas daily. Host of the money will be used to
purchase gas separators and compressors from Japan. No interest rate has been given
but, according to the Export-Import Bank, it falls within the limits set by the OECD.
The Export-Import Bank will provide 60 percent of total amount of this loan and the
rest will be supplied by seven commercial banks (Mitsubishi Bank, Dai-Ichi Kangyo
Bank, Sanwa Bank, Sumitomo Bank, Taiyo Kobe Bank, Industrial Bank of Japan, Hitsubi~
shi Trust and Banking). [Text] [Paris NARCBES TROPICAUX ET HEDITERRANBENS in French
No 1875,16 Oct 81 p 2615] [COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux et Cie Paris 1981] 8796

CEMENT PLANT CONTRACT--The National Building Materials Company (SNHC) and the CDR
company Sket Export-Import signed a contract on 24 September this year to build a
cement plant in Ain Touts, governorate of Batna. capable of producting 1 million
tons of cement (with two production lines of 500,000 tons each) using the dry pro-
cess. The contract is part of the agreements betveen the Algerian and East German
governments and in particular the agreement singed in October 1977. [Text] [Paris
HARCNES TROPICAUX ET HEDITERRANBENS in French No 1872 16 Oct 81 p 2615] [COPYRIGHT:
Rene Horeux et Cie Paris 1981} 8796

C50: 4519/27

16

FINICNWﬂC1A1.lﬂﬂE(MNLY
FOR(HﬂﬂC1ALlﬂﬂEONLY

EGYPT

INTERVIEWS WITH EGYPTIAN OPPOSITION FIGURES
Milan PANORAHA in ltalian 26 Oct 81 pp 97-103

[Two of several interviews published under general heading "After Sadat": Inter—
view with Khalid Huhyi-al-Din, president of the National Progressive Union Party,
and Rif'at Sa'id. theorist of the Party: "After Sadat/2: Houbarak ls Pro-USA.
But..." by Giovanni Porzio. Interview with Gen Sa'd-al-Din al-Shadhili, former
Egyptian Army chief of staff: "After Sadat/3: He Will Kill Him Too" by Robert
Fox. Places of interviews: Cairo and Tripoli, respectively; dates not given]

[Text] After the death of Sadat. he is the only survivor of the historic group
called th "Secret Organization of Free Officers," the group of military men who,
in July 1952, toppled Farouk's monarchy. At age 68, Khalid Huhyi-al-Din, former
right-hand man of Nasser, is the charismatic leader of the Egyptian Left. Presi-
dent of the National Progressive Union Party, the only semilegal opposition
party that the repressive measures impOsed by the late rais did not succeed in
crushing. has undergone many arrests during the last several years for "subver-
sive activity."

Rif'at Sa'id. 49, theorist of the Progressive Union, which he helped found in
April 1976, was working as a reporter with Cairo's leading daily AL-AHRAM. In-
volved in the September wave of arrests, he was compelled to leave his newspaper.
He, too, is thoroughly familiar with Cairo's prisons: 2 months in August 3979,

6 morths in l977--accused of having taken part in the riots that shook the Egyp-
tian capital in January of that year--and 16 consecutive years during Nasser's
presidency.

PANORAMA discussed with the two leaders of the Progressive Union the post-Sadat
outlook.

[Question] in your opinion, what will be the immediate political consequences of
the assassination of the rais?

[Answer] Internally, an abrupt turn-on of the screws, with a reinforcement of
the police and the security forces. In :he 2 days following the assassination,

60 of our cadres were arrested in Cairo. The regime fears that the Left will try
to take advantage of the power vacuum. This is why the succession process was

17

FINICNWWCIALIJSEiﬂﬂLY
FIMICMWWCJAI.USEIDNLY

accelerated, after which the government, having decreed a national emergency, was
able to order the Armed Forces to maintain internal security. But repression,
weapons and indiscriminate arrests cannot create a consensus, which is the only
true guarantee of stability. The coldness with which the people received the news
of the assassination, and the lack of participation in the funeral rites, show
that it takes more than mere silencing of the mass media and the press to dull

the awareness of the Egyptians.

[Question] Who are the killers and what motivated them to kill the president?

[Answer] Sadat signed his own death warrant with the September repression.

Among the l,500 persons arrested, there were members of our party, of the “APO
[expansion unknown]. of the Muslim Brotherhood, of the Coptic Church, as well as
lawyers, journalists, university professors, communists and liberals. He shut the
door in everyone's face and in so doing he cleared the way for the violent groups
and the excremists. This is what gave birth to his assassination. For a reli-
gious fanatic, the important thing is to act, to eliminate the person who repre-
sents evil, and thus to gain entry to Paradise. It will take time now to learn,
going beyond the identities of the actual executors, whether there was also a
plot. There are questions to be clarified: "here have the munitions come from?
How was it possible to place two civilians in uniform among the troops that took
part in the parade? But what really counts is the result: The $25 million spent
by the United States for Sadat's security actually served no purpose. Above all,
they did nothing to change the sentiments of a people ideologically confused by
the turnabout in propaganda and slogans: The American and Israeli "enemies" have
become Egypt's best friends, while the Arabic "brotherhood" and the Palestinians
have broken off their relations with Cairo.

[Question] How could Sadat possibly have made the same error as the shah of Iran,
alienating the goodwill of the religious circles7

[Answer] in 1972, when he realized that in the universities the youth were being
attracted by the Marxists and the Nasserites, Sadat began to encourage openly the
more extremist Islamic groups. But the most fanatically religious among them
began to challenge the pro-western change in policy and became dangerous: the
rais responded with the repression, extending it to the Copts as well to vest it
with an appearance of even-handedness. And this was another serious mistake:

The Copts are a discriminated-against minority in Egypt. But there are 7 million
of them, their Church is well organized and their spiritual head, Shenouda III,
whom Sadat tried to exile, is a man of action, highly intelligent, cultured and
very popular.

[Question] what is currently the extent of the influence of the Islamic extremist
groups in Egypt? A figure of 10 percent is quoted as representing their active
sympathizers in the universities.

[Answer] They are unquestionably stronger in the universities than elsewhere.

In general, I think their number is overestimated: The authorities consider it
fully in their interest to label the opposition as Muslim fanatics. But they are

18

FOR¢0FFKJAI.USE(MVLY
FORIDFFKJAI.USE(MVLY

definitely well armed, well organized and extremely effective. Somewhat similar
to the Italian Red Brigades, with the difference that the Red Brigades are iso-
lated from the masses.

[Question] Are they also active in the Armed Forces?

[Answer] Yes. All the persuasions and ideologies are reflected in the Egyptian
Armed Forces. Here, too, Sadat made a mistake. it was he who decided to politi-
cize the Armed Forces, appointing military officers to the top posts in his party
and his government.

[Question] What is likely to change in Egypt with the new president?

[Answer] Moubarek is tied to the United States, to its strategy in this region.
But no one can actually say he will be another Sadat. We do not know his think-
ing as yet; and in Egypt, the rais is the rais; he governs according to his own
personal leanings. Houbnrek, however, has never gone to Israel. was this a
personal decision on his part or a concerted maneuver with Sadat? Until the
complete evacuation of the Sinai in April 1982, Egypt's policy will continue
along a previously laid track. But thereafter? Camp David has definitely been
torpedoed and Houbarek could seek a rapprochement with the other Arabic countries.

[Question] And would the United States allow that?

[Answer] That is precisely the problem. The United States is more involved in
Egypt's internal affairs than we, as Egyptians, can accept. The alliance with

Washington is a threat to Egypt's independence. This is the very basis of our

opposition.

[Question] what will be your party's course of action in the coming months?

[Answer] He have won the battle for the legalization of our party, even though
it is less dangerous to operate clandestinely in Egypt today. Now we say: We have
had enough of repressions and referendums.

[End of interview with National Progressive Union Party leaders, Khalid Huhyi-
al-Din and Rif'at Sa'id; interview with Gen Sa'd-al-Din al-Shadhili follows]:

In this interview, Sa'd-al-Din al-Shadhili, former chief of
staff of the Egyptian Army,declares himself responsible for
the assassination and predicts for Egypt a wave of anti-
regime violence. '

in Tripoli, PANORAMA met with Gen Sa'd-al-Din al-Shadhili, 60, former chief of
staff at the Egyptian Army. General al-Shadhili claims to be "the real head

of the Egyptian opposition." Backed by Hu'ammar Qadhafi and by the countries of
the Resolute Fronl, the general expects to return to Egypt soon and is convinced
that much is due to happen in the next few weeks. Here are the thoughts of the

man who toasted the assassination of Sadat.

19

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FI”l(Mﬂﬂ(1Al.lEﬂE(NVLY

[Question] You have said that Moubarek must change everything on pain of being
overthrown in the very near future...

[Answer] Sadat was a dictator. what we want instead is a democracy. How could
Houbarek have gone into a referendum without having liberated the 5,000 political
prisoners, without having abolished martial law, after having actually instituted
new repressive measures against the officers and against the leading figures of
the opposition? "hat, in these circumstances, is a plebiscitary worth? Under
these conditions we cannot allow Houbarek a respite. We will oppose him in every

way.
[Question] A struggle of short or long duration?

[Answer] He shall begin immediately and will finish it when we have achieved our
victory.

[Question] in that case, do you intend to run for president?

[Answer] We shall decide together with the other opposition leaders what is to be
done. When democracy has been restored, we will select a candidate.

[Question] What is your model of a democracy?

[Answer] It is the Western type of pluralistic democracy, with a parliament in
which all the parties are represented and with a president having little power.

[Question] In whom then would the most power reside?

[Answer] In a head of the government to be agreed by the majority of the parties.
As you can see, this is far from being the Nasser model or the Sadat model.

[Question] And far from that of Qadhafi as well. Yet you live in Libya and you
obtain help from Tripoli. Such backing seems to be incompatible with your
Western democratic ideas...

lAnswer] I am not interested in Libya. My only concern is Egypt.
[Question] Do you believe you have a following among the Egyptian people?

[Answer] 1 am convinced the vast majority of the Egyptian people would vote for
me if they had the chance.

huestiod Hhat methods of struggle do you intend to use against Houbarek's
regime? '

[Answer] That is the problem. The only way to bring down an autocratic regime is
through violence. I hate the use of violence. But first Sadat's regime, and now
Moubarek's regime. have closed all avenues to a peaceful policy. Violence in
these circumstances thus becomes inevitable.

20

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
IN)R OPINCJAl.lh5EZ(M9LY

[Question] Do you consider yourself. then, the responsible political head of
every violent action that is taking place in Egypt at this moment?

[Answer] Every form of rebellion is under our control.
[Question] Are you the commander-in-chief of the entire operation?

[Answer] 1 cannot reveal such details. Let me simply say that the struggle
against the regime is spreading among the people.

[Question] You are considered to be an anti-Western figure. Is that true?

[Answer] I am not against the West and I did not criticize Sadat on that score.
But the Host must understand that it cannot want a denocracy in its own house
and at the same time back the autocratic dictatorships of the Third world. This
is why the presence of so many western leaders at the funeral services surprised
me so. They were mourning a servile agent and certainly not a champion of
democracy. For us. Sadat was nothing more than a traitor to his people.

Question] How, in your view, do the socialist countries of Eastern Euro e act
P

with respect to the Third World? They too back dictatorships. Do you not think

so?

[Answer] 1 do not wish to talk at this time about the socialist bloc. 1 want to
talk only about the Western powers. They backed Sadat and upheld an autocratic
political system. and were thus guilty of inconsistency.

COPYRIGHT: 1981 Arnaldo Hondadori Editore S.p.A. Hilano

9399
C50: 6528”

21

IN)R*0FTWCLAL USIECMVLY
KHOHEYNI EXPECTED TO FALL IN MONTHS OR EVEN WEEKS
PH290859 Paris AFRIQUE—ASIE in French 12-25 Oct 81 pp 34-36
[Report by Bouzid Kouza: "Just Before the Curtain Rises"]

[Excerpts] Iran has just been given a new president. A "free and democratic“
election. the Tehran authorities claim after reducing the voting age to 15 and
mobilizing large forces to ensure 'Ali Khamene'i's "victory." It was an illegal
and rigged election according to the national resistance council which maintains
that the new president is not representative and which has just announced the
drafting of a government program applicable as soon as a government is formed in
Iran following the collapse of the regime-forecast by Hojahedin circles for the
next few months or even weeks.

The democratic opposition led by the Hojahedin-s Khalq, which is gaining grounds
thanks to growing awareness and a determination which the smmnary executions are
not destroying, is confronting inside the country a regime which has bludgeoned its
way into undivided power.

Better still, it has the initiative. Hojahedin organization leader Has'ud Rajavi
told us recently: "After destroying the Khomeyni myth. the present phase of the
resistance movement is to develop the mass movement by occupying the streets and
not allowing the reactionaries any chance of remaining there. Moreover they have
realized that it is no longer possible for them to mobilize, even by force and
corruption, the tens of thousands of supporters which the Islamic Republican Party
[IRP] could once bring onto the streets at any time. It is a joke to suggest that
a speech by Khomeyni can now mobilize 1 million people in Tehran. The famous
pictures shown by Iranian television during Raja'i's funeral are from the archives:
it was the demonstration staged after Bani-Sadr's election. Pictures of the

president of the republic could be seen."

what will the next stage he? Rajavi replied: “To use strikes to completely
paralyze the economic and administrative apparatus. which is already seriously
undermined by the incompetence, intrigue and deliberate sabotage of the IRP's
men." And he added: "The mass movement will be swelled by demonstrations, strikes
and finally the people's rising until the regime falls. And rest assured that it
will fall soon."

The Mojahedin leader said that he thinks that "the Khomeyni regime's efforts to
emerge from isolation are doomed to failure. The reports which we have received
indicate that Khomeyni's foreign minister has not had a good reception. I think
that the steadfastness front leaders have expressed their disagreement and have

shown that they cannot be taken in...."

COPYRIGHT: 1981 Afrique-Asie
cso: 4619/18 22
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ISRAEL

BRIEFS

TRADE WITH NIGERIA--Israel has concluded a contract with Nigeria to build three
hotels, a mill, an aluminum plant, and two water stations in this African country.
The value of the contract is $190 million. This deal is another indication of
the resumption of Israel's trade, economic, and technical activity in Africa,
thereby penetrating the Arab wall built in the 1970's to strengthen the boycott
of the Zionist state in Africa. These projects will be implemented by Solel -
Boneh International, which is owned by the Israeli trade union federation, His-
tadrut. It is strange that, although Nigeria is the largest Islamic country in
Africa, it did not prevent the conclusion of this deal with Israel. And this is
despite the fact that Nigeria” participated in the Islamic mlt conference held
earlier in Saudi Arabia, which issued recommendations calling on the Islamic
countries to sever diplomatic and economic relations with the Zionist entity.
Sixty—eight percent of the sun will be provided by 50 Israeli and foreign banks
as a loan to finance these projects with the Nigerian government paying the rest.
The entire loan will be guaranteed by the Italian government with the proviso
that the Israeli company purchase the necessary industrial materials from Italy.

Text] [Paris AL-HATAN AL-‘ARABI in Arabic no 239, 11-17 Sep 81 p 60] (common-r:
931, Alt-"ATM AL-‘ARABI/ 9123

CSO: 4406/62

23

FOR OFFKJAL.USEG3NLY
FOR OFF“ 1M. USE ONLY

TENSIONS IN CEASB Pm Pmlm 0mm
Paris AL-HATAN AL-‘ABABI in Arabic No 241, 25 Sep-l'Oct 81 pp 28, 29

IZrticle: "They Are Terrorizing Lebanon from North to South To Sebgtage Arab
Solutions and Shut Life down: The Hessecres during the Cease tireﬂ/

lgexsl who nakes up the Front to Liberate Lebanon from Foreigners which is setting
up booby-trapped cars and bombs from north to south, passing through Beirut, in the
course of the Lebanese cease fire? th has this front become active now that the
"Arab Followup Canines" has managed to cone up with limited security steps that
have given promise of tangible relief in the political context? Hho is harmed by
the calm in Lebanon? Who is anxious to thwart efforts to restore tranquility,
whether Arab or non‘Areb, through the kidnappings, killing and terroriretion?

The capital of Lebanon was experiencing atteqts to engender optinisn in the niddle
.of last week, and the newspapers were talking, even if with some caution, about
"subsequent security steps along the avenue," after one of the main thoroughfares
between western and eastern Beirut, Huseum Avenue, was opened up. Sons observers
went so far as to imagine a long integrated timetable of political steps to pre-
pare the way for security steps, and vice verse, and to enumerate the priorities
in the schedules, which the Lebanese have learned by heart because of the frequency
with which they have read or heard the- over the 7 years.

Then suddenly the first explosion broke out.

Thirty kilograms of TNT exploded at 0640 hours in the morning last Thursday in the
Lebanese Cement Caspany in Shake. The targets were the conpany, the workers and
truck drivers who arrive early to get a turn in the rush of custoeer applications.
The area that witnessed the explosion lies within the area of influence of fenesr
President Sulaynan Prsnjiyeh and the Heradeh brignde of al-Zaghertah. The result:
a few dozen killed and wounded. The signature: the Front to Liberate Lebanon
from Foreigners.

0n the morning of the same day, in Sayda, the capital of southern Lebanon, e
liercedesozoo automobile parked in front of the headquarters of the joint forces
connend in the center of the city. It was rigged with more than 100 kilograms of
TNT. At 0915 hours in the norning, 45 nimtes before the hour for the meeting the
con-send was intending to hold, which was to consist of about 60 security and polit-
ical officials, a terrifying explosion broke out, bringing down the six-story

2‘

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

col-sand building; adjacent buildings within a radius of 300 meters collapsed or
were damaged. The result: more than 200 killed and wounded. The signature: the
Front to Liberate Lebanon from Foreigners.

The al-Silm section of al-Shiyah (the southern suburb of Beirut) was the third vic-
tim: explosives were laid in a car parked on a residential street, as Shaka and
Sayda were declaring mourning for the victims of the first two explosions, less
than 24 hours after they occurred. The result: six children dead or wotmded. The
signature: The Front to Liberate Lebanon from Foreigners.

The fourth victim, and perhaps not the last, was a movie theater in western Beirut
(the Salwa Theater), in a congested cannon section. The bomb exploded in the
theater, 35 people were killed or wounded, fire broke out, and the end of the
bloody week was "crowned" by the signature: The Front to Liberate Lebanon.

The fifth explosion was observed in Tripoli at the beginning of this week. It had
as its target a gas tank in a crowded residential area. As luck would have it,
the charge was set off before the tank was filled and its losses were restricted
to the depot.

Thus the series of events enconpassed Lebanon, from south to north, in less than
5 days; meanwhile news of the state of terror western Beirut is going through has
increased, following the discovery of other charges on al-llamra' Street.

It has become clear that a single thread connects the five explosions and that
their purpose, and the purpose behind the slaughter that could follow then, is to
undernine the state of optimism that had started to appear on the Lebanese horizon,
to thwart the efforts of the Arab Followup Comittee and to keep Lebanon in the
vortex of infernal violence it is going through, as if life was forbidden, and
calm was prohibited for the ordinary exhausted citizen.

ls , and Are?

But who makes up the Front to Liberate Lebanon from Foreigners that has launched
all these explosions in the areas of Syrian-Palestinian concentration? Is it a
group that is cooperating with the "Lebanese front?" Is it an Israeli puppet
front that does not necessarily go through the Lebanese Front? Or is it the off-
spring of well-known disputes among certain armed detachaents in western Beirut
and the areas that are clients of the Palestinians and the Lebanese National Hove-
nent, hiding behind a “separatist" name in order to camouflage their real identity’l

Whatever this front may be, the Lebanese consider it criminal, because it has inno-
cent persons as its target, and, beyond the innocents, the destiny of Lebanon.
This is not the first time that roads in Lebanon have been opening up and that
Lebanese, Christian and hoslem, have resumed meeting one another--and now the
"fifth columns" have intervened to spoil the "melange" here, there and everywhere.
Lebanon today has more than 80 movenents, armed groups and srniee; that is, it is
a diminutive League of Nations meeting in permanent fashion in order to trigger
the local, regional and international contradictions in the midst of the Lebanese

people.
25

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Perhaps. he resolutions of the Arab Followup Mttee, and all the Arab resolu-
tions that have been taken since 1976, retain [gerg/ ink on paper. Hhenever cir-
cus-stances are propitious for an Arab neeting on Lebanon, contrary circunstances
emerge which eliminate then: or dispel their positive effects. In this regard, a
former prime minister says, "lebenon needs resolutions that can be carried out at
once. Do not be amazed to see any step in the execution stage failing when this
execution is delayed for more than 3 days."

the truth of the former prenier‘s conclusion in his analysis of the reason any the
resolutions that are adopted are not executed. Perhaps the best method officials
are following to arrive at actual application of their resolutions consists of
carrying then out swiftly and instantly. The proliferation of parties that are
active on Lebanese territo , their diverse orientations and inclinations, and the
growing number of people benefiting from the country's continued political, civil
and econo-ic collapse call for strong authorities that know how to adopt decisions
and proceed to carry them out at once, before any group can catch its breath or
try to violate what has been already agreed upon.

fares between the two segnents of the capital not started to dissipate. After
Museum Avenue was opened up, officials discovered that attempts were being made to
close it up again. They concentrated their efforts on strengthening security in
its inediate surroundings, considering that it was more inortant to manage to
keep that open than proceed to open other thoroughfares, especially since these
thoroughfares would close with the first atteapt to shut than down. Therefore the
"Followup Connittee" ambassadors concentrated their attention on ensuring an ade-
quate cover to maintain a constant guarantee for traffic through the Maeun gate-
way, acknowledging, as one of then stated, that keeping a given gateway open would
be more difficult than opening other ones (since one security agency official was
unhappy with the obstacles that stood in the way of the continued execution of the
Followup Counittee's resolutions and the opening of the other thoroughfares) and

tying out the execution of the resolutions before the date of this neeting. On

top of that, officials will face difficulty in their atteqnt to convince the parties
to the conflict to facilitate the process of applying the resolutions. The issue
of acceptance or nonacceptance devolves now upon the army, which constitutes an
obstacle to all attenpts to end the difficulty that has arisen. One fears that

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

this issue will become a thorny problem threatening to_thwart the effgrts underway,
and will not stop with the mere failure to carry out [the resolutions] but will pro-
duce sudden lapses in the security situation.

It is well known that the national government is demanding that the army withdraw
from its concentrated positions in Sodeco and the al-shan Road extending up to
the museum and that the Lebanese forces are demanding that the Palestine Liberation
Army which is concentrated in the same area be withdrawn, claiming that the two
armies took part in the fighting in the course of the incidents that started last
2 April. However, President Sarkis sees no benefit in withdrawing the Lebanese
army from its locations and insists that it remain where it is, considering that
there is no way to set matters straight and restore confidence to the citizens'
spirits except through recourse to the legitimate authorities' forces, foremost
among which is the army. Although some parties are demanding that it not be
brought in, it is not logical to demand that it be withdrawn from the centers it
occupies.

Conditions and Further Conditions

Therefore, political circles are afraid that matters will become increasingly com-
plex through concentration on the question of whether to keep the army in its posi-
tions or withdraw it from them. This causes these circles to wonder what positive
elements the Pollowup Comittee built its evaluations on when it reassured people
that broad steps had been taken toward relief. In this context the Saudi ambassa-
dor, 'Ali el-Sha'ir, says that he observed, in the course of his meetings with Col
)1th Ghanim, the chief of the Syrian intelligence forces operating in Lebanon,
and the higher coordination cosmittee that includes the National Movement, the
Palestinian resistance, the AMI. movement and the comander of the Lebanese Forces,
Shaykh Pierre al-Jumayyil, that everyone agreed that the roads and thoroughfares
between the two segnmnts of the capital should be opened and were prepared to car-
ry out all the comittee's resolutions. However, this agreemnt and readiness re-
mained mere talk, since the conditions and the counter-conditions that each group
set forth obstructed the opening of these thoroughfares, and could stymie the reso-
lutions in light of what the connittee had in mind and the people anticipated.

It was no secret to anyone that the National Movement set out a meter of conditions
for execution lgf the resolutions], most inportant of which were:

First withdrawal of the Lebanese army from its centers in Sodeco. al-Barimu
and ai'BarJa‘“! to be replaced by the domestic security forces.

Second, removal of all armed persons from lines of contact and thoroughfares.

Third, assumption by the Arab Deterrent Porces of the task of maintaining order in
the thoroughfares and lines of contact.

Fourth, rejection of the opening of the thoroughfares in stages, demanding that
they be opened at one stroke.

27

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

when these conditions were presented to the conander of the Lebanese Forces,
Pierre al-Jumsyyil, he expressed a water of reservations toward them, most isport-
ant being the reservation on handing over to the Deterrent Forces the security
tasks along the lines of contact and the reservation on the issue of the Lebanese
army's withdrawal from the points in which it is concentrated.

These conditions end counterconditions only added to the followup Comittee's in-
sistence on eliminating all the obstacles that night stand in the way of execution.
The premier. Shafiq al-Hazsan, joined in eaphaaising the comittee's resolution by
saying "The goverment is determined to continue carrying out these measures. since
opening the thoroughfares is to be considered an initial step which will be followed

by the attaimnt of other resolutions related to oversight of the illegal harbors
along. the Lebanese coastline."

while an atmosphere of pessimism on the subject of the opening of the thoroughfares
and hopes that the area of relief would broaden has spread in the past few days, an
official source has been quoted as saying that the government is determined to fol-
low up on the security steps in preparation for the expected reconciliation this
time and that it will not hesitate to eliminate every type of obstacle, that arises
to prevent that-~be it political, geographical or civil. This security source went
on to say, "Ask about the people who are obstructing the execution, and the people
who are causing the public to feel fear, restoring the atmosphere of pessimism and
narrowing the room for hOpu for solutions. Hhat are needed are withdrawals in the
field from all areas around the lines of contact, because the proof lies not in
opening a given road but in protecting it and preventing people with grievances
from closing it back up. This will require that a military force take the place
of the forces that are still shooting and creating problems to prevent the attain-
ment of the desired relief."

A Mutual Rigidity

It has become clear that the boutsrdment, sniping and provocation the al-Sudiku
area has recently been experiencing proves that the two conflicting parties have
not abandoned their positions and ultimately an approach may prevail that will re-
quire that the Lebanese army and the Palestine Liberation Army remain where they
are until units of the domestic security forces assume the task of preserving
security in the main transit points.

Whatever the situation may be, the approach that prevails now is that of ensuring
that conditions on the lines of contact are restored to their state as of 2 April.
This will have the effect of bringing people back into their homes and enabling
them to get their children to school, especially since a radical solution to the
problems that have been raised is not possible at the present time.

On this basis, every group is remaining in its position, and a joint army-domestic
security force under the prime minister's comaand is taking over the lines of con-
tact. Nhile official Lebanese sources are insisting that there will be no solution
unless the army assumes its tasks, sooner or later, Damascus is announcing by means
of its representatives that its refusal to let the Lebanese army assm these tasks
is not a Syrian position but a Lebanese one, because it is the Lebanese National

28

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

he Be'th Party organization

Adding to the observers' pessimism, and in

solutions, is the insistence

Lebanese crisis on continuing to s
Lebanese affairs. The politica

onflict with the military ones.
hrough its "moderate Arab" allies,
the Lebanese stage to be moderate, to offer concessions, and consequent

at a national reconciliation, and while it also prefers that Israel
it is not feasible to ex he Christiane in Lebanon and interfere in

that country's affairs, that it will renounce the ailitary card
rauists, headed by

ources have

Syria, refused to let the crisis and

pointed out lately. will agree to an Israeli incursion into amerous areas of south-
in the view of the United States will have iaposed

t. Bill the people who are active on

the lesson before it is too late. or will they sustain their
and snail, so on without

end?

COPYRIGHT: 1981 AL-WATAN Ala-ARAB}.
11887

080: “Oh/73

29

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

LIBYA

OPPOSITIONIST EXILES PLAN TRIAL OF AL-QADHDHAFI
PH061449 London THE GUARDIAN in English 6 Nov 81 p 6
[Report by Ian Black: "Libyans Want To Try al-Qadhdhafi"]

[Text] A group of Libyan exiles plans to bring "the world's most notorious
international terrorist"-Colonel al-Qadhdhafi--to trial in person or in
absentia, with the help of the Sudanese Goverrunent, it was announced in London
yesterday.

Dr Mohammad al-Hughariaf. spokesman for the National Front for the.Sa1vation
of Libya, told a press conference that the "Afro-Arab International Committee
Against al-Qadhdhafi," to which his organisation is affiliated, is to request
Sudan to host the trial.

The committee, Dr Hughariaf said, is controlled by no foreign country or organi-
sation, and raises its funds "solely through exile groups." But it clearly
owes a considerable debt to the Sudanese authorities: the formation of the
national front was announced in Khartoum last month, and bulky press releases
cataloguing Colonel al-Qadhdhafi's activities were distributed yesterday by

the London public relations firm which acts for the Sudanese Government.

'Ve aa Libyans have a responsibility to see that the crimes al-Qadhdhafi commits
in the name of Libya are punished, and that his evil shadow is removed from the
world stage," Dr Hughariaf said. The committee, he said, supported armed struggle
against al-Qadhdhafi in Libya and in Chad. He announced the formation of a
supreme council for coordination between the national forces of Libya and Chad.

A personal representative of the Chad rebel leader, Hissene Habre, Hr Mohammad
Cibeir El Nour, said yesterday that the verdict of the proposed trial of
al-Qadhdhafi could not be predicted. "It will be up to the comission which
examines the charges to determine the judgment," he saiu.

Dr Hughariaf, a former Libyan ambassador to India, was hazy about the form of
regime with which he and other exiles hoped would replace Colonel al-Qadhdhafi's
rule. "It will be sensible, reasonable, and principally for justice," he said.

30

IW)R 0FF1C1AL:USEZ(HVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The danger faced by opponents of Colonel al-Qadhdhafi were underlined by a
discreet police presence at yesterday's press conference. But Dr Mughariaf,
who refused to reveal where he lives, said he did not fear for his personal
safety. "I believe in God. No force on earth will put an end to my life
before the tine specified for me and in the place specified for me," he said.

COPYRIGHT: Guardian Newspapers Limited. 6 November 1981

0302 (0500/43

31

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SYRIA

LATEST (HERMES T0 SOVIETS asvnmn

Paris AL-‘ARABI in Arabic No 242, 2-8 Oct 81 p 37

lzrticle: "Tales Visited Hoscow at the Appropriate Tinefl-

llexsl The visit to the Soviet Union by Gen Hustafa Tales, the Syrian defense
minister who headed a large Syrian military delegation, came to an end last 23
November. That visit occurred at the time of the convening of the nenghasi confer-
ence of perseverance and steadfastness countries, and in the course of it talks
took place between Tales and Soviet defense minister Dmitri Ustinov.

AL-HA‘I‘AN AL-MBABI has learned that these discussions did not involve any of the
political aspects related to the situation in the area. Rather, they were confined
to a study of new arms requests that Danascus had presented to Hoecow and the dis-
cussion of a masher of "technical problems" related to the upkeep of Soviet arms
now present in Syria.

The same information had it that the talks were restricted to these aspects as a
result of Syria's desire to postpone the "exchange of views" on politics with
Moscow at the present time, in view of a number of considerations. The most con-
spicuOus of these considerations became apparent through Syrian President Hafiz
al-Asad's reconnendation at the Benghasi conference that a joint perseverance and
steadfastness country force he feared. That would mean setting aside a joint
budget for military expenses to which Libya would contribute. It was al-Asad's
confiction that acceptance of this recomsndation would have the effect of increas-
ing the relative financial and military weight of the Syrian party in negotiations

with the Soviet Union.

The second consideration was also apparent when, in the minutes of the meetings of
the Benghazi conference, al-Asad frankly requested that the "strategic cooperation"
with the Soviet Union be given a new forward thrust as what he described as the
"political price" for the arms deals ‘l'alas was negotiating with Ustinov in lioscov.

Observers say that the Syrian president considered that the movement was opportune
for acquiring more Soviet aid. The expulsion of the Soviet diplomats and experts
from Cairo was going on full steam, along with a broad hostile propaganda campaign

against Moscow in Egypt, while the United States was signing a strategic aid agree-
ment with Tel Aviv and the parties to the Perseverance and Steadfastness Pront were

preparing to hold their latest meetings in Benghazi.

32

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Prom cements on Talas' visit by the Soviet and Syrian media. one can infer that
the Syrians have actually succeeded in acquiring Soviet term related to new arms

transactions in exchange for continuing to promote the Arab-Soviet strategic
cooperation plan.

COPYRIGHT: 1981 AL-WATAN AL-ARABI

11887
080: 4404/73

33

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

TUNISIA

SIXTH AGRICULTURAL PLAN 8838 GROHTE IN FARM REVENUE, AMPLE SEED SUPPLY
Paris HARCNES TROPICAUX ET MBDITRRRANBENS in French No 1875. 16 Oct 81 pp 2616, 2617

[Text] The Sixth Development Plan envisages a 5 percent growth of the nation's farm
revenue. Investments in that sector will amount to 1.3 billion dinars which is 800
million dinars more than under the Fifth Plan and represents 17 percent of the over—
all investments. The purpose is to achieve food self-sufficiency by the time the
Sixth Plan is completed.

Under the Sixth Plan, 1.5 million hectares of land are expected to be cultivated ev-
ery year. During the current year, the planted areas are estimated to cover 1.563
million hectares distributed as follows: 860,000 hectares in the north and 692,900
hectares in the center and south. The estimated figures for the center and south
regions are still tentative since the acreage of planted areas will depend on the
amount of rainfall during a 3-month period from September to November. Forecasts
made by the Regional Develoment Offices indicate that, compared to the estimates of
the Sixth Plan, there will be a shortfall of 135,000 hectares for hard wheat (56,000
hectares in the north) and an excess of 85,000 hectares of soft wheat (49,000 hec-
tares in the north).

Net available supplies of certified seeds total 180,000 quintals, enough to amply
meet the season's requirements. The total supplies of fertilizers required stand
as follows: 60,000 tons of 105 percent superphosphates. 60,000 tons of 16 percent
superphosphates, 100,000 tons of 33.5 percent selenium nitrate.

Widespread use of chemical weed-killers was not introduced until last year men they
were used on 130,000 hectares. During the 1981-1982 agricultural year, they will
be used over an area of 270,000 hectares--250,000 hectares of grain crops and 20,000
hectares of pulse crops.

The Ministry of Agriculture has encouraged farmers to purchase modern equipment. Pi-
nancing sources for the purchase of that equipment increased in 1981 with the intro-
duction of the supplier credit formula. Moreover, as a result of the higher cost of
fertilizers and the higher agricultural guaranteed minimum wage paid during this
past agricultural year, the departments of the Ministry of Agriculture are studying
the possibility of readjusting the scale of charges for farm credits.

During the Sixth Plan period, the Ministry of Agriculture will pay particular atten-
tion to three types of crops connected with the harmonious development of grain farm-
ing. These crops are triticale, feverole and medicago. A popularization campaign

3‘

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

will be carried out in the subhunid zone to plant from 1000 to 1500 hectares of
triticaie. The Directorate of Plant Production intends to start a nedicago program
during the 1981-1932 farming season. Finally, the Directorate of Livestock Produc-
tion is studying a fornu1a of concentrated feed for livestock and will ask manu-

facturers of concentrated animal feed to use feverole rather than imported oilcakes.

COPYRIGHT: Rene Moreux et Cie Paris 1981.

8796
CSO: 6519/27 END

35

FOR 0F11C1AL.US£|)NLY