APPROVID FOR NIL-AOI: 2007/02/00: CIA-RDPOZ-OOOOOROOOIOOOOOOOO-O
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82—00850R000100050005—0

FOR OIIILIAL USE UNLY

JPRS L/8434
3 May 1979

TRANSLATIONS 0N NEAR EAST AND NORTH AFRICA
(FDUO 18/79)

U. S. JOINT PUBLICATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82—00850R000100050005—0
NOTB

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted. with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines. editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[l are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Hhere no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied asappropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes =f the u.s. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAHS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED i-‘OROEFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE .ONLY

JPRS L/SGIN
3 May 1979

TRANSLATIONS 0N NEAR EAST AND NORTH AFRICA

(P000 18/79)
Coursuts

AKMMHSNW

Brie"
Japanese Aid

AIBERIA

".1: of 1m Sales To Be Handled by Algerian Fleet
(m m EAST, m 79) DOC...I...COOOOOIOCOOOOOOOOOOCI

Briefs
Nippon Steel Agreelnent

Iran Between Chaos and Barbarian
(cmlo 16, 25 “Cr 79) COCOIOOOOOOOOOOOOIOOIOOOOOOIOOOOOO

IRAQ

Hum 'Strives for Stability in Area, Stresses Arab Sovereignty
(David Hirst; THE GUARDIAN, 11 Aw 79) eeee-eeeeeeeaeeeeo

MAURITANIA

aoueeit Prepared for War But Hopes It. Will Not Happen
(Abdelssis Mani; mum-5513, 25 Apr 79) ............

001d Ann Said To Be Relaunching Political Debate
(Abdelasis Dahnanis am APRIQUB, 28 Mar 79) ...........
”(ROCCO

Horace!" Citrus Exports Increasing
(um um ”ST, W 79) UO0IOOOOOOOOOOCOOODOOOOQQO..000

PAGE

11

13
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CONTEMS (Continued)

Briers
When

PBRSIAR 00E? ARBA
Iranian Revolution Said to Jeopardiae Qaani Security,

“.80 we!
(AL-HAT“ AIP'MI, 16-22 Feb 79) oeeeeeeeeoeeeeeeee

TUNISIA

'JBUNB AFRIQUB' View: Symptoms or Muslim Revival
(Souhm Belhaeeen; mm APRIQUB, 1!: Her 79) .......

'JBUIIB AFRIQUB' Continues Report on Muslim Revival
(Souhayr Belhaeeen; JEUIIB AFRIQUE, 21 Mar 79) .......

'JEUNB APRIQUE' Concludes Survey of Islamic Renewal Movement
(Souheyr Belhaeeen; Jam AFRIQUB, 28 Mar 79) .......

-b-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE OIL!

AFGHANISI'AN

KEEPS

JAPANESE AIDuJapen will extend e grant aid of 65,022,000 yen ($325,000)
to Afghanistan under notea exchanged in Kabul Sunday. the Foreign Hinietry
announced Hondey. The money to he donated will finance purchneee of
products neceeeery for economic development end the improvement of the
people's welfare in Afghanietan. The minietry eeid that the grant ie in
line with a reeolution adopted by the UNCTAD in March laet year. which
urged developed countriee to take etepe to eoften tent and conditions

of their official development aid to developing countriee. [Tokyo THE
DAILY YOHIURI in English 10 Apr 79 p 6 OH]

630: 6920

l

M OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OWICMI. USE ONLY

my 0? LNG SALES 1'0 33 NANDLED BY “BRIAN FLEET

London m nmnu us: in Engliah )iar 79 p 103

COPY! IGll'l' :

CSO:

LN

ment programme.
can-ed technlal dimcultlee.
obliged both thia tankee and
the 119,000 nun Ben M'Hidi
to lie idle for ovev a year

peo-
hlenulhvabeenenlvedandthe
expendon of the company'a
tenlteelleeteanpahead.
LNG W la the local
pnintotAlgeria'ehidtohandle
motitahyt‘hooaehonelpona
undeeitam .CNAN in-
tends. luv . to
W-idwcealeeandaclaue
tothieetleetlamitten intolll

A620

ALGERI

CNAN already handles haltlte trade \vlth Fiance but only
am otteade with Italy and Spala

LNG eontneueigned between
Sonatrachandlueimlieme.

CNAN alnady Mia tlvee
gee tanlma and mill be receiv-
ing another three by 1900.
Company ottieiale expect
to buy ahom l0 mote o! theee
3% ""° mm" “‘

M W
ahobeinvited foeadoaenoeeo
UGtInltenoNOJnkum.

It ia mainly tlieeapanaion of
CNAN'a LNG ahi ping
capacity \elieh will In the
Algerian ﬂeet oneotthe biggest

otthie year the fleet mm
10 ahipa boasting an avenge
agent under ﬁve yeah.

According to company
ofﬁcials. however. CNAN atill
llae a long way to go to teach
the 50" target ﬁgure. but yea:
it was abletoahiponlym o!
Algetia'e oveneee trade. Otthie
1345’; we carried in ON»!-
outed nude and the not in 70
time-charmed ehipe.

CNAN‘a activities are not
limited to and
panel metchandiee teat-wt.

1979 1c Nagaunae Ltd.

2

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The company aleo tune

. get een'ieee between

over mono people and about
momma in I978.
CNAN'I m numhee ovee
mo. many at them ttalned at
Algeria'a own National
inatitme o! Shipping. and We!
the com y’e ehipe are now
an to Algerian ataﬂ‘
ofﬁce”. Manyolﬁcenhave etill
to be appointed him almed.
lumen and the real ehoetege
e! the trained Algetiane will not
hemeroome until INS-86.
Jhuhievehthie level h:
ment t company
had to rely heavily on intee-
aatlonal lunde. At the mtunent
it is attiving to obtain longer
maturities of was yeau toe ita
lens and ’- generally eeelting
move laxweable term. in
recent tallu CNAN ofﬁcials
have made no aectet to
Akeria'a mama d the fact
i“ w“ “'33: 3'23: '"
med '
to calculatm added ”'1':
thepeieeotLNG.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ALGERIA

BRIEFS

NIPPOR STEEL AGREEMENTuTha Algerian atate-ovned atael company. Societa
Rationale da sidemrgie (3N8) haa appointed Nippon Steal of Japan to pro-
vide deaign and conaultancy aervicaa worth $l9mn over the next three yaara,
under the tern of a 10-year technical aaaietanca agreeaent. Nippon Steel
vill be aaaiatins in the preparationa for a ataal complex to he built at
La Macta. [Text] [London 1112 HIDDLB EAST in Ensliah Hat 79 p 1le

CSO: M20

3
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

IRAN

1mm 3mm cums m BARBARISH
Madrid canto 16m Spanish 25 Mar 79 p 69

[Text] One month after the revolution which overthrew the Shah's regime.
Iran finds itself paralyzed industrially. The administration which Mahdi
bazsrgan's progressive goverment is trying to set up has becone a den of
conspirators. The army has dissolved as if by magic. By night Tehran is
a city where anonymous shots are traded.

On his arrival at his retreat in the sacred city of Qon, the Ayatollah
Khomeyni. still independent of the situation, was received tumultuoualy by
300,000 faithful. In his first public address in the city where Khomeyni
has his religious fist. the all-powerful Ayatollah criticized the Bazargen
government for its excessive weakness and its inability to carry out the
reestablish-ant of the Islamic laws.

however. in reality it was not weakness, but in any case powerlessness.
According to rmors, Bezargen has tried to submit his resignation three
times in the last month. Every time, Khomeyni has refused to listen to the
protests of the prime minister whom he appointed of his own will. Barargan
has demanded that Innomeyni dissolve the Khomeynist conittees which are
currently operating in Iran as an uncontrolled parallel government.

bazargan is willing to govern because he knows that right now his is the
only man with majority support among the progressive population of Iran.
This is a fact that even Khomeyni himself realizes and weighs. and he has
not hesitated to contradict himself since his first speech in Qom to de-
clare once again his unconditional support of the provisional government.

however, Bazargsn demands the rebuilding of the army, the disarmament of
the Khomeynist and Marxist Muslim guerrillu--mojahedeen and fedsyeen--, the
unification of the judicial power and the inediate cessation of the secret
trials where extremely sumary justice is meted out in the name of the laws
of the Koran. More than 50 extremely su-ary executions have been carried
out in the last 4 weeks. There have been over 2.000 deaths in street con-
flicts among rival factions, not just in Tehran but in cities in the provin-
ces. There is total disorder.

It
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A perfect sysptoe of the chaos were the denonstrations by tens of thousands
of wuen who protested for lo hours in the streets of Tehran during the sec-
cnd weekend in March. The wasn, dressed "provocatively” in western style.
protested against one of the latest Islasic edicts which reinstated the
obligatory use of the chador—a veil covering fru nose to anklsnfor fenslc
public officials.

And from one chaos to another: The woaen also deaanded the repeal of another
Islanic edict which abolished one of the laws proeulgated by the Shah by
which the wuan could file for divorce. Islasic brigades attacked the votes
with knives in the streets of Tehran. A last Iinute intercession by Bazsrgan
forced Khaeyni to publish a co-unique forbidding the ill treataent of
wassn denonstrators.

Khaeyni has begun to show signs of vacillating. All the western fears about
a possible return to nedieval obscurant'isn sea. nevertheless, to be ooeing
true. The autononous Khasyni conittess are organising public whippings

of adulterers, drunks and thieves.

Among the over half a hundred nortal victins of the new Islaaic Inquisitia:
are five homosexuals and five rapists or corruptors of minors. The execu-
tions of officials or forner police gents are reported to Basargen's power-
less government when they are already a fait accoepli. moneyniuisolated
by his praetorisn guard, his self-iaportance fanned by his victory—thinks
only about the arrival of 30 larch, when a referendum will be held in which
every Iranian over 16 years of age will be able to vote in favor of or
egath the legal constitution of an Islamic republic. Those voting in
favor will cast a green ballot; those against, a red one signed with their
name and address.

The idea of a referendum as a solution seens absurd not just to Bazergsn
himself. We ayatollahs. the liberal Shariatnsdsri and the pro-socialist
Taleghsni. i-ediately went over to the opposition. The "secular" Iranian
forces have divided up radically. The westernists. with Bazergen as their
Iain patron. seek an mediate rsestablisluent of order. the effective ra-
building of the any and a decided return to work so that the oil exports
reach their for-er level of 7 nillion barrels a day.

The leftist guerrillas—armed since before the beginning of the revolution--
are in favor of the creation of a people's any, the workers conitteea
controlling the factories and businesses, and IOIoIeyni's ceasing to return
to the old traditions of the Koran.

If forced to tone to an agree-sot, the guerrillas want to join the Bazargan
govern-eat. a desire rejected out of hand by Khoaeyni. who recently declared
that there is nothing written in the Isl-ic creed against private enterprise.

The western countries. now forced to negotiate Iranian petroleua concessions
separately, are in favor of a solution for order. Their hopes rest with a

5
FOR OFFICIAL use om:
FOR (ll-'FIClM. USE ONLY

takeover by the air force. the only military branch which supported Khmcyni
from the beginning and whose officers have not been decapitated in the ma-
jority by the revolution.

The 30 March referendum seems devoid of meaning in a country with more than
90 percent ehiaa faithful. Everything seem to portend a final solution
by force. But who has the power to etart it in a country where the power
is all in pieces?

COPYRIGRT 1979. lnfonaeiony Publicacionee. S.A.

11937
CSO: 1.410

6
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
M OFFICIAL USE ONLY

IRAQ

RUSAYN STRIVBS FOR STABILITY IN AREA. STRESSES ARAB SOVEREIGNTY
London 1113 GUARDIAN in English ll Apr 79 p 8 1.0
[Report from Beirut by David airat: "Iraq ls Sitting on the Fence"!

[Text] Iraq's "strongman," Saddam Husayn al-‘l‘iltriti, has warned that his
country would never allow Saudi Arabia to be occupied by the Soviet Union.
There could be hardly a more startling exsnple of the topsy-turvy condition
of the Arab world today--with Iraq as the purest expression of it.

Iraq, ostensibly one of the most radical Arab states, has put forward the
view that the Soviet. Union is as likely an aggressor as the United States,
at s tine when two pro-western "moderates," Saudi Arabia and Jordan, are
taking their distance from the United States in exasperation at its efforts
to line then up behind the Israeli-Egyptian "separate peace," when all other
Gulf states are saying--as Kuwait did yesterday--that if anyone is likely
to be invading their oilfields, it is the United States, and when the Iraqi
Ba'thists' would-be union partners, the Syrian Bs'thists, are trying to cul-

tivate Soviet support as a counterweight to the American-Israel i-h‘gyptian
axis.

In a speech distributed by the Iraqi News Agency, Saddam Husayn al-‘l'ikriti
said: "He must take up arms against any foreigner, regardless of his colour,
who may violate (Arab) sovereignty. In this context we do not differen-
tiate between a progressive, a Zionist, or a Frenchman. Nor do we differ-
entiate between American and Soviet. Irrespective of the formal friendly
ties it may have with some of us, the Soviet Union-osnd it is a friend of
lraq--cannot be allowed to occupy Saudi territory. This is because Saudi
land is not outside the Arab map, and what applies to it applies to the

rest of the Arab countries."

It is the boldest hint Iraq has yet made in its campaign to display itself
as a stoutly anti-comnist regime. Whatever Saddam llusayn may say, anti-
coa-unism cannot be wholly divorced from anti-Sovietisn. Bis message is
clearly intended for American as well as Saudi ears, coming as it does
after many other signs, such as moderation on oil prices and an ordour to
do business with American companies, that Iraq would like the Americans to
distinguish between its ostensible radicalism and its actual pragmatism.

7
ma OFFICIAL USE ONLY
m OFFICIAL USE ONLY

It is not ferfetched to suggest. as the Bs'thiste' critics do, that, after
the revolution in Iran the na'thists are aiming to present thenselves. if
not exactly es America's sendsrne in the Gulf, at least es e guarantor of
its stability elons with the Saudis.

The problse for the Iraqis however, is that, in offering their candidature
for this role, they are reduced to something bordering on schizophrenia.
They heve to protect their "progressive" (leaks and they seen to be achiev-
ing this, vetbslly st least, less by their feltering union with Syria than
by their nest approaches to the Pelestiniens. They have now earned a cer-
tificete of good conduct from the mo which given Yesir 'Arefet's excellent
reletions uith Ayatollah Khoneyni, they met value.

A fee nonthe ago. the PLO was denouncing Saddam Busayn es a terrorist indis-
tinguishsble from Mr Basin. but before the recent Baghdad conference a joint

Iraqi-Palestinian declaretion called for "e cox-plate severence of relations
vith the United States and the use of the oil weapon against it."

COPIRIGEI‘: Guardian Newspaper Limited 11 Apr 1979
680: 10820

8
M OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MAUI! ITAN IA

300681? PREPARED FOR UAR wt nuns IT HILL NOT HAPPEN
Perie APRIQUE-ASIE in Prench 25 Apr 79 p 15 [.0
[Report by Abdeleeie Dehneni: "United Atnoephere in Heuritenie")

[Text] The receptinn rooue of fora-er ninietere under Preeident Mokhter Ould
Deddnh or Abdeleeiz Seel, former Netionel Aeeenbly cheirnen, heve been con-
etently crowded eince they were releeeed Pridey 13 April efter 9 nonthe
inprieonnent.

There hee been e conetunt etree- of vieitore. including current ninietere,
with etebrecee end moving neetinge. Por e few deye they heve become the
etere of the country'e newe. But the reel victor ie Aheed Ould Bouceif.
the new prise Iinieter. who hee eucceeded in creeting e new united etnoe-
phere eround hiuelf efter e period of cheoe.

To earl: the change. Ahmed Ould Bouceif hee choeen to etteck "the old regine,
in other worde current Preeident Houetefe Ould Seleck'e regime," eccueing

it of heving, in ite turn, led the country into "totel confueion" end heving
revived "the deoone of former divieione."

"I heve nothing to do with the previoue teen," Bouceif told me in e tiny
office furtively prepered in the preeidenty juet 20 menu from the preei-
dcntiel office. however reel power no longer lien in thet preeidentiel
office where Houetefe Ould Seleck repleced Hokhter Ould Deddeh 10 July 1978.

However the progrel drewn up by Ahmed Ould Bouceif end hie nein coeredee in
em euch ee Lieutenant Colonele Ahmed Sele- Ould Sidi. ﬁche-ed Be Ould
Abdelkeder. better known to "Keder." Khou-e Ould aidelleh or Ahudou Ould
Abdelleh. for loving towerd peece ie bound to neet with internel end externel
oppoeition.

Certein young people cloee to the Polieerio ere denouncing the ettelept to
petch up the "Rebet-Noueckchott-Deker" exit. And the Polieerio iteelf. in

e eteteuent ieeued Sundey 15 April, ennounced thet the withdrewel of Horoccene
end Heuritiene from Seheren territory it e precondition to eny negotietion.

9
FOR OFFICIAL use «my
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The: stence does not worry Ahmed Ould Bouceif too much. lle considers it
extremely "illogicel." It csnnot be e definitive answer. Is Heuritenie
prepared for s possible resumption of the war? "If we ere pushed too fer

end not left sny choice then we ere prepsred," Bouceif ssid in e determined
wey while hoping thst the need would not erise....

By neeting Leopold Seder Senghor on 9 April Bout .if secured e respite in

the ethnic qusrrel between white end bleck Heuritsnisns on his southern
flenk.

It remeins to be seen whether the new heuritenie. which hes emerged from

the third chenge in government in 2 months, in eepeble of meeting the ehel-
lenge.

COPYRIGHT: 1979 Airique-Asie
(:80: 1.1.00

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICI\L USE ONLY

MAURITANIA

OULD AMAR SAID TO BE RBLAUNCHING POLITICAL DEBATE
Paris JEUNE APRIQUB in French 28 Mar 79 pp 11. 18
[Article by Abdelaziz Dahmani, "The Paving-Bloc of Ismail Ould Amsr"]

[Text] "I intend to form a political party as soon as general conditions
ensuang freedom of expression, assembly. and political associations are
created". This communique presented on 15 March to the international

press by Mr lsmail Ould Amar, former student of the Central School (France),
and former President Director-General of the National Mining and industrial
Company (SNIM). had a certain effect in Mauritania.

0n the eve of the coup d'etat of 10 July 1978 against Mokhtar Ould Daddah.
Mr Ould Amer was one of the first to lend his support to the Military
Committee of the National Revival. Mia motives than seemed to be economic.
Actually. under the former regime. the Polisario was furiously attacking
Mauritania in the "war of the Sahara". and particularly the mining sector
of Zouerate. But the SNIM. which Mr Ould Amer directed, controlled the
extraction and exportation of iron. the main asset of Mauritania. And the
survival of this sector depends on the extension of the Guelbs project.

But the "dynamic of peace” preached by the Mauritanian military men did not
move the neighboring countries, Morocco and Algeria. the economy is still
in the swamp. and the two main communities of Mauritania are in open con-
flict. It is in this context that the former strongman. known for his
abilities as an economist and manager. substitutes himself for the poli-
ticians (President Mokhtar Ould Daddeh and all of his ministers are still
under arrest). he takes at their word the military men. who promised on

10 July to encourage the return to democratic nor-s and even to multiparty
activity.

Ismail Ould Amar announces the color: "Mauritania should opt in internal.
economic. and foreign policy for the path which its religious and liberal
traditions recommended for it.” That did not fail to intrigue more than
one person and reassured a large part of Mauritanian opinion which would
like to see Mauritania return to what it was before "the exclusive rela-
tions" with Algeria of the years 1972-1975. before the nationalization

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of the iron and the conflict in the Sahara. It is this imbalance. with the
enormous burden of the var. which has destabilized the country. without
nentioning the long and terrible drought.~

Nevertheless it was the nationalization of the iron (mined by the HIPBRHA)
on 28 November 1974 vhich made use of the great management abilities of
Ismail Ould Anar. 0n the eve of this nationalisation everyone believed

that the former MIPERHA. 95 percent of the key employees of which were for-
eigners, would collapse. he succeeded in gaining mastery over "the monsterﬁ
known until recently as a "state within the state". “is stubbornness, his
sense of organization. his American manager style. and his exceptional
capacity for vork gained him much respect and also much animosity among his
compatriots. He upset the rhythm of their lives. Only President Hokhtar
Ould Daddah supported him against nany key employees. including certain
ninisters...8eversl weeks after the coup d'etat. Ismail Ould Amer understood
the quali;y of this support. he resigned from the management of the SNIH
last January.

Since then he has joined the national reconciliation. he has pleaded for the
release of all the political prisoners and for the restoration of the na-
tional community with the least racial prejudice. For him, only "democracy
and essential freedoms" can save the country from gradual exhaustion. His
idea of reviving political debate in a country obsessed by the var arouses
the hope that Mauritania can once again find the equilibrium it needs to
settle its own problems.

COPYRIGHT: Jeune-Afrique. GRUPJIA 1979.

680: 6600
6108

12
FOR OP?ICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MROCCAN CITRUS EXPORTS INCREASING

London m3 MIDDLE EAST in English Mar 79 p 101

[Text]

(3mm! main; of new and-
len elm- main. whilv ucdv
havinum-mbeimcut
The main. imo Nation
of m mum of undia-
clomim ma. 00411de with
and weather unu’! the autumn.
mdbuud salami-ﬂy to u.
ubmdant lam. Although
«we: mime 78'; of film
valuation. an dementia.- cmp

amuﬁdyjdwbbd

In (he put mo m and
ekmcnllno «mom this you we
«mod to touch moon tonne:
- a ﬂat of My 11.0% over the
M your.

Clementine: am being peo-
mmed Io: a variety of mm.
11* mil. WWW
{out is hkhly decorative and
my to pool. The Clementine h
5mm dually: "deli: of
(range. in on p juicy u- in
human“ unable. Mou im-
p-mml. it can be picked earlier
than "am fruits. than lepnhcn.

mm

mu. join the Bu :1
ic Community )
(In 1'?!) Middle Eon. No SI.
I l .
‘ h why duh with new
«gunmen on miﬁunl.

WWW

13

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MOROCCO

contacts may won

Momma in the Eu really Why
out when one «1min» Itmunt
the vast tonnage. which a: u.
ported by other Mediterranean
comm..." Saudi

Kuwait. dong
COPYRIGHT :

080:

“20

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

duo of fruit. udder tum
:31.“ «ﬁasco-tong:
moon ASPAM. tho
Morocenn cltruo nmn'
audition. h- ated the
Oovornmont to take a aria at

$5;

abolition or reduction of Import

duti- on omenlturol Ironic
manta. upon pom Ind
Nelda undo roduction in
M and (calf-or price. for
citrus m In addition the
power- “ recommending the

1979 16 Magazines Ltd.

study lhlllty o! |
“Gran blame“: Warmth]

etch-n30 rote oppIIoohk to
citruozporutozuropraimnu

to rad-l dirhorn rota mud
to orocunr whim In

the

EEC. Dweloprnrnt of port
Militia 0t Nader. dueto
broom. oporotionol thhyur
ohould likewise focillutn citrus
uh! to (ram the interior

‘ tho Moroccan Government
can met that demands. dtruo
tom \. dong with otonolniou.
my hwr m to an“. om
roaring Mum (or production
Induport.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MOROCCO

BRIEFS

AMP LOAN-morocco ia to not a $7.25nn loan from the Arab Honataty Fund
(w) to halp to cover ita trada deficit. The thraa-year loan, which will
carry an initial intataat rate of 3.757. riaing to 6.251. and than 10.757. ia
the fourth to have been grantad by the Abu Dhabi-baaed AHF. 0that loana
to Egypt, Sudan and Mauritania bring the Fund's total lending to Eat to
$35.). [Text] [London TIE MIDDLE EAST in Engliah Mat 79 p 116]

C80: “20

15
FOR orncm. use ouu
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PERSIAN GULF AREA

IRANIAN REVOLUTION SAID To JBOPARDIZE OMAN! SECURITY. U.s. BASES
Paris AL-UATAN AL-‘ARABI in Arabic 16-22 Feb 79 pp 22-25

[Article: "America Strengthens Its Electronic Presence in Turkey and the
Gulf"]

[Text] Hr Qais Al-stawi. foreign affairs minister in the Sultanate of Muscat
and Oman. is conducting a series of visits to states in the area. with special
instructions from Sultan stus. Informed sources told the correspondent of
AL-UATAN AL-‘ARABI that the purpose of Al-Zawawi's visits is to justify the
Sultanate's inclination towards contracting a mutual defense ; at with the

United States. in which American military organizations would take the place
of the Iranian military organizatiOns in the Sultanate of Oman.

This justification is based on the change that has occured in Iran. which is
leading to the decline of the Iranian military role in supporting the defense
forces of the Sultanate, which could encourage "the destructive elements“ to
resume their activity in the Dhofsr region. in such a way that would threaten

the security of the petroleum supply lines of the Gulf. especially in the
Harmuz straits.

The government of Muscat bases its fears on reports which spoke of the be-
ginning of secret movements in Dhofer Province. and of an active movement
across the borders with South Yemen. Linked with this renewed activity are
attacks aimed in the past year at a group of British technical sdvisors on
the coast of Dhofar.

It is known that there are two squadrons of helicopters belonging to the
weapons of Iranian Air, which are stationed with their crews in the Sultan-
ate. in addition to four new reconnaissance planes. which were until recently
carrying out exploratory flights in the sky over neighboring states. In-
formed circles said that the likelihood of the decline of the Iranian mili-
tary role had stimulated a special interest in the United States in strength-
ening the defense forces of the Sultanate of Oman. at the same time as they
strengthen the defense forces of North Yemen, in such a way that it would
place South Yemen in a strategic "nutcracker," which would prevent Soviet
influence from spreading from there.

16
ran orncm. use our
FOR OFPICIAL USE ONLY

The truth is that military discussions between Hashington and Oman began

as soon as the shah left Iran. and they continue, apart from the mission

of American Secretary of Defense harold Brown, in the region. Informed
sources said. concerning the procedure of these discussions. that follow-
up consultations are being carried out with Egypt. on the basis that the
United States prefers not to have a direct military presence in the Sultan-
ate of Oman. in order to avoid the feelings and reaction that would provoke.
and on the basis that Egypt can take the place of Iran in the Sultanate of
Oman. These sources mentioned that President Sadat was enthusiastic about
the idea. and is considering sending a squadron of artillery and two squad-
rons of paratroopsrs to Oman with a large number of officers who previously
served in Yemen, and have had experience with guerrilla warfare.

AL-HATAN AL-‘ARABI understood from informed circles that the last visit of
Qais al-Zawawi to Jidds and his meeting with Prince Sa'ud al-Faisal was to
inform Saudi Arabia of the possibilities. and to consult them concerning
the question of seeking assistance froa Egyptian forces. It is said in
this respect that the Sultanate of Oman. in order to maintain "balance."
asked for help from Jordanian forces in addition to the Egyptien forces.
For this reason. it is possible that Mr Qais sl-Zawawi will visit Anman in
the near future. in preparation for a secondary meeting between King hussein
and Sultan Qabus. in order to study the subject. It is understood that the
Sultanate of Oman is attempting to obtain finances to provide fer the ex-
penses of any Egyptian or Jordanian forces which come to settle in place of
the Iranian forces. The communications between the Sultanate and Cairo ar-
rived at a basic agreement that Egyptian forces will ask for finances in

a security situation. The subject has been studied with the American auth-
orities. which preferred to wait for some time until the Iranian incidents
and developments crystallize in final form. and until, in light of that.
the final touches are completed in the plan, to fill in the gaps which have
been caused by the Iranian developments in the organization of American ob-
servation stations.

Nevertheless, the recent clashes between Iranian military units loyal to the
shah and those loyal to Khomeyni have led to an increase in the fear of the
American leadership that a number of modern. secret observation installations
will fall into the hands of Soviet agents during the turmoil, though those
clashes remain linited in scope, and may be contained by the Iranian Army
commanders through an immediate agreement that would protect Iran from the
danger of a real civil war. Therefore. orders have been issued to disassem-
ble the rest of the observation stations and early warning stations which
were set up by the eggpong of'A-erican cash-legging, The dismemberment of

the chief station was begun immediately following the departure of the shah.
This station. with its supporting stations, records what is called the "Ibex"
organisation. which operates along 2000 kilometers of the Iranian-Soviet
border, and is connected with similar organizations in Alaska. Canada. Japan
and Thailand. in addition to the Anerican bases in Turkey. Experts say

that the closing of the American stations in Iran opens a gap in the power

or American intelligence. a deficiency which cannot be filled by means of

spy satellites.

17
rot orncm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

It is known that the lbex stations had two functions: the iirst_reliea on
strong radar apparatus to discover movements and mohilizatinns, tor the se-

curity of early warning of any surprise attack. The second follows experi-
ments carried out by the Soviet Union to develop its satellites, spaceships
and nuclear weapons, and picks up and records signals and communications
between Soviet units, and attempts to decipher their code.

it was revealed, in this connection. that the American organizations of the
observation and spy stations are under the custody of Dr Aaron, the chief
adviser for national security, and one of the most important assistants of
the first advisor, Dr Brzezinski. In that capacity, he is undertaking a
study of the distribution of the apparatuses and installations after their
diamemherment in Iran, among all the American bases in Turkey and the bases
which are being negotiated in the Sultanate of Oman.

There were reports from some Arab diplomatic sources that a number of Ameri-
can intelligence agents who had been working in Iran have begun to take up
residence, under the pretext of commercial work and economic activity, in
numerous spots of the Gulf, especially in Duhayy, taking advantage of the
freedom to work in any free trade zone. These reports indicate that the
intelligence agency may set up its new chief center in Dubayy, under the
pretext of an institution for economic and development studies, avoiding any-
thing that might attract attention.

in spite of the importance of the bases which will be set up in the Sultanate
of Oman, their activity will be mixed, and will never be able to cover any-
thing except a tiny part of the Soviet Union, though it will cover chiefly
the Gulf area and the Red Sea straits, and the hills of the Horn of Africa.
Likewise. the real functions of observation will be transferred to the Ameri-
can bases in Turkey, and these functions will be distributed between obser-
vation of the Soviet borders, toward the middle Soviet region, and observing
the neighboring area along the southeast borders of Turkey, which contain
iraq, Syria and Iran. It is clear from the information of diplomatic obser-
vers in Ankara that the project of the new Turkish-American bases aims parti-
cularly at operating and consolidating two pivotal bases, namelv the Sinop
base on the Black Sea and the Bit Angelique base in Diyar nakr (southeast Tur-
key). The arrangements require the Diyar Bakr base to concentrate its acti-
vity on observing Soviet activity in the field of rockets and spaceships,
especially in the middle and southern Soviet republics. This base will be
directly linked with the American naval observation base in New Jersey in

the United States. Because of these arrangements. it is reported that the
security agency of the American Army will administer the Sinop base on the
Black Sea.

In anticipation of the completion of the new arrangements in the Sultanate
of Oman and in Turkey. the latest reports from Hashingtan have informed that
there is an orientation toward concentrating the activity of American satel-
lites ahOVe the region of the Iranian-Soviet border.

COPYRIGHT: 1979 Al-Hatan Al-‘Arabi

0397
050: 4802
16
FOR OFFICIAL USE OSLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

TUNISIA

'JEUNB APRIQUB' VIBUS SYMPTOMS 0P MUSLIM REVIVAL
Paris JEUNB AFRIQUB in French 16 Mar 79 pp 82-86 no
[Report by Souhayr Belhassen: "Islanic Challenge in Tunisia"!

[Text] In the working class quarter of El Khsdrs (near the industrial
area of Tunis) a wedding is taking place. Surprise! No one in the dis-
trict is aware of the event. Neither the old, nor the young nor even the
children....

A group of gen chat quietly in front of a house. There is no excitement,
no yu-yu [traditional Arab song of joy at weddings]. Is it a wedding or
a funersll...

Yet the grooe is the local grocer, a man of neans who could easily afford
a noisy wedding.... But the grocer is marrying according to Korenic prin-
ciples. he is surrounded by about 30 nen, his friends and relatives, who
are taking part in this cereaony "recounended by God," but which aust
remain siaple.

In the cool dusk, under the fragrant orange tree, rugs have been laid

out. Around the groom, dressed in a suit and European-style necktie, his
friends, sitting crosslegged, break into liturgical chants. A young nan
serves orgeat syrup as they wait for the dish of couscous to arrive. when
the dish is eepty everything will be over and the gxoon will be able to go
nest his wife....

On the women's side the simplicity is even more surprising, especially when
it is displayed in a prosperous setting.

Another wedding, between a lawyer and a student this tine.... The bride,
dressed in a Rattan. wears a garment which falls to her shoulders. No
jewelry; the only decoration is a flower pinned to her tenple.... No makeup
either. her lips are barely pink. A large number of veiled woaen surround
her. chatting, joking and, here too. singing liturgicsl chants. Cakes are
handed round, but no one thinks of singing nonreligious songs. Nor is there
any question of belly dancing!

19
FOR ontcm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL US-S ONLY

When the groom is announced. without the customary hooting horns. only
close relatives are left. among them an amateur photographer. the sole
concession to "modernism."

The Islamic revival is an ideology. men. a movement. but also a way of
life.

In the Tunisia of tolerance. easy living and tourism. a parallel society
is emerging. developing and becoming organised. It has its laws and its
rules. Its members refuse to speak French and will not shake hands with
a women. It is obviously out of the question for women to appear in public.

Thus. the two "Huslim" theatrical t:oupae.who only perform in private.
are exclusively male. The one at Bab el Djazira performs two plays. "The
city of Slaves" and "Robeyechie." in which the action revolves around
Islam's response to worker exploitation.

There are many groups of musicians. They are male or female but never
mixed. Their repertoire consists of liturgical chants. but also songs
exalting Islamic zeal.

This austerity sometimes shocks certain young people who, despite their
cousitmsnt. would prefer a more modern form of Islam. H'Hamed. aged 21.
is manager of one of the 62 "Islamic" sports teams. Like the Muslim scout
groups the sports teams. chiefly soccer clubs. are generally under the
control of the local Hosque. The aim of the notches held at the local
stadium. h'llamed explains. is not so much competitive sport itself as a
means of proving to young people that Islam is not grim and forbidding.
The players' shorts come down to their knees and. as Islam dictates,
blows and insults are prohibited.

Perched on a racing bicycle H'llemed. who works as a sales assistant in

a bookshop for 50 diners a month. claims that since he has been with his
"borthers" he feels he is leading a useful life but. he says. "in my view
Islam should not be sad. Because I am happy to be involved with them. I
sometimes want to sing and dance about it. Yet Islam forbids this!"

Together with Islamic sporting pursuits there are of course intellectual
activities.

The movement has its own literary premises: In a working class quarter
of Tunis the Arrays (Flag) Bookshop and Publishing house publishes some
100 titles and offers nearly 2.000 works for sale. The publications
have the austere appearance of Soviet or Chinese propaganda brochures.

The best sellers reach sales of l0.000-l$,000 copies and include works by
Egyptian authors (Ilasen el-Bsnna. founder of the Huslim Brotherhood. and
his disciple Ssyyid mtub) and works by Pakistani poet Mohamed Iqbal. The
movement's ngssine AL-HA'RIPAH (WEDGE) prints 5,000 copies but that
low distribution level is compensated by the success of the cassettes.

20
FOR OFFICII‘L USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"the new weapon of the century." as one of the leaders said. A small
dealer in the medina claims he sells 500 cassettes per month of recordings
nade in mnis of sermons by Egyptian Shaikh 'abd-sl-hsnid Kishk.

As far as organisation is concerned. there is also a study and infatuation
group (to be exact. an "information-seeking" group). This group has the
task of promoting publications favorable to the cause or pronouncing
unfavorable ones anathema. It is this group which is responsible for the
"wall newspapers" (to be seen mainly in the mosques) and small posters.

0n the walls of ths downtown Charles de Gaulle pedestrian street you can
read: "Prayer is a pillar of Islaa."

"At prinary school ny teacher encouraged me to play." said Ahmed. a
16-year-old boy. "then I stopped for a few years. Some 3 years ago I
met the 'messengers' who always go round in a group of three. There is
sl-Amir (the prince), al-Dalil (the guide) and sl-Khstib (the speaker-
propagsndist). They invited me to attend the 'lessons' they give at the
20 Hatch masque in the Bards (inner suburb of Tunis) and it is only after
I. months spent in complete isolation with other brothers in another mosque.
reading and understanding the Koran that I have become a propagandist my-
self." Ali has an sfro hairstyle, black jacket. tee-shirt. Jeans and
clogs and still has no beard. although he is allowing what there is of
his heard to grow: "I attend classes since there is nothing else to do
and no roundups are carried out there."

his zlo-year-old "brother" Hohsen said he is sickened by the deterioration
of morals. films and women who walk around virtually naked.... He is a
worker but opposes strikes. "1 always manage to reach an understanding
with my boss who is a committed Islamic militant."

Certain public and private enterprises are ostentatiously rncouraging this
return to the faith. One polytechnic graduate. managing director of one
of the biggest state companies, inaugurated his appointment with a Koran
reading ceremony in his office.

It is not unusual to find somebody praying in a minister's snteroom. The
army barracks are one of the movement's (recent) fields of action. how-
ever, there is nothing to equal the teachers' force of persuasion. One
mother having laftwing political leanings was always anxious to send her
children to a state school. "This year I was forced to send my eldest
daughter to a different school. Last year they were taken to collective
lessons in a mosque every Friday afternoon...." Another mother said that
her son (12 years old) forbids her to watch French television progress and
forces her to wear long skirts. "It is in school that we met prepare the
lslanic society of the future," one teacher told me.

COPYRIGHT: Jeune Afrique GRUPJIA 1979

050: 6600

21.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

TUNISIA

'JEUNB AFRIQUB' CONTINUES REPORT 0!! MUSLIM REVIVAL
Paris Jam mom: in French 21 Mar 79 pp 65-69 1.0
[Part two of report by Souhsyr Belhessen: "Islamic Dissent in Tunisia"]

[Text] Tunis. 10 Nov 78nRsin is pouring down and the city has become a
nets blurred landscape. The day is just beginning. Unusual ectivities
are beginning in Belvadere gardens. in the city's northern district.
People are striving fro. all directions and are gradually forming groups
on the lewn-100, 200, 300...nore and sore. The groups are becoaing a
dense crowd standing under umbrellas which together fore a protective
black canopy.

"Allah Akbar.” "Allah Akbar" (God is greatest)-for 15 or 20 ninutes,
voices invoke God's uses as one of the new police cars which have
watched approaches to the park draws nearer to the crowd closely followed
by a Remult 4L automobile.

The use who alights fron it is young--about 30. He is immediately hoisted
on to sons shoulders. In the presence of the police officer who does not
leave hie, he addresses the crowd: "Allah Akbar." "We have not gathered
here with a view to any confrontation." he says, "but to say the '1d al-
Adha (feast day lurking the conclusion of the pilgrinsge to Mecca) prayer.
Law enforcenent officers are our brothers. He met help then to nsintain
order. If we are told where we can find s mosque which is open, we will
go there. .." The crowd scatters among the park's lanes but as soon as the
group surrounding the an who has just spoken leaves the gardens, police
units intervene. A general aelee ensues. Host of the demonstrators are
arrested.

At the very sane tine, similar. though less spectacular scenes are being
enacted in the narket square. behind the radio building, in the new resi-
dential Bl Henssh district. in city suburbs. and in Ariana and Berdo dis-
tricts where the faithful have occupied the mosque.

22
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

”Ho Believe that the Term 'Hualin' is Inappropriate"

For the first time since independence was achieved. the faithful demon-
strata in the streets to protest against the closing of mosques on '1d
Day according to the hegira calendar.

This demonstration can be traced back to an ideology. some men and a move-
nant. People called "khouanjias." a neologism meaning "brother-like"
["freristes"] with reference to the Muslim brothers in Egypt who incidently
object to this name. ”We believe that the term 'brother' must not lead to
any misunderstanding." a leader of the movement stated. "We are all
brothers inasmuch as we are members of the same community. We reject any
political connotation." One of the principal leaders of the Islamic revival
movement (a term on which everybody seems to agree) explained: "We do not
recognize ourselves under the designation 'Huslim brothers' which has been
conferred on us by the Destourian Socialist Party for counterpropaganda
purposes. Furthermore. we believe that the term 'Huslim' is not quite
right. we contrast it with the term 'lslanic.’ meaning that it is not
enough to pray five times a day and to fast to be worthy of Islam....

Islam is tantamount to 'militancy.'"

Active members of the movement, especially leaders. do not refuse to ex-
plain what they mean nor to discuss matters. 0n the contrary, they give
the impression that the combatants of this new "Jihad" (holy war) have only
one objective--to spread. They lose no opportunity to make themselves
known.

Asked about the origin of their movement. the integrists mention 1970 and
explain it mainly in terms of the "1969 crisis." In 1969. the Tunisian
Government put a stop to a policy of extending cooperatives. which was
advocated by hinister Ahmed Ben Salah. and gradually embarked on the path
of a liberal economy. As far as the integrists were concerned. this crisis
was not only an economic crisis but also a crisis of society. "It was
natural." that say. "that we should have seen ourselves as an alternative.
Our solution has the following advantage: It has its roots in our civiliza-
tion, culture and religion." During the "pause for reflection" in 1970-
1971. which marked the end of cooperativisation. many "liberal" and
"progressive" Tunisians first played a role and then were dispensed with.

Organized at University

Only the integrist movement emerged strengthened from this transitional
period. For instance, in 1970. the association for the safeguarding of

the Koran--a legal but watered down expression of a movement long in decline
and officially belonging to the cultural sphers--gained strength.

A movement for the safeguarding and propagation of Islam. whose members
were young students both from the Ez-Zitouna faculty of theology and the
faculty of law. took shape and was organized at the university. The

23
FOR orncmt use (my
P0“ OFFICIAL USE ONLY

present lenders or the movement were at that time either teachers or
students. with the exception of sheikh Mohamed Salah heifer. a moderate
element in a movement which has its "reactionariea" and its "extremists."

Historical Figure of lntegrism

The 75-year-old sheikh left Tunisia for Algeria in 1960 when President
Bourguiba. who saw the battle against underdevelopaent in terms of a
”jihad" of modern times. declared that there was no need to fast during
the sacred Ramadan month.

Despite the political aspects of his opposition, Sheikh heifer shares the
belief of certain “fucuaha” (jurists) of classical times that fight from
secular responsibilities was proof of purity and independence. Indeed. he
still believes that it is the duty of religious leaders to exercise a
moral censorship over the state. not to assume power. ”In any case." he
recalls. ”former Algerian leader Parhat Abbas told me: 'It is in your
interest to have a secular state since this will insure that the state
does not gain control over religious affairs under the pretest that it is
Muslim. "

Shelkh heifer assesses realistically the role of the movement in society.
For instance. he does not oppose participation in the powernment's activi-
ties insofar as state policy can be oriented in a direction more consistent
with Islam. however. he adds, our main role in the opposition is to in-
sure that certain liberties. especially freedom of worship. are restored.

A fierce denouncer of corruption and immorality, the venerable sheikh.

whose wife joins in the conversation and whose daughter serves tea wearing
tight fitting slacks and a tee shirt. recalls that he has created the

first school for "Muslim girls" because women are "at the basis of any

just society.“ Therefore. they must be given instruments of knowledge "even
though steps must be taken to insure that they do not become agents of
deterioration in morals."

Uhile Sheikh Neifer is a historical figure of integrism. Abdelfateh Hero
is the best known leader of the movement. "Sheikh Moro." as he is called
by his followers. brings to mind both Jesuits and cabaret singers. his
manners. style and behavior in private are :csiniscent of the former. he
dislikes neither good food nor good company. his plump figure. his
immaculate "jebba." his turban and his beard cut in a style favored by
the ”brothers" make him physically reassuring for the older generations.
“is age (35) and his profession (lawyer) enable him to move in various
circles. he maintains relations both at hoae--with business circles and
political movements (he was one of the lawyers who represented former
trade unionists at their trial)--and abroad. especially in Saudi Arabia
which he visits regularly. He was one of the first people who established
links between university and mosque.

2%
FOR OFFICIhL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USP: ONLY

Islam Means Effort and Struggle

A good talker. his popularity stems from his criticisms. often humorous.
of the government. As imam of the Bay M'hanmnd Mosque in halfaouine. a
working class suburb of Tunis. he was the life and soul of that district
during the August 1978 Ramadan nights. In his most popular sermons. he
discusses all subjects. including international and national events. and
criticises both the information media and the authorities. his straight-
forward. even simplistic approach smacks of paternalism. A legend grew up
around Shaikh Moro following the 26 January events--it is said that he was
struck by a bullet during the riots but that the bullet was stopped by

a small Koran which he carried in the left side pocket of his waistcoat.

A miracle!

forty-year-old theology professor Rached al-Ghanouchi is endowed with a
prudence and effectiveness of an apparatchik. At sidi Youssef Mosque

in the Tunis Kasbah. he explains that Islam means effort. struggle-~"Iran's
example proves this." he says. the time for awakening has come--let us
fight against any slovenliness. austerity and effort should inspire us.

It is because he set an example that the prophet was able to demand so
many sacrifices from others. In order to improve others and carry out

our revolution. we must first improve ourselves and worship God. If
neither leftist nor rightist revolutions have succeeded. it is because

man has not carried out his own revolution.... He has always yielded to
temptation. Muslim believers derive their spirit of sacrifice. which

will enable them to create a better future. from strength derived from
their faith. They harbor powerful elements of progress a tireless mili-
tant. Rached al-chanouchi does not aspire to leadership. Everywhere he
provides answers consistent with Islamic integrism to questions any member
of the community can ask.

Hassen Ghodbani. who recruits followers from among Sheik horo's supporters.
the movement's youngest and most radical leader.

In the heart of a densely populated area of the Medina. the Sidi Hehres
Mosque is crowded with people thronging into the great hall and courtyard
and even onto the steps.... Almost 1.000 people are listening religiously
to the preacher. Haesen Ghodbani in no way resembles the beturbanned old
man to whom age and experience generally assign this role. His appearance
is rather that of a student vigorously haranguing the crowd of the faithful.
His voice is young and strong. his language vernacular. It is not the
language of the Koran. but rather of the tribunes. "We say to those who
oppose us that to confront us is to fight against God!"

God the Only Judge

"Allahu Akbar. Allahu Akbar." the crowd shouts repeatedly: "Allahu Akbar."
comes the echo reverberating from the imposing vaults and marble columns.

25
son orrlcnc. use om
FOR OFFICIAL "SI-2 ONLY

Me is 26--"I nest wait another 16 years." he says. "until I can stand

as a candidate for the presidency of the republic"--a graduate in law,

and a partner in former Justice Minister Beilalounna‘s chambers. Msssen
Ghodbani believes that God is the only judge of his actions. ”If God were
not with me. i would not do what i am doing. The leaders knov this. That
is why I can express myself freely. Every Sunday hundreds of cassettes of
my speeches are recorded."

Combating Marxism

This young man‘s aggressive assurance stems from the fact that at least
once a week man and women of all ages and conditions come to the mosque to
hear his sermons. to hear them again and to record them. with his turn-
over collar end tortoise-shell glasses, this cantor of the "new Islam"
was formerly a convinced Marxist and has visited the Soviet Union. "It
matters little." he says. ”that I was in an organized movement and had
contacts with the embassy. because I have renounced Marxism. by the grace
of God." So it is with the faith of the proselyte studying in the law
faculty that he addresses meetings. to virulently attack communists and
atheism. Meesen Ghodbani knows Marxism from the inside, so to speak.

Me maintains that he can confront it more easily. So it is through the
"circles" of the Islamic movement both in the faculty and on the campus
(where he is imam of the chapel) that Msssen Ghodbani makes himself known.
A Pakistani brotherhood. whose mission is to spread lslsm. contacts him.
Together. they travel to Europe. According to Ghodbani. with the aim of
spreading the good word. but, according to his detractors. to assimilate
propaganda methods.

Efficient. enterprising and clever, he is gaining followers and a stature
that are threatening to eclipse his predecessors in this movement.

According to his followers. the reason why he is now recognized as a
leader is that he is "the strongest Muslim militant.” Me can speak for

2 hours without notes on any subject and is not afraid of openly attacking
specific national leaders.

Many people accuse him of inflexibility. Me scarcely bothers to deny it:
"I cannot shake hands with a non-Muslim but I never refuse dialog."
Ghodbani. who had former foreign minister Mohamed Masmoudi as a witness
at his wedding, states that "a person's past does not interest me."
"Mnemoudi is a good Muslim." he adds.

These new Muslim leaders do not deliver sermons. They "give lectures."
As imsms they do not need pamphlets or watchwords to assemble their
supporters. God calls his faithful on specific days at fixed times and
in a previously appointed place: The mosque. The imam. who might be a
simple believer. delivers his sermon. That type of immunity gives rise
to veritable meetings. especially during Friday prayers between 1300 and
1500 hours and evening prayers. The congregation is generally made up of

2
FOR OFFICII'... USE ONLY

(h
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

young people; the majority are about 20 years old and they record any
lesson on cassettes. The tone is that of a political speech. generally
critical of the governent and social inequalities.

The subversive tone surprises the oldest sea and women and provides them
with a topic of conversation; it has a mobilizing effect on the young who
are attracted by this freedom of speech and above all by a marked need
for identification and authenticity.

Following the five daily prayers and sheltered by places of prayer. they
learn to know and especially to recognize their fellows. The mosques are
more numerous than the cells of any political group and they are also a

"church" with its militants. its supporters and its faithful who believe
and hope...

COPYRIGHT: Jeune Afrique GRUPJIA 1979

C80: 6600

27
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

TUNISIA

'JEUNE APRIQUB' CONCLUDES SURVEY OF ISLAMIC RBNEHAL MOVEMENT
Paris JEUNB APRIQUB in French 28 Mar 79 pp 89-92 LD

[Part three of article by Souhayr Belhassen: "Dissident Islam in Tunisia")

[Text] The Islamic renewal movement leaders in Tunisia are as vague as
they are verbose when defining the running of a society completely con-
trolled by religion. But amid the general incoherence, the state-ants
made by some reveal the new currents stirring in Islamic thought. Should
they or should they not secede to power? How? should they reject al-
Qadhdhafi and the Saudis. Marxism and the Heat, democracy and thranny all
at the same time? Those are questions which they have no hesitation in
answering and which show an important evolution in the movement.

The Muslim integrists have a unitary view of the world inspired by the
Koranic principle: "Everything in heaven and on earth belongs to God."
That rules out any distinction between secular and sacred and between
juridical and religious. Dogma and law are one. The Koran is God's
message but also a rule of life. Hasssn Ghodbani. a young imam from one

of the city's most important mosques. Sidi Hehrez. said "Islam is our
ideological foundation, our end and our means." "The western notion of
political organization cannot be applied to us." another imam said during

a sermon. The idea of national unity built around Bourguiba is attacked

by the new preachers: "He reject the separation between state and religion.
we oppose Bourguiba's claim to be the greatest. No man is greater than
another. only God." "God is greatl" The speaker exclaimed. "God is great"
the crowd replied. while the regime's social doctrine is based on the
concept of national unity to combat the Marxist idea of class struggle.

the new Islamic theoreticians stress the importance, in the people's

minds. of the link between Islam and the unitary national ideology.

Real National Debate
During their classes. the most highly politicized among them readily

exploit that idea. turning the slogan against the government and accusing
it of cutting the idea off from its very essence which is Islam.

28
ron orncm. use (mu
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

For example. some of the government's achievements. regarded by the
integriate as "gains"--particularly the cooperatives or education--were
doomed to failure because. according to them. they were not based on an
ideological foundation. in this case Islam. A theology professor who is
a leader of the movement explained: "Our school programs are not based
on our Islamic heritage. they are simply imitations of programs designed
with an eye to the Heat."

Slaheddine Jourchi. chief editor of the magazine AL-MA'RIPAR. has the

age. manner and dress of a student and during religious discussions at a
mosque in halfaouine. an ordinary people's district in Tunis. expounds the
movements theories. Hie demands are. curiously enough. part of what the
political parties want to make the subject of a real national debate:
Namely the future of freedom and democracy in the country.

For example. when questioned on the young integriats' program he replied:
"Asking us to talk about our program poses a false problem. We are de-
manding a free environment. Then we could put forward proposals and
compare them to others." "however." he added. "although the principle of
freedom is a constant in Islam. its application can vary."

On that question and on many others. two trends can be distinguished
within the movement which come together on priority objectives. which are
essentially ideological. "Ours is a social. educational and cultural
movement." one of the movement's theoreticians stated. "we are trying

to take this society back to its deep-seated roots and to promote a
flourishing Islamic culture. If we transform the basis of society. in
other words the young men and women of our society. and spread Islam to
found an Islamic society. politics and economics will follow."

"western-style Democracy"

One group. represented by lawyer Sheikh Abdelfateh Hero. does not regard
politics as a determining force. ”He will support an experiment in
western-style democracy because it would benefit us and would enable us
to put theory into practice in that it would give different groups the
opportunity to express their views. however. what is unusual about us is
that we are in no hurry. we do not want power. He know that as long as
a society is illegitimate and until it returns to what constitutes its
ideological foundation. any political experiment is doomed to failure."

Islam is Multidimensional

Another group. more recent. more politicized and more radical. which is
represented by the other jurist ﬂassen Ghodbani. rejects any western-style
compromise. "Democracy is government by the people." he said. "the prophet
did not govern on his own account or by consulting the people but by
following the Koran-~the word of God." "God is God of heaven and earth."

29
FOR ornctnz. use ONLY
FOR ()Fl-‘ICIM. USE ONLY

Ghodbani thinks this Koranic precept should be applied to the letter.
"The Zitouna sheikhs believe that God is only in heaven and they leave
the earth to politicians...thnt is a false view of Islam. The idea of

a multiparty system is also false. Neither the people nor the govern-
ment are living truly by [slam in Tunisia or elsewhere." The example

of Saudi Arabia is irrelevant because. according to the group's theo-
reticians. the Koran precepts can only be applied if the strategy of the
prophet‘s assumption of power is applied. Therefore. to win power you
must first have a popular base as Mohamed did when he went to Medina.
however. Ghodbani added an important detail. If an Islamic party were
formed he would vote for it because it would be a step toward an Islamic
society.

For the integrists the capitalist system and the communist system are
”relative” and "incomplete." If capitalism is based on freedom. and
communism on justice (but "a justice which sat'iflces individual freedom
for the benefit of the state"). Islam. like man. is multidimensional.
One thing is certain and that is the profound study and absorption of
religious values which should provide the integrists with the best weapon
in the fight against dialectical materialism. "God created man to submit
to nobody but him." The believer's attitude must be based on his faith.
"To satisfy God." one imam said. "i must be just." Speaking from his
pulpit. Imam Abdelfateh Moro affirmed: "This society is sick and needs
care." Asked: "what do you prescribai“. he replied with this outburst:
"no not ask me to solve problems which others have created!" He replied
with this outburst: "Do not ask me to solve problems which others have
created!" Psuever. he added: "The current problems are due to the nature
or the regime.“

Although modernity should be welcomed. especially in its scientific and
technical aspect. traditionalism and modernism are rejected as ideologies
in favor of pure Islam. At this level. there are flagrant imitations from
the "Muslim brothers." In trying to get rid of superstructure: inherited
from non-Islamic social frameworks. the movement includes all fields:
Social. economic and political.

The Koran and the Sunnah

The integrists oppose demonstrations of popular piety. particularly the
use of magical practices. the cult of saints and the veneration of tombs.
"We are against folkloric lslam--the lslam of incense and Benjamin,"
theology professor Ruched Ghanouchi stated. "These rites have given
Islam an old-fashioned image. which has enabled Bourguiba to introduce
his reforms." "Today that Islam opposes us to the old ”turban-wearers"
of Zitouna and elsewhere. Under the guise of Muslim orthodoxy they have
tried to satisfy their thirst for power by exploiting the Muslim masses'
need for holiness which is expressed in the veneration of pious people."
In the Huslim religion. Ghanouchi went on "there can be no intercessor
between God and men. Allah does not tolerate any partners."

30.
FOR OFFICIAL llhll 030'
FUR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The integrlsts, therefore, refer only to the Koran and the Sunnah. That
is why al-Qadhdhafi comes under strong attack from the integrists who all
say virtually the same on that subject. The Koran lays down union between
all Muslims. In that context union with the Libyan people is desired but
"union with al-Qadhdhafi's Libya: Never. He is an atheist. an infidel.

a communist agent and he denies the prophet.“ Ghodbani said of him. "he
has stated that the green book is his program. we want a union based on
the Koran."

The fight which the integrists are waging against the communists is as
violent as the one against al-Qadhdhafi. The sermon at the sidi Hehrez
Mosque Sunday. 4 November. lasted 2 hours or more. it was essentially
devoted to a pamphlet edited by NOVOSTl which is circulating in Tunis and
which says that "the Koran is false and contradictory. is opposed to the
people and should not be believed."

The lntelllgentsia--An Anti-Islamic Nucleus

"As long as the integrists fight against al-Qndhdhafi and the communists
they will have an objective alliance with the government." one professor
declared. That "objective alliance" disturbs the progressives and. more
generally. the intelligentsia. It is perhaps among them that the anti-
laiamic nucleus is strongest. it is composed both of elements belonging
to another "chapel" and those who want to liberate a "repressive. backward
and religious-type“ society. They are almost identical to those who.
since independence. have been the pillars of the state spreading the
modernist ideal.

The post-independence political class. educated in French universities.
adapted perfectly to that option. It was in favor of secularization and
even hostile to the lslamism of the old Zitounian ruling class. The
adherence to the Western way of life which was at times complete in the
new bourgeoisie and their tendency to move away from tradition. accentuates
their separation from lslam.

However. "although it is often possible to de-Arabize people it is
impossible to de-lalamize them." That remark by a former minister illus-
trates the fact that, in an opposition and reaction movement. certain
politicians who praised Bourguiba's modernist line, are now gaining a new
awareness of the lslamic and also Arab foundation of their personality.
hence. some former leaders heed. if not encourage and even help, the
growth of this "Islamic revival." The rapproachment between certain
politicians--such as former foreign minister Hohsmed Masmoudi. who was
removed from power--and the new "Islamic" leaders is not without ulterior
motives on both sides.

However. both sides have a long way to go before their viewpoints coincide.
If these farmer leaders decided to form a party. islamism might possibly
find political expression.

31
FOR "FFICIAL USE UﬂLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE "NLY

A Reversal?

it is as surprising to find such strong lslamic feeling and weak modern
Arab feeling among young Islamic militants as it is among the old Zitounian
generation. While for the latter Arabism had more of a socio-cultural
content tinged with provinciaiism. for the former the connotation is
politicoecoaomic and is associated with a sense of failure. In 1978 young
people coapared Nasir's "glory" with al-Sadat's "treachery." While

Arabist ideology was previously to be found beyond Islam it is now within
lslam. The diffuse awareness of lslamism is general and strong. It may
be capable of turning into enthusiasm or fenticism.

Are the bold reforms of the nourguiba era in danger of vanishing with
their author? Are we going to see a reversal? At the moment only the
party seems vigilant about the development of an integrist movement. The
events in Sfax during Ramadan (1977) when integrists supported by the
local trade union ransacked a cafe to denounce infidels, prove that the
movement is a readily usable force.

The Need for Faith is an Individual Need

The government hesitates to adopt a stance. Former culture minister and
current Information Minister Klibi stated: "we are witnessing a return to
the faith throughout the world. In Tunisia that trend accords with deep
religious and culture roots and it is impossible to oppose this need to
return to the faith which is an individual need. However, we cannot
accept that the return to the faith should constitute a political and
social regression or that it shoald be manipulated to political ends."

when questioned. most leaders said that the Islamic renewal is a normal
swing which cannot be dangerous since it meets a need for free expression.

Government and opposition have the same attitude to the lslsmic renewal
movement. "If political life were liberalized that movement would take
its rightful place and could be regarded as one current among many." they
say. Meanwhile the movement is growing.

COPYRIGHT: Jeune Afrique GRUPJIA 1979

650: 6600 END

32
FOR int'ICliif. US}; ONLY