APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/00: ClA-RDPO2-00060R000200040004-1
Near East/North Africa Report

No.2063

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.5. Government.

PROCUREMENT 0? PUBLICATIONS

JPRS publications may be ordered from the National Technical
Information Service, Springfield, Virginia 22161. In order-
ing, it is recommended that the JTRS number, title, date and
author, if applicable, of publication be cited.

Current JPRS publications are announced in Government Repgrts
Announcements issued semi-monthly by the National Technical
Information Service, and are listed in the Monthly Catalog of
U.S. Government Publications issued by the Superintendent of
Documents, 0.8. Government Printing Office, Htshington, D.C.
20402.

Indexes to this report (by keyword, author, personal names,
title and series) are available from Bell & Howell, Old
Mansfield Road, Rooster, Ohio 44691.

Correspondence pertaining to matters other than procurement
may be addressed to Joint Publications Research Service,
1000 North Glebe Road, Arlington, Virginia 22201.
‘n cacao-unmo- I Mm
? vllrlcul Science

LIncer-Areb Affairs x Libya

Sociology __North African :Heuritania
Economic: Affairs Lﬂorocco
Culture (Social ___Afghnnlecen __Peop1e's nema-
Scicncvs) __Alserla cutie Republic
Ethnology Lnehrein of Yemen
Geography 41.3891“ __Pere:lan Gulf
Techological _x__ Inn Are-
Hilltary Sciencee Linq __Qeter
_X_Ieteel __Saudi Arabia
_X_Jorden ___Spenish North
Luv-it Africa
_X__Lehenon LSuden

b “loam-m Inn-
NEAR EAST/NORTH AFRICA REPORT
No. 2063

CONTENTS

Inn-ARAB AFFAIRS

Arabs Nervous About Iranian Revolution Consequences
(AL‘TALI'AB, 17 0‘31" ’9) eeeoeoeoeoeﬁoseessso-eueooeooo

1‘ Potential Dangers to Gulf Security Identiﬁed
(Sumir 'Atalleh; upmarmnu, 27 Oct 79)

Hebesh Restatcs WLP Position on Palestinian State
(AL-TALI'AH, an Oct 79)

Palestinian Education Efforts Discussed
(mm, 30 “V 79) 0......OIOODIOIOOIOIOOOOOOIOII

BAHRAIN

Nation Takes Over 01]. Production Facilities
(AL-SHASAH, 5 Nov 79)

HEYPI'

Egyptian Opposition Leader Views Political, Socioeconomic
Problems
(Khalid Muhyi Al-Din Interview; 23 JULY, 10 Dec 79) ..

Defense for Conmnist Organizations Begins
(Ahmd AJ-Asuani; AL-ABRAM AL-IQI'ISADI, 5 Nov 79) ....

More Restrictions on Using Telecomunlcation System
(58ml Mintw81113ul-m, 3 "av 79) 0000000000000...-

Sadat mete With Universities Personnel
(Lam: al-Siba'i; AL-AHRAM AL—IQI‘ISADI, 15 Oct 79)
Surge of Anti-Anericanism Gri Tehran
("m-ERIE, 6NOV79 etooeo'eeoooeosoooeooo-esoone-

Khomeyni Cells for Purge of All Western [aunts
(m, 30 OCt n) I.IOIIOOIOIIOIICIIOOOIIIOOOI0.0... _

Khomeyni's Son Also Wants Clerg Purged
(Seyyed Ahnnd Khomeyni Interview; mm, 30 Sep 79) .

Conditions for Imposing hurtisl Law Approved
(m, 30 Sep 79) onesenescent-ouneooe-uooetoes-o...

IRAQ

New Developments in Northern Reﬁning Plants Reviewed
(Mu'syyad 'Abd-sl-Zshrsh; AL-JIMIRIYAH, 23 Nov 79)...

ISRAEL

Government Must Renew mblic Confidence
(Editorial; MDI'A, 5 NOV 79) ooeee-o-eooeepnoeoee-o

Writer Looks at 0.8. Proposals on Southern Lebanon
(Z'ev $111.; HA'AREZPZ, 8 NOV 79) one-ouoee-ooucoo-oc-eo

Rabbinic Council 'i‘ru'eatens Coalition Fixture
(Avrshsm T1rosh;M'ARIV, 1h Nov 79) .................

Religious Party Repudiates Abortion Vote
(Editorial; HAMODI'A, 1h Nov 79)

Effect of Neblus Mayor's Actions Viewed
(Biltorisl: EAMODI'A, 9 Nov 79)

Background of Police Inspector General Detailed
(Avi non; MA'ARIV, 5 Nov 79)

Sabbath Observance--I-‘irst Step for Airline Recovery
(Editorial; mum, 1h Nov 79)

JGDAN

Government's Hal-king Paper to Arab Sunnit Scrutinizcd
(a. Bavrani; AL-HURRIYAR, 26 Nov 79)
comms (Continued)

Various Measures To Compensste for Drought Reviewed
(AL-0mm, 1? Nov 79) OI'OIOIIOOQOI.OolltiCIOIOOOCI

Briefs
Municipality, Village loans
Electronic Service Center

'AL-HATAN' Heishs U.S. Motives in Iran, Sees Young Role
(m'ad lhtar; AL-HATAN, 23 Nov 79)

'AL-VATAN' Denounces Threat of U.S. Military Action in Gulf
(Ibrahim al-Barghuti; AL-HATAN, 27 Nov 79)

'AL-RA'Y AL-‘Am' Doubts Compromise in Iranian-v.6. Crisis
(m, l me n) 0......00.009.00.00...OIIDOOIOIOOQ.

'KWAI'I.‘ TMS': Iran Should Seriously Consider Releasing
Hostages

(KUHA, 3 NC 79) coo-es.as...sees-aooeoeooo-oooseeoo

'AL-RA'Y AL-‘AMM‘ Assails u.s. Attitudes Toward Third World
(Editorial; AL-RA'Y AL—‘Am, 3 Dec 79)

Problems Seen for Non-Citizen Student Population
(AL-TAH'AH, 17 Oct 79)

American Attendance at Algerian Independence Celebration
Analyzed

(hthi Sharif; AL-SIYASAH, b Nov 79)

Supreme 011 Council Discusses Prices, Organization
(AL‘SIYASAH, 10 NOV 79) Is00.000.00.000sooooosoosoos

LEBANON

North Korea Charged Hith Abducting Vomen
(AL-WAN, 17 NOV 79) 000.co-secs-o'ueo-eosloeoa

Dcuxielne Bureau Criticized as Terrorist Ann of the
Authorities

(AL-HURRIYAH, 26 NOV 79) ooupovooso-ooaooeooeoo-one.

Revival. of Secret Agencies
Israeli Monetary Support
CWI'ENI'C (Cnnl. i uuml)

LIBYA
Role of Basic Conferences in Building Islamic Society
Extolled
('Ali mm m'smr; AL~USBU‘ AL-snAsr, 19 Oct 79)
Brici‘s
Defective Defense System
Egyptian Intelligence Coup
Campaign Against Palestinians
MOROCCO
Ties to world Jewish Congress by Horoccan Jews Criticized
(mm AL-‘ARABI WA AL-quLI, 19-25 Nov 79).....
SUDAN

Radical Leader Gives Press Conference in syria
('Abd-al-Rs'ui’ sl-Ksi‘ri; AL-BA'TH, 20 Nov 79)

SULTARATE 0F OMAN

Progress Made in Agriculture and Commercial Fishing
('UMAN, 18 NOV ’9) 00.000.000.000.0.0000000000000000

TUNISIA

Tunis Daily Scores mploitation of Islam for Dark Designs
(Editorial, Abdelhay Sghsier; L'ACI'ION, 6 Dec 79)...

WESTERN SAHARA
Concensus for Political Solution to Sahara. Problem Reported

(Shauqi al-Rsyyis; AL-NAHAR AL-‘ARABI WA AL-DUJALI,
19-25 NOV 79) coo-00000.00Iococo-ooooe-ooseoosoooooo
ANS NERVOUS ABOUT IRANIAN REVOLUTION oonsmumcss
Kuwait Al-TALI'AH in Arabic 17 Oct 79 pp 12-15

[Articlez "External Security—And the National Front in the Petroleum
Gulf")

[Text] ‘me events through which the Gulf area ha passed and is passing
during the past few weeks have been the object of mtary and analysis
by the Arab and western press, each handling the subject fron the point
of view which it favors. Soae of these ooments are provocative and are
connected with events which have not yet happened--and perhaps which they
would like to see}! Sone of then brought the area to the brink of "a
Lebanon." after the pattern of what happened in Lebanon. which will pro-
mte a similar struggle in the Gulf in the view of these journalists.

Others have begun to speak in earnest behind the foreign fingers which
are kindling fires in the Gulf and the hostile states whose agents in
the Gulf have mved and are loving to show discord. In the end, Gulf
security of the African continent and the Red Sea passageways had been

the foresost concern for everyone a few years ago out of fear for that
vital corridorf!

while the Red Sea events ebb'ed and then fell into silence, the events of
the Gulf are still interacting, and our proxinity to then here is nixed

with any dangers, since writing about a hot topic is exposed to many
interpretations.

Core of Events

There are facts which cannot be skipped over or ignored surrounding us in
this Gulf. They are our destiny, and therefore we lust take pains to
understand than and study thn.

First: The Gulf, with its small, oil-rich countries. is the subject of
the albitions of world powers. which now have. shd in the past, and pro-
bably will continue to have in the future oil. cousrcial or strategic
interests.
Naturally, the oil interests are the core of all of these interests.
Thus the stability of the Gulf is of great concern to them. Also, they
could achieve other goals during a period of instability}!

Second: The countries of the Gulf are snll; the two largest Arab coun-
tries bordering the Gulf are Saudi Arabia and Iraq. Saudi Arabia, from
the'standpoint of progress in economic development, is relatively modern.
that is, after raising oil prices in the years since 197‘, and it is
also an important scurce of Western oil financing. Its military size
and structure have not reached full potential, on the best assmptions to
date, and it is suffering from extremely complex development problem.

As for Iraq, in the past 10 years it has made great strides in develop-
ment. It is expected to have greater weight than it actually would

have attained if the National Front had continued in its coalition while
granting more internal participation.

Third: The third basic element is the presence of Iran and the influence
of its policy on the region.

Iran under the rule of the Shah, especially in the 10 years prior to his
overthrow, was the "bosom buddy" of many Arab regimes. lhe Shah tried to
build his domestic and foreign strength toward one goal, which was to
impose his authority on the region. His nain interest at first was to
weaken "Iraq of the Revolution." Then all of his propaganda weapons
were concentrated on saying that the danger in the Gulf came from Iraq,
which had connections (so the Shah justified his thesis) with the Soviet
Union.

However, the political step and the Iraqi-Iranian accord in recent years
before the Shah's overthrow removed this card from his hand, except that
the presence of the Shah's Iran was well-known in the Gulf, from his
withdrawal of nine anbassadors from Gulf countries as a protest against
what he considered to be Arab coordination—without the Shah--in the Gulf,

to direct intervention in Oman with the approval or nutual consent of
several Arab parties.

The Shah's Iran extended its anhitions to more distant spots. he also
had anbitions in the Red Sea and in the Indian Ocean. Some matters
continued to connect the Shah's regime and the Arab regimes bordering
the Gulf, including the division of international waters and the ques-
tion of Gulf security, on which a conference was held in Muscat but

failed because of Iraq's position at the time of rejecting any foreign
in te rvention .

Historically, then, and in the era after the official British withdrawal
from the Gulf, Iran played a role which could please or displease us.
Naturally we were not pleased with the role of the protector or the role
of the authority. Therefore, when the Shah's bases in Iran began to
trestle, this trenor found strong sympathy with the Arab people in the
Gulf. when the Iranian people finally overthrew the Shah, joy filled the
hearts of most Gulf citizens, on the basis that a nightmare had ended,

placing the interests of the peoples bordering the Gulf above any other
cons ide rat ion .

Iran's revolution supported this hope by a group of positions, including
support of the Palestinian Arab people, uprooting the Anerican presence,
and withdrawing Iranian forces from Oman, which were regarded as auspicious.

However, the Iranian revolution quickly entered what any revolution after

long oppression enters, that is, aggravation and accumulation of internal

incompatibilities, for example, the situation of the Arabs and the situa-
tion of the Kurds.

All sincere people on the Arab bank hope that the revolution will achieve
satisfactory solutions to these problems. with the certain knowledge that
these solutions cannot cone about overnight. However, the position of many
on the Arab bank of the Gulf was the wish that the Iranian revolution
would reach those solutions, and that the Iranian people no doubt will
find their final solutions which achieve national goals.

And Gulf Goals

The sons of the small Arab Gulf countries believe in their Arabian, and
they have longstanding historical positions of rejecting any call to
eliminate or wipe out this Arab character. Partition has been imposed
on then, and they strive constantly to go beyond this partition to some
form of unity. lbre than once these societies have acclaimed anyone who
aims at achieving their unity, whether in the Gulf or outside it.

They participate in denonatrations, send wires, and welcone anyone who calls
for unity. Their desire for unity and Arabdon was present even when they
were under the direct rule of British imperialism. In 1963, when the

events of tripartite Egyptian-Iraqi-Syrian unity took place, the voices of
the pan Arabist sons of the Gulf hailed that unity.

Also, the masses of the Gulf moved forward to support each project for
unity and Arabdom, for their feeling toward Arabdonmd unity is genuine
and springs from their own situation. There is no doubt that the Gulf,

by its proximity to the Indian subcontinent and the Iranian coast, has
received and sent emigrants. written history is filled with emigrations

to the Iranian coast and settlements there. Sons of them my have returned
to the shores of the Arabian peninsula, and every fair man knows that there
are, families living in more than one area of the Gulf, since the prominence
of the "modern state" as a result of the presence of oil and other politi-
cal snd geographic reasons cannot eliminate human interconnections. Here-
in lies the truth, that is, in the circumtances of human interconnections.
It is the root of the appearance of the force of unity for the people of
the region and adherence to their Arabdom. The emigrations, whether to
the shores of Africa or to the Iranian coasts, absorbed the culture of
the society, and it assimilated them. Any ancient or nodern emigrationa
in history absorbed the culture of the society to which they emigrated:
the Arabs in the United States, or the Italians, for examle, or the emi-
gration of Indians to Britain, for another exalple.

He could go into proof of those examles. However, if we in the Gulf look
into the origins of the individuals and families for our type of "national
unity," we find that the state accepts citizens under the provisions of
the law. These citizens have their editions, just as any citizen in any
country of the world.

Bridging the Gulf

If we continue the preceding logic to arrive at the snail Gulf state today.
its citizens face a group of difficulties. These difficulties are dif-
ferences in internal points of view about how the country should go about
its public affairs. The question which confronts us is: do these diffi-
culties really exist?

We believe that these difficulties exist, and saying that they do not
is burying your head in the sand. However, we also believe that while

they may differ in level fron one Gulf country to the next, the essence
is the same.

in some Gulf countries we see that the gulf between the haves and have-nots
is wide. This was not created suddenly and was not accentuated by a
shortage. Rather, it is a result of long-term policies. 'lhis gap also
has an economic, political and social leaning. This gap may not be visible
in other countries became of the presence of huge resources, but it
definitely is felt.

what does this gap mean? It means oppression and repression at worst, and
fraud and feelings of the inadequacy of the citizen in less dire circum-
stances. All of the difficulties faced by the societies of the Gulf today
are generated by this balance.

Dangers for the Nation

If all today are agreed that this region is the object of awitions and all
are also agreed that the region is disregarding these dangers, then it is
illogical for us to look for a foreign "cause" by which we interpret the
situations as "dissatisfaction" on the part of sectors of our people which
are "inported from abroad." To point this up, it was clear from the visit
of Iranian officials to the Gulf countries that Iran of the Revolution
desires the stability of this area, as others have desired this stability.

The question remains: how do we all face the dangers which we know surround
us?
It is by continued ignorance of the demands of one group or another of our
people, and trying to put them on the sidelines—the sidelines of economic
and polltcal innovation? Is it by attempting to express the aﬁitions of
our people in the Gulf, which are freedom from the economic subordination,
building a strong national economy in the Gulf, and building a federal
relationship in areas which still drift with the wind?

Is it in disregarding the question of popular participation and postponing
it for real or imaginary reasons and letting opportunities pass for our
people to take advantage of their resources, which we all know are dwindling,
if not in this generation then in the next?

Is it by uttering slogans of Gulf mity, Gulf dinars, and travel by per-
sonal ticket only, with the knowledge that there are legal and mral impedi-
ments and limits which we place before the son of the Gulf and the Arab
citizen to keep him from what he desires?

These are examples of the questions which we must answer successfully to
overcome all of the obstacles before us in the next 10 years, the years of
the 803.

The S i tuat ion Today

One cannot ignore the laws which restrict freedoms in the Gulf area. You
cannot ignore the political prisoners who have spent years in prison with-
out trial in some Gulf countries. You cannot ignore the use of some pro-
visions of laws drawn up earlier in an arbitrary fashion as a result of
people expressing their views in a peaceful public neeting. You cannot
ignore the fact that people are excluded from participating in the develop-
lent of their situation and the planning of their future. One also cannot
ignore despotic policies to distribute the wealth of the nation to the
fortunate few at a time when the ujority are not even allowed to express
their opinions”

These are sons of the characteristics of the situation today in the Gulf,
and a sincere effort to change the: is the first way to get out of this
sad situation.

Nat ional Front

Therefore, our demand for building a national front mans basically resist-
ing foreign dangers by removing the causes of domestic dangers, and by
building the nation as a nation in which all take part under the auspices
of the law,'vhich is made by all, with contentment and participation by
all. Then the nation does not become dinars, or dirhams, or cars or bar-
rels of oil. It is people, first and last. It becones a society in

which people move as citizens who hold their heads high and believe in
defending it, not as chimneys of fear that their fuel of greed for money

will destroy the humanity of people. "hen the interests of the nation
are denied, the nation vanishes. God willing, our good Gulf and its
people will persevere through all of that.

7587 5

Ann. L OM
POTNTIAL DANCERS T0 GULF SECURITY IDENI'IFIBD
Paris AL-HUSTAQBAL in Arabic 27 Oct 79 pp 12-13
[Article by Samir 'Atallah: "who Threatens Gulf Security?"]

[Text] 1: was clear to the journalists who were invited to Al-Ta'if last
week that the talks which they would follow were of the utmost importance.
The location of the meeting alone was enough to indicate that there was
an atmosphere of urgency. Al-Ta'if is usually the sonar residence of
the Saudi state, and consequently the important meetings which have been
held there have been very few and very critical.

The meeting of Arab ministers last week was one of them. Although very
little leaked out about the conference, Saudi Foreign Minister Prince
Sa'ud Al-Paysal left no doubt that they were fearful of dramatic develop-
ments when he said that those who met had agreed to try to hold the next
Arab unit on its scheduled date. As for the other ministers, especi-
ally Bahraini Foreign Minister Shaykb Huhamad Ibn tharak, they looked
as if they wished the summit would be held tomorrow.

What is the cause of the \fear?

The Gulf. The struggle in the Gulf. Revolution in the Gulf. Arrests in
the Gulf. Mass deportation in the Gulf. Easense of the Gulf. Fate of
the Gulf. and naturally, oil of the Gulf.

However, even if the Gulf had as little oil as it has springs, the situa-
tion today would be the same. More important than oil is the Gulf's geo-
graphic position, which makes it the borders of the Arab nation and the
beginning of other borders.

It is to the remaining quarter of the 20th Century what the Suez Canal was
to the first three-quarters: straits, islands, and seas, a stone's throw
from the Indian Ocean. In addition to that, it is not only half of the
Arab nation but also its richest half, at a time when the energy issue
has been raised. The first strategic international dimension naturally
is branching out to other dimensions, such as the money crisis, the igni-
tion of the world stock exchanges, and fear that the stages of economic
stagnation might reach the degree of explosions.

At the time when the Al-‘l'a'if meeting was discussing the political aspect
of the Gulf crisis, the Saudi minister of petroleum was warning that the
world of producers was approaching a confrontation with the world of con-
sumers, that is, the industrial world, as long as there was no end in
sight to the insane speculation in oil prices on the Rotterdam market.

It is most likely that the minister was trying to get ahead as usual of
a strange resolution or position toward the producing states of the type
of the positions and resolutions which usually blame rising petroleum
prices for crises in the economies of the west.

All of these events followed in succession to make the question of the
Gulf and the security of the Gulf the Arab topic of the hour. At a time
when the Arab rulers were ready to go to the Tunis sumit, with the Leba-
nese situation at the top of the agenda, the southern part of the Gulf
appeared as the most innediate question.

The Al—Ta'if conference convened, and the first thought of the conferees
was the internal situation in some of the countries of the region. How-
ever, the conferees found that the question of "external'I security kept
resurfacing, this time from the heart of the Gulf and not only from out-
side it, specifically, the Omani call to establish an alliance requiring
summoning Western forces to protect the Strait of Hormuz. From Oman also,
Egyptian Vice-President Husni Mubarak stated that his country was ready
to send Egyptian forces to the Gulf states which wanted them, in keeping
with the Egyptian proposal to send military aid to Morocco to help it in
the desert war.

Hhether or not these were just attempts to break the Arab boycott which
came about in response to "Camp David," the struggle in the Gulf has
taken the following form in light of the new movements:

The Iranian situation, split into two parallel lines: one advocates
transporting the revolution to the Gulf countries and Islamic unity
through this revolution. Another advocates achieving unity by peaceful
methods, leaving the situation in the Gulf as it is, and not making the
factions of the Gulf choose between denominational loyalty and nationalist
loyalty.

The Arab and Arabdom situation is what brought about a genuine meeting
between Saudi Arabia and Iraq before and after the Baghdad Sui-lit. This
meeting was typified by the security agreement between the two countries
and by what high Arab sources describe as complete harmony between
Jresident Saddam Husayn and Prince Fahd. This position is summed up in
preserving the Arabdom of the Gulf first. and second, removing the area
from the arena of the international struggle. A group of Gulf comtries
adhere to this posi tion--almost.

The international situation: The American position sees two complementary
strategic points in the Gulf: oil and geography. Both are vital mili-
tarily, economically and internally. Any possibility of using any Gulf
resolution for productive purposes or for influence [is to be exploited.]
Host of the Western states and Japan. for whom Arab oil and especially
Gulf oil constitutes the backbone of their financial empires, adhere to
this position.

The Soviet Union does not need to take the oil dimension into immediate
account. It seem content with what it has in the Mediterranean Basin,
a military link within the scope of the Indian Ocean, and its ports of
entry on the African continent.

In light of these positions. the internal situation in the Gulf seen of
the utmost importance. Kuwait and Bahrain have operated on this basis
from the beginning. As for the decision to expel 118,000 people from
Saudi Arabia, which is an unusual figure in the history o.‘ the area, it
also is proof that the customary flexibility no longer is found at the
current stage.

Some Arab politicians even feel that the death sentences issued for some
members of the Iraqi Conunist Party some months ago have significance
beyond the internal situation, since although the decision was internal
some Gulf countries see in it an indication that Iraq does not intend to
intervene in any ideological struggle with them and that it is differen-
tiating between its position as a state ruled by an ideological party
and its position as a large state on the Gulf.

Such a position is in contrast to the Iranian position of transporting
the revolution to the Gulf, represented in the statements of the
Ayatollah Rohaai who threatened to "lead a revoluntionary movement to
overthrow the amir of Bahrain, since he does not represent the teachings
of Islam." However, Iranian Foreign Minister Dr Ibrahim Yazdi replied
to that by saying that Rohani "is an unofficial personality who does
not represent the view of the Iranian revolution." On another occasion
Dr Yazdi also said that "the basic danger to the Gulf is the struggle
between the great powers in the Gulf area and outside it."

Who are these "great powers"? Is there a role for the Soviet Union?
The answer again is that if the Soviets have a role it is not yet clear
or at worst is not overt. but it is clear from American statements for
at least 3 years that there is "some sort of plan" or a group of alter-
nate steps to raise the question. Perhaps the Omani proposal to seek
help from "America and West German forces" is one of these steps or
rather one of the alternate steps.
In spite of American talk, official and otherwise, about troop-landing
operations at unspecified "oil wells," it is unlikely. for purely domes-
tlv reasons, that the Americans would offer to send soldiers abroad on
mllltary missions. The effects of the Vietnam Har have not yet ended.
although the American people are prepared mentally to accept any step in
the direction of the producing states. I asked Mr George Ball, former
undersecretary of state and one of those concerned with conditions in
the Gulf, at a luncheon held by the Arab League and attended by Profes-
sor Shafiq al-Hut, director of the office of the Liberation Organization
in Lebanon, for his view on the American allusions to the troop-landing
operation. for I regard it as unlikely that that is mentioned, but he

stressed the importance which his country's government gives to the
region.

what Mr Ball did not say is that since Vietnam the United States has re-
placed a policy of direct intervention in the struggle with a policy of
destabilizing the target areas. The fact is, the situation in the Gulf
today is more a situation of instability than a situation of struggle.
For more than a year the area has been in a state of extended and almost
daily turmoil, either by foreign threats or by way of internal disputes
which have in turn facilitated the impact and effects of foreign threats.

Although the Lloyd's Company recently changed its mind about its deci-
sion to raise the amount of insurance on sea transport in the Gulf, the
uproar which the decision stirred up at first put the area into a state
of instability and left economic effects which cannot be estimated.
Instability sometimes has greater effects than actual battle.

Thus it was clear from the Al-Ta'if Conference that the Arab trend at
present is to try to end this new condition. There are those who say
that while the states of the region are tending to act with firmness at
home considering the fact that the question is within their sovereignty
and their law, they are tending abroad toward flexibility and trying to
avoid confrontation. There are those who say that the foreign minister
of Kuwait, Shaykh Sabah al-Ahmad, had traveled to Baghdad first after
the Al-Ta'if Conference in order to inform the Iraqi leaders of the re-
sults of the conference and also to place them in an atmosphere to end
the tension with Tehran.

If it were impossible for Kuwait itself to undertake this sort of media-
tion, either because of its recent incidents or because of its nature as
a direct and basic party in the Gulf situation, then it is most likely
that it would entrust the Palestinian resistance with such a mission,
because of its position with both parties.

It is probable that the subject of mediation will be raised at the sum-
mit in Tunis, viewing it as an Arab and not a Gulf issue. There are
those who say that although Saudi diplomacy has always been characterized
by silence. after the situation in the Gulf and especially after the
incidents in Kuwait and Bahrain there no longer was any justification
for slowness in achieving an immediate resolution to a complex crisis.
Removal of a complicated crisis cannot be put off. Saudi Minister of
Defense Prince Sultan announced, as did Prince Nayif, minister of the
interior, and Prince Sa'ud al-Faysal, foreign minister, that the
security of the Gulf is the responsibility of the Gulf alone. Note
that it is not customary for the minister of the interior to speak on
foreign affairs, but all of these situations seem to point up what the
question of the Gulf means to Riyadh.

Hhile awaiting the Tunis Summit, the unrest remains. Battle is not
the only unfortunate situation which requires a unanimous Arab deci-
sion rather than a non-unanimous decision or position.
HABASH RBSTATES PFLP POSITION 0N PALESTINIAN STATE
Kuwait AL-TALI'AH in Arabic 24 Oct 79 p 19
[Article: "Dr Habash Opposes Establishing Any Truce in South Lebanon"]

[Text] Dr George Habash, head of the Popular Front for the Liberation of
Palestine. opposes establishing any truce in the south of Lebanon, since he
feels that the Palestinian resistance "has the right to fight the Zionist
eneny starting not only from the Lebanese borders. but from all Arab
borders."

In an interview which Dr Habash granted to the weekly magazine AL-USBU'
AL—‘ARABI, he said that a condition for agreeing to send the Lebanese army
to the south should be "that its mission is to fight Israel and its agents."

Dr Habash went on to say that "if the mission of the army were to be in-
peding the Palestinian freedom fighters and the Lebanese nationalists to

the north of the Litani River, then we would oppose its spread." Be

spoke from another aspect about his opposition to making any contact between
the Palestinian resistance and the American government.

Dr. Habash said: "There is no complete or almost complete conformity
between the strategic goal of the Palestinian revolution, which is repre-
sented in the establishment of a denocratic state on all the soil of
Palestine, and the position of the Soviet Union." Dr Habash feels that
Moscow "is still the main supporter of the Arab national liberation nove-
sent."

Dr Habash also expressed his belief that establishing a Palestinian state
on part of the Palestinian land might represent a basic solution with
respect to the Palestinians living in Lebanon and Syria, with the condi-
tion that establishment of this state is not linked to recognition of
Israel or signing a peace treaty with the Zionist state."

7587
C30: 4802

ll
PALESTINIAN ENCA‘I'ION EFFORTS DXSCUSSBD
Istanbul cunwlum in Turkish 30 Nov 79 p 12

[Text] Abu Piras. the PLO representative in mm. is interviewed in the
Novenber issue of mutation snuocu: negatine on the subject of “Education
in the Palestinian Revolution."

we will try to give a very brief sunary of this interesting intervieu
which reflects the education efforts being advanced with an eye to the
future by a people who are fighting for their freedon and getting the uorld
to accept then and their arguent and who still are unable to live in their
own lsni. Or. more correctly. we are obliged to content ourselves with
excerpting those portions of Abu Pirae' state-ents which we felt it neces-
sary to unierscore:

”The Palestinians were driven fro. their land and today live in various
countries. One portion of our people have been living under occupation
for 30 years. Re are forced to start all over again on! build as best we
can everything that sionisn end i-perielisn have destroyed and distorted.
Therefore. it is neceesery to consciously inculcate a brand new set of
values. The organs of state which we have established and are establish-
ing are taking up the new values as the basic fabric of national unity.

"The Education Depertnent of the Pin-affiliated Palestinian Research Cen-
ter has deter-ined the besic principles on which educational philosophy for
Pslestinian Arabs rests. provided for organized education frat prilery
school to high school. prepared text books in light of the principles set
down. developed curricula and teachiu and training nethods, an! specified
the require-onto for training and retraining of teachers while they are
active in their professions. '

We have been given pernission to open our own schools in the Palestinian
refugee cups in certain friendly countries. ﬂere. children ere tsught
free the books prepared by the Pelestinian Research Center. However, in
the countries where we do not have our own schools. especially in the occu-
pied lands. our own books will be read. thet is, Palestinian history.

Palestinian geography and so forth. This clandestine education is the
responsibility of the P11).

12
"The State of Israel. the synhol of rionisn, is teaching students a dis-
torted view of history. should our children. Palestinian children he
taught such history? The P10 is trying to ensure that our children who do
not attend Palestinian schools receive the sane education as the others.

This effort, I think. is the only educational experiment of its kind in
the world.

"There is a question of pressures applied through different nethods in
other countries. In prticular. neasures are taken to prevent develollent
of the Palestinian culture. The no has nade iniatives to open a Pales-
tinian university in a friendly country. outside the occupied territories.

He have adequate staff. there are 241,000 Palestinians who have conpleted
university educations in various countries.

"Hhat are we fighting for? To liberate our occupied lands an: establish a
Palestinian State. This state will rest not on ignorance, hat a: a scientiv
fie. technical foundation. After the revolution. we will have no need for
people uho tell us heroic stories, who live with their senories of the
past and are content to boast. At that tine. the develop-ant of the
Palestinian State will be ensured through the existence of a well-
educated generation vhich can he used for the good of the society and the
people in every scientific and technical field. Every Palestinian youth
has an obligation to be the best and the brightest in his own field.”
NATION TABS WI! OIL mama! IACILI‘I’IIS

Kuwait AL-SIYASAB in Arobic 5 Nov 79 p S

IZrticlo: "Bohr_o_in lloo Couplotod Procoduroo for Notionol rahoovor of In-
tiro Oil Soctorﬂl

@347 'l'ho Governont of Bohroin onnouncod rocontly thot it hao coqlotod
tho logol procoduroo for ottoinnont of full notional dooinonco ovor tho

oil ooctor. 0n thio occooion AL-Slnsni io publiohin; o roport corriod in
tho latoot ioauo of tho oonthly OAPBC publication.

Oil in conoidorod Bahroin'o ooin oourco of rovonuo. oinco it accounto for
60 porcont of it. Tho noin oilfioldo in Bahroin aro tho Bahroin ond Abu
So'fah iioldo. lovonuoo to bo dorivod fro- tho ooloo of oil fro. thooo

two fioldo thio yoor, 1979, oro ootiootod at 161 Iillion Bahroini dinoro;

thoy totollod l8l million Bahraini dinoro in 1977, 156 oillion in 1976 ond
lll oillion in 1975.

The Bahrain fiold lioo in tho contor of tho ooin iolond, ol-liono-oh. and
tho Abu So'foh tiold lioo offohoro obout 50 oiloo north of Bohroin in on
aroo oituotod botvoon Bahrain and tho Kingdou of Soudi Arabio. ‘l'ho tvo
countrioo divido tho incono occruing iron tho fiold.

On 30 Juno 1975. a participation osroooont woo opprovod by tho Bahrain
sworn-mt ond tho Bahrain Oil Cowony Ltd, by virtuo of vhich tho sworn-
nont took pooooooion of 61 porcont of production and oxplorotion focilitioo
and 100 percent of tho goo rooourcoo oubooquontly to bo dovolopod; tho
agroonont was to bo offoctivo oo of l Jonuory 1976.

Tho govorI-ont oooignod to tho Bohroin Notional Oil Canons» (Bonoco) ootob-
liohod in 1976 ouporvioion of tho oharo which it had obtoinod through tho

porticipotion ogroooont. It voo onnouncod rocontly thot ogroooont hod boon
roachod thot tho govorn-onr would toko control ovor all oil ond goo produc-
tion and would toko our tho norhoting of producto in Bohrain, offoctivo

l Jonuory 1978. Although oil production otortod in 1936. annuol produc-
tion voluno io anoll. Production of tho Jobol ol Dukhon Piold dooo not

oxcood 3.7 million tono por yoor. Hovovor. thoro to o oojor rofinory in

1'4
Sitreh whoee output totele 12 nillion tone per yeer. lioet of the oil it
refinee conee fron Seudi Arebie; therefore Behrein'e role ee e eource of
refined petroleun producte ie nore inortent then ite role ee e crude
producer.

Production reechcd ite peek in l97l end hee eince begun to decline. The

following teble givee the volunee of production fron the lehrein end Abu
Se'feh fielde fron 1966 to 1977:

Crude Oil Production, l966~ 1977 (In Thoueende of us berrele per Yeer)

Yeer Behrein Field Abu Se'feh field
1966 22,521 11,688
1967 25,370 16,876
1968 27,598 _ _ 22,733
l969 27.74 [digit nieeing/ 21mm
1970 27,973 27,310
1971 27,387 32,121
1972 25 ,508 310, 178
1973 24,988 39,811
1976 210,597 65,000
1975 22,362 21,000
1976 21,288 39,000
1977 21,237 105,000

At the preeent tine nnch effort ie being node to increeee production while
preeerving nexinun recovery potentiel. The oil production rete reeched

ebout 56,000 herrele e dey in l977 while uphelt output cene to 2.100 ber-
rele e dey. lfforte ere eleo being node to iqlenent eecondery end terti-

ery IOCOVCSy .

The term prinery oil recovery neene the production of oil fron the reeer-
voir under ite own preeeure, thet ie, by flowing. Belle ere eeid to be
flowing under deficient preeeure when there ie need to nee puwe to lift
the oil to the eurfece of the ground. Hhen the flowing well driee up e
lerge portion of the originel oil reneine. conteined within the producing
reeervoir eround it, but preeeure ie too week to bring the oil to the eur-
fece. lt hee becone poeeible et the preeent tine. thenlte to inroved
neene for edditionel recovery, to lift e lerge portion of the reneining
oil efter the prinery recovery etege. The ecquieition of thie reneining
oil ie celled eecondery recovery, which ie ueuelly etteined by injecting
weter or gee into the reeervoir. Atteqte node to recover whet night
etill be left efter the eecond etege ere celled tertiery recovery.

Oil Reeervee: The noet recent eetinetee point out thet reeervee will leet
beyond the beginning of the caning century. There ere continuoue ettewte
to diecover new oil depoeite in verioue locetione, on lend or offehore
(north of the ielend). however. the chencee of finding nejor new diecov-
eriee rennin linited.
In 1977. 35 percent of netural gaa production waa conouood in power gener-
ation by the Alba Coqany (the eluninun onoltor), 26 percent in maintain-
ing the nocoooary proaouro level in the oil fieldo, and 21 percent in op-
erating the refinery, while the ronaindor wao need for electricity genera-
tion, local conouqtion and field uoeo.

Electric Power Generation and Conauwtion

xxcept in the caoe of the major induatriea, which generate tho electricity
they need, tho State of Bahrein llectricity Departnent io tho body which
generotoo electric power throughout Bahrain. ‘l'hio depart-ont operateo
four generating otationo. The table of the capacitieo of thooe otationo
end their fuel require-onto in ac followo:

al-lhuff Gae quuirouento (Million Ouhic loot per Day)

Power in llogowat to Va luo Rate
Si treh 120.0 33 19
al-Rito' 200.0 (55) 23 (eatinate)
el-uuharreq 38.8 nil ni l
el-Jufeyr 133. 1 35 26

Conatruction of the al-life' otetion will he coqleted in 1980. This ota-
ticn generated 100 negawatto in Auguot 1978 and a further 50 megawatto in

aid-1979. It will he aupplenented with an additional 50 nogawette in oid-
l980.

‘l'he al-Huharraq otation rune on dieoel.

It io anticipated that electricity duend will rice to about 978 noaowetto
in 1990, no towered with 308 oogawetto thio yeor.

Aooociatod Goo lzrploi ration

A project io currently being carried out in Bahrain to exploit aaoociatod
see; in the firot otage of operation it will he poooihle to troot 100 nil-
lion cubic feet of aooociatod goo a day.

Solar Bnorgy

Boghroin National Oil chony lo otudying a report on the feaoihility of
uoing oolar energy in the country, ainco it in a potential elternoto
aource to oil, whoee output io conetantly declining. Bahrain'o clinete io
conaidorod exenplary for aolar energy exploitation, oince the ground de-
rivoa noot of ito power fro- tho oun in the for. of electromagnetic rayo,
of which 3 percent conaiota of ultroviolet rayo. 62 percent of wioihlo
rayo and 55 percent of infrared roya. ‘l‘he otudy ia concentroting on the
possibility of using solsr energy in Behrein for eir conditioning. fern-
ing. end deeelinetion, since the percentege of eelinity in erteeisn well

voter hee stsrted to rise, neening thet there is s need to distill see-
weter.

Behrsin Netionel Oil Coqeny's proposed progr-a in the field of eolsr
energy includes:

Contraction of etetions to neesure soler reys in sll eress of Behrsin.

lstsblishnent of en merinentel house to be heeted end cooled by soler
energy.

Performance of nunerous other experiments releted to soler energy.
lstsblishnent of e specialized eolsr energy library.

Atomic Power

The letionel Psper esphesires thet nucleer power generstion is to be con-
sidered nore expensive then other for” of power; thus one cennot justify
using it in e limited econouy such es Behrein's. llovever, there is the

possibility of eeteblishing centrel nuclear power plents in Seudi Arsbie
to serve the Gulf region.
mYPTIAN OPPOSITION LEADER VIEVS POLITICAL, SOCIOBCONGHC PROBLHIS
1.0171211 London 23 JULY in Arabic 10 Dec 79 pp 3-6. 26, 27 1D

[Interview with Khalid Huhyi Al-Din, leader of the Egyptian Nationalist

Progressive Unionist Grouping (NPUG) Party, to 23 JULY correspondent in
London; date not given]

[Excerpts] [Question] Mr Khalid Muhyi Al—Din, what is the reason for
your presence in London?

[Answer] Re have been invited by the general secretary of the Labor Party
to come to london to hold discussions with the party's executive comittee.
the comittee on Middle East affairs. the foreign relations comittee and
the parliamentary foreign relations group.

[Question] He would like to ask you about the NPUG's present role, the role
of the other opposition forces and the role the NPUG has played so far in
rallying these forces.

[Answer] Until 1979, that is until the signing of the [peace] treaty, the
party played a major role in rallying the nationalist forces against the
treaty. We also contributed to the issuing of the statement by 13 people's
assembly mubers representing the religious group, the natioml front, the
independent Marxists, the ma and the independent elements. Afterward all
the nationalist forces issued statements condemning the treaty, including_
the Al-Hafd party and the [former] revolution counand council. There
appeared to be a nucleus of a broad national front movement. I believe that
the dissolution of the people's assembly then was because of the opposition's
stan . Despite the small number in opposition, the stand was an expression
of rejection. The opposition's voice during the assembly debate was very
strong despite the small number of those in opposition. It is not a ques-
tion of number but of a strong argument. Our strength and influence lay in
the fact that what we said was true. Nobody believed us when we said that
the Arab countries would boycott Egypt and that the Arab League would

pull out. They thought that the Baghdad resoluticns were mere "bluster."
Although we called on them [the government] not to sign the treaty and to
find a way out of it, nobody heeded us and the treaty was signed. One of
the fundamental things we clarified was that prime minister and foreign
minister Mustafa Khalil's memorandum objecting to the U.s.-Israeli memoran-
dum of understanding contained 16 objections each of which is sufficient for
rejection of the treaty. We told them that three foreign ministers had al-
ready resigned and that the fourth foreign minister has 16 objections to the
Egyptian-Israeli treaty. In my opinion the measures that were adopted after-
ward represented a radical change in the government's stand with regard to
future political action.

[Question] How?

[Answer] First, the dissolution of the people's assembly. This was uncon-
stitutional because the people's assembly is dissolved only after a consti-
tutional collapse or a constitutional crisis or as a result of a real clash
between the president of the republic and the assembly because of the assem-
bly's repeated rejection of a bill proposed by the president. In which case
the president of the republic is forced to go back to the people with a pub-
lic referendum.

But even the ruling National Democratic Party [NDP] was not consulted about
the decision to dissolve the people's assanbly. This means that the pres-
ident did not even consult his own institutions to seek their views on a
grave decision such as this.

Briefly. what happened was a constitutional coup, the way to which was paved
by a host of freedom-restricting laws, which was not surprising.

[Question] Why?

[Answer] Because the signing of the treaty and the normalization of rela-
tions with Israel consequent upon it, the ensuing political alliance against
the Arab world between Egypt and Israel, the Egyptian Government's attitude
toward what is happening in the Arab world, its encouragement of the 0.3.
stand on freezing Iranian assets in U.S. banks as well as its encouragement
for it to adopt certain attitudes toward the oil countries—all this goes
to show that the government's policy is part of a U.s.-Israeli plan. This
entails suppressing and gagging the opposition. It is no longer a question
of Egypt's ending the war and turning its attention to its internal problem.

The issue is much graver: it is a question of an Egyptian-Israeli alliance
to confront the Arab liberation movement.

This question has forced many of those who supported the peace treaty inside

and outside the ruling party to reconsider their stands following the con-
tinuing concessions on Egypt's part.

The seriousness of the matter lies in the fact that Israel's reaction to such
concessions has been to build more settlements. to expel [Nabulus mayor]
Al-Shak'ah and to threaten other mayors who object to the Israeli policy.
[1.0171213] This underlines the basis of self-rule. All this goes to show
that Israel craves and is seeking further concessions. It wants the Nile
waters to irrigate the Negev. This generated a strong reaction in Egypt,
particularly since the dream of affluence has not been achieved and the cut-

ting off of Arab aid and trade with us has directly affected our economic
resources.

The government has paved the way for dealing with all these conditions with
a host of laws.

But on the other hand. this favored our party. The violations col-titted dur-
ing the recent elections were the best propaganda for the NPUG because what
matters was not our failure to win in the elections but the fact that we have
emerged frm the elections much closer to the masses and with a substantial
increase in party membership. He emerged from the elections defeated by

the government but not by the Egyptian public. EVen had we spent large sums
of money we would not have been able to prove the government's false claims
about denocracy, and we would not have had such an impact on the masses which
have seen through the government's false and illegal actions that convinced

the man in the street that what was taking place was mere dictating to the
people and not a free election.

What we are concerned about is not the question of opposition, nor the NPl'G
nor even the treaty; it is the question of Egypt's independence which is
being squandered, the Egyptian will which is being suppressed, and the ques-
tion of opening the door to Israeli culture. trade and tourism. This demands
that all citizens close ranks to thwart this danger which is threatening the
future of their children and will strengthen Israeli Zionism inside Egypt.

Therefore, a front action has become the top priority in our activities.

[Question] What do you mean by front action? Is it coordination with
other opposition factions?

[Answer] Exactly. We are coordinating with the other nonparty forces, such
as all the nationalist forces that have not joined the NPUC, whether these
be Nasirite. Marxist, nationalist or religious, as well as the national front
party, the independent nationalist forces, the Hafdist forces and the
Egyptian nationalist capital forces that see the open-door policy as a dan-
ger to then. For this reason we urge cooperation to save Egypt on the basis
of a program which our party has already published concerning what is happen-
ing now. Hhat is at issue is no longer the treaty but.the future of Egypt.

[Question] Let us move on to the question of democracy.

[Answer] Those who accepted the treaty imagined that it would free us of
the martial law and of the problem of the battle [with Israel]. But although
we now see that no foreign danger exists, every day we see more freedom-
restricting exceptional measures and laws, the latest of which being the

socialist attorney law giving the socialist attorney the power to conduct
political investigation.

20
[Question] ”hat is the difference between political investigation and
judiciary investigation?

[Answer] Judiciary investigation means that you are interrogated about
incidents and your answer deals with incidents. But political ' vestigation
means discussing your ideas and cross-examining your political views. A
report is then written about your views on the basis of which of your views
are considered to be hostile to the state and, consequently, you will be
isolated politically. If you appeal you are referred to the court of values.
It is a special court consisting of some judges and lay citizens in the

same line of business. Appeal against the court of values' decisions takes
place before the people's assembly which is selected by the government.

[Question] Is this measure aimed against the NPUG in particular or against
all the opposition factions?

[Answer] It is directed against all the nationalist forces but because the

NPUG is the existing legitimate party most of the blows are directed against
it.

[Question] Can you give an example of such measures?

[Answer] First, the law prohibiting parties publishing their own newspapers.
Previously every party had a right to publish a newspaper expressing its
views, but we have lost this right because a party must be represented

by 10 members in the people's assembly [to have the right to publish a paper].

Second, the press law and the interference in the journalists union with the
aim of excluding progressive journalists.

Third, the new law on parties. Supposing that a party member in Xaj'hanmad,
for example, committed a violation, the whole party would be dissolved. If
a party member travelled abroad and committed a violation the whole party
would be punished and dissolved instead of action being taken against the
member who committed the offense.

In other words, the law places the existing parties at the mercy of the
authorities and thus paralyzes their activity. of course, the NPUG can
only go on struggling to expose the truth to the masses.

[LDl71309] [Question] The NPUG is constantly accused of the fact that most
of its leadership is communist. How true is this?

[Answer] This is not a new accusation. Strong accusations were made to this
effect when steps to form the party were taken.

What is strange is that, despite the reiteration of such accusation, the party
membership is increasing steadily, which goes to show that the masses do not
believe the accusation. If we take a look at the party general secretariat's
structure we find that the Marxist members number no more than 10 percent.
In fact. there are exactly 6 Marxist members out of the secre:ariat's 44
members. The NPUG members generally represent the left without any speci-
fic categorization. In other words, a Rasirite active member of the NPUG
is naturally socialist and religious. Generally they are leftists but
without any specific categorization. Categorization is noticeable only
among a number of the older leadership, that is. those who belonged to pre-
viously existing organizations. But an ordinary member can be called an
NPUC member who generally believes in the NPUG program; he is generally
leftist.

The secretariat decisions are handed down on the basis of a majority vote.
So far we have issued statements only on the basis of a large majority or
unanimity whenever major party issues are involved. How can there be Marx-
ist domination and on what basis do they claim that the party is Marxist
inclined? Hhat decision has the party taken that indicates Marxist control?

There is another point. He have been accused of being agents of the Soviet
Union. I would like to see one party statement lauding the Soviet Union.
The only statement issued by the party and mentioning the Soviet Union was
one criticizing it for attacking President Al-Sadat. He said that criti-
cism of Al-Sadat or the Egyptian leadership is the sole prerogative of the
Egyptian people. He said that our attitude toward the treaty or toward
Al—Sadat is a different matter and that we allow nobody to criticize our
leadership.

I wonder if there is a single lecision taken by the party betraying com-
munist domination. Today, for example, they say that we are agents of the
rejectionist states because our attitude toward the treaty is the same as
theirs. Can we, by the same token say that Saudi Arabia is an agent of
the Soviet Union because it has condemned the treaty in the same way the
Soviet Union condemned it?

[Question] Let us move on to the economic situation and its effect on the
political situation in Egypt.

[Answer] Hhat is happening in Egypt is the result of the problem of shift—
ing the Egyptian economy from being an independent economy to subservient
economy. The economic policy applied since 1971 and to this day has harmed
the Egyptian economy and caused it to deviate from the course of independent
development to that of a subservient economy. In other words, allowing the
entry of foreign capital and its participation in the public sector while
renouncing planning and encouraging certain Egyptian social factions to
operate in the Egyptian market has led to crises that will continue to afflict
the Egyptian society--shortages of cigarettes, soap, public transport defi—
ciencies and so on and so forth.

It is not surprising that the term "development" has disappeared from the

vocabulary of daily life and has been replaced by "profit"--that is, the
road is paved for people to make profits or to become affluent. Affluence

22
in a backward country in which the people do not find their daily livelihood
is different from affluence in English. What is needed in Egypt is to elim-
inate hardship and end the ever-intensifying crises resulting from the slump
in Egyptian industry which is suffering not only from foreign competition
but also because the purchasing power of the Egyptian citizen has declined
and, therefore, his ability to purchase manufactured goods has diminished.
For this reason we see millions of pounds worth of manufactured goods stock-
piled in depots.

Meanwhile, foreign products are being imported in order to do away with
what is left of Egyptian industry. Foreign cigarettes, for example, are
being imported, while production of local cigarettes is being reduced.

Take the telephone system, for example. From 1952 through 1965 telephone
exchanges were being built with Egyptian expertise and labor. Why should
we now pay 1.8 billion pounds to have a telephone network built. "here is
the Egyptian worker and Egyptian expertise? th have they been forsaken?

The answer is simple: we have no will to develop, for if we had such a will
we would have nurtured the Egyptian workers and paid than sufficient wages

to participate in development plans instead of paying high wages to the
foreign expertise we are now importing.

[[0171613} [Question] Hhat about prosperity?

[Answer] In my opinion prosperity can be achieved if the crises can be
eased, in which case the government would make a significant advance. But
the opposite is true. With every passing day the Egyptian people are suffer-
ing more hardships and difficulties in their daily life. This goes to prove
that the myth of postwar prosperity is mere talk.

In the past they said that all Egypt's difficulties stem from its military
debts. We stopped payment of our military debts 2 years ago. Has the
Egyptian economy improved? They said prosperity will come after the peace
treaty is signed. now they have signed it. What have they achieved? Noth-
ing. Where will prosperity come from? We must also take into consideration
the fact that we have lost the Arab market and Arab aid. In my opinion the
hopes on which prosperity is being conceived are false hopes.

Moreover. there is no serious intention for development. Development re—
quires a spirit, a will, sacrifices. Who is going to make sacrifices now?
Are the poor who are tightening their belts ready to make sacrifices, or are
the rich, whose bellies are growing bigger? This is a political decision;
development is a political decision. As long as we are afraid to take de-
cisions that would force certain classes of people to make sacrifices--afraid
because their voice is louder--then there will be no development in Egypt.
Development is a social and political problem more than an economic problem.

[Question] As an opposition political party do you have an alternative
policy?

23
[Answer] The alternative is to be found in our program. But we also
propose practical solutions within the government's capitalist program.

In other words, we are proposing two alternatives: the first is our party
policy that basically disagrees with the government's general line. and the
second is our view of what the government should do in accordance with its
general life. But this is falling on deaf ears.

we have told them: Let us call your economists and our economists to a
joint meeting to agree on an alternative program for the rationalization
of the government's policy and the rescuing of Egypt's economy. But they
insist on their program; they insist on furthering the open-door policy,
the entry of foreign capital, the freedom of foreign capital and economic
laissez-faire. But the practical result is that the price for this is
paid by the lowbincome groups comprising 90 percent of the Egyptian people.

[Question] How do you view the political map of the Arab area following
the Camp David agreement?

[Answer] Camp David marked the peak in the retreat of the Arab liberation
movement because, thanks to it. 0.5. imperialism achieved the first real

victory in the area. But on the other hand developments opposed to 0.5.
imperialism have occurred as well.

The Iranian revolution has altered the balance of power and changed Iran
from an imperialist reserve to a reserve of the liberation movement.

The second event was the Baghdad summit. The aim was for the Camp David
policy to extend to all the Arab countries and for all the Arab countries
to submit one after another to the U.S.-Israeli peace plans. But what hap-
pened in Baghdad halted this march, despite what has been said--that the
Baghdad summit did not offer an alternative. The Arab countries, despite
their disagreements and different regimes, have been able to agree on one

thing--to oppose Camp David and to resist its extension to the rest of the
Arab world.

Another event was the victory achieved by the Palestinian revolution and the
widening recognition of the PLO, such as Kreisky's invitation to ‘Arafat
and the rapprochement with the socialist international. All these events are

regarded as a victory for the line opposing U.S. policy and strategy in the
area.

It is unfortunate, however, that some Egyptians believe that by signing the
Camp David agreements Egypt will end the state of war and will build itself
up. Instead, we find that we have entered into an alliance with the biggest
enemy of our nation, namely Zionism. In other words, Egypt has entered

another battle and has become a party to a conflict with the rest of the
Arab nation.

The result has been that Egypt has become isolated in the nonalined group.
It is also isolated on the African, Arab and Islamic levels. It is also
isolated internationally at the UN General Assembly.

2h
What is happening in the Arab world at present is the result of a U.S.
policy which has tried to embrace Camp David. The conflict has extended
beyond the Arab world. The thin veneer which the United States created
in Iran in order to deepen hostility between Islam and socialism and the
socialist orientation has been exposed. The situation has backfiredom the
United States and the truth has surfaced. It was merely a thin veneer
designed to dull the citizen‘s mind. All the false propaganda has fallen
apart and it has emerged that the greatest enemy of imperialism is the
Islamic revolution and the religious trends within the nationalist senti-
ments. [LDl71637] In other words, the U.S. plan is now being opposed by
an Arab movement that is daily proving its insistence on security its
rights. We are glad that the NPUG party has foreseen all this. All that
has happened now is that the United States has been trying to solve the
Middle East crisis within the framework of cold war and by excluding the
other parties--even the Arab parties--and isolating Egypt from them. The

Egyptian Government is now reaping the fruits of this policy in the prob-
lems it is facing at present.

[Question] what about the normalization of relations between Egypt and

Israel? So far we have no idea about the exact form of such relations.
What is your view on this?

[Answer] I have noticed that all the aid Egypt will receive will go to the
Sinai region to build farming communities and implement joint projects
there with the aim of linking the Egyptian and Israeli economies. I be-
lieve that this will have far—reaching and very serious effects which the
Egyptians will not feel right away. The Israeli presence comes at a time
when the Egyptian people find themselves completely disarmed; that is, the
Israeli presence comes at a time when our economy is open and we can do
nothing to avert any future risks. This is because the treaty bans the
erection of any barriers. Moreover, the Egyptian citizen's awareness of
the Zionist danger is being blunted. There is a difference between ending
the state of war with Israel and maintaining one's sense of the danger of
the Zionist movement. You may establish relations with the United States
as a state, but there exists the U.S. imperialist interests. You must
always teach your people about the dangers of U.S. imperialism and its
existence. But to remove from your people's books and their schools any
reference to the Zionist danger while Zionism has changed nothing of its
objectives nor its indoctrination of its people that Israel is the country
of all world Jewry and that all Jews must come to Israel to dominate the
peoples of the area-this means that you are taking away from your people
their most important nationalist weapons. Therefore the upcoming stage

is a grave one. For this reason the NPUG raises the slogan of opposing

the Israeli presence in Egypt, boycotting it and suppressing it because
this presence will be serious.

[Question] We have spoken about everything but we have not discussed the

Egyptian public. Does the man on the street agree with what is going on
now and with the normalization of relations?
[Answer] The Egyptian public is being specifically manipulated. Day and
night the media try to brainwash the Egyptian man in the street. He is
being led to believe that there is no alternative and that there is no use

in cooperating with the Arabs. when the Egyptian man in the street discovers
the truth the situation will be in his hands. There will be a reaction.
Don‘t forget the question of dignity.

There is another important point: the majority of Egyptian youth feels that
it can no longer live in this country and has to accept one of two alterna-
tives: emigrate or resist. Society cannot offer youth the hope of setting
up a happy and stable hone. Whatever brainwashing is carried out, in the
final analysis youth lust think of the future.

[Question] A final question: There are outside Egypt many societies of

partisans and friends of the NPUG. Do these groups officially represent
the NPUG?

[Answer] The NPUG has no branches abroad; it has no spokesman abroad. We
have given nobody the authority to speak on our behalf. These people estab-
lish what are known as societies of supporters and friends of the "PUG, and
during their activities they adopt and expound NPUG views. We are not
against this, but we are not responsible for them. This is merely an effort
on their part and a means to make the NPUG's voice heard. The party has not
yet begun planning to organize the activities of Egyptians abroad.
DEFENSE FOR COMMUNIST ORGANIZATIONS BEGINS
Cairo AL-ABRAM AL-IQTISADI in Arabic 5 Nov 79 p 10

[Article by Ahmad Al-Aswani: "Defense of Communists and Inciting Disorder
Suit"]

[Text] Yesterday the defense began its endeavor concerning communist organ-
izations and incitement to violence which occurred on January 18 and 19.
1977 and which involves 176 defendants.

The court held its session which lasted 3 hours with Judge Hakim Hunir Salib
presiding, and the membership of 'Ali 'Abd-al-Hakim and Ahmad Bahkari as
members. Consultant Raga' al-‘Arabi, the General Attorney for State Secur-

ity prosecution, Yusif Darraz, Chief of prosecution, Ahmad Ramadan and
Ramadan Nasr secretaries were present.

Attorney Adil Amin defended six of the defendants. He reviewed legally and
historically, decisions of The Court of Cessation related to similar cases
and referred to the previous brief submitted on 11 February concerning the
inadmissability of reviewing the appeal before the State Security Court. Re
said acceptance of the brief does not mean this case is out of the court's
jurisdiction but let a criminal court decide. This means submission of its
decision to the court of cessation.

The defense pointed out that criticizing the present regime is not a crime
as long as good intentions for the general welfare exists. Also. criticiz-
ing the economic liberalism and American-Egyptian relations do not apply

to Article 98 "A" of the penal code because it specifies the change of the
basic organization of the social system by force.

The defense also said that the 25 November march from the university to the
People's Assembly was not intended to clash with State authority.

After that, the court decided to continue the defense for today's session.
MORE RESTRICTIONS ON USING TELECOMMUNICATION SYSTEM

Cairo ALPAHRAM in Arabic 3 Nov 79 p 8

[Article by Sami Hintwalli: "A Proposed Law To Be Discussed by Transpor-
tation and Communication Committee in the People's National Assenbly.
Prohibition To Operate Radio Systems or Telex without Permission From the

Minister. An Annual Fee of 300 Pounds To Be Paid for License To Operate
a Radio Transmitter."]

[Text] This week the Transportation and Communications Committee in the
People's Assembly, under the chairmanship of Engineer Huhyi-ad-Din' Abd-
Bl-Latif. will discuss a proposed law which specifies that it is impermis-
sable to assemble or operate any radio apparatus for transmitting telephone
calls, telex or telegraphic messages or photos withOut a license from the
Minister of Communications. This law would be applicable to fixed or mobile
apparatuses inside Egypt and to radio stations prepared for transmitting
and receiving aboard planes or ships registered in the Republic; also radio
apparatuses prepared for transmitting in technical experiments and scien-
tific tests or in radio communications institutes.

Exempted from this are only radio apparatuses for transmitting and receiv-

ing whose power does not exceed 100 milli-wats and function on frequencies
less than 30 mega-hertz.

The minister of communications issued a decision on regulating the necessary
subscriptions for licensing in administering educational institutes for
radio communications which qualifiestheir graduates to earn qualification
certificates, the conditions which must be met by teachers who teach in

the institutes for radio communications as well as their curricula, the
system of examinations and granting certificates. and how the General

Egyptian Organization for Telecomunications would supervise these insti-
tutions and the progress of study in them.

The Board of Egyptian Telecommunications Organization will fix the required
fees for radio services not to exceed the following categories:

28
--Three hundred pounds paid annually for licensing to operate a radio
transmitting system;

--Uhen operating the primary apparatuses to contact mobile or stationary
points an extra fee is levied on the dues which are determined according
to the previous provision, and renting the communication line according to
the schedule used by the Organization at the time of licensing for each
kilometer of the telecoanunication line. The collected rent. in any case,
should not be less than the rent for a distance of 20 kilometers;

--Fifty pounds per annum for each extra channel in relation to multichannel
apparatuses. This is in addition to collecting the rent of the telecommuni-
cation line for each channel--according to the previous provision;

--0ne hundred pounds for licensing to operate any of the aforementioned
institutes;

--Two pounds as a fee to apply to enter the examination of one of the qual-
ification certificates in telegraph and radio telephone. or granting the
successful student a license to practice his job.

The proposed law stipulates that exempted from the provisions of this law
are the General Organization for Meteorology, the Civil Aviation Organiza-
tion, the Ports and Lighthouses Administration, Radio and Television Union.
the Central Agency for Mobilization in the Presidency of the Republic, the
Armed Forces, the Intelligence Agency, the Ministry of Interior, Public
Appertenances of Traffic, fire-Brigades and Rescue, Middle East News Agency,
and foreign Embassies with the condition of reciprocal treatment. and other
areas which are specified by a decree from the Minister of Communications.

Anyone violating the provisions of the law will be punished by not more than
6 months in prison and a fine not to exceed 500 pounds or one of either.
SADAT MEETS WITH UNIVERSITIES PERSONNEL
Cairo AL-AHRAH AL-IQTISADI in Arabic 15 Oct 79 pp 52-53

[Article by Labib al-Siba'i: "President Sadat Meets With Universities'
Personnel: The Beginning of New Phase of Students' Action"]

[Text] President Anwar al-Sadat discussed a number of important university
and national issues with the presidents of universities and their faculties
for 3 consecutive days. The discussion focused on the responsibility and
the role of universities in up-grading the society, the accomplishment of
the Green Revolution. tax policy. and economy. Moreover. he discussed
aspects of students care and the form and responsibilities of students'
action in the forthcoming phase. It has been ascertained that the univer-
sities' concern with student activities during the forthcoming phase need
vision as well as a new philosophy within the framework of the amendments
which were included in the Executive Ordinance for the reorganization of
universities and by which universities will start their new year for the
first time with a new approach for student action whose ultimate goal is
the realization of student care as well as the direction of effective
student activities.

In a dialog with Dr Hasan Hamdi Ibrahim, Asyut University president and
acting secretary of the Higher Council of Universities. concerning the
content of the new by-laws in the sphere of students' action, he says that
these laws emphasize the organization of scientific leadership policy in
such a way that each group of students in a department or college or an
institute should have a faculty leader assisted by an assistant professor
or a graduate assistant who meets with his student group regularly in order
to know their academic problems, guiding them. and work to solve these
problems as well as facilitating printing and publishing books and academic
articles in addition to encouraging the formation of scientific associa-
tions by increasing the number of the faculty, organizing scientific activ-
ities which are suitable for the students as well as the projects rendering
service to the community in as much as it is related to their specialties.
Moreover. he adds that it has been decided to establish funds for social
equality which aims at student's social security in all its different forms
such as insurance. social care or loans as well as participating in provid-
ing services for the students to solve their problems which hinder quiet
continuity in their studies as well as add to their financial difficulties.
He also decided to establish a central fund for social equality among uni-
versity students sponsored by the higher council of universities. Such a
trust would have an independent status and an administrative council chaired
by the president of the Higher Council of universities. It would also in-
clude representatives of university presidents for academic affairs, stu-
dents, a secretary for the council, and nine representatives from the
organizations whose function is related to the aims of the funds. The
sources of the funds would come from government subsidies which the state
would provide annually, from allocations provided by the Ministry of Endow-
ment, financial allocations which are available to equalize ministries,
provinces. and students' organizations. Other sources are the earned
interest from students' insurance contracts, income from parties, donations,
festivals. and the revenue from investing the funds.

Then Dr Hasan Hamdi said that in addition to all that, a branch fund will
be established in every university for social equality. Its administrative
will be formed under the chairmanship of the vice president for academic
and student affairs. Moreover, in each college there will be another fund
which will take care of social equality between students. Its sources come
from donations and gifts and 20 percent of the revenue earmarked for the
students' union of that college.

As for student unions. Asyut University president and general secretary for
the Higher Council of Universities says that the new organization of student
unions demands that such unions be formed entirely from regular students

who are seniors in their colleges. New students who pay the union fee will
have the right to vote or be nominated. These unions are in charge of pro-
moting spiritual. moral, and educational awareness, providing the opportun-
ity for responsible expression of opinions, implanting the proper university
spirit among students, discovering students' talents and abilities, dissem-
inating and encouraging the formation of fraternities and students' coopera-
tive associations, organizing social. psychological and educational scout
activities, and organizing the use of students' energies to serve the
society. The college or institutions' union councils would work to realize
all that through five committees: the fraternity committee which encourages
the formation of fraternities in the college and coordinating fraternity
activities with the committee of athletic activities in the college; then
the cultural and artistic committee and the scout and general services
committee which is in charge of executing environmental programs approved

by the college as well as participating in social development and allowing
student participation in executing such programs, and participating in
public and national projects; finally, the social and travel activity com~
mittee.

Dr Hasan Hamdi adds that by the beginning of the present academic year.
these committees will be formed under the leadership of one faculty member
and two students as members representing each academic group which the
students elect every year. The formation of a college council union will
be completed under the leadership of the college dean or whoever he selects
to represent him. A council will be formed for each university to coordin-
ate student activiries under the leadership of the vice president for aca-
demic and activity affairs.

According to the new by-laws and Dr Hasan Hamdi's discussion. it would be
impossible to form any organization on racial. political or religious basis
in all universities or their branches. It is also impossible to organize
any activity for the union councils or their comittees or in their name on
the same bases. Every student without exception in the colleges or the
universities and their affiliate institutes must pay one pound and a half
as annual dues. These dues are collected during the first month of the
academic year. However. the university council, by decree can allocate

not more than 20 percent of these dues to finance competitions and projects.
Regarding nomination procedures for union council comittees, the secretary
of the universities' higher council says that the nominee mst be an Egyp-
tian citizen who is morally upright and must be a new regular student in
his group but should not stand for re-nomination for any reason. He must
pay union dues and be known as an active member in the committee's activi-
ties to which he noninates himself. He also must not have been convicted
or semenced which would limit his freedom or decide to drop or suspend
his membership in any student union.

The elections of Union Councils and their committees will take place before
next November. For valid elections of the Student Union Couittees. 50 per-
cent of the students who have the right to vote must vote. If the number
is insufficient. elections should be postponed to another date within 3 days.
In such a case, at least 20 percent must vote to validate the elections. If
20 percent do not vote this time, all student groups must be eliminated
from representation. Dr Abd Al Hagid Uthman, president of the Suez Canal
University says that each by-law has come out in order to face the separa-
tion which has occurred between the students' base and their unions which
resulted in the deterioration of student activities. For this reason.
these by-laws, before anything else aim at the fact that the universities
must bear more responsibility to care and lead. Moreover, they should
provide a meeting of minds for more intellectual and scientific interplay
in addition to the fact that the university must cooperate equally with

the students on the basis of academic leadership by caring for their aca-
demic affairs, the formation of fraternities, academic associations, and
follow-up their activities in serving the environment.

Indeed we have lost all that in the past years. That is why the new aca-
demic year will witness the true image of the university, faculty. and
students.

Dr Subhi Abd Al-Hakia. vice president of Cairo University says that the

position of student action with its forms in the past years created a call
for separating the student and the professor, which. in turn, has resulted
in certain phenomena. namely, the professor's avoidence to participate and
offer any service beyond the lecture hall. This was dictated by the sen-
sitivity which has been created by such situations. including the monopoly
of a minority of students in students' action. This kept the wide base of
students away from participation. For this reason it was imperative to
search for a new system for student unions and actions. The success of
these systems depends on two things: first the participation of the faculty
with their efforts and giving for the sake of creating a fatherly image.
educational. and fraternal spirit inside the university family: second
student participation and the realization of how inportant such student
participation is in student activities and the nature of the fraternal
relationship between the student and the professor inside the university.
SURE G‘ AMI-mm (RIPS Tam
Paris we RIJZ in Persian 6 Nov 79 pp 10—11

[m] Ez‘iclbuleau, cmumtator ofmmm, who, Lnstyear, during
themnimkvolutimnmdemytripsboMamandﬁnistheﬂrst

”Does Sunday, «immermrkaumngpointinkan'smtic affairs
andfoureignpolicy? IastPebmary,forthefirsttimafterﬂ1eover-
ﬂtrwoftheshah,millimsof1rmtod<partindemstratims
muliating U.S. imperialist forces. 'meoocupatimofthe U.s. arbasay
byshﬂentsandtheseimofitsaployeeeashoetagesareviwedae
justifiedactsbymstnaniansbeausethefmtmveeinthatincimm
havebmmiedmtwiﬂztheamtaﬁmaganmtofm

lanteym.

Actually, wand-Americanian whidxhasgripped Iranwerpastweeks
reflectslranians'angertmzﬂsastrmgcamtrytmtmgamnlmnim
despise. Itﬂeed,in1ran,thestuhiaequatedwithﬂitlerasablood—
ﬁrstytyrantmisrespmsibleforthedeathsofmofumsmﬂs
people. 'matiswhy neither his illness nor "the exclusively huuanita-
rianreasms" whichixﬂwedhisoldc.s.amrberstomm hashes:
abletomllifyuzeuassesofnuﬁmsunarestintramtizedbythe
daughters of last fallandwinter. Iranima' feelingstadardsﬂxeir
ptwimsmnmhmaqxessedinﬂegallmtmemiedbydma-

tors on Suday.
A Forseeable (mum:

Butthehaued Iranians kindletuardsmeU.S. Wannabe
uﬂerestimted.

Nobodyinlrmhasforgottmdntuledeposedstuhhadbemreinsmlled
thtthaCIA—mgineemdcmpd'etatinl953,mrtlntthemited
Stateshdstrengtl‘mxedthePalﬂsviruletmmghvarious forusof supth,
especially by providing tactial assistance for the establisl'nmt of the
dreadedSAVAKorganizatim. meshgansofhmdredtlmsammu‘ators
(overamillimaeoordingtothel’rmdtneusagamcy) memVing like
omtimms waves on 'nehran streets and incluied the following:

”Yankees, go hate," ”Death to Carter and his guest," "Mex-ice is
enemy umber one."

The outmrst of Iranians was not mforseeable: sane three weeks pier
to it, Ayatollah Khaneyni lashed at western inperialisn in general and
the united States in partiwlar.

Such acrinmims statetatts were astmishingly raninisoent of Nasser's
fervent speeches in 1950's and 1960's. Many senior religiaxs leada's,
saneofman, likeAyatollahBeheehtihavebeenkrmtodateasmmm'o-
mising conservatives, have m adoptai a 'rebellims Marxist-like“ rhe-
toric. madditimtoAyatollathmueyni, scmenanbersof theclergynow
mtantlyusetennsanchas "theworkingclass' midi, inﬂsepast,was
omsidered anti-Islam.

mZOOctoberl979Merisadrwhonaturallyismtamppa-terofthe
LSSmete inhisnswspaper MAB-RESIN (“Islanic Rewlutim") an
articlewrportirgthatthelranianlslanickevolutim ausedmreharm
totheIBSRtknntothemitedStates.

mmmattackmgtheaazargangwernnent. Inthepastﬂrsanisalr
hasoftmacwsedtteﬁazargangwermentofwisﬁngtoreestabnshths
samehahregime,h1twithoutthesknh. Thisviewis sharedbymany
senior religious leada’s, andespecially loweredIeJmcleriee, aswellas
leftistparties.

It is intheomtactof this polluted anti-Medan amepheretlntthe
meeting, last week, of Engineer mzargan with Braezinskiin Algiers, has
bemmideredasaprovocativeactbythegeneral public. Inthat
heating, PrimeMinisterBazarganmsaeeatpmiedbymahimYazdi,
Minister of Foreign Affairs, and metafa Oman, Defense Minister. the-
thertmecrfalse,thesemimiividualshavebeen1abeledaspro-
Nun-mans. An added lack of precautim on their part was that not only
MrBazarganhadmtdemndedthereuu-noftheslnh, buthadtacitly
acquiesced, without any cannent, President Carter's regrt according to
whichthedeposedshahhadmdesiretoengageinpoliticalactivitym
U.s. soil. Mm'eover, after his talks with Brzezimi, Mr Bazargan,
wittmt hesitatim or any reservatims, tamed his talks as "cordial."
Instead, Mr Brzaziaukt labeled the talks timely as "mmntive."

35
Dauplarofswanicm

musMraazarganumittinglyemoaethmselfbocmshingdnrges. Per
veekspticrtotluthiselanieslndbeenmivimtobopplehim. (n
Mymwmte: "Asymmaee,ltnamgm,wmissittingin
frontofmeofthemstratedstaffnadaa’softmmteﬂmse,mses
sadness."

itselfanaffiliabeofﬁmmﬂnmyni,pablismdthemmmtottmt
partydtereinitdarandedmaazarganto "Wmmmumy
Cumilwitharepartonhistalkswiththemmtiveofw
SatanicPowerJ

By men of that sueday, 400 students sl'mting 'Elaelaln ellthh"
["mereisnocodmthllah"lstmmdtheu.s.mssy. mlestudenm
here picmresofnyatollahnnreyrummeirdmts; femle salient:
mheaddressea,arda11wiemedclubs. 'meycljnbedthehighulls
www.mmunmmmwmm,
andconfrontedU.S.lhrines.Subaeqaently negotiatimmpolitebnm—
Winglastedzmahtthismytineatlﬁckwebiuowed
ﬂruaghmeofthealbassywixﬂouaamauofﬂnsmdmtsatmted:
"meyaremrningdoanenta." Amulet-mm: "Let'soccupy
that nest of spies right away!" U.s. Marines used tear gas. '32 Iranian
students, holding Wet: next to me me, raided the
mad. Afterbeﬂdmcloseddoorsuﬂwﬂﬂmsmeymtered
tninirganiarreetedstaffnaubersofﬂneﬂnssmemeptm
mm,mssycinrged'affaires. Nobodyh‘ewhwnrlahqen
magedtoeempe.

Assomasﬂzeradiobmadcastthemofdleu.s.elbassyseime,
maagesamdmﬂmmvestartaﬂtodalmeﬂempidmbassy.
'maoffice ofmmldmneyni, Ayatollah Mmtazeri, uremilof
Btperts, thePeople's ibjahernin, andnum politicalmdcultural
organizatimsallhaveviwadﬂzeseimeofmeu.s.atassyas
reflecmguewinoftlxepeopleamnaveoaxgraunamuesmu.
w,dncxganofﬂnmparty,hasjoinedmtreclergy's
laticn.

&E

a?
mmmmmmmum
mmmmmaomtvspn

[M] mrimameetmgoflslanicsumwmiwmsheldatue
mfidi mimsity ichm, mmmeynistrongly attackedtheWeatand
"Westophilesﬁpointingwttmtallmemst'spmbmmmmamsed
bycheWest, partimlarlyﬂaethﬁted states.

ante-«ofamm'smssageisbemgrepmmcedbem:
"InfheNameotAllah. uremiante, treMuciful

ParatleastthepthOyearsallIranimsocialchsmlnvemived
with traitors tokeep Iran as a 'patimt" in a hospital. That patjmt has
justmwbeatreleased.8utheisst1uveryweaksﬂi11:ymcaxmt
acpectsuchapatimt,a£ta'aomnyyears,toimndiatelyrecoverm
releasefranmetmpiul.

'IheIranian societyhadcmtrached its illness frantheWestwhidz
mrwealth. Sodan'tamectmiswestemiumsstoababein
amaths,8years,¢25years.rcr50yearsthewesthasbnixmslﬁd
mnylranianeducatorsto,1nm,braimaahmeirlrmansmdmtswith
sidcwesternideas. 'Bms,toe)q>ectstxﬁzpadmtstorecoverimaiiately
ismreasmable. Immﬂntalllraniansocialstrataamgmps,
especially educators,hwebeeninf1wwedbyWestemershofonwa
definitepathartodeflectfmnthepaththeyalnﬂdfonomuderm
cimnstanoesymsrmldmtexpectﬂntsudieducammﬂeixstu-
daxtswinrightmymvefz‘anthatpaﬁiamtonmﬂepathofthe
people. m,dm'tdespair:tmpeop1ehas '
ym,yumgpeople,have£axﬂymrs. If Iran is mtpxgedboday,itwnl
besotmwzw. s‘maprgeisnevitabmapeoplemmnpointed
itsinness. Atﬂ'esmtofmycanpaigaﬂemtuumisto
ascettaind‘uenammoftkepmblan. ForttepastSOyearswehavebeen
ledastrayastotherealnamreofwrpmblen. Wacmsideredﬂnse
oormptmicxobeeaamrmre. Heregazdedmrcormpberaaamrdocmts.
metqaganﬂa,wroonupt&shadtxaimshdustobenevetmt
we should acquire allour applies, ”culture, andwrcivilizatim
franthewest, because, allegedly, we were devoid of all that.

Smhrottenideasuhiditheyixutiuedumxghcmnsptﬂmsamaeviult
stamtshadmimasredus,especiallymrywth,mregardpoismas
medicineforIran'aimuess. myﬂeeeczrnptersarestiufand
Wainallsectiuxsoflnmaxﬁmadmlmvmsinplymm
atpectpatimtssufferirqforSOyearstobeamedwiﬂdnaevemllnn-a,
days,ou:yaars. Asymhm,evmaamw1ﬂ1asinpleco1daanetims
needsxptoamﬂz'smdimlcate. IranvdzidﬂnssufferedZﬁOOyears
of rulebyself-styledgodsuﬂtyrmnical despots,haspartimlarly
mfferedovermepastwyears. mmmt'hemtyeamin
Iranianhistory: mladbemattadtedfmallsides,alllranian
social strata hadbealmnipﬂated.andwehadbeenoalp1etelydivested
ofouramanmre,i.e.,ofourselws. Notmlylran,mtthelaastin
general,mﬁd1hadbealequa11ydiveatedofitswlume.mtredim
andreviveitsculmre. wmwmmmm
hadsmvedussomxittoﬂxeﬂestandmtemizedusﬂatwehadfor-
gottenall Iran's heritagealdglm'ies. Wehadlostany faichinoup-
selves

Justafavdaysagaastrangervisitadwithueaniu’iedbopersuadem
that: 'Afteralllranmedsthemt,mmyeverytlﬁmfranmemat."
Iimnediatalymtmymersationwithtmtpetsm. Iraniansuust
ralizetrutwedonotneedmewast.mttmtitneedsm. 'meiasthas
mummitsmlmreismpermrtommaﬂmre (Westa'nmlmre
msderivedfmmtemunm);thenastismperiotmthemtin
allregamds. m,mmmmly,mtemculmhasbem
divestedofallitscammtsﬂmoughmsmagandamiedoutby
ﬁremst'sndceysvhomtjnnetooperate,evmtodny,mdu differaxt
guisesinlran. mmmaivesbedusofmmmre,delmhg
ustobeliaetiatallgoodstmfmtleﬂest. mlesswereviveour
mlmearﬁrediscovermselves,mlessuemstredisoovers its Mingle,
wewillbe mbletostarﬂmom'feet. Wemtwipemtfmmhram
themdﬂeet.“

Indlepast,vtm1ranianswiahedtomkeanavmue,anamt
building, adrug, aafahric popular, fashionable, orprestigiws, they
mugivethanfomjgnnme(mchasnooseve1tnm,ebc.n).mm
lostwrindividualitymdidmtity. Nowwetuvetlmmmtdmethievee,
bitinwdertoredismom'selvatheaastnustskmoffmedomm
theHast. SolongastheWestmaccastotremst,ywwillmtbe
hadepaadmt,axdaolorqastheulmnilees‘wlnareevexr
Hm,aremtthrwnoutof1ran,ouraremtre-edtmted,ywwinmt
attain independence. Iranian 'mtophila" will pevent us frcm
adzieving that irdependeme. We nust rediswver ourselves so that we
maybeableto stardonwrfeet. mueethasmtardwillmtgiveus
whatwereally need, but only its rejects, iaespectiveofthefactthat
theymightbe injuiwstolranians. Aaanexmple, Imuld like to,
Iwmthelprepeating afactmidllhavereommtedmmms
oocasims because it has input-eased me vividly: I read in a periodical
tintthesaleofoertaindmgsishannedinmemitedsmm,mtﬂnt
itisO.K.toexporttlmtotheMrdVbrld. Canymhragimthe
devious way the mited States has been treating us? My most likely
coxxsiderustobeinferiorevmtoaxdmls: tleywouldmtgivesuch
injurimsdrugseventotheirminals.Canymixmginethevile

' ' taistatea? (Idon't

%
E?
5
g
z
E
5
5

5%

.E

timing Zionism urinassacringom'Arabtreﬂmm. Until weave fully

amofampraninerneﬁuitaqmmtuehaibeminhismrmmtm
tuvenoubecme,andmt\ermpsms,wewinmtachievemdepen-
dance. truss vethinkixﬁepemently,kancamotbeixﬁepaﬁmt.

malizetheyareaﬂaeduiththeirmmlttme,amlmremidihadbeen
mtedfmxranabtoad,tmtwe,too, arepartofthismrld, andthat
mwishtomnageouramaffaixs. M‘sMyangpeoplemstbe

jobhe is holding. BeforeascertajnmgMymrsupetviscxoroolleague
is doing,youshould striwtodoanemellent job yourselves. Anycri-
ticisnslmldstartwithqrselves. Bachof us, especiallyour farmers,
nustmrklurd. Hemstmthedupedbytlnsevtnwiehtoameusto
our previms simatim purporting that our geneml well-being and fate

39
areomtingmtupmthewest. Wemstnotbedupedbythepmpagam
ofalchelamts. Qttaskliesfirstofallindoingagaodjobmt

ofmateverhasbemmtmstedtous. Ifymareasuﬂentwwmst
stmlywell; ifyouareateader,ymmstteachwll; ifyouarea
college professor, younust lecture well: if you are aim-mar, younust
farmweu;ifywareawllah,ywmstbeagoodmllah.ﬂnevayware,
mutwertaakhasbemmtmstedtoym,strivetod>agoodjob. Ifsuch
mattaptisuademamtianlbasissocietyasamleismwedam
dreamtirenatimvillbenefitfrmit. “utensifsamofymareidle,
don'tecpectotlm'stomrkfa'ym. Inthepastweacpectedtheuuted
Statestofeelsorryforusammaxpplymwithmpms. Irandidnot
medmlericanams: theyhadbeandetrimtaltolran. Anormst
U.S.agrea1mtswiﬂmusmredeleberimstous. Don't sit idlyand
ecpectotherstolabor for yw.You oughttolabor yourselves. 'me
Iraniannatimitselfmghttomrk.Itcanttmimplwtpmgramit
reallyneeds.

We trust be responsible in m—edmating ourselves mam-Jars. Wet-y
little bitofeffortamewdmtatjm cunts. Whatever jobyml’uvedoit
wnandedmtyun‘asaociatestodoagoodjob, too. Macannimt,
carriedoutmamtiomlhasis.winleadtorapidirmanmtofthe

mtryasamole.
‘Ibsunup:
Newstmtsitidlyandhaveothercamtriesmkfcrm.

wemstmtsitidlyandhnvempplies inpatedfrantheﬂeat.
We nust toil unselm, manage out can affairs, and forget theWest.

myGodpmtectallofymalﬂlnlpymtotrimpl-A inallymrelﬂenvors!
KHOHEYNI'S SON ALSO WANTS CLERGY PuRGBD

Tehran EAMDAD in Persian 30 Sep 79 p l, 2

[Interview with Seyyed Ahmad Khomeyni]

[Excerpt] The first part of Seyyed Ahmad Khomeyni's interview
with BAMDAD was published in yesterdays issue and was carried
around the world. Meanwhile within the country, the official
news agency and the mass media have also reported it.

In the second part of this interview the issues relating to
the revolution were propounded and discussed as was the role of

the various social groups in the present interval of the
revolution.

Seyyed Ahmad Khoneyni asked intellectuals not to measure all
the clergy with the same scale. Moreover, if the intellec-
tuals believe that some of the clergy are opportunists,

they should introduce them to society--and that is the duty
of all the people in the society.

The interview follows:

BAHDAD: You have talked about the classification of the clergy. This is
an opportunity for you to clarify this classification more clearly.

Ahmad Khomeyni: First let us discuss classification which I pointed out in
the beginning. Now, it is fashionable, by some who attack the clergy to

say that they are exposing religious despotism. They say the clergy do what
they wish to do. Here, it is necessary for me to give some explanation

about myself. Those who know me know that I always try to discuss only

what I have seen and that I am not intolerant. About the classification,

as I said before, a group of the clergy is in the religious schools; they are
students like the students in a university. During all the Emam's struggles,
these people came forward and took the Emam's thoughts to the villages,
hamlets, districts, towns, and cities. They were paid two or three hundred
tomans. They went to the villages and talked with people in their language.

hl
They are themselves from these villages and they knew where they must go.
They never finished their words with "ism or ist." Like the people. wherever

they went, they went bare footed and said, Mr Khomeyni issued a state-ant
and they discussed the text.

These people went to jail, they were beaten, tortured, and were pushed around.
Many times their schools were attacked. Because attacks on the universities
did not have good international repute, they attacked the religious schools.
But the attacks on these schools were not allowed to be published and nobody
cared about it. In those days, there was not a single week that Feyziyeh School
was not attacked. There was not a single week where there were no injuries
among the students of religion. There was not a week that sale of these
students were not arrested. These are our religious students, in a way you
could compare them to university students, but with one difference. A univer-
sity student would not go to a village, but the religious student has traveled
through villages. The struggle of a university student is limited to the
universities and to some extent to the cities, of course he was beaten, he
went to jail, but he was not involved in villages. Let us examine the main
difference between a teacher of religion and a university professor. Of
course some university professors resisted and did not bend under the weight
of injustice and tyranny, however we have not forgotten that the majority

of university professors, always bowed to the Shah and there are plenty of
photographs showing these gentlemen kissing the hand of the Shah or Farah.
Although the teachers of religious schools in Qom and other areas were placed
under tremendous pressure to meet with the Shah in order to attract public
attention. they did not meet with him, let alone greet or, God forbid, bow to
him. Show me one teacher of a religious school who throughout the duration
of the struggle met with the Shah, the Prime Minister or a Minister. This

is the difference between a teacher of a religious school and a university
professor. In those days, if you told a university professor that the Shah
wants to meet with you, and you must be at a certain place at a certain time,
he would not dare to refuse and he would go. However, all the pressures,
threats, entreats, and requests put on this group (religious school teachers)
were not able to make them meet with the Shah for even a minute, let alone,
bow in front of him or listen to him. Therefore, in the first group. there
are students and teachers of religious schools who were previously mentioned.
In the second group there were those who had finished their studies and were
getting out of schools with the right to practice, or because of certain
necessities in the villages or cities interrupted their education and were
not able to practice. They were scattered among the society in the Mosques,
religious centers, and villages. They themselves are divided into three
groups. The first group were the strugglers, meaning the ones who believed
in the nation's struggle. They struggled, were imprisoned, were beaten, and
were exiled. There are many examples of them. The second group consists

of those who were obedient to the Shah, obedient to the Shah's fanily. I
believe this group must be punished very severely. Their punishment must be
more severe than the punishment for the ordinary people, because they changed
the thoughts and beliefs of the people. In my opinion, this group must be
punished very severely. The third group, which consists of a large number

h2
of clergy, is the silent one, they were not happy with the Shah, or the
administration. But their disappointment was not because the Shah acted as

a stranger, because the Shah sold to the United States, because the Shah
connected Iran militarily, politically, culturally and economically to the
West. or because the United States was taking Iran's oil, but because in their
alleys, streets. or cities there was insolence. and the Shah or the government
did not stop these irregularities.

Purge of Clergy
BAHDAD: Do you believe in the purge of the clergy's?

.Ahmad Khomeyni: God willing, the purge of the clergy will be done in the future.
There is no doubt about it because this is what the ham thinks also. The era
of the monarchy will be set aside and the people will recognize the opportunists
and God willing will gradually know all these elements. However, the main
problem is with those who are propounding clercalism. They actually are

unhappy with only ten or twenty. If you take religion and Islam from the
people with what could you replace it, in order to unite the people? Let us
take Hr Taleqani, whom I really liked like my father and and I actually

loved him, when he died, the people solidly came out and again said the same
things which they said before the revolution [sic]. The people are massive

and we must not break the composition of these solid, hand-in-hand people.

Why? Because in Mr Taleqani's death the people showed the strength of their
solidarity and what bright results we could earn from this unity.

If we destroy this political and religious consciousness, we will cause the
biggest blow to this nation and this country. Of course, do not think that
I cannot understand why some people say do not touch the bad clergy because
they will demolish by themselves, but demolish the group of clergy who is
good, is working and has something beneficial to say, because they are
protecting a certain class, and whether willing or not they will not benefit
the poor. Is this a proper way of thinking?

You, who want to propound clercalism, think about it at night, you will find
that you are unhappy with only seven, eight, or ten people and not the rest.
80 come and name the people whom you do not like. Do not denouce all. come
and say this Ahmad Khomeyni is a bad man, he in trying to establish
clericalism, he is putting a great deal of pressure on us. Why are you afraid
to name them? Come and name them. Otherwise that same clergyman, who
suffered torture, who struggled, and now in the most difficult situations,
accompanies other brothers and sisters, and works in the villages and cities.
If you do not name the opportunists and the clergymen who are harming
Islam's roots, if you do not name the people who you believe betrayed us,
you are causing the biggest blow to the structure of the religion of the
nation whose solidarity, whether you agree or not, comes from the clergy.
Come and with great courage say that I do not like so and so and give the
reasons why. Say this man who has never been to jail, never been beaten,

and never been slapped, now is sitting uptown and making plans for downtown.
You name this man. then he also, will come and say that Mr intellectual.
whose hand till yesterday, was in the hand of the Shah. and is still enjoying
a good standard of living, is now talking about the people. He also must
come and submit names. th are you attacking each other indirectly? That
could in the end be harmful to the good people on both sides. That group
must also come and say that it does not like this specific "Hr intellectual."
who is making noise and talking about the people. when you name that certain
intellectual. a responsible intellectual who put all his possibilities

to serve the people will know that he is not the target of attacks. But

when the attack is indirect, the people in the streets think that the target

of attacks are all intellectuals and in this way the rest of the noble people
will suffer.

9540
050: 4906

hh
CONDITIONS FOR IHPOSING MARTIAL LAW APPROVED
Tehran BAHDAD in Persian 30 Sep 79 pp 1, 2

[Text] According to Article 65, international treaties, protocols, and
agreements must be approved by the National Assembly.

The Assembly for final study of the Constitution in its open session

yesterday afternoon approved another 5 articles of those related to legislation
in the Constitution of the Islamic Republic and one article related to the
circumstances of interpellation of the government in cases of non-agreement
among legislators, was sent to the commission for further study.

In yesterday afternoon's session chaired by Dr Beheshti, the articles related
to the conditions for establishing martial law and the terms of transfering
valuable national buildings and property, the terms for concluding inter-
national treaties, protocols and agreements, and the minister's duties toward
the National Assembly for answering its questions, as well as the article
about employing foreign experts were discussed and studied by the legislators.
After presentation of the opinions of the opposing and supporting legislators
on revision of the proposals, each article was approved by ballot. The
article regarding the conditions for employing foreign experts, which had
been mistakenly previously as approved by the Assembly on Thursday, was
approved yesterday, after brief consideration. Since this article did not
have enough favorable votes in the Thursday session, it was sent to the
Commission for revision and the revised text was approved in yesterday's
session. The articles approved in yesterday's session of the assembly are

as follows:

Article 64-with 56 votes in favor, none opposing, and6abstentions, "Government
buildings and properties which are national assets cannot be transferred

to others unless approved by the National Assembly. However, government
buildings and properties of limited value are transferable."

Article 65-with 50 votes in favor, 6 against and 8 abstentions. "Imposing

martial law is prohibited. In event of war and similar emergency conditions,
the Government may impose the necessary restrictions with the approval of
the National Assembly, but in any event the duration of this restriction

“5
may not exceed 30 days. If the need were to remain, the government must
get further approval of the National Assenbly".

Article 68-wlth 55 votes in favor, 1 against and 6 abstentions. "The employ-
ment of foreign experts by the government is prohibited unless, in case of
necessity. with approval of the National Assembly".

Article 69-with 60 votes in favor. 1 against and 2 abstentions. "In any case
when a legislator puts a question to a cabinet minister about one of his duties
the said minister should be present in the National. Assembly and answer the
legislator's question, and the answer must not be delayed more than 10 days,
unless by excuse acceptable to the National Assembly".

Returned to the Committee

Article 70 of the draft Constitution which was rejected in its entirety
yesterday because of the legislators' failure to agree. was sent to the joint
committee of the legislature for revision. It reads as follows:

Article 70--1.egislators may interpellate the government or one of the minis-
ters. The interpellation may be submitted when 10 legislators have signed
it, the interpellation must be answered in 10 days from the date it was
presented. After receiving the government or minister‘s reply the assembly
will give it's vote of confidence or no confidence. In the latter case. the
government or the minister who interpellated is dismissed and the prime
minister or that minister may not participate in the cabinet which is formed
iunediately thereafter.
NW DIVIWNINTS 1N mum WIRING PLANS new/nun
Beghded AL-JUHINRIYAH in Arebic 23 Nov 79 p 6

lzrticle by Hu'eyyed 'Abd-el-Zehreh: "AL-mrm on e Field Trip to
Oil Inetelletione et the beyji end el-Qeyyereh Refineriee: lien chelleng-
ing Problenejj/

53:57 He ere with wen who know no eleep to eweeten their rece egeinet
tine; teen who ere proud in their etruggle end chellenge of ell obeteclee
in the oil fielde--workere, engineere end nenegere.

we node e field tour of the conetruction end production eitee. 0n the oc-
ceeion of the cowletion of conetruction on the production unite edded to
the el~Qeyyereh end Beyji refineriee end lgoncerning/ the imrtmce of
theee unite end the role of our netionei poeeeeeione, AL-JUHEIIIYAR con-
ducted e number of eeetinge end diecueeione on thie experiment end ite
lofty inert for our beloved lreq.

el-Qeyyereh end Aephelt

The firet etop on our tour wee the el-Qeyyereh refinery. lt ee. ee if
ite ne-e conee tron ite product; it ie well known for producing high-grede
eephelt ee e rew uteriel ee well ee ite other producte, euch ee gee oil,
which ie ueed ee fuel in etetionery notore, light geeoil, end geeoline
(while oil). Ae we know, eephelt ie e neteriel which entere tbe heert of
the develop-ent proceee our country ie witneeeiog, epecificelly the con-
text of the network of roede connecting verioue eectione of the country.

However, the refinery, which begen producing 50,000 tone e yeer in 1955,
etill euffered from eevere neglect fro- the etendpoint both of ite eervicee
end worker-e. end indeed even of production, eince neny of ite byproducte
went to weete through flerlng. In eddition to thet, the proceee of ebut—
ting it down for the period 1958-63 pleyed e role of eignificence in the
phenonenon of ice neglect, ee e reeult of the policy of the nonopolietic
coqeniee.
The Revolution and the Achievement

”with the dawning of the new light of the 17-30 July revolution, ae a re-
eult of the party and revolutionary leadere' intereet following the im-
mortal act of nationalization. the oil eector witneeeed greet rapid devel-
opmente qualitatively and quantitatively, from the etandpoint of manage-
ment and project implementation. A conpreheneive review wae etarted in
thie field through development proceeeee. apecificelly the development of
the oil induetriee. Therefore the wheel of life in thie vital eector re-
eumed turning." Hith theae worde hr Juim De'bul Jaaim, manager of the al-
Qayyerah refinery, began hie tell: to AL-JUHHUIIYMI, which he continued by
etating "New 1 would have wiehed you to eee the real etete in the peat ae
conpared with today, and how great the difference hee become! It ia the
revolution of accoqlielwaent, the revolution of change, the revolution of
eerioue unremitting labor alwaye aimed at progreae. Thie refinery re-
ceived no attention until after the revolution, during which work and ex-
paneion began with an increaee in productive capacity ae well ae euch oth-
er eervicee aa traneportation and houeing. The refinery expaneion wae com-
pleted in May 1978 with the addition of the eecond dietilletion unit, which
hae a capacity of 120.000 tone a year. The organization'e etaffe ieple-
mented it directly and ite productive capacity then reached 180.000 tone
per year. The productive capacity of the third unit in the refinery expan-
eion, which waa coqleted a month before the epecified date. in aleo
120,000 tone per year; thue the total capacity will be 300,000 tone of
eephalt per year beeidea other byprodurza.

"In thia regard one can etete that the project, whoee coeta come to 3.05
million dinare, eleo includea a group of tanke, a platform for loading and
filling tank trucka, a tower for cooling proceee water and a boiler.
Domeetic pereonnel perticipated in it by taking over the civil engineering
work, epecification and etandarde examination, and direct eupervieion of
conatruction in all etagee, and the experience there had many poeitive
featuree which took the form of great efforta and conetant zeal to perform
on the part of our workere and engineere.

"Beeidee all that, the el-Qeyyarah refinery hee witneeeed other expaneione
which are coneidered a eource of pride for the democratic reletione between
management and workere. The workere have taken the inplementetion of a
number of projecte ineide the refinery on their ahouldere in the place of
contractore, and have thereby achieved a eucceee unmatched in terne of time
and coeta. Among the mattere accmliehed were:

"Conetruction of a modern atorehouee building to which 200,000 dinare had
been allocated and which wee conetructed for 50,000 dinare; conatruction
of a maintenance ehop which had been appraieed at 50,000 dinare, which wee
conetructed for 36,000; expanaion of the garage and conetruction of a
eafety and fire department with a garage for fire truche which had been
appraieed at l5,000 dinare but wee built for 7,000 in juet 52 deye; the
laying of cablee to eupply all projecte with electricity. including
lighting for the outer wall, which wee eetieated to take a year and wee
built in a week; and conetruction of e ehelter to which l70,000 dinare
were allocated and which wee conetructed for 25,000 dinere."

ﬂeet ing Chel lengee

After that we net with Bng Azad Nuri Hehnud, project naneger. who talked

to no about the challengee, the expertiae acquired and the role of doneetic
entitiee in conetruction, eeying "The fact ie that the proceee of expanding
the al-Qayyereh Iefinery in a year or two in addition to new production
unite ie not an eaey one, from the etandpoint of the ataffe involved or
such other nattere ea the renoteneee of the area for workere, scene of
traneportetion, houeing, building neteriale, and equip-mt. However. we
have been able to trenecend ell thie with the will end deter-ination to
achieve, eo that there will be no pretexte for the comany to delay the
work. epecifically civil engineering work, which alweya conee firet-work
related to concrete facilitiee, tank foundatione, 'etreete, worioue build-

inge, tower pletforna, equipnent, bridgee, furnace platform, the control
room and eettleeent ponde.

"we enberked on conetruction and actual production began in October, thet
ie, before the etipulated tile-1 poeitive eatter and object of pride to
no. The inepection during prelininary operation wee a eucceee, and 2 daye
after etartup we were eelling producte, which ie an exeqlary letter ee
fer ae projecte go, eince perforeence wee higher than the deeign rate, or
l08 percent, which ie coneidered rare ee far ae al-Qeyyerah crude oil goee.

"The fact ie that eucceee in thie job may be attributed to the challengee.
He gained experience from the firet challenge which faced ue in Project
M laet year, when the project wee carried out but did not operate ae de-
eired, working rather at 90 percent due to eoee errore. Therefore our ex-
perience with the third unit began with preciee foruulation of epecifica-
tione, changee in deeign and eizee, and application of theee changee to
the project. In reality, it wee a big eucceee."

In addition to that, eaid Eng Aud Nuri, "The dietinctive characterietic
of the achieve-tent ie that not the Projecte Inlenentation Depart-eat but
rather a swell number of do-eetic etaffe in the Technical Department car-
ried it out. The benefite realized are:

"Piret, the Technical Department acquired rare expertiee in negotiation,

operation, neintenance, coordination among departmente and inetallation of
mechanical work.

"Second, for the firet tine we have acquired expertiee in treating heavy

oil and al-Qeyyarah can becone e echool in thie eubject fro. the refining
etendpoint.
"Third, benefiting from goo pollution treetnent."

The workers on the Project

Ho hold e nooting with sons of the workers. non who exerted oxceptionel of—
forto. worked oven outsido their opociolized fields in the reel to ocean-

lish the job end continue the progress of tho revolution. end, expressing
their joy et its unlimited genorooity, govo without limit.

Solih Huhoned Selnon. e worker in tho Pipeline end welding Section:

He begen his telk by eoying, "He undertook to perform the job es soon es
poeoible, whotevor the difficulties night ho, to express our love of tho
revolution end the core it hos token of us end to underline the clinete of
denocretic reletions which provoils enong our renks. we alleged to seve
opecific suns as for os dooro end windows go, since we nonufoctured those.
He olso denoliehed end erected (jmlunet) end did construction work."

His colleegue the worker Neyif Borjee ﬁche-ed:

He begon by oteting, "we did not know tho sweetness of sleep. Although
the work we performed, like workshops end storehouses, were not our field
of epecielizetion, we continued the job nonetheless becsuse we did not went
the connectors to teko it--rether, we her! the copecity end hed only to ex-
ert efforts. indeed, through effort, cooperetion end insistence, our work

woo good end lgong/ in record time. This is the duty we, the workers.
hove towerd our revolution."

The worker Ahmed 'Abd-ol-lehnon, Project Electric Heintenence Deport- ;t,
comenting on the project, srstod:

"Project iuplementotion ropresonto the progrooo of the course of the revo-
lution end its cos-ending porty. This io one of the rovolution'o occoup-
lishnonts end benefits for the whole people, boceuse our country is in con-
stont growth end every worker must teke port in the procoos of conetruc-
tion, in o roce with tine, et the loweet cost. 0:: support end response
from officiele ie constent end the neneger of tho instellotion is content-
ly present, which hoe node us coqete greotly over the job. This is whet
the loeders end our porty, the Areb Sociolist Be'th Perty. went of us."

The worker Khueebu Qeein consented by soying,

”As for oo olectricol neintononce work goes, this tokes numerous for-s end

includee the erection of ell new shops end werohouseo. The new depertnont
mode o coneitrnent to the controctor, but he woo not eble to corry it out

in e proper manner, whereos our working group wee eble to do so. end in
loos time, sowing lorge enounts of money. He oloo loid o ceble line which
con cover the reeidentiol town end the refinery es well. As for es the
project goee, thet ie e eource of pride to ue end ell the eone of our
netion. we ere eoldiere of the revolution end whet we heve done ie nothing
new to eny one of ue but ie juet e little loyelty to our revolution.

The Servicee Sector

Servicee pley en extremely ieportent role in increeeing end ieproving pro-
duction end increeeing worker productivity. In the light of thet. the
17-30 July revolution hee etruggled tireleeely eince ite firet dey to pro-
vide ell eervicee for workere in every eector. It wee neturel thet eer-
vicee in the oil eector ehould enjoy greet ettention from officiele, in e

nenner hernonioue with the eepiretione of the perty end the revolution to
creete en edvenced oil induetry.

In the couree of the oil eector plen to provide houeing unite for workere

on oil projecte, work eterted on the el-Qeyyereh refinery reeidentiel town
with the conetruction of 68 hoeee to he built in 22 nonthe. It ehould be

nentioned thet theee houeee ere broken down into ls for white coller work-
ere end 50 leborere, epecificelly thoee on duty in the refinery; when they
ere built, enny problene will he eolved, including treneportetion.

Pinelly. we nuet reelize thet the reeidentiel town now hee 104 houeee. In
eddition to thet, there ie e club for workere in the refinery. in eddition
to e novie houee, while work in now underway et full pitch to light the

etreete of the reeidentiel town end repeir houeee which ere in need of re-
peir.

In eddition to ell thet, the refinery'e vehiclee provide treneport for the
workere end neet their foodetuff requiremente twice e week.

Iron el-Qeyyereh to heyji, our eecond etop.
The Beyji Refinery preneion Project

with noet confidence end pride, thie project in to be coneidered e eplendid
echieveeent in the forwerd eerch of the revolution, eince doneetic lebor
conetructed it directly 100 percent.

The refinery wee built in July 1978 with e cepecity of 10,000 berrele of
crude oil per dey. Hort eterted on the new unit in July of leet yeer end
thet wee put into production in July 1979.

The project, whoee coete cone to 1.5 nillion dinere, coneiete of e refining
unit with e cepecity of 10,000 herrele per dey; thue the refinery'e totel
cepecity will be 20,000 berrele e dey.

The project eleo includee e group of anke, relying on the old refinery for
eupply, etorege, eteen end eir eervicee end eefety end neintenence unite.
As for the sections, these are:
The crude oil distillation unit.
The white oil sweetening unit and the gasoline reactor unit.

Production, 107 percent of design capacity, consists of white oil, black
oil, and "heavy naphtha" or boiler fuel.

Finally, we should realize that four other tanks are being constructed to
increase the storage capacity in the refinery. as the refinery aanager.
Eng Hilal 'Abd-al-lsuaq Hashia, says.

This work, the second production unit, was cospleted in record tiae--9
months.

Dooestic staffs operations in the Bayji refinery are performing and they
will be considered the core of the giant Salah-al-Din Refinery.

The Project and Donestic Staffs

The General Oil Projects Organization, an organization which is responsible
for the construction of all oil sector projects, inleasnted this project;
in addition, it is responsible for design. construction or construction
supervision, as well as making contracts and delivery. It delivers coa-
plated projects to the oil organizations. The Ministry of Oil, being con-
cerned with the system of direct project inlenantation by donestic staffs,
established a general organization within the organisation which specialized
in inleaenting projects doaesticelly and it provided this organisation
with the aost modern material, equipaent, laboratories and personnel. It
was successful with its projects by this aethod, saving aonay and ties and
acquiring additional eapertise. Among the projects it iqleaented, or
whose issplenentations it gupgrvised, were the projects to develop the
Nahran 'Uaar, al-Luqays lgigl, Jabal Pakkab. lusurgsn and Abu Ghurab fields,
to lay a pipeline fro. Kaysan to Basrah. the Mina'al-Bakr project in the
Arab Gulf with a capacity of 60 million tone, the Iraq-Turkey pipeline pro-
ject, the oil products pipeline project between Baghdad and Basrab, and
many others.

In the light of this increasing experience of our do-estic staffs, we find
that most of the projects are now being carried out directly in record tins
and at minimum cost. Visiting those of our engineers who participated in
implementation of the project, we last with the assistant project aanager,
senior engineer ‘l'ha'ir Taha al—Shaykb Ahmad, who spoke, saying:

"In reality, this project is not the only one we have carried out and super-
vised in full, but is to be considered the sixth. The direct inle-entation
process is to be considered very good because it saves large aaounts of

money in addition to training Iraqi staffs to ilplenent further projects in
the future. On this occesion, no recourse wee nede to eny foreign experts
et eny stege of iwlenentetion in this project, since we followed up on ell

ectivitiee stertins fro- the procure-eat of. equip-ent end ending with erec-
tion end construction ectivities.

"In this context I would like to point out thet construction stetf workers
pleyed e big role. lie cowleted the project in e period of just 9 nonths.
3 nonths of which were for nechenicel instelletion ectivities end six for
civil end other work."

The engineer supervising the project. Mr Mel-ad 'Ali Huseyn. counted by
seying:

"Contributing to the success wss the expertise of the perticipents, workers
end engineers. ‘l'henks to their cooperetion, we neneged to elininete ell
the difficulties which we feced, enong which I light mention the reeoteness
of the eree, site preperstion, housing, end trensportetion, since most
workers ere from outside the eree. The help of officisls end the ettention

of the workers pleyed the nsjor role in reducing ohstecles end shortening
time."

Finally, we should reelice thet the two projects were ineugureted on Hondey
l2 Nave-her 1979 under the eegis of Mr ‘reyih 'Abd-el-Ksrin, number of the
Revolutionery Connend Council end einister of oil, who preised the greet

efforts nede end amended the cepebility of ell those teking pert in the
two projects.
GOVERNMENT MUST RENE" PUBLIC CONFIDENCE
Jerusalem HAHODI‘A in Hebrew 5 Nov 79 p 2
[Editorial by H. H.: "A Test of Confidence")

[Text] Everyone agrees that the present government needs strengthening.
The confidence that it achieved when it began is being steadily wasted.
Indeed, it hops from crisis to crisis. and the internal crises obscure the
crises in foreign policy. The economic failure obscures the political
achievements abroad, but most worrisome of all is the disintegration of
internal discipline. A coalition that cannot keep its word cannot demand
the confidence that it needs so much, and not only in parliamentary vote.

The proposals that were crystallized into a reorganization of the government
through changes in assignments came as a result of internal demands. The
quarrels in the Liberal Party weaken the position and the authority of

the government. There is no longer any confidence that personnel changes

in the Ministry of Finance will solve or heal the country's economic ills.
Hr Erlikh, who accepted the "party's decision." is willing to accept the
post of deputy prime minister as a way out from under the crisis that had
befallen him. Few are ready to accept the "way out" as an inescapable
necessity. The government's weakness in economic matters is further
expressed by the internal conflicts; the ministers make one another fail.

The proposal to appoint Mr Erlikh deputy prime minister appears to be an
honorable personal way out, but not a way out of the complications into
which the government has been thrown against its will. There were other
proposals for reorganizing the government, but some of the members defeated
them for considerations that do not originate in the needs of the state.

Hr Dayan's resignation created new possibilities that do not require legis-
lative changes. The government preferred to take the easiest way. But
this is not the way by which the government can strengthen its position and
authority to receive far—reaching proposals by which it might rescue the

economy from the crisis. To achieve that goal the government must renew
public confidence.

5“
This confidence depends on the extent to which the government can honor
the obligations that it assumed. Once it shows such weakness. it loses
the support of public confidence. The coalition was founded on fundamental
principles to which all its members agreed. Agudat Yiara'el considers the
progress that has been achieved so far as a realization of the coalition
agreements. It has relinquished positions and has not demanded important
status for itself. But its agreement to support the government was given
conditionally. The agreements are all of a piece, and it is impossible to
loosen a single one of the layers of support on which this coalition has
arisen.

The reform of the abortion law was known as one of the foundations on which
the coalition rested. For 2 years it has repeatedly demanded implementa-
tion of the obligations that were assumed when the government was estab-
lished. The evasion of the implementation has created a deep depression.
The demand for annulment of the "social" section unites wide circles in
Israeli society and is not limited exclusively to religious circles. Much
has already been said and written on this subject. The proposed reform is
minimal. It does not annul the entire law; this is not acceptable to anyone
who is concerned about the future of the nation. Israel cannot be inferior
to other nations. In its present form the law undermines the foundations

of the nation's existence. It contains no economic or material argument to
answer the fundamental question. The Jewish people cannot live with the
possibility that any woman can demand public assistance in killing her embryo.
It has been said that in its present proportions the law permits the murder
of a fetus for the sake of convenience. This is a struggle over the image
of Israeli society. Jewish morality is not to be tested only by the cri-
teria by which the Knesat grants approval for the murder of a fetus.

If the government wants to strengthen its moral power and authority in the
eyes of the people, it is not enough for it to demonstrate its tenacity by
implementing an unpopular economic policy. It must first and foremost
strengthen the moral foundations of the society. It must turn the battle
toward a reform of society, to root out permissiveness everywhere. and
undoubtedly much depends on its ability to halt the spread of the atmos-
phere of irresponsibility. We see in the subject of abortion an important
preventive measure. a basis for the restoration of the image of the society.
No demagogic complaint can withstand this need.

Agudat Yisra'el has shown great patience, and overall consideration for the
government's distress. But there is a limit to this patience. When Agudat
Yisra'el is asked to support the government, it is entitled to make its sup-
port conditional on a test of confidence on a subject that it sees as
supremely important to the nation. If the government cannot withstand the
foul stream of people who would destroy the nation completely, it cannot
demand that its credit be restored. This is a serious test. Those who
pull the strings have to be aware of this obligation. If the coalition's
discipline has become so weak that it cannot fulfill an obligation that

is assumed when it was established, it cannot ask Agudat Yisra'el to help
it save others.

9045
cso: 4805 55
WRITER LOOKS AI U.S. PROPOSALS 0“ 5001333“ LEBANON
Tel Aviv HA'ARETZ in Hebrew 8 Nov 79 p 9

[Article by Z'ev Shif: The Habib Program; Along With a Desire to Achieve
an Arrangement among All Sides in Southern Lebanon the 0.5. Is Trying to
Create a New Channel, Outside the Camp David Agreements, for Contacts with
Syria and the PLO"!

[Text] Philip Habib, the American assistant secretary of state, has con-
cluded his Middle East tour without having achieved anything practical in
his dealing with the complications in Lebanon. However, let us not deduce
that the U.S. efforts to organize a "package deal" in Lebanon have ceased.
Certainly contacts with all the parties will continue. For us in Israel,

it is appropriate to pay attention to this American effort, in which Hash-
ington is seeking to create an additional channel of contact and negotiation
outside that of Camp David.

From what Habib reported in Israel and in the neighboring countries it is
clear that the Americans have not yet crystallized their program. They have
brought up various ideas and proposals, which when collected will tell us
Washington's line of thought and planning. The interesting thing is that
the program contains no attempt to find a settlement for the whole Lebanese
problem. Probably it contains no more than what the reporters wrote about
convening a conference in which all the concerned parties would take part.
Apparently Hashington has understood that the time for such a proposal has
not yet arrived, and has therefore decided to concentrate at this stage

on the problem of southern Lebanon only. And this is correct, because it
is from that area that the danger of an outbreak of war seems most likely.

What are the basic principles of the Americans' ideas concerning southern
Lebanon? To each of the participants they offer limited "compensation" in
exchange for participating in a settlement. Syria would have to support the
settlement and compel the saboteurs to withdraw from southern Lebanon. The
compensation: Israel would stop its incursions into Lebanon and would
refrain from flights over Lebanon. In the second stage the Lebanese govern-
ment would take control of the enclaves, which would fall under full Lebanese
sovereignty. But the greatest and most practical compensation would be that
Hashington would grant indirect recognition to the Syrian military presence
in Lebanon, and to the function that the Syrians fulfill there.

56
The saboteurs would withdraw from southern Lebanon and would refrain from
infiltrating into that area, or into Israel from there. The compensation:
In the course of time Haddad's enclaves would be abolished. Israel would
stop attacking the saboteurs. The great compensation would be that thereby
the dialog between Washington and the PLO would be strengthened.

All the Participants Are Fearful

To Israel, the U.S. proposes to pressure Haddad to agree to the entrance

of the Lebanese army into the enclaves. It demands that Israel stop its
attacks on the saboteurs, and limit its overflights to the necessary minimum.
The compensation: The saboteurs wOuld withdraw from southern Lebanon and
stop attacking the enclaves. Along with the inducement there is also a
local threat against Israel; if it does not participate, the attack on
Israel's image in the U.S. will continue.

The Americans also have proposals with respect to the Lebanese authorities
and UNIFIL. The two latter deserve compensation. The Lebanese Government
would achieve practical sovereignty in southern Lebanon by means of this
program, and would achieve more respect for this sovereignty from the PLO
and Israel. UNIPIL (i.e., the UN) would-also achieve more respect; the
UN, and not the U.S., would oversee the settlement.

There is no doubt that the American objective, beyond just a ceasefire,

is clear to all the important participants. Therefore they have become most
apprehensive, and have refrained from giving immediate binding answers to
the American emissary.

Prom the way in which Philip Habib was received in Damascus, it appears that
the Syrians have not yet decided which way to go. They are not rejecting
the Americans, but they are seeking to learn how the proposal would take
shape. The Syrians are worried; to accept the American pr0posal would
improve their prospect of political maneuvering in the Middle East and

also with respect to the USSR. And this would be in addition to American
recognition of their military presence in Lebanon. 0n_the other hand they
fear that the whole plan is only an "American-Israeli plot" aimed at dragging
them deviously into the Camp David agreements, and creating a split between
them and the PLO. Their conclusion for the present is not to break contact,
and to find out for certain how the American proposals are developing.

The saboteurs are even more seriously worried. To relinquish their grip

on Lebanon, or even only on southern Lebanon, would seriously hurt them.

By means of the presence that they have created in the area (the Tyre
enclave and inside the UNIPIL areas), they win attention and achieve some-
thing. The presence is a card in their hand both in the Arab world (Saudi
support) and against the U.S. It is therefore hard to assume that they will
be ready to clear out of the Tyre enclave. At most they will be ready to
play the card of their presence in the UNIPIL area; i.e., a limitation of
the number of saboteurs and an announcement that they will observe the
cease-fire.

57
But even in this matter things are not so simple. Fatah has indeed ordered
a cease—fire in southern Lebanon. but some of the rejectionist organizations
are not obeying the order and are attacking the positions of Haddad's men.
Furthermore, it appears that Fatah interprets the cease-fire in its own

way. It sees it as a cease-fire between itself and Israel. It is exploiting
the fact that the IDF has nearly stopped its activity. and only from time

to time hits positions and settlements in the enclaves with artillery fire.
These are to be sure controlled incidents. but they are evidence that the
saboteurs do not take Israel's repeated warnings very seriously.

Haddad's Direction

The Lebanese Government also faces problems. Its proposals to reduce the
forces in southern Lebanon have met with opposition. The leftists in the
villages are not happy at the thought. nor is the Pm accepting the idea
unconditionally. The Lebanese army, which to be sure numbers close to
15,000 men, is being built up very slowly. It has many loose formations.
but only one complete brigade. The Beirut government, especially, does
not want to throw that brigade into combat in the south. where the Hoalems
among the soldiers may outnumber the Christians. At the moment the Lebanese
army has one brigade in Ka'ukba (the eastern part of southern Lebanon). In
addition an under—manned battalion is spread out next to the UNIFIL units.
Under such conditions the Lebanese government has no prospect of achieving
anything more than symbolism in southern Lebanon; e. g., establishing an
additional force in the Tyre enclave or even in a buffer operation. The
Americans have not asked Haddad what he thinks. They are maintaining con-
tact with him through Israel, just as they are maintaining contact with the
PLO through the Syrians and the Lebanese Government. But clearly Haddad
does not intend to sacrifice himself on the altar of this prograa. Lately
he has spoken of his readiness to receive a unit of the Lebanese army at
Muraj 'Iyun, but he does not mean a force like the one that tried to descend
on the enclave last year by way of Ka'ukba. when he speaks of a Lebanese
force, he intends to scrutinize every officer and soldier in it before they
will be permitted to take up a position in the enclaves.

Israel also faces complex problems. She does not want the American ideas
to develop into a program that will mean perpetuation of the Syrian presence
in Lebanon and abolition of the enclaves. It is clear that Israel will not
lightly relinquish its position in southern Lebanon. In whatever arrange-
ment is reached in Lebanon she will demand that her interests also be taken
into consideration.
RABBINIC COUNCIL mums COALITION FUTURE
Tel Aviv HA'ARlV in Hebrew 15 Nov 79 p 17

[Article by Avraham Tirosh: “The Council of Torah Greats: The 16 Rabbis

Who Hill Determine the Fate of the Coalition; Unlike Any Other Party, Agudat
Yisra'el Is Not Free to Make Decisions on Hatters of Principle; Such Hatters
Are Decided by the Torah Greats and Cannot Be Appealed; The Failure to Amend

the Abortion Law Requires in the Opinion of the 16 Rabbis Quitting the
Coalition"]

[Text] The future of the government coalition is now to a large extent in the

hands of 16 rabbis, known as Torah Greats, who make up the "Council of Torah
Greats" of Agudat Yiara'el.

They had decided some time ago that if the abortion law is not amended the
"Aguda" will quit the government. They are now expected to make the final
decision as to the date of leaving the government—should they grant another

extension for another attempt to amend the law, or should the "Aguda" quit
imediately?

This is what makes the way Agudat Yisra'el is run as a party unique. Unlike
any other political party, the institutions of Agudat Yisra'el are not free
to make decisions on matters of principle and on crucial issues. All such
matters are referred to the Torah Greats, whose decision cannot be questioned
or appealed. The political bodies of the "Aguda" only decide on on-going,
nonessential matters, while the Council of Torah Greats seldom goes into
anything other than matters of principle. This happened, for example, in
the previous term of the Kenesset, when the council was asked to intervene
in the dispute between Members of Kenesset Rabbi Henaham Porush and Jacob
Gross, when the former refused to yield his seat in the house to the latter,
according to the agreement [as published].
Yeshivah Heads and Hassidic Rabbis

Who are the nembers of the Council of Torah Greats? How are they chosen?
How does this institution operate?

The Council of Torah Greats has been in existence since the inception of
Agudat Yiara'el. It constitutes the supreme body of the ultra-orthodox
party. It does not have a fixed amber of members, and at present it has
16 members. Those are yeshivah beads and hassidic rabbis (the rabbis of
the hassidic dynasties). "hen a seat on the council is vacated, the council

adds a new member. If a seat is vacated by a deceased hassidic rabbi, his
heir automatically takes his place in the council.

The Council of Torah Greats does not choose a chairman, but its oldest
active members who have the highest status in the orthodox and hassidic
world are generally considered the heads of the council. Thus, for instance,
Rabbi Bliezer Kenahem Schach, the head of the Ponibezh Yeshivah, and the
Gerre rebbe, Rabbi Simha Bonita Alter, are considered the heads of the Council
of Torah Greats, having a decisive influence over its members.

In the present council there is also a four-member col-ittee, acting as a
"secretariat" which administrates the council, prepares its agenda, and
takes care of technical matters. Its members are Rabbi Plnhas Henahem Alter
(the brother of the Gerre rebbe and the chairman of the Center of Agudat

Yisra'el), Rabbi Shalom Noah Brozovski, Rabbi Barukh Shin'on Schneersohn,
and Rabbi Hoshe Shapira.

These Are the Members of the Council

The present 16 matters of the council are:

Yeshivah heads: Rabbi Blieser Heoah- Schach, head of the Ponibezh Yeahivah;
Rabbi Pinhas Henahem Alter, head of the S'fat bet Yeshivah; Rabbi Simah
Zissel Broida. head of the Rebron Yeahivah; Rabbi Shalom Noah Brozovski,
head of the Slonim Yeshivah; Rabbi Moshe Shapira, head of the B'er Ya'akov
Yeshivah; Rabbi Yohanan Sot'er, head of the Brloy Yeshivah; Rabbi Barukb
Shim'on Schneersohn, head of. the Tchebin Yeshivah; Rabbi Avraham Ya'akov

Zelsnik, head of the Rt: Hayim Yeshivah; Rabbi Nisim Karlitz, head of the
Hazon Ish Comnity.

Hassidic Rabbis: Rabbi Simha Donia Alter, ,the Gerre rebbe; Rabbi Moshe
Y'hoshua ﬂager, the Vishnitzer rebbe; Rabbi Sh'muel Bliyahu Taub, the
Hodzhitzer rebbe; Rabbi Avraham Y'hoshua Tversky, the Hahnovker rebbe; Rabbi
Avraham Heinberg, the Sloniner rebbe; Rabbi Y'hiyel Y'hoshua Rabinovitz, the
Bialer rebbe; Rabbi Avraham Ya'aqov Priedmann, the Sadgorer rebbe.
A Conference in Israel--Soon

The Council of Torah Greats of Agudat Yisra'el also operates in the United
States, headed by Rabbi Moshe Feinstein, and is considered an important
body, but it does not interfere in the affairs of Agudat Yiara'el in

Israel. A similar institution also exists in Europe. but is much less
active.

In about 2 months the Great Assembly of Agudat Yisra'el (the world conference
of the movement) will convene in Israel, and it will include the Torah Greats
from the United States and Europe. Among other things it will discuss the
expanding of the Council of Torah Greats in Israel. For a long time Rabbi
Solomon Zalman Auerbach has been heavily pressured to join (he is considered
the greatest rabbinic legal authority and is one of the two heads of the
yeshivah board) but has refused. Also the attempts to bring the Belzer

rebbe into the council have failed thus far.

The Council of Torah Greats convenes as the need arises, at the decision of
its senior members, following a consultation among them. The council
secretary, Shalom ﬂayim Porush, convenes the members, who usually come

accompanied by their hassidim and assistants, who wait outside the assed>ly
hall.

ﬁome of the elders of the council rarely show up because of poor health.
Those include the Bialer rebbe, the Sloniner rebbe, and the Hahanovker rebbe.

Generally the meeting opens with the interested parties-~meﬂaers of the
Kenessct, members of the institutions of the movement, and others—presenting
the issue, while the Torah Greats ask to hear their opinions—the opinions
of the "bosses." Afterwards the politicians leave the room and the council
members discuss the issue among themselves. At the end of the discussion
the members of the Kenesset are called back in to hear the decision.

Kept Up-to-Date

Although the council meders are renowned rabbis who spend their lives in
the world of Torah and hassidism, it is incorrect to asslme that they are
out of touch with the world at large and with current public issues. They
all have aides and confidante, which include the Agudat Yisra'el medaers
of the K9088“! and the leaders of the movement, who regularly keep then up-

to-date and seek their advise on matters other than those dealt with by the
Council of Torah Greats.

Thus, for instance, HR Shlomo Lorentz is a follower of Rabbi Schach; MK Rabbi-
Y'hudah Heir Abramowitz is a Gerre hassid, MK Jacob Gross is s Vizhnitzer

hassid, and MK Rabbi Henahem Porush is close to the heads of the yeshivot from
Jerusalem (Hebron. ‘L’tz Hayim), who are meters of the council.
When they deal with the current public issues which are brought before then,
the members of the Council of Torah Greats are quite well informed, and
when they are about to determine the "Torah stand" on the issue, they often

consider the public and political aspects as well. albeit as secondary to
the halakha [religious law].

There Is No Controversy

A distorted picture of the issue of unending the abortion law was created

in public. There were no substantive differences of opinion in the council
on this issue. and in the opinion of _s_l_l_ its members. failing to amend the
law will sake it mandatory for Agudat Yisra'el to quit the government. The
only differences of opinion had to do with the question of when to quit. The
Gerre rebbe had originally demanded that the amendment be passed at the last
sunser session of the Kcncsset,vhile Rabbi Schach was willing to wait until
the winter session. Finally the Gerre rebbe relented but insisted that the
law be amended within a month after the start of the winter session.

Now that the amendment was voted down by the Kenssset, if it does not 9838
in the days ahead. there is no doubt that the Council of Torah Greats will
order the Aguda HK's to quit the coalition.

9565
C50: 6805
RELIGIOUS PARTY REPUDIATBS ABORTION VOTE
Jerusalem HAWDI'A in Hebrew 110 Nov 79 p 2
(Editorial: "The Vote and Its Significance")

[Text] It is difficult to go back to our daily affairs after the shameful
vote in the Keuesset on the abortion law. This vote has many implications
which were hard to discern during the sorry state of affairs produced by

the shocking blow. Still, this vote deserves to be analysed in terms of

its significance, at least as an edifying lesson for the future. We are
writing these lines on the assumption and the hope, that indeed the amend-
ment will be discussed again soon, since the coalition cannot shun the com-
mitment it has made if it does not want to comit suicide, and if it wants

to retain whatever public and political credit it has left according to public
opinion.

We must express our respect for the effort the coalition has made in this
regard. Gathering 510 votes, most of whom are non-religious, is no small
matter. First and foremost we must give credit to the four members of the
Agudat Yisra'el faction. They have done their utmost to persuade the
members of the coalition to vote for the amendment. This effort bore fruit.
What hurts all the more is that the effort failed because of one vote.

He shall not belabor the question of the dissidents and those who shun their
coalitional responsibility. They will have to account for their actions, and,
undoubtedly, they have forfeited their public trust. We assume that the

vote of the justice minister in opposition to the opinion of the government
requires a strong reaction. A government which does not react to such
disIOyalty loses the little prestige it may still have. Expecting the govern-
ment to do all this does not exempt it from fulfilling its coalitional
comitment. It cannot rely on negative precedents. It may be true that

the Alinement had maneuvered coalitional agreements into a blind alley until
election time. The late Levi Bshkol had coinec the infelicitous phrase:

"Who says you are not allowed to make promises, but who says you have to

keep your promises.“ We had innocently assumed, that with the change of
government there was also a change in the methods of public deception which

had characterized several previous governments.
Close to 25 years Agudat Yisra'el sat in the opposition desert, so long as
the possibility of joining the coalition did not exist. There were those
who did not accept its demands in religious matters, and there were those
who were willing to meet only certain demands. Notsothe coalition which
the Likud had formed. It had made an explicit commitment. Agudat Yiara'el
had given it enough time to amend those laws. He do not withhold credit
where credit is due. Some of the co-itments were met in full. The Likud
needed a great deal of courage to make those amendments, going against the
wishes of the opposition. But the Likud knew fron the beginning that this
issue is closest to the heart of those who abide by religious laws.

There is no question here of outside pressures. This is purely a matter of
conscience. The abortion law as a whole and the social article in particular
allow the murder of embryos in their mother's womb. It is not possible to
keep silent in the face of such a law which exists in the Jewish state.
Certainly we cannot be partners in a government which permits such a horrible
pitfall, and which, better yet, is required to assist the embryos' murderers.
The expectation for a coalition initiative to amend the law is natural and
very simple, perhaps too innocent in the eyes of shrewd politicians, but it
emanates from the pure heart of Jews who believe in the existence of the

Creator of the Universe, and of a pristine Jewish ethic inspired by the
giving of the Law at Mount Sinai.

The expectation of seeing this matter rectified stems precisely from the
overall attitude of appreciation for the effort which the coalition had
expended. The task of disciplining a few rebels and responsibility-dodgers
is not too great and it cannot be shunned. The Likud cannot escape making
this effort even if it has to do it several times. It is not possible to
condone such a disgrace which casts a dark shadow on the Jewish people. We
as believers are afraid that much of the moral decadence in our land is the
result of this law which contradicts one of the commandments which we had
received at Sinai, namely, Thou shalt not kill! Let us not enter into any

arguments with those who preach the defilement of the land with all the
abominations of the nations.

There is another implication which should be nentioned on this occasion.

This is an internal rebuke. against those who were indifferent during the
elections to the Kenesset, those who refrained from voting for Agudat Yisra'el,
these who were caught up in the mistaken notion that a small party cannot
influence the life of the state. The vote proved how totally mistaken this
notion is. If Agudat Yisra'el had more mandates, in this case only one mandate,
it would have tipped the scale. After all, we have learned the rule concerning
the weight of one commandment as well as, heaven forbid, one sin, which can
make the entire world either guilty or innocent. This rule was vindicated here

in its fullest sense, and it calls upon us to take stock now and certainly
in the future.

9565
C80: 4805
EFFECT OF NABLUS MAYOR'S ACTIONS VIEWED
Jerusalem HANODI'A in Hebrew 9 Nov 79 p 2
[Editorial: "The Rebellious Hayor"]

[Text] The expressions of the mayor of Shkhem [Nablus] were so sharp as to
require an imediate reaction by the authorities. They contained all the
elenents of incitement and provocation for the murder of civilians. It
takes a good deal of brutal cynicism to express such an extreme opinion,
that one may throw a baby into a burning autobus in order to free one's
brothers from prison. It is doubtful whether any important Arab personality
holding an official position has hitherto gone so far. That this man should
continue to hold his position in local government is impossible, and the
first thing that had to be done was to discharge him from his post as mayor.

It is still too early to say how the supreme court will decide on the request
submitted yesterday, which is intended to seek revocation of the decree of
expulsion. Going to law has an additional purpose, namely to exploit the
court for propagandizing against continuation of the Israeli presence in
Judea and Samaria. The mayor, who never concealed his identification with
the PLO, apparently wants to achieve the halo of a "national hero," which
would elevate his status at home and abroad. It is no secret that most of
the population in the occupied areas, to put it discreetly, supports the
PLO and its actions. There is pent up hatred, which is expressed at various
opportunities in extreme form, as happened at Tul Karen, where young people
danced around the corpse of a Jew who had been killed in a road accident,
and there are also more cautious expressions of this feeling.

The prospect of creating an orderly network of relations with the population
of the occupied areas melted away some time ago. No kind of effort will
succeed in changing their opinion. The support that the PLO is winning in
the world is encouraging the population to aggravate relations with the
authorities. The fact that some Israeli circles are preaching recognition

of the PLO only strengthens the fanatics to take extreme action. Whether
the mayor is expelled from Israel, or whether other measures are taken
against him, it will be impossible to silence the man.

65
Possibly there is no way to avoid bringing him to trial for incitement to
murder. But in that case the administration would award him a free platform
to proclaim his opinions and to win a wide international response. In such
a case Israel could not lock the doors of the military court, which makes
the situation far more difficult. Yet there is nothing to prevent the
government from taking energetic measures, if only because any silence in
this case is likely to encourage other persons to imitate his. The Jews
always used to blame the mandatory government for doing nothing in the face
of open incitement. Incitement such as this creates disaster. Shaq'ah did
not talk about ideology, about his wish to expel the Israeli rule from the
occupied areas. He talked about actual deeds, about the need to kill men,
women, and children in order to obtain the liberation of prisoners, even

though he knows that the "Palestinian revolution for rebuilding" cannot
succeed in this way.

So the Israeli authorities face a difficult dilemma. It must also listen
to the unavoidable reactions in the world capitals. The PLO is liable to
exploit the case in order to make converts to support the creation of a
Palestinian entity, and to use the incident to prove that the population

is indeef rebelling. Expulsion is liable to arouse new agitation. Already
yesterday it was reported that the mayors in Judea and Samaria are pre-

paring to take steps in support of the position of the mayor of Nablus.
It is therefore well to weigh carefully and prudently the steps that we
intend to take against him.

There is also room to reflect on whether the person who had the conversation
with the mayor of Nablus had to publicize words that were spoken privately.
We do not know who did the publicizing, but in any case, he certainly did
not contribute to improving the troubled relations. Sharp words have been
heard before in conversations with important people in the West Bank or

the Gaza strip. The opinions are not new. Upon reconsideration, perhaps

it would have been better to leave them inside the house where they were
heard.

9045
630: 4805
BACKGROUND OF POLICE INSPECTOR GENERAL DETAILED
Tel Aviv HA'ARIV in Hebrew 5 Nov 79 p 17

[Article by Avi Dan: "Brigadier General (Reserves) Herzl Shapir-The Man
Who Wanted To Be Chief of Staff Will Be Inspector General; For the First
Time the Police Will Be Headed by Someone Who Has 'Parachuted' in from the
Outside"!

[Text] Brigadier General (Res) Herzl Shapir, the man who wanted to be chief
of the general staff--and almost became the Number One Soldier of the IDF--
will become the Number One policeman of the Israeli Police.

Shapir's two most outstanding characteristics are his distinguished talent
as an organizer, the ability to "enter" quickly into matters where he has
no experience; and his tendency to centralize affairs--a centralist who

is not at ease in delegating authority.

Possessed of an analytical mind, stubborn, suspicious, introverted-these
are the characteristics that his intimates ascribe to him. They say: He's
not easy, but he's good to work with.

Herzl Shapir was a candidate for chief of the general staff, after Mote Cur.
According to his intimates, Minister of Defense Heismann chose "Raful"
because he feared that Shapir would insist on maintaining his own "authority"
as chief of staff, and would not let Weizmann mix into matters that were

not in his jurisdiction.

Herzl Shapir was born 50 years ago as a "son of old age" to the Shekhterman
family. (His oldest brother, Avraham Shekhterman, his senior by 19 years,
is chairman of the center of the Herut movement and was a member of the
Knesset). He grew up in a traditional and nationalist home.

Herzl studied at the Tahkemoni school in Hiqveh Yisra'el, and at the Mari-

time school in Haifa near the Technion. Those who knew him in his youth
say that he was unruly.
in l9h7, when the studies of ﬂerzl and his friends were Interrupted, the
group joined Palmah. As a member of the third battalion he took part in a
long series of operations. "The battle for 'Ein Zeitun was especially
difficult," Shapir related subsequently. "As soon as the battle started.

a report came that Arab women were throwing grenades at our men from the
windows of their houses. The men wanted to open fire, but I prevented them.
We succeeded in breaking through to the house, and we found women and
children on the second floor. Had we opened fire, we would have caused
unnecessary killing. Even in time of battle we did not disgrace our weapons.

In 1950, when he was an instructor in Officers' school, he decided to leave
the armed forces ("At that time there was a general desire to go back home,"
he explains). he was appointed company commander in the reserves, and was
called up for the reserves in the same year. In the field he was visited

by Major General Yiga'el Allon (then Chief of the General Staff) and Dis-
trict Commander Tzadoq. They were impressed by the young officer and influ-
enced him to join the regular army. As an "inducement" they sent him to

a regimental commanders' course.

"The business took hold of me," Shapir related. He returned to the ID? and
was appointed brigade officer in the Operations Branch, operations officer
in the southern command, and counnnder of a reconnaissance company. when
he became a major he attended a course for officers of armored units-~the
force that he learned to see as decisive in battle--and after than he was
appointed to establish the third tank company of ID? and to command it.
Then, perhaps for the first time, he became directly acquainted with men,
many of whose kind he would meet as inspector general of police: "Among
my trainees were problem youths, products of the 'second Israel,‘ many
with a criminal past. I trained them in the spirit of Palmah. and succeeded
in making them into a choice company crew.“ Shaplr was different in his
approach to discipline, and it is doubtful whether what has long been clear
in ID? is understood in the police today: "Discipline must be based on

understanding, the understanding of the orders and of the soldier's
rights.“

in 1955 he was appointed Operations officer at armor HQ (under the command
of Brigadier Generals Pundaq, Lasqov. and Zorea). In the Qadesh campaign
he was operations officer at the group headquarters of General Lasqov.

His duties were command of an armored infantry corps that was converted to
a tank battalion, and command of a course for officers of armored companies.

In 1959 he was sent to a British Army school for command and staff in
(Kimberley) and when he returned a year later, he was appointed commanding
officer of a school for armored warfare. He showed himself to be both a
leader and a manager when he commanded a regular armored brigade in
1963-64. After that he became second in command of the armored corps, and
some years passed before he returned tu command responsibility.

Shapir went to study at the Hebrew University of Jerusalem. he has a
bachelor's degree in economics and geography. 0n the eve of the Six Day
War he was called by Brigadier General Tal to serve as his second in command
and as chief of his group staff.
The officer who spent so much time during combat days in coordinating and
improvising, was-—and remuins--blunt in "public relations." Shapir took
no part in the "festivals" around the senior officers.

In April 1969, when his studies were finished, he was appointed chief of
stuff of the central command. He concentrated on organizing the line of
command posts that was being built. After 4 months he became assistant
head of the operations branch of the general staff, most of the time under
Brigadier General Ezer Weizmann.

In Septeaber 1972 he was appointed head of the manpower branch of the
general Staff. Shapir, who lacked experience in adjutancy and in manpower,
was considered one of the outstanding heads of the manpower branch.

After he had dealt a great deal with the subject of soldiers missing in
action, in April 1974 he was appointed to head the staff branch of the
operations branch. He served at this post for almost 2 years and inter
uiia headed a military working group for the talks with Egypt in Geneva
(he was one of the two Israeli signers of the interim agreement). In
February 1976 he was appointed Regional Commander of the southern region,
and it seemed then that this command function was intended to train his to
serve as chief of the general staff.

henncine calamities befell Shapir. His son (he also has two daughters),
an officer in an armored unit, was wounded in the Yom Kippur war and lost
a hand. in May 1977 his wife died of a malignant disease.

In January of last year, when it was decided that Refa'el Eitan would
succeed Mote Cur as chief of staff, Shapir decided to resign. he enrolled
in Stanford University. Hhen he came back to Israel for a vacation a few
months ago. the proposal that he become inspector general of the police was
first made to him.

when he returned from his studies at the end of July, he did not hurry to
be free of IDF, but waited to see "what would happen." Evidently he found
that his prospects for becoming chief of staff had disappeared. Now that
he has accepted the offer of the Minister of the Interior, the police

are headed for the first time by a man who was "parachuted in" from the
outside.
SABBATH OBSERVANCE-PIRST STEP FOR AIRLINE RECOVERY
Jerusalem HAHODI'A in Hebrew 14 Nov 79 p 2
(Editorial: "El Al Needs Urgent Recovery"]

[Text] The national airline of the State of Israel needs an overhauling
and an urgent recovery. The personnel changes at the top are not the only
means of saving the company from collapse. The reason why the company has
not yet declared bankruptcy stems from the fact that someone pays for its
losses, namely, the Israeli taxpayer. But the government will not be able

to go on supporting indefinitely a bankrupt company which acts like a rich
one and squanders the resources of others.

The chairman of the board. Hordakhay Ben Ari, who resigned after he had

been asked to do so. had served previously as the director general; Hoti Hod,
former commander of the Israeli Air Force, failed in his attempt to change
the condition of the company and had to quit [as published]. Now, it is the
turn of Bums Shavit. the industrialists' president. But we doubt whether he.
will succeed where others have failed.

E1 Al's deficit has now reached three billion pounds. Such a deficit can
startle even a country which has a galloping inflation of 100 percent a

year. A deficit in the billions demands full investigation. A national
airline which cannot manage its affairs has no right to exist. Its directors
have obviously been extremely spendthrift, the assumption being that there

is a "rich uncle," a bottomless treasury box.

Lately it became known that the management knows that there is an excess of
1500 workers. including 100 pilots. A pilot‘s salary is 200 thousand pounds
a month and more according to a conservative estimate. It is sufficient to
calculate the workers' salary to see where the problem begins. If the

company continues to squander money the way it has, the deficit will reach
the level of the national budget.
Re have to point out that the heads of the company have always tried to
justify the flights on the Sabbath on econoaic grounds. Needless to say,
this reasoning has never been acceptable to those who believe in the
sanctity of the Sabbath and the blessing it brings to its keepers. At the
same time, we believe that work on the Sabbath does not enrich, quite to

the contrary. But a company which allows itself such a deficit forfeits
the economical argument.

It is necessary to heal the company, make it more efficient, regain the
trust of the passenger who does not wish to be grounded because of the whim
of worker groups who take turns sabotaging the coupany. But first and
foremost, we advise the management of El Al to stop flying on the Sabbath.
This will naturally reduce the deficit and we believe that Sabbath observance
will bestow its blessing upon the six workdays, and the name of the holy
Sabbath and of the Jewish people will be exalted and sanctified.

9565
C50: 5805

7|
GOVRBW‘S WING PAPIR r0 ARAB SUIHI‘!‘ SCRUTINIM
Beirut AL-mlun in Arabic 26 Nov 79 pp 1!), 3l

IZrticle by H. ﬂewrani: "Jordanian Working Paper for ‘l‘unia Sun-it: A
Peace Offenaive or a Call To Sanctify Camp David‘ljl

lzexsl The official Jordanian working paper preaented to the mu- aunit
ie one unifeatation of the current Arab reactionary preauqtioueneea
againat the aoet prominent concentrationa of Arab national pereeverance
via-a-vie the hoatile front. the Can David front.

Thin Jordanian working paper it diatinguiahed by no objective obetinacy
which night underline thie arrogance at a force for control or the «tab-
liahnent of control. for examle; rather, like other reactionary working
papera (ouch no the official Lebaneae working paper). thie one ie backed

up by the general torpor dominating the partiea to the eteadfaatneae and
confrontation forcea following the Baghdad annuituforcea which are ahackled
to the policy of an Arab eoliderity baaad on a ninima of oppoeition to the
Can David policy, on the pretext of preaerving the eolidarity.

The phenouenon of official Jordanian arrogance in the paper preeented to
the ‘l‘unie auuit in not conepicgoua for confronting the main pertiea to
the eteadfaetneae forces Iglong/ but ia alao conepicuoua for confronting
the required ateadfaatneu and confrontation platform of oppoaition to the
Cow David policy.

The official Jordanian working paper, in brief, calla, ea Jordanian author-
itiee have erpreaaed it. for conaolidation of the pillara of Arab aolidar-
ity in the context of the Baghdad reeolutiona and for the evolution of thin

solidarity into a baaie for Arab political and diplonetic activity in the
international acene no that a new resolution nay be attained which will

conpriae the principlee neceaaary for settling the diapute in the area.
Ob jectivee of the Jordanian working Paper

The firet objective in the official Jordanian plan in to preserve the cur-
rent fora of Arab eolidarity, which has atopped at boycotting al-Sadat and
has stayed within the existing limits of the boycott. It is an Arab
solidarity which is content to draw Jordan away froe inediate enrollnent
in inplenantation of the Gay David agreements but does not call upon
Jordan to battle the agree-ants in effective fashion. It is an Arab sol-
idarity which will provide Jordan with the Arab political cover suitable
firstly for slowing down the process of the develop-ant and explosion of
the domestic crisis, giving close attention to shackling the noses and
restricting their freedoms, secondly for iwosing cooperation and coordina-
tion between itself and the Palestine Liberation Organization on bases
which will guarantee further opportunities for political gains in the
donestic context and the context of the occupied territories, and thirdly
for guaranteeing its continued acquisition of the subsidy nonies stipulated
at Baghdad and its acquisition of more such subsidy aonies.

The second objective of the official Jordanian plan presented to the “lunis
sunnit blatantly exposes the nature of the solidarity whose pillars it is
demanding be consolidated on the one hand and the fraudulent means for con-
fronting Caap David on the other. lore than a year ago the eost conspicu-
ous slogan of Jordanien policy was to distract citizens, forces end govern-
ments through the slogsn of "building internal strength." In the current
working paper for the ‘runis su-it, this slogan has retreated and withdrawn
far fron sight. Ivan when it by chance appears, in talk about "Building
strength," confrontation of the pressing question is svoided--the question
of what is new in Jordanian "internal strength" a year after the baghdad
ounnit and the acquisition of wore than $1.2 billion for the sake of build-
ing that strength.

The Peace Offensive!

The eost prominent face, the one which corresponds to the nature of actual
Jordanian orientations, is not the "building of internal strength" but the
sheer diplonatic, political and nedie nature of the Jordanian plan. No
embarrassnent appears anong Jordanian officials in reviewing their funda-
mental policy, to which they like to give the appellation "the peace of-
fensive." The old and new Jordanian plan, in brief, is, as official
Jordanian circles have expressed it, "drawing up a foreign policy which
has the stege by stage objective of eabracing a new international resolu~
tion on the Hiddle last" and setting forth a diploeetic and political ac-
tion progran for reviewing the "necessary principles for settling the
struggle in order to get the Security Council to adopt a new resolution on
the Middle last."

Jordanian officials and the official media like to extol King Husayn'e
speech before the United Nations on grounds that it is a nodel of the
“peace offensive" and a suitable cqaign for explaining the Arab position
and governnent, eating official Arab policy appear not negative and based
on "rejection" but in the guise rather of a "positive" policy based on
"Acceptance" of the grounds of a just settle-ant.

73
Hodification of the Cap David Agreementa la the Goal

In order to preaerve the brilliant facade of thia propoaed "practical and
poeitive" policy, thoee who call for the policy ignore a group of eeeential
conaideratione and conditiona. Like a military offeneive, a peace offen-
eive needa pointa of emheeie and belancea of forcea which are appropriate
for eucceaa, and, note inportent that that, for survival. in order for it
to eucceed! In the context of the current dieruption in the balance of
forcee, with the Can David alliance, the area it not prepared for the in-
poeition of the baaee of a "juat honorable political aettleaent," not even
a nininal one. what ia required therefore ie that the dieruptione be rec-
tified and an internal atrengtb be built in reality. not worde, on the
military and economic levele end in the context of political life ineide
each country.

Beaidea diverting attention from the direct danger repreaented in the Gen
David agreement which in to be fought againat and brought down, the polit-
ical and diplomatic activity propoaed in the official Jordanian working
paper in oriented in the practical and fundamental eenee, directly and in-
directly, toward the United Statea, in the deaire to pereuede that country
of the need to Iodify ite exieting policy of embracing and inlementing the
Camp David agreementa. In apite of official Jordanian talk about a diplo-
matic orientation toward Aaian, African, European and American countriea.
the intent ia to furnieh a suitable context for putting preaeure on the
United Statea in order to convince it of the need to modify the Caap David
agreeaente--epecifically the aecond agreement concerning edninietrative
autonomy in the occupied Paleatinian territorial, eince, ea ie well known,
there in no eaeential Jordanian opposition to the agreement on Sinai.

Ultimately, even if the diplomatic and political activity required on the
international level ie a aucceee, it will be hard to proceed to line all
Arab partiee alongeide one another behind the Can David alliance, on an
unequal baeie, to end the ieolation surrounding this hoatile alliance, and

to have the atate of affaira ariaing from al-Sadet'a capitulation acquire
the character of legitinacy and acceptance.

There, in brief, are the reeulta of the political camaign, labelled "the
peace offenaive," which in contained in the Jordanian working paper. The
cmaign doee not mean and done not intend to achieve any of ite declared
goale; in the practical eenae it aim. at following up on the proceaa which
atarted at Carp David, and inroving the conditione and beneflte of official

Jordanian participation in implementation of theee agreemente after they
are modified.

The Jordanian working paper in a cell for gradual etep by etep entry into
the Cup David maeletrom, ending up with al-Sadat'e poeitiona.
BackgrOund of the Preauqtion

The official Jordanian presunption in the working paper presented to the
Tunis conference appears not in the nature of the paper, which is hostile
to and in contradiction with the bases of effective opposition to the Cw
David policies, but rather in the fact that the paper concentrates on a
group of fraudulent acts which have been carried out on basic perseverant
forces and parties in order to weaken then further and follow up on the
practical scheme of those policies, which is based on improving the condi-
tions for participation in inple-entation of the Can) David agreenents.

The concessions offered by the Palestinian party in successive rounds of
negotiation, and in the joint counittee to support the perseverance, have
encouraged and are encouraging the Jordanian govern-cut to help weaken the
armed Palestinian presence in Lebanon, and to exploit the perseverance aub-
aidies to revive its shattered influence in the occupied territories. lt
ignores, indeed encourages the Healer: Brothers and other reactionary groups
opposed to Syria and uses then as cards to exert pressure on the Syrian
position. The obvious resuscitation of Jordanian relations and contacts
with the Lebanese Front and the authorities in Lebanon correspond to the
submission of an official Lebanese working paper which is in direct con-
flict with Syria and the Palestine Liberation Organization and the bases
of a balanced national resolution to the Lebanese problem. This explains
the all-inclusiveness of the Syrian nedia canpaign against Jordan's Arab
reaction, though not in e direct forn, after a long period of silence re-
garding the official Jordanian presumption.

The 'l‘unis sue-nit mat respond to the presmtion of Arab reaction, includ-
ing Jordanian reaction, of slaughtering its proponents, end the parties to
the steedfestnasa front nuat demand that Jordan be ordered to provide an
accounting of the funds for "building an internal strength" and supporting
its perseverance. The facade of bonbaetic Arab solidarity with which it
cloaks its real policy, which is aimed at following up on the platform of
Gen David after its conditions are inproved, in order to carry out the
capitulationist agreements, not be pulled sway.

'l‘he Jordanian working paper must be rejected, its goals must be revealed
on grounds that they are anong the phenomena of Arab reactionary presunp-
tiousness as contained in the Camp David alliance's reserves within the
Twin sunnit, and the struggle with American inerialian, and with the
platform which calls for conciliation with it, mat be intensified.
VARIOUS msuus 1'0 OWEN“?! IQ DRWGHT eevnutn

Amen AL-IISTUR in Arabic l7 llov 79 p S

Izrticle: "Adoption of the Heaeuree Necaeeary ‘ro Cope with the Coneequegcee
of the Drought: Formation of Co-itteee To Study Borrowere' Conditionef/

Izexsl In the peat 5 yeare Jordan hae been faced with a wave of drought
which wee at ite eoet eevere in the 1979 eeaeon. Preliminary estimatee

have ehown that agricultural production by dry farming will drop by no leee
than 60 percent from the level in wrevioue yeare: the output of wheat hae
totalled about 16,000 tone, and that of barley 5,000 tone, while Jordan'e
level of wheat production in normal yaare ie l60,000 tone and that of barley
35,000 tone. One ehould bear in aind that the kingdoe'e requiremente for
wheat thle year are about 350,000 tone and for barley 150,000 tone.

The effect of the drought hae extended to encoepaee olivee and fruit which
are aleo being influenced by khaaein winde. It ie anticipated that the pro-
duction value: will not exceed 50 percent of laet year‘e production, and it
ie aleo expected that olive output will decline to 3,000 tone inetead of
6,000 tone, which wae the kingdoe'e output laet year.

To overcome the deficit reeulting from grain and crop production ee a con-

eequence of the drought, the coupetent authoritiee have adopted the follow-
ing neceeeary meaeuree:

The governaent hee contacted the International Pood and Agricultural Organ-
ization and the world Food Program to inform them of the drought condition
in Jordan. The government hae managed to obtain wheat aid of 16,000 tone
for e 3-month period, and the conpetent authoritiee are now diecueeing
final procedures for dietributing it. Concerning the provieion of eeede
for farmere, the government has managed to obtain aid from the World Food
Program valued at $100,000 to buy quantitiee of eeede and dietribute theee
to farmere and the government ie conducting a etudy on the poeeibility of

buying 8,000 tone of wheat and barley eeede to eell at coet or lend to
farmere.
he regards the provision of free fodder to protect livestock, the govern-
aent is able to furnish barley. having disbursed a loan for the purchase

of 50,000 tons of barley and assigned the Ministry of Supply to take charge
of the purchase operation.

the Agricultural Lending Inatitute and the Cooperative Organization will
for. counittees to study the conditione of borrowers and will accordingly

defer the debts of farmers who cannot pey the instalments for which they
are liable this year becauee of the drought.

Vegetable growers in the Ghawr areas and other regions are being protected
by the provision of agricultural ecceesoriee at reasonable prices and pro-

duction guidance and marketing; the Parnere' Federation in the Ghawrs has
begun providing fertilizer at reasonable prices.

The process of nsrketing of agricultural products is being carried out by
intermediaries. ‘l'he neesures the govern-eat has taken to naintain agri-
cultural product prices at a profitable level are as follows:

Prevention of iwortation of any locally-produced connodity unless local
production is inadequate for coneuqtion.

The marketing by the Marketing Institute of certain agricultural producte

through contract with farmers directly if the suitable conditions for this
exist.

Contribution by the tomato factory to absorbing surplus production when
pricee drop locally by entering an s conpetitor into purchasing operations.

The govern-ent will establish refrigerators through a loan obtained from
the guvernnent of Dennerk on behalf of the Supply Hinietry, the Agricul-
tural Herketing Inetitute and the Parners' Federation. One goal of thie
project will be to store fruit and vegetables when there is a production

surplue and prices drop and to supply then to the nerkete again when pro-
duction is low.
BRIEFS

MICIPALITY, VIM LOANS-Air ﬂashis al-‘l'ell, general manager of the
Municipality and Village Loan Fund, pointed out that the sun of 116,620
diners had been disbursed to uunicipal and village councils last week. Of
this, the sun of 72,000 diners is frosu the fund's deposits which are de-
rived froe fuel, road trsneport and incose taxes, fines and other revenues.
These are the mnicipsl and village councils involved: the Municipality
of North al-Shunah, [5,000 diners; the Municipality of Sahha and Sahhiyyah,
10,000 diners; the Municipality of Zahr, 9,000 diners; the municipality of
'Anjarsh, 5,000 diners; the Municipality of leu'sb, 5,000 diners; the I‘m-lye
Village Council, 8,000 diners; the ﬂute Village Council, 6,500 diners; the
Jerinsh Village Council, 3,500 diners; the left Jayi: Village Council,
3,500 diners; the 0- al-Siussq Village Council, 3,000 diners: the Mevfa sl-
Hastiysh Village Council, 1,000 diners. In addition the sun of 62,620
diners,vhich will be paid back to the fund, has been disbursed in the for-
of loans to the following municipal and village councils: the Municipality
of Sabha and Sabhiyya, 12,500 diners; the Municipality of sl-aabbah, 6,370
diners; the Municipality of Madabba, 6,000 diners; the Municipality of
Hanshiyet Dani Mason, 6,000 diners; the Municipality of al-s-ekiysh, 6,700
diners; the Municipality of Malta, 2,200 diners; the Municipality of 'Ayn
sl-asshs, l,000 diners; the sl-Mugbayyir Village Council, 2,650 diners.

In another area, Mr sl~‘l’ell pointed out that the loans the fund provided

to usunicipel and village councils in the eonth of October 1979 totalled
926,500 diners for ineeentation of vital develop-sot projects in these
sunicipalities, broken down as follows: electrical projects, 65,500 diners;
school projects, 282,000 diners; the water project, 10,000 diners; street
projects, 21,000 diners; eever projects, 563,000 diners; building projects,
21,000 diners. Out of these loans which were set aside, and hed previously
been set aside for the uunicipsl and village councils, the fund has dis.
bursed 261,636 diners to be spent on develop-ant projects in thesu, broken
down as follows: electric projects, 19,600 diners; school projects, 57,480
diners; vatsrprojects, 26,868 diners; street projects, 65.212 dinars;
sever projects, 36,820 diners; public building projects, 2,900 diners; pub-
lic utility projects, 52,9510 diners. In addition. fro. its deposits deo
rived fro. fuel, road transport and income taxes, fines and other revenues,
the fund he. disbursed the sun of 910,632 diners to municipsl end villsge
councils, broken down so follows: ngnicipel- councile, 772,102 diners, end

villege councils, 138,160 diners. Il'exsl [An-en AL-M'Y in Arebic 16
Nov 79 p 2/

lLBC‘l‘lDNlC SERVICE emu-«nun» e delegetion of the loyel Scientific
Society returned to A-en following e visit to Tokyo in which it signed en
egreenent in isplcnentetion of the egreetsent eigned between the Jor'denien
end Jepeneec govern-cute leet June, stipuleting thet en electronic servicee
center to be outfitted with the neceseery electronic equipment end fscilio
tiee be erected in the society. The inleasntstion sgree-ent signed by

the delegetion of e Jepenese coweny stipuleted thet iepleesntetion ie to
stert next l December end thet the conetruction end equipping of the center.
coeting e totel of $3 million. is to be coepleted by Herch 1981. It eleo
stipuleted thet the construction of the center will include nsintensnce end
repeir units, e specificetione end neeeurenent unit for the electronic
equipment, s unit for trsining specieliste in operetion, end intensified
progrens for groups of techniciens end engineers working in public end pri-
vete orgenizetions. Included in the delegetion, heeded by Dr Albert Butrue,
director generel of the eociety, were Dr Pskhr-el-Din el-Dsghieteni, deputy
director generel. Jennel el-Dedur, neneger of the Ad-inietrstivc Depertnent,
Dr ﬂekub Beltikien, chief of the Electronic Services Center, end Dr Deusd
el-Jebji, hged 9f the Building Technology Depertelent of_tbe loysl Scientific
Society. may [AI-sen AL-RA’Y in Arebic lb Nov 79 p 3/ 11887
'AL-HATAN' WEIGHS U.S. MOTIVES IN IRAN, SEES YOUNG ROLE
LD281131 Kuwait AL—HATAN in Arabic 23 Nov 79 pp 1. ll LD
[Article by Fu'ad Hatar: "A Mistake Once Again"]

[Text] Once again, President Carter's administration has committed a
mistake vis-a-vis its current war with Iran, even though the new mistake
could have eased somewhat the complexity of the worsening situation and
consequently more or less kept the administration from deciding on mili-
tary intervention.

Instead of encouraging the idea of dispatching former U.S. UN representa-
tive Andrew Young to Tehran for consultations with the Iranian officials,
the administration moved an aircraft carrier and beat the war drums more
and more with the onset of the month of Huharram which, to Iranians,
means preparation for martyrdom.

It could be asked: what could Andrew Young do now that things have
reached such a pass? The answer is that Young can do something, because
of the high opinion the Iranian revolution had of him for being the first
American official to ask President Carter's administration to conduct a
dialog with Imam Khomeyni when he was living in exile in France. Young's
view at the time was that Khoaeyni would eventually become a saint and
that it would then be difficult to have a dialog with him.

Young's request, however, was not heeded because the U.S. administration's
security advisers had been advising the shah in bad faith to leave the
country. believing that Khomeyni's role would end with the downfall of

the shah and that matters would be left in the hands of the people-some-
thing which could be easily dealt with.

It has now become apparent that Young's request was based on discernment
and farsightedness.

when we say that encouraging the idea of sending Young to Tehran could
have prevented the hiterhto cold war between Iran and America from turning
into a war in which a lot of blood would flow. we do so on the basis that
imam Khoncynl remembers that there is an American official who understands
him. whereas the other officials refused to understand his revolution and
its aspirations. He believe that Khomeyni would talk with a man of this
kind and, therefore, we come to the following conclusions:

l-—uhether intervention takes place, is delayed, or does not take place,

the American hostages have been considered spies and Khoneyni's authorities,
instead of putting American on trial through the shah, will try the shah
through the hostages. At all events, the charges are identical and the
responsibility is a joint one. Intervention night not be for the sake of
prestige but to preclude the unveiling of things that could torpedo the
policy of American-Soviet detente.

2--Hhether intervention takes place, is delayed, or does not take place.
the chances of Carter's winning the presidential election are diminishing.
it seems, therefore. that intervention might not be for the sake of pres-
tige but for vengeance.

3-—Hhether intervention takes place, is delayed, or does not take place.
the United States faces a tough test. So far, it appears that luau
Khomeyni's authority is putting America's night to the test.

He repeat that Andrew Young could have done something. but President Carter,
who has disdained the overwhelming majority of the Arab world for the sake
of the peace organized between Anwar al-Sadat and Menahem Begin, is now
again being disdainful with regard to what is happening in Iran.

C80: 4802
'AL-HATAN' DENOUNCES THRENT OF 0.8. MILITARY ACTION IN GULF
1.0301505 Kuwait AL-HATAN in Arabic 27 Nov 79 p 10 [.0
[Article by Ibrahin al-Barghuti: "The United States and Gulf Security"]

[Text] The successive U.S. statements regarding the Carter administra-
tion's intention to use military force in order to solve the problem of
the 0.5. hostages held in the American Embassy in Tehran remind us of the
threats by 11.5. officials to invade the Arab Gulf if the Arab oil coun-
tries used oil as a veapon in the national battle against the Zionist
enemy.

While these statements truly reflect the 11.8. administration's hostile
intentions toward the peoples of the area they also involve great risks
that do not stop at threats to the security and stability of our Arab

peoples but also threaten the peace and security of the uhole world and
flout all international laws and conventions for the following reasons:

First. because they represent a blatant violation of the sovereignty of
the countries of the area and overt interference in the internal affairs
of independent and sovereign states.

Second. because they represent serious political blackmail against the
countries of the area with the aim of preventing them from devoting their

economic resources to the battle for social progress and national libera-
tion.

Third, because they constitute a serious precedent in dealing with the
financial wealth of the people of the area by subordinating trade relations
to political stands in favor of 0.5. interests and consequently lend
colonialist overtones to U.S.-Arab friendship in that it becomes a means
to preserve imperialist interests at the expense of the basic interests of
the Arab peoples.

Fourth, because, finally. they undermine international concepts and pacts
that provide for the nonuse of force in solving political problems between
states of different social systems.
In the light of these risks we see Deputy Prime Minister and Foreign
Minister Shaykh Sabah al-Ahmad's statement on extending a helping hand
to the Iranian revolution and on the intention of Kuwait and its people
to stand firm in the face of the American aggressor, if the U.S. in-

vasion plan is put into action, as a true and sincere expression of the
Gulf stand on what is known as Gulf security. This stand reflects the
real interests of the people of the area and of their views with regard

to Gulf security as primarily a national cause facing a real threat from
aggressive U.S. hostile tendencies which pose a direct danger to the inde-
pendence of the countries of the area and their peoples.

He also believe that the Security Council is the appropriate place for

the settlement of political disputes among states in a manner serving the
real interests of the peoples.
'AL-RA'Y AL-‘AHM' DOUBTS COHPROHISE IN IRANIAN-U.S. CRISIS
LDOlO938 Kuwait KUNA in Arabic 0900 GMT 1 Dec 79 LD

[Text] Kuwait--A local paper today thought it unlikely that a compromise
solution would be found to the American-Iranian crisis. In its editorial
today AL-RA’Y AL-'AHH likened the United States to a dinosaur which is
becoming extinct.

It said that the firm leadership of Iran has exposed the American
dinosaur. which was defeated by the street masses who wore shrouds.

It pointed out that a determined people with e1ually determined leader-
ship can bend any giant committing aggression against-them. It recalled
the words of a British spokesman that the great powers must get used to
humiliation.

The paper asked: when will the Arabs come out in their shrouds? It was
referring to the U.S. disregard of Arab rights and its assertion that it
would not recognize the PLO or agree to the establishment of a Palestinian
state. saying that yet it is seeking the friendship. understanding and. in-
deed, the aediation of the Arabs.

C50: 4802

8k
'KUHAIT TIHES': IRAN SHOULD SERIOUSLY CONSIDER RELEASING HOSTAGES
LD031406 Kuwait KUNA in Arabic 0705 GMT 3 Dec 79 L0

[Text] Kuwait. 3 Dec--The KUWAIT TIMES today warns against an escalation
of the Iranian-American crisis in a manner that would exhaust all diplo-
matic efforts for the release of the detainees and leave no alternative
for the U.S. administration but to resort to military action under the
growing pressure that it is being exposed to, and in order to preserve
President Carter's assets particularly as his election popularity has
begun to waver.

The paper calls on the Iranian revolution to seriously consider releasing
the hostages amid the tangible signs of concerted diplomatic activity by

the U.S. Government in the Western world aimed at denouncing the action

of the Iranian students and their support by the spiritual leader of the
Iranian revolution, Imam Ayatollah Khomeyni, so as to use this world
support as a justification for any military action on which it Inight eabark.

This English-language newspaper proposes the release of the American hos—
tages in Tehran in return for the formation of an international legal
committee with full powers to adopt decisions in regard to the shah's
malpractices.

The paper does not discount the likelihood of an American-Soviet under-
standing to rearrange conditions in Iran in a manner which would safeguard
the interests of both oi them, which have been shaken by the Iranian
revolution, under the pretext of military intervention to secure the
release of the detainees.

C80: 4820
'AL-RA'Y AL-'AHM' ASSAILS U.S. ATTITUDES TOWARD THIRD WORLD
LDObllbl Kuwait AL-RA'Y AL-‘AMM in Arabic 3 Dec 79 p 1 LD
[Editorial: "The Spreading Fire"]

[Excerpt] It is no longer possible to predict what is going to happen
in the area from one moment to the next. There is yet another blow
delt to the ugly American's face in Tripoli, Libya. There are more
blows on the horizon, just as there is so much pent up feeling against
Hashington's policies.

The American state definitely has many means for revenge. This state,
which has flouted all laws. has also definitely lost much of its prestige
and its pride has been injured.

But if Washington, prompted by such pride, wants to trample on the pride
of the small nations then it has been and still is following the wrong
road. These hungry and persecuted peoples whose pride has been injured
are now learning from their own tormen:ors how to avenge their injured
pride.

Unless Hashington realizes now and in these days in particular how it
should deal with the peoples appropriately it will lose a great deal,
although it may possess every savage means of assault. In other words.
Washington can destroy any of these angry countries but it can win
nothing in the longer term, either economically. strategically or
ethically. The mutiny against this American hegemony is spreading
vertically and horizontally and at the same speed as technology is ex-
panding. In fact, the mutiny is using this very technology in its
enveloping spread.

Therefore, it is time for the United States to search for reasonable and
creative alternatives by which it can adapt to the new facts rather than
search for new means of subjugation through the use of force of blockade.

If Washington presumes that it can treat the Third World and the Middle
East in particular as its "Eastern Europe" then it is once again committing
a mortal mistake. This is because the Third world, including the Middle
East. has come of age.

86
cs0: anno
PROBLEMS SEEN FOR NON-CITIZEN STUDENT POPULATION
Kuwait AL-TALI'AH in Arabic 17 Oct 79 p 42

[Article: "National Federation of Students of Kuwait and Problem of
Students Without Citizenship“]

[Textl The National Federation of Students of Kuwait is considered the
legitimate representative of all Kuwaiti students at home and abroad, with
its executive board and administrative boards for each branch. There are
several problems which have concerned and still concern students in
general, and there are problems which concern a group of them on which the
federation must stand with the students and help them to arrive at solu-
tions to those problems. Among the most important of the problems facing
some students is the problem of citizenship. Many of the students of the
university and outside the university are Kuwaitis with a stay of execu-
tion. They have lived here and have been educated in this land, but for
reasons of poor application of the law or because of their own ignorance.
they have not obtained citizenship. The National Federation of Students
of Kuwait has gone out of its way to find solutions to help this group.

It adopted a reasolution at one of the conferences stating that Kuwaiti
students without citizenship who are working members of the federation
have the right to vote and be a candidate. This is acknowledged in the
federation's bylaws. Thus. under the bylaws they are members of the
National Federation of Students of Kuwait, which must help them to obtain
their legitimate demands for membership and education.

we know that the National Federation of Students of Kuwait. Kuwait Branch,
had submitted a note to the amir and another to the crown prince previous-
ly to explain the problem of this group of students. They were promised
good things, but no signs or inclinations to solve this problem have yet
appeared.

These students are now in a very critical situation. No matter how much
the secondary student has exceeded his percentage. even if it was higher
than 90 percent, he is not accepted by the university, nor even by the
other institutes such as the teachers institute, the institute of techno-
logy, etc. This step which appeared recently to prevent them from
completing their studies in the university or the other institutes is

87
considered by the members of the federation to be a dangerous develop-
ment against this group. The government officials do not accept them,
even if they have their university diplomas. They have public secondary
diplomas, and thus the federation with its new leadership lust raise
this problem on nany levels and take the necessary steps, whether on the
level of the university or on the level of society, and stir up serious
discussion about it to arrive at radical solutions to this problem and
give each person what is owed him. It is necessary to contact other
popular societies such as the teachers society. the alumni and the law-
yers. All of these societies have members who have suffered from the
same problem, and silence toward this problem is selling this group into
ignorance.

7587
cso: 6802
MIRICAN ammo: AT mm mmmwct much MY!!!)
Kuwait AL-SIYASAII in Arabic 6 Nov 79 p 16
IZrticle by Iathi Sharif: "Once Again--Hhat Does A-erica want?'_'7

lint] American attendance at the 25th anniveraary of the Algerian revo-
lntion, at the level of Preeident Carter'a repreaentative National Secur-

ity adviaor Zhigniew Brzezinaki haa nore than one leaning and iaponderahle
among political oheerwera in the region.

The haaic declared objective, that of conducting conaultatione with Alger—
ian officiala to leaean the United Statea' decieion to aupply Morocco with
weapona. wee not the whole atory.

Nor waa the United Statea' co-itnent to continue and maintain ita econon-
ic relationa, which it had to naintain, on the one hand, and the probabil-

ity of providing eon invent-ant loana and aid to the Algerian econc-y on
the other, the whole atory either!

It appeara, rather, that lrtezinaki'a vieit to Algeria and hie appropriate
tining etruck at nore than one target and achieved nore than one idea. It

aleo appeara that the pacing neetinga or encountera were not, in ny eati-
nation. a nere coincidence!

Pirat, America wante to eaaert that it can deal with, and achieve an under-
etanding with. conntriea in the third world group which have a radical
orientation and differ with it and that it ia truly oriented toward thie
non-traditional political pletforn in the context of nntual intareate.

America wante to tell Algeria that at the use tine it ie in agree-ant on
aelling arena, airplanea and nilitary equipnent to Morocco it nay enpport
the holding of a referendun on the Poliaario people'a right to deter-doe
their deatiny in the Heetern Sahara region.

America wante to declare ita participation in any Arab or African iaouea
or diapntee and that without Anerican nadiation or intervention reaolu-
tiona or peace will not he achieved in the region.
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/00: ClA-RDPB2-00050R0002000Q0006-1
By attending the celebratione of one of the progreaaiva revolutione in the
Arab region. America alao wanta to open the door to a dialogue with all

the progreaaive countriae in the Arab region in order to place than in a
framework for dealing with current Arab iaauee, in particular the Paleatine
iaeue, which in remote tron extremiam.

Obeervera cannot ignore the inortant. intanaitied contacte which
Brzezinaki aade with a nunber of the Quanta at the celebrationa. in partic-
ular the Irmian prine niniater, lgith/ who. it waa aaid diacueeiona would
be continued ahortly afterward.

If the exchange of greetinge made between Brzezineki and 'Arafet atirred
up intereet and con-lotion in political and journaliatic circlea--at which
point Brzezinalti waa obligated to etate that he had no intention of re-
peating forner American aacretary of atata John Poeter Dullae' refuaal to
ahake hand; with hie international rivale--and Jody Powell, the American
journalieta' preaa secretary, aaid in effect that thin neating wee part of
the government :epreeentativea' concern for social gracea:

Nonetheleee, there are con-entatora who provide other explanationa for
these neetinga which night lie within the realm of predictione that thin
neeting ie probably the beginning of secret aeaaiona the United Statee
will hold with the Paleatiniena, einilar to its political diacueeiona with
the Vietna-eae before the American withdrawal tron Vietnam.

Here a new form of Aearican movement might be appearing before ue, endowed
with n dynamic character changing with developnenta: the extent to which
the American adminiatratlon uaea thew-here I mean the ieaue of the Heat-
ern Sahara and the atruggle between Morocco and Algeria-~to atreee that it
in not alien to any gene of war or peace in the region. If in our deacrip-
tion of chic American novenent we are once again warning of the nature of
the continuing new gene, we want Arab politiciane to nova at the nan

epeed and realiatically revaluate the phenomenon we are now experiencing
but not underatanding!

l 1887
C80: 6802

90
surmzd on. councn. nrscussrs pucrs, ORGANIZATION
Kuwait AL-SIYASMI in Arabic 10 Nov 79 pp 1, l8

lzrticle: "Supreme Oil Council Hill Finieh with Oil Organization and
Kuwait Oil Price Increaaee Todayj/

ling It ie expected that the Supreme Oil Council will diecuee two met-
tera at ita meeting today:

1. The fire: it coqletion of the diacuaaion on the matter of the General
Oil Organization, the organization which will take charge of reorganizing
rho oil senor, including the merger of the three oil coqaniea (Kuwait
Oil Company, National Oil Cowany, and the Petrochemical Cowany) into one
organization headed by the miniater. ‘i'hie organization will cowriee aix
departments: production, procuring, refining, marketing, tranaportation
and finance.

In the event the Supreme Council conpletea the diacuaaion of the matter of
the organization, the Council of Hinietere will diecuae the matter tour-
row, Sunday, and it ie likely that the organization will he proclaieed of-
ficially after that.

2. The eecond matter it the rectification of Kuwaiti crude oil pricee in
the fraaework of a emit-eat to (PIC reeolutiona. with the recent rieea
which have occurred in pricee for Iranian and Iraqi nib-which by their
nature are aimilar to Kuwaiti crudee--it has become naceaaary to raiee
Kuwaiti crude pricae in reeponee to the regional and international market
conditiona. It in worth pointing out that even if Kuwait rained ita cur-
rent pricea by $2. it would remain within the linite the recent 03C con-
ference laid out. netting the price ceiling at $23.50 per barrel.

world Pricee Are Aleo Riaing

In another area, all evidence from the field confirm that world all
pricee are on their way up or, more preciaely. that they will "leapfrog"
before 20 December, the data of the NBC minietere' periodic meeting.
Even before the crieie in Iranian-American relatione, the epiaode of the

91
Tehran embeuy, end the diecneeion that he: genereted on stopping Irenian
“MP-Ont: to Ancrice, crude oil pricce on the world uerket hed experienced
fOi’eeted increeeee, epot eelee pricee in Europe reechins $34 I barrel.
Yeeterdey epot price: reeched $65 end there are eigne that they may go up
to $50 thie week. The likelihood of a cutoff ct Irenien oil to mrica
“‘3 hId the effect of reieing the teqereture of the world oil market,

“n“ 011 market circled consider that official (PIC pricee will ride to
$30 e barrel in the middle of next uonth.

while the eerket will accept prices of thin eort, in practice they will

continue to be rejected by certain W8C countriee end there ie the obvioue
11k°11h°od that the toning NBC conference will be faced with coneidereble
mmmll tumoil which eight end with e re-eetebliehnent of the duel pric-

in; 'Y'ten or e eyete- where verioue pricee hold during the first quarter
of next ye",
HORTE KOREA CHARGED WITH ABDUCTIHG WOMEN

Paris AL-HUSTAQBAL in Arabic 17 Nov 79 pp 16-17
lArticle: "Korean Ring to Kidnap Young Women!"]

[Text] Four months ago, the Lebanese Security Organization discovered the
threads of the most serious plant aimed at Lebanon since the war. This
plot involves the exploitation of young Lebanese men and women.

A Lebanese family notified the General Security Organization that a young
woman family member and her female companion had disappeared in North
Korea under mysterious circumstances 8 months before.

Through investigations, and on the basis of information which reached the
Security Organization, many important threads were put together which re-
vealed the reasons behind the disappearance of the two women, the main one
being the existence of an international ring which seeks to export young
women from a number of countries to work in a field closely resenbling
espionage. First of all, educated young women are seized under the cloak
of a visit to North Korea. After a month's detention which includes
"clever brainwashing operations," the women sign a contract to work as
hostesses in first-class hotels in return for a nonreturnable gift of
$3,000 in cash and a monthly salary of $1,500, as well as guaranteed
residence and clothing from the hotel.

The hotels are Japanese, located in Tokyo and Hong Kong. The young women
-work as guides and hostesses for specified politicians or businessmen who
are guests at the hotels, and obtain secrets and specified information
from them about their movements, activities and assignments. In some
cases, one of the women may he ordered to accompany a certain guest to
another capital.

The young women working in this field include Lebanese, Dutch, Germans,
French and Mexicans.

93
0“ "“8“ "Wkina in this field arrived in Beirut last week with a female
Lebanese CDmpaniOn and provided important information about this inter-
national “et"°rk- The two wouen had escaped with the help of Lebanese

passports 39": :9 them by a Lebanese enbasey in one of the East European
capitals.

The aforementioned young women said that their passports were confiscated
1 '°“‘h ‘ftcr they arrived in North Korea. They were then given “0‘93“
passports and Paid $3,000 apiece, and began working in this operation with
other conpaniona in the countries mentioned previously.

Security OYEInizations in a number of countries are cooperating at the
present time 1“ an effort to uncover more information about this network

in order to reveal the idenc1cies of other young women of several different
“3‘1°“311t1°€- The fate of the two young Lebanese woaen was discovered by
Chance “he“ the family of one of then furnished the General Security
Organization Vith specific information about the woman's fate and the
identity °f the Persons who arranged contact with her.
0mm BUREAU (11111012. AS WRIST ARM 0? THE mmITIBS
Revival of Secret Agencies

Beirut AL-lWRRIYAIl in Arabic 26 Nov 79 pp 12-13

[Text] The newest development of the past few weeks is the entrance

of the Lebanese authorities as a party to the Second Branch's terrorist
operations against the nationalist regions. The name of the Second Branch
has once again becane prominent, because all the fingers of suspicion,
from the Islamic Grouping to the Nationalist Movement, have pointed to it
as being behind the al-Bustah massacre, the setting-off of the al-shiyah
clashes, and the destruction of the statue of the late leader Jamal
'Abd-al-Nasir at Qabb Ilyas--not to mention scores of small eruptive
outbreaks blued on "unknown persons."

The entry of the official authorities as a party to the "secret war"
against the nationalist regions was an operational translation of an
entire political trend which needed to be firmly grounded. This explains
why these operations encompassed the south, the Biqa' and Beirut instead
of the north. The political developments witnessed by the country during
the past few weeks all came under the heading of an attempt to further
the imposition of the army on the south once this army became ready to
spread out to any part of Lebanese territory, as Army Col-sander Victor
Khuri said. Therefore, the failure of the attempt to impose the army

on the south forced the Lebanese authorities to turn towards Beirut,

or its nationalist areas to be exact, and this explains the seal with

which the Deuxieme Bureau agents in the capital's nationalist areas and
the southern al-Hatn coast acted.

The Lebanese authorities' desire to bring down the army on the nationalist
regions was originally channeled in a planned course outlined by the
"Alnerican plan," preparatory to bringing up the issue of the Arab
deterrent forces, which anointed to nothing more than the isolationist
forces' desire to ensure the penetration of the nationalist regions by
Victor Khuri's army after having failed to do so for more than ’0 1/2 years.

Inasmuch as the Lebanese authorities' plan intersects with the isolationist
plan, it is self-evident to say that this intersection came about under the
umbrella of the American plan, which leaves plenty of room for the role

of the "legitimate" army. In the prepared American plans there was a

special addendum about the part which the army could play. And since the
operation to impose the army on the south had been temporarily thwarted,

the system of alternates lost no time in replacing it with sending the

army to the nationalist areas of the capital, as part of an effort to change
"Greater Beirut" into a city isolated by nature from the nationalist forces.
This is what American Assistant Secretary of State for Middle East Affairs
Morris Draper subsequently announced. The militia's approval of this role
for the army did not arise just fran this army's political plan, but from
the huge price which it might again have to pay if it again decided to enter
into a military venture. as happened throughout 1978.

This series began in the south, while the authorities were submitting their
plan for imposing the army, and included Sidon, Tyre, al-Nabatiyah, Dayr
Qanun sl-Nahr, and other places. The purpose behind implementing this

series of operations, which varied from calling strikes, agitation against

the nationalist presence, and destroying and burning military vehicles
belonging to the Nationalist Movement, to organizing massacres, was to ensure
the proper climate for bringing in the anay as a lifesaver in this

explosive situation.

But the failure of the authorities' plan to ensure the army‘s infiltration of
the south forced it and the militias to head north, in order to safeguard

the nOLthern flank of the militias' front by means of the army. The climax
of this northern activity was the inflammatory operations directed at the
Islamic Group's positions in Tripoli (the Negresco Cafe, the cinema, vehicles,
and so forth). However. these operations failed to ensure the preper
political climate for the imposition of the army, because of the revival
experienced by the north. This led to the plot's being shifted to a more
advanced stage, in the seige of 'Aynata al-Ars, the seige led by Phalanglst
Samir Ja'ja’ who, it was later proven, was working for the intelligence agency
in addition to being militarily responsible for the Phalangist militias in
the north. With the shift of political weight in the authorities' activities
towards penetrating the nationalist areas of the capital and the southern
al-Hstan coast, the above-mentioned agency's agents in the nationalist
regions acted. The first introduction in this arena was the sl-Bustah out-
break, which was tantamount to a gift from Johnny 'Abduh, the secret

member of the Phalangist Her Council and the leader of the Tall al-Za'tar
attack, to his commander, Shaykh Bashir sl-Jumayyil, on the occasion of the
first anniversary of the murder of Officer Samir al-Ashqar. The second blow
was the explosion of the situation in Al-Shiyah, in an attempt aimed at
ensuring that the army would be brought in; this outbreak spread from

Saint Michael's Church to the airport.

Just as the era of President Pu'ad shihab (1958 to 1964) was described

as an era of 'Hemocratization" of the military and the intelligence agencies,
it is possible to describe the era of President Ilyas Sarkis as being the
way he wants it or plans it. However, the difference between the two eras
does not lie in the liberation of the Second Branch to rule the country,
the latter abandoned it in the context of the disturbance of this equilibrium
in the Carp David era. Thus his "political plan" was made a subsidiary
of a general plan which made American Ambassador to Beirut John Gunther Dean

and his predecessor Richard Parker similar to the high couanissioner during
the mandate.

It is true that as soon as President Ilyas Sarkis took over the government
he began reviving the "secret agencies." In political circles it is said
that the president's coming to power was merely an indication of the
return of "ghosts" to rule the cauntry, inasmuch as Sarkis belongs to the
same school which laid down the guidelines for building these agencies.
Circles close to the Republican Palace say that precisely this issue was
President Ssrkis' first concern when he came to power. In order to put
the guidelines for rebuilding the security agencies into practice, many
meetings were held under s cloak of secrecy. The viewpoint which President
Sarkis expressed in the presence of many persons close to him indicated,

on more than one occasion, the need to create security agencies which would
give him all the information needed to rule in light of his perception of
the extent of powers, their distribution, and their true stands on various
levels. When Serkis coamissioned Maj Johnny 'Abduh to head to Second Branch,
inasmuch as it was the "nerve" of the agencies he wanted to build, he gave
him explicit instructions to take in all the agencies of the Deuxieme
Bureau without exception, provided that this transaction be done with the
required secrecy and very skillfully, especially with some of the big
names whose return to the public scene might lead to revulsion among
political circles previously "tormented" by the activity of those persons
during the goverments of late President Fu'ad Shihab and Former President
Charles Hilu. Thus Johnny, surrounded by many leaders experienced in this
field, began carrying out the mission assigned to him by concentrating

on two pivotal issues:

1. Reassenbling all the regular personnel of the Deuxieme Bureau who were
previously known by various names such as "gumen," "strongmen," and
"coffeehouse highwaymen," in addition to scores of persons chosen by then
and whose sole loyalty to the Deuxiene Bureau was proven without exception.

2. Reestablishing contact with political networks, beginning with the
ministers and deputies and going on to senior employees such as general
directors and the like, and senior reporters considered high-level report
writers in view of their being important political keys because of the
positions they occupy. This group also includes employees of the Deuxieme
Bureau, tribal chiefs, and some journalists who get huge salaries in return
for the news they spread or the cmsntsries they write. 'lhe Deuxieme
Bureau reestablished contact with them after a period of "breaking contact"
because of this agency's decline in 1976. Through the above-mentioned
journalists, two types of work are ensured--first, leaking news favorable to
the regime, and second, distributing statements attributed to politicians
who did not utter them. This is what Lebanese political personalities

call the typewriter which prints these statanents fabricated by the
well-known agencies.
The Old Agency and Counterintelligence

The rebuildinL the Deuxiene hureau or the Second Branch, the old structure
with all its minute details was retained--that structure which placed

a chief at the apex of the pyramid, assisted in principle by a deputy.
Three officials were added to the chief and his deputy--a military
security official, a national security official, and a counterintelligence
official, Officer Suhayl Khuri. The first two officials were known in the
old agency, while the counterintelligence division was newly created. It
has more personnel than a battalion, and is especially trained. Suhayl
Khuri, commander of this force, is directly connected to Johnny 'Abduh.
This is the first time a battalion has been detached from the army to serve
the Second Branch, and this situation is unprecedented except in military
dictatorships, especially in Latin America, where the intelligence agencies
are forces of political repression having, just like the security agenties,
military divisions trained in pursuit, attack and liquidation. Connected
to the three agencies (military security, national security and counter-
intelligence) are regional officers directly linked to the chief, each

of whom builds his own private networks. In addition to his basic salary,
each receives 1,500 Lebanese pounds a month as compensation for special
missions, as well as a chauffeur and a guard. Also, every month each
officer receives 10,000 pounds which he can spend as he likes, without
having to submit a monthly expense account. The Second Branch works
through legal channels to prevent the spread of political .ction to the
army and co cmsbat cetmv espionage agencies, although these two tasks

are in fact unrelated. The biggest innovation in this respect is the

work of the national security agency, which is concerned with all political
issues. This agency has played an Outstanding role in previous periods,
and by the nature of its work was one of the pivots abunt which concentrated
the political attack 0n the Deuxieme Bureau during the time of President
Sulayman Pranjiyah. This agency, as well as other agencies, was reorganized
at an earlier time. The Second Branch has extensive powers in information
collection, strengthened by an almost canplete financial independence; none

of this agency's expenses are subject to any financial auditing.

The Deuxieme Bureau, which played a major role in setting off and kindling
the civil war, is now raising its head in an attempt to ensure security
services for the plot to Zionize Lebanon from within and impose surrender
on it from abroad. This is what the majority has rejected; it has
demonstrated and called more than one strike to confirm that this shall
not come to pass. The nationalist forces which have fought the plot in
its most vicious forms are capable of resisting the handfuls of hirelings
operating under the name of legitimacy.

Israeli Monetary Support
Beirut AL-HURRIYAH in Arabic 26 Nov 79 p [2
[Text] During the Israeli Knesset debates on Israeli intelligence agency

activities in the Arab world, it was revealed that Israeli intelligence
pays 40 million pounds a year to the Deuxieme Bureau, which is supervised
by Haj Johruw 'Abduh, in return for what some delegates loyal to the
Menachim Begin government described as "the need to combat Palestinian
terrorism allied with the hft." The above-mentioned debates were reported
by the IsrncH press, alongwith the growing enthusiasm for the need

to develop the relation, especially since Lebanon has become the main
center for resistance activity.

8559
050: 6802

99
ROLE 0? BASIC consumers IN WINDING ISLAMIC SWIM mum
‘l‘ripoli AL-USBU’ AL-SIYASI in Arabic 19 Oct 79 pp 9. 10

IZrticle by 'Ali Yahya ﬁnial-lat: “The basic Conferences Are a Practical
Application of Consensusﬂl

lzensl It has becoas firnly established in the ninds of all Moslens in
this era that consensus is the third source of Islamic law. The opinions
of scholars have differed greatly in the consensus which is to be authori-
tative. without addressing nysslf to the technical aspects of it. without
participating in the boisterous debate which has revolved around it. and
without discussing views or giving nore weight to sons views by reviewing
the evidence (all theoretical), and before entering into details, I would
like to point to sinple observations which one nust take into consideration
in carrying out this investigation. These are:

l. The legislation which has been set down in [the holy] texts does not
need consensus, in spite of jurists' insistence on their faailiar espres-
sion "the evidence for it is in the Book, the sayings end doings of the
prophet. and consensus." This is e nsaningless exercise in one-upasnship.
What has been established in the Koran does not need further contirsetion.
lverything that has been nentioned since the Koran is nsddling and none of
the fire precepts of the Koran will be detracted by its absence.

2. Consensus met not enter into precepts on worship. The nation. as a
whole or otherwise, has no right to legislate e leans for worshiping God
other then that which hes been established by revelation. and God will be
worshipped only in the nenner in which he ordered hinself to be worshipped.

3. All issues related to politics, economics end society are fields for

cgnsensus_as long as provisions have not been set down on any of th. in
/_t_he holy] texts.

These observations lust be taken into consideration in any investigation
which the precept of consensus deals with. In reality. religious jurists
have stipulated nany conditions for consensus and have requested neny qual-
ificationo for it. The truth of the letter is that none of then has been
founded on e eound beeie beyond the viewpoint of the pereon holding the
opinion himeelf. Juriete hove put forth meny conceptione of coneeneue.
Among they ere thou who heve been eetiefied with tho coneeneue of e epe-
cific town, region, clen or number of clone, coneidering the coneoneue
they eee .‘it in one of thoee preceding forme to be velid for the entire
ielemic notion. Among them ere people who coneidor thet coneoneue ie not
proper end ie not euthoritetivo in Ielemic lew unleee egreement hee been
reeched on it emong ell the membere of the notion. Among ell thoee viewe
two etend out which we heve choeen beceuee we believe thet they ere cloe-
eet to melting reelity of the notion of coneeneue which ie eeent to be
euthoritetive in Ieiemic lew beceuee it ie the view of the netion or the
precept of the notion concerning eomething on which no precept hed previ-
ouely been reveeled by God. Theee two viewe ere:

l. Coneeneue cen be coneeneue only if the entire netion--ite wiee end ig-
norent men, ite pioue men end ite profligete--egree on it. el-Shewlteni in
hie hook "Guidence of the Heetere" hee euI-erizod it in the following
linee: "Ihe etetgmente of ordinery people ere to be token into coneidere-
tion in lgeeching/ coneeneue beceuee ell in all they ere the netion. Al-
though the etetement of the notion met be euthoritetivo. in order to pre-
eerve it from wrong. there ie nothing to prohibit protection from encom-
peeeing the entire notion, ite wiee end ignorent men both."

2. Hint ie reepected in coneeneue ie firetly the opinion of men of epeci-
elizetion or "weight" then the egreement of the othere to theee men; if
men of epocieliution ere unenimouely agreed on e precept, end the root of
the people egree to it, then e legelly ecceptod coneeneue hee come ebout
end the word of the men of epecieliretion, or men of weight, hoe. no the
religioue juriete eey. become iqortent in thie reepect. Men of epecieli-
zetion or men of weight ere not elweye religioue juriete; rethor, the pool-
tion of juriete on meny ieeuee ie no more then thet of the coma people.
If the ieeue being inveetigeted ie one of heelth, for oxenlo. the men of
weight will be doctore, end the root of the people, well educeted or not,
will, on thie ieeue, even if they poeeeee the higheet degreee, rent with
the canon people. The eeee ie the eituetion if the problem ie politicel,
economic, militery or otherwiee.

If we went to cite exenplee. we cen bring up meny gueetione on which re-
ligioue juriete reech decieione through pereonel individuel judgment with-
out referring to men of epecielired leerning. 'l'heir individuel judgmente
differ end decieione conflict eccordlng to the conflict in their viowe.
Perhepe the neereet exemple we cen cite here ie the diepute over which
there bee been e lengthy etruggle emong religioue juriete for generetio --
thet of determining the meximum period of pregnency, which wee recently ro-
eolved by men of weight or epecielieetion. doctore. leiigioue juriete ed-
dreeeed themeelvee to theee men end lewe were codified in moot Ielemic
countriee in eccordence with the conclueion medicel opinion hed reeched,

in epite of the diecropency between thet conclueion end the moot prominent
etetemente which hed been in effect in e number of Ielemic countriee
etenming from the individuel judgmente of religioue juriete.
Heny nettere in verioue fielde of life heve been reieed end ere being
reieed on which juriete heve hed lengthy dieputee in eccordence with their
own judg-ente. Theee ere not enong theee juriete' epeciel knowledge end,
if they hed been left to people with epecielieed knowledge end juriete hed
helped then, decieione would heve been ieeued on the. by coneeneue or by
eejority, the problem would heve ended, end people would heve been eble to
epere the-elven fro. going beck end forth to houeee of juriete end weigh-
ing etetenente. Juriete would mention coneeneue coneidering thet it wee
out of the queetion thet it could cone ebout--indeed, eone echolere heve
ruled thie cetegoricelly. on grounde thet it ie iqpoeeible to contect ev-
eryone who hee weight or ell the people in the netion in eny ere, ee they
believe. however, the nodel which the Socieliet teople'e Libyen Areb
Je-ehiriyeh hee offered in ite pioneering experinent of govern-ant by the
people hee proved thet erriving et the ettein-nt of legel coneeneue in
the Areb netion or the lelenic netion todey hee becoee eeey end ecceeeible.
thet one any rely on it in reeolving ell problem eround which teqeete of
diepute heve been or will be reieed beceuee of pereonel judgnnte in theory,
then ieeue e unified verdict on then, end thet one ney diecuee eny problen
reieed then cerry it to e group or coneeneue reeolution. Perhepe thie
eethod will permit the ere of pereonel individuel judgment to end end the
eetebliehment of coneeneue judgment, thet ie, relience on the third eource
of lelenic jurieprudence, to be eetebliehed.

If the Iele-ic netion followe the peth of the Jenehiriyeh in forming beeic
conferencee end then preeente nettere which require diecueeion end etudy

to theee conferencee, end if eech conference etudiee the nettere which ere
preeented to ell conferencee end ieeuee reco-endetione concerning the. on
which the conference reeched egreeeent, then thoee recouendetione will ell
be nede enoug then end the reeult will be either the ettein-ent of egree-
nent by the nejority on e perticuler opinion Ohich will be the verdict of
the nejority, e hypotheticel verdict etronger then the opinion of eny in-
dividuel deliberetor in eny ceee) or the etteinnent of egreeaent by ell

the beeic conferencee on e perticuler opinion, which will be the coneeneue
decleion which in deeired by lelenic lew--e coneeneue which juriete inegine
end coneider to be unetteinehle.

“the feet ie thet beeidee being the noet exemlery neene for epplying direct
democrecy and the beet wey to trein ell neabere of the people to exerciee
freedou, norel courege, e concern for ell ieeuee preoccupying citizene,

end the epreed of ewereneee through give end teke, the eyetee of beeic con-
ferencee ie eleo the noet exeqlery neene for epplying the concept of legel
coneeneue in thie ere, beceuee thie nethod givee every neeber everywhere
en opportunity to ettend. lieten end perticipete in the diecueeion of eny
problem reieed for diecueeion in the deeire to bring it to e eound decieion.
There in no doubt thet the queetion--eny queetion--ney heve e reletionehip
to one eepect or enother of the public intereet in life, end therefore the
greeteet poeeible nunbcr of people ehould diecuee it no thet e referendu-
ney be teken on ell ite eepecte.

l0?
Since the basic conference is made up of all the residents of a branch or
region, everyone with fields of specialization, and all educated people,
including scholars of Islamic jurisprudence, are by the nature of the case
part of the popular masses of the branch. After the problem, in all its
weight and dimensions has been reviewed by the secretariat of the confer-
ence, people with specialized knowledge will come forward to analyze it,
discuss it from all aspects and express sound views on it. Anyone in at-
tendance who wishes to may participate in the discussion and jurists or
scholars of Islamic jurisprudence must establish their presence through ob-
servations, directives and formulation: so that the discussion will bring
everyone to agreement on a general reco-endation which will be accoapan-
ied by the general reco-endationa issued in other conferences. Then a
conclusion will be derived from these reco-nendations and the verdict will
be by consensus, if all conferences are agreed on it, or by the majority
if the opinions of the majority are agreed on it.

There is no doubt that some religious scholars do not like this because
they consider that they alone possess specialized knowledge and are men of
weight, and because consensus is a legal judgment and legal judgments are
issued only by religious jurists. In times past a group of such jurists
tried to exclude even their colleagues, the scholars of fundamentals of
jurisprudence and the scholars of rhetoric, from the subject, on grounds
that the' ' participation deprived them of the major portion of what they
believed :heir specialized fields to be and stripped them of the most pow-
erful weapon but they retained their status, though this was not the case,
because religious jurists are a category of the people, have a scope of
specialization which no one begrudgee them, and are not prohibited from
taking part in any subject set forth for discussion, but rather met at-
tend and articulate religious aspects which might be lost on other people.
Religious jurists also consider engineers, doctors, farmers and industrial-
late to be counon people as far as matters of jurisprudence go and take the
sane view concerning issues which are those people's fields of specializa-
tion. However, this does not prevent them from having a necessary connec-
tion to all issues raised for the issuance of legal decisions, and thus
their presence is necessary at all meetings and is effective in all cases.
while the prophet-may God's blessings and peace be upon him-was directed
by revelation and was the paragon of all fields of specialization. he would
in many cases defer to others, as happened in the Bedr offensive and the
al-Ahzab offensive. He would gather together all his coqenions, with all
their groups, present the problem to them in all its details, then tell
them "Consult with me, people," and adopt the opinion of the majority even
if the majority were opposed by people who he thought had s more correct
opinion or acCurate view. As happened in the Uhud offensive, he did not
do this, did not procrastinate, did not hesitate and did not waver. All
issues related to various aspects of life have specialists whose word on
these issues is the moat correct, whose knowledge is the most valid and
whose opinion is the most accurate--indeed, there are issues and problems

which must be presented to ordinary people for judgpent and are not to be
restricted to the opinions of specialists.
The 1 September revolution has achieved a brilliant success in innovating
this method, which, in treating the probleas of the masses, has no similar
precedent, setting forth these problems in a nanner whereby it is easy for
all citizens without exception to attend. become informed, participate ef-
fectively and issue reco-nendations and decisions.

Today the jamehiriyah issues all its decisions in one of two ways: by con-
sensus or by majority.

were we to say, as some old-time religious jurists do, that the validity of
consensus is part of the Islamic nation, then we would be saying that de-
cisions have been, and will be, issued by consensus. Indeed, we would be
saying that all opinions in the jamehiriyah will be issued by consensus.
However, we are not of that view. He consider that a consensus will be
lawful and correct only if the Islamic nation with all its groupings is
unanimously agreed to it. It will not be feasible for the Islamic nation
to be unanimous on a decision on any matter unless all the countries in
this nation apply the notion of basic Islamic conferences and unless the
various regimes in the Islamic world are convinced of the -jamahiriyah’s ex-
periment of assigning the task of taking the initiative to rule to the
people themselves. In reviewing the ruling on issues, the ja-ahiriyah has
taken broad steps not only toward true deaocracy but also toward the sound
situation which Islam calla for and the proper method for assuming power,
since the holy Koran has placed this directly in the hands of the nation,
the masses, and not in the hands of an individual or authority, "You were
the best of nations brought forth to the people; contend that which is
good and prohibit that which is odious and believe in God." In the fact
and truth of the setter, power does not go beyond commanding the good and
prohibiting the odious. In iqosing on the nation or the masses the re-
sponsibility for rule, the holy Koran did not content itself with that but,
in another holy verse, specified the method whereby the masses were to es-
ercise power, stating "And he ordered the- to consult among themselves."
Is there any more splendid and preferable way for performing consultation
among all mesbers of the nation than that of basic conferences?

I have said nothing new in stipulating here that this method is the souni~
est one, so far, for achieving the rule by consensus which religious jur-
lets have labored greatly over but could not attain, since all that was
mentioned was surrounded by doubt OB ev_e_ry side, except for the consensus
which has been established in the /holy/ texts, and most of which was inex-

plicit because provisions were established without it and it was not the
requisite consensus we are talking about.

In order to remedy all their problems and make rulings on them which are
valid in Islamic law, Hoslens in their various countries must follow the
same or nearly same path the Socialist People‘s Libyan Arab Janahiriyah
has adopted through the basic conferences. If they do so, they will be
performing a subliae service for Islam and their peoples, because the
lholx/ texts are linited, some dealing with certain provisions with precise

3.0L
specificity end others deeling with then flexibly, leeving most probleu
for people to deel with in eccordence with the public interest efter
setting forth the generel broed issues for then end drewing up breed out-
lines for then which they must observe. "hen the holy texts were finel-
ized reveletion wee conpieted; since then, schoiers with individuel views
heve borne the benner of lslenic jurisprudence. Though the work they
heve performed wes greet, it wee no more then individuel opinion! end per-
sonei points of view which could not teke the piece of the [3011/ text or
teke the piece of consensus or neke it diepeneeble; indeed, sons of the
opinions which were errived st through individuel judpent end perle in-
terpretetions heve been the ceuee of division in the netion, end this
division hes eonetines led to hetreds end sntegonisns which led to the
estebiishnent of neeger petty religious stetes fighting over power in the
nene of religion, which helped weeken the netion in the fece of the on-
eleught of inperielism.

However, there is no true neesurenent for degrees of individuel judgnent,
or any specific entity to issue then, so neny people who ere not quelified
to do so by the neture of their jobs but ere quelified by the truth of
their views end the soundness of their thinking, end ere eminently quell-
fied by their norelity end principles, rise to the surfece end ere cled in
the reiment of individuel judglent then enter into religious struggle with
the tee: of e conbstent. Heny people who deserve this degree of excel-
lence are not recognized, but indeed there ere people who ere not recog-
nized for knowledge in their lives, then violent were ere fought end efter
they die their writings ere uncovered, perheps efter e long time, end it
is recognized thet they were enong the greatest thinkers end they ere per-
heps given the title of imen.

‘l'he tine hes cone for the islenic netion to rely upon e steble source of
lslenic jurisprudence, nenely the source of consensus; eccording to out be-
lief, consensus ten cone ebout only in this nsnner.

The orgenizetion of the Islenic netion with eli its countries into besic
brench conr‘erences whose recomendetions will ell be eccumietsd within e
eecreteriet generel of the Isienic netion end tempered, efter which e de-
cision will be issued either by nsjority or by uneninity, is the step which
must be teken in order to errive et e fixed source of lslenic jurisprudence.
It is plein thet jurists end scholers of Islemic lew, whetever their de-
grees night he, met, just es ell seen of specielizetion nust, ettend these
conferences, perticipete in then effectively, end hide none of the knowl-
edge whose conveyence end disclosure is amended of then. Hhoever does
not ettend is responsible before God before he is responsible before his-
eelf or the messes, end no excuse for feiiing to ettend will eveil his: es
long es he knows thet e netter is to be set forth so thet e iegei verdict
my be issued on it.

The Socielist People's Libyen Areb Jemehiriyeh hes chosen the systee of
besic conferences to study end deel with ell its issues end problems end
it has attained coeplete success in this, although sous elements have been
hesitant and have straggled from the pioneering cavalcade. The masses.
with all their groups, have cone to discuss everything that is presented
in the conferences with interest, awareness and an appreciation of popular
responsibility. Before we conclude this chapter we must review the nega-
tive aspect of the concept, especially since we want to bring the concept
of the basic conferences in the janahiriyah forth to the entire lslenic
world, restricting these conferences in issuing organisational decrees to
fixed legal consensus decisions.

Perhaps we can sunnerise these negative points or criticisms in the follow-
ing points:

1. We cannot consider the recossnendstions which the basic conferences is-
sue as consensus since we know through experience that any people do not
attend these conferences and that those who do not attend do not take part

in determining the decision. This is enough to keep the decision fro. be-
ing one of consensus.

2. Scholars of Islamic jurisprudence, who are the lost iqsortant eleuent
in the utter, might not attend, or they night attend but not be given an
opportunity to discuss. ‘i‘hus recounendations will be issued deficiently,

without explicit agree-sot on their part. This is enough to render the
consensus invalid.

3. Generally, basic conferences are dominated by ee-hars of the conference
secretariat and revolutionary connittees and they direct the. as they want,
others being unable to cos-and the situation and appear clearly before the
masses. Thus recounendst‘.ons are issued by specific directives which are
the opinions held by the lac-hers of the conference and the revolutionary
couittees. A decision issuul in this fashion cannot be considered a de-
cision by consensus. Perhaps "here are other observations of less isport-
snce than these. The answer to 0.1 these observations may be concentrated
on:

l. The first point: The failure of individuals, whatever their status,
to attend basic conferences is not a negative aspect or drawback of the
concept but is a negative aspect and drawback of those who straggle. As
long as a citizen knows that a basic conference will be held, that specific

issues will he raised, and that what is required is agree-ant in order that
a legal decision nay be attained, why should he not attend?

If we odd to this that if an issue is raised on which the issuance of a
legal judgment hosed on consensus is required, it is not permissible that
people who are specialized and people who feel within the-selves the abil-
ity to participate and benefit not attend. when scholars of Islanic law
and people with specialized knowledge look at this issue frost this stand-
point, no one will fail to cone, and anyone who does not cone will not be
pardoned. Scholars of Islamic law are themselves the first to be obligated

106
to ettend beceuse of the fire reletionship between then end every issue
reised for the edoption of decisions. All spirits eust be divested of de-
lusions of grendeur end personality worship end the conduct of certein in-
dependent elements who iepert en etmosphere of boisterousness to the con-
ferences, ceusing the e-berressment of some citizens, defeming then end
neking themselves custodiens of the conference end the revolution, must be
limited.

2. The second point: The experiment is still in its initiel steps end
soon people's ninds heve not gresped it or understood it. Therefore they
ere not evincing full intereet in it. These sluggish mentelities will un-
derstend end gresp the experinent end will be won over to it greduelly
within s reesonebly short period end then e rush to ettend end e carpeti-
tion to perticipete in dilcussion will occur end no one will not ettend,
beceuse no one who tekes pride in his dignity will ignore his rights or
ebendon thee to other people to deel with.

3. The third point: The erperinent of the besic conferences end the popu-
lsr exercise of power. eepecielly legisletive power, is s new one for the
people of the jemehiriyeh end hes not yet been presented in soy other
country of the world. Therefore other countries need the support of ewere
leedere who ere represented by the menbers of the secreteriet end members
of the :evolutionery connittees efter en experiment hee been conducted for
e period which we do not consider will lest long. The experiment will be-
come esteblished in the minds of ell the people. The theory will prove
its feesibility end effectiveness eeong the most negetive people end every-
one will becoue convinced thet it is the only wey, the wey they lust follow.
Then the conferences will not be in need of lenders or the support of lend-
ers beceuse it is they who will leed; ettendence will be rounded out, dis-
cussion will be guided, excitebility will diseppeer end logic end genuine-
ness will doninete. Then the decisions issued in the jenehiriyeh will per-
force heco-e e pertiel unenimity.

If there were people who ecknnwledged the euthority of the consensus of the
people of Hedine, the consensus of the people of el-Kufeh. or the consensus
of the people of el-‘Atreh emong the religious jurists of old, e dey will
come very soon when the decisions in the jemehiriyeh will be issued in the
neme of consensus. while the Libyen people could not Ieke their decisions,
which were issued by consensus, binding on say other Areb or Isluic
peoples, they could set before then the wey in which to ettein consensus
end solve e problee whose solution hes eluded them for ll. centuries for
then. They heve only to edopt the system of the besic conferences, reedy-
nede es it is being epplied here. Just es ruling regimes in Isle-it Areh
countries ecknowledge thet it in their people who possess the right to ee~
suns power end possess the right to legislete verdicts end lews, then s
system will erise smong then siniler to the system of besic conferences,
end the decisions issued in the. will heve the force of pertiel uneninity.
If this system goes into effect enong ell Isle-1c peoples end is inle-
nented by them, end the reco-endetions of ell their conferences with
regard to a given decision are agreed upon, then they will_tru_ly have re-
vived the most iaportant source of legislation after the [holy/ texts.
This is the third source of legislation, the source which the Islamic ne-

tion has lost because of doctrinal dispute. political antagonism and tribal
fanaticism.

we believe that it is necessary that the era of individual judgments dis-
appear and that the page of imams and men of individual judgment, the page
which hes dominated the Islamic world since the death of the prophet, on
whom be God's peace and blessings, be turged,_so that the rule of consensus,
which is second in inortance after the /holy/ text, may tdte its place.

If those who came before did not know the means for attaining consensus,
here is almighty blessed God who has inspired this noble people and lighted
the path for them, revealing to the Arab world and the Islamic world the

platform they must follow. The competent authority has arisen: is there
anyone to respond?

1188
080: (9802

108
BRIEFS

DBIBCTIVB DEFENSE SYS'I'ninCol Mo's-er al-Qedbdhafi conducted an examina-
tion into the air defense system the Soviets installed in Libya at a cost
of more than $1 billion and found thet about 20 percent of the systee was
working and the rest was unable to function because of a lack of fuel and
no maintenance. The colonel becale agitated and requested contgct gith
Vietna- to contract for 5,000 people to opergte this systen. /_‘l_'ex_t/
lgondon AL-HAHADlTll in Arabic 16 Nov 79 p 13/

mum INTELLIGENCE CWP- -lgyptian intelligence has obtained the cowlete
plan of the new building the Libyan president Hu'aaner al-Qadhdhafi built
as his residence, showing all the entrances, exits, roone and contents of
the house. The people who transnitted this intonation said that "al-
thdhafi's house" has become transparent and no longer has any secrets!
They stress that there is a radical dispute between the colonel and his
prine ninister, 'Abd-al-Sslan Jallud. now that Jallud has nenaged to build
a sort of popularity for himself within the any. This gave al-Qsdhdhafi
warning to for. popular co-nittees in the armed forces consisting of of-
ficers loyal to his in order to reduce Jallud's position within the any.
Counting on a decree sl-Qadhdafi issued prohibiting the eating of garlic
in Libya "because it is exorbitantly expensive and unheneficial," the
Cairo newspaper AL-MIBAH cornered sl-Qadhdhefi to the Yeti-id al-llekin bi-
Anr Allah. who prevented lgyptians from eating noloukheyya. Other decrees
al-Qedhdhafi has issued include the allocation of 30 head of livestock to
every owner of sheep, with the rest to be delivered to popular co-ittees,
and granting every person the right to buy just two shoes a year, with
shoe purchases to be by coupon. AL-AHRAH said. in concluding its_co__en-
tgry. "History also reaenbers how al-llakin b_i.-Anr Allah died.“ /Iex_t_/
lgondon AL-RAHADITH in Arabic 16 Nov 79 p 13/

CAMPAIGN AGAINST PALESTINIANs-Jrhe Libyan media have launched a violent
caspaign agath the Palestine Liberation Organization as a consequence of
its nediation to free the hostages detained in the Anerican hbsssy in
Tehran. The political editor of the Libyan News Agency wrote a couentery
stating “it is not the job of Palestinians to nediate in issues concerning
Anaricans, who are the financers and nain supporters of the Zionist gangs."
The agency editor described this nediation as "An infanoua stain on the
forehead of the Palestinian revolution." Palestinian sources say that the
real reason for the canoaign is a dispute between Libya and PATH and that
the Libyan government hae not been content to freeze the $15 million which
PATH collected in Palestinian donations in Libya but has proceeded to
transfer $16 million to the Popular Pront led by Dr George Habash! Pales-
tinian sources have described this Libyan policy as being ailsed at driving
a wedge between Palestinian organizations on the one hand and 5he_Pelestin-

ian revolution and the Iranian revolgtion on the other. lgexsl ILondon
AL-HAHADITH in Arabic 16 Nov 79 p 13/ l1887
TIES T0 HORLD JEUISH CONGRESS BY WROCCAN JEHS CRITICIZED
Paris AL—NAHAR AL—‘ARABI HA AL-DUHALI in Arabic 19-25 Nov 79 p 27

[Article by AL-NAHAR AL-‘ARABI WA Ab-DWALI‘s correspondent in Morocco:

"The Jewish Conunity Joins the 'World Jewish Congress,” The second
congress of the Moroccan Jewish co-unity is a step toward incorporating the
Moroccan Jews into the "World Jewish Congress" to defend the interests of
Israel on the international scene*]

[Text] The second congress of the Moroccan Jewish conunity, held recently
in the city of Casablanca, emphasized the "loyalty of Moroccan Jews to King
Hasan II and their desire to mobilize their resources in support of Moroccan
policy in Western Sahara, particularly among Anerican Jewish circles.

It was for this purpose that David Amt, the secretary general of this
[Jewish] comunity's council, amounted that, in the near future, Jewish
organizations would join the "World Jewish Congress" in order to "defend
the legitimacy of our cause and the interests of our country on the inter—
national scene." He expressed his hope that the Moroccan govern-ant would
agree to that.

It is certain that the Moroccan govern-ant will not object to this affiliation,
and may even have encouraged it, as long as it serves the interests of its
policy which aims at playing all [possible] cards, including the Jewish

card, in order to obtain as much Anerican support as possible for Morocco

in order to win the Sahara war.

This congress has brought a few facts out into the open. For example, the
Jewish comunity (30,000 persons) is being wooed by two main trends: the
first one calls for the priority of belonging to the Moroccan homeland, on
the basis of having a Jewish identity, and the second one supports the idea
of [Jewish] comunity solidarity.

___ﬁ_____
*Phrase interests of Israel" does not appear in text below. Phrase "interests

of our country" does appear in paragraph 1. Writer has, unwittingly or
otherwise, misinterpreted the former.

L11
This idea has been adopted by a group which considers itself presently to
be a distinct con-unity, although socially it has been integrated. This
is attributable to the fact that its prominent elements have suspect foreign
connections, and that some of them have previously been involved in financial
scandals and bribes, together with [important] Moroccan figures, in addition

to the active Zionist propaganda [which they have waged] in Morocco since
the bO's.

But this does not particularly bother the Moroccan authorities, which

regard this comunity's leaders—most of whom are doctors, businessmen,

and representatives of foreign multinational corporations-~as a link between
theaselves and foreign investors, especially Jews, who are able to revive
the Moroccan economy, which is suffering a suffocating crisis because of
expenditures for the Sahara war.

Furthermore the vicissitudes of Moroccan policy with regard to the Palestine

Question encourage them to play a role in Moroccan political life, after
they restricted their activities, during recent years, to the field of

business. They know that most of the Jews who left Morocco for Israel in
the 50's and 60's--close to 200,000--did not make fortunes and did not
achieve [professional] qualifications, as did those who chose to stay behind
in Morocco, and who were able to reach the highest government positions.

The direction in the Ministry of Defense in 1965 was a Jew, and this is
sonethin; that we rarely saw happening in Arab countries at that time.

If we go back to the first years of Moroccan independence, we find that Dr

Leon Ben Zakiue, a Jewish citizen, was the minister of communications...and
the list is long.

But the Jewish problem in Morocco will remain an issue as long as the Jews
who fall under [the influence of ] Zionist propaganda consider themselves to
be persecuted. And this is what causes them, in order to insure their own
protection, to throw themselves into the lap of the ruling circles, which

are confronting then with a difficult choice: either be loyal or pack your
bags.
“BIC“. LEAD“ GIVES KISS COMM! IN SYRIA
Deenecue AL-BA'TI! in Arabic 20 Nov 79 p 3

lirticle by 'Abd-al-Ie'uf al-Kafri: "The ha'th Publiehee Hinutee of 5on-
ference with Secretary General of Sudaneee National Duncratic Irontﬂl

any 111' ﬂuaayn ﬁlth-en Honour. aecretery general of the Sudaneee Netion-
el De-ocretic front and the Deaocratic Federation Perry in exile. held e
preee conference laet Saturday. 17 hove-her, attended by repreeentativee
of the prone and the newe eervicen. A nude:- of our brother eenhera of the
Sudaneee National Front participated in the conference.

The queetione we brought nought enewera concerning the facta and evente of
the revolution of our and Areb people in the Sudan. He eleo nought a
political analyeie of the etetue of the dictatorial region in power and
ite reletione with reaction. Zionien end iqerialien.

Aleo al-lh-eyri'a claine on the eolution to the problen of the aoutharn

Sudan and hie etand on the Iranian revolution. Alao the prioritiee of the
atruggle ae eet forth by the oppoeition National De-ncratic Front end the
front'e poeition on the eubject of piping Nile water to the lioniet one-y.

In view of the inortence of the etatenente Kr neneur node at the confer-
ence, AL-BA'I'I! in publiehing the full deteile of the preee conference.

At the beginning of the conference, Mr Hueayn Honour eaid, "In the none of
the Sudaneee Arab people, in the naee of the Netionel Democratic Front.

and in the one of the Sudaneee Deaocratic federal Party, the perty of the
nejority throughout the hietory of the Sudeneee etruggle, I would eincere-
1y like to thank the national leederehip which hea given ue the opportunity
to deecribe aone of the eufferinge of the Arab people in the Sudaneee
nation. I believe thet it ie a etroke of good luck that this conference in
occurring while the Arab people in Sytie--indeed the Areb people in every
country~-ate heiling the triuqhe of the corrective enve-ent which ie in
reality to be coneidered e hietoric echieve-ent fro. which the Arab people

in every nation eey benefit in their atregglee to build Arab unity, freedo-
and eocialien.

113
"I would like to speak briefly about al-llumsyri's regime's stand on the
domestic cause, his stand on the national cause, and then the regime's
stand on international politics. god you may condemn and judge him after
these stands [have been presented/. -

The Domestic Cause and the Regime

"Concerning the domestic cause, the regime is dictatorial and tyranical.
It is the regime of a cruel sultan which has eliminated all freedoms, even
the siqlest human rights. The Sudanese people no longer enjoy any rights
through which they can express their free will.

"Concentration camps and prisons which our Sudanese people have become
familiar with in the era of the current second military dictatorship they
did not know even in the days of iqerislism. Our people have rejected
this regime even though the regime managed to paint a false picture domest-
ically to some Sudanese in its first declaration, giving the iqression
that it was raising progressive Arab slogans. Sven some Arab and African
brothers abroad were deceived by this regime.

"llowever, it was soon exposed and the progressive forces made efforts to
reject the wavering of the regime and its partiality toward reactionary
puppet forces in the Arab and African region. The regime became flabby,
corruption spread, popular uprisings were declared, and the rejection move-
ment passed from economic struggle to the stage of political struggle. In-
deed. the stage of struggle reached 'the politicisation of the rifle' and
the effort was made to raise arms against the regime. Battles are now be-
ing waged by the Sudanese people against the regime which are quiet some-
times and heated at other times.

"The trade unions, federegions and all existing bodies in the Sudan are
challenging the lgegime'g/ domination, proclaiming unremitting strikes and
declaring that they are advancing today or tomorrow to renew and repeat the
inortel October experience, the experience in which the unarmed Sudanese
people proved with the tree branches with which they were armed that they
could topple the dictatorial military regime at that time.

"Some traditional politicians have fancied. and some of the world press
has fancied with them, that the struggle between the Sudanese people and
the regime is one of 'livelihood' and economic crises. this is not true.
The Sudanese people do not live by bread alone. They are a people who have
had a grasp of their lengthy history and have learned from lumen experi-
ences everywhere. They are a people calling for democracy. and history
bears witness that while the Sudenese people lived in a state of relative
prosperity in the context of the first ailitary dictatorship they nonethe-
less revolted and rose up, rejected the first military dictatorship and de-
clared that they wanted freedom and democracy, wanted human rights, wanted
trade union rights, wanted rights by which they could express their will in
a manner free from dominance, repression or obduracy.
"The fact in that if we take a quick look at thie regime and evaluate it
ecientificelly we will find that the claae evaluation by thia regime in in
no way related to eocialiem becauee it ie not related to e aocieliet people
by any innate character. Sven imperialiam in ite ere wee forced to eetab-
lieh public life on foundatione from which it iteelf could benefit; at

the: time the railway workere' union had 68.000 workera.

"That waa a large number an fer an the Sudan went at that time and the name
wee the can with aome government bureaue and agricultural depart-ante.
leperialien even grew cotton on behalf of en inerieliet country then
handed the coapany'e accounte over to the government after the coqany had
grown rich. Thua the Sudaneee workere end fer-ere claahed with the ruling
regine in the daye of inerieliem, not juet beceuae it wee in power but el-
eo becauee it wee the ewloyer. Therefore the economic atruggle in the
Sudan perforce ahifted to a political atruggle.

"al-Nu-ayri'a regime hea aucceeded in thia brief period in creating a
group of capitalieta who have become millionairee. The regime hea managed
to create 20 nillionairee, whereee on 25 Hay 1969 there were no Sudaneee
nillionairee--indeed if one gathered together all the wealth of the rich
on 25 Hay 1969 one would have not amaeeed l nillion.

"Aa fer ea a political evaluation of this regime goee, we atete that it ie
the vile opportunietic puppet of the treacheroua hoetile trinity hoatile
to all peoplee--the puppet of American inerielien, world Zionian and
treeeonoue capituletioniet Sedation.

"Therefore we etete that we find oureelvee faced with an anlyaia of the
poeition of the regime regarding the national queetion.

"In fact the regime came in raieing national alogana but it wee quickly un-
naahed and aligned iteelf with the inperieliat can and the group of reac-
tionary countriea in the Arab region.

"The Sudaneee people have been able through hietory to epecify their atand
on the national cauee in a unique nanner. Since 1948 volunteera in their
official uniforme, the uniforma of the Sudaneee arwy, have taken part and
fought on ueurped l'eleatinian land. The Sudaneae peeple'a relationahip to
the Arab cauae hea remained fire, a relationahip of thought and ideology,
a relationahip of goele and atrategy, and no party in the Sudan, in epite
of the preeence of a few reactionary partiea. hee been able to ignore the

Arab ceuee throughout hiatory except inaofar ea it could preeerve ite poei-
tion under the ahedow of reaction.

"Our party hea continued to call for a full relationahip with Arab unity
and with the alogana of freedom and eocialiam, not juet ea alogana but an
a firm ideology; time hea continued to ehow that no Arab people in any

country of our great nation can but adopt thia ideology, becauee it in the
eole road to eelvetion.
Nile Hater for the Masses of the Nile

"At the Arab foreign ministers' conference held in mnis, it happened that
Mr 'Abd-al-Nalim Khaddam, in the course of the action plan he presented to
the conference, demanded under the seventh subheading that the Sudan be re-
quested to reject and repel the Egyptian regine's decision to supply
'Israel’ with water from the Nile. The Sudanese National Democratic Front
and the Federal Party issued a statensnt at that time condemning sl-Sadet's
arrogant attitude toward the rights of the people. The Nile does not be-
long to el-Sadat or to sl-Numayri; rather, the Nile belongs to the Arab
people living on the soil of the Nile Valley. Ne support the conclusion
our domrade Khaddam reached and in the name of the Sudanese people dele-
gate his to carry on this cause on our behalf and assert it to the coming
Arab auanit conference, especially since our Sudanese people have no repre-
sentative at this conference and because the regime in the Sudan cannot
claim that it represents our people, for it is lacking all powers and no
longer can state that it represents the people of the Sudan (not that it
ever could). then Ja'far sl-Numnyri and his government were silent about
al-Sadat'e statement. which condemned him, Ja'far al-Numayri hiaaelf re-
quested donations from the world to solve the famine of the thirsty and
drought-ridden people of the Sudan, and here he fell silent about the Nile
water al-Sadat was trying to pipe to our Zionist enemy. al-Numayri's re-
gime'r failure to oppose al-Sadat is an aggression against our people's
right: to the essentials of their existence, and it is not reasonable that
our people, who reject the 'Israeli' presence on the land of Arabhood,

should agree to be drought-ridden while Nile water is transferred to
Israel.

"al-Sadat's 'initiative' and treasonous visit to the occupied Arab terri-
tories is a black spot in the history of the Arab struggle and is totally
rejected. However, blacker and uglier than that has been Ja'far al-
Numayri's support of al-Sadat, to the point where he even said that al-
Sadat took the entire show away fro- hia, blaming his ministers who did
not allow him to go with al-Sadat on that historic trip. In fact, the re-
gime is following behind al-Sadat in a loathesomely. opportunistic way,
ignoring the sacred aspects of governance and the people in the Sudan. It
has permitted Egyptian intelligence to be present just as it has prohibited
the people even to breathe by themelves. After it had tightened the noose
arwnd the Sudanese people, who reject eepionsge, and spread espionage
around everywhere. even in homes, al-Nunayri_ang his gender-es then asked
the aid of the Egyptian regime and allowed litg/ intelligence service to
build a nest in many strategic locations and sites in the Sudan, in Nadi
Ssyyidna. where the ailitary airport protecting Khartoum is situated, in
the Shajarah-chardun cap, in the Jabal al-Awilya' cup, in the Flamingo
Camp, and in eastern Sudan near the port, Port Sudan. Thus it is clear

that the Egyptian regime's forces are surrounding Khartoum and taking over
the Sudan's only port, Port Sudan.
An American Base in the Sudan

"I am announcing no secrets when I say that a massive nilitary base is to-
day being built in the old port of Suwakin. This is the second port and
was only used for pilgrims. Another Arab country is contributing to this
American base in the name of the Red Sea Treaty and we assert that this
treaty essentially is an inperielistic treaty which is absolutely not pro-
tecting the Sudan's territorial waters but will be a jming-off spot for
aggression against the territory of the Sudan and Arab lands.

"We know that contacts recently made by Maj Gen 'Umsr huhaned al-‘i‘ayyib,
head of the State Security Agency in the Sudan, who returned last week
from America, bringing with him agreements from America (a gift, not a
loan, of $350 million), with countless aid in the form of supply connodi-
ties, specifically sugar, flour and wheat. An Arab country contributed
$350 million in order to save the eupty Sudanese treasury and $l28 million
for the army. All this will go to salaries and none for production. Then
there is another Arab country which has contributed the cost of oil to the
Sudan for a period of 2 years. He, in the name of the Arab people in the
Sudan, ask these two Arab countries to take their hands away from the col-
lapsing regime. Any aid offered to that regime is in reality being of-
fered in some way to 'Isreel' and the parties to Can David. we, and the
whole world,know that the fall of al-Numayri will nean the fall of al-
Sedat by necessity, that any iqortant event in Egypt will have its rapid
repercussion in the Sudan, and that any iwortant event in the Sudan will
have a powerful and also swift reaction in Bgypt.

"The regime no longer has any connection to the Arab cause. Everything
al-Sadat does el-Numayri does. The lgyptian foreign minister has become
the main planner for the Sudanese minister of foreign effeirs--indeed, the
Sudanese armed forces have fallen under the mercy of the Egyptian regime's
advisers. Even al-Nunayri has beeone hemed in by a large group of spies,
headed by Mohamed Hahjub Sulayman, who occupies the position of al-
Numayri's press counsellor. One should realize that this Sulaymen was for-
merly a prison official--en officer.

The Regime and International Politics

"He find that this puppet regime has become a mouthpiece for American in-
perialism in Africa. From the day al-Sadat set out hie policy against the
Soviet Union, al-Numayri set out his policy on the Soviet Union. Instead
of winning over the countries of the socialist cam and refusing to cooper-
ate with the ilperialist countries revolving in Aaerica's orbit, we find
that el-Numayri isolated the people in the Sudan from their traditional
friends. al-Numayri proceeded to warn of the illusory danger that there
was a Co-uniat threat headed for the Sudan, sending for and bringing back
all students from the Soviet Union and lestern 3urope--those refusing be-
ing unable to come back to the Sudan. Indeed the Sudanese people lost
their most important weapon, as a defense force for a massive country. the
eir weapon, since most or all of ita pilots had studied in the Soviet
Union. what is important is that instead of preparing a replacement for
Sudanese arny weapons inported from the Soviet Union, he aold theae weap-
ona to an Arab entity. Thia entity manufactured and made apare parta out
of these Sudanese weapons for thoee of its weapons which had been inorted
from the Soviet Union, thereby weakening the Sudaneee army; thua the Sudan
lost its force in international politics. The proof is too well known and
obvious for us to repeat it--even at the Arab aunit meeting in Nnia al-
Sadat did not go and Ja’far al-Nunayri did not go, juat like Oman.

"He have seen that the regime must disappear because it haa lost ita
etetue within the doneatic end national cause end in international ceuau."

The Role of the Oppoaition
"Hhat in the opposition'a role in bringing thia regime down?

"The front oppoaed to this regime, end the oppoaition in the Sudan, have
in fact become four-fold:

"The opposition loyal to the regime, which is represented by the puppet or-

ganization of the Mosle- Brothers, who have becone the strongest and loud-
est voice in Khartoum.

"Then there in the al- -Uunah Party opposition, more appropriately Hr a1-
Sadiq al- Hahdi' s opposition. al- -Sadiq al Mahdi. since the Port Sudan nect-
ing. when there was supposed to have been a reconciliation. has up to this
day seemed confused. he is neither in opporition nor in aupport--he has
become, as the Arabs say, 'like an oatrich, neither a bird nor a camel.’
The Anear have become bewildered over hi- and have split up. There are
those who support him-the vanguard with financial intereste in col-on
with the regime-while most of the Anaar. the youths. are opposed to
Sadiq' a policy and are demanding revenge against the killers of the in.

"After Sadiq, there is a third opposition. This waa a eerioua oppoaition,
but it so happened that some of its members fell into the trap of an Arab
entity which knowa how to infiltrate the ranks of liberation fronts (and

nothing else), buying off weak apirite and fragmenting ranks. The result
of this in the result al-Sadat has been working for.

"Therefore the revolutionary opposition has considered it appropriate to
reconstitute the progreaeive Sudanese National Front with genuine revolu-
tionary elements. Theae organizationa are seven:

"The Democratic Federal Party.

"the Arab Socialist Ba'th Party.

"The modern Arab forcea.
"The al-Bajjeh Conference. inhabitanta of the eaetern Sudan.
"The Sudaneae Cc-Iuniat Party.

"The Organization of the Sona of the Southern Sudan.

"The organizationa of the weatern aona of the Sudan.

"Thie front conaidera that there can be no peace, no negotiation and no
participation whataoever with the al-Nunayri regine, whatever conceaaiona
the regiee night offer it. It conaidera that the aole eolution for getting
rid of thia regime ie the politiciration of the rifle. areed etruggle.
arned popular revolution, popular war.

The South and the legioa'a Allegationa

"The fact ia, aa far at the iaeue of the eouthern Sudan goee, that it in
not a new one. Rather, it aroee under the preaence of inerialian and ex-
panded in accordance with the iqerialiat planning aet forth. The Sudan
in an Arab country and ita people are Arab; there ie no doubt about that.
However, for 70 yeara, eore correctly aince the 1926 revolution and the
expulaion of the Sgyptiane fro. the Sudan, the Sngliah adniniatration nan-
aged to aplit off the three aouthern governoratea.

"The area of theee governoratea in approximately one-third that of the ter-
ritory of the Sudan and their population ie approxinately one-third that
of the Sudan. The eouthern region haa cone to be called the cloaed region,
the objective behind that being to iaolate our brothera. Nonetheleaa. con-
tinuoua apecial relationa continued after independence to be eteedfaat and
oulti-faceted. In apite of everything, the aouthernera continued to be-

lieve in the unity of Sudaneae toil, which in Arab eoil, and to believe in
liberation and aocialian.

"A number of atteqta were nade to reaolve the iaaue of the aouth, but
politiciana looked at that through a political view reeote fro- reality at
til-ea and erroneoua at other tinea, eapecially in the daya of Gen Ibrahin
'Abbud, 1958-61., when Maj Gen Ilaaan Baahir tried to burn the foreete of
the aouth with everything in the-"a policy which we in the north condom
totally. Southernera in Khartoum Univeraity were among the etrong ale-ante
which contributed to the outbreak of the October 1964 revolution, and revo-
lutionary ele-enta in the aouth continued to carry riflea and participate
in bringing the regiee down. They are atill firing agath the region and
participating in all oppoeition fronta which call for ita collapae. aa ie
clear from the announced nakeup of the Sudaneee National Deeocratic Front.

"The clain the regine ie eaking, to the effect that there it no oppoeition
in the aouth, ia a claie which all the facta dieavow, becauae the niniater-
ial changee proclained officially every day and night, the auapiciona and
chargee reaching officiale in the aouth. the dead people and the military

119
attacks cannot all be covered up. They are all obvious and are being car-
ried in the international press. Opposition in the south exists and is
fully connected to the opposition in the north. Do not be at all sur-
prised if the south, or the eastern part of the west, demand a kind of
autono-y with everyone respecting the unity of the Sudan and its territory.

Struggle from within

"In fact we believe fully that the obvious revolutionary slogan is 'atrug-
gle from within.’ Our military organizations within reflect the fact that
the cosmend exists there, and that the co-and which exists abroad is or-
ganized and cooperates with the contend within. Hhereas the Organization
of Hoslem brothers dominated the Federation of Khartoum University-~tbe
number of seats is 60 and the brothers up to last year had all loO--elec-
tions were held in the university a month ago. the progressive front of
the Federal Party and the Sudanese Col—mist Farty entered in a joint list,
and they managed to defeat the brothers, getting 25 out of the 60 seats
while the southerners got four, so that the University of Khartoum, the
most serious conscious podiu- in the Sudan, came into the hands of the
front and the Sudanese opposition. Some members of the _f_ront's co-and
cannot enter the Sudan at all and others can do so [only] secretly; they
are playing their part with great effectiveness. "hat happened in the uni-
versity is happening now in all workers‘ trade union federations, the Fed-
eratior. of Farmers, and the students‘ and workers' federations. Proof of
that is the severity of the unremitting strikes against the regime.

The Eritrean Revolution and the Regime

"‘l‘he Sudanese regime's strings are attached to American policy. It is
truly painful that any Arab regime, no matter what its political levels
are, should trade in a popular issue, like the Eritrean one. The regime
in the Sudan is trying to put pressure on the Britrean revolution, being
lax with some of its detachments which are known for being agents and
putting pressure on some detach-ants known for purity and a national repu-
tation. we believe in our party and are preparing for the fact that the
success of the lritrean revolution will be inevitable and definite as soon
as aloNumayri's regime falls. because we are anxious that there be a free
Britrean state on our eastern side, because it is the natural ally of the
Sudanese people and is the strategic extension of the Sudan in the led Sea
waters. Therefore we stipulate that the revolutionary popular opposition‘s

success in bringing down al-Ivumayri's regime will of necessity nean support
for the lritrean revolution, not with resolutions and not with support but
with the Sudanese people and any, because the Eritrean revolution is part
of the Sudanese revolution, which is part of the Arab revolution as a
whole. We stress that the peaceful solution being offered to lthiopia now
will proqt al-Numayri's regime to present an armed solution in exchange,
because we are convinced that a peaceful solution. or any negotiations,
will be a waste of the Eritrean revolution’s time and a squandering of its
efforts, even though its current circumstances are somewhat difficult.
The Front and the Liberation Forces

"As we have pointed out, the front is conpoaed of a number of parties, in-
cluding the Democratic Federal Party, which is essentially an Arab party
believing since its establiel-ent in unity, freedom and socialism. I can
say that there is no great difference between our two parties. All that
there is is that the Federal Party in the Sudan is an unorganized party
without an ideology, while the Arab Socialist Ba'th Party in Syria has one.
He are a spontaneous party believing in national positions against incri-
aliss and capitalism and taking the side of liberation and socialism, and
this has provided us with a broad lass base.

"In reality we consider and appreciate that the Sudanese Comnist Party
is the party of the working class in the Sudan. All the battles the Sudan-
ese Conuniet Party has embarked on were most honestly national battles
and the party was the first to stand up to al-Nusayri. Hashim al-‘Ata's
uprising was the first armed uprising against al-Nunayri. The Sudanese
Communist Party was the first to raise am against al-Numayri and the
first men to ascend the nartyrs' gallows were the head of the Connist

Party, the Iartyr 'Abd-al-Qadir Mahjub, al-Shafi' Ahmad al-Shaylth, and
Joseph Qarn.

"Host sorrowfully I say that reaction in the Sudan and the puppets have
been able to sell the blood of these martyrs to a number of countries which
are in disagreement over their policies, and some details of their poli-
cies, but are agreed in the Sudan over one thing, which is the Sudanese
Communist Party. It is now in the Sudanese Comunist Party's interests to
stress, and it is stressing, the raising of slogans of democracy and de-
sanding public freedoms. This is clesr in its statanent which was issued
during the days of the 'reconciliation.‘ It was very alert and condemd
the reconciliation. and we ourselves, the revolutionary vanguard of the
Federal Party, condemned the reconciliation. He were in the right, along
with the Sudanese Communist Party.

"In 91'. the Sudanese parties, eVen ours, there is a right wing which re—
fuses to cooperate with progressive wings. Fortunately this wing has been
weakened. The participation of the Sudanese Comunist Party in this front
emphasizes that we are chasing the right from the party and chasing the
right from the future of the Sudan. The Sudanese people have defined their
position fully on the right and the left in the Sudan."
PROGRESS MADE IN AGRICULTURE AND COWERCIAL FISHING
Oman 'llMN in Arabic 18 Nov 79 pp 33-31:.

[Excerpts] The ainistry of agriculture and fisheries is endeavoring
to increase production by adopting the following measures:

Increasing the nmber of Iodel agricultural fields from 353 in 1976
to 886 in 1978.

Distributing improved seeds. The farmers received 18.425 kilograms
of these last year. as compared with 5.396 kilogram in 1975. The
govern-eat bears 50 percent of the cost of then as a grant to the
farmer.

Distributing fertilizers. The quantity of fertilizers distributed
last year was 2.559.306 tons. as compared with 1.789.1 tons in 1975.
The government bears 25 percent of the costs of then.

Supplying water punps to far-ere. Last year. (063 pimps. valued at
226.555 riyals. were distributed by the ministry through 5-year loans.

Supplying insecticide sprayers. Last year. the ministry supplied 628
of these. valued at 13.924 riyals. to fartsers. The govern-ent bears 50
percent of the cost of the Sprayers.

The date processing plants in Nazi-Ia and al-Rustaq increased their output
from 391.6 tens to 562.4 tons. The revenues of these plants increased
from 85.000 riyals in 1977 to 338.045 riyais in 1978.

Agricultural marketing cooperatives were introduced into the Bedouin
areas. such as the villages of '12: in the district of Hanan and "my-
thah in the district of Adam. The nunber of cooperatives registered
increased from 14 in 1977 to 20 in 1978. Also. a cooperative was for-ed
in the capital.

An agricultural marketing center was set up in Ruwi. and its gross sales
amounted to 105.306 riyals last year. Another center was set up in
Salalah.

122
The cattle research center and the sheep and goat research center are
conducting breeding experiments, and foreign poultry are being raised
for egg production.

Work is in progress to build the al-Hajar veterinary center for al-Sib

and Raysut. the central laboratory for diagnosing animal diseases, two
clinics in 'Ibri, and a clinic in Sama'il.

The income from veterinary services amounted to 60,000 riyals in 1978,
representing an increase of 45,000 riyals over 1977. There were 112,921
cases treated in 1978.

1

Projects to Be Opened During the National Festival

During the ninth national festival ceremonies, the agricultural region
in Salalah, which cost 600,000 riyals, will be opened. This region com-
prises a central unit for animal raising, guidance and environment pro-
motion scrvices, crop protection services and protection teams, coopera-
tive services, special agricultural services for providing seeds, ferti-
lizers, and insecticides, a workshop for the repair and maintenance of
agricultural tools and equipment, storage facilities for seeds, fertili-
zers, chemicals, and spare parts, tarpaulins for machinery and means of
transportation, a model farm, and an agricultural marketing center.

The al-Hajar veterinary health center, which cost 368,632 riyals, will

be opened in Raysut. It will comprise a veterinary clinic, a dissection
room for dead animals, a diagnostic laboratory, an electrical furnace for
disposing of dead animals, a pharmacy for keeping medicines, sera, and
vaccines, animal enclosures, and dip baths.

The Dhofar branch veterinary clinic, which cost 80,600 riyals will be
opened.

Fish Resources

The output of the Matrah fish resources exploitation project amounted to
632.55 tons last year, as compared with 534.2 tons in 1977. Its sales
amounted to 2,569.3 tons, valued at 651,632 riyals.

In August 1979, the ministry adopted measures to establish a national
Omani fish corporation, whose first meeting will take place next January
or February. The corporation was registered on 25 September 1979 with a
capital of one million riyals, with the provision that its shares are to
be distributed as follows: 30 percent to the government, represented in
the ministry of agriculture and fisheries: 10 percent to the fishermen,
represented in the Fishermen's Incentive Fund: 30 percent to the founders;

and 30 percent to general subscription.

123
. -..u-- , run w I unpu-mtor 197‘), the i‘I mi :ilr-tri l:.ulmi 1.70
25-horscpower and 65 lS-horsepower machines in the capital area and 45
25-horsepower and 30 lS-horsepower machines in the Northern District.

It also distributed 238 boats under loans which have been made available,

and the government bears 25 percent of the cost of each boat as a grant
to the fishermen.

During the ninth national festival, the ministry will open a fish resour-
ces promotion project in al~Buraymi. This project will comprise a cool-
ing tank with a capacity of 200 tons, a freezing plant with an output of
20 tons per day, two refrigerators to keep fish for marketing in al-Buray-
mi and neighboring villages. a workshop for repairing the equipment, a
refrigerator truck for distributing fish in the district, and dwellings

for the officials and technicians who will administer and operate the
project.

The Hasandam project, on which work is in progress, will comprise a re-
frigeration warehouse with a capacity of 200 tons. an ice plant with an
output of 15 tons per day. a completely equipped maritime workshop to
serve the local fishermen, and dwellings for the officials and technicians
who will administer and operate the project.

work is in progress on the construction of a maritime workshop in Mirbat.
work is in progress on the construction of a project for the exploitation
of fish resources in Masirah. which will comprise an ice plant with an

output of 30 tons per day. a freezing chamber with a capacity of 220 tons

per day. a maritime workshop. and dwellings for the workers on the pro-
ject.

C50: h802

12h
TUNIS DAILY SCORES EXPLOITATION 0P ISLAM FOR DARK DESIGNS
LDl3lOl3 Tunis L'ACTION in French 6 Dec 79 pp 1, 9 LD
[Editorial by Abdelhay Sghaier: "Islam: Vigilance Is Essential"]

[Text] In the current situation it is vital to resort to reason to
separate the wheat from the chaff and void taking the wrong path.

There is ferment in many third world countries, especially some Muslim
countries. The events taking place do not always look the same and do
not all seem to have the same motives but, on analysis, the facts, in
their objective state, cannot withstand comparison.

In politics there are no movements which arise from "spontaneous genera-
tion." As we approach the end of this century it is important to be able
to distinguish the pure metal from the dress and the sound path from the
pitfall. Today the road to hell is paved with good intentions and it is
more dangerous than ever to abandon the substance for the shadow. The
traps are layed and the Islamic countries, to mention just one example,
are walking through a minefield.

It is true that the third world countries are still suffering grave
injustices which have gradually assumed the nature of intolerable
challenges. The colonial and racist phenomena, the arsenals of economic
domination and exploitation at world level, the attempts at penetration
and hegemony have exasperated people and legitimately outraged their
consciences. The Palestinian tragedy caused by Zionist defiance, southern
Africa's probleus due to the defiance of the racist regimes, the maneuvers
aimed at keeping the developing countries in an outrageous state of eco-
nomic dependence have created areas of frustration and a state of
insecurity which have encouraged two conflicting phenomena!

First. injustices, with their train of passionate reactions. have
crystallized many forms of hatred which have sparked off acute tension
and created explosive situations. The struggle against these injustices
takes several forms, ranging from the demonstration of solidarity to
armed resistance. In essence this is a noble phenomenon since the forces

125
which cause and sustain it are fighting for the triumph of a noble ideal.
This is true of the Palestinian, Eritrean, Zimbabwean, South African and
Namibian people who face an extremely degrading form of colonization and
are subjected to a policy of destructive repression. The movement which
emerges from this combat mobilizes energies and catalyzes fellow feeling
and solidarity. Indeed the third world peoples are not insensitive to a
struggle whose principles and motives they share since their struggle on
the economic front is founded on the same principles of justice and fairer
distribution of international responsibilities. This struggle is our
struggle. We feel part of it on the level of principles and political
practice.

The second phenomenon differs from the first in that it is to do with
predominant forces whose ultimate objectives are not explained and fre-
quently escape everyday perception but whose means of action are used to
exploit. to their benefit and in their way, the tidal wave of peoples and
states which have become aware of the need to break ties of dependence and
subordination. Hence the many attempts to infiltrate movements having
unquestionably noble aims. Hence also the maneuvers to deflect struggles
for just causes from their courses and the appearance of certain pernicious
forms of struggle whose extremism and violence constantly sow doubts and
raise questions on the full details of a game which involves risks of an
unprecedentedly serious nature.

Today the appearance of certain factions and small groups alleged to be
revolutionary in their nature, objectives and methods is necessarily

leading to the idea f using for secret ends ideology, religion and even
things humanity has ccepted as sacred values forming the price of freedom
and life. However, those are merely screens. In each case there is usually
a Trojan horse. Manipulating forces provide their agents with increasingly
sophisticated means both in the sphere of propaganda and that of political
agitation or military action.

Modern subversion is defined by the fact that it is inseparable from
tendencies toward destabilization and hegemony because it is the preferred
means of achieving those aims. Similarly it is essentially based on popu-
lar mobilization in the countries which form the targets of the new domi-
nation strategy. It is not always necessarily a question of using an iron
pot to break an earthenware pot since means have been found of [apparent
line drop] and hence enabling the strongest to reduce the weakest to
impotence. Furthermore that explains the attacks sometimes made on coun-
tries which are democratic and sound in their political options, their
successful model of development and the actions they are untiringiy taking
to contribute to the victory of just causes. The strategists of
destabilization regard these countries as embarrassing witnesses--the

few countries capable of contradicting their ideology and their designs.

At this point a crucial question arises: Where stands Islam in all this?
Where are the values of progress, the principles of justice and attachment
to the rules of international law which are undoubtedly among the soundest
and most effective means of helping small and medium-sized nations to
succeed in eradicating injustice, preserving their sovereignty and

insuring their approval [sourire; possibly misprint for survie: survival]
in a world in which the need for development is now reflected in a frantic
race in which nobody can afford to waste time and energy. Where in all
this can we find the interests of the Islamic countries, the Arab coun-
tries, the African countries and the Third World countries whose solidarity
is sorely tried if not challenged by secret forces receiving their orders
from here or elsewhere?

It is to say the least aberrant for religion to be travestied to the point
of being used as an instrument of regression whereas Islam is undoubtedly
the religion of progress par excellence. It is no less cruel that it is
being used as a means to trick people's consciences, create fanatical minds
and to set them against the masses' deepest and most legitimate aspirations
to strengthen their unity and consolidate their culture and personality in
fact of the devastating assault from subversive ideologies. If the aim is
to fight peoples by themselves and because they have something more sacred
in order to subjugate them, then beware of their power of resistance and

of the antidotes they have accumulated against obscurantism and venture.

[LDlSlOlS] when you recall the heroic resistance, the finest and strongest
resistance ever put up in this country, to save Islam when it was threat-
ened with disintegration, as was the Tunisian character, by the colonial
forces and their supporters and when you also realize that the same man,
Bourguiba, and his party made the regeneration of the Arab—Islamic component
of the nation one of the substrata of his liberation struggle, you see, on
the other hand, the dangerous, reactionary and medieval shabbiness of those
now portraying themselves as defenders of Islam in Tunisia, as if our
religion were threatened here when it has never flourished so much.

The Bourgiban contribution to the spread of Islam freed from archaic and
ossified traditions is a model for what every Muslim people should do to
meet the challenge of the modern world and win progress without abandoning,
releting or destroying anything. Without a considered and rational
development a people will regress and died in a world in which the fight
for survival must of necessity mobilize all the resources of reason.

In the singularly complicated and redoubtable game between opposing blocs
the worst thing that can happen to a Third Horld country is to become a
meek tool, a pawn on the board-—in a word, to lose its independence.
Indeed that is the principal danger as the century draws to a close.

There is only one way of averting the danger: Consolidate the front
within your borders, bar the path to Sorcerer's apprentices, debunk the
advocates of obscurantism, denounce the flagrant abuse now being made of
a religion and a people's faith, disarm the submarines which, under the
white flag of Islam, conceal the black designs of subversion and only
aim to destroy the soundest and most precious achievement a nation has
ever attained in its history both in its aspirations to progress and in
the preservation of its personality and unity. He must stop the adven-
turers wherever they show themselves.
National independence has requirements which religion itself raises to
the level of patriotic duty and to the sacred duty to defend your country
against such Nachiavelian designs.

Vigilance is essential for a people determined to maintain their stability
and to continue their victorious march along the path of progress.
CONCENSHS FOR POLITICAL SOLUTION T0 SAHARA PROBLEM REPORTED
Paris AL-NAHAR AL—‘ARABI HA AL-DUHALI in Arabic 19-25 Nov 79 p 26

[Article by Shawqi al-Rayyis, AL-NAHAR AL-‘ARABI HA AL-DUHALI's correspondent
in Madrid: "Everybody Is For a Dialogue, But the Problem Is...How?")

[Text] All parties are convinced of the necessity of a political solution
to the Western Sahara problem. But the obstacles are many and the spectre
of internationalization is dominant.

Washington's decision to supply Morocco with weapons for its war in Western
Sahara, the recent escalation of Morocco's attacks on the Polisario positions,
plus Algeria's attitude toward Washington which could be described as
moderate--these are indications that developments in the Sahara conflict

are beginning to move in a direction which is the opposite of what it used

to be. And there is more than one reason to believe that the probability

of internationalization has become a serious one after the American decision,
and fears of the repercussions of this internationalization in the domestic
situations in Algeria and Morocco are what have paved the way for opening

up the door of negotiations and gathering the parties concerned with the
Sahara conflict around the conference table.

After Mauritania succeeded in breaking out of the circle of the Sahara
conflict by ceding to the Polisario the part of Western Sahara that it
obtained according to the Madrid agreement, and after the Mauritanian regine
obtained the support of Algeria and most of the African countries without
cutting ties with Morocco, its traditional ally, the parties concerned in
the Sahara conflict began to seriously think that negotiation is the only
possible solution for ending this conflict.

The parties directly concerned, that is, Morocco, Algeria, and the Polisario.
have stated time and time again that there is no substitute for a political
solution for ending the war which is going on in the Sahara. The last of
these statements was an invitation by King Hasan II to hold negotiations,
starting with the conference that will soon be held in Monrovia under the
supervision of the Organization of African Unity. But the motive for such
statements differ according to the party who makes the statement.
As far as Morocco is concerned, the Sahara war serves the regime's interests
on the domestic level, if only temporarily. But the continuation of this
war, and Horocco's inability to conclude it, threatens Hasan 11's regime
which is facing a severe economic and social crisis. Besides this, the
continual attacks made by the Polisario forces in the E1 Aaiun and Bu Craa

areas are making it impossible to exploit the great mineral resources in
that region.

Also a large number of African states have adopted a position which supports
the Polisario in the Sahara issue, and this is threatening to increase Morocco‘s
isolation from its normal African framework.

As far as Algeria is concerned, the Sahara war means moral, political, and,
in particular, material and military support for the Polisario Front. This
support, which has increased lately, has started to arouse discontent in sale
of Algeria's political circles and among groups of citizens who consider

that the government is supposed to devote more attention to the numerous
problems that Algerian society is suffering from. And they feel that the
tine has come to demonstrate some flexibility and moderation in the rigid
attitude which [the government] has taken since the beginning of the Sahara
conflict. As for the Polisario, its motives for accepting negotiations

and an invitation to participate in then are, of course, completely different
from those of Morocco and Algeria. 0n the one hand. its human resources are
limited, and consequently a continuation of the war, and especially Horocco's
starting to launch large-scale, concentrated attacks, in depth, against

the Polisario positions, could lead, in the long run, to decimating the
numerical existence of the Saharans in the area. On the other hand, the area
that Mauritania ceded to the Polisario has no strategic or economic value

in comparison with the area [of Western Sahara] that Morocco annexed.

Therefore negotiations will inevitably center around this latter area,

which the Polisario hopes to obtain a part of. The motives, then, and

the intentions are obvious. And there is a general agreement about the
necessity to hold negotiations and to reach a political solution to the
problem. Also, territorial backing has been prepared within the framework
of the Organization of African Unity, and the international climate is
favorable, especially after the moderate approach with which the Algerian
press dealt with the talks held between the American advisor and Algerian
officials during the recent celebrations in honor of the revolution's silver
anniversary.

But the goal toward which the parties concerned with the Sahara conflict

are now striving is the consolidation of their political and military positions
before any negotiations begin. Perhaps this stage is the most acute one

since it is noticeable that the three parties {concerned} have achieved
tangible progress in this area.

1. 30
Last month the Polisario was able to inflict bruising military strikes on
the Moroccan forces in Western Sahara. Lately it has also obtained broad
political support from the Organization of African Unity and the Non-Alliance
Conference. Morocco. on its part, succeeded in persuading Hashington to
take an official decision to supply it with weapons and to comit itself in
principle, and to a certain extent in practice, concerning the Sahara
conflict. This American decision constitutes an inportant change in the
position of Washington which, since the beginning of the conflict, has
declined to recognize Morocco's sovereignty in Hestern Sahara, considering
that Morocco's role is only administrative and the the UN's decisions should
be implemented as a beginning for any solution to the Sahara conflict.

The first result of the American decision was that Morocco proceeded to
launch a large-scale, concentrated attack on the Polisario positions. This
was after Rabat, for a whole month, had been content to repel the Polisario
attacks and proclaim the message of standing fast in the face of coumunist
penetration on the African continent.

The main obstacle now is the creation of a suitable fornula which could
bring all the parties [concerned] to the negotiation tables. Morocco insists
that the Polisario is nothing but a group of mercenaries and refuses to
negotiate with then. Algeria refuses to participate in any discussions,
considering that the issue is between Morocco and the Polisario, and that
Algeria is not a party concerned in the issue.

The formula which appears to be feasible at the present time, even though

it is weak in substance--a fact which exposes it to [the possibility of]
disintegration if any obstacles or difficulties crop up--is the participation
of the Polisario in an Algerian delegation which would enter into negotiations
with Morocco and other cuuntries or official organizations, on the basis
Algeria is a country which borders Hestern Sahara and is not a country which
is directly concerned In the conflict.

In any case, at the end of this month, in Monrovia, there will be a

meeting of the "Conittee of Wise Men," which originated in the Organization
of African Unity. Liberia chairs this committee, which includes Mali,
Nigeria, Guinea-Conakry, and Tanzania. Its first official task will be to
create a framework, which is suitable and acceptance to all parties, for
opening the door to negotiations concerning this issue, which has begun

to be clouded by both the spectre of internationalization and the danger
that matters will slip out of the hands of those that so far have been
controlling them.

9468
C50: 4402 END