APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02108: ClA-RDPBZ-OOOSOR000200020021-4
No. 2043

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapersl periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources at. translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line if each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transiiterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the U.S. Government.

PROCUREMENT 0? PUBLICATIONS

JPRS publications may be ordered from the National Technical
information Service, Springfield, Virginia 22161. In order-
ing, it is recommended that the JPRS number, title, date and
author, if applicable, of publication be cited.

Current JPRS publications are announced in Government Reports
Announcements issued semi-monthly by the National Technical
Information Service, and are listed in the Monthly Catalog of
v.5. Government Publications issued by the Superintendent of
Documents, U.S. Government Printing Office, Hashington, 0.0.
20402.

Indexes to this report (by keyword, author, personal names,
title and series) are available from Bell 5 Howell, Old
Mansfield Road, Wooster, Ohio 44691.

Correspondence pertaining to matters other than procurement
may be addressed to Joint Publications Research Service,
1000 North Glebe Road, Arlington, Virginia 22201.
-. 030:2:

npmano

:3.

_
323m

[331:3 >mmmwum
llzown: :10»:
>233
Ill>mmrw=nmnm=
|>Hwolb
labia»:
xlmesn
xlnga
ulllnnma
LMIHwnan
lxluoag
luxctmun
IKE—no...

I

_

'm >ltnltn|n 5'." a A '_l~l~'
NEAR EAST/NORTH AFRICA REPORT

No. 2043

CONTENTS

Proposed Amendment to the Constitution Criticized
(Editorial, 'Uunr al-Talmsnni; AL-M'HAH, 7 Sep 79) .

Peace Between Egypt, Israel Deemd an Impossibility
(Muhamd ‘Abd-al-Quddus; AL-DA'HAE, Sep 79) .........

Siege of inhabad Blocks Peace Negotiations
(mm, 21 Oct 79)

Comunist Party Issues Statement on Internal Situation
(BAHDAD, 25 &p 79) oooo-uooaoo-uuooaoacocoon-account.

Relations With Persian Gulf States Summarized
(W'E RUZ, 6 0C1: 79) an...coco-cocoaoacocaooooaoooo

Power Struggle Between Two Military Figures Reviewed
("Am-E Rm, 10 wt 79) cocoa-accoste-cacao-oooooooao

New Cnanges Announced in Military, Police Intelligence
(ammo, 25 Sep 79)

Shari'atrradari Contrasts Iranian, Soviet Councils
(m, an Sep 79)

Shari'atmdari Defends National Councils
(mm, 23 Sep 79)

Religious Leader Accuses Shah's Sister of Fomentim Secession
(W, 6 OCI‘. 79) Ioooooaacoooooooaooo-oooaoooo-oooao
ISRAEL

Religious leaders Demand Cutoff of Relations With Libya .
(mu, h Oct 79)

Professor Criticizes Behavior of Minorities
(Shapur Beaten; 1mm, 29 Sep 79)

Ayatollah Denies Minorities, Upholds Executions
(Hedi Khosrou Shahi Interview; AL-SHA'B, 9 Sep 79).

Physicians' Protest Rally for Execution of Colleague in
Kordestan

(mum, 25 Aug 79)

Khalkhali Interviewed on Recent Event in Kordestan
(mm'AT, 28 Aug 79)

Isolation, Confusion in Country Reviewed
(LB MONDE, 10 Oct 79)

Cultural Expert Warns Against Arabization,
Bureaucratization
(Abbas Mirkhani; mm, 2 Oct 79)

Councils Are To Be Formed in Educational Units
(mm, 23 Sep 79)

Economic Conference Discusses Agricultural Problems
(MAB-3 “M, 20 sep 79) conscience-oooooooooo

Briefs
Taleqani's Council Abstention

Fifty Pct-cent of Public Favors Early Elections
(mayor manor, 26 Oct 79)

Middle East Balance of Fbrces Analyzed
(Ghazi al-Sa'dl; AL-OABAS, 5 Step 79)

Character of Prospective Prime Minister Rammed
(Dan meant; HA'AREI‘Z, 21 Sep 79)

Call for and to Jewish Settlement
(Editorial; AL-QUIB, 15 Sep 79)

Solutions for 'Iieacher Shortage Proposed
(mm 'lhayrah; AL-QUDs, 15 Sep 79)
Jordan Calls for International Summit
(Ml211101ur13AL-MUSTAQBAL, L5 Sep 79)

Hater Shortage Poses Serious Problems
(Badr 'Abd al-Baqq; AL-Mlmqu, 8 Sep 79)

WNSAHARA

Spain Urged To Promote Solution Desired by Saharens
(NURSERA mum.

New Model of Society Being Created in Sahara.
(Paloma Portela; mm mm
PNPOSED mm TO THE CONSHTU'HOII CRITICIZED

cum AL-DA'WAH in Arabic 7 Sep 79 pp 3i;

[Editorial by 'Umar al-Talmasani: "We Have an Opinion on Amending the
Consti tution"]

[Text] Nothing can prevent a )bslem from touching upon a matter that is at
the heart of the Islamic religion--the religion of this nation. Even if a
world or restrictions were to prevent the Ibslem from expressing his opinion
from an Islamic point of View, it were better for him to take his Islam
seriously and candidly at the expense of the world and all its worldliness.
Pbr it is the first and foremost duty of the lbslem to please God, even if
he incurs the wrath of the entire world, from beginning to end, with its
force, its weapons and its illicit business. Accordingly, when we touch
upon the subject of amending the constitution, purely from an Islamic point
of View, we must speak the truth that would please God without taking any-
thing else into consideration.

Before I turn to those aspects [of the constitution] whose change is being
sought, let me express.my considerable and sorrowful regret that the consti-
tution, the father of all laws, is being taken so lightly that it has reached
this limit of undergoing amendments and changes. hardly does a year go by
without a desire for an amendment emerging or a proposal for change being
submitted. It were as though the Egyptian constitution, in spite of the fact
that it is described as permanent, were a piece of paper that was based on
foundations of anxiety with no stability.

It may be said that the law of developnent requires that adJustments be made
[that are consistent with] the events of the time. I am saying that this is
our opinion about man-made constitutions; they are all subject to changes and
to amendments. But what I am asking is this: Are there changes and amend-
ments in the man-nude constitutions of Britain, France or the United States
that compare with the speed and frequency of the changes and the amendments
that are taking place in our constitution?
Obvious and Welvinown Reuons

The secret behind occasional changes and amendments in constitutions is due
to one reason, although it would appear that there was a group of reasons
for these changes. The text of the Egyptian Constitution is derived orig-
inally from constitutions that are foreign to us. These constitutions
belong to people whose manners, customs and beliefs are all quite different
from ours. The wording of the constitution was also derived in a manner
that has proved to be inadequate in protecting freedoms, rights, personal
safety and group safety in Egypt. Had it been based originally on the law
of God, which is the religion of this nation--"Falsehood cannot reach it
from before or behind" [Revelations Hell Expounded:h2]--not one letter of
the law would have been changed since it was revealed hundreds of years ago.
Had the constitution been based originally on the religion of God, it would
not have been affected by change, nor would it have been amended from the
day of its execution. We would not have had to create this storm that has
affected the feelings of hbslems regarding amending the Personal Status Law.
I was truly impressed by and I did ponder at length the fact that the Coptic
Personal Status Law had rennined unchanged. The Copts are part of the. home-
land, but their personal status law was neither changed nor amended. Does
this mean that it was more rigorous than Islamic legislation in adapting
itself to development? But let us forget that lest it be said, and it does
not intimidate us at all because we know who it is who is concerned about
national unity and who it is who is bent on destroying it.

Socialism. . .Democracy

The amendments that were mentioned in the newspapers on Friday, 20 July 1979
state that a text was to be introduced into the permanent constitution stat-
ing that our regime was a socialist democratic regime. It is the strangest
of all. things that those who want to introduce this text into the constitu-
tion are bbslems. Is Islam lacking in rules for a system of government?

Has the practical application of Islam failed to explain the principles of
government? Have the theologians been incapable of explaining the rules of
a system of government in Islam? If all of this is absolutely clear and

does not disturb all the aspects and the different conditions of the balances
of life, what is it that compels us to evaluate the conditions of life in our
Islamic country on a socialist, democratic basis? Why isn't there a stipula-
tion that our regime is Islamic and based on the Koran? Is it not possible
that tomorrow something may happen that would require a change in this social-
ist demcratic regime and that this change be brought about by those who are
today calling for the socialist democratic regime?

These characteristics of a regime are devised by humans, and humns are
ephemeral. Their notions, their views and their opinions on a single matter
any change from time to time. Today, a person may be a socialist demcrat;
yesterday, a secular atheist; and tomorrow, a capitalist and so on ad infini-
tum with all such innovatiVe ascriptions and names. It is thus that lbslem
people are living in a maelstrom of regimes that are removed from their
Islamic system. They know no stability, no tranquillity and no safety.

What Are Those People Saying?

And now, what is the opinion of the religious scholars in Egypt? What is
the opinion of the elders of al-Azhar? of the Ministry of Waqf? of the seat
of formal legal opinions? of the Research Academy? of the Scholastic Acadew?
of the al-Azhar Colleges of Principles? Hhat is the opinion of our Egyptian
universities and of their faculty who are brilliant scholars and enthusiastic
about the Islamic law? Is it right for the people to express their opinion
in a referendum without hearing the opinion of illustrious Islamic scholars?
I believe that a clear word of truth from any one of these organizations will
have a profound effect on people, will awaken them from their slumber, and
will caution them against these changes and these texts whose only result, I
think, will be to separate the ibslem people from the beauty and the splendor
of their religion day after day, month after month, and year after year.
However, I am quite confident that this religion and its splendor will pre-
vail, and that its victory is inevitable despite the danger of the attempts
[made against it] and of the forces that back those attempts. This is
because it is the religion of God. God is its protector, and God is omni-
potent.

Don't people find an inconsistency in the fact that our regime is socialist
and democratic and the fact that the principles of Islamic law are the prin-
cipal source of legislation in Egypt? How can the two principles be put to
practice if they conflict? It is inevitable that they do conflict because
Islam does not recognize socialism, nor does it recognize democracy in the
sense in which these two words are used or in the senses in which they have
been established or applied here or there or in any country in the world.

If there are those who’ say that socialism is the lack of exploitation of one
man by another, doesn't this sense and doesn't this principle exist in a more
comprehensive, a more beautiful, and a more perfect way in the divine law?
How then can we leave the foundation in the law and the divine foundations
and details that are clear and evident and extremely significant and splendid
and adopt humn designations and terrestrial legislations?

Which is more stable, more useful and more feasible: the Judgment of God or
that of mankind?

The socialist democratic regime views grave offenses, abominations and for-
bidden actions with concern. If punishment is decreed for anything, the
punishment is specific. 1f controls are placed on something, they are spe-
cific controls. He see some of these controls on television; we hear some
of them on the radio; or we read about them in the newspapers or magazines.
These newspapers and magazines print semi-nude pictures and invite people
to frequent the abodes of obscenity and immorality within the hearing of the
socialist, democratic regime. But the principles of Islamic law which are
are being proposed as the basic source of legislation, do punish and pro-

hibit all these abominations. They do not allow them. I know of no other
expression to use [in this instance] than that of amusement, but smzement
is not enough for me.

he Socialist Union and the Parties

It is of no concern to me that the Socialist Union is abolished or that it
survive. 'Ihis is because those who set it up in the past are those who are
attacking it today, and they may restore it tomorrow. HLmnn systems and
legislation do not endure. The system of multiple parties [that was in
existence] before 1952 was attacked by today's press and by the People's
Assemblyin a large scale battle that they launched. Some of the claims
that were nude against the press were true, and some were exaggerated.

The parties of yesterday are the same parties of today. The word, parties,
and particularly in the plural form, was mentioned in the Koran about lb
times. [Translator's note: The Koran Concordance lists 11 occurrences of
the word, al-ahzah, in plural form. It is translated variously in these 11
instances as factions, sects, confederate tribes and oonfederates.] In all
these instances parties were described as evil and foul. He should haVe
been warned, cautioned, enlightened and reminded by this context of the Holy
Koran, but when have we taken advantage of warnings? I strongly. renounce the
single party system on the basis of my conviction, and I also do not approve
of the multiple party system in particular, nor do I approve of the system
upon which it was based in the past. This is the system upon which the
multiple party system is based at present: one opinion and another. Islam
does not recognize wrangling and feuding in an effort to achieve the power
to implement a specific course. his is the only notion upon which the
multiple party theory is established. What would happen if we were to make
our [divine] law our system [of government] and if we were to let elections
be freely based and fully guaranteed on erudition, on religious suitability,
on moral characteristics and on practical conduct? Government would thus
avoid what is being said about the pressures of administration, about the
falsification of elections, about filling the voting boxes, and about remov-
ing those whose removal is being sought?

The Presidency and the Presidential Term

I have a view of the presidency. I prefer a parliamentary republican regime
that is based on the application of the law of God. I look upon the presi-

dential tenn from the point of view of the religious law. In an Islamic
state, a person was acknowledged a leader for life after meeting specific
conditions. If he lost these conditions during his term of office, the
Hoslems deposed him. .ka view of the presidential term then is the Islamic
view. Those who submitted the proposal about a life-term presidency beat
about the bush in formulating the expressions [that would enable them] to
nuke this statement. Had they faced the situation openly and candidly, they
would not have had to do this. But this is what they wanted, and this is
what they received, even though we neither approve of it nor do we accept it.
What is strange--and there is much that is strange in these proposals and
smendments--is what has been said to Justify a life-term presidency. It
has been said that popular demd was emphatic that the president haVe the
full responsibility for completing the construction of the peace and for
achieving socialist democracy and prosperity. Hm: can the full responsi-
bility be given to the president of the republic regardless of his quali-
fications and his capabilities? hssengers and prophets used to seek
advice. What is it that makes our people want to give the hill responsi-
bility to the president of the republic? Those who have self-esteem and
who value their opinions do not accept abdicating the full responsibility
to one man who is the president of the republic. How do those who made
this suggestion think? What kind of respect do they have for the mentality
of the people? Will the president of the republic accept the full respon-
sibility alone without advice or supervision? Where is the responsibility
of the Voslem scholars? h'hete is the responsibility of the People's
Assembly? Where is the responsibility of the Council of Ministers, and
where is the responsibility of this nation?

Is it not time that we stop taking such positions and acting in this way?

Those who are opposed to this strange proposal have more pity on the pres-
ident and show more genuine mercy [for him] than those who want to promote
his image as a unique ruler. Do those who made this proposal want to give
up their responsibility as representatives of the people? Do they have
forebodings about things to come and do not, therefore, want to have a full
responsibility for them? There is much that is hidden behind this proposal;
it raises many questions.

The Consultative Council

then we come to the proposal about organizing a consultative council. mose
who proposed the establishment of a consultative council are Justifying their
proposal by saying that the establishment of a political system which is
based on party democracy, the fact that the constitution and the law regulate
the People's Assembly, and the fact that members of the People's Assembly are
elected purely on a party and political basis require the creation of a
second council that would be tantamount to an Eyptian family council. Let
us refer to the spheres of authority of this council, to the election of its
members, to its formation and to the right of the president of the republic

to dissolve it when necessary--and when was it that such councils were not
dissolved except when it was necessary? Let us refer to that, and we will
find ourselves at a loss for a description. Is it a council of elders or a
senate? The spheres of authority are not those of either; the characteristics
are not those of either. If it is an Egyptian family council, as they say, is
there anyone who is not aware of the fact that the Egyptians are lbslems and
Christians? Does a Christian have the right to enact laws for a Moslem? Does
not this undermine God's religion? that is the raison d'etre for this council
and why should the people bear its expenses and its costs? How can the multi-
plicity of consultative or advisory councils be reconciled with the statement
of making the president of the republic the only one responsible?
And the Press -

What retains is the press! For the first time in history we hear of a con-
stitution in the world which stipulates that the press is a fourth authority
and that it has the powers of the legislative, the Judicial and the execu-
tive branches of government and that, accordingly, it has those duties.

Are not the three authorities [determined by] appointments, elections,
positions and salaries? Is this what is being sought for the press? Hill
the Journalist be elected to his position, or will he be appointed?

If the Journalists are to be appointed, who will appoint them? Will it be
the government or a press council? And who will appoint the Supreme Press
Council in the first place?

The press achieved a high standard in Egypt before 1952 in criticizing
[matters] and expressing opinions on them. An article was published [at
that time] by a member of the senate stating that he was willing to cut off
the head of the most important man in Egypt if he were to oppose the consti-
tution. The punishment for this statement was 6 months imprisonment; it was
a case of [one person's] opinion.

Journalists who do not speak up about this law and those who support it will
become the first ones to be scorched by its fires. 'lhe law is capable of
punishing anyone who transgresses its precepts, and it is capable of making

every Journalist not exceed the boundaries of propriety, of [the public]
interest and of security. Those who willingly accept restrictions on the

press will not find these restrictions useful to them, to their religion or
to their nation.

The press constitutes a fourth authority with the power of its influence. It
is a fourth authority because of the fact that it seeks the guiding principle
of the truth; because it upholds its banner; because it protects those who
have been wronged; and finally because it seeks the divine principle alone in
everything that it reads or writes.

I may have been brief, but I do not know if m brief statement will come to
light or [remain in the dark] with former statements that I had made. All
that we know is that I have believed in the truth and I proclaimed it amidst
the hustle of the applause. I hope that w proclamation will not go unheeded.
As a Moslem I have believed in what is right and it was my duty to proclaim
it. "Alllah declares the truth and guides to the right path" [The Confederate
Tribes: 1.

3592
CS): h802
mes 13mm mm, ISRAEL AN mossmurr
Cairo mama in Arabic Sep79 pp 55-57'

[Article by )1de 'Abd-al-Quddus: "Warning: the Jews Are Coming: the
Impossible Peace Between Egypt and Israel; Advice to Drery Egyptian Before
the Arrival of the People of Israel; Egyptian Industry First; Invest Your

hands in Egyptian Banks Only; Do Not 'vlork for a Jew; Read the Koran Thor-

oughly So You Would Know the People With Whom You. Will Be Dealing")

[Text] In the next few months and before the end of this year a new chapter
in Egyptian-Israeli relations is to begin. Ibis chapter is different from
all those that preceded it. It is the chapter that deals with the effort to

normalize relations between Egypt and Israel, that is, the attempt to achieve
comprehensive peace between them.

True peace is that which has three principal components.

It is peace between people and not between governments.

It is a comprehensive peace that is natural and unaffected.

It is a balanced peace wherein no party takes advantage of the other or
attempts to steer the other into a direction it has in view. When peace
loses one of its three conditions, it becomes affected and not real. 'ihat
is, it becomes fragile peace that will not last.

On the basis of these three components we can say that the achievement of
genuine peace is impossible under these circumstances which met undergo a
radical change.

There are several reasons that move as to make this statement.

1. The Effects of Four Wars

Maths Nassar member of the People's Assembly wonders, and he is right to

do so, "Is it possible to achieve imediate peace between the Egptians and
the Jews in spite of the effects of the four wars? These wars were so repug-
nant! 'Ihe wars of l9h8, 1956, 1967 and 1973 left deep wounds in the heart of

7
every Egyptian, and the blood of Egypt's sons who were killed in action and
who are estimated to be about 80,000 is crying out about the brutality of
Israel, whose nature was clearly treacherous. In the 1948 War Israel imposed
a truce on the Arabs so it can prepare itself and fight them again. In the
1956 War it made a secret agreement with England and France to launch a sur-
prise attack against Egypt in a treacherous manner. In 1967 while making
preparations for its pre-emptive strike, Israel suggested to the president
of Egypt via the Soviet Union that he refrain from launching an attack and
that he send his representative to the United States.

Ihe destruction that Israel wrought upon the cities of the canal bears
witness to its treachery in killing civilians.

The first condition for peace is that there be peace between the peoples

and not between the governments. This is not available at the present time.
A long time must elapse before the wounds are healed, that is, if circum-

stances did allow them to heal and if Israel did not conduct itself in a
manner that would widen the gap between the two parties.

2. The Panaticism of Israel

What makes peace between the Egyptian and the Israeli peoples more difficult
in addition to the destructive effects of the four wars is the fanaticism
of Israel.

Al-Hamzah Di'bis assistant secretary general of the Liberal Party says that
Israel is a racist, fanatic state whose citizens believe that they are God's
chosen people and that they have historical rights to the land of the Arabs.
Peace cannot be achieved with the Jews as long as they are so fanatic and so
haughty.

If we want genuine peace, we must tear down many of the false beliefs upon
which the state of Israel is built. Genuine peace precludes haughtiness
and pride; it is inconsistent with the usurpation of others' land.

3. The Continued Occupation of Arab Land

Israel's continued occupation of Arab land is inconsistent with the notion
of genuine peace as a comprehensive and not a partial peace and as a balanced
peace that is not effected t the expense of one of its parties. Israel's
occupation of Arab land assumes four forms. ihese are mentioned by Dr 'Abd-
al-Hamid Hashish professor of constitutional law at Cairo University.

'lhere is the military occupation of Syrian territory and of the Western Bank
or the Jordan River.

There is a civilian occupation that is evident in the establishment of set-
tlements in different occupied areas; in the growing density of existing
settlements; and in the attempt to alter Arab landmarks in the occupied areas.
There is no recognition of the legitimate rights of the Palestinian people
and no recognition of the liberation organization, the only legitimate
representative of those people.

Arab residents are persecuted, and this is evident in the brutal treatment
of Arab detainees.

Is the achievement of peace between Egypt and Israel possible after all this?
10. Poor Relations Between Egypt and the Arab Countries

here is no doubt that poor relations between Egypt and the majority of Arab
countries makes peace between Egypt and Israel [difficult].

Dr 'Abd-al-Hsnid Hashish says, "Amne who thinks that the Arab nation can

continue to surViVe as a nation without Egypt is mking a mistake, and any-
one who thinks that Egypt can continue to survive as a power that can influ-
ence the balances of international politics is also making a grievous error.

[Egypt cannot survive as an influential force unless it is] incorporated
into the Arab structure.

”There is no place in the world today but for maJor blocs, and there is no
clearer indication for this than the fact that Europe is taking serious steps
to form a single cohesive entity in different areas so it can find a place
for itself on the map between the two superpowers."

Al-Shaykh Salah Abu Ism‘il warns those who "try to fish in- troubled waters"
and who are trying by different means to create division between the Egyptian
people and the Arab peoples.

They are going beyond the objective conflict to an exchange of insults,
slander and different charges, and they are discrediting all Arab values.

They are uaggerating and talking about the poor treatment of Egptians in
Arab countries to incite the Egptian people to hate these countries.

They are talking excessively about what is called the scandals of wealthy
Arabs and their extreme wasteihlness of the immense wealth which came to
than in spite of their ignorance, their lack of education and their lack
of civilization.

we must not allow anyone to fish in troubled waters because this would delay
the peace that we are all hoping for. This is the peace with the Arab nations
first and the return of harmony with them because Arabs forming one rank con-
stitute the road to genuine peace.
5. The Military Situation

I mentioned at the beginning of this article that genuine peace must be
natural and not affected. This means that there should be no room in such

a peace for exceptional conditions. Genuine peace must also be a balanced
peace. None of these conditions is available in the peace that is to take
place between Egypt and Israel. This makes it an impossible peace for the
following reasons that are mentioned by Manta: lassar, member of the People's
Assembly.

Normalization of relations between Egypt and Israel is to begin while Israel
is still occupying one fourth of Sinai. This is an abnormal situation. Nor-
ml relations cannot exist between one country that is occupying the other.

The vast majority of our forces, in accordance with the peace treaty, are
not allowed to be in Sinai and this is an abnoml situation. There is no
room for exceptional conditions in genuine peace, and this is an exceptional
situation that is not normal and indicates that the coming peace is not
genuine.

Israel's remsal to become affiliated with the Melear Non-Proliferation
Treaty indicates that it is not serious about peace and that the coming
Egyptian-Israeli peace may come under the mercy of Israel's nuclear power.

The constant threats on the part of Israeli officials to force Egypt to pur-
sue the course of the Israeli peace cannot possibly lead to the achievement
of genuine peace. The threat nude by Heizman the Israeli minister of defense
is an example of this. Heizmn threatened that Israel would occupy the Sinai
again if Israeli ships were prevented from crossing the canal or if the treaty
were violated. He made this threat in spite of the fact that the treaty it-
self stipulates that any dispute that may arise was to be solved by peaceful
means only. ‘

6. The Cultural and Media Threat

In defining genuine peace we said that it was a balanced peace in which no
party controlled the other or steered it into a direction it was seeking.

Early signs of the cultural threat which contradicts the real peace have
begun to appear. The purpose of the cultural threat is to alter the person-
ality of the Egyptian, and it can take place either through the Jews, through
their friends, or through the Egyptians themselves who have contacts with the
Jews: they can be writers, intellectuals, ofﬁcials or others.

The cultural threat can seem various forms.
Mimtaz Nasser member of the People's Assembly warns that Israel may resort

to an attempt to obliterate recorded religious facts about the Jews in the
lbly Koran. He says that this matter is not at all unlikely. Israel did

10
make quite an uproar to force the Vatican to absolve the Jews of Christ's
death. [Israel maintained that uproar] until it accomplished what it wanted.
It is therefore not unlikely for the Jews to try to blot out what is men-
tioned about them in the Holy Koran. The first step in this regard is to
try to prohibit the teaching of those verses in the Holy Koran that talk
about the Jews or to prohibit broadcasting them over the media. In brief,
they will attempt to relegate them to oblivion.

Al-alaykh Salah Ahu Ism'il says, "References to the Jars in the Holy Koran
can be divided into three groups.

One group clarifies the nature of the relationship they have with God
Almighty and their misconduct with the lord of the universe. The Jews, for
example, describe God in terms that are inappropriate as when they said,
"God is poor and we are rich," and their statement, "God's hands are tied."

Another group describes the Jews' betrayal of their prophets. Ibe Koran
says, for example, "To ibses we gave the Scriptures and after him we sent
other apostles. we gave Jesus the son of Dhry veritable signs and strength-
ened him with the Holy Spirit. Will you then scorn each apostle whose mes-
sage does not suit your fancies, charging some with imposture and slaying
others? They say: 'Our hearts are sealed.‘ But Allah has cursed them for
their unbelief. They have but little faith" [The Cow: 87-88] .

The third section describes the morals of the Jews and their crude habits
and the fact that they take possession of others, such as their statement,
"He are not bound to keep faith with the Gentiles" [The Imrans: 75]. hey
revoke promises, as the Holy Koran states in the chapter, The Cow, "Hhat'.
Whenever they make a covenant, must some of them cast it aside? Most of
them are unbelievers" [100].

Al-Shaykh Salah Abu Isma'il says, "It is natural that the attack on the
verses of the ibly Koran will go beyond that and turn to an attack on Islamic
groups, such as the attempt to picture those who adhere to religion as reac-
tionaries, and the effort to give concrete form to individudl incidents that
can occur as a result of the pressure that is exerted on them. The Jews will
make up fictional incidents and ascribe them to those religious people, and
they will ridicule the adherence of religious people to customary practices.
They will also ridicule the congregations of religious people which embraces
Islam as a way of life.

Note: Compare everything that is happening in Egypt with the great prestige
that religious groups in Israel are enjoying.

There is an effort to express admiration for the state of Israel and for its
accomplishments, and the reason for this is, naturally, obvious. It is to
win the Egyptians over to cooperate with Israel in all areas. (See what some
Egptian writers wrote after their visit to Beersheba about their extreme
admiration for the fact that the Jews had cultivated the negev.)
The personality of the Egyptian is to be weakened by means of three ways
that are- interconnected and interrelated. These are:

The Egyptian is to be isolated from his religion.

An effort is to be nude to make him renounce everything that is Arab and to
admire everything that is western and Jewish.

The Egyptian is to be deluged with consumer goods. Confronting this cultural
attack we find that our good people are trying to hang on to their natural
dispositions and to their origins in spite of the broad cultural and media
attack on them. Al-Shaykh Salah Abu Isma'il speaks of the result of all this:
"There will either be a generation rebelling against the generation that nude
the Israeli peace or there will be despair and surrender. The worst thing

that a people can lose is the enthusiasm of their youth and the solicitude
on their sons."

Is it reasonable that this could be the harvest of the genuine peace for
which we are aspiring?

7. The Economic Threat

When one country controls another economically, this control destroys all
the possibilities for genuine peace between them because such a control
generates a deep-rooted bitterness.

we are actually fearful of the Jewish economic threat to our country.
Several reasons move us to be apprehensive.

The Jews are well-known for utilizing their wealth in trade and usury. They
take advantage of all opportunities and of legitimate and illegitimate methods,
such as monopolizing [goods and services] and exploiting [people's] needs',
cimmstances and crises to obtain the highest possible profits.

There is a special relationship that binds Israel to the United States of
America, the strongest country in the world. There is no doubt that this
special relationship will be an effective factor in the attempt that the
two countries will Inkeuthe United Sta tea and Israel--to control the

Egyptian economy.

Jews are scattered throughout the world. An Israeli in Tel Aviv may have a
brother who manages a major corporation in the United States, and one of his
relltives, may hold a senior position in one of the European countries. In
brief, Jews have a clear impact on the world's economy, and especially on
U.8. and European economy.

All this naturally contrasts with Egypt whose econow is locally based.
The Jews have a materialistic view of peace. They think that the withdrawal
frat Sinai must be countered by opening the Egyptian markets to Israeli goods.

Al-ﬂmah Di'bis, assistant secretary general of the liberal party warns of
the subtle methods that the Jews will resort to. [The following] are amng
them:

They will create a class of Egyptian hangers-on who will be omitted to them.

An example of this is the establishment of an Israeli plant in Egypt and the

elployment of Egyptian workers who will be paid the highest wages. Naturally,
the prism-y loyalty of those workers will be to Israel.

'Ihey will bring the best consumer goods to the markets to take Eyptians fall
all (We!) themselves to purchase them. By doing so they realize three gains
for Israel: they gain profit; they win admiration for Israel; and they deal
Egyptian industry a severe blow.

They will control the Egyptian economy in a subtle way. Their method will
be beautiful on the outside, but its objectives and long-term goals are
wicked. They will, for example, lend Egyptians money on easy terms; they
will try to open Israeli banks in Egypt and offer the best service to their
customers, especially the Egyptian customers, to attract their savings and
their mnds; and they will try to take part in all the major projects.

ibw Do We Confront Israel?

It matters proceeded on a normal course, the beginning of the 15th Hegira
century, or in 1980, will witness the advent of the Jews to Egypt in accord-
ance with the stipulations of the peace treaty. They will come by various
means: tourism, trade, media, etc.

If we want to confront the Jews, there are four measures that we would be
required to observe.

1. We must adhere to religion. It is religion that will prevent the oblit-
eration of the Arab, Moslem, Egyptian character, and that is the Jews' primary
target.

2. We must achieve more democracy. Mmtaz Nassar says that one of the basic
reasons for the victory of the Jews over the Arabs in the different wars is
the fact that Israel was the only democratic country in the area facing mili-
tary dictator-ships that were based on oppressing and terrorizing their peoples.

Demcracy has magnificent characteristics.

Democracy gives free rain to all movements, thoughts and minds; this is con-
trary to a dictatorial regime from which no thoughts are uttered unless they
are allowed by the ruler, provided that they do not contradict what he believes
in.
Demcracy is capable of revealing every error that is made because no one
in a democracy is above criticism or questioning. In a dictatorship the
ruler's decisions are not discussed, and he is above all questioning or
criticism.

Briefly, in a democracy all minds think, but in a dictatorship no one thinks
but the ruler and whoever the ruler wishes [to allow] to think.

3. This is a plea made to all Egyptians by al-Shaykh Salah Abu Isu'il and
by al-ﬂsmzah Di'bis: mercise extreme caution in dealing with the Jews.

Turn to your Egyptian merchandise even if it were worse than the Jewish
merchandise.

Deposit your money in Egyptian banks only, even though dealing with them may
be more difficult than with foreign banks.

Don‘t ever work for Jews even if they pay you double the wages.

Turn to your national industry even if [its products] are high priced.

Read the Koran thoroughly so that you would become familiar with the people
you are dealing with. "' - --‘
lo. Finally, al-Shaykh Salah Abu Ism'il says a word to Egyptian officials:
"Study all the projects that are submitted by the Jews very carefully and

do not rush into approving them. Try to determine their long-range goals
in attempting to control our country."

The principle that if Israel were to take one step forward, we will advance
into is objectionable. It is an affected principle, and it is inconsistent
with the genuine peace- whose nature we said showed no affectation and was
normal. It is not possible for us to become the friends of Israel all of a
sudden after 30 years of wars, destruction and bloodshed; nor is it possible
for us to take two steps towards Israel if it takes one step towards us,
that is, if it does take a step at all!

592
cso: 1.802

1h .
SIEGB 0P HAHABAD BIDCKS PEACE NEGOTIATION
‘l‘ehran mm in Persian 21 Oct 79 p 2-H

[Text] Kermshah—KZYHAN reporter: Since Tuesday afternoon last week
until today (Sunday aorning), the city of Hshabsd has been besieged by
the strand forces, and no traveler has entered or left this city during
that period.

This norning Colonel Najaftadeh, co-nander of the Hahabed Brigade. while
confirming the report of the siege, said: The order to surround Hahabsd
and continue it was issued by the high authorities. according to which
all entry and exit roads are to be strictly controlled.

He added: Of course, I believe this order will put the people in
distress and create a lot of trouble for th-. but I do not have any
infornation about how the high authorities made this decision.

Also, "Atri." the new comnder of Mahabad, said: My repeated contacts.
to raise the siege of Hahebsd have not succeeded, and for several days
now. the city has been idle in every respect. He also added: In my
opinion, the siege of the city of Mahabad is a kind of obstacle blocking
negotiations and a political settlesent in the area, and I an convinced
that it will hurt the prospects of negotiations.

At the sane tile. the consnder said: Innocent people caught in the
aiddle are under pressure. and every effort should be nada as soon as
possible to sake their course clear. The consander of hahabad also
said: Every day large groups of the people of Hahsbad cone to [our]
headquarters and follow the latest negotiations in the region and
fervently look forward to a general peace settlement on the regional
level. And the asjority of the people asked the cut-sender for a asrch
to proaote this view of revolutionary leadership. In conclusion, the
comaander said: Yesterday I could not talk with the minister of
interior and the governor of Rest Azerbaijan and have now becoae dirty
with the confused situation that has developed because I do not know
why negotiations are stalled at this favorable tine.
Regarding continuation of these talks in the western area the KEYHAN
reporter writes: Concerning the heavy bombing of the last several days
in the city of Sanandaj and the statements of the governor of Kordestsn
about breaking off the negotiations, Hr Poruhar held talks with a group
of the public about the siege of Hahahad, the protest of the commander
and other Kurdish dignitaries of the area to this decision and the
explanation yesterday of the representative of the prime minister in
Baneh and Sardaaht about the continuation of negotiations and the plan
for them in the cabinet as well as statements of the commanders of Baneh
and Harivan about holding the talks. The point is that the line of
Foruhar's talks has caused worry in the second round, and it is apparent
that the parties do not want the negotiations to achieve any results.

In a contact with KEYHAN today, Babs Taheri, former commander of Hahahad,
said: The meeting of the people of Hahabad with representatives of the
army and local commanders of Hahabad have had no results so far, and in
response to the question of why the city is under siege they say only:
Orders from above. -

He added: Although the talks of Mr Foruhar on the regional level and
finding a political solution to relieve the turmoil and confrontation
have come close to achieving success, nevertheless, it is not known what
elements are at work to spoil the negotiations.

The former commander of Hahabsd also said: Mr Poruhar spread a lot of
rumors in Mahabad about the negotiations which have not been substan-
tiated yet. but what is clear is that, with the presentation of the
reciprocal proposals, the parties have gone forward on the road to a
political settlement, on condition that the appropriate persons permit
a reasonable line to be followed in the negotiations.

Report of the PARS "BUS AGENCY About the Siege of Hahabad

Urumieh--According to the latest reports, after clashes yesterday after-
noon, Mahsbad has now been besieged by the military forces. As for the
situation last night, conflicting and contradictory reports have reached
the PARS “HHS AGENCY. The chief of staff of the Urumieh Division and
the commander of Hahabad Garrison describe the situation last night in
Hehabad as relatively quiet. A spokesman at Mahabad Headquarters
reported scattered firing which is still continuing at present (0755

hours). In any case, there is no clear picture available of the present
situation in Mahabsd.
CWIS‘I‘ PARTY ISSUES 31113188? 0N INTERNAL SITUATION

‘l'ehran BAMDAD in Persian 25 Sep 79 p 12

IZrticle: "The Central Connittee of the Meh Perty_'s Statement on the
Current Situation in the Country Has Been Publishedfj/

/'_lfex_§/ The Central Co-nittee of the Mob Party of Iran has analysed and
closely examined personal freedoms, the events in Kurdestan, the draft of
the constitution, and the reconstruction of the army in publishing a state-
ment on the current situation in Iran. In the course of reaffirming that
the move to the right is causing class struggles, it considered that the
basic, dangerous enemy of the Iranian revolution is American inmerialism
and international Zionism and demanded the unification and advancement of
forces‘ in order to combat inperialisn and Zionism.

In its statement, with reference to the revolution of the Iranian people,
the absolute leadership of Beam momeyni in bringing this revolution to
its consumation, the role of the ‘l‘udeh Party in defending the interests
of the struggling classes, and the severe blow which has been dealt to the
interests of Zionism and imperialism in Iran, the ‘l‘udeh Party of Iran,
through its understanding of imperialism and Zionism, has clearly seen
through the counterrevolutionary plots and schemes and time and time again
has expressed warnings on the threats to the revolution from its enemies.
It has subjected the serious change in the country's domestic politics to
study and dealt with the subject of individual and social freedoms in the
course of an investigation. The groups which are being supplied by right-
wing extremists throughout Iran are attacking the forces opposed to them
and preventing these forces from being able to benefit from the freedoms
which have been declared by the revolutionary leadership in order to ex-
plain their views to the people. In this portion of the statement, in
criticising the act of executing two Tudeh Party of Iran members in
Kermanshah, episodes of attacks against the party offices in various towns
were also subjected to criticism and it was pointed out that "One oust
clearly state that these measures are clearly at variance with all the

promises the leader of the revolution, Beam Khomeyni, made concerning the
guarantee of individual and social freedoms."

17
The Events of Kurdeatan

The Tudeh Party of Iran considers the recent events of Kurdestan to be the
result of measures taken by the basic enemies of the revolution of the
Iranian people, declares that the current peace in the region of Kurdestsn
is tesporary and expresses the opinion that the problem of the Kurdish
people and similar problems throughout the country will not be solved with
this kind of peace because a painful new wound has been added to existing
ones. In an examination into the future of the draft constitution, the
declaration stated that the departed spirit of Ayatollah Taleqani also ex-
pressed his dissatisfaction in this matter by refraining from effective
participation in examining the draft of the constitution; the Tudeh Party
of Iran has declared, "In our opinion the departed combatant Ayatollah
Taleqani's concern is the concern of all Iranian patriots and lovers of
freedom."

Regarding the process of reconstructing the army, the Tudeh Party of Iran
asked, in its statemnt, "In spite of Iran's officially joining the Council
of nonaligned nations, why hasn't the bilateral Iranian-American military
agreement been abrogated?"

Regarding the move toward the right in Iran's domestic politics, this party
also expressed the opinion that the expulsion of workers and engineers on
the charge of being "leftist" which has been taking place in many Iranian
factories at the hands of rightists in recent days and weeks is fraught
with great danger.

The Tudeh Party also requested that the government take a convincing posi-
tion on behalf of a comprehensive policy of support for the interests of
the peasants and the provision of schools and doctors for peasants.

that Will Happen Tomorrow?

In answer to this question, the Tudeh Party of Iran replied that one can-
not yet give a single answer to this question because while it

is true that the people are behind the Islamic revolution under the lead-
ership of Emem Khomeyni, the framework of this Iranian revolution and its

precise, clearly identified impact have not yet become clear.

In the statement, it was pointed out that what are threatening the gains
of the Iranian revolution today and in the future are the plots of inperi-
alism under the leadership of America, Zionism and iaperial reaction con-
nected to them. Only through the unification of all national and freedom-
loving forces and partisans of the people can one repel this danger and
erect an unbridgeable bulwark against the "counterrevolution."
RELATIORS WITH PERSIAN GULF STATES SUMMARIZBD
Paris NAME-E [(02 in Persian 6 Oct 79 p 7
lzrticle: "Iran's Relations with the Arab Persian Gulf States_'_'7

/_'§ex_t/ Regarding fears vhich statements by some Iranian religious persons
have stirred up among Persian Gulf states, BBC's counentator says "The
Iranian revolution has caused much distress among rulers of Persian Gulf
area states. Substantial Shiite majorities exist in these countries;
Shiites are actually in the majority in Bahrain. Sunnite emirs of the
countries of Kuwait, Iraq, Bahrain and Dubai have taken measures against
Shiite religious figures, who consider themselves to be representatives

of Ayatollah Khomeyni, in their countries believing that the sermons of
these religious figures are provocative. The government of Iraq recently
claimed that Iran intends to carry on the previous regime's policy of seal:-
ing dominance in the Persian Gulf area. This doubt about Iran's goals de-
rives its sustenance from the belief of some religious persons in Iran who
claim that an Iranian revolution could be launched in all Moslem countries.
Ayatollah Khomeyni has stated numerous times that Islam is not restricted
to the boundaries of countries and that all oppressed Mosleme must rise

up against their governments and form Islamic republics, in the hope that
a united Islamic society will soon come into being. Some religious per-
sons close to the Ayatollah also hold this belief. 'l'ehran's Ewan Jom'eh,
Ayatollah Hontazeri, has stated that the Iranian revolution can and met
be exported, Dr Mohamed Beheshti, head of the Islamic Republican Party,
has pointed out that some Arab sultanates are against God and God's people
and consider the appearance of the Iranian revolution to be unacceptable.

It is almost certain that these two people. who are the chairman and vice
chairman of the Council to Investigate the Iranian Constitution are mem-
bers of the Iranian Revolutionary Council. Ayatollah Sadeq Ruhani, anoth-
er religious Iesder in Iran, has given warning that his country will re-
vive its old claim concerning Bahrain and that this island will be annexed
to Iran following the overthrow of its emit. It was in 1971 that Iran re-
nounced its claim to possession of Bahrain. Iran's ambassador to the
state of Kuwait has stated that Ayatollah Ruhani is not a responsible per-
son in this matter. Dr Ibrahim Yasdi, minister of foreign affairs. has
also stated numerous times that Ayatollah Ruhani's opinions are personal
views and that he does not represent the general policy of the Iranian
government. Ayatollah Khomeyni has neither confirmed nor denied Ayatollah
Ruhani's views on Bahrain Dr Yazdi, as well as the official governnent
spokesman, Sadeq Tabataba'i, have confirmed that unofficial statements con-
cerning the export of the Iranian revolution have no connection with the
general policy of the government, which is based on nonintervention in the
internal affairs of other countries. These statements. as well as today's
declarations by Eng Bazargan, make it clear that the government of Iran in-

tends to show that its policy is separate from the conduct of certain re-
ligious persons.
POWER STRUGGLE BETWEEN 190 MILITARY FIGURES REVIEW
Paris NAME-E: 3.02 in Persian 10 Oct 79 p l
IZrticle: "Hadsni and Chamran Confront One Another}?

liars-l- As had been expected, two persons on the Iranian political scene

are gradually dividing up military power among themselves: Adm Madani and
Hostafa Ch Inran.

Adm Madani is the comander of the southern fleet and the governor of
Khuzestan. Because of his past history of struggle against the former re-
gime and closeness to lib'cral and freedomloving people, he is the object
of acceptance both by intellectuals and non-fanatic Hosleue. The navy,
which is to be considered the only intact, organized force in Iran today,
is entirely in his hands. His governorship of Khuzestan, which at the be-
ginning faced opposition on the part of the Arabic minority, is now con-
sidered the most successful post-revolutionary provincial government. He
is opposed to blind fanaticism and eupty slogans and yesterday announced
that Iran is faced with a recession, unesployment and apathy and that the
nation is discouraged. He added, "This is dangerous, Islamic government
does not mean that the economy must regress, since if it does go backward
we will be annihilated." Regarding the "purge" which is being talked
about by the mollas today, he said "This is not purification, it is the
liquidation of personal accounts."

Hostafa Chamran is the minister of War and the previous cosanander of the
guards. Because of his past and present relations with the Palestinians,
and his long struggle against imperialism, he is supported by religious
elements and some leftist groups. The factory in Kurdistan has been cred-
ited to him. At the outset he tried to convert the force of revolutionary
guards into the basic element executing the power of the Islamic republic
and he criticised the army. when it was observed that these strange, odd
disorganized persons who had received no training were not capable of be-
ing transformed into a factor of strength, he tried to reorganize the army
and "purge" it. On the latter subject, he said yesterday that the three
criteria for purge in the army consist of receptivity to national

21
independence, belief in the Islamic revolution under the leadership of
8mm Khomeyni, and absolute obedience to the government. The leftovers
of the army do not follow him and conaider him to be a foreign body in
their midst.

Madani and Chamran view the Iranian revolution from two complet-.y differ-
ent perspectives and are drawing up directions for the future of Iran in
different directions. Undoubtedly before either of them sets out in his
direction they will go after one another hammer and tons.

11387
C80: 5906
NEH CHANGES ANNWNC. IN HILITAKV, POLICE INTELLIGENCE
Tehran BAHDAD in Persian 25 Sep 79 pp 1, 9

lzrticle: "The Army and_Policy Intelligence and Counter-intelligence
System Is Being Changedﬂ/

/;i‘ex_t_/ At the conclusion of the consultative session of the Council of
the Joint Staff of yesterday evening, Dr Sedeq ‘l'abatabe'i, the governmnt
spokesmen, declared and confirmed the decisions made at this session and
matters under discussion in a telephone conversation with MAD. The
structure of the police and the army intelligence and counterintelligence
systems, which in the past were deliberately opposed to the people and the
interests of the nation, will be changed and made cosmetible with the con-
ditions of the revolution.

The government spokesman participated on behalf of the prime minister at
this session, which was held in the presence of representatives of the
three armed forces services, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and the Min-
istry of the Interior. In regard to decisions regarding measures under
discussion in the session, he said:

"This session was held in staff headquarters to deterudne the course of
the domestic and foreign policy of the army and the three service branches
of the military and security."

The government spokesman added, "Since possessing a strong army based on
the people and oriented toward the interests of the people and the guer-
entee of the goals of the revolution-which is coupetible with the liber-
tarian end unificationist spirit of lslemuis the basic condition for the
stability, triumph and endurance of the Islamic revolution of Iran; since
the leader of the revolution, especially in the past weeks, has repeatedly
emphasized that strengthening the army and security forces of the Islamic
Republic of Iran must be the subject of concern, that the weakening of
these forces must be considered treason against Islam, and that people who
harbor ill will by pen or deed against the army and its commanders must

be handed over to the courts of the Islamic revolution; and since strength-
ening the existing bonds of syapethy with the army, which is the protector
and guarantor of the preservation of national sovereignty, territorial in-
tegrity and freedom of the land of Iran, has been established, the politic-
al course of the military and security forces are to be codified and or-
ganized in harmony with the other agencies of the country and with the par-
ticipation and surveillance of nonmilitary persons."

Change in the Intelligence System

He added, "At today's session discussion, conversation and a search for
solutions with regard to problems arising from the economy measures carried
out in the military personnel budget took place."

The government spokesmen went on, "At this meeting the problem of putting
Phantom pilots to work was also subjected to examination, since most Air
Force pilots are facing the problem of employment and each experienced
Phantom pilot involves expenditures of about $7 million in education and
training." Dr stataba'i said : "At today's session, consolidation of
the army and police intelligence system was also discussed, since the sub-
stance of the Islamic Republic of Iran and the freedomrloving objectives
of the revolution must possess a different form and substance consonant
with the condition of the revolution; in the past the fruits of intelli-
gence and counterintelligence were intentionally used against the people
and the interests of the nation."

Ssdeq Tabatabe'i expressed the hope that in the next meeting of this com-
mission, which is to be held next week in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs,
decisions will be reached on the above-mentioned points under review fol-
lowing appropriate discussion and exchanges of views. The government
spokesman added, "Continuation of this discussion for codification of the
form and substance of the military and security forces, as well as limits
and constraints on the action of each of these forces in connection with
matters inside and outside the country and neighboring countries, will al-
so continue in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs next week."

Sadeq Tabatsba'i added, "The basic objective in nolding such meetings is,

in fact, to have representatives of the government and the people partici-
pating in codifying the political program for the military activity of the
nation's security forces, since it is thereby possible to make the army

and the security forces conform as effectively and properly as possible to
the content and course of the Islamic Republic of Iran, guarantee and vouch-
safe the country's freedom and independence, and preserve national sov-
ereignty."
SHARI'ATMADARI CGiTRASTS IRANIAN, SOVIET COUNCILS
Tehran BAHDAD in Persian 2!. Sep 79 p 12

/:A:rticle: "The Great Ayatollah Shari'etmaderi Stated in an Interview with
Swiss Television: The System of Councils in Iren Is Different from the
Comnist end Socialist System12]

/_‘l_'ex_t_/ The great Ayatollah Shari'atmadari took pert in an interview with
e correspondent from Mes Television. In this conversstion, responding
to the question whether iwluentation of the principle of the sovereignty
of religious jurists in the constitution would cause the creation of a re-
ligious dictatorship in Iran, the great Ayatollah Shari'atmedari said "We
have stated our opinion regarding this principle and some domestic news-
papers may print it. In this regard, we have stated that the sovereignty
of religious jurists, which has been ratified, is moot and ambivalent.

It has not been made clear to what extent it has legal force. Of course
there is sovereignty of religious jurists, but this sovereignty has lieits
end meanwhile one must not forget the power of the nation and the swer-
eignty of the people, since the referendum which voted for the Islamic re-
public in Iran means that power belongs to the notion, that elections to
the Council of Experts and that its representatives were also for the
people. Therefore one must not interpret the principle of the sovereignty
of religious jurists in another way; the sovereignty of religious jurists
met never be interpreted as dictatorship. As I have seid, the sovereignty
of the jurists exists but mostly in areas where no one has jurisdiction.
For exsuple, previously there was no council, no government; therefore,
the current tenporary government was appointed, under the surveillance of
the sovereignty of jurists. However, the sovereignty of jurists does not
mean a dictatorship where we negate netional governmnt and the sovereignty
of the people, placing all powers at the dispoeel of the jurists. The is-
sue which nowadays is being presented to the law on councils and is one of
the principles of the constitution holds that the people must make decisions
themselves for the sake of their own destinies, and this is not cowetible
with the notion which has inplented itself in your mind concerning the
sovereignty of the jurists. In any event we have reconsended that the
principle which has been ratified under the rubric of sovereignty of the
jurists be explained and interpreted in a clear fashion, since it is
ambiguous."

25
He was asked whether the principle of unification in Islam, holding that
there is one God and one truth, deans that different opinions are prohib-
ited in Islam.

Ayatollah Shari‘stmadsri said, “The question of unification and the exist-
ence of one principle does not require that there not be different opinions
regarding social matters in society. The unification of almighty God has
no relationship to this subject, as the meaning of necessary differences

of opinion on social questions is not connected to the trinity in Christi-
anity, because the matter of determining a principle and the creator of

the world cannot have any kind of connection with the manner of management
of the affairs of society from the standpoint of unity or difference. Dif-
ferences of viewpoint and various views are for the purpose of finding a
proper, logical path.

"In natural laws, the proper way and the straight path are the same and
people's differences in views and opinions are for arriving at this true,
straight path. Pirm recommendations, and orders, have been given in Islam
regarding the examination of views and opinions and making use of different
ideas. For example, in the Koran we have two clear, straightforward verses
on this subject. In one place God commands "And order them: consult among
yourselves” and in another place "And consult with them in the matter."
This means that attaining the true way and straight path in the performance
of activities must take place through consultation, discussion and the ex-
change of ideas. In another place the Koran says "Spread the good word to
the servants who listen to minds and follow the best." In this verse, the
almighty creator considers the best people to be those who listen to
people's views, opinions and statements and select the best words and most
proper statements from among them. It is the belief of all philosophers
that the world is one unit and that all its parts are joined together and
linked. You see, even when the wind blows and the leaf of a tree or a
piece of straw falls to the side, this is connected to all parts of the
world. The world is one unit and it has one creator, and one must not say
that unification is dictatorial or that the trinity is something which is
not dictatorial. Again I repeat that in order to recognize the truth and
arri-‘ at the best path and the best road, there is no other way than for
there to be consultation on the matter and for different views to be ex-
pressed so that the truth may be obtained from among them." The question
was asked: Since it is the system of councils which is to constitute the
foundation and basis of government in Iran, will this not have a similar-

ity to the socialist or comnunist systeaﬂ He replied, "The system of
councils in Iran is different from the communist and socialist system.
Their consultation and joint discussion is within the context of communist
and socialist ideologies whereas those of Iran are in the context of Islam
and the commandments of the Koran. Now there are also councils in America,
but their councils are based on the foundation of capitalist ideas. How-
ever, our councils are founded on the system of Islam."
The Swiss Television correspondent asked, "Ayatollah, do the measures be-
ing taken by the government in Kurdistan, in connection with the events in
that ostan, resemble the measures and actions previous governments in Iran
carried out?"

The great Ayatollah Shari'atmadari said "So far as we have been informed,
the government is keeping the issue of the Kurds separate from the issue
of the Kurdistan Democratic Party. It states that it is not making war
with the Kurds or Kurdistan but that it is making war with a party which
says it has a link with foreigners and whose aim is secession. Of course
the government is not opposed to a kind of autonomy within the context of
remaining Iranian, but the issue of the secession or separation of Kurdistan
is never to be accepted or tolerated. Yesterday evening Mr Hoftizadeh was
in our presence in the company of a number of religious scholars and
Islamic personalities from Kurdistan. and they emphasized the same things.
or course in such conditions and states it is possible that certain con-
trary, disturbing acts on the part of irresponsible individuals could take
place."

[1887
C80: #906
SHARI'ATMADARI DEFENDS NATIONAL COUNCILS
Tehran KBYHAN in Persian 23 Sep 79 p 3

Izrticle: "The Great Ayatollah sheri'atnsdari: Iran's Councils Conform
to Framework of Islam and the Couands of the Koran:/

/Iex_t/ His eminence Ayatollah Shari'etmedari talked about the various is
sues of the country, the councils and the sovereignty of religious jurists
in an interview with Swiss Television. At the start, the television
correspondent asked,

"Ayatollah, won't implementation of the principle of the sovereignty of
religious jurists in the constitution cause the establishment of a religi-
ous dictatorship in Iran?"

The great Ayatollah Seyyed Karen: Shari'atnsdari replied, "He have stated
our opinion regarding this principle and some domestic newspapers may
print it. In this regard, we have stated that the sovereignty of religi-
ous jurists, which has been ratified, is aoot and ambivalent. It has not
been made clear to what extent it has legal force. Of course, there is
sovereignty of religious jurists, but this sovereignty has limits, and
meanwhile one must not forget the power of the nation and the sovereignty
of the people, since the referendum which voted for the Islamic republic
in Iran means that power belongs to the nation, that elections to the
Council of Experts and its representatives were also for the people, and
that representatives who are now present in the Council of Experts are
talking from the standpoint of representatives of the people. Thus the
genuine power lies with the people and even the fact that the National
Consultative Council and presidency are to be elected with the supervision
of the people is further proof of national government. Therefore one must
not interpret the principle of the sovereignty of religious jurists in
another way; the sovereignty of religious jurists mat never be interpreted
as dictatorship. As I have said, the sovereignty of the jurists exists
but mostly in areas where no one has jurisdiction. For examle, previous-
ly there was no council, no government. therefore, the current tenporary
government was appointed, under the surveillance of the sovereignty of
jurists. However, the sovereignty of jurists does not mean a dictatorship

28
where we negate national government and the sovereignty of the people,
placing all powers at the disposal of the jurists. The issue which nowa-
days is being presented to the law on councils and is one of the principles
of the constitution holds that the people must make decisions themselves
for the sake of their own destinies, end this is not compatible with the
notion which hes implanted itself in your mind concerning the sovereignty
of the jurists. In any event we have recommended that the principle which
has been ratified under the rubric of sovereignty of the jurists be ex-
plained and interpreted in a clear fashion, since it is ambiguous."

Question: The principle of unification in Islam holds that there is one
God and one truth; doesn't this mean that different opinions are prohib-
ited in Islam?

Answer: The question of unification end the existence of one principle
does not require that there not be different opinions regarding social mat-
ters in society. The unification of almighty God has no relationship to
this subject, as the meaning of necessary differences of opinion on social
questions is not connected to the trinity in Christianity, because the mat-
ter of determining a principle and the creator of the world cannot have any
kind of connection with the manner of management of the affairs of society
from the standpoint of unity or difference. Differences of viewpoint and
various views are for the purpose of finding a proper, logical path. In
natural laws, the proper way and the straight path are the same and people's
differences in views and opinions are for arriving at this true, straight
path. Pirm recommendations, and even orders, have been given in Islam re-
garding the examination of views and opinions and making use of different
ideas. For example, in the Koran we have two clear, straightforward verses
on this subject. In one place God commands "And order them: consult among
yourselves" and in another place "And consult with than in the matter."
This means that obtaining the true way and straight path in the performance
of activities must take place through consultation, discussion and the ex-
change of ideas. In another place the Koran says "Spread the good word to
the servants who listen to minds and follow the best of them." In this
verse, the almighty creator considers the best people to be those who
listen to people's views, opinions and statements and select the best words
and most proper statements from among them. It is the belief of all philos-
ophers that the world is one unit and that all its parts are joined togeth-
er and linked. You see, even when the wind blows and the leaf of a tree

or a piece of straw falls to the side, this is connected to all parts of
the world. The world is one unit and it has one creator, and one must not
say that unification is dictatorial or that the trinity is something which
is not dictatorial. Again I repeat that in order to recognize the truth
and arrive at the best path and the beat road, there is no way other than
for there to be consultation on the matter and for different views to be
expressed so that the truth may be obtained from among them.

Question: Since it is the system of councils which is to constitute the
foundation and basis of government in Iran, will this not have a similarity
to the socialist or cosumnist systenﬂ
Answer: The system of councils in Iran is different from the communist

and socialist system. Their consultation and joint discussion is within
the context of conmunist and socialist ideologies whereas those of Iran

are in the context of Islam and the commandments of the Koran.

Now there are also councils in America but their councils are based on the

foundation of capitalist ideas. However, our councils are founded on the
system of Islam.
RELIGIOUS LEADER Accuses SHAH'S SISTER 0F MMING SECESSIOﬂ
Tehran KBYHAN in Persian 6 Oct 79 p ll

lzrticle: "In an Interview with KEY'HAN, HaJJatoleSIem a...“ Revealed
Hatching of Flo; To Create Republic of Kurdestan with Financial Help of
Ashraf Pahlaviﬂ/

llextl Hojjatollah cholamreza Rasani, the well known spiritual figure of
Orumieh and the western area of the country, described the situation in
Heat Azarbayjan and Kurdistan, stating, "At the present time Deteocratic
Party Inenbers are scattered over a border strip free Haku to Sardasht and
are active along with a nuuber of local feudsliets such as Mohamed Main
Hates-i and Mohyioddin Seyyedi, who are heads of tribes in Iraq. Son-e days
ago these two people held an isportant meeting in the village of Zireh,
attended as well, on part of the Deaocratic Party, by Ezzoddin Hoseyni,

Dr Abdorrshxnan Qsaealu, chani Ballurian and Palisban. After some talk,

it was decided at this meeting that a large independent republic by name
of the Republic of Kurdesten would be established. Of course, one must
realize that his republic was to be forued out of the nations of Turkey,
Iraq, Syria and Iran, which each have two aillion Kurds on the borders,
totalling 8 million, and that Palizban undertook to provide the preliminar-
ies for the job from the financial standpoint with the help of Ashraf
Pahlavi, who is currently in Iraq."

In answer to a question on the meat that the Deaocrats were making prepar-
ations for a winter attack, Hojjetoleslen nuani said "winter in Kurdestan,
especially the border strip, is extremely difficult. There is a heavy snow
cover, which is to our benefit since they have no place to hide."

In this interview, Hojjatoleslas: described stris as the second hero of
Iran and said "Leaving Qotn aside, Tabriz played a special part in the
Islamic revolution of Iran. It was the heroic people of ‘l'abriz who gave
Islamic greetings to the voice of the traditional sources. ‘l'abriz rose
up at a time when no one had the strength to speak or the strength to pro

test. It is ture that it gave up a lot of people killed but the people
were not killed without result."

31
Regarding the unification of the two Azarbayjans, Hasani said "From the
standpoint of strength, federation and agreement this would be a very good
thing but it would not be good from the standpoint of development or con-
struction because the towns have become very big and it would be difficult
for one governor to suffice."

In answer to the question why some political groups did not have good re-
lations with him, Hojjetoleslam Hasani said "This is extremely natural,
and there is a long story behind it. In September of last year, when the
people were called upon to arm themselves, we also issued weapons. Since
I was familiar with the mentality of Democratic Party members, and knew
that they were intending to secede, I was watching for the regime to fall
and for us to be faced with another parasite. I warned my people from
this angle and they also became suspicious, until the regime attacked the
great mosque of Orumleh on 16 December and I with my men proceeded to re.
sist them with the weapons we had issued. A number of them were killed
and some of our men were wOunded also. After this episode I wrote letters
to 'l'abriz, Maku, shapur and Khoy so that young people could arm themselves
but unfortunately a positive answer was not given. On 23 January the re-
gime attacked us with six tanks and shut down the great mosque with cannon.
I gave the order to counterattack and as a result 70 or 80 of them, and
the thugs who were cooperating with them were killed; six of our people
were also killed and some were wounded. After that, we regularly procured
weapons with money the people gave in aid via the Turkish and Iraqi bord-
ers through a retired warrant officer name of Hajj Hamid Pasuniechi.‘ Our
weapons were generally of the Klashenkov type."

Hojjetoleslam Hasani added, "He repeatedly attacked the regime's men, even
taking 18 prisoners one day and sending them to Tehran. During that period
I repeatedly preached that the Kurds were our religious brothers and our
brothers in belief, but word reached me that they were withdrawing them-
selves and that on the surface they had autonomy in mind but really intended
to secede. When I heard this I became very upset. On top of the great
mosque, where I gave lessons in the use of weapons, I declared that they
should also know that we were informed of their intentions. The following
day they could not continue to hide themselves and declared their intent;
thus our dispute was laid bare and the Naqadeh incident occurred."

Regarding the conflagrations of Naqadeh, he said "No days after the inci-
dent I went to Naqadeh with my men. Members of the Democratic Party had
chopped up pregnant women in that-town, not even showing mercy on suckling
infants. When we got to Naqsdeh we had no choice but to confront them and
expel them from the town." Regarding the tribunals, he announced he was
not active in the Orumieh revolutionary court because of his participation
in the fighting and because the purge was not yet couplets.

Regarding the situation on the borders, Hojjatollah Hassni said "Even if
we had 100,000 border guards, it would not be possible to close the border.

32
A number of Democrats are in Hargvar at the present time; that is a small
sector. The rest are scattered along the border strip from Bazargan to
Maku and Sardasht. "hat is certain is that we will continue the struggle
and that their interest lies in surrendering. Ultimately they will be
conpelled to obey the enam's orders and come under the banner of Islam."

On the visit to Tabriz, which took place by invitation of the air force

peraonnel of 'l'abriz, he visited and talked with Ayatollah Qasi 'l'abataba'i,
the eman's representative in 'rabriz.

11387
C80: 4906

33
RELIGIOUS LEADERS DMND CUTOFP 0P RELATIONS HIT“ LIBYA
Tehran KBYHAN in Persian lo Oct 79 p 3

/_Art‘.cle: 'In Meeting with Prime Minister Religioug Men of Tehran Request
That Iran Not Have Political Relat '.ons with Libye_'_'/

/_‘i‘ex_t_/ Yesterday morning 25 religious leaders of society and clerics from
Tehran and Shman went to the office of Eng Hehdi Bezargan the prime min-
ister, and had a visit and conversation with the prime minister. The prime
minister's political side and government spokesman,who was also present at
this meeting. stated, with regard to the meeting, "While giving absolute
support to the government and its humanitarian Islamic measures, the spir-
itual leaders requested Eng Basargan to take more decisive steps regarding
the issue of the disappearance of man Huse Sadr and follow up on previous
worthwhile measures.

"The spiritual men also requested that the government, pursuant to the re-
quests and com-ands of amen Khoaeyni, leader of the Islamic revolution of
Iran, refrain from establishing any kind of diplomatic relations with the
government of Libya until the fate of 2m Muse Sadr becomes known. At the
beginning of this meeting, one of the spiritual men. Hojjatoleslam Mahdavi,
addressing the prime minister. said: '1, representing the religious schol-
ars and clerics attending the meeting, declare that we consider you to be
a revolutionary and that we have seen Islamic decisiveness on your part.
He consider that the most conspicuous exawle of this decisiveness is the
fact that you undertook the responsibility of political leadership in the
most sensitive moments in the history of this nation and the most severely
fecillating days of the struggle of this nation. He expect that you, as a
brother, as a Moslem, as a freedomloving human being, and as the chief of
an Islamic state who has been elected by the nation and the emem, first
will increase your investigations and measures regarding the disappearance
of Bmam Hues Sadr; what has taken place so far has been very essential and
valuable but it in no way has been sufficient. Our people expect that
more decisive measures will be taken in this matter and that previous meas-
ures will be pursued. 'l'ha Hoslem nation of Iran requests that you strictly
refrain from establishing and founding diplomatic relations with Libya
until the condition and fate of Guam Husa Sadr become clear. He support

31+
the policies of your minister of foreign affairs and also request that he
follow up on the incident more insistently. May God preserve you. Our
hearts are with you, we support you and may God protect you.’

"In the course of statemnts, Eng Bazargan declared in response,

"'To me it is a matter of the utmost joy and pride that I have come to per-
ceive the attention of the grace and affection of you, my masters, in spite
of extreme problems and proximity to a nultitude of unpleasant aspects.

For my own part and that of my brothers in the government council, my
tongue fails me in responding to all this goodwill, support, call for good
fortune and expression of grace. God willing, our prayers will be accepted
end we will be more successful in realizing the requests end prayers of
this Islamic people with each successive day. What I can state, all in
all, is that both of your requests have been the hope, decision, and pro--
gram of the government, and will continue to be so. I can state that even
if I had no function in the government I would consider myself conmitted
to taking measures in this field. Fortunately some of my ministers and
aides are also giving effective assistance toward the adoption of better
steps in this direction. Hhat has been done and what has taken place is
within the limits of possibilities, although measures in these fields have
not failed to produce reactions on the part of special groups. I can cate-
gorically state that I will pursue this policy which has been adopted with
regard to Libya. When the prime minister of Libya was in Iran he brought
a great deal of pressure on me and on us to inpose the establishment of
diplomatic relations, but he went away enptyhanded. 0n various occasions,
among them the conferences in Horocco and Havana, in addition to all the
visits and discussions with ambassadors from Islamic countries and min-
isters from Islamic countries gho have been in Iran, the government of the
Islamic Republic of Iran /mad_e/ the subject of Emsm Muss Sadr a matter of
discussion. Remember that on Jerusalem Day the late Ayatollah ‘l‘sleqani,
Mr Abd-al-Halim Khaddam, Syrian minister of foreign affairs, and I men
cloned the missing spirit of amen Muse Sadr at this historic moment and in
this place and area. In addition to this, the government of Iran tried to
issue invitations to a meeting in Paris, in which ambassadors of Islamic
countries who could be effective in this area would participate, but we
saw that the government of Libya ruled itself out of participating in this
conference. I will state this: in spite of the Libyan government's ex-
treme desire and need to establish relations with us. their refusal to
agree in this matter is very isportant from the international perspective.
During his trip to Iran, Hr Jallud made a request, acconpanied by a threat,
regarding the establishment of relations with Libya and stated that Zion-
ist and American agents were preventing the establishment of relations. I
stated frankly, 'No, air, that is not the way it is. It is a very clear
issue, the matter of Bmam Muss Sadr.' This frankness vexed him and of
course he conplained to various people in various places. I will order

Mr Minachi, the minister of national guidance, to benefit from the oppor-
tunity of the pilgrimage this year and to take appropriate measures in
associating with Hoslem brothers and sisters from other Islamic countries.

I emphasize that my prayer, my hope and my wishes are for the safety and
the life of 8mm Muse Sadr.

"'what must happen is for the cries that he is missing and that he be pres-
ent where he belongs to continue.‘ After conclusion of Eng Bazargan's
statements, some of the religious scholars gave him their thanks and prayed
for the triumph of the Islamic revolution of Iran."
PROPBSSM CRITICISBS BBHAVIQ OF HINtRI‘l'IBS
Tehran arms in Persian 29 Sep 79 p 10

lzrticle by Dr Shanur Bastan: "Religious Minorities And Their Role in
the Iran of Today:/

I1ex_t/ History considers the point that our forefathers, by virtue of
their quality of hospitality, long ago acknowledged a special respect for
the Jews and other religious minorities to be very well known and takes

it for granted. Right when the Ottoman Turks were engaged in repressing
and extirpating the Armenians and putting hundreds of Christians to their
unstinting sword every day, Iran was the only‘ safe haven for the Armenians
in the ﬂick] ls East. We all know that the opportunity for ell types of
economic and social activity was always open to all classes of the society
of religious minorities in Iran and, if we eaclude insignificant acts of
contenpt which were sometimes emitted in past area by certain fanatics
against the Arsenians end Jews, one must acknowledge that the people's con-
duct toward ainorities in any of the countries bordering Iran, or even in
most European countries, menu as good as that of the Iranians. However,
one oust unfortunately state that some minorities in our country, especial-
ly the beloved Jews, did not always respond to the inviohility of our

hospitality in the appropriate manner and, if we give some attention to
these minorities' node of social conduct, we will see that after the long
years in which they benefited from all Iran's bounties they looked like
newly-arrived i-igrents upon Iranians and refrained from mixing and ming-
ling with ths majority of our nation. It is usually to be observed that
these minorities have been umindful of our customs and traditions and ap-
parently consider themselves apart from the Iranian nation. Some people
in these minorities sometimes engaged in activities which it is very pain-
ful to mention: in World war II, when the Russian troops violated Iran's
neutrality and attacked Iran, some Armenians rained flowers on Russian
tanks and by this act caused vexation to the majority of the Iranian people.
(It is clear that such persons as Yeprem Khan and others like him within
this religious minority in Iran performed national services, and Iranian
history will always remember their good qualities.)

37
By taking over the economic arteries of the country by different kinds of
deceit, the fabrication of fraudulent medicines, deceptive transactions,
lgnd/ land speculation, they created artificial high prices in the consum-
er market and showed themselves to be richer with each day. while the under
privileged people of Iran became poorer. This minority group even pro-
ceeded to spread corruption in cultural affairs and smoothed the way for
the influence of world Zionism in the Cultural environment by creating in-
ternational symposiums at the University of Tahran--with the oil company
budget and the government of Israel, furthermore. These minorities even
opened special accounts for regular assistance to the government of Israel
and it was sometimes heard that some of their number considered Israel to
be their homeland and mentioned'it as "their own country," stating, for
instance, in times of sickness, "we are thinking of going to our country,
that is, Israel, for treatment." It is amazing for us, in these days when
the Islamic Republic has taken.the place of the detested previous regime
and the light of Islamic justice is casting a shadow in our country, to
see that the Jews have bit by bit left for Israel, selling their property
and furniture and transferring the wealth of the nation of Iran to another
country. It is a source of great amazement that the government in the
meantime is playing the part of an impartial observer and taking no serious
measures, although one can see millions of dollars being sent out of the
country at the hands of these Jews every day. If it is assumed that the
wealthy Jews will leave Iran and the poor ones will stay behind, it is not
clear what the lot of this nation‘s economic situation will become. There-
fore it is appropriate for the government to make a complete investigation
into the finances of people of this type, to look into their areas of
acquisition and to prevent the unrestricted flight of millions of dollars
from Iran, in order to preserve the nation's wealth. There is no doubt
that this is intolerable to the majority of the Iranian people.

Now even though the emem, through the inspiration of the Koran and the con-
duct and manner of the righteous prophet of Islam, has consigned the dark
past of the Jews to oblivion and has placed them in the shelter of the pro-
tection of Islam, the Jews have not come to their senses and are not effec-
tively participating in the holy war for the construction of Iran, under
the guardianship of the emem'a mercy. I, as a devout individual who be-
lieves in the Islamic Republic, recommend that these minorities take note
before they become the object of the wrath of the majority of the Iranian

people, and give attention to the following points for the construction of
a better Iran:

Look upon the national religious traditions and customs of the majority of
the people of Iran with greater respect and not refrain from participating

in the performance of national celebrations on the pretext that they are
not Moslems.

Truly consider themselves to be Iranian and show pride in being Iranian,
not considering themselves to be binstional and not holding themselves

separate from the people in participating in the joys and the griefs and
sorrows of the nation.

38
Bring tidings of Iranian culture and civilization to foreign countries by
their admirable acts and conduct, not presenting themselves as adherents
of the world society of Jews or Armenians when they perform a good deed

or acquire an honor, while spending this country's foreign currency, or--

God forbid- -imediately flashing their Iranian passports in the faces of
officials when emitting an unpleasant act.

Seriously refrain froa isolating themselves from the Hoslen majority and
make the rich culture and civilization of Iran richer by allowing it to
benefit from their customs and traditions, and not try to show obvious
blemishes 1n the greater national society by creating limited, closed
societies and making this cleavage deeper with each passing day by estab-
lishing special schools and refraining from learning the Persian language.

Accept with open arms the limitations which the Islamic Republic considers

essential for preserving the security of the society and not consider them
proof of repression or the advent of tyranny.

Refrain from profiteerlng and obtaining revenues by unlawful means, give
help and aid to stability in the Islamic Republic by offering sincere ser-
vices, and always hear in mind the counand of the emem, the leader of the
revolution, to the effect that all groups will attain their desires and

live in a prosperous society if the creator wills the Islamic revolution
to bear fruit and the Islamic Republic to become stable.

11887
C80: 4906
AYATOLLAH DENIES MINORITIES, UPHOLDS BXECUTIONS
Algiers AL-SHA'B in Arabic 9 Sep 79 p ll

[(Haburayu') Tablit interview with Hedi Khosrow'Shahi, director of the Islamic
Studies Center in Qom, conducted during Shahi's presence in Tamanrasset for
the 13th Symposium on Islamic Thought: "The Arabs, Turks and Baluchis are

not Minorities; The Executions will Continue as Long as There are Criminals"]

[Text] [Question] Hr Hadi, may we first welcome you and wish you a pleasant
stay in Tamanrasset in particular and the Algerian Republic in general.
Tell us about Iran.

[Answer] To talk about present-day Iran and the achievements of the Iranian
revolution, one has first to talk knowingly about the pre—revolutionary
situation. Any such talk in detail would be too long. Suffice it to say
that before the Islamic revolution, Iran was a base for the Americans and
the Zionists and a free market for the entire Rest, including the United
States, while the people were in a lamentable condition of misery and did
not have the right benefit from their resources, in addition to being
persecuted. In short, the Iranian people's situation before the Islamic
revolution was the worst possible, economically, politically and socially.

The Islamic revolution took place to achieve the Islamic goals set forth by
Islam. After putting an end to the shah's rule and following the collapse_
of the dark internal tyranny which lasted for 56 years and which stood in

the way of the Moslem Iranian peOpIe's spiritual and material progress, the
revolution freed Iran of all internal and foreign fetters. He ousted 100,000
foreign experts and advisers, nationalized the large firms and the banks and
introduced radical reforms in all cultural, economic, political and even
religious fields.

Economically speaking, our economy has become Islamic. Iran is no longer
a market for America, giving it oil and taking from it tanks and aircraft.
we no longer pay the salaries of 100,000 American and Hestern experts and
advisers at the expense of the unfortunate people. We have also nationalized

all the properties of the shah and his fanily, which are in the millions of
dollars.

ho
Culturally, we have done away with the Western colonialist curricula and
will seek to replace them with Islamic curricula in the institutes and
universities. 0n the social level, the Islamic revolution has granted all
the people public freedoms and liberties.

Politically, the revolution has done its duty toward the helpless peoples

of the world. We have severed relations with Egypt, Israel and South Africa,
and recognized Cuba, Angola and other liberation movements. He will
continue to do our duty toward the helpless peoples, God willing, because
Imam Khomeyni has recently affirmed the need to establish a united front

for the helpless and weak in the world, which would embrace Hoslema and

non-Koslema. We have also abolished military treaties with America, Italy,
England and other European states.

As for internal achievements, there are many. I would like to cite the
nationalization of 90,000 buildings and vacant houses which belonged to
the shah and the capitalists who have fled Iran. The buildings were
nationalized for the benefit of the homeless.

Status of Minorities and Their Contribution to the Revolution

[Question] Let us turn from this general view of the situation in Iran today
to other matters. First, the status of the minorities in Iran.

[Answer] with regard to the Arabs, Turks, Kurds and Baluchis (the Moslens
of western Afghanistan and Pakistan), we do not call them minorities. They
and the Persians—that is to say those who speak Persian—constitute the
Iranian people. The minorities are the Jews, Christians and Zoroastrians,
and they are citizens with rights equal to those of all Moslema in Iran.

They have a special (code) in the National Assembly and they enjoy their own
religious and personal freedoms.

Executions and Differences

[Question] A loud uproar has been raised in many circles over the executions
in Iran, especially in the circles of the Western press which eulogized

and lamented the victims. He would like here to know the truth about those
executions, because we believe that "Nobody knows the labyrinth of Mecca
better than its residents," as the Arabic saying goes.

[Answer] The question of the executions is a simple one, because the traitors
who were executed had ruled the country for 35 years and were responsible for
the death of 50,000 persons in prison and 70,000 martyrs last year. They were
also responsible for the loss of the country, the corruption of the people
and the theft of their wealth as well as for turning Iran into a military
base for Israel and America.. How can't they be executed? And if they were
not executed who would be responsible for such crimes and treason? Should we
have allowed them to live so as to hatch more plots? And can we forget God's
ruling in such matters, where he says: "Those who fight Cod and His Prophet
and spread corruption on earth shall be punished by death..." to the rest

of the verse. We have carried out the provisions of this verse, for the
first time in Iran, against those corrupters. Strangely enough, the Western
press is crying over the persons who are executed in Iran, but has ignored
the tens of thousands of martyrs killed by those murderers. Following the
execution of 3 women who were running houses of prostitution in Iran for 20
years, I read in the London papers that 3 strugglers for the freedom of
women were executed. If this is the meaning of freedom, then we leave this
kind of freedom to Britain and America. There was also an Israeli spy
called Habib Alghanian, who was a big capitalist in Iran with 30 plants and
factories, all of which have been nationalized. After his execution. Israel
wept over him because he was a good man, in its view, and a believer in
Zionism. Executions will continue in Iran as long as corrupters remain,

or until they repent. Murderers cannot be forgiven, but those who have not
committed murders will be forgiven if they repent.

Another example is that of a man called 'Ali (Khorom), a big capitalist

and an associate of the shah. He owned a large park in which we discovered
500 rooms used for prostitution. Be used to import women from abroad. The
last time he had brought 280 women from Thailand to be prostitutes. "hen
he was about to be executed, he said that he opened the park to entertain
the young men. He said that this was not a crime, but an act that deserves
a reward. The revolution rewarded him with death by execution.

[Question] Some people are trying to contrive stories about differences
between Sunnis and Shi'ites in Iran. How do you respond to that?

[Answer] There is no difference in Iran between a Sunni and a Shi'ite.

There are 7 million Sunni brethren in Iran. They have the same rights and
freedom as the Shi'ites. There is no discrimination against them-the only
discrimination there is is the one we hear about outside Iran. Some colonialists
have tried to create such differences in Kurdistan, and Imam Khomeyni has

issued a statement branding such efforts as colonialist and Zionist intrigues,
for there is no difference in Islam between Sunnis and Shi'ites, or among

Kurds, Turks, Arabs and Persians.

[Question] It has also been said that a disagreement has developed between

Imam Khomeyni and Ayatollah Shari'ah Hadari. Is there a basis for such
contention?

[Answer] There is absolutely no disagreement between Imam Khomeynl and
Ayatollah Shari'ah Hadari, because it is inconceivable that a disagreement

would occur between two great religious authorities on the establishment of
Islamic rule in a country.

[Question] what will the status of women be in the new Islamic society?
[Answer] The status of women is like that of men. We do not distinguish
between the two. Freedom. money and rights are for all, but within the
bounds of what God has decreed. As to the question of women wearing veils
or unveiling, this is up to them and we do not force them to wear a veil.
He should not talk only about women wearing veils, but men too have to be
decently and properly dressed.

[Question] Hhat about the question of swimming pools and beeches and
segregation of men and women in public places?

[Answer] This is a clear-cut case in Islam. It is a question of jurisprudence.
A woman and a man who is lawfully associated with her cannot bathe together
in the same place because this is an invitation to obscenity. lewdness and
forbidden actions. Islam prohibits this. The government. therefore,
segregated swimming places between men and women to prevent the occurrence
of unlawful acts. Otherwise, everybody is allowed to swim in the area
assigned to then. With respect to families, members of the same family can
swim together in the same place provided that there are no foreign men or
foreign women. This is an easy problem for us, because the Hoslel Iranian
people observe such rules out of belief in their religion and creed. He
prohibit mixing because mixing is inconsistent with our status as a

revolutionary Islamic country, although such practices were permitted under
the previous regime.
PHYSICIANS' PROTEST RALLY FOR EXECUTION 0P COLLEAGUE IN KORDESTAN
Tehran BTTBLA'AT in Persian 25 Aug 79 p 2

[Text] Ayatollah Sheykh Sadeg Khalkhali, in a telephone interview with the
Voice of the Islamic Republic, described his responsibilities as well as
the execution of a captured rebel. He said that he went to the western
region on the Eman's orders following reports of the terrible occurrences
there. in order to investigate. However, by the time he reached the town
of Paveh, the battle was nearly over.

The Ayatollah said that one of the more noteworthy rebels captured was a
doctor named Abdolqassem Rashvand Sarday (a resident of Qolhak). who did
not know a word of Kurdish but was wearing Kurdish attire. After being
captured near the Paveh hospital, the doctor confessed that he was a Commu-
nist and a supporter of the Democratic Party and a separate Kordestan.

He had fought in the battle for Paveh. and had stolen drugs needed by the
Kords from the hospital.

The doctor was imprisoned in the Quri Qal'e. Dr. Rashvand had bloodied

his hands with the blood of Revolutionary Guards, many of whose heads he

had ordered cut off. He had even taken away serum from wounded Revolution-
ary Guards to whom it was being administered.

The Ayatollah said that he had no choice but to order this man executed.

A number of Democratic Party leaders were also arrested and punished. A
group fled toward Iraq. but the army and border guards. closed the border and
thus were able to catch the party leaders from Paveh, Sanandaj and Marivan.

Physicians Demonstrate

Doctors and nurses from the Loqmanoldoleh Adham Hospital went on strike
three days ago to protest Rashvand's execution. They vowed to continue
their strike until their demands are met. Their conditions include broad-

casting the facts of the case over radio and television and ezonerating the
doctor's name.

an
According to the strikers' statement, Dr nashvand went to aid the supporters
of Ayatollah Taleqhani during the struggle against the shah and, this

past New Year's Day. then. hurried to Sanadaj to help the hurt and wounded
there. Dr. Raahvand left Tehran for Paveh Friday evening at 8 o'clock, and
was executed Monday morning. In conclusion, the strikers' statement said
that "the doctor did not die from battle wounds. His blood uas shed on
account of his political vieus. on the accusation of opposition to a politi-
cal organization which had no relevance for him."

Gathering of Physicians in Tehran

This morning a group of Dr. Rashvand's fellas-physicians gathered in front
of the Ministry of Health and demanded a meeting with the Minister.
Fereshteh Nurafshar, a final-year medical student and the finance of the
executed doctor, was present with the group. She said that Dr. Rashvand
reached Paveh last Saturday, two or three days after the killing and be-
heading of the Revolutionary Guards.

Doctors and nurses of Tehran Medical School presented their demands in a
sir-part proposal.

8921
C50: 4906
KHAIJCHALI INTERVIMD ON RECENT EVENT IN KORDESTAN
Tehran ETTELA'AT in Persian 28 Aug 79 p 12

[Text] ETTELA'AT'S reporter in Kordestan, Khalil Bahrami, arranged a
short conversation with Ayatollah Sadegh Khalkhali. following a session of
the Islanic Revolutionary Court of Sanandaj, of which the Ayatollah is the
head. Nenty-three individuals had stood trial, of whom 11 had been con-
victed and 12 released. Our reporter asked why Dr. Rashvand had been con-
demned to death, notwithstanding the protests of a group of Rashvand's
colleagues, who contended that the doctor had not taken part in the fight-
ing at Paveh. The Ayatollah answered:

"Dr. Rashvand. after he had been captured carrying weapons and wearing
Kurdish clothes, tried under the pretext of. going to the restroom to burn
documents showing his identity. The guards who arrested him know the facts,
and will relate the detailed circumstances to anyone who wishes to know
them. I am obliged to say that Dr Rashvand unfortunately violated the phy-
sician's oath by the instructions he gave-I a- aahaned to mention them—.
concerning the wounded. innocent guards who should have been under his

care and protection.

"What kind of doctor would order the mutilation of wounded Iranian youths?"
The reporter asked, "What exactly were these instructions which you are
ashamed to mention? Did he only give orders. as you said, to 'mutilate'
them, or was it something else?" '

Khalkhali said, "I an ashamed to say that he gave the order to cut off the
genitals of some of the guards and stuff than into their mouths!" .

Khalkhali, in describing the events at Paveh and Saqez. said, "They want

to turn Kordestan into a kind of Palestine. It may interest you to know
that all of the former SAVAK agents in Tehran who have not yet been cap-
tured have gone to Kordestan to fight. One of then was captured at Harivan
and executed."

1+6
Talebani's Ken Taking Part

Our reporter asked, "How true are the rmors about Jallal Talebani's men
taking part, since ‘ralebani cannot possibly share any interests with the
armed insurgents in Kordestan?"

Khalkhali answered that Talebani and his men have been active in the region
around Panjvin. He continued to say that "if God pleases, these executions
will rid the revolution of its enemies. We are receiving declarations of
allegiance from all parts of Kordestan, and our enemies are becoming dis-
couraged."

Guards and Any

Speaking of the day before yesterday's execution's at Sanandaj, Khalkhali
said that "fortunately the persons who wanted to close down the Sanandaj
airport with mortar-fire were apprehended by Revolutionary Guards and
condemned to death by a revolutionary court.

"On all fronts, the Revolutionary Guards are playing a vital role. while

their actics may not be perfect, faith is the source of their revolution-
ary movement."

Khalkhali added that "the army also fights well, foiling our enemies' evil
plots in Saqez and elsewhere. Many of the enemy have been killed, and
the ordinary people who make up 90 percent of the population of Kordestan
want the godless rebels destroyed.

Rubbish Heap of History

Khalkhali said that "I hope that the situation at Hahabad is resolved as
soon as possible, and the Democrats, Qassemlu and Ezzaeldin lloseyni thrown
onto the rubbish-heap of history for good. Before the revolution,
Ezzaeldin Hoseyni accepted money from the shah and sang the latter's
praises. Now, however. he is a so-cailed partisan of the Kurdish people."

Bluffing and Lies

Khalkhali responded to the Democratic Party's announcement that it would
kill one Revolutionary Guard for each one of its members executed by the
government: "They have attempted this kind of bluff before, but the heroic
Iranian people will never submit. As a responsible person and as a Hoslem,
I cannot show the slightest mercy to the separatists." Our reporter said
that "they say that it is not partition that they are seeking, but rather
self-determination within a free and independent Iran." Khalkhali answered
that "both the revolutionary leadership and the government accept the prin-
ciple of self-determination, but an individual like Qassemlu is an advocate
of Zionism and the partition of Kordestnn."
Journey to Mahabad

Asked where he would go next after Sanandaj, Khalkhali said that "as long
as there 13 a drop of blood in my body. I will go to every part of Kordes-
tan, including—God willingnHahabad, to combat couterrevolutionaries,

SAVAK agents, supporters of the shah and those who advocate the partition
of Kordeatan."

8921
(ISO: 6906

1+8
ISOLATIW, CONFUSION IN COUNTRY REVIEWED

Paris L8 HONDE in French 10 Oct 79 p 1

[Excerpt] The Iranian minister of foreign affairs. Mr Ibrahim Yazdi, has
outlined a rather optimistic picture of his country's position on the
international scene. During a press conference, while passing through
Paris, he mai:.:ained that Tehran relations with Paris were "satisfactory";
that those with the USSR and the United States respectively were "very
good" and "lukewarm but improving." Also, in his opinion. relations

between Iran and the Arab states-with the exception of Egypt--are
"excellent ."

Hr Yazdi's remarks will not fail to surprise a number of foreign govern-
ments. Despite his repeatedly stating that "Iran has no intention of
extending the revolution abroad." the majority of the Persian Gulf
countries' leaders are deeply troubled by the continual statments by
Iranian religious dignitaries that describe them as "despots," and
"imperialistic henchmen," while threatening them with the lot which befell
the ex-shah. Bahrain and Kuwait have gone so far as to expel, or arrest,
Shi'ite agitators who claim kinship with the Imam Khomeyni. By way of
reprisal, Iraq forcibly supports the Arab-speaking activists of southern
Iran. Even Colonel Qadhdhafi, whose Hosiem integrality is not inferior
to that of the 001:: patriarch, is publicly criticizing the direction which
the Tehran politics has taken. In short, from one end of the Arab world

to the other, the Iranian revolution is causing disturbance. annoyance and
anxiety.

In both the East and the West, the new regime is, to say the least, inspir-

ing no enthusiasm. It is true that the multinationals, who prospered under

the Pahlavi monarchy, have from one day to another suffered losses amounting
to $80 billion.

The new Tehran leaders make no distinction between "enemies" and "friends."
The interests of France-~which although it provided hospitality and

support to the Imam [Gnomeyni-u-have been more seriously affected, compara-
tivcly speaking, than those of Federal Germany or the United States. The
Soviet Union and the Americans are each just as "imperialist" as the other,
with this difference that the open attacks against the USSR—particularly

1&9
because of the fate meted out to Moslem citizens and to Afghanistan-were
more numerous and more virulent. In actual fact. the Imam Khomeyni chose
to fight on all fronts at one and the same time. both in the international
field and in the domestic field. He intends to destroy the old regime

at its very roots. a feet which does not proaise to be easy. Despit: .39
recent national izations. the economic power is still largely in the hands
of the old propertied classes. The state bureaucracy. no soonel weeded
cut, is hankering after the past. Repression. which seems ruthless toward
the foreigner, has not reached even an infestesimal minority of the
98,000 recorded SAVAK agents, the shah's greatly feared secret police.
Many among the latter have succeeded in finding another job, when they are
not stirring up trouble in the various provinces. However. and contrary
to all reason, the Imam Khomeyni is attacking with no less ardor the most
determined enemies of the old regime for the simple reason that they do

not share his "Islamic" convictions: the nationalist center. the laity.
the left whether Marxist or not.

To tell the truth, the Iranian regime is still torn between two trends,
neither of which can utilize the monopoly of power. Some, numerous in
the traditional clergy. are trying to maintain a liberal economic system.
to "normalize" their relations with the United States. The others still
hope if not to set up a radical system. at least to reduce the influence
of the right. both religious and lay, and enter Iran on the road to a
positive nonalinement which will put an end to their isolation.
CULTURAL EXPERT WARNS AGAINST ARABIZATION, BUREAUCRATIZATION

Tehran BAMDAD in Persian 2 Oct 79 p 9

IZrticle by Abbas Mirkhani: "th Are Our Culture and Arts Pacing Stagna-

tion and Depression_? 'Arabism' Must Not Dominate Iranian Culture in the
is lamic Revolutionﬂl

lIexgl 0n 8 September of last year, the Iranian nation fully recognized
the true nature of the detested Pahlavi regime and decided to do may with
the regime at any price. The street demnstrations and general fighting'
penetrated into the government, and government esployees entered a new
road. This new road was crystallized in the framework of general strikes,
starting first with the Bank Melli and the Commnications Company. At the
same time, some Ministry of Culture and Art enployees took the lesd in
testing the Bank Melli and Communications Cowany experiment in the con-
text of the ministry. However, it was clear from the start that a welfare
strike in the context of a ministry which has no place for expressing it-
self in society could not meet with success. Therefore he strike plan
was changed and the issue of a strike in the overall context. of the govern-
ment and the employees of the ministries in Tehran and the provinces was
raised; it was decided that an invitation would be extended by proclamation
to all government employees throughout the country to a general strike.
This proclamation was drawn up under the signature of the "Society of Gov-
ernmnt Snployees," which had no external identity, and was mimeographed
with great difficulty in one of the rooms of the Ministry of Culture and
Art. Then a 20-man team with a feeling of responsibility took charge of
distributing it. With the distribution of these proclamations and their
announcement via foreign news agencies under the title "Invitation by
Federation of Government Employees to a General Strike in Iran,“ as well
as preparatory work by government employees, general strikes took place in
the ministries beginning 9 October. while the government dragged its feet
vis-a-vis the welfare requests of ministry erployeesnincluding enloyees
of the Ministry of Culture and Art--a 26 article proclamation by the am-
ployees of the Ministry of Culture and Art was signed in the original by
the minister at the time,and the welfare, which was the first step in the
political struggle, ended. Several days later, the political strikes be-
gan, by invitation of the Ministry of Culture Baployeea' Club; these con-
tinued until the end of the general strikes and the fall of the regime.
Throughout all the period of strikes and political struggles which wer‘
accompanied by general workers' meetings and speeches, ridiculing the bay-
onets of Gen Azhari which faced them, the employees in this ministry proved
that the organisation's faulty administration had laid its inevitable fate
before them and that if this administration were to be changed they would
be able to take steps to participate in service of the construction of
society. In those days, all progressive clubs held this radical change
among Ministry of Culture and Art employees in esteem, and many employees
in this ministry who had faced an atrophy of their personality and as a
result of disillusionment had made group requests for transfer to other
ministries during the previous decadent regime renounced their decisions
and said "We will remain and serve our organization." Thus it was that
with the advent to power of the temporary government of the Islamic Re-
public and Bmam Khomeyni's order concerning obedience to the tenporary gov-
ernment, the employees of the ministry, with the representation of the
Employees' Club, began to cooperate with the minister and the ministry
supervisor and opened the road for ministry officials and their appointed

representatives to engage in their revolutionary duties with full powers
and without problems or complications.

In order to evince their full good will, and in spite of their total oppo-
sition to the incorporation or dissolution of this ministry in the period
of Sharif Emami, Azhari and Bakhtiar, they did not oppose its merger into
the Ministry of Science and Higher Education. Now that more than 7 months
have elapsed since this episode, in spite of all these expressions of good
will, the employees of the Ministry of Culture and Art have the national
and legal duty of conducting an investigation into the list of this min-
istry's achievements in the past few months and of reiterating its weak
points and deviations.

At the outset of the strike, the minister of culture and higher education
apparently merged this ministry of almost 6,000 employees with the Ministry
of Science and Higher Education, whose employees were less than one tenth
those of the Culture and Art Ministry in number, without reference to the
philosophy of merging the Ministry of Culture and Art with that of Science
and Higher Education. As a university professor, the minister had greater
educational interest in higher education, the universities and education,
and therefore ascribed greater importance to the Ministry of Science and
Higher Education, placing this ministry in second place in terms of im-
portance--moreover, in the most critical stages of cultural life. Mr Min-

ister, your place of employment was in this ministry, but you did not visit
the Ministry of Culture and Art more than once a week. Fortunately your

delegated authority. that is, Dr Varjavand, compensated for this lack of
interest for a while and started a series of radical measures but alas--
a hundred alases--his administration, soon ripe, quickly rotted. After
him Dr Barkeshli, as your sole deputy in the Ministry of Culture and Art,
engaged in handling matters without your pe'sonal attendance, while you
took on a number of deputies in the Ministry of Science but were not even
prepared to give your sole deputy in the Ministry of Culture and Art the
position of delegated authority or supervisor. This in itself is proof of
the little value you and the temporary government have given to culture
and art.

In spite of all this expression of goodwill on the part of Ministry of
Culture end Art employees, you and your deputy consigned the employges ig
this ministry to oblivion and, except for one time-~when you were [first]
appointed to this position-~you did not meet with the employees of this
ministry. (One or two speeches in the meeting hall on the occasion of the
commemoration of Dr Shari'ati and the like are separate from this point.)

As well as you, Dr Barkeshli also hid himself from general view and not
once did he invite ministry employees to a general meeting so that he could
confront their ideas, beliefs and ideals from close at hand. This ailment
does not only exist in our ministry but is to be found in all ministries
and throughout the govermment--an ailment where people use the old dis-
carded methods of the past, that is, only implementing power and relying
on a series of administrative ranks, series of ranks, and the system which
was the heritage of the detested regime of the past, where no change has
occurred in its identity or fabric, instead of relying on government em-
ployees and attracting their general participation and cooperation in order
to advance objectives. At the outset, persistent efforts were made to have
artistic and cultural activity emerge from the context of the bureaucracy
of general departments and general bureaus and to have groups organized in-
to various cultural and artistic fields proceed with the work of cultural
and artistic production, but no one heeded these efforts. It was not even
known what Art and Culture wanted to do with its general manager and gen-
eral chief. Through this intellectual evaluation of the administrative
system and the lack of familiarity on your part and that of your deputy
with cultural organization, cultural production and the evil effects of
running a bureaucracy, the Ministry of Culture and Art unfortunately re-
tained the organizational form it had possessed under the previous regime.
The iupotent management of this organization, instead of thinking of a red-
ical change in the fabric of the organization, engaged in a series of un-
successful, unstudied mergers and with the collapse of the previous organ-
isation, in the practical sense confronted the Ministry of Culture and Art
with chaos. It could not work out many of the mergers either but left them
to God's safekeeping. The result of all this was that after more than 7
months had passed since this incident, all the employees of this ministry
were suspended in a state of indolence, waiting to see what the nunagement
of this organization finally wanted to do. During this period, we never
observed that this ministry, with all its installations and resources, man-
aged to establish an impression in the revolution through its administra-
tion. No determination of cultural and artistic responsibility has yet
been made and no criteria have been released to distinguish committed from
uncoundtted art, or art which was at the service of the satanic regime of
the past. No kind of cultural or artistic activity, even in its Islamic
sense, has occurred in accordance with the Islamic desire and need of the
society. Inevitably you and your deputy will place blame for this around
the necks of the ministry employees on grounds that they are not capable
of artistic and cultural production. If this is your belief, then one has
ho choice but to point out that these employees have taken their examina-
tions in the past like all the Iranian nation and have proved that they
can establish a full influence on society. what is preventing the flour-

ishing and activity of these employees are a mistaken administrative system
and its improper management.

If you want to preserve the organization in this bureaucratic form, you
must at least endow it with a management which is 100 percent aware,
acquainted, thoughtful and creative so that it will be superior to the en-
tire organization and guide the organization and its members. How can one
both retain a mistaken organization and put a weak, unaware administration
in control of it, and then place all powers at the disposal of this admin-
istration and ask subordinates to be brilliant? When all organizations
collapse and are left idle, when the organization's management is not cap-
able of attracting the participation of the intelligent members of the
puolic, when the organization's management cannot determine the status and
place of its organization in society, even in its Islamic sense, then what
expectations can one have of a person? Apparently you and your deputy,
like your predecessors, are not strangers to the belief that if you keep
several thousand employees inside a space of four walls and poison them
with monthly salaries, they will never cry out and this poisoned state will
mold their work till the end of their lives. Neither you nor any member
of the group in government have been able, nor are you able, to benefit
from the real revolution in government organizations which emerged after
the revolution of the Iranian people, or, by attracting people, to reduce

the torpor in government organizations over the society for once and for
all.

In these few months the Iranian nation has been thirsty for information
and learning. Our ministry is not the Ministry of Agriculture or the
Ministry of Industry and Mines that it should have need of a long-range
plan. You could have made the maximum use of this general spirit for in-
formation, sn opportunity which rarely is obtained, and if this hunger had
been made into something different than a complex of despair, pessimism and
blind hopelessness, things would have been different from the past. You
were not able to rely on the great strength of the employees of this min-
istry and to rely on the creative strength of society in order to draw up
thousands of lecture, discussion and consultation programs in this sphere,
to put dozens of seminars and congresses into action, to susumn all people
of ideas and thought to participate and ask them to show you the way, to
compose dozens of films, plays, songs and revolutionary anthems, and place
your resources in these fields at the disposal of people who are involved
in this kind of activity and who were pursuing these media out of love in
order to serve the Iranian revolution. You have dozens of lecture halls
and movie theaters at your disposal; put them at the service of society.

4
Try to have the important films of the world shown in Iranian movie theat-
ers. You could have made use of the resources of the fully- equipped Hin-
istry of Culture and Art press to print and publish books and publications
useful to the revolution. The holy war for construction has taken form

by orders of the emam. The Ministry of Culture and Art, as one of the re-
sponsible organs of the government. with its thousands of resources, could
have undertaken the cultural holy war and the intellectual mobilization of
the masses. It could have mobilized all the intellectual and cultural
clubs throughout the country, organized cultural societies and discussion
and conversation sessions, mobilized and reconstructed the mosques, that
most iaportant of Cultural strongholds, which are close to 75,000 in num-
ber and are inplanted throughout the country and in the body of the soci-
ety. and seized the opportunity to renew the life of Iran's mosQues. You
could have assigned your employees. by their own choice and interest, to
attract public participation in these fields. By making use of the aware
members of society and men of ideas and knowledge in the field of culture,
art, history and the culture and literature of Iran, you could have made
the status and position of Iran's culture vis-a-vis the bourgeois and
socialist known, reintroduced the special qualities of Iranian culture, il-
luminated the relationship between Iran, Islam and Arabism, presented the
reasons for the acceptance by Iranian culture of Islam as a world view and
also determined the reasons why Arabism was not accepted but was rejected
as a non-Iranian dominant culture at odds with Iranian nationalism. You
would have viewed these forms of nomenclature throughout the. country as a
cultural statement and would not have allowed inpolitic nomenclature which
was at odds with Iranian culture to become widespread under the Islamic
revolution. You would not have allowed Arabism to attain dominance over
Iranian Culture in the Islamic revolution--something which Iranian culture
would never tolerate. You would have made it known what consequences the
renunciation of nationalism and the refusal to keep Iran in mind, while
making Islam universal, have for Iran. You would have made the evil ef-
fects of censorship in all fields under the previous regime known. You
would have as a responsible governmental organization defended the freedom
of thought, of writing and of ideas. You would have stood up to bookburn-
ers, would have issued proclamations, would have had laws passed and would
have punished those who violated them. You would have been the forerunner
in giving importance to people of ideas, thoughts, the pen, knowledge, and
specialization in the creation of the society of the era of the revolution.

During this period, your administration has proved that it is incapable of
expressing any form of cultural solution, and you have not extended your
hand to the masses of employees and the masses of the people from a position
of strength so that they would at least come and give some thought to the
condition of the cultural future of the society and this responsible or-
ganizatlon. This great organization, with all its installations and re-
sources and all its equipment, should have been a free organ for the activ~
ities of all cultural and artistic groups. All the persons who are involved
in culture and art in all fields should have considered this ministry as
their home, should have come to make use of the resources of this
organization, which was created with the money of this nation, and should
have paid their national and Islamic debt to this society. Now this has
not been done; now the management of this organization does not have any
issues by the name of culture and art; now idleness, lethargy and silence
have taken over this ministry from top to bottom and are reminding people
of the era of Pahlbod. If you do not get to work as the minister of this
organization, it is a religious obligation on all the employees of this
ministry to become a vanguard in setting out a new plan with full goodwill
and brotherhood, as in the period of strikes and struggles, and give some
thought to the state of this organization through their own participation.
refusing to allow the seal of worthlessness and futility to be stamped on
their foreheads once again as it was in the Pahlbod era. It is clear that
since I have become the forerunner in presenting this matter, I am, as in
the past, ready to pay with my life for accusations and injustices from
those who are accustomed to and are content with the existing situation

and, instead of hearing the response of truth, to see myself confronted
with such file clerks.

None of this is important. What is important is that we should be able

to preserve the reputation of the employees present in this ministry and

not allow them to vanish from under the weight of incompetent management.
This ministry must serve the revolution of Iran, its Islamic and national
revolution. He must not allow this ministry to be nourished by the nation's
money but offer no yield. He must not allow such a great force to remain
unused and help less .
CWNCILS ARE TO BE FORMED IN EDUCATIONAL UNITS

Tehran KSYHAN in Persian 23 Sep 79 p 9

IZrticle: "The Temporary Secretary of the Ministry of Education: Councils
Hill Soon Be Formed in the Educational Unitsﬂ/

liex§7 At a press conference yesterday, Mohammad Ali Raja'i. the temporary
secretary general of the Ministry of Education. discussed matters concern-
ing the formation of councils in the schools and the purification of the

ministry and then answered newsmen's questions on various educational
fields.

He said, "We accept the principle of councils in all levels of the Ministry
of Education, especially in the schools, but first we must understand the
meaning of councils, because there is a difference between a council and
consultation on the one hand and decisionmaking on the other. He not only
accept councils in the sense of consultation and the offering of recommen-
dations but also insist that the schools must certainly operate with
councils.

"Councils. in the meaning of determining where the public interest lies,
we do not accept, though we not only completely accept them in the sense
of cooperating with officials in carrying out the public interest, we con-
sider them necessary. Decisionmaking and giving orders cannot be one of
the functions of a council because the decisionmsker must have a minimal
connection with the benefits of that decision. Therefore recommendations

for improvement, not decisionmaking, can be declared to be among the func-
tions of councils.”

He added, "From the standpoint of Islamic ideology, decisionmaking always
lies with God or with persons who are more familiar with divine guidance;
in a unificationist society, responsibility is assigned to these individuals.

Raja'i stated that the functions and activities of the councils will soon
be conveyed to the educational units in the form of a circular, and these

units will have to prepare the preliminaries for the formation of such
councils.
In regard to purification, the temporary secretary general of the Ministry
of Education stated, "In the summer of this year we changed 763 school
principals in Tehran. He changed all the director generals in Tehran and
the provinces and most heads of districts, but not all these changes were
for the purification commonly meant by society. A number of people were
dismissed because they reached retirement age, and a number because of
their own request; we have no accusations against any of these responsible
persons in this connection. of course there also were persons who had been
accused, and the revolutionary court has made a decision in their regard."
He added, "The issue of purification, in its particular meaning, is in the
hands of a five-man commission which is to be formed in each ministry, and
we will form such a commission in this ministry as well starting next week.
we wish anyone who has any kind of information regarding people to recom-
mendations concerning means for purification to give their information to
officials of the district, shahreatan or eaten in confidence. Since this
is a human matter, we must strive to keep any kind of revelation or rumor
from spreading before decisions are made by the five-man commission."

Reversion of National Schools to the Government

Regarding the letter from Dr Sahabi to the Minister of Education on re
version of national schools to the government, Raja'i said "He did not pro-
test against this but stipulated in his 10-point letter that an effort
should be made to standardize the education level in all schools."

He added, "The purpose in having national schools revert to the government
is not so that the people should not cooperate with education; rather, we
accept all kinds of cooperation except in terms of providing luxuries for
the schools, such as teaching languages in the elementary stages or series
of special programs in the secondary schools." Reja'i stressed, "He at-
cept cooperation from the students' guardians in improving the quality of
education in all the schools of Iran with open arms." In regard to the
problem that some minority schools or schools related to religious missions
are faced with a shortage of students in the first year, in spite of the
presence of ample resources, while other schools are faced with an exces-
sive number of students in terms of the resources they possess, he said
"He will be making an investigation into schools adjacent to this kind of
school in the last week of September. In the event we observe that stu-
dents in adjacent schools are in excess, we will make use of the resources
of all schools to which Education has given licenses, with attention to
the proximity of the student's home."

Regarding textbooks, Raja'i also said "The primary stage books are ready
and available. In the guidance and intermediary stages, we are faced with
a shortage of one or two titles of books in class but these two will be

given the students by the third week in November at the latest, since many
of these books are in the process of being bound."

11887
C80: 6906
BCONWIC COMM! DISCUSSES AGRICUL‘NRAL PROBLD‘S
Tehran MIME-8 ISLAM! in Persian 20 Sep 79 p 10

ILA-rticle: "Text gf the Conference on The Nation's Bconouic Problems, Agri-
cultural Sectionl'l

IIextl [line missing] "law we wish to advance agriculture. This is a pure
mistake. The second point is that it is true that we want to increase pro-
duction, and this will happen, but we must take care that this increase in
production not lead to intensifying differences in incomes in rural areas.
He must take a long-range view in every plan, even short-tern plans, and
think about problems which other countries have experienced. He aust ad-
vence in a direction where we will both increase output and also modify
the production difference which exists firstly between rural and urban
areas and secondly within rural society itself. Today, the world's econo-
mists have reached the conclusion that the basic issue is to have balanced
growth in all sectors of the country-agriculture, industry and so forth.
That is, we not strengthen agricultural resources, proceed toward self-
sufficiency, and suspend industry. Finally, one point is of inportence in
the expansion of agriculture--the type of industry we adopt for the sake
of progress. He met pursue those industries which have two characterist-
ics: one, we must possess the raw materials for then, and their produc-
tion therefore must take a form which is capable of being supplied and of
cospeting in the world, and two, we must turn toward agricultural process-
ing, that is. we must encourage industries and give priority to industries
which in sons way have an effect on agriculture. That is, we met produce
artificial fertilisers and we must produce agricultural machinery indus-
tries so that we cen have an additional workforce in the agricultural sec-
tor. He met give thought to the pest system, where they concentrated
industries in the city; we met concentrate industries in centers where
the workforce exists. That is, it is for this reason that peripheral
areas of sons big cities established industries; we should create 5 popu-
lation on the outskirts of cities, create disguised unemploylent [gig] and
go to the centers in the rural areas where the workforce is and expand and
advance industries in those areas." Following Dr Najlsi's statements, Eng
Ts], in his talk, said "One gentleman stated a very correct sentence 2
days ego-~‘sosne people work, some people talk about work and there is a

59
great difference between those two groups.‘ One must truly see what the
complaint of those who work is, since the general couplaint of the country
now, as we are witnessing it, is that work has been completely suspended
and if we comers the current situation, work and work procedures of the
present with s year ago one must admit that the work being done now is
many times less. One met remedy this ail-ant. ‘l'o sit here and draw up
ideal plans will not work.

"First the conplaints of peeple who are at work must be eliminated and
then plans must be put into action" Then Dr Keshavsrz Sadr, undersecretary
of agriculture, stood behind the podium and said,

"If we went to take a step, we will be faced with problems unless that step
is accompanied by a proper understanding of what has happened to agriculture
in Iran. The result of what the minister of agriculture stated has been s
strengthening of authority and an intensification of dependence. Therefore
we are returning to this dependence, and we see that one cannot separate
the previous objectives of the Ministry of Agriculture and Iranian agri-
culture from questions of authority and dependence. From this standpoint
we can discern two distinct periods in Iran's agriculture. The land re-
forms were the point of departure, and these continued to 1972. The land
reforms were propounded with special objectives in mind not only in Iran
but also in a belt through Asia and Latin America. The land reform were
not something which were advanced in accordance with domestic needs or
arose from inside society; they were something which was dictated to the
political systems of these countries from outside. The basic objective of
the land reforms was to change the social structures in society. In the
light of these characteristics more than 70 percent of our society could
not be tied in to the world market; the effort was made to tie it in.

Finally the political structure and system which existed within the country
were twisted and deformed and suspended, and rendered unfunctional. This
was the first period. During this first period we can also state that the
problems of the Ministry of Agriculture were that following the land reforms
bureaucracy became a political instrument. Following these reforms, these
organizations arose: the cooperative companies, with 6,500 people; the
joint stock agricultural companies, 1,500 people; the houses of rural cult-
ure, lo,000 people; the development areas, houses of justice, the marketing
corps, the literacy and health corps, and so on. First the Ministry of
Agriculture took form with these organizations and became a very large
system. By 1972 this had become a movement but it did not perform a neces-
sary function within society, until the flow of oil money into the market
took place. With the flow of all money into the market, society ceased to

benefit from it and people's eyes were closed to the realities of rural
society."
BRIEFS

TALBQANI'S COUNCIL ABSTBNTION--Mohamad Aqe Shanechi and Nosratollah
Bsma'ilzadeh, among the members of Ayatollah Taleqani's office and close
friends of his, have stated that Ayatollah Taleqani in essence retired

from the Revolutionary Council about three and a half months before his
death because of several considerations. In another portion of their
reminiscences concerning the late Ayatollah Taleqani, they pointed out
that in spite of the great national reputation and popularity which he
held among the people he demonstrated no desire to participate in the
elections to the Council of Experts and in effect did not offer himself

as a candidate for representation in this council. Finally, however, after
consultations he made with the lO-uan council in his office, he became per-
suaded to take part in the Council of Experts, on grounds that it was neces-
sary to observe unity under the leadership of Bmam Khoneyni and neutralize
the intentions of opportunistic elmnta which were prepared to use this
opportunity to spread hypocrisy through the ranks of the nation. In anoth-
er portion of their conversation, concerning the meeting with the Soviet
ambassador, Shanechi and Esan'ilzedeh steted:"ﬂe by previous agreement was
present at about 2100 hours on the evening the late ayatollah died at his
home, in our presence and that of Messrs Ghaffari and Shabestari, who were
to have gone to Moscow as part of a delegation investigating some matters
of Soviet Moslems. He engaged in conversation with Ayatollah Taleqani.

The translator from the Soviet Embassy translated this conversation. In
sumary of the subjects covered in the discussions, the Soviet ambassador,
concerning the ayatollah's speech on the northern neighbor's intervention
in Iran' s affairs, emphasized that the Soviet Union in no way interfered
in the dgnestic affairs of Iran, especially the issue of Kurdistan."

/Text/ lgaris "AMER-E RUZ in Persian ll Oct 79 p 8/ 11887
FIFTY PERCENT OF PUBLIC FAVORS EARLY ELECTIONS
11260917 Tel Aviv YBDI'OT AHARONOT in Hebrew 26 Oct 79 p 1 TA

[Text] Half of the public (50 percent) now favors early elections and
most want the elections to be held within the next 6 months. These are
the conclusions of the latest public opinion poll conducted for YEDI'OT
AHARONOT by the Institute for Applied Social Research and Hebrew
University's Institute of Comnications.

The poll was conducted in mid-October (after the "stronghold campaign"
of Gush Bunnim and before Dayan's resignation). The poll also indi-
cates that the Alinement has a considerable edge over the Likud.

Question: Who would you like to form the next government?

Likud Alinement No preference
August 1979 20 percent 38 percent 102 percent
September 1979 23 percent 36 percent 41 percent
October 1979 23 percent 36 percent 61 percent

The poll (conducted after the establishment of the "Revival" [Hatehiya]
Movement) further indicates that 38 percent of the public is not aware
of the establishment of the new party and more than half (53 percent)
does not exactly know its policy. Only 1 percent of the public is
inclined to vote for this party.

Regarding the expropriation of land from Arabs in the territories, 30
percent definitely objects to expropriation, 55 percent favors expro-
priation but only for security reasons, 7 percent justifies expropriation
for settlement purposes and 8 percent justifies unconditional expropria-

tion. These conclusions are very similar to those of a poll conducted
in July 1979.
MIDDLE EAST BALAIICE 0F FORCES ANALYZE)
Kuwait AL-QABAS in Arabic 5 Sep 79 p 13

[Article by Ghazi al-Sa'di: "The Balance at Arab-Israeli Military Forces
After Exit or 39pm

[Text] What is the extent of the military option open to
the Arab states against Israel according to the current
balance of forces in the wake of the Byptian-Israeli

peace accords? And what is the nature or this military
option?

The Institute for Strategic Studies at Tel Aviv University
has conducted a study under the supervision of Col Yehoshua
Rafi! which, according to its premises, contains answers
to these two questions. The study was published by the
Israeli newspaper AL HAHISEMAR in its latest weekly supple-
ment. Pollo‘ring is a translation.

Reserve Col Yehoshua Rafi! says that the element of boastfulness or
pretentiousness in this study was not great. Rather, we wanted to describe
what will happen in the Middle East theater during the next 3 years when
Egpt leaves the arena of war. It in the past, before the 1973 war. we used
to say that without Egypt the states of the Arab world were incapable of
going to war, I would like to say now--indeed, to demonstrate-to the public
through this study that Syria and Iraq are the main centers of military
forces. when we read the information contained in the stuw, we can see that

Syria and Iraq equal Egypt in strength. In fact, Iraq surpasses Egypt in
the area of araored and mechanized divisions. However. I believe that the

Arab states are incapable of conducting a total war against Israel with the
aim of eliminating it as a political presence. But they are capable of

carrying out a series of military operations in an attempt to impose the
solution they want on Israel.

Colonel Ratii'. who is a member or the Institute for Strategic Studies. says:
"As far as I an cancel-n , the data are a tool to explain what I regard as a
phenomenon. This study enables one to see the background from which
phenomena have sprung. and this is one of the lessons of the 1973 war."

It took many long mnths to conduct this study, which was begun before the
signing of the peace accords with Egypt. It is the first study of its kind
that attempts to answer the questions that have been raised.

A reporter for AL-HAMISHMAR interviewed Colonel Rafif at his hone in
Givatayim in an effort to find out about many of the lessons and warnings
which are intended to be had from the information contained in the study.
Colonel Rafif is considered one of the experts in the field of strategic
research in Israel. He is now 53 years old and has a past rich in military
activities, from battalion comander in s Golan brigade in 1950, to graduate
of a comand and staff training course in the United States in 1959 to a
long chain of positions within various sections of the staff department
(operations) in the office of the chief of general staff. lie also worked as
military secretary for Moshe Dayan for 6 1/2 years. In 19'": he moved to the
Foreign Ministry, and through the influence of recomendations given by the
"(agranat)" committee, he was appointed chief of the ministry's Office of
Political Research. Since July 1977, he has been conducting research at the
Institute for Strategic Studi es. He is a graduate of Tel Aviv University
and holds a political science degree.

The interview went as follows:
Three-to-One Ratio

[Question] The study contains a quantity of statistical infomtion
pertaining to military importance. What results did you reach with regard to
the arms race in the Middle East region based on this informtion?

[Answer] The study reveals that despite arms competition in the Middle hat,
the balance of forces between Israel and the Arab state has not changed.

In spite of the large increase which has occurred in the area of military
importance. it appears that the balance that prevailed between Israel and
the Arabs in 1973 still stands. Thus in the area of military forces, the
balance has reaained at a 3:1 ratio. In aircraft there has been somewhat of
a change, namely to 3.5:1. These ratios are true when we put all the Arab
states up against Israel.

The study contains another kind of data which is more realistic. This collection
of data shows which part of these hidden forces in the Arab states would

appear in the region. The study gives a number of probabilities along these
lines. It is clear that if Egypt leaves the arena of war, the .balance between
Israel and the Arabs will he more favorable than it was in the 1973 war.

The balance of forces would be 1.521 for military forces, 1.76:1 for tanks
and 1.8:1 for coabat aircraft. In the area of quality, it is also clear that
whenever a change occurs in one side there will be a response from the other
side. thus the situation is good.

0|
We must be very cautious in our conclusion not to forget that what is neant
here is balance in ratios. I do not believe that a 3:1 ratio is a happy one
for Israel. The Israeli Am was successful in opposing this ratio in the
1913 War. but this does not nean that today's balance of forces is a happy
one for Israel. even if we have gotten used to thinking that the Israeli Am
is able to stand up against this 3:1 ratio.

The Technological Difference

[Question] It. was said in the stow that Israel is approaching exhaustion of
its manpower in contrast to the situation which prevails in the Arab states.
Can it be assumed that as a result of this the gap between Israel and the
confrontation states will grow wider?

[Answer] The truth of the cement that Israel is utilizing all its manpower
does not indicate that a stumbling block exists. We can conclude from this
fact that an the military equipment in the Israeli Army is being put to use.
On the other ms. the assumption you mentioned in your question could be
reasonable, but I disagree with this. The Arab states presently have between
1.500 and 2,000 unutilized tanks. It is no coincidence that the Arab states
are incapable of making use of all the equipment they have in their possession.
Thus even these states face limitations. we can perceive these limitations in
the qualitative areas and technological developent in every state, and so

on.

The Target: The Rear Lines

[Question] One of the main issues to which the stuck refers is the enew's
ability to strike Israel's rear lines. Vhat change has occurred in the policy
of the confrontation states with regard to this issue in View of the fact that
Israel's rear lines were not exposed to such a strike in previous wars?

[Answer] As a matter or fact. we did not attack Egypt's rear lines in the 1913
War. but there was one Egyptian attempt to attack our rear lines. This is
attributable to the Eyptians' lack of readiness to expand the war beyond

the Sinai area. and to the deterrence capability enjoyed by the Israeli Air
Force. With regard to the Syrian front. we actually did attack it, and

there were also Syrian att-pts to strike our front. However, you will under-
stand presently that they do not possess the capability to strike our rear
front effectively. In order for a military force in any state to be capable

of attacking the enenw'a rear lines. there must be two things: an attack
capability and a defense capability. the of these alone is not enough.

The study points out a series of facts concerning the develoment of the
size of the eneuu's forces. and these facts show that the enemy at least
possesses the capability to strike Israel's internal front. The enem air
force has grown in importance in terms of both quantity and quality. Let's
take the Syrian Air Force as an example. "bile it is true that only 100
combat aircraft have been added to the Syrian Air Force since the 1973 Var,
its weapons carrying capacity has increased by 100 percent since 1973. The
second element is SKAD-type ground-to—ground missiles. Despite the fact that
Syria, Iraq and Libya have not had ground-to-ground missiles in the past, Syria
now owns 12 launching bases for SKAD-type ground-to—ground missiles. Iraq

has 9 such bases and Libya 2?.

There is another element in the field of attack capability which relates to
the increasing development of special forces in the confrontation states, such
as air transport capability in helicopters. connando infiltration operations,
etc. On the other hand, long-range development is occurring in the area of
defense and antiaircraft weapons. Thus, in the Arab states, excluding Eypt
the ground defense system has tripled in size, i.e. from between 50 and 60
ground-to-air missile batteries in 1973 to between 175 and 180 batteries at
present. This aspect must turn on a warning ligit for us.

Moreover, Jordan is today no longer undefended in large measure against Israeli
air raids, and the Syrians are capable fo setting up antiaircraft missiles in
Lebanon. The quantities are not fixed; antiaircraft missiles continuously
pour into the Arab states. Every few months a new deal is made by Syrian, and
Jordan has not yet completed installation of 1h Hawk batteries which it
purchased from the United States. Accordingly, the figure which appears in the
study may be inexact.

Taking all the likely elements in the development of an attack capability and
a defense capability, we arrive at the clear conclusion that an attack on the
internal front is one of the problems which will be created in the next round,
and that the problem of protecting the rear lines from air raids, missiles,
special forces and other threats is one which compels us to make greater
preparations.

Effect of Egypt's Departure

[Question] One of the hypotheses of this study is that Egypt has left the
arena of confrontation with Israel. Nevertheless, there are cases in which

the stuQ treats Eypt as a confrontation state, if only acting defensively.
Therefore, how would you characterize Eypt's behaviour during the years covered
by the study, which are 1978 through 1982'!

[Answer] The hypothesis you mention in the study is that Emt will not
participate actively in a war. This means that even if the Arab states were
to take actions like those appearing in the study, Egypt would not participate
in these actions. In spite of the fact that I make a basic assumption out

of this statement, in the context of the study I set aside two groups plus
Io00 tanks from the bulk of the Israeli forces for protection of the western
front in case of war. I believe that this force is sufficient to impose an
obstruction, only. This is. as is recognized, a contradiction of the basic
hypothesis. However, no chief of staff would allow himself under present
conditions to leave the Egyptian front without any protection.
Jordanian Participation

[Question] What is the position of Jordan within the political frsnework on
which this study is based?

[Answer] I believe that Jordan belong to that group of states termed the
moderate states despite the fact that it has not Joined the peace agreement

between Israel and Egypt. My assumption is that the United States considers
Jordan a moderate state. Also mentioned in the report is the desire of the

United States to create a liaison with the PLO and Syria. Further-ore, Jordan
defends its territory, and thus forms a part of the eastern front by protecting
the Syrian flank and tying down Israeli forces on its border.

Increasing the Days of the Har

[Question] You gave an important place in the study to "weapons depository
states" which would guarantee the supply of weapons to the confrontation
states. How would weapons from the depository states reach the front?

[Answer] These states include Libya only. As far as Saudi Arabia is concerned,
its growth in importance in the areas of equipment and force size does not
match what has occurred in Libya, which alone is capable of sending 200 talks.
In addition, there are hundreds of tanks which could be utilized for one of

two purposes:

a) reinforcing the combat forces

b) transport to emergency depositories for use in rearmnent.

Israel and the Arab states learned in the 1973 War that the days of duration of
the war nust be increased without reliance on foreign elements. i.e. the Big
Powers. As for the second part of the question, I do not see any difficulty

in transporting equipment. The transport operation need not occur during the
time of the war.

[Question] Don't you expect a'Libyan airlift?

[Answer] There is no need for an airlift. The equipmt could be transported
several months prior to the outbreak of the war.

Iraq Is a Cmfrontation State

[mestion] Wasn’t the study correct in diminishing the role which Iraq would
play in the eastern front in light of the developments in Iran and Khuzutan
and the Kurdish problen?

[Answer] I believe that Iraq would not be a supporting state in the next
war but rather a direct confrontation state. Iraq would send five divisions
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007102108: CIA-RDP82-00850R000200020021-4

into the var, which is less than half the military divio
In any case, there in nothing that would prevent Iraq fr
the next var with more forces than in the past.

Balance of l'brcea Based on
Israeli Strategic Stow

_ a) Division: in the yound forces:

State 1973 1979 Amount
- Egypt 1'. 16

Syria 6 7

Jordm 5 lo -

Iraq 1 12

Libya 1 2

Saudi Arabia 1 2

ibtal for

Arab states 3’1 03

Israel 11 1|.

Ratio,

Arabausrael 3:1 3:1

b) Growth in number of tanks

States 1973 1979 Amunt
Total in
Arab States 6.000 10,000 h.o
Total in Israel 2.000 3.300 1.!
Ratio,
Arabs:Israe1 3:1 3:1
‘ 8591
050: .5802
68

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: CIA-RDP82-00860R000200020021-4
CHARACTER OP PmSPZCTIVE PRIME MINISTER WIRED
Tel AViv RA'AREPZ in Hebrew 21 Sep 79 PP 16-17

(Article by Dan Margslit: ."Yitzhaq Shamir: From the Underground to the Peak"!

the next prime minister. Both are Herut members. They are completely
different from each other. more so than any teem that ever competed in Israeli
politics for a high position. One or the candidates is Minister of Defense
Eser Heisman. and the other is Knesset Chaim Yitzhaq Shamir.

The rumors of Begin's resignation were renewed after the "nudist meeting"of
the government. during which Ariwel Sharon "stripped" Professor Yiga el

Yadin "on the table." In the meantime they have been denied. It was reported
that Begin's strength to function has returned, however, when the ministers
left the meeting. they appeared to he in shock. Slowly. private secret
exploratory discussions began. 01‘ course, not all or them focused on Heisman
and Shamir. In discussions in which the heads of Herut did not participate,

Hamer's suggestion because it does not want to be a minor partner or the
Likud, another possibility was mentioned. that the main opposition would
change its stand on this utter if the Likud would agree to place the prime
ministership in the hands or a minister or the m. (Theoretically. it seems.
also one of the Democrats.)

time to give up the prime ministership to a minister of the m. Therefore.
as much as the possibility of Begin's resignation was discussed. only two
candidates to replace him were mentioned. Heisman and Shamir.
The Job Obligates

ﬁery-thing that is in Heisman is not in Shamir, and the opposite. Heisman
very much believes in the chances for peace and Shamir very much doubts then.
ﬁlter is very open, quick or speech and temper, brilliant, very charming and
in need of constant attention. Shamir is suspicious, carefully formulates
his words, heavily. He is not brilliant and almost is not interested in calling
attention to hisself. Ezer makes friends within a few ainutes and is quick
to gain people's trust, whereas "Hicha'el" (Shsnir's underground name) keeps
the political experience hidden within him. "I am not a Rabbi," he consented
last week, "and I am not a ﬂuid." Heisman is tall and Shamir short. the
defense minister is light and the Knesset chairman is well-built. her is
liable to curse loudly in public with yeat frequency, whereas "Micha'el"
does this very little. During the 3 weeks that I accompanied a parliamentary

in whispered Yiddish under his moustache, "old dog."

opinion. "There was no clarificatim in which it was necessary to detemine

a position on this or any other topic." This is true, except for one discussion
the day after the Likud victory in the elections, which alreub foretold
expected differences of Opinion. The Likud had not yet put together the
government. Heiznmn had not yet seated hisself in his armchair at the Defense
Ministry. Despite this, he said at one of the sessions, with striking
straight-forwardness: "The execution of settlements nust be careful and
weighed with consideration to the general status of Israel in the world."

On this Shamir hurried to answer: "Settlaent is Zionism," and the nature

Shanir denied that he is a candidate for the prime ninistership. "I an not
responsible for these declarations," he commented, and certainly not "for
the unfounded ital" as though Begin had promised him his position in 1980.
'Ihey have never discussed this. He does not deal with this. And despite
this he is different than his predecessors. In the 31 years of existence
of a Hebrew parlianent the position of Knesset chairman was a last stop in
the political career or all those who held the position. Not thus Shamir.
The position does not necessarily have to be the last in his political life.
"HM should I disqualify wself? when I am asked if my present position is
the last in my political life-J answer, that nothing forbids in thinking
differently."

From the tactical point, the position of chaimn of the Knesset is the
ideal waiting position for a candidate for the prime ainistership. This is
because with the protection of a high government position, Shamir is

excused or prevented from expressing opinions on political topics. I
presented him with a set of questions of the for-ulation "What would you

do it you were appointed prime minister?" --a technique used once by the
the poet Hails Guz-i when interviewing Moshe Sneh--but shamir felt excused from
answering them. "It was easy for Moshe Sneh, because he was far from the
government and his chances of being included in it were small. He was able
to give freedom to his opinions. I can not do that. '0 position and my
menbership in the Likud prevent me from doing this."

{hes not the public have the right to know what the opinion of the candidate
for the prime ministership is? '

It appears to me that it is comfortable for him to lean on the responsibilities
or his Job in the Knesset and that in fact he is not such a vegetarian in his
political activities. [He is not as pure as he acts]. He continues to visit
Mezudat-Ze'ev. In Herut there is a large group that supports him. They are
Moshe Arens, Micha'el Dekel. and Rani Kilo. It is claimed that indirectly
the candidacy of Dekel for a high position in the Herut movement is n challengo
of the hawks, and among them Shamir, to the status or the "doves," if it is pos-
sible to can "doves" those who are supported by Begin and Heimn. Thai

and many others support Yoram Aridor. Recently-«o thq tello-the hawks

won an important achievement. when the head of the coalition, Rain Kortu.
changed his support and sympatm/ from Heisman to Shamir. He did this with

the "forecast" systal. According to his estimation—it is saidnthe chances
of the Knesset chairman are better than those of the defense minister.

The book of Shamir's political-public life divides into three volumes. Two
chapters in the first volume deal with security matters. He was one of the
three leaders of Le"Hi and afterwards, until the '60's. held a high position
in the Israeli security network. One volume. which is the striking one frat
the point or public and political activities. is related to his political
and Zionist activities in the struggle for tree immigration of Jews or the
USSR. The last subJect is related to his evaluation and conception of the
strength of Israeli democracy and his activities to change some of it's
bases.

Three months ago Shanir said that the frameworks of the state are crumbling;
and what now?

"People who belong to government frameworks do not observe the rules that
their participation obligates than to. The situation has not improved

and I have nothing to add to what I have already said. He must educate
ourselves to carry out the danands of government frameworks. this is no less
important than adhering to principles. Recently I read in the memoirs of
Lord HacHillan about the argument in the British government between two
ministers on the matter of Rhodesia. and how he acted to prevent the leaking
of this matter until the solution would be tomd. I was terribly Jealous

or him, this is what we need. Many of us see in a government position given
to us something coincidental, secondary, marginal. as though there were some-
thing more important than this, as though everyone has something more important
than this. and the government position is the last consideration. This can not
be. It is not so in other countries."

Does Shamir relate this to the weakness of the prime minister?

"No. This is a general weakness. Why Just the weakness of the crime minister?
And are the members of the government little children who must be educated

and trained? They are grown-ups. W does everything have to be placed on
the prime minister? These phenomena are being seen everywhere, this is a
breaking out of frameworks that is most destructive and damaging." when he
recently read the memoirs of Moshe Sharet he learned that the situation in that
government was no better, but then they knew how to keep secrets. Just

because Israel has no government tradition of the country's existence-Shank
has come to believr-it would be nice to try hard to honor the government
frameworks.

The breaking up that he speaks of is occurring in the Knesset as well. What
about the corrections that he suggested?

"One correction was accepted: to strengthen the authority of the chairm.
Only Rakah objected. Other corrections: It is difficult. but there is a
tendency to accept most of my suggestions."

Don't the public reactions that he receives prove that danocracy is beginning
to bore part of the population?

"I fear the repercussions that could come of failure of the democratic
institutions to keep a viable government going. If the Knesset does not
function properly, if you present the public with visions of riots and loud
obscene wrestling. and you do not accept laws--the public is liable to come
to the conclusion that the democratic regime does not suit the state. I
already hear once in a while in private discussions.although not yet in the
media, that perhaps our public is not mature enough for this kind of
democracy. There is always this danger that democracy will become inefficient.
and from too such per-issiveness it begins to turn to anarcly. Then there is
danger that the demands to limit democracy and to change to a government
closer to totalitarian concepts will increase. This has already happened in
various countries in the world." Shamir is comforted by the feeling that
democracy is so deeply buried in the Jewish people's, to such an extent since
the days of the Bible, that this can not happen in Israel.

After the Love and After the Hatred

Shamir was born 65 years ago in Poland. In 1935, with a Zionist Hebrew
education and a matriculation certificate. he inigrated to the country as a
student and Joined Etsel. and after the split, along with Avraham Stern
Joined Lehi. he is one of the few former underground people who does not
look with exaggerated sentimentality at the past. mu times I saw, when one
of the Etsel or Lehi people began to raise memories, Shamir interfered with
"Why do you do this?" Despite this, in his inaugural address he mentioned
his comrades in Lehi and explained this by saying he wanted the parliament to
be a memorial to the. Principally, he was shocked at the time by the death
of ll of his comrades during the Lehi attack on the train factories in Haifa,
an activity for which he was responsible. As one of the veterans he was
involved in all the important decisions--except for the period during which
he was Jailed (twice). deported to Africa. escaped and hid in Jabouti. When
Eliahu Gil'adi was done in—-a Lehi nn who had become so extrme as to intend
to hurt Yishuv 1eaders--Shalir had a key position in the decision-making.
From the distance of a generation's year-"After the love and after the hate,
as Abba Ahimeir once wrote"--he still is unable to speak about the end of
Gil'adi. "This was a tragic incident, very tragic, which it is hard to talk
about. In those conditions we saw no other way."

Recently another "internal" incident was raised: a thin book which appeared
to he a novel which came to light, told of the incident of the taking out to
kill of one of the underground members suspected of treason. low it seems

to several Lehi members that he was wrongly accused. "I was outside of the
country then and I did not participate in that decision," explained Shamir.

It was possible to understand from a hint that he also feels a mistake was
made, "but do not Judge your comrade until you have stood in his place."

That same book surrounded in mystery spoke of disappearing and hidden treasures
of underground writings and of great ammts of material that have not seen
light, and even accused one of the underground leaders of international
connections whose quality was differences of opinion. "This has no basis,"
Shamir dismissed the importance of the matter, that is to say.--this is a story,
but it has no historical witness.

It is surprising that in the early days of the state Shamir was the political
colleague of Natan Yellin-Mor and not of Dr Israel Fldad (Shiv). This was
already after the founding of the State. Shamir and Eldad claimed, and still
claim, that it then was the Lehi center which decided upon the assassination
of Count Folk Bernadette of Switzerland. and that due to the denial of
Yellin-Mnr a disagre-ent that never was settled began. But in those days
Lehi created a party. and Shamir supported Yellin-Mor, and not his rival
Eidsd. "True, I went with Yellin-lbr, but that belongs to the past. Left
and right were not the issue. Yellin-Mor's opinions then were different than
they are now. I am not accusing him, but a man can change his opinions; then
there was a general tendency either to accept or reJect the state as a fact.
Let me tell you, there are problems in leaving the underground. It is hard
for people to leave it. It sometimes appears that they are looking for reasons
to continue to exist and not to break up. I am not saying that others
thought it ought to continue to exist--but for me it was clear that this
underground had completely finished serving its function."

Eldad thought that Lehi ought to continue to exist, and to carry out illegal
activities?
"No. he did not think that. but he thought there was still roan for Lehi
to fight for the same principles within the state. Actually these were Just
differences of nood that did not really cone to awthing."

low Shnir refuses to sink into the past, or to glorify it. The problems of
now are important. and must be dealth with. However. recently he tried
writing. He wrote several chapters of anoirs. "But memoirs should be
written by one who has resigned."

Therefore Shanir does not intend to resign? And if so—only for political
reasons. for something like Canp David?

"It is possible that in certain situations I would resign; but right now I
an not weighing such thoughts."

Are his hawkish friends angry at bin for traveling to the cere-ony of signing
the Camp David agreeaent?

"No one said anything to me about it. I an carrying out ny Job and in this
capacity I wont. My trip did not add or subtract a thing.

Is he satisfied with the execution of the Camp mvid agreenent‘!

"I was not a great supporter of the agrcanent. I do not agree with sense of
its points. I am not excited by it to this day. I also did not vote in
support of it. hit to be obJectiwe--and that is difficult--it Inst be said
that it is being carried out properly. I did not have great expectations of
it, therefore I an not disappointed by what is happening."

Should it not be understood from the agruent's contents that there is roo-
for liaiting settlemth

"Certainly not. There is nothing in it which negates settlement. I undﬂr-
stand that the governnent has a settlement program which it is trying to
execute. I would place the asphasis on its execution."

How would he define the necessary policy toward settlement of the Land of
Israel?

"I do not like definitions created to order. There is an ideological plat-
form, there is a platfor- for the elections. There is no need to change
anything in it. But soaetines in a certain situation at a certain lament
it becoaes necessary to accept a decision which does not exactly fit with

the formulation in the platform. In general. the policy should fit the
principles."

With such an approach does he not think it is possible and necessary to form
a wide government?

7h
Shalir feels that "the whole world is against us," since there is national
consensus against giving up Jerusalan and returning to the 1967 borders--
"From the point of the dangers to Israel that can be foreseen, there is room
for a wide Likud government. Perhaps, if there were willingness on the part
of the various camps to come forward to meet each other--they could find

a couson formulation. Begin suggested this to the Aligment despite his
knowing there were differences of opinion. I would welcome such a step."

The Expectations Are Low

After he left the security network in the '60's Shamir primarily dealt with
Zionist matters. A few years ago he suggested changing Israel's name to
"The Jewish State." He wanted to increase the feeling between all the Jews.
Not to create an artificial barrier between Israel and the Jews. Anyway in
the world Israel is called--"The State of the Jews." But he received no
response. I now found Shamir in a gray mood. Has Zionism failed?

"It does not appear to have failed. First of all it succeeded in creating

a Jewish state. This is a peat Zionist achievement. So then what? The
problem is if Israel is the end of Zionism, or Just a stage along the way.
All of our crises come from our not having dealt with this question. My
answer is that Zionism has not yet canpleted serving its function. The

goal is concentration of all or the maJority of the Jewish nation in Israel.‘

This is the "secure shelter" it promised to the Jews of the world?

"Secure shelter" is a question of formulation. That is the Basle-foraula.
It is not necessary to stick with the exact word formlation nade at a
certain time at a certain place. A safe or un-safe shelters-at any rate
it is the safest shelter for Jews from a historical standpoint."

Shamir dealt with Russian Jewry; is their attrition seen by him as a
failure:

"It is not a failure of Zionism. The attrition also did not surprise se.
what percentage of Jews who left Russia before World War I and alfter it-
that went to the Land of Israel? A timr percentage. The maJority even then
went to the United States. The fact that the maJority todsrv does not go to
the Land of Israel proves that Zionism has not yet completed its task. Then
and also today, there is need for convincing leans."

But when they began to deal with this subJect. did they see in it a messianic
awakening?

"That is how it was. There is a great difference between the situation of
today and that of 15 years ago. In 12 years 150.000 Jews arrived here from
Russia. Anyone who would have said that such an aliyah was expected would
have been though to be a dreamer. in 1967."

75
‘Ihat is to say. the attrition is a historical fact and no one is to blame for
it?

"I am close to these matters. It is impossible to blame anyone. I know what
the defects are. I wish I could an that the government, or the Jewish Agency,
or the Zionist movalent are guilty. We can not reach the Jews of the USSR,

due to the conditions of the regime there—it is impossible to carry out any
propaganda there, to come to the youth and educate it, to argue with. or to
bring it Zionist literature. When I see the conflict between the government
and the Jewish Agency. the heart winces. they are Just wasting energy and not
dealing with the principal problem of Zionism which is: how to reach the Jews
uprooted from their place who despite this do not reach the Land of Israel."

I wondered if there is not a certain paradox here. Despite this, from a
totalitarian state, that representatives of the Jewish Agency cannot be
active in and explain their mission, mre Jewish people ionic-ate to Israel
than non the west, in which offices of the Zionist movement are plentiful.
Can it be that in fact due to the totalitarian nature of the regime in the
USSR there is some imigration from there? Can it be that in fact the

complaint on the difficulties that the Soviet regime places before Zionist
propagandists is not relevant?

"The situation is very bad." But Shamir is not angry at those who drop out.
"I an angry at us and I cry at our fate. We do not succeed in reaching them.
I can say that I know th- to a certain extent. They are closed to us and

c‘r not understand what the Jewish people is. True, those from Russia who
innigrated to Israel are not angry at those who drop out. that of them would
like for the dropouts to come here, but are not angry at them. because they
know them."

From the standpoint of Zionism it is doubtful whether the situatim in the
Heat is any better. About h months ago Shamir traveled as the head of a
parliamentary delegation to Australia and New Zealand. 'ib IV surprise, at
a fancy gathering at the home of one of the coamunity leaders. he astonished
the honorable members of the commity. He spoke about anti-sanitism, about
pogroms in Poland, on the need to react with force to pogrons against Jews--
and to prepare to thee that day. I felt the discomfort of the Australians.
They wanted to talk about the Palestinians, and Shamir did not let then, but
rather lectured on Poland in the 1930's. Hasn't he changed from his
traditional outlook on anti-Semitim? Does he continue to see anti-Semitism
in the West today like in Poland in the first quarter of this century?

"Just yesterday I read a review in 1.3 MOI!!! of a new book that came out in
France on the problem of anti-Semitism. The writers did a survey of rich,
assimilated Jews, whose families have been in France for generations. And
what do they say? They have no doubt that anti-Semitism exist and
assimilation is not a solution. The solution in their opinion is the creation
of a Jewish state, and this is being said by Jews who are not Zionists. They
emphasize that the snti-Senitism in their area is something regular. See
who is interviewed in the book: Dreyfus. who was the head of the Renoult
plants. and other such people. I also was in France recently. In my conver-
sations with Jewish leaders in France I found that they are worried about the
increase in anti-Suitism in all circles. The running after the Palestinian
movement in France is to a great extent an expression of the same anti-Semitic
tendency whispering in the souls of the French. From the Zionist standpoint
this should be exploited to the good of its realization [Zionism] without

wanting of course the anti-Sessitism to increase. But if it exists--it should
be used as a crane."

Shanir used the vacation to visit various places in the country. he discovered
a positive side to the government. Despite the Joking—he claim—the project
for neighborhood improvements is advancing. It has improved tax-collection.
It [the government] has forced many into the circles of those who pay tax.
Shamir emphasized: "This will really be felt in coming years." "hen Shamir
was an Opposition member of the Knesset he criticized the Justice minister at
the time, Haim Zadok, who expressed satisfaction with the situation in the

war against corruption. "The Justice minister in the preth government is
also working to combat corruption, but did not express satisfaction with the

situation." Also Shamir does not. In the area of law enforcment the situation
remains serious.

I asked Shamir if in the coming elections he will be able to recon-end to
the voters to vote For the Likud, and if he foresees a chance for this

party to put together the coming government. It is still too early to
determine. the Knesset chairman claims. it depends what will be done in the
remaining 2 years. The government at present is enjoying an interesting
situation. The expectations of it are low, therefore, a few normal successes
are likely to improve its image significantly.
CALL FOR END T0 JEWISH SETTLEMENT
Jerusalem AL-QUDS in Arabic 15 Sep 79 p 7
[Editorial: Caucasians in Ya'budi]

[Text] Colonization and Zionism are synonymous. Despite unanimous inter-
national opposition—including that of America-~to every act of settlement

in the occupied territories, every day we hear about new settlements or about
closing off land in preparation for settlement, whether official and sanctioned
by the Israeli Government, or unofficial, undertaken by the Gush Emunim.

The basis of the Arab-Israeli conflict is colonization--that is, land--first
and last. Before the existence of the State of Israel, colonization prepared
the way for its actual establishment and made possible the existence of
Israel. By means of settlements, the Israeli Government is seeking to
impose a fait accompli as it has done in the past.

Settlement is linked to Jewish immigration, the ingathering of Jews from all
over the world to settle in the "Promised Land" as Israeli officials say—
in their forefront Begin and the leaders of Gush Bmunim.

Therefore, under this policy a group from the Caucasus is expected to settle
in the land near Ya'bud on the pretext that these Caucasians and others from
every country in the world have the "right" to settle anywhere in "Israel"
simply because they are Jewish, while natives of the occupied land abroad
cannot return, and natives of the occupied territories within [Israel] are
considered "foreigners" who have no right to their land. They live here as
unwelcome guests in "Israel." Begin has interpreted autonomy in this manner
by emphasizing time and again that autonomy applies to the inhabitants and
not to the land.

AH long as the Israeli leaders cling to this point of view, even though their
[individual] criteria might differ in accordance with their political parties,
any talk about coexistence will be only fantasy, and any search for a peaceful
solution will only be a waste of time.

9123
050: 6802
SOLUTIONS FOR TEACHER SHORTAGE PROPOSED
Jerusalem AL-QUDS in Arabic 15 Sep 79 p 5

[Article by Muhammad 'Umayrah: "Problems and Their Treatment in the West
Bank and the Gaza Strip"]

[Text] The problem of the resignations of hard-to—find teachers of English,
physics. chemistry. mathematics, and the sciences which are plaguing the
districts of the West Bank, where a not insignificant number prefer to work
abroad--while others are considering resigning--is a result of direct pres-
sure by the director of the Office of Technical Educational Affairs in
Ramallah on the officer of education preventing such teachers from working
in private family schools and educational centers, in accordance with his
letter number 3808-18 of 8 July 1979, following his verbal discussion with
the commanding officer on 8 July 1979. That was in accordance with the
1etter—-number 6156-539-20 of 11 July l979-which the director of education
circulated in the district of Nabulus among male and female schoolteachers.

1n the face of this serious problem, the director of education in the dis-
trict of Nabulus forwarded a request to the authorities of the military govern-
ment in which he suggested, as a radical solution to this problem. acting on
the request by Jordan and the Arab countries to return several hard-to-find
teachers for a period of 1 year to work in the West Bank schools. we, then,
support the suggestion of the director of education in Nabulus for solving
this problem. We also think that a natural and quick solution to this pro-
blem is also possible if the commanding officer in the Department of Edu-
cation were to retract his decision not to authorize additional class time

for male and female teachers, and if he were not to fall under the influence
or pressure of the director of the Office of Technical and Educational Affairs
in Ramallah.

The teachers' salaries are inadequate for them.
The teachers' salaries provide bare subsistence for them and their families

for no more than 10 days of the month, inasmuch as under the best conditions
the salary does not exceed 5,000 pounds.
The male and female teachers who work in the outlying villages or in the other

provinces pay more than a third of their salaries for transportation, while
wages are paid in accordance with old bus fares.

The male and female teachers need justice and consideration. They are the
people who are most worthy and most deserving of what is due them materially
and morally, because all male and female teachers give prodigiously of their
efforts, energy, and thought in directing all of their interest to their
children the students. and so the male and female teachers should feel con-
fident while carrying out the most noble and sacred mission, the mission of
education. for civilization and mankind. There should be prompt justice for
this cream of the transmitters of humanity, civilization, and progress, who
also happen to be the cream of male and female teachers.

9123
C50: 4302

80
JORDAN CALLS FOR INTERNATIONAL SUMMIT
Paris AL-HUSTAQBAL in Arabic 15 Sep 79 pp 5-5

[Article by Nabil Khuri: "Cover Page Topic. My Opinion: Secret Agreement
Between King Husayn and Abu 'Almar: Jordan Calls for International Summit
Attended by the Soviet, United States and European Community“]

[Text] King Husayn will decide within the next few hours whether he will go
to New York and address the General Assembly of the United Nations, or not.

King Husayn will go "if the Arabs stop trying to have Resolution 242 amended,"
not because King Husayn is against any amendment to this resolution, but
rather because he believes "that the United States of America cannot take

any step in favor of the Palestinian people, since such a step would conflict
with the wishes and interests of the Zionist entity, unless some international
developments allow washington to bend a little."

King Husayn also believes "that whatever has been and still is undertaken by
Washington is nothing more than pulse-feeling maneuvers, and the only way for
the Arabs to come out of this deadend is to look for other interlocutors."

If the Arabs approve King Husayn's point of view in question. and if he goes

to New York, such are the words which he will say. as well as much note explicit
and blunter words, from the platform of the United Nations. If the Arabs

do not agree, and continue their maneuvers concerning Resolution 242, King
Husayn will not go, and he will stay in 'Amman until future developments

bring the Arabs about to his point of view. King Husayn has already conveyed
his point of view to the Arabs through special envoys, to Washington through
the American Consul in 'Amman, and to the Soviet through Jordanian Chief of
Staff Zayd Ibn Shakir, during his visit to Moscow.

He also conveyed it to the Europeans when he stopped in Paris a few days ago,

on his way back from Havana, during his interview with French President Valery
Giscard d'Estaing.

81
While in Havana, he expressed his point of view, during the non-aligned
conference, to most attending rulers and delegations with whom he met.

Most important of all, he discussed this matter with the chairman of the
PLO, Yasir 'Arafst, during their recent meeting in al-Mafraq, in Jordan.

[Question] "hat happened in al-Mafraq?

[Answer] A Jordanian politician, currently away from the field of official

action and close to the field of decision making, told AL-MUSTAQBAL some-
thing about what happened.

Here is what the man had to say.

The first remark, he said, is that the meeting between the two men was such
warmer than their previous encounter, which also took place in al-Hafraq.
"Abu 'Ammar" began the talks by submitting to the king a list including more
than 60 names of Palestinians currently incarcerated in Jordanian jails,

and he asked that they be released. 'Arafat also asked King Husayn to have
Jordanian passports issued to a number of Palestinians residing abroad. The
conversation at this point passed to Jordanian Prime Minister Hudhar Badran,
who explained that the matter of the prisoners and the passports was
insignificant and unworthy of being the start of talks between the Jordanian
and Palestinian parties. However, King Husayn was more flexible, and he
talked about this matter. promising to solve it as soon as possible, and

asserting that "special amnesty" might be proclaimed for most people whose
names appeared on the list submitted by the PLO.

Aside from this question, the man added, one of the Jordanian security men
spoke and expressed his regrets concerning the occurrence of some breaches
of security, including the confiscation of a number of weapons smuggled
into Jordan, but 'Arafat clearly and explicitly countered that, asserting
that he was unaware of such operations and that the Executive Committee of
the PLO actually had taken a series of definite decisions prohibiting the

occurrence of such actions. King Husayn once more was more flexible than
his aides and advisers, and he dropped the matter in order to pass to the
main point of the talks.

[Question] And what is this main point?

[Answer] First of all, the evolution of the Palestinian-Jordanian relations,

and the search for a new formula in order to come out of the current political
stagnation concerning the Middle East crisis.

with reference to the first point, an initial agreement was reached between

the two parties, to give a more important role of play to the joint Palestinian-
Jordanian committee, whose Jordanian side currently is headed by 'Adnan

Abu 'Awdah, minister of information, and whose Palestinian side is headed by
Hr Mahmud 'Abbas “Abu Hazin." It is currently intended to make this connittee
an independent legal entity, headed by only one chairman and continuously
engaged in a joint action. I believe that some attempts are currently

being undertaken to find a suitable personality. agreeable to both sides, to
assume the office of chair-an of this committee.

[Question] What about the other point?

[Answer] With reference to this point, both sides agreed that the two Caap
David agree-ents contributed to preventing any chance of possible and
fruitful dialogue between the parties capable of exercising any influence
and finding any solution. It is consequently necessary to look for another
opening. That is why a new idea was brought up, i.e. that Jordan should
innediately call for an international conference with the participation of
the Soviet Union, the United States and the European Com-unity. It was
agreed to try by all possible leans to make such a conference successful,
even if that neant that both Jordan and the PLO should be represented by a
united delegation, if Washington continues to insist on having no direct
negotiations with the PLO.

[Question] What is the purpose of this suggested conference?

[Answer] This conference first of all is meant to bring up the question of
the Middle East again on the table of the international asseably, after

Camp David succeeded in putting it on the table of Zionisn and Sadatisn.
That will accordingly contribute to naking the international assenbly assune
its responsibility vis-a-vis the Palestinian peOple.

[Question] Do you expect such a conference to succeed?

[Answer] Yes. There actually are other Arab parties involved. such as the
Baghdad Conference group, which is ready to back and support the suggested
Jordanian initiative to the utmost extent.

[Question] When? When do you think that this new nova will start?

[Answer] I believe that King Husayn and Yasir 'Arafat will both start putting
out feelers in order to determine the response of the international powers
to such an idea, during the non-aligned sun-lit neetings in havana. However,
the principal political activity required to lake this idea succeed and
materialize will start after King Husayn's return from Havana.

The Jordanian politician's statement stops here.

And King Husayn has cone back from Havana.

While he was in Havana, he heard the secretary general of the United Nations,

Dr Kurt Waldhein, call for "an international conference concerning the
Middle East."

83
"If such a conference is duly arranged," he said in his address to the rulers

of the non-aligned states, "it will provide a way to come out of the dangerous
situation in which we currently are."

"Only an all-embracing solution dealing with the various aspects of the
question, including the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people," he
added, "may guarantee the establishment of a just and durable peace in the
Middle East. Finally. all the interested parties must contribute to finding
a solution to this problem. If we have any imagination and patience, the

United Nations provides exceptional possibilities in this regard, and these
possibilities have never been fully used."

And then?

[E King Husayn goes to New York, and addresses the United Nations. what will
he say?

According to the information received from 'Amman:

1. The king will openly and explicitly attack the United States and its
attitude. as well as the Camp David initiative.

2. The king will explain the sterility of the attempts to have Resolution

242 amended, since he is certain that the United States is making no serious
efforts.

3. The king will bring up the idea of arranging an international summit
to discuss the question of the Middle East.

A new scenario?

That is possible. However, it seems at this point that this is the only
solution between a suicidal war (see "My Opinion" in the previous issue).
which might be launched by Israel, the standstill reached by Resolution 262,

and the capitulation arranged among the Camp David participants. Success
depends on God himself.

2693
C50: 4802
HATER SHORTAGB POSES SERIOUS PROBLEMS
Paris AL—HUSTAQBAL in Arabic 8 Sep 79 pp 41-52

[Article by Badr 'Abd al-Haqq: "Economy: 'Anman Drinks Yarmuk Hater With
an Eye on the Euphrates! How Did a Jordanian Housewife's Problem Become a
Political Problem?"]

[Text] Housewives in 'Aanmn, capital of Jordan. try to use as few dishes and
kitchen utensils as possible for every meal. People here try to bathe no
more than once a week. Private gardens and plants adorning the balconies
of private houses and apartment buildings are dying away. All that is the
result of the stifling water shortage currently experienced by 'Amman and
most Jordanian cities, so much so that the pepular maxim, "Jordan is a
thirsty country." has become the most faithful description of the terrible
water shortage currently experienced by this small country.

Social and psychological effects are not the most serious consequences
which Jordan has to face owing to this situation. In fact, there also are
what may be called “political dangers." How?

The potable water shortage in Jordan actually is nothing new. The city of
'Amman itself has suffered a shortage of water for more than 20 years, and
the other Jordanian cities suffer a similar shortage, to various extents.
However, this shortage has increased in intensity during these last years.
and has become an overbearing survival problem for the local people, as

well as a serious concern for the authorities, for some years, because
Jordan has been affected by an unprecedented drought wave. Springs have
dried up. The running waters of the rivers and streams alike have become
nostalgic memories of the past. This may be clearly seen with reference

to the Nahr al-Zarqa, which in the 50's was one of the most important local
rivers in Jordan, and which has now become nothing more than a dry riverbed,
where frogs are dying from thirst. This river itself is the main source of
potable water for the city of 'Amman and the nearby city of al-Zarqa. In the
north. the city of lrbid was the first Jordanian city to be hit by the water
shortage, but it also was the first city where this crisis was partly
solved, when they managed to bring to it water supplies from the desert
oasis of al-Azraq, which is close to the Saudi border and at a distance of
over 150 kilometers from Irbid itself.

The authorities in charge of potable water supplies in Jordan currently
think of bringing more water from the oasis of al-Azraq to the city of
'Amman in order to quench the thirst of the local people. However, the
people of the city of Irbid are worried about the possible results of this
solution, as they think that it may be detrimental to them, and that the
water of the oasis of al-Azraq may not be abundant enough to meet the
requirements of both 'Amman and Irbid, the two largest Jordanian cities.
All that has contributed to increasing the concern about the potable water

shortage, so that it has almost or actually become a political problem.
How?

while undergoing such a crisis, Jordan naturally had to seek the assistance
of the closest Arab country, which actually has more potable water supplies
at its disposal, and that is Syria. Syria has the Yarmuk River, out of
which thousands of cubic meters of water uselessly disappear into the lake
of al-Hawlah, in an area occupied by the Zionist entity, while Jordanian
farmlands dry up, as well as people's throats.

This gave birth to the idea or project of the dam of al-Huqarin, an area

in the northern part of Jordan, from which it is possible to see the occupied
Palestinian land as well as the Syrian territory. That spot consequently
has its own military importance, in addition to being important with
reference to water supplies.

The idea concerning the construction of the dam of al-Huqarim came up a
number of years ago, when the consolidation of relations between Jordan and
Syria reached a peak. Such an idea actually might not have crossed anybody's
mind without the mutual trust which the Syrian and Jordanian parties felt at
that time for one another, and without each party's desire to give the other
all possible resources and facilities concerning the intended economic and
human unification to be realized between the two countries.

Nobody knows exactly why the final agreement concerning the initiation of

the construction work for the dam was delayed. However, it is a sure thing
that the "question of the dam" and the fact that Jordan needs water, generally
speaking, were among the major points which brought relations between

Syria and Jordan to a standstill. In fact. some people claim that this

very problem actually was the direct cause of the standstill which affected
relation; between Syria and Jordan a short time ago.
Nobody can definitely confirm or deny that Syria has at any time refused to
provide Jordan with its water requirements or to transfer any portion of
water from the Yarmuk River to be stored behind the den of al-Huqsrin. The
only sure thing is that the talks between Syria and Jordan concerning the

den have taken a long time and involved a large number of mutual visits and
delegations between both sides.

According to some sources. King Husayn‘s last visit--which lasted a few hours-
to Syria, about 3 weeks ago, mainly concerned this topic. According to the
some sources. the Jordanian king came back from that visit with an unconditional
Syrian agreement to complete the dam. This evolution of the situation seems

to be confirmed by the fact that Syrian Prime Minister Muhammad al-Halabi,

3 days after King Husayn's visit, actually went to visit the project of the
den at al-Nuqarin. not just Jordan itself, and proceeded with an extensive
inspection of the construction sites there. accompanied by Jordanian Prime
Minister Mudhar Badran. Official talks between the two parties also took
place there. and this gives the impression that all the Syrian reservations
concerning the construction of the dam have come to an end.

According to the information obtained by AL—HUSTAQBAL. the construction
work concerning the project of the dam of al-Muqarin should be completed
within 4 years. This project will provide 370 million cubic meters of water
a year, of which 120 million cubic esters are destined to meet the require-
ments of the population of 'Amman and lrbid.

The dam of al-Huqarin is supposed to be the highest dan in the Middle East.
The final planning concerning the body of the dam and its various related
projects is currently under way, in anticipation of the publication on 1
February 1980 of a world tender for the construction of the dam. The dam
will be 168 meters high. and will have an annual storage capacity of about
270 million cubic meters. The dam will be built with "piled up material"
consisting of earth, rocks and clay, and will have tunnels and other
installations made of concrete. The dam will create a large lake with
ramifications extending in both Syrian and Jordanian lands.

Both this project and the project concerning the diverting of water from the
oasis of al-Azraq to 'Amman will bring Jordan close to the termination of the
water shortage by 1980. However. the main topic of conversation in every
Jordanian home deals with the necessity of finding a more comprehensive and
lasting solution to the water shortage. 0n the other hand, the idea of
negotiating with Iraq about diverting some water from the Euphrates to Jordan
is still a were thought, but many observers already believe that nothing
should prevent it from aaterializing, especially since Sidam Husayn's last
visit to Jordan made Iraq more aware of the magnitude of the water problem

in Jordan and also more willing to discuss such an idea, without necessarily

going to the extent of saying that Iraq not only approved the idea but also
agreed to finance the project.
Generally speaking. one might say that the potable water shortage—-as well
as the irrigation water shortage-do Jordan actually is one of the worst
crises which may prevent Jordan from being able to sustain the pressure to
which it is subjected by many powers at the present stage. This is what
Jordanian officials state on every occasion and during all the negotiations
which they conduct with any visiting delegation. On the other hand. both
Arab and foreign rulers, leaders and officials who visit Jordan are convinced
of the importance of finding a solution to this crisis. not only as a local
and marginal crisis. but actually as a political and general problem which
may influence the political attitude assused by Jordan at the present stage.
This was confirmed to AL-HUSTAQBAL by some Jordanian sources, according to
which this matter was thoroughly considered and understood by all the Arab
leaders who recently visited Jordan, in particular by Hu'amar Qadhdhafi,
president of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriyah, and Iraqi President Sidam liusayn
(who was vice president at the time of his visit).

While housewives in Jordan may be unaware of the political implications of
the crisis and the contacts currently undertaken at the higher levels in
order to solve it, it still is a fact that there is a direct and actual
relationship between these housewives' lack of sufficient water to clean
their dishes and cooking utensils, as well as to water their plants, and

the foreign relations of Jordan at the present stage. The fact is that

the solution to the housewives' problem seems to be only a portion of the
overall solution to the Middle East crisis. Down with the theory which says
that "political kitchens" have nothing to do with private kitchens!
SPAIN URGE) TO PRODTE SOLUTION DESIRED BY SAHARANS
Madrid NUESI'RA BANDERA in Spanish No 100 [no date given] PP 57-59

[Excerpts] Dossier: The "dossier" we are presenting in this issue of
NUESTRA BANDERA responds not only to a desire to inform our readers with
original documents unfortunately little known by the Spanish public. It
is above all a trenchant, unqualified stand in support of the struggle of
the POLISARIO Front for the self-determination of the Saharan people; and
more, for their independence and sovereignty; for the right to establish
their own state in all of their territory: the Saharan Arab Democratic
Republic.

muritania has Just drawn the logical consequences of the defeat to which
the mad policy of the Mrid Agreements has led it. It has fully recog-
nized the POLISARIO Front and has announced its withdrawal from the terri-
tory it occupies by virtue of the aforementioned Madrid Agreements. The
latter, therefore, have been definitively broken. Including in the area

of international law, the presence of Poroccan troops in the northern part
of the Western Sahara becomes an even more flagrant fact. It is an even
more brazen violation of the principles of the United Nations, of elementary
international norms of respect for the sovereignty of the peoples.

Two principal parameters shape the present situation:
1. The Military Victory of the POLISARIO Front

The new position of muritania implies the retreat and failure of the
maneuvers nurtured up to now, especially by France, to seek "pseudosolutions"
bypassing the POLISARIO Front. Now it is already clear, including to those
who deplore it: the decisive factor of any solution is the POLISARIO Front
(and that for a very simple reason: because the Saharan people have given

it complete support; and that has developed in the very difficult battle-
ground that is the desert).

2. The Isolation of Morocco

The bbroccan position has been defeated in the United Nations, in the OAU.
All the. international organizations, all the main powers (the USSR, the U.S. ,
etc.) recognize the right of the Saharan people to self-determination.
lilo processes with very different consequences and implications can flow
from this situation--existing in early August:

a) The most logic would be a peace initiative: that traces of comn
sense, at least of realism, would appear in the ibroccan position; that
conditions will thus be created for a solution in accord with the decisions
of the United Nations.

b) But we cannot discount another development: that lbrocco may try to
prolong and extend the hostilities. According to recent reports, the most
aggressive circles of Yankee imperialism, could support such a course.

The threat that this represents is very serious and specifically for Spain.
Because Spain is vitally interested, for today and for tomorrow, in a peace-
ful and Just solution, based on self-determination and the independence of
the Saharan people.

For that reason, these pages of RUE-:STRA BANDERA are another contribution
to the policy defended in an unadulterated, direct and unswerving manner
by the Spanish Communist Party on this subject. 'Ihis period (following
the abandonment of the Sahara by iburitania) is going to be propitious for
taking more favorable stands toward the POLISARIO Front. We are gratiﬁed
about that, although we must say that the Spanish Comunist Party has not
needed those more recent incentives.

The Spanish Comunist Party, along with the Spanish Socialist Horkers Party,
has been an essential factor in bringing about a change in official Spanish
policy, and specifically the policy of the Democratic Center Union (UCD), a
change that assumed concrete form in President Suares' trip to Algiers.
Unfortunately, that positive step has not been continued.

The '30:) is undoubtedly subjected to the pressures of the Moroccan lobby,
which not us into the quagnire of the mdrid Agreements. Because that lobby
was not only "political" in the Prancoist system of 1965-166; it was, and is,
also economic and. financial, and it continues to have influence.

But to continue to "take steps forward and steps backward," to prolong
ambiguities, etc. can have very serious consequences, as we have said.
Because as things are now, it can only serve to stimulate the intransigence
and aggressiveness of brocco.

52min has a great responsibility which it ::.nnot escape.

The principal error of UCD policy has been to be unaware that the Suarez'
meetirg with the secretary general of the POLISARIO in Algiers permitted
Spain to assume a leading role in the peaceful solution of the problem.

A leading role due above all to the pressure of the left but which, in any
case, was essential to erase past wrongs, to defend long-range Spanish
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00880R000200020021-4
iutcrcnts am] to project an democratic image of the foreign policy of con-
:ztitutlonal Spain to Africa, the Third World (and also Europe).

'I'Inet ru-quirml en a. basic condition fully recognizing the POLJSARJO Fronl ,
taking, negotiation initiatives in the United Nations, with the United
Nations, based on the need for the presence of the POLISARIO Front.

We have lost time and 1:: politics one pays the price for that. But it is
still important in the new situation for Spain to not clearly to avoid con
plications and to promote the solution which the Saharan people yearn for.
NEW MODEL OF SOCIETY BEING CREATED IN SAHARA

Phdrid nussrss mm in Spanish No 100 [Ho date giveﬂ7 pp 65, 68-75

[Article by Paloma Portela: "National Liberation and Revolution in the
Sahara"]

[Excerpts] In the evenore frequent occasions when the Spanish press reports
on the situation in the Sahara, the reports refer almost exclusively to
political or military events. These subJects are undoubtedly madamental but
they do not completely reflect the Saharan situation because simltaneous
with the military or diplomatic achievements of the POLISARIO Front a new
model of society is developing, a collective way of life is being created
with very particular characteristics on the basis of the fact that the

national liberation movement has to go hand in hand with the transformation
of the preexisting social structures.

The leaders of the Saharan people express that unity of objectives saying
that "there are two principles that guide military activity: one is that
scientific theory directs and controls the rifle and not the other way
around; the other is that only the masses guarantee the war of liberation."
And they add that in order to establish the revolution, the point of depar-
ture is that it is the old that has to be changed and transformed into
something new "in our struggle for independence it is very important not to

forget that we are dealing at the same tine with the passage from the old
to the new Saharan society."

A People in the Process of Transformation from Tribalism to a Nation

Following the signing of the bdrid Agreements, thousands of Saharana fled
the zone controlled by the Nbroccan and thuritanian troops, seeking the

protection of the POLISMUO Front. Refugee camps were organized, first at
the border with Algeria and later in the liberated territories. Aware that
the problem is basically political, the POLISARIO Front undertook the organ-

ization of the camps as veritable rearguard bases without foregoing their
labeling as classical "refugee camps."
Following the program of the third congress in August 1975, which posed the
need to intensity the political awareness and strengthen the organization of
the popular masses, effectiVely and permanently to mobilize all the people
in the tasks of reestablishing sovereignty, and broadening the participation
of the masses in the administration of all the affairs of the state, based
on the popular administrative organizations elected to fulfill the tasks in
that specific stage of the struggle, the camps were divided into three
provinces or wilayas: El Aaiun, Smara and Dakhla, under the responsibility
of a wali or governor, who is at the some time a member of the Political
Bum of the POLISARIO Front. Each vilaya is comprised of several camps

(ai ran) directed by a popular council made up of an administrative official
elected by the Rank-and-File People's Congress which meets every 8 months,
and by the heads of special comnittees. These special committees are made
up of women and are in charge of administering sanitation, the distribution
of food, child care, Justice, social affairs and crafts. Education and
security of the camps are centralized at the national level.

In their political aspect, the camps are organized into cells, to vhich all
of the population over lb years of age belongs. Each cell elects its repre-
sentatives to the different special committees. They meet twice a week,
discuss the political and military situation, initiate popular campaigns for
the construction of schools, dispensaries, digging of wells and, in general,
analyze and take measures for the proper administration of the daira.

The general assembly of all the inhabitants of the daira is held frequently
and in it the situation, the problems of the armed struggle, of production,
of food, etc. are discussed. Relying practically on their own resources,
all productive activity is carried out in production cooperatives. The aid
that comes from abroad, basically foodstuffs, is distributed for collective
use. There is no currency in circulation nor is there any way of having or
selling anything.

All of the population learns how to handle a weapon, not only to be able to
fight in case of need but especially to have greater capability to understand
the struggle in order to resist better. The learning of reading and writing,
the history and geography of the Saharan territory, and the study of the
political line of the POLISARIO Front are promoted.

The present secretary general of the POLISARIO Front explained it as follows
in May 1978: "Our cadres must intensify their efforts in work with the popu-
lar masses in each home, under each tent, in each settlement and in the board-
ing schools and literacy schools to make our people a force capable of trans-
forming it all, of understanding it all. Our people are living within the
context of a revolution in the midst of which their political and military
experience is developing, because a rifle is not effective nor is it well
aimed except when one knows why it is fired, when one is really motivated

not by demagogic propaganda but by a purpose and irrefutable arguments."

93
me of the great successes of the political vanguard of the Sahara in
:obilizing the people has been precisely the organization of the dairas
tecause from them has emerged great identity of customs, of the social
Life of all Saharans and has helped to create a collective feeling of

national unity .

This system of organization, in which different organizations are inter-
linked, ray seem complicated at first glance but, on the one hand, it

population participating in one way or another in
strative life; and on the other, it develops the capacity for political

formulation by the masses because they themselves are responsible for the
solution of their problems.

One of the elements of analysis that led the POLISARIO Front to this type
of organization was the problem of tribalisn. For 2 years its action was
limited to sensitizing them against deep-rooted values and to try to find
the solution for practical problems in that area. Beginning in 1975, it
went froa propaganda to sass practice. Beginning in 1976 the camps became
the appropriate place for the forﬁulation and experimentation of a new
social organization, making it possible to go from the concept of tribe to

the concept of nation in a very few years.

'ihe traditional Bedouin and tribal society had already been modified by the
sedentary life imposed by the droughts and facilitated by Spanish coloniali-
zation. Perhaps, under normal conditions, this process would have continued
until arriving at a complete change of customs and the mentality of the
people. The armed intervention has introduced more radical and rapid changes

which directly affect the national conscience, sweeping away tribalism,
is replaced by a feeling of identity, linked with acceptance of belonging to

a broader coununity, to a consideration of the solidarity that goes beyond
the patrimonial name and the shared livestock. It was clear to the POLISARIO
Front that a people embarking on a struggle for 8
its cohesion, eliminate the obstacles that traditionally weaken it and elim-
inate the old causes of division if it wanted to haVe any hope of victory.

Previously, no nor-ml social intercourse was possible without "identifying"
the speaker: his tribe, his family, his social level, relations of alliance
or hostility were indispensable elements in a conversation. Now one does not
hear the name of any tribe in the camps, through a practice that has “eradi-
cated fro: the language and the mentality the reference to caste.

Measures such as avoiding grouping refugees of the same tribe in the same
camp, the dissemination of the idea that without unity there is no victory

and the action of the POLISARIO Front as the first national central power
have succeeded in unifying the various tribal states. That is an original
experience, unique in the whole region mug the Moorish calamities.
The integration of Social Groups

The effort to create a national ieentity has not been limited to eliminating
the tribal structure as: the basis of social organization; ide010gical and
cultural work is also i-eing carried out which is integrating traditionally
neglected social strata, either for reasons 01' age, sex or status. Slavery
has been abolished and the former slaves or their descendants participate
as members with full rights in social and military life. The elders are
extremely respected and retain the authority to adjudicate Judicial or
religious matters, but at the same time they are being encouraged to go to
literacy schools, by campaigns of po itical explanation combating the tend-
ency to reJect learning at that age, showing the importance of literacy for
a people in arms. .‘En connected wi th Spanish colonialism, prosperous merch-
ants in other times with a traditional mentality have been attracted to the
struggle of the FOLISARIO Front so that today former members of the Menu
are engaged in military training and carry out political activities with a
degree of revolutionary maturity. Social contradictions and private inter-
ests have disappeav ed in the face of the common idea of achieving national
independence .

It is perhaps among the womer. where the transformations are most noticeable
because the situation they started from was also the most backward. The
policy of the POL] SARiO Front with regard to the participation of women in
the struggle has consisted in gradually integrating them in the tasks of

the revolution as the struggle itself creates the conditions for a partici-
pation because "the liberation of women is their own task." Among the items
in the from. program is the achievement of all. the political and social rights
of women, their access to all fields, stressing above all the educational

aspect: .

The women assume all the tasks and constitute the fundamental basis of
organization in the camps. They head the administrative committees, the
crafts schools, they receive military training, comprise a high percentage
of the members of the People's Liberation Army, both in the front lines as
well as in support tasks. 'ihere are many women political cadres; they have
their own organization, the Union of Women, charged with the political edu-
cation of Saharan women. Coeducation is a fact in all schools; the literacy
campaigns are especially intensive for the women and the last months of
pregnancy are used to learn a trade in the crafts schools. Child care has
been soeialized so that women can rake mtemity and work compatible. The
age-old rules on arranged marriage and the dowry that accompanied it have
been prohibited; the cell to which the prospective bride belongs being the
guarantor of her free choice of a husband.

Education
When Spain left the Sahara, 98 percent of the population was illiterate;

there were few schools and the number of persons with higher education was
limited to one doctor, half a dozen teachers and a few technical engineers.
The majority of the Saharan population did not have the opportunity to
attend any educational institution. in 19% the first primary school
classes were organized but by 1958 only 23 native students had graduated
and in 1972 the figure was 2,600 graduates. The first secondary school
institutes did not open until 1969.

The deculturizat‘.on or the native population was a conscious policy 01‘ the
Spanish Government until recent years when the interest in extracting phos—
phates required having sufﬁciently skilled people.

The knowledge of Spanish reality was not transmitted by the school but by
the imposition of colonial power, which not only did not promote the assim-
ilation or its own culture but destroyed the cultural traditions of a people,
who in 1912 had a library of more than 5,000 historic manuscripts, for cer-
tain, destroyed by the French in legendary Shara.

At the present time, all children up to 16 years of age are schooled; illit-
eracy has disappeared in the camps and several thousand youths are engaged
in university studies in friendly countries, although none yet in Spain
despite the fact that the second language taught in school is Spanish.

In the course of the phase of the POLISARIO Front, understood as the libera-
tion consent that directs the affairs of the state, national institutions
were set into operation, among them the Ministry of Education, which gen-
eralized an overall education plan the basic strategy of which is to put an
end to illiteracy and to provide the whole population with cultural tools.
The program embraces the day-care and preschool stage, guaranteed in each
daira by the day-care committee. Every morning this coamittee distributes
milk among the tents and gathers the children to be transported to the day-
care center, where they are taken care of throughout the day.

School education properly speaking is conducted in board: '1 schools with a
capacity of several thousand students between 6 and 16 years of age. In the
first stage, basic reading, writing, mathematics, history and geography are
taught; beginning with the third grade they begin to learn Spanish. The
texts are prepared by the Ministry of Education, and take into account to a
great extent the present situation of struggle. The teachers are recruited
from among youths with a secondary school education, who in some cases have
received diplomas from Spanish teachers schools. All school work is con-
ducted in terms of raising political awareness and the cultural level. All
learn the same language, the same way of analyzing. Another basic aspect is
the education in internationalism. The children know about the struggles of
other people: and where they coincide with the struggle of the Saharan people.
Despite the deficiencies and lack of basic elements, the organization of the
boarding schools, based on the participation and self-responsibility of the
students, is exemplary. The teachers program school activities together;
the students have their own representatives, and the keen awareness that
they are building a country makes it possible to surmount the many problems
that present themselves every day.

96
Educated People, Victorious People

31 Can, the secretary of the POLISARIO Front killed in action some years
ago, posed the need to put an end to illiteracy and ignorance, to build a
culture emanating from the people that would have as its obJective trans-
formation of the current situation. From the beginning, the POLISARIO Front
paid great attention to culture and the health care of the nomadic population
along with their integration in the struggle for national construction; and
mrthermore, gathered from the various congresses the idea of strengthening
the links between the armed revolution and the cultural revolution as well

as the idea of struggling against the vestiges of a backward ideology.

The literacy campaign has been undertaken in line with this idea, beginning
with many political cadres who had a high level 01' militancy but did not
know how to read or write. It was precisely the argtment that they would
work much better if they could read the military communiques, the mnii‘estos
of the Political Bureau, etc. that provided the incentive for literacy in
that sector. For months, at meetings and gatherings at the cell and daira
levels, it was explained that literacy was also a weapon against the enemy
and a tool of liberation as mndamental as the rifle. The result, among
others, was that the women, who represent the great majority of the rank-and-
i‘ile have a high political level, a sufficient knowledge of general cultural
and great maturity in the affairs of national administration.

At the military level, a special "department of literacy of the political
comic:-.ariat of the People's Liberation Army" insures teaching at all fronts
and at the rear-guard bases. in the military instruction centers, geography
or history classes are alternated with target practice so that all fighters
learn how to read and write.

lhe Traditions

Ideological wor‘r. is a constant in the daily life of the desert; even customs
and folklore have been adapted to the new requirements. Popular songs,
dancing or the theater occupy an important place in the struggle for libera-
tion.

Song is a means of gaining awareness, of mobilization and it played a role
of primary importance at the beginning of the revolution. Rooted in tra-
ditions, popular songs with didactic and militant content are like an oral
newspaper in the camps of the liberated territories and in the occupied
cities. They tell of the victories, attack the enemy, disseminate watch-
words. A popular song comi‘. tee has been created in each wilaya, in each
daira, whose task it is to compose the words to songs about the most sig-
nificant events, so that song is transformed into the collective expression
of a people, who sing basically at night, at meetings, presenting a very
beautiful sight.
Ideologv

When one asks a POLISARIO leader if the F‘ront's ideological positions are
Mirxist, hoist or Islamic, he begins to laugh and replies that its ideology
is Saharan. Behind this phrase, there is great pragmatism, a strong rejec-
tion of dogmatism, an analysis strictly based on practice, which leads them
to reject any alinement with any of the world blocs.

Nevertheless, both the program texts and concrete practice indicate that the
POLISARIO mm. pursues progressive political principles. The dialectical
nature of its analysis, the capacity for adapting to the reality of each
moment in order at the same time to overcome it, the insistence on the trans-
formation and change of the existing social structures are elements proper
to a political concept inspired in scientific socialism.

The constitution approved in February 1976 contains very clear doctrinal
aspects in this regard. It declares that the Saharan people opt for the
policy of nonalinement, have the full conviction of the militant solidarity
of the peoples of the world to impose a Just and equitable world order. The
achievement of socialism and the application of social Justice are one of

the objectives of the state. National property belongs to the people;
private property is guaranteed as long as it does not constitute exploitation.

Among the social benefits envisaged is the fair distribution of national
resources and the elimination of all exploitation, the guarantee of housing,
compulsory, free education at all levels, health care and concern for the
family as the basic nucleus of all society.

The revolutionary process has succeeded in uniting the armed struggle and
popular mobilization in one cluster--national independence--of which they
are indissoluble elements. The armed struggle is not the only offensive of
the Saharan people inasmuch as mobilization exists at all levels.

Political education, the participation of everyone in the tasks and in the
decisions, both in the dairas and in the army units, are establishing a deep
demoratic conviction among the population. The fact that the camps are also
the field for struggle and that the front is not only military but also a
cultural and political front, permit a close symbiosis between the concepts
of literation struggle and political revolution.

A new society is developing that rejects t'ribalism but reuses the gains of
a centuries-old tradition: resistance, the ability for rapid movement, the
solidarity inherent in nomadic life are factors of identity already existing
among the population, which the leadership of the POLISARIO Front has con-
verted into elements of national awareness.

Concurrent with this anti-imperialist and anticolonialist war, a revolutionary

transfomation of the power structures is being carried out; the feeling of
national unity over tribalisln is being formalized, closely lirJted with

98
principles of political, economic and social organization of a socialist
nature; and the organizational practice gives the masses a system that
prevents "leaderism" because they themselve.. control decisions from the
bottom and become the motive force for change.

As Ahmed-Baba Miske, POLISARIO leader, said, "the extraordinary success is
to have invented modern desert guerrilla warfare, to have almost destroyed
one of the largest military and industrial powers in the world, practically
without foreign aid, to have transformed the decision of a handful of mili~
tants into national unity." And he adds with a certain touch of stock sagas-
i.ty:"1-:xp1ain well to those who do not know us that we like the impossible."

'lhe impossible is becoming an undeniable reality. 'rlhat is temed "amed
bands" in Western foreign ministries are today an organized people, possess—
ing a state apparatus determined that there will be no peace or stahili ty in
the region until complete independence is recognized. One of the potentially
richest people in Africa, situated ir. a strategic position. A people who in
5 years of war have overcome an anachronistic and medieval social system, and
are preparing to become a progressive, democratic and mdern nation.

3711
cm: lihlo END