FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10254
13 January 1982

Near East/North Africa Report

(FOUO 2/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers. periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
nation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the U.S. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500020023-9

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

- NEAR EAST/NORTH AFRICA REPORT
(rouo 2/82)

Coureurs

I NTER-ARAB AFFAIRS

Countries Try To Retain More Scientists, Technologists
(AL-HATAN AL—‘ARABI, 23-29 Oct 61)

PBIGLAN GULF AFFAIRS

Need for Strategic Consensus anhasized
(Ahmad Hafez; AL-HATAN AL-'ARABI, 17 Sep 81)

‘ ALGERIA

Agreements on Financial Cooperation Signed
(MARCHES TROPICAUX Er EDITERRANEENS, 20 Nov 81)

ID ROCCO

Expansion Project H111 Increase Mohammedia Capabilities
- (MARCHES TROPICAUX ET MBDITERRANEENS, 23 Oct 81)

QATAR

Qatar 10 Yours M‘tcr independence
(AL-HATAN AL-‘ARABI, h-io Sep 81)

TUNISIA

Sixth Plan Will Exploit Pull Potential of Jendouba
(MARCHES TROPICAUX ET MEDITERRANEEIIS, 23 Oct 81)

- a - [III - I
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007I02109: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500020023-9
COUNTRIES TRY TO RE?AIH MORE SCIENTISTS, TECHNOLOGISTS
Paris AL-HATAN AL—‘ARABl in Arabic No 245, 23-29 Oct 81 pp 66-67

(Article: "Reverse Arab Technology Transfer: 2,000 Arab Specialists Emigrate
Annually")

[Text] The role of education in economic development is an important Subject
which scholars have not treated with the requisite study and debate until nOw.
Husaddiq Jamil al-Habih departs free the classical theoretical framework in which
the subject has been treated on numerous occasiOns. in order to reach a solution
through a comprehensive field study which sheds light on the distinct importance
of the human element in economic and social development on one hand, and the im-
portance of education and training in creating a productive person on the other.

The book AL—TA'LIM HA AL—TANMIYAB AL—IQTISADIYAH [EDUCATION AND ECONOMIC DEVELOP-
MENT], written by Musaddiq Jamil al-Habib (published by the Ministry of Education
and Information, Baghdad, 238 pp), contains four parts which differ in importance:
The Human Element and Economic Development; Econoaics of Education; The System of
Education in Iraq and the Development of Its Agencies and Institutions After 1968;
and On Educational Planning. However, they come together at one point: The con-
fident and firm objective solution to a problem which is almost one of the most
important educational-and even social-problems in the Arab homeland, that is,
that education has a distinct role in determining the size and quality of human
resource requirements, people who are qualified and capable of grasping the neces-
sities of development. assuming their missions and obligations, and anchoring the
f0undations of moral and behavioral values for them. This makes the educational
system a vital factor in devoloping the society and establishing its authority.

From this book we have selected an important discussion which deals with a sub-
ject both old and new: The emigration of Arab brainpower and the direct and in-
direct effects of this economic loss on the economy and the cOurse of development.
The author states:

The emigration of brainpower is also called the "emigration or absorption of
capable people." Some also call it the "emigration of intellect or qualified
personnel," or "brain drain," or "dissipation of brainpower or expertise," while
others prefer to call it "reverse technology transfer," in view of the fact that
the hrainpower and abilities which are emigrating from emerging countries form
the broad fundamental base for the development and progress of science and tech-
nology in the advanced countries due to the high ratio they represent of the

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL [ESE ()Nl."

overall total of scientists and researchers. This matter can be understood on

the basis of the fact that it is not the advanced nations alone which are the
source of technology...on the contrary, there is always a reverse transfer of
technology and sciences. It occurs through emigration of the scientists, re—
searchers, technical cadres, and skilled work force from the developing countries
to the advanced countries. Hence comes the use of this expression, "reverse tech-
nology transfer," to confirm the connection and parallelism between the measures
and controls associated with "technology transfer" from the advanced countries to
the developing countries and those associated with the emigration of brainpower
from developing to advanced countries.

Studies in this field indicate that more than a third of the Americans who win
the Nobel prize in the sciences, and more than a sixth of the members of the
American academies of science. are immigrants who settled in the United States
after they studied outside the United States.

in this regard, another study indicates that investing the knowledge, experience
and talent of one immigrant scirntist returns financial benefit to the American
economy estimated at $214,000.

A person who holds a doctorate in the sciences is the equivalent of fixed capital
in the amount of $600,000.

The current return for a person who holds a doctorate in the sciences are 10 times
greater than its cost.

The problem of students studying abroad forms the main channel for the drain of
brainpower and capable people. whether through the students failing to return to
their countries after completing their studies, or emigrating once again after
returning to their countries.

Studies in this field have indicated that, during the period 1961-1972, the ad-
vanced capitalist nations gathered in no less than 300,000 experienced and spe-
cialized immigrants. The United States of America, Canada, and the United King-
dom acquired the greater part of them: The total immigrants to these three coun-
tries was about 230,829. of whom 90,190 were in the United States, 56,598 were in
Canada, and 84,040 were in the United Kingdom. of the capable people emigrating
to the United States, 59 percent were from developing countries. while the ratio
in Canada and the United Kingdom amounted to 26 percent and 22 percent, respec-
tively.

Also the phenomenon of human resources continuously pouring out of developing
countries into advanced countries becomes increasingly serious day after day as
an operation very destructive to all of the efforts aimed at stimulating rapid
technological growth and development. This makes the scientific, technological,
and cultural gulf between the emerging and developed countries deeper and wider.

In this manner, losses occurred at all economic, social, and cultural levels.

Through loss of the human element in this field, the problems of development
were aggravated. The losses were compounded more and more as a result of the
great deficit which was created in scientific and technological abilities (theo-
retical and applied), which greatly limits and narrows the absorptive capacity

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
of the economy in general. The negative economic results of this process take
concrete form in the losses which the developing country suffers due to losing
ceoable people when they emigrate. losses which eventually result in benefits to
the country to which these capable people immigrate.

A United Nations study indicates that the net income gained by the United States
of America, Canada, and England resulting from the participation of qualified
immigrants in their tctal activity during the period 1961-1972 exceeded $45 bil-
lion. of which $30 billion was for the United States of America and $10 billion
was for Canada, while England obtained 56 billion.

Tables 15 and .6 [not available] show the effect of qualified people emigrating
from the developing countries to the United States on the net income of both,
distributed according to specialty. These negative economic results also take
form in the expenses borne by the developing country in teaching, training, and
qualifying the emigrants, expenditures which will profit the country to which
these qualified people immigrate in an amount which equals or surpasses the ex—
penditures. They enter the sphere of work and production at no cost.

The estimated investment or capital value of the brainpower emigrating from the
emerging countries to the United States, Canada, and the United Kingdom amounted
to about $50.9 billion, of which about $23 billion was the estimated investment
value of the brainpower emigrating from Asia alone, especially India and the Mid—

dle Eastern countries.

The loss is clearly manifest when we learn that the total these three nations
offered to the developing nations as official assistance in the period 1961-1972
did not exceed even $66.3 billion.

The total foreign debt accruing to the emerging countries at the end of 1972
amounted to $89,068,000, at a time when the investment value of the emigrating
brainpowcr approached 30 percent of the amount of these debts. Tables 17 and 18
show this [not available].

The loss which accrues to the developing countries by way of penalty for the
emigration of their qualified people is not limited to these countries' bearing
the cost of training qualified personnel without benefiting from them, but also
lies in depriving them of all the new added value in all branches of economic
activity which these cadres add in the countries to which they immigrate.

These two aspects of the loss become benefits gained with respect to the coun-
tries which receive the cadres, in addition to the enormous revenues these coun-
tries reap through imposing income taxes on the immigrants. In 1972 alone these
profits amounted to about $950 million each for the United States of America,
Canada, and the United Kingdom.

Thls is in addition to the losses realized thrOugh damage to the educational sys-
tems in the developing countries on account of their reduced stock of these quali-
fied people. This situation weakens their ability to mobilize and prepare the
manpower necessary to establish development, taking into consideration the fact
that the qualified emigrants are the ELITE which operates as an instrument to
educate and metivate future generations. The same effect is created with respect

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

to health agencies; it contributes to deterioration of the health situation, which
puts these agencies among the tanks of the developing countries.

Statistics indicate that there are 140,000 physicians working in countries which
are not their countries of origin, concentrated in the United States, England,
Canada, and Federal Germany, in that order. Another statistic indicates that
among the 53,000 emigres to the United States in the 1961-1970 period, 14,540
were specialized physicians and surgeons, that is, 27 percent.

The loss also becomes especially grievous when we learn that the cost of training
one scientist in the Arab countries, for example, is estimated at $20,000. The
total expense which is borne by the Arab economy for educating and training stu-
dents abroad is about $240,000,000.

This phenomenon, which has the disastrous effects presented above, is founded in
a group of factors which the emerging countries should deal with in a radical and
rapid manner in order to avoid the negative effects of the phenomenon on develop-
ing economies. These factors can be classified as follows:

1. Factors which push toward emigration (repelling factors):

These factors are associated with local conditions in the countries of emigration,
characterized by cultural and social backwardness. which are usually caused by de-
fective planning and poor utilization of qualified people. One such factor is

the absence of a suitable scientific atmosphere, represented by a shortage of
places for scientific work, apparatus necessary for research, and room for activ—
ity in the rare specialities. In addition, there is a lack of objective standards
for qualified scientists on an official level, and low salaries, not to mention
the fear of political repression and military service, or a weak commitment on the
family and ethnic/national levels, arising from the breakdown of values and the
spread of a spirit of hopelessness and social and cultural alienation.

2. Factors which attract emigration:

These factors are associated with conditions in the countries of immigration, such
as an advanced scientific, social, and cultural climate, characterized by exten-

sive scientific and academic opportunities; and progressive and more free and open
social and official confederations, relationships, and institutions. In addition,

there is political stability and a higher level of pay.

One of the studies indicated that about 2,000 Arabs emigrate annually as a result
of the attractive foreign factors, while 3,000 to 5,000 Arabs emigrate annually

as a result of the internal repelling factors. This phenomenon, through its
numerous causes, makes it incumbent on the developing countries to pay serious
attention to dealing with the causes by adopting a series of organizational steps
and measures, the nature of which is to stimulate and develop the qualified peo-
-1e and bind them to the nation, in addition to the principal treatment for this
phenomenon, which is a comprehensive social and economic revolution in development

through planning;

h

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The organizational measures can take the form of social facilities and the im-
provement of the standard of living of the cadres. In addition, the scientific
atmosphere and opportunities which afford continuous education to qualified peo-
ple should be provided, along with constant practical application, opening the
arena for then to pursue their national work by linking it to the requirements
and needs of development. In addition, patronage of science should be expanded

and concentrated, and the founding of scientific societies and academies should
be given free rein.

COPYRIGHT: 1981 Al—Hatan A1-'Arabi

9605
C80: 4404/118

5

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NEED FOR STRATEGIC CONSENSUS EHPHASIZED

A

Paris AL-HATAN AL-‘ARABI in Arabic No 239. 17 Sep 81 pp 41-42
{Article by Ahmad Hafez: “Clear Economic Steps Toward Strategic Consensus")

[Text] The holding of the conference of foreign ministers of the Gulf Cooperation
Council [ccc] coincided with two extremely important developments: The first was

the Gulf of Sidra incident, and the second, the Aden—Libyan-Ethiopian alliance. This
was in addition to new developments in the Iranian situation. However, these "shocks"
did not deter the Gulf ministers from full agreement on all the agenda items, including
the recent unforseen developments.

The basic purpose of the GCC foreign ministers' meeting on 31 August in Ta'if was

to study the draft of the economic agreement between the six Arab Gulf states: Saudi
Arabia. the UAE, Kuwait, Qatar. Bahrain and the Sultanate of Oman. This agreement.
after its adoption by the heads of the council nations at their 3 November meeting

in Riyadh, represents a basic and practical step toward economic integration among
the Arab Gulf states. however, the agenda included some other fundamental issues,
highlighted by developments in the Middle East crisis. in light of the Saudi peace
plan.

However, no sooner had the Gulf states' foreign ministers arrived in Ta'if than the
news reports followed. bearing in their wake new developments that cast their shadow
over the Gulf region especially. and the Arab World in general.

-Libya, South Yemen and Ethiopia signed a joint military security treaty. bearing
the name of "treaty of friendship and cooperation.“

—The bloody storm in Iran after the deaths of its president and prime minister.

-The American air attack on the Libyan Gulf of SIDRA, and the dawning of two Libyan
aircraft.

It was easy for a political observer, watching the events of the Ta'if conference

from close up, to see the effects of these incidents, which occurred on the eve of

the conference or rather. as it was being convened. on the activities of its members,
their contacts and deliberations both within and outside the conference rooms, whether
in bilateral contacts and asides among the foreign ministers. or between the ministers
themselves and their countries, in order to ascertain the views of the political
leaderships regarding what had occurred. At the same time, Saudi Foreign Minister

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONIYI'

PrInCe Sa'ud nl-Faysnl, the host for the conference. and 'Abdullah Bisharah. the

GCC's secretary general, were making intense efforts to contact the delegation members,
and to sound out the views of each minister separately. regarding the proposed agenda,
and as to whether there was a need to add new items, as a result of the new develop-
ments.

The Soviet Shadow

AL-HATAN AL—‘ARABI learned from Gulf sources legitimately in the conference that

the friendship and cooperation treaty between Libya, Aden and Ethiopia. as well as
the American attack against the Gulf of Sidra, were debated in detail at the con-
ference's sessions. and that Oman was not the only one eager to debate the new treaty
which constitutes a direct danger to it. because its fierce neighbor Aden is a party
to it. The other Gulf states shared Oman's view, on the basis that the treaty might
drag the Gulf states into foreign counter-alliances which would increase the tension.
There is a principle here. which the alliance crystallized. It is an alliance con-
necting an African Arab state (Libya) with another on the Arabian Penninsula (South
Yemen) and a third Marxist. non-Arab state (Ethiopia). This is in addition to these
three nations' well-known connection with the Soviet orbit.

Hhcn Prince Sa'ud al-Faysal was asked whether the conference had discussed that treaty
in details. along with the ramifications which will flow from it. he said: "He did
discuss this matter in the meetings, depite the fact that we have not yet received

the full details of the agreement between Libya. Ethiopia and South Yemen. The only
details we have are what the press has published." Sa'ud al-Faysal added: "However.
what some of the newspapers have reported, and the remarks of some of the officials

of the nations concerned, raise many questions and suspicions, not only within the
context of matters which the Gulf nations are specifically concerned with, but also
withinthe framework of the Arab group in general. in terms of the mutual defense
agreement." The Saudi minister did not hide his uneasiness over the establishment

of a new axis upon the Arabian Penninsula. In this regard, he said: "This matter
disturbs us, and I imagine that it will disturb the other Arab nations. 1 have requested
clarifications from the Arab nations concerned. and we are waiting for them"

This position or "Saudi interpretation" of the new Libyan-South Yemeni-Ethiopian

alliance Supported the Omani thrust within the GCC. which Musqat has repeatedly expressed
at Council meetings. This position concentrates on the need for joint Gulf confronta-
tionv-which includes all the council nations—-to put an end to Soviet aspirations

in the Gulf region. using South Yemen as a springboard. An Omani official told AL-
HATAN AL-'ARABI that this means that the goals of the new tripartite alliance are

clear and not subject to interpretation. "It suffices for us to raise the question:

th the treaty. when is it for and whom is it against? This once again clarifies

Llw Omani pusitlon. which we hrve emphasized repeatedly.”

The Coltnel's Problems

One of the strange coincidents was that the Gulf debate over the new security treaty
was combined with another debate over the incident that occurred in the Gulf of Sidra,
aimed at an Arab state which happens to be Libya. 'Abdullah Bisharah finally came
out of one of the conference's sessions to announce its condemnation of the American
raid. lb then went on. in a conversation about Iran, to express its "regrest" over
what was occurring in Teheran. The conference's final communique mentioned that

the Gulf states' foreign ministers had discussed the conflict between Iraq and Iran,

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
and the resulting threat to the security and stability of the entire region. The
conference expressed "its hope that the Islamic mediation efforts, stemming from

the Islamic summit conference, would be crowned with success.“ It also emphasized

its support [or these efforts and its readiness to participate in achieving its success.

Fahd's Plan

let us return to the basic issues which were on the conference agenda, headed by

the developments in the Middle East situation and the draft economic agreement among
the council nations. Regarding the Saudi peace plan, there was a consensus to consider
it a springboard for any discussion of a just and comprehensive solution to the Arab-
lsraeli conflict. In this regard, the final communique included a paragraph which
reported that the council "has reviewed the Palestinian case from all aspects and
principles, including Prince Fahd Ibn 'Abd al-‘Aziz's statement regarding the just

and comprehensive solution to the problem. It has also reviewed the positive responses
to it on the Arab and international levels. In view of the support that these prin-
ciples have received from the member nations, the council decided to request that

it be placed on the next Arab summit conference agenda, for the purpose of crystalliz-
ing an unified Arab position regarding this issue.

Economic Integration

Hith regard to the second pivotal case, i.e., the draft economic agreement. which

a previous conference of Gulf states' finance ministers had discussed, and which

was submitted to the foreign ministers to put the final touches on it, preparatory

to submitting it to the next Arab Gulf summit conference, the conference has finished

discussing it, and therefore, it is in its final form awaiting summit decision. This

agreement, in its comprehensive form, achieves broad steps toward economic Integration
among the Gulf states. It is comprised of seven points:

—Commerciai cooperation among the six states, and means to facilitate it, such as
permitting any citizen to pursue commercial activity in any Gulf state, as if he
were one of its citizens.

—Freedom of movement of Gulf citizens on a personal identification card, and giving
them complete freedom to own real estate and businesses without restrictions.

-Indusrriai coordination. including the building of joint industries between these
states and others, which are complementary to each other, especially as regards oil.
petrochemical and oil-refining industries.

—Financial, currency and banking operations and the ways to unify them.

-Problems of tlm transportation and communications sectors, and coordination between
t hem.

-Jolnt techniCaI training to prepare the generation of workers and professionals
whom the Gulf states need to implement their growth plans.

-Unificntion of the regulations in effect in the economic field among the six nations.

U

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

It was stated in the conference's final connmnique that "in compliance with the deci—
sions of the first summit conference of the Gulf Cooperation Council, held in Abu
Dhabi, and in harmony with the economic working paper which was agreed to by their
majesties. representing the desires of the people of the region to eliminate the
economic obstacles between the council nations, and to ensure the principle of equality
among all citizens, the council has approved the draft economic agreement and has
decided to submit it to their majesties at their next cor:erencein Riyadh for approval."

Unified Strategy

Among the other important matters, discussed by the conference. was the debate over
drawing up an unified oil strategy. in order to face up to future oil conferences.
Prince Sa' ud al-Faysal clarified the discussion over this issue by saying that the
economic agreement includes many elements with regard to economic cooperation in
its various fields. including the oil sector.

One of the other issues that Sa'ud al-Faysal concentrated on, in his press conference
immediately following the conclusion of the conference's sessions. was the status

of the ace in the region. He stressed that this council does not constitute a military
or tactical axis against anyone, but is an assembly that does not only serve the
nations of the region alone. but also serves the Arab and Islamic issues as well.

It has a positive and practical return in terms of the stability of the Gulf region.
The council's goals are clearly evident in its charter and in the stats-ants it has

issued on numerous occasions.

In this sense, some Gulf officials are inclined to consider the GCC as a model for
Arab solidarity. which the Arab East and the Arab West are lacking at this fateful

stage.

COPYRIGHT: 1981 AL-HATAN AL-‘ARABI

7005
C50: 4404/26

9

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
AGREEMENTS OR FINANCIAL COOPERATION SIGNED
Paris MARCHES TROPICAUX ET HEDITERRANEENS in French No 1880, 20 Nov 81 pp 2936-2937

[Text] On 12 November, the Algerian ambassador to Belgium and the European commis-
sioner in charge of cooperation and development signed three financing agreements
for which the 26 April 1976 agreement provided in Brussels. This nonreimbursable aid
totaling 8.9 million BCUs. will be used in three sectors: the training of teachers.
the training of farm managers, and the expansion of two training centers for ocean
fishermen in Annaba and Beni-Saf.

This agreement serves to complete the comitment of all of the comunity funds total—
ing some 44 million BCUs, apart from three farm projects which still remain to be
finished: the building of a raisin processing plant and also the artificial insemi-
nation and the raising of cattle.

To be specific, this financial cooperation agreement is designed to promote an in-
crease in the Algerian scientific potential and the training of teachers on the higher
educational level through the allocation of 24 scholarships for the training in Europe
of researchers and the supply of scientific equipment. The BBC will also assist with
the ONRS [National Office for Scientific Research] research centers given specific re-
sponsibility for the energy. farming anJ housing sectors.

The goal of the project establishes this research effort as a basic element in the pro-
cess of Algerian economic and social development. The BBC officials were reminded of
the intention to staff this research effort with Algeriana. to assimilate and inte-
grate it in development and thus to assure that it is planned.

The daily newspaper EL MOUDJAHID notes in a dispatch from Houloud Atcheba that the
total number of Algerian researchers in all sectors of activity is about 2,400, more
than half of them coming under the Jurisdiction of the ONRS, which operates on an
annual budget estimated at nearly 2 billion diners, of which three fourths are allo-
cated for industrial research, including payment for the services of foreign design
bureaus.

Still within this field, the program thus completed will contribute to the achieve-
ment of research goals designed to ensure mastery of nuclear technology, a better ap-
proach to solar energy studies and the development and processing of hydrocarbon
fuels. It should also be mentioned that of the 20,000 Algerian students taking cour-
ses abroad, 15,000 are currently studying in EEC nations.

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLV

With these figures and the priorities set forth within the framework of the 1980-
1984 5-year plan. the main goal of this agreement is twofold:

--To develop scientific research with a view to acquiring and adapting foreign tech—
nologies; and

-—To satisfy the need for trained high-level personnel both in terms of quality and
quantity. The imminent assignment of young Algerian graduates to training establish-

ability of teaching personnel in the technical and scientific branches. And by this
token. the contribution of the European Community will benefit the Nuclear Sciences
and Technology Center (CSTN), the Agronomic Studies and Research Center (CERAG), the
National Center for Research on Arid Zones (CNRZA), the University Center for Re-
search. Studies and Implementation (CURER) and the Solar Energy Station (535).

The second agreement pertains to the training of agricultural managers who will be
called upon to head the 6,500 new operations, following the decision to reorganize
these sectors in such a way as to improve production. The Community contribution. in
the amount of 3.6 million ECUs in the form of nonreimbursable aid. will be used for
the training of the future "management officials" recruited from among the 2.700 ag-
ricultural engineers, in other words the total number in the five classes graduated
from the ITA [Institute of Agricultural Technology] in Moataganem. At the end of a

S~month training course, these engineers will be assigned to head production units.
The basic training which will be provided at El Khemis and Skikda will, in 2 years'

time. provide the Algerian Ministry of Agriculture with some 1,600 management offi—

cials. This broad farm training operation comes within the framework of the reorgani-
zation of the land areas in progress, which is designed to create profitable produc-

tion units of a size requiring the assignment of one manager, one accountant and one

farm supervisor. The whole of the project is consistent with the series of goals es-
tablished by the 5-year plan.

At the end of the month, Algeria and the BBC will take up the proposed new financial
protocol. involving about 151 million 3083. including 107 million in the form of 381
[European investment Bank] loans ani 44 million based on the Community budget esti-
mate, 28 million of it in the form of nonreimbursable aid.

This future protocol may be implemented in February or March of next year.
COPYRIGHT: Rene Moreux et Cie Paris 1981.

5157
C50: 4519/57

11

FOR OFVICIAL USE ONLY
EXPANSION PROJECT HILL INCREASE MOHAMMEDIA CAPABILITIES
Paris HARCHES TROPICAUX ET HEDITERRANEENS in French “0 1876, 23 Oct 81 p 2683
[Article: "Expansion Project for the Port of Hohammedia"]

[Texr] Because of the growth of Morocco's energy needs, considerable expansion
works have been undertaken for the port of Hohammedia, located about 25 km
northwest of Casablanca. Mohammedia today specializes in the unloading of oil
tankers arriving to supply the SAMIR (Moroccan-Italian Refining Corporation)
refinery, which has recently doubled its production capacity. At the present
time, the port of Hohammedia is equipped with sheltered stations which cannot
accommodate ships of tonnage greaterthan 10,000 tons, and with a sea-line
consisting of two 14-inch pipelines permitting tankers moored at buoys to be
unloaded under surge conditions not exceeding 3 meters. However, surge is
greater than 3 meters an average of 120 days per year, and varies from year to
year. As a result, SAHIR's supplies are disorganized, and costly demurrage fees
must be paid.

The expansion works for th. port were begun by King Hassan II on 7 July 1980
with the purpose of equipping the port with a 2,585-meter protective jetty

to reach the depths necessary for 150,000-ton tankers (depth at the pierhead
will be 30 meters of water at high tide, or 10 meters more than at Casablanca),
with six tanker stations for 10,000 to 150,000 ton ships, and with correspond-
ing superstructures (fitting out for the berths, pipelines for linkage to

SAMIR, deballasting, rinsing, and fire-fighting equipment). The protective
jetty will provide shelter for 1,600 meters of wharfs and 68.5 hectares of earth
platforms for non-tanker traffic, thus easing the strain on the port of
Casablanca.

The first phase includes the building of the protective jetty, the SOO-meter,
transverse breakwater, 500 meters of wharf and 275,000 square meters of earth
platforms. in a later phaae, and depending upon need, the length of the
transverse breakwater can be extended to 1,100 meters, that of the wharfs to
1,600 meters, and the area of the earth platforms to 410,000 square meters.

The estimated cost of the works is 600 million dirhams, including the fitting
out of the stations and the completion ofthe pipelines which will link the
port to SAMIR.

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USI-I ONLY

The port of Hohmnmedia specializes in oil tanker traffic and is to remain
Morocco's principal oil tanker port up to the year 2000. When modernized, it
will also be able to handle a certain amount of additional traffic, including
the following:

One million to 5 million tons per year of coal to fuel the thermal power sta-
tions of Mohammedia, Roches-Noires (a suburb of Casablanca), and others in the
country if consumption needs dictate. This option may be exercised in the
country's energy plan.

One million to-Z million tons of wheat, if a decision is made to import wheat
through Hohamnedia because of congestion in the port of Casablanca. Hohammedia
will in fact be able to accommodate grain ships of between 20,000 and 70,000
tons.

One million to 2 million tons of salt for export from the Mohammedis Salt Com-
pany, which has investments in excess of 70 million dirhams.

About 500,000 tons of weed which could be processed several years after the new
port facilities have been put into service.

The modernized port should become operational beginning in 1984.

.a m: u .
' -' "lloltam(1)-"’.’:9 '

'0‘

Key:

(1) Protective jetty

(2) Earth platform

(3) Wharf

(4) Station

(5) Turning circle

(6) Access dike to "C"
stations

 

 

COPYRIGHT: Rene Moreux et Cie Paris 1981.

9927
080: 4519/44

13
FOR OFFICIAL USP. ONLY
QATAR 10 YEARS AFTER INDEPENDENCE
Paris AL-HATAN AL-‘ARABI in Arabic No 238. 4-10 Sep 81 pp 59-61
[Article: "Qatar, Shining Years in the Course of Independence")

[Text] Ten years have past since Qatar's independence. What accomplishments and
projects have been achieved during this time?

This report will shed light on many aspects of the course of independence.

Since the start of independence on 3 September 1971. Qatar's political direction
has been clearly distinguished by profound views regarding various issues. It is
considered a model nation. whose influence in its Arab, Islamic and international
relations transcends its boundaries and its size.

Therefore, the celebration of the tenth anniversary of independence is an important
and historic occasion. especially since Qatar today occupies a significant place
among its fellow Arab nations and among all the nations of the world.

On the domestic political level, Qatar has pursued a conscious policy in support

of economic independence, and has concentrated on an ambitious plan aimed-~through
comprehensive growth—-at achieving economic and social stability. and directing material
and human energies to build self-sufficiency for the state. This policy. based on

the two firmly supported economic and social structures. has created a modern state,
moving forward with positive steps to further the just issues in the international
community.

In its progress toward modernization of the country and achieveing a complete renais-
sance. Qatar is following an ambitious policy to diversify sources of income and

to develop human resources. This will ensure conscious progress aimed at safeguarding
all the individual and regional characteristics and the original heritage.

1We Advisory Council was one of the tangible results of this domestic policy during

the past 10 years. One must stress its value and its cooperation with the government

on behalf of exerting maximum efforts in dealing with the country's affairs and debating
the state's general policy.

In the speech of the Emir of Qatar, Shaykh Khalifah Ibn Hamad A1 Thani. at the opening
of the ninth regular session of the Advisory Council on 1) November 1980, he said:

1h
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OI-‘FK'IAI. USE ONLY

“There is no doubt about our principles and values that guide our course within the
framework cf our domestic arena. since we rre following this course to achieve Qatar's
national goals. At the same time. we intend to prepare our country to be more capable
of assuming its component duties which are indivisible from the group of Gulf Arab
nations particularly, and from our Arab and Islamic Nation in general. by virtue

of the fact that it is a member of the international family."

Qatar‘s relations with its fellow Arab Gulf states are cordial. They are aimed at
complete cooperation and integration. and work toward cementing the pillars of stabil-
ity in the region and building mutual self—sufficiency on behalf of progress and
prosperity. along with a fervrent desire to keep the region away from world competi-
tions and international disputes.

From this point of departure. Qatar is anxious to participate in the various conferences.
forums. meetings and study and research circles that the people of the region sponsor.

it also pays a great deal of attention to coordination of Gulf activities and the
achieving of desired cooperation in the various fields of life. as well as consul-
tations o'er many important issues. believing in unity of purpose and one destiny.

The Emir of Qatar. Shaykh Khalifah lbn Hamad A1 Thani, participated with his brother
leaders of the Gulf Cooperation Council {GCC} nations in the first meeting held in
Abu Dhabi in May 1981. Immediately upon his return from the conference. he informed
the Council of Ministers of the results. declaring his complete agreement and full
support for the conference's decisions. considering them to be a major accomplishment
on the path to achieving the security that the people of the six Arab Gulf member
states have so long desired, and a positive step toward integration in all fields.

in order to achieve progress. prosperity. security and stability.

Qatar participated in the sixth conference of Arab Gulf states' information ministers.
held this year in the Sultanate of Oman. During the conference. agreement was reached
on the Qatari delegation's proposal to form a committee chaired by Qatar to draft

a strategy for Gulf media activities in the western nations. aimed at clarifying

the true picture of the Gulf people and at combatting the hostile campaigns and propa-
ganda against the Arab nations in general. and the Gulf states in particular.

This is in addition to the state's interest in inviting a number of the most important
prominent world personalities in the fields of the media. press. and culture to visit
the country and to learn about its social. intellectual and cultural renaissance.

As for the milieu of Arab relations. Qatar believes that Arab solidarity is the most
efective weapon in the fight to achieve victory and in the service of our pan-Arab
issues.

Based on its desire for solidarity of the Arab Nation, Qatar constantly strives to
reinforce mutual understanding among the Arab nations. and is desirous of continuing
Arab contacts in the service of all fateful issues and to strengthen the bonds of

mutual cooperation among the peoples of the Arab Nation. Therefore. when Saudi Arabia
announced its peace plan. Qatar declared its complete support for the program. including
its principles and conditions. all of which it considers a realistic. constructive

and positive step toward achieving a just. comprehensive peaceful settlement of the
Arab-Israeli dispute. The plan requires the establishment of an Arab consensus for

15
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
it, and the support ol tlw entire international community with respect to the need
for Israel's withdrawal from all the Arab territory that it Occupied by force of
arms in 1967, including Arab Jerusalem, and for recognition of the legitimate rights
of the Palestinian people. most of all their right to establish their independent
state. with Jerusalem as its capital.

Qatar condemned the Zionist attack against the Iraqi nuclear reactor. considering
it an attack against the entire Arab Nation, and demanded that the Arab Nation stand

together in the face of the plots aimed at its security.

Qatar has an established position with respect to deep-rooted support for the Pales-
tinian people. their just cause. and their struggle for freedom and independence
under the leadership of the PLO. It is a position which obligates the State to the
various resolutions of the Arab summit conferences. the Islamic conference and the
sixth summit conference of non-aligned nations. as well as tie UR charter which calls
for justice, desire for peace. the right to self-determination and national indepen-

dcnce.

Along with the reality of this firm policy. Qatar is desirous of achieving its politi-
cal initiative on the international level which calls on the international family

to stand up against Zionist obstinacy. and for the Securit; Council to adopt effective
measures to prevent Israel from continuing to expose the security and peace of the
world to danger, as a result of its non-compliance with international resolutions.

Qatar believes that the explosive power of the Islamic community will make it capable
of playing a progressive role to spread peace. the principles of justice and similar
moral values. It looks at the protection of the Islamic World's holy places and

the careful study of its main issues as a panuArab duty which must always be placed
in tln forefront.

In the past 10 years. Qatar has welcomed many leaders of the Islamic nations, 'Ulama',
religious leaders and delegations from the Islamic trganizations. It has also joined
the economic. technical and commercial cooperation agreement among the members of

the Islamic conference organization. and considers it an important element to bolster
Islamic solidarity and to open vast horizons for mutual activities among the member

nations.

At the beginning of the fifteenth century of the Negira. Qatar hosted the world con-
ference of the Snnna oi the Prophet. which issued a series of iuportant guidelines,
calling for the consolidation of the Sunna‘s place in Islamic legislation, and for
Muslim solidarity and cooperation in all endeavors.

Qatar's position regarding Soviet military intervention in Afghanistan is clear and
firm. It demands the withdrawal of the invading forces, and that the Afghani Muslim
people be allowed the right to self-determination and to choose the type of system
which they want and which they deem appropriate for them, based upon their beliefs
and values. It believes in their right to pursue their own national destiny on their
land.

A Balanced International Policy

In its international action. Qntar is striving to adhere to the path of the Islamic
Shari‘ah. to the charter of the United Nations, and the International Declaration
of Human Rights which recognizes the people's fundamental rights. led by

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

self-determination. freedom, independence and sovereignty over their natural resources,
as well as the right to exploit these resources by means appropriate to their growth
and their legitimate interests.

Because of the state's concern for the security and stability of the world, it demands
that the international community share fairly in solving the world's economic problems,
under the aegis of a new economic system. for which the group of developing and non-
aligned nations is calling. in order to put an end to the current unfair situation
which not only represents a deepening chasm between the growth level in the indus—
trialized nations and the level in the developing nations. but also goes beyond that

to what the International Bank's statistics indicate is the expectation of a rise

in the number of those threatened with death by starvation, at the end of this century,
to about one-quarter of the world's population.

Qatar believes that allocating a small percentage of not more than 5 percent of the
total spent on destructive armaments, which the large industrial nations vie to pro-
duce. could guarantee the salvation of millions of the poor and deprived.

Qatar is fulfilling its duty in this regard through the organizations concerned.

The statistics of the UN's Cooperation and Economic Development Organization confirm
that the developmental assistance given to developing nations by such states as Qatar.
Saudi Arabia, Kuwait and th UAE amounts. with respect to the national income of each

of these nations, to some 15 to 20 times the amount given by any Western industrialized
nation.

0n the domestic political level, Qatari political leadership employs an ambitious
plan which concentrates on diversification of sources of income, the development
of industrial potential and the modernization of laws to encourage investment. as
well as developing the Qatari citizen who is the back bone of all development and
growth.

From the point of departure of a policy aimed at putting all the assets of the petroleum
revolution at the service of similar development in the country. we find the leader

of Qatar's destiny expressing his vast dreams and goals at every occasion, spurring

on the movement of life toward modernization, while safeguarding the values and legacy
of our ancestors. making available every opportunity to learn, work and be successful

to the Qatari citizen. even as the great and original culture of the people continues.
He enables the sons of this generation to participate in the growth of this society.

as someone who believes in a better. more advanced modern life. In this regard.

Shaykh Khalifah Ibn Hamad A1 Thani, confirming the Qatari citizen's role in shaping

his country's culture. has said:

"The Qatari citizen is the means of all the progress that we desire and the object

of all we strive for. He shall do every thing possible to pursue the best ways to
enable our youth to learn more and to be of the most value to their country, so that
all of them can occupy their place of public responsibility, and support--consciously
and with enlightened experience--our zealous efforts toward the nation's progress

and prosperity."

The state's realization of the role of youth in developing the resources throughout
the coluntry is one of the three prominent goals in this year's budget. This is
to direct material and human energies to achieve as much self-sufficiency for the

17

FOR‘OFFMJAI.USE(MNLY
nation as possible. This of course is akin to development goals in the full sense
of the term. covering all aspects of economic and social activity. and the goals
of prosperity through achieving economic and social stability by implementing the
economic policy by scientific means based on realistic indicators.

The figures. alone. in the areas of training and education can give us a bright picture.
reflecting the extent of the inportnt accomplishments to prepare the human skills.

upon which the burden rests to achieve economic and social advancement for the Qatari
society.

Growth of Commercial Activity

with regard to encouraging commercial activity. the state has achieved the largest
part of this development in this field during the past 10 years. through planning
and programs. and preparing projects to ensure support for the national economy in
order to guarantee security and prosperity for a better nation.

in this regard, the state established several vital facilities. such as the Qatari
Monetary Board, the commercial records division in the Ministry of Economy and Trade.
and the Qatar Chamber of Commerce. to oversee connnrcial interests. It also established
a number of national banks. and introduced some state industries among the goods
exported abroad. It has prepared annual analyses concerning the state of the national
corporations' budgets. which include the development of the capital of these companies
and the percentage of the government's share in them.

It has also issued an annual publication including statements and statistics about
the insurance market in the state.

There is an overwhelming interest in the means of communications and transport. since

this sector is a fundamental pillar of the development movement and a principal artery
of economic and business life.

in the field of air transportation, a new passenger terminal was opened at Doha Inter-
national Airport. at a cost of 23 million Qatari riyals. Work is now underway in

the present airport terminal to convert it into a future terminal for departues and
transients. The cost will amount to 25 million Qatari riyals. In the same field.
Qatar established the Gulf Airlines Company, along with three other Gulf states.

the UAB. Bahrain and the Sultanate of Oman. It also established a civil aviation
academy, which graduated its first classes of young Qatari and Gulf men in 1980.

As for sea transportation. interest has been keen in developing. modernizing and
expanding ports and equipment. and in offering the best of services. Last year.
five new warehouses. each with a capacity of 60.000 cubic feet. were built.

Studies have been prepared to build a new station for integrated coverage of satellite
communications. so that direct contact can be achieved with states that do not work
with the Indian Ocean satellite. It is expected that the station will be ready in
1982. Moreover. the ground station for satellite communications currently operating
to transmit telephone. telegraph and television communications was opened in 1976.

and its capacity was increased in 1979 to 192 channels.

This year. work was completed on the first electronic telephone central. with capacity
of up to 30.000 lines.

18

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The Qatari Media

Throughout the phase of cultural change in the life of Qatar since the country's
independence in 1971, the Qatari media has followed an historic course. highlighted
by its enormous accomplishments and its cultural message.

The Qatari media's message, during the past 10 years, has sprung from solid ground.
and has concentrated on Islamic values and principles. expressed in all the tradi-
tions and heritage. as well as the modern life now spreading throughout the country.

On the international sphere, Qatari media presence is evident. It has a prominent
role in explaining the cultural steps in the Arab region and the Gulf Arab's accom-
plishments and aspirations, and plays a constructive role in all aspects of development.

Various media systems have been developed in recent years, and they have been ful-
filling their mission in the service of citizen and society.

Qatar has taken part in most of the media federations. meetings and conferences held
during the past 10 years. Its role at these meeting; was creative and positive.

The country has worked to achieve media and cultural coordination with most of the
Arab states. Media agreements have been concluded. so as to inform the Qatari citi-
zen about his brothers in the larger Nation. and so as to inform the Arab citizen
about the accomplishments and developments inside Qatar.

Thus it is clear that those 10 years. which have followed the historic day of inde-
pendence, have been distinguished by reconstruction. building, progress and growth,
in order to accompany the human development and to achieve all the desired hopes
for growth, progress and contemporary life. under the leadership of His Highness
the Emir of Qatar and his loyal crown prince.

COPYRIGHT: 1981 AL-RATAN AL-'ARABI

7005
C80: 4506/26

19
FOR 0F?ﬂ(]Al.USE¢JNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

TUNISIA

SIXTH PLAN WILL EXPLOIT FULL POTENTIAL OF .IENDOUBA

Paris MARCHES TROPICAUX ET HEDITERRANBENS in French No 1876, 23 Oct 81 pp 2682,
2683

[Art icle: "Northwest Region To Become a Development Pole"]

[Text] A constant and often reiterated concern of government policy has been
the gradual reduction, within the framework of the Sixth Plan. of disparity
among the regions. This goal was recalled by the prime minister during his 2-
day visit to the governorate of Jendouba, which is located in the northwest.
The governornte,3,102 square kilometers (or 2 percent of the area of Tunisia)
covers the western part of the Khroumirie Mountains and the western zone of the
Hedjerda Valley. It is bordered on the west by Algeria, on the east by the gov-
ernorate of Beja, on the north by the Mediterranean and on the south by the
governorates of Siliana and Le Kef. It has an estimated population of 330,000
(or 5.2 percent of the Tunisian population), 80 percent of whom live in rural
areas.

This region is mainly agricultural. Sixty percent of its area consists of fer—
tile plains watered by the Medjerda and which enjoy abundant rainfall. The
remainder is made up of mountainous chains and forests. Mining is the princi-
pal industrial activity, with lead and zinc deposits in Bou Aouane, Jebel
"allouf and Fe] Assine.

Lastly, the region presents great potential for tourism.

The government wants to bring this region out of its current underdevelopment
and turn it into a development pole through the exploitation of its potentiali-
ties.

in the agricultural sector, the region produces mainly grains (wheat and barley),
leguninous plants, fodder and beets. It is a cattle-raising region as well.

Within the time period covered by the Sixth Plan, irrigated areas will be ex—
tended to more than 30,000 hectares with the possibility of an additional 7,000-
hectare increase. Fodder production will allow around 25,000 milk cows to be
brought in to supply the region's fresh milk needs, and dairies will be set up
to produce milk byproducts which will be sent throughout the rest of Tunisia.

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The governorate's maritime frontage, 30 km, contains considerable ocean re-
sources (notably coral). nevelopment of fishing was hampered by the lack of a
fishing port, so a decision was made to modernize the port of Tabarka. The
second phase of the work is included in the Sixth Plan and is currently in the
study stage, which is abOut to be completed. The fishing port might be equipped
with a.conmercia1 wharf for the loading of cork produced in Khroumirie and the
Hagodos. A joint corporation, bringing together Tunisian, Lebanese and Saudi
capital. will be created at Tabarka to promote fishing development. An in-
vestment sum of 25 million dinars is projected.

Large Sugar Project

In the agro-food sector, the principal project is the Sugar Complex of Tunisia
which will be established at Ben Bechir and which is being promoted by the Minis-
try of National Economy. This sugar refinery is being built in hopes of making
the Bou Hertma irrigation project profitable and of further developing uses for
molasses. Economic studies have shown that beets are the only crop which can
maximize farm income in the region. Thus the project includes a sugar refinery
and a yeast plant. Its processing capacity will be 4,000 tons per day of beets
and 7.5 tons per day of yeast, or an annual production of 40,000 tons of white
sugar, 2,000 tons of dry yeast, 15,000 tons of dry pulp and 15,000 tons of
molasses. -

Its cost is estimated at 47 million dinars, 20.7 million of which will be domes-
tic Tunisian credits and 26.3 million foreign credits divided in the following
way: German state credit: 10.25 million dinars over 20 years, including a 5-year
grace period, at a rate of 4.5 percent, plus 0.25 percent commitment commission;
Italian state credit: 3.3 million dinars over 12.5 years including a 2-1/2-year
grace period, at a rate of 4 percent; supplier's credit: 12.75 million dinars,
over 134 months, including 44 months' grace, at a rate of 7.5 percent.

The time specified for the handing over of the sugar refinery is planned for the
end of June 1983 and for the yeast plant, 31 December 1983.

The sugar complex will be completed by a service company which will guarantee a
regularsupply of beets and will rent the specialized beet-harvesting equipment
to the farmers. The total value of its plant is estimated at 1.3 million dinars.
The company will also be able to supply farmers with seeds and input necessary
for beet growing. The complete project calls for an investment of 2.5 million

dinars.
Industry. Mines and Tourism

In the industrial sector, the Bank for the Economic Development of Tunisia (03)
In supporting two projects. The first is a match factory at an estimated cost
of 1.1 million dinars. The technical and financial file is being handled by
the National Tobacco Company (PNTA). The second project is a plant for the
manufacture of starters and alternators and represents an investment of 450,000
dinars with 80 percent participation by the 03. Production might be inte-
grated into that of foreign automobile corporations such as Renault, Peugeot,
etc. The Panofort Company. which is to manufacture standardized panels from

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ()Nl .\'

the Tnbarka Forest. has been created with the participation of the Tunisian
Banking Company (TBC). In all, projects being studied by the TBC represent a
1.9 million dinar investment. The Tunisian Building Materials Industries
Company (Sotimaco) also plans to complete three projects for an investment

of 3.5 million dinars. These include the establishment at Tabarka of factories
for the manufacture of biscuits and earthenware tiles. Finally, the National
Handicrafts Office has undertaken activities to develop available and often
abundant resources.

The mining industry is represented in the region by the Sidi Bou Aouane mine
(lead and zinc, principally zinc) and the Jebel Hallouf mine (lead) operated

by the Tunisian Mining Development Company (Sotemi) and by the Fej Hassine mine
(zinc) operated by the Mining and Metallurgical Company of Tunisia (SSHT). The
first two of these are experiencing difficulties, and their reserves are being
exhausted. The Sidi Bou Aouane mine is scheduled to be closed in 1986. The
Ministry of Economy would like to see a repair workshopestablished which would
be analogous to the Gabes mechanical engineering workshOp, and which could be—
come a maintenance and repair workshop for all the industries of the northwest.
Workers released by the closing of the mines could be employed in this project,
and existing facilities could be reused. Production from the Fej Hassine mine
should undergo considerable expansion during the course of the decade. and
should reach normal operational rate in 1983. The old gravimetry method are
processing plant was replaced in 1980 by a flotation plant with a 60,000 ton
annual capacity.

The region offers great possibilities in the realm of tourism. especially the
Tabarka and Ain Drahane regions, which (along with the Kerkenna Islands off

Sfax) have just been declared "prioritary" by presidential decree. The Tuni-
sian National Tourist Office will receive 12 million dinars in credits to carry
out a plan to allow for the creation of 7,000 beds. The creation of a marina with
mooring space for 50 boats for the port of Tabarka is also projected within the
framework of the expansion works, and the completion of a complex at the "Hill

of Ruins" between Ain Drabane and Tabarka. Financing for this latter project
might be requested of a Saudi consortium. A Tuniso-Qatari consortium may become
involved with the region's touristic development.

To allow the region to develop. the Sixth Plan has projected the completion of

a certain number of infrastructures. The Bou Hertma dam, construction of which
had been decided upon as far back as 1976 by President Bourgiba, will be com—
pleted at a cost of 50 million dinars, including installation expenses for the
irrigated peripheral areas. The first phase of the "Road of the Seven Sheikhat"
project. the Bcja-Ain Drahane section, will be completed at an investment of

6 million dinars. Competitive bidding will begin before the end of the year and
work could start around July 1982. Part of the financing will be guaranteed by
Kuwaiti investors. Construction of an airport at Tabarka will be studied by the
board of directors of the Saudi Development Bank.

COPYRIGHT: Rene Moreux et Cie Paris 1981

9927

cso: ism/1.1. m

22
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY