FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10372
5 March 1982

Near East/North Africa Report

(FOUO 9/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
JPRS publications contain informtion primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by ”RS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original intonation was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of ﬁle 0.8. Government.

COPYRIGlT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING WHERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF HIS PURICATION BB RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
m OFFICIAL [SE ONLY

JPRS L/lt
5 March 1

NEAR EAST/NORTH AFRICA REPORT.
(rouo 9/82)

CONTENTS
ALQRIA

Private Sector's Status Banned
(m1 Djuhr; AMQUB-EIE. 18-31 Jan 82)....ooooovooooooooo

Rise and Fall of Jihan {Ll-Sadat
(MAM MP’MI’ 11‘17 m: 81)..0.00.00.00.00.oooo‘uocooooo

Lutﬂ. al-Khuli (hunts on Grouping Party Program
(AL-"Am Ala-'MI. 11-17 me 81)....0oooooooo-oooooooooooooo

IRAN

Promises, haul“, Etched. of Rho-gym. Revolution Compared
("131$ mm; WA “QIV, 10 Jan 82).'oooaooooooo-oooooooo

Ongoing Anti-Babel hrmrion reviewed
(Pomml P57. 21 J“ 82)....0.0.0.00.0000000000IOOQOOOOOOOOO

Begins hpmsu 'Heretio' m'n, 'Auuonolist' Kurds
(L'snms’ 22-28 J” 82).oooooooopooooooooooooooooooncooooooo

Marcy-u of God, by Jacques me
winter of honors in Kurdistan, by Gadsden Roche

SYRIA

Pro-Iraqi maxim Comte on ﬂash Incidents
(Mm All-'MI. 19 Rb 82)...coooonaoooooooooooooooooooo
SUM

m OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Syria bdiatton I01. 1:: Inn-Iraq Hat manned
(mam; “w“ “F'MI. &1‘ J” u)OOOOOO..OOOQOOOOOO

mutation. Sun as Hamming Incutnua hwlt
(lbw sub; AQO'518. 18 3.1 82)....ooooocooooocoo-0.000.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
F01 OFFICIAL 083 OIL!

PRIVATE srcroa '8 8TA'1'US EXAMINED

Paris AFRIQUE-ASE in French No 257, 18~31 Jan 82 pp 25-26

[Article by correspondent Kanel Djaider: "The Distinction"; passages quoted
also printed in imieg

(but? The ma Centr '_ Comittee devoted its sixth meeting essentially to

debate on the place and role of the pri’te sector in the Algerian national
economy. The aim was to deter-inc as exactly as possible the field of ac-
tion of that sector so that it shall contribute effectively to the process

of econoadc and social developaent, without giving it the power to question
fundamental decisions anew.

There is reason to recall here that the Algerian private sector, which ac-
counts for more than a third of national production—of which two thirds is
in agricultural and one third in non-agricultural ”lament-does not have

access to the strategic domains (hydrocarbons, nines, transportation by air,
sea, or rail, or telecommunications).

Before its submission to the country's highest political body. the question
of the private sector had already been debated at the base, within FLN struc-
tures. It emerged from this debate that in the mind of the Algerian citi-
zen the problea is to lay down the framework—if not the limits—within
which that sector should develop so as not to risk turning into "a spring-
board for the seizure of power." The dominant concern was to localize the
economic fields in which its action could complement the activity of state

enterprises without risk of market control, worker exploitation, or unjust
cornering of wealth.

Decisive Planning

On the eve of the initial working session. it appeared quite evident that
the direction being taken was toward implementation of a policy in which
planning would intervene decisively.- "It-is inconsistent to be told that
this debate could turn or deviate towards a discussion of choice," wrote
the Algerian Press Service as that working session opened. "It is illusory
to wish to change the course of history." it added, and considered it op-

?OR OFFICIAL USE OIL!
rua uranium. uos uau

portune to recall that "recent uperinents elsewhere, notably in Saudi
Arabia, have shown how dangerous it was, as much froa the standpoint of eco-

nomics as in terms of political and social 'cmsequences, to wish to strong-
then a private sector..." -

Still, the general orientation was all upped out, since it is understood
in Algeria that private sector activities "mist be situated and limited in
such a way that they cannot acquire economic power or influence the centers
of state decisions" (National Charter). The real task, than, for the 200
central counittee members, was to "distinguish between that private sector
which plays a useful role in the country's economy, and that parasitic or

middleman private sector which endangers not only socialism but all inde-
pendent economic_davelopaent" (National Charter).

It is pointed out in Algiers, moreover,'that'if this private sector must be
so situated as to complement the state-sector, that is to be done also to
reduce recourse to foreign production, and primarily to that of mltination-
als, which "remain the foremost anew of all countries on the road to inde-
pendent development." Fron that standpoint firm emphasis was placed, in the
grassroots debates, on the riskstentailed by maintaining any relations be-
tween the private sector and fore'ign capitalist circles, and the need was
reaffirmed for the state to continue in control of the economic levers di-
rectly linked to foreign countries.

It is publicly admitted today that the Algerian private sector, which has

grown considerably in recent years, "has developed in an anarchic and wild
manor, both geographically and in the branches of its production."

There are actually two types of private sector. One, powerful and profit-
able, has spread into the most varied fields of construction and industrial
processing, thanks to the immense possibilities-of public markets, to the
inexperience of taxation and pricing administrations, to the protective
wall sheltering the domesticmrket from competition by imported products,
and finally to the exceptional boom in consumption. Ii‘he other, that of
agriculture, traditional building, fisheries, handicrafts, services, retail
trade, and transportation, after experiencing relative prosperity in the
shadow of colonization, has-seen its capacities under-utilised, at times
forzen, or simply destroyed. At the periphery of the state economic appara-
tus set up in the decade of the 70‘s, there arose in a very empirical way
a private "market place" which fed almost exclusively on the products of
the imbalances in the emerging modern national economy, such as shortages,
weaknesses of monopolies, and frailty of the first marketing institutions.

In that spreading jungle of niddlemen--businessmen, wholesalers, proxies
and connivers "speculative economic operations" range from the stall cig-
arette retailer to the "nabobs" "representing" foreign firms, for whom the

most effective working method remains the practice of corruption applied
to certain officials of the public sector.

’0! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

To Strengthen the Public Sector

After completing an extremely thorough task of information and investigation,
carried out in depth and in close liaison with economic operators in the
state sector, the PIN Economic and Social Commission drew up a number of
documents which place private activity in its macro-economic context and
formulate the essential questions concerning organization of that sector.

It is this Economic and Social Omission report which the members of the
central committee studied during the two working days.

Starting with a global approach which considers that "the whole economy
functions as a unit," this sixth session examined the question from the
angle of the pressing need to strengthen the state sector.

Considering that the country's private sector developed "with the help of

a very rapid growth of investment impelled by the state since independence,"
Algerian leaders considered that it is "the good' or bad management of this
aggregate of material and human resources (of the state) which in large mea-
sure determines the good or bad functioning of enterprises, whatever their
status (socialist or private) ." -

In that spirit they consider that in the future it will be the role of the

state to "make the rules of the game" by integrating private sector develop-
ment with national planning. .

To that end, it is proposed to set up legal machinery, with financial and
comercial instruments intended to organize and control that sector so as
truly to embody it in the general movement of the country's economy, and
cause it to play, under proper conditions, the role assigned to it by the
censtitutior and National Charter.

OOPYRIGEI‘: 1982 Afrique-Asie

611+5
<30: 4519/102

FOR OWICIAL USE ONLY
FOI‘OFFKJAL.USE(HVLY

EGYPT

RISE AND PILL 0P JIBAN ALPSADAT
Paris AL-HATAN AL-‘ARABI in Arabic No 252, 11-17 Dec 81 pp hb-éé

[Articles “The Sorrows of a woman who Has Egypt's First Lady: the Rise
and Fall of Jihan al-Sadat"]

[Text] Her last request was to be appointed ambassador
to the United Nations.
Bgyptian television declines to designate a weekly pro-
gram during which she would discuss the glorious deeds
of the late president.

Is Jihan al-Sadat making preparations for leaving Egypt? The news is provo-
cative, but what is even more provocative is the life of this woman who in
recent years attained a [measure of] personal glory which vanished in [a
few] tumultuous, dramatic moments.

She was the first and foremost lady in al-Sadat's Egypt. ﬂow did she rise.
and how did she fall? How did she take part in government as the second
unproclained president? How did she disappear from the limelight, which
left her a woman veiled in black and facing one of two choices: travel to
the United States or to west Germany?

Between the [presidential] palace and [the contemplation of] exile the
story is a long one. This dispatch which AL-HATAN AL-‘ARABI received from
Cairo is a collection of stories about Egypt's talented and ambitious Eva
Peron. For many this has been a closely guarded secret. These stories come
under the short title of "A Woman's Sorrows."

Because of their amazing nature, discussions about Jihan al-Sadat have
overshadowed any other discussions here [in Cairo]. They have even over-
shadowed discussions about the life of Anwar al-Sadat himself. In most
private gatherings the sorrows of the lady in this particular period of
time have captured a large part of the interests of various circles.

The sorrows of al-Sadat's widow, who was Bgypt's first lady are sorrows

of a very special kind. They are sorrows for a personal glory that has
irrevocably vanished; they are sorrows for personal ambition that has

FOI‘OIIICIAI.USEiﬂNlY
e use va a swans. we UNI-l

melted into thin air. Everyone knows that Hrs Jihan's ambitions did not
stop with her desire for wealth and for taking part in economic projects.
Everyone knows that her ambitions went beyond that and that she also enter-
tained political ambitions and a serious desire to "take'part in governing
Egypt” beside her husband. the late president. She even entertained
ambitions of governing Egypt by herself when necessary after his departure.
She would thus become another Eva Peron. She herself expressed that desire
to participate in the reins of power as her late husband's successor when
commenting on her husband's assassination in a conversation she had with Mr
Hansur Hasan, former minister of state for presidential affairs and former
minister of information and culture. Hr Hansur Hasan was removed from these
positions by al-Sadat in a cabinet shuffle in which he was the only target.
This was only one week before al-Sadat's death. In that conversation Hrs
Jihan said. "If al-Sadat's killers had succeeded in assassinating all the
political leaders on the reviewing stand for the military parade. I would
have gone myself to the Broadcast Building and made a statement to the
people or announced Bulletin No 1."

It may be that Jihan al-Sadat's unruly desire to take part in the govern-
ment of Egypt as her husband's successor was the only reason that led her
to appear the way she did at her husband's funeral. her appearance was

the subject of various comments in every Egyptian household. Her appearance
was that of a strong woman who was in control and who was not shaken by
what had happened. She also took pains to appear. as she usually does.
elegant and beautiful. She refused to cover her head with the black veil
of mourning. and everyone who saw her on the television screen noticed
that she was arranging her hair with her hand while her husband's body
was being laid to rest. Her fingernails were also covered with white nail
polish. and this [too] was the subject of numerous comments here. It was
also the subject of a comparison between al-Sadat's widow and the widow

of the former Shah. the Shahbanu, who appeared beside her fully dressed in
black.

Jihan al-Sadat. Umm Kulthum and the Wives of Others

Ever since the earliest days of al-Sadat's managing the government of
Egypt, Jihan al-Sadat has been working at maintaining for herself a
position of pre-eminence among the women of Egypt: Egypt's first and
foremost lady. Toward that end she set out first on the scene of social
activity to prepare herself for her entry into the field of political
activity. Because the road to [her objective] had to go first through caari-
table societies and societies for social activities, that was a reason for
her early clash with many of Egypt's women who were prominent then in that
field. Umm Kulthum was one of those women. At that time Umm Kulthum had
adopted a charitable or a social project through a society she had estab-
lished for that purpose. She had begun gathering donations and contribu-
tions to that society. But Hrs Jihan soon took over that project under the
pretext of developing it. She removed Umm Kulthum, and she even kept her
away from it after she contrived a.misunderstanding with her and claimed
that she refused to have Umm Kulthum address the president by his name of

FKIICIHHCIAI.IEHB(MVLY
FORINHHKJAL.USE(NWLY

Anwar or by his nickname of Abu al-Anawir. [She claimed] she told Umm
Kulthum in one of their meetings, "He is the president. You must address
him as any other citizen addresses him. You must address him as Mr
President."

Umm Kulthum was extremely intelligent. She understood this message, and

she gave up her role as ”prima donna" after a new one came along and wanted
to be everything by herself. Ever since then, Umm Kulthum retired from the
social activity she had initiated. She also retired from singing so that
the first lady and the new star can control the al-Hafa' wa al-Amal project
by herself with the assistance of Mr 'Uthman Ahmad 'Uthman who had begun to
worm his way into the ruler's household, trying to enter it from every
door, even from that of the first lady.

What happened with Umm Kulthum happened with every other lady who was
trying to find for herself a place on the scene of social activity. Jihan
al-Sadat considered that personal competition and a challenge to her
position at the top.

That was also the reason for the fall out she had with the wife of ﬂusayn
al-Shafi'i, who was vice president at the time. Hrs al-Shafi'i had also
begun to be active in social work through the Baladi [My Country] Society.
She had established that society and defined its goals: to carry out opera-
tions to clean up Cairo.

The first lady overshadowed all ladies. and her society, al-Hafa' wa
al-Amal overshadowed all societies. Hrs Husayn al-Shafi'i disappeared from
the scene just as Umm Kulthum did; her charitable society failed; and her
husband, ﬂusayn al-Shafi'i, was removed from his position for rersons he
himself does not know to this day.

Many women were removed in this manner and for any reason no matter how
trivial. What mattered was that Egypt's first lady remain the center of
attention, remain in the limelight, remain in the center of activity and
remain the subject of people's conversation. It was important that she
remain the first in everything, even in beauty and elegance. It was for
this last reason alone that Dr 'A'ishah Ratib, the minister of social
affairs in Egypt, was removed. Later, she was removed even further when she
was appointed ambassador in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and did not go
back to her former position as professor at the university. Dr 'A'ishah
Ratib's crime was that people in Egypt had begun comparing her with Jihan
al-Sadat. People were saying that Dr 'A'ishah was more knowledgeable. She
paid the price of all this by being removed from her position, and she
became an example for other women who would try to compete with The Lady in
any one of these areas. Therefore, it was enough for a beautiful woman to
appear on television, and people would say that Jihan would get rid of her!

The Story of Mrs Himmat Hustafa

There is another story that is not less curious or amazing than the prece-
. ding stories. It is the story of Hrs Himmat Hustafa, the former television

FOI‘OFIICIAI.IEHB(HVLY
run urn-ruin. use: ONLY

announcer. and the present director of Egyptian television. This "lady“ has
an instinctive talent for finding her way to reach rulers. During the age
of 'Abd-al-Nasir she was more of a Nasirist than 'Abd-al-Nasir himself.
People remember how she appeared on Egyptian television on the day
'Abd-al-Nasir announced that he was stepping down. that famous 9th day in
June. [People saw] Himmat Hustafa weeping on the television screen. and she
was asking people to reject the decision and to insist on the president's
leadership and on continuing the march.

'Abd-al-Nasir died. and the lady who was a Nasirist changed her colors and
became a follower of al-Sadat. She would shed profuse tears before every
interview she had with the new leader. She was the only one who interviewed
the president in the annual television interview al-Sadat made on his birth-
day. She would always cry at the beginning of every interview. She would
cry with emotion. considering that "she was in the presence of an ‘
inspiring. capable and talented leader who saved Egypt from perdition." She
also used her tears to pave the way for her visit to Jerusalem. when prepa-
rations were begun to make up the media delegation that would accompany
al-Sadat to Jerusalem, Hrs Himmat went to meet the president. she wept in
his presence and pleaded with him about how much she wanted to "experience"
this unprecedented political and historic event. The president complied
with her wishes and her tears, and Himmat Hustafa was the only Egyptian
woman in the official delegation that visited Jerusalem with al-Sadat. This
was before a decree was issued appointing her presidential adviser for
press relations along with Sa'd Zaghlul Nassar who was then President
al-Sadat's press secretary.

She thus became the first Egyptian woman to hold a position in al-Sadat's
private secretariat. For her. getting close to the president was the begin-
ning of the end. This is because the first lady did not allow anyone that
much ambition. that much advancement and that much success in overcoming
obstacles. Only 9 months after she was appointed to that position. the lady
announcer was removed from that position in an appropriate manner and
appointed director of television broadcasting. This is despite the fact
that there were candidates for that position who were more experienced and
more efficient than she is and who also had seniority. But ﬂimmat Hustafa.
nevertheless. continued to be loyal to the first lady. appreciating the
fact that the first lady did not remove her altogether but prepared for her
a position suitable to the loyalty she had demonstrated to the president
and to his policy.

The Limousine [Service] Project

Since Hrs Jihan al-Sadat has been interested throughout the past years in
"ensuring“ her economic future as a precaution against any unforeseen
situation whatsoever. she has therefore set up numerous economic projects
and entered into partnerships with major investors and capitalists in other
projects. The most important of these projects to which she was related

were those of al-Hafa' wa al-Amal Society and the limousine [service]
project.

FOIIOFFNJA1.U§BIH¥LY
FORiOFFKJAl.U§IZONlY

As far as the first project is concerned, despite the fact that it is a
social project, its budget was not subject to any kind of supervision by
the state. Project books and contributions made to the society in Egypt and
from abroad, which Mrs Jihan worked diligently to obtain, remained a
closely guarded secret not known to anyone except those who ale in charge
of the project who are her close aides.

But what is known to everyone is that in the name of this project Hrs Jihan
received large sums of money. Specifically, she received contributions

from international and especially American agencies and organizations.

She also received contributions from important Arab personalities before
the political boycott of Bgypt. The project was also used as a cover to
bring into the country devices and equipment that were not scrutinized by
customs. Consequently, no one knew what was_in those huge containers that
came from abroad and were addressed to al-Hafa' wa al-Amal Society. No

one also knows how much money was offered to that society or in what
account these funds were deposited. However, the answer to this baffling
matter soon came in news that the well-known 1,000 hectare California ranch
had been purchased in the name of the first lady. This is the farm where
the late president's son. Hr Jamal al-Sadat, was staying for a few days of
rest and relaxation when his father was assassinated.

The other project is that of the Limousine Automobile Company. This is
hrs Jihan's project; it is hers alone. She has monopolized the operation
of a fleet of Mercedes automobiles that are run by radio in various parts
of Egypt. It is estimated that the capital of this company is 100 million
Egyptian pounds.

If making such economic preparations was a kind of precaution against the
surprises [future] days may bring, and based on the principle that politics
is a dangerous game in the Third "orld and that [it is a game] whose future
is unknown, the first lady's [preoccupation with these preparations] did
not mean that she ignored her political ambitions and her desire to take
part in government. Therefore, she began preparing herself politically,
academically and socially for this mission.

Academically, she found an opportunity to become Dr Jihan al-Sadat. As
long as she was in government, education would serve government. She was
able--and no one believes this--to start on the road with the secondary
school certificate and to go to the university. Then she obtained a
master's degree, and she is preparing for a doctorate.

The "Unknown" Talent

The Egyptian university suddenly discovered that Mrs Jihan was an unusual
talent and a closeted genius. She used to pass every year with excellent
marks. revealing a genius that exceeded that of the professors themselves.
Naturally, there were scandals everywhere, and people talked in whispers
about professors who sold their consciences for a position granted to them
by the first lady. Dr Rashad Rushdi was one of those who "taught" the lady.

FOIiOFFNJA1.USE(NVLY
l-Uli OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The reward he received for his loyalty was a presidential appointment as
adviser for artistic and musical affairs. Hrs Jihan conferred positions on
most of the members of Rushdi's family. She even appointed his nephew,
journalist Ahmad Bahjat editor-in-chief and president of the board of direc-
tors of one of Egypt's weeklies. She also prevented his trial in the sec-
tarian sedition incidents. His articles in AL-AHRAH were a clear invitation
[to sedition], inciting Muslims one time and Copts the other time.

Just as Rashad Rushdi was rewarded, various professors who offered their
academic services to Mrs Jihan were rewarded. Dr Mustafa Abu Talib, who
was director of the university when the lady [was a student at the univer-
sity] became speaker of the People's Assembly. Dr Subhi 'Abd-al-Hakim who
was dean of the College of Arts where she graduated and where she was later
appointed, became president of the Advisory Council and so on.

On the political level Hrs Jihan al-Sadat tried to maintain for herself a
prominent position on the domestic scene and on the foreign scene as well.
In addition to chairing the local council (the political council) of the
governorate of al-Hinufiyah, she used to attend various political events
inside and outside Egypt. When she visited the United States "alone" last
February, she did not hesitate to make numerous political statements just
as though she were responsible for making that policy. This provoked the
opposition in Egypt and prompted Dr Hilmi Hurad to write and ask what right
did "the president's wife" have to make political statements. That mere
question was enough to arouse the president's anger against Hilmi Hurad who
was later disciplined when he was arrested along with those who were
charged with inciting sectarian sedition in Egypt.

Hrs Jihan used to affirm to everyone that she was a lady qualified for
government. She used to "negotiate;" to meet with delegations; to meet
with stars; to give press interviews; to dance with heads of state and

to show the Nest an image of a woman who was extremely modern and
enlightened. Besides, she was a daily item on television news in one form
or another. and [she apeared] in various publications.

Actual Participation in Government

Naturally, Mrs Jihan al-Sadat was not satisfied with the fact that the
years she would spend by her late husband's side would merely be years in
which she would prepare herself for government. Instead, she thought she
should spend these years participating in government as well. Hence, her
presence influenced the decision making process. There were numerous minis-
ters who were personally loyal to her. In fact, she was capable of issuing
her instructions to all ministers if there was a need to do so. There were
journalists whose survival depended on her. Aminah al-Sa'id was her per-
sonal friend and adviser, and so was Muhammad 'Abd-al-Jawwad, president of
a news agency, and Safwat al-Sharif, president of radio and television
broadcasting. In addition, the speaker of the People's Assembly and the
president of the Advisory Council depended on her as well. For a period of
time 'Uthman Ahmad 'Uthman represented the strong arm she extended into the

9
F0I10IITCJAI.IEHE(MVLY
Ptﬂltﬂﬂﬂ(1AI.lﬂSEi(NVLY

management of government. But then there was a disagreement between them
because of family problems. She replaced him by Sayyid Har'i who was a
close political adviser and a relative.

The Shock and the Collapse of Ambition

The lady's ambition continued even after al-Sadat's assassination. In the
first hours that followed the assassination of her husband, some of her
proteges told her that the People's Assembly would nominate her vice presi-
dent. This was something she urgently desired and was striving for. But

she was later surprised. after the presidential referendum and the selec-
tion of President Mubarak president. to see al! her hopes begin to
collapse. President Mubarak turned out to be completely different from what
she expected or thought he would be. The man dealt with himself firmly.
thinking he should set an example for everybody. He issued instructions to
the agencies of the media asking them not to publish any news about his
family or his private life. They were not to publish anything about his
wife or his family under any circumstances whatsoever. He issued instruc-
tions to the ministers asking them to stay away from the limelight and to
refrain from making promises they cannot keep and statements they cannot
carry out.

Hrs Jihan was by necessity out of the limelight, but she could not tolerate
that. She wanted to test the situation herself so as to determine what the
coming days would be like for her. She began making numerous requests.

She asked that television cameras record her private meeting with one of
the delegations that came to visit her from the United States. Safwat
al-Sharif, director of Radio and Television [Broadcasting Agency] declined.
He told her he was at her service and that he would actually like to do
that. But he said he could not do what she asked because his instructions
would not allow him to. He affirmed his loyalty to her, and he was moved to
tears during his conversation [with her], so she comforted him.

Then she asked that a statement be broadcast to the people to commemorate
the 60th day of her late husband's death. That request was denied with
intense regrets. Her response was to publish a statement in the newspapers

stating that "Women would not be receiving mourners coming to offer con-
dolences."

She asked that an.hour on television be designated every week for a discus-
sion of the late president's glorious deeds and accomplishments. The reply
[she was given] was. "we will think about it, God willing."

She asked that a number of rest houses which had been designated for the
late president be designated for her and the family just as the mansion

in al-Jizah and Alexandria were. But she was told that that would not be
possible also. At the same time President Mubarak asked that a large number
of these rest houses be disposed of and turned over to the agencies with

which they were originally affiliated, such as the rest house at Ismailia
which is owned by the Suez Canal [Authority].

10

FOI|OFFKJA1.USEINHLY
llﬂltﬂﬁﬂCblt.USEINVLY

Ambassador. . . Or?

Jihan thus realized that her ambitions for government, for stardom, for
the world of limelights had begun to collapse altogether. So her last
request was to be appointed ambassador of Egypt at the United Nations.

And here numerous questions are being raised in Egypt.

would this be the beginning of a permanent immigration? Has the lady who
used to be the first lady decided to immigrate to her ranch in California?

Dr is this a political ambition that cannot easily be forgotten? Hill the
lady actually travel and begin her voluntary exile? Or will future days
open the books on the last 10 years: the books on politics, on the economy,
on the university, on al-Hafa' wa al-Amal, on the Limousine Automobile
Company and on whatever [else] has been hidden?

COPYRIGHT: 1981 AL-UATAN AL-ARABI

8592
cso: asoa/169

FINI¢HHHCLALI£HE¢HULY
FORiOFFHJAl.USB(HVLY

EGYPT

LUTFI AL-KHULI COMMENTS ON GROUPING PARTY PROGRAM
Paris AL-VATAN AL-‘ARABI in Arabic No 252. 11-11 Dec 81 pp “2-43

[Article: "An Open Letter about the Grouping Party's Position on Current
Egyptian Conditions; Lutfi al-Khuli Says. 'Our Strategic Choices Are Firm
and Binding, and Our Tactics Do not Include Trickery and Submission' "]

[Text] The document published by AL-WATAN AL—‘ARABI in its recent issue,
which included the full text of the political report issued by the National
Progressive Unionist Grouping Party, the opposition party in Egypt. raised
broad political reactions in the Arab homeland and in some European circles.

He received scores of telephone calls and a large number of letters early
in the week, especially from Egyptians. These calls and letters commented
on the report and also on the position of the Grouping Party after the
departure of al-Sadat. The Grouping party is the party that endured the
most in the campaign of arrests which was launched by the former president
of Egypt against different factions who opposed his policy.

Readers who communicated with us were asking if the Grouping party had
changed its policy after President Husni Mubarak took over the responsi-
bility [of the presidency]. especially with regard to the Camp David
accords and the Egyptian-Israeli treaty. They were asking if the Grouping
party had changed its policy after the new Egyptian president released some
of its leaders. who were among the 31 persons released from custody, even
though others are still being held pending trial by the State Supreme
Security Court.

In an attempt to answer these questions AL-HATAN AL-‘ARABI contacted Mr
Lutfi alehuli in his capacity as one of the leaders of the Grouping party.
His name is still-included in the detention and trial decree. At the
present time he is in Paris where he is undergoing truatment. Re preferred
answering our questions in writing. The full text of his reply follows.

I. I thank you and I also thank [our] brothers who wrote the letters for
the interest you show in Egypt's causes and in the struggle of its people.

I also thank you for your conscientious effort to inform your readers about
the positions and policies of our party which has been and still is a new

12

IOIIOIFKJAI.USI(IHLY
IV“ UI‘IILMI. 08L UNI-Y

experience in political organization and thought in the context of the
experiences of the Arab homeland in this field. The Grouping party is an
attempt to set up a public, legal party that would serve as the political
home [so to speak] for all leftist factions with their various ideological
premises. These would come together in Egypt's [current] circumstances,

around strategic political. economic and social choices and form one politi-
cal force with unified action.

2. The strategic choices for our party are still firm and binding. Only

the party's General National Congress can change these choices, and the
National Congress has not been convened, nor has it considered any proposed
changes to these strategic choices until this writing. Accordingly, it is
not true and it is basically irrelevant to say that changes have been made
recently in these choices or that the party's program, which includes these
choices, has been amended after the death of President al-Sadat and after
President Husni Mubarak became president.

Chief among these choices are that Egypt is an indivisible part of the

Arab homeland; that the Palestinian question is the central question of the
Arab Liberation Movement; that the Liberation Organization is the only legi-
timate representative of the Palestinian people; that there is to be no
reconciliation with the Zionist enemy; and that the Arab-Israeli dispute

is a national, not a regional dispute. This struggle is a distinct part of

the struggle of the Arab Liberation Movement against all old and new forms
of imperialism and colonialism.

Hence the position of our party has been and still is to condemn the Camp
David policy; to reject the Egyptian-israeli peace treaty and the normaliza-
tion of relations with Israel; [to reject] Egypt's isolation from its Arab
nation; [to_reject] the military facilities granted to the United States;
and [to reject] Egypt's departure from the policy of non-alignment.

Possibilities for Change

3. Our party. like any other party in every society, has strategies and
tactics to serve these strategies. If a strategy is firm, tactics have

to be flexible so as to deal effectively with the variables and given fac-
tors of [all] situations.

Naturally, President al-Sadat's departure in the bloody, tragic manner

in which that incident took place and under the circumstances in which

it occurred [would seem to suggest change]. [When] President Husni Mubarak
took office. some of the slogans he proclaimed were a continuation of Presi-
dent al-Sadat's policy, especially with regard to the Camp David policy and
peaceful relations with Israel. In other slogans some differences with
President al-Sadat's policy were noted, especially with regard to relative
freedom for the opposition to express itself and changing the method of
implementing the open-door policy, by putting more emphasis on production

rather than on consumption. he also stopped hostile campaigns in the press
against Arabs.

13

lilllOIlﬂClAl.lEﬂl(ﬂﬁLY
FOR OFFICIAl.lEﬂE(HNLY

Furthermore, President Mubarak invited our party along with other parties
to engage in a dialogue with him.

In view of these “new conditions" there are all kinds of possibilities
for change, and these exist side by side with specific policies that the
regime will continue to pursue.

Hence, I am quite certain that our party has not changed its strategic
choices; nor has it changed its positions on the Camp David policy, on the
treaty and on the normalization of relations with the Israeli enemy. At the
same time our party, which is a political force and not a political club,
has not hesitated in its pursuit of tactics to deal with the possibilities
and given data of the new conditions and with President Hubarak's invi-
tation to engage in a dialogue. Tactful dealings do not mean that our party
is engaged in trickery or is submitting blindly to new conditions. Tactful
dealings rather mean getting to the bottom of these conditions, examining
their depth and their orientation and participating with all the other

national forces to steer these new conditions toward a proper patriotic,
national democracy.

Leadership in the Field

6. It is self-evident that the determination of the party's policy in des-
ling with the premises and possibilities of the new conditions is first
and foremost the responsibility of the party's leaders who are out in the
field. Those are [the people] who have the opportunity to find out the
nature and the dimensions of circumstances; they have their hands on the
pulse of the nation, and they know the opinions of the infrastructure of
parties. They are not the ones who were thrown in prisons or who were
forced to stay abroad, regardless of their status in the leadership
[hierarchy]. When I say the leaders of our party who are in the field I
mean the members of the Central Committee and the General Secretariat who
were not arrested and who stayed out of prison and the secretary general of
the party, Hr Khalid Huhi al-Din. The actions they take adhere to the
party's program and the party's strategic choices and [demonstrate] an
appreciation of their responsibilites to all the levels of the party's
leadership until that time when the party recovers from the blows that
befell it.

5. what was published in your magazine is actually the complete text of
"The Proposed Political Report." This proposed report is prepared, accor-
ding to the traditions of our party, by a committee whose members are
selected from the members of the General Secretariat. The proposed report

was prepared in the light of discussions about current conditions within
the secretariat.

6. According to the rules and traditions of the party, after the proposal
is prepared, it is presented to party organizations in the governorates for

discussion. What comes out of these discussions, along with observations
and critical remarks, is compiled and the general secretariat ultimately

.11. .

F0.‘09MKJA1.U88§NVLY
IUﬂ!UtFﬂJAl.USE(NVLY

presents the proposed report, to which a collection of observations and
critical remarks are attached. to the Central Committee. Both documents are
discussed in the Central Committee. and suggestions for deletions,
additions or amendments are offered by the colleagues who are members of
the Central Committee. There is a special committee within the Central
Committee which writes the final text of the party's political report in

light of the principal lines [about which an agreement] is reached during
the open, democratic discussion.

I can affirm that not a single report that was presented by the general
secretariat to the Central Committee throughout the life of our party has
not been enriched by discussion. There was not a single report whose final
form was not slightly or greatly different from the proposed report that
had been presented. We consider this phenomenon in our party healthy and an
indication of its vitality.

Eight Observations

7. According to reliable information I received the proposed political

report that was presented by the general secretariat went through all these
stages. It was discussed, and the discussion produced a set of observations
and critical remarks made by a number of colleagues. These were included in

a party document that was presented to the Central Committee along with the
proposed report.

Of these observations and critical remarks we mention eight points only
to provide an example.

First, the proposed report based its analysis on two anomalous incidents,
notwithstanding their extreme significance. These are: (1) the phenomenon
of terrorism that has surfaced recently; and (2) the sudden and violent
departure of President al-Sadat. The fact that these two incidents were
considered the center of the report and not its introduction upset the
basic organization of the report. turning it into a document that was
closer to a political statement than a political report submitted to the
party's Central Committee.

This resulted in the absence of an integrated analysis of material facts on
the Egyptian scene from various points of view. There is no analysis of the
relationship between material facts in Egypt and those on the Arab and
international scenes; nor is there an analysis based on the party's prin—
ciples and political positions, as defined during the course of the party,
of the mutual effects between those material facts in Egypt and those on
the Arab and international scene at this stage. This absence of an integ-
rated analysis has resulted, in turn. in the fact that proposed party
functions were to a large degree general [in character] and did not express

the specific aspects of those material facts.
Second. despite the fact that we appreciate the gravity of the terrorist

incidents--incidents which we condemn--that have recently surfaced in poli-
tical life and despite our appreciation of the importance of the change in

15

FOI10FFNJA1.USE(NVLY
l!”l(lﬁﬂ(1hl.U§ElMVLY

the presidency, with President Husni Mubarak assuming the office of presi-
dent after the assassination of former president, Muhammad Anwar al-Sadat.
we do not see in all of this anything that would make us conclude that we
are facing a new political stage, as the proposed report states on the
basis of these two incidents.

It is our opinion that the term. "new stage," in this regard means prima-
rily a set of coordinated, basic policies whose sum total constitutes the
public policy of a regime at a certain stage of its development. Unless we
are facing this change in secondary policies or in executive programs that
would put basic policies into practice, [what we have] constitutes no more
than a new management of the same public policy that is adopted by the
regime.

We may in fact be on the verge of a new stage, but what was presented by
the report does not constitute the components of such a stage. The report
lacks an adequate, integrated, coherent analysis of effective forces on the
local scene and of international variables to prove that we are on the
verge of a new stage. especially since the proposed report affirms that the
change that came about with the departure of President Anwar al-Sadat did
not alter the basic nature of the existing regime even though it is
possible that that may lead to the replacement of a few courses of action
and methods of execution.

Third. the proposed report begins by saying that it is the masses and
nations that make history. Then the report states with regret that the
masses in Egypt, in this historical period, are not capable of shaping
their lives to serve their own interests. [In Egypt] the present and the
future of the masses is determined by the role played by one individual
whom fate places at the top of government. That is why there were fundamen-
tal differences, which were referred to in the report, between
'Abd-al-Nasir's and al-Sadat's period. Thus. [the report states that] we
believe that it is the masses who shape the future, but that they are not
capable of doing so [in Egypt] where history is forged by the individual
who heads the government. All these absolute contradictory statements lead
to confusion and raise questions.

Hhat is the use of our work if the masses are impotent? Is not this an
excuse for being passive and apathetic? If an individual's role is that
absolute. is not this an ideological justification for advocates of poli-
tical assassination who think that assassinating a president will'lead to a
change in our destiny?

Fourth, the proposed report openly agrees with the emergency measures that
are being adopted by the government. Is this the position of a party,
scores of whose leaders and members were arrested? [Is this the position
of a party] whose publications were confiscated?

The report speaks about the September measures that led to the detention
of 1,536 citizens and the transfer of more than 100 university professors
and journalists from their positions to others that have nothing to do

16

F0!‘0FFKJA1.USE(NVLY
tokquFKJAl.USE(N‘LY

with their areas of specialization. The report speaks about these measures
as "protective measures" taken after matters got worse. Does the party
really consider these measures a preventive strike even though that strike
came late?

Fifth, the formulation of the report is controlled by the agencies of the
media whose current jargon it uses. Because terms such as security, safety.
tranquillity, peace. violence, terror. liberalisation of production, etc.
are used often. they have assumed the form of slogans without a clear defi-
nition of the party's understanding of any of them.

The report was also full of judgments or absolute and premature condemna-
tions such as those that are current in the agencies of the media at the
present time. For example. the report states that President al-Sadat was
assassinated by the "bullets of fanatic terrorists." How did we come up
with such a judgment when the investigation is still being conducted in
total secrecy. when the trial has not yet begun and the courts have not yet
issued their verdict? Such condemnations and descriptions are among those
that are being used by agencies of the media at the present time. The fact
is that the line quoted by media agencies has changed more than once in
this regard since President al-Sadat was assassinated. It was said that the
assassination was the result of the individual motives of a group [of
people] outside the army. It was said that the assassination was related to
the tragic events of Asyut. It was said that those who carried out the
assassination were 12 men from the armed forces after [it was reported
that] they were 6 or 5 outside the armed forces. The whole truth is still
unknown. Nevertheless. we set ourselves up in judgment. and we issue ver-
dicts! The proposed report also openly accuses Islamic groups of working
for others abroad and of receiving finances from abroad. This is what has
been repeated by the agencies of the media; but the truth [of these allega-
tions] has not been established. and no reliable verdict from the courts
has been issued. This is the same charge that is often repeated with regard
to factions of the opposition. And once again we issue a condemnation. It
was not that long ago that the Grouping party was accused in the events of
18 and 19 January 1977 by the former president, and the campaign that was
launched by media agencies in that regard has not been that long ago. But
the courts did speak and vindicate all the members of our party.

Sixth, the proposed report mentions that we are not opposed to finding
ways out of the pitfalls of the Camp David accords. In our opinion this
wording is unfortunate. It is the position of the party to reject Camp
David and. accordingly. to take action in an effort to avoid its con-
sequences. As far as looking for ways to get the Camp David process out of
its pitfalls is concerned. that is the function of those who made the
accords and those who support them.

Seventh, as our party affirms its conviction that the question of
Palestine-~the homeland and the people--is the center of the struggle in
the area. it is aware of its role in making the joint Arab struggle in
support of the Palestine Liberation Organization. the only legitimate rep-
resentative of the Palestinian people. a struggle that can settle this

.17 .

FDR‘OUIICIAI.I£IB(HVLY
IN)! OlﬂﬂflAl.lﬂiE(HVLY

question. not only in the interests of the Palestinian people and their
legitimate rights, but also for establishing a just and comprehensive peace
in the entire area. This is the proper road to the restoration of stable
Egyptian-Arab relations.

Eighth, an exchange of opinion about current problems with the broadest
political and social forces in Egypt is essential to preclude the growth
of the violence and terrorism phenomenon. This is based on an awareness
of the danger of this destructive phenomenon, not only to any democratic

action, but also with regard to the question of progress in Egypt in
general.

8. These are some of the observations and critical remarks that were dealt
with publicly during the Central Committee's open debate and in party
documents. I have no doubt that all of this has enriched the proposed poli-
tical report and that that has accordingly been reflected on its final
version which was approved and issued by the Central Committee. Unfor-
tunately, I have not yet received the final report that is binding on the
party. I will send you a copy as soon as I receive it, and I ask that you
print it.

9. I [respectfully] decline to answer your question about my personal
position on the proposed report as a member of the party's General Sec-
retariat. This is because my obligations to the party do not give me the
right, regardless of my position in the party, to discuss the party‘s
documents in newspapers. Such discussions take place freely within the
organizational channels of the party. This is what I actually did when I
sent my observations and my critical remarks to the General Secretariat in
Cairo. The General Secretariat alone has the right to announce them and
circulate them in accordance with the bylaws of the party.

10. Finally, I hope that my letter to you will have helped as much as pos-
sible in answering your questions and the questions your readers have regar-
ding the positions of our party, the methods and means by which the party
makes decisions and the climate under which those decisions are made or the
political report is issued. Once again I thank you for your interest.

Hith sincere appreciation and regard,
Lutfi al-Khuli

AL—HATAN AL-‘ARABI: It is known that Mr Lutfi al-Khuli is a member of the
General Secretariat of the Grouping party and that he is the party's
secretary for Arab affairs. His name was on the list of detainees whose
arrest was ordered by al-Sadat last September. But he escaped prison

because he has been abroad since last August, recovering from a heart
attack.

Last November President ﬂusni Mubarak issued a decree turning Hr al-Khuli
and 21 of his colleagues who are under arrest to the Supreme State Security

18

FOItOIiIClALIJSlflVLY
rum venues. use. ONLY

Court. They are being charged with trying to form a national coalition
to overthrow al-Sadat's regime in cooperation with the Soviet Union and
Islamic groups.

in statements made to international news agencies Lutfi al-Khuli had asked
President Musni Mubarak to try from his new position to create a healthy
climate in Egypt that would close the tragic chapter which ended the life
of President al-Sadat. He asked him to do so by releasing immediately and
without exception all those who were arrested in September; by restoring
all university professors, journalists and writers who had been removed
from their positions to their positions; by repealing all the laws that
restrict freedom. chief among which is the Law of Shame; and by reinstating
the legal board [of directors] of the bar association. That board had been
removed from office arbitrarily in violation of the constitution. Hr
al-Khuli asked President Mubarak to open the door to a real dialogue about
fundamental political choices. chief among which is the Camp David policy.
Such a'dialogue was violently repressed and aborted by the legislative and
security agencies during the administration of President al-Sadat.

Mr al-Khuli also asked President Mubarak to convene an Arab summit con-
ference and to present to it the Camp David policies he had inherited.

He asked that all Arab officials be placed squarely in front of their res-
ponsibilities regarding this matter so that a unified Arab position can be
achieved and Egypt, through that position, can be restored to its leader-
ship role in the Arab homeland and in the Arab Liberation Movement.

Mr al-Khuli affirmed that all this required the formation of a national
coalition government in which all national forces and parties would partici-
pate. Such a government would have credibility and effectiveness with both
the Egyptian and the Arab masses.

COPYRIGHT: 1981 AL-HATAN AL-ARABI

8592
C50: 4506/169

F!”l(lﬂl(1Al.lﬂﬂl(lilY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

IRAN

PMS“, RESULTS, METHODS OF momma mournon mam

Bonn EUROPA ARCBIV in Ger-an No 1-37, 10 Jan 82 pp 21-28

[Article by Ulrich Encke of the Bavarian Radio, Hunich. who was radio correspondent
of the Working Group of the m Broadcasting Institutes in Tehran in 1979-1980

and has been traveling correspondent for Iran since: ”Between Revolution and
TyrannyuThree Years of hullah Rule in Iran"]

[Text] Independence, freedom and social justice-"to reach those three ails,
Ayatollah Khoneyni had said in his exile in Paris, would be the Iain task of the
Islanic lepublic. They are still being repeatedly talked about in Iran, but their
propaganda: nature has neamvhile becone apparent to all. The historic opportunity
of a new political beginning following the revolution has been nissed. Reviewing
the situation not quite 3 years after the revolution, one realizes that Iran has
not even approached those three great aim. Though under different ideological
auspices, the sane problem still determine everyday politics. and the seas unsuit-
able attenpts at solving the problems are being nade. Even the internal organiza-
tional structures of the ruling fundansntalist Ialuic cup and of the opposition

oninously recall the past.

Economic Dependence. on Foreign Countries

The dependence of the Islanic Republic of Iran on foreign countries today is every
bit as great as it was under the shah and can only increase in the future. The
Islanic fraternal war with Iraq. which professes to be secular, has nade postrevolu-
tionary Iran dependent on arm supplies froI abroad. If the deliveries of kerosene
from .the Soviet Union for the Iranian Air Force were to stop or if the deliveries i
of nunitions, nissiles and grenades fro- the Hestern countries—particularly the
United States, Great Britain and the Ger-an Federal Republic—were to cease, the
ayatollshs would have to hoist white flags on their southern and western fronts.

The war itself was started by Iraq-«no doubt about that-but it was a war which was
definitely welcone to those in power in Tehran, who needed a new donestic political
lightning rod after the end of the enbassy siege in Tehran. In addition the war
provided an opportunity for tying down at the front an arm vhich' was suspected of
being politically unreliable. These considerations are still valid today, lore
than a year after the war began. It is therefore not only Baghdad but also Tehran
that bears responsibility for the war. Dependence on foreign area was wittingly
taken into the bargain in order to cover up insoluble donestic political problems.

20.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Some initial parallels become apparent here. At the same time the dependence is
now becoming noticeable. for, unlike their Iraqi adversary, the Iranians have only
managed to remedy the shortcomings in the supply of spare parts and ammunition
caused by the war. while having been denied access to new and more effective weapons
systems. They will not lose the war on that account, but they will not win it on
that account either. There are primarily two reasons which have led to this stale-
mate. For one thing, the unpredictability of Tehran's policies have been standing
in the way of any military partnership with countries in the East or Heat. For
another thing, there are economic difficulties because Iran's ability to pay is
being placed in doubt.

The collapse of Iranian economic activity abroad caused by the revolution and the
utter lack of concepts of law and order on the basis of Islamic values have driven
the country into an economic and financial crisis from which it certainly cannot
escape on its own. Already some few crisis symptoms are making it clear that the
Islamic appeals for moderation, such as are now the order of the day, cannot help
the country along.

Iranian foreign currency reserves have dropped to about 2 billion 0.8. dollars,
forcing the government to make drastic restrictions of imports, which had again
begun to rise slightly last year.1 The preferential treatment of food imports to
insure basic needs occurred at the expense of imports of raw materials and semi-
finished goods. This in turn could not help but have repercussions in the sector
of the finishing industry. Thus in late fall 1981 the utilization of industrial
capacities--down to do percent as it was-«was reduced by another 15 percent. With
an inflation rate which is 25 percent according to official data but actually is

as high as 50 percent in certain sectors.2 and an unemployment rate of an estimated
5 million, this could be coped with only if, as in former times, funds could be
provided for the individual and society as a whole with the aid of foreign currency
obtained fro. oil exports. Current oil production does not make this possible,
however.

If Iran adheres to its current production quota of 800,000 barrels a day,3 foreign
currency reserves will be all used up in about 3 months. According to-albeit
unofficial--computationa by the ministry concerned, Iran would have to produce at
least 2.5 million barrels a day to keep its economy going more or less. Consider-
ing the current problems. such a figure would represent a utopian target.

Unsuccessful Social Revolution

So here too postrevolutionary politics have led to increased economic dependence on
foreign countries rather than to the hoped for emancipation. This is but one side
of the medal, however. In addition to the country's economic freedom, the utopias
of economic improvement and social justice entertained by both the middle class

and the lower class and above all by the lumpen proletariat settled around Tehran
went for naught. The middle class had speculated that after elimination of the
upper class it would form the new elite in the country and thus be able to play a
leading sociopolitical role. but its largely opportunistically motivated contribu-
tion to the revolution was not acknowledged.

21

FOR¢NHHC1A1.USE(MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Following the predictable breakup of the antishah opposition movement, the post-
revolutionary power struggles assmaed the nature of a class struggle. The masses

of the lower strata and of the subproletariat under the leadership of the fundamen-
talist portion of the clerics rebelled against the middle class and its intellectual
representatives. A campaign agath the 'Vssternised intellectuals" justified by
cultural independence, restrictive measures against bourgeois, leftist and also
Islamic Opposition groups, as well as the banning of any kind of non-Islamic ideas,
pushed all forces not belonging to the fundamentalist camp first into a hopeless
minority position and then underground.

This political plan night have worked if the economic and social weds of the
"barefoot" had been satisfied at the same time, but in light of the enormous eco-
nomic difficulties that was and still is impossible. For almost 2 years this had
no political consequences. Despite no change in the catastrophic economic situation
of the individual, the mass identified with the revolution and its fundamentalist
propagandists. The feeling for the first time in one's life to be able to develop
an identity of one's own, and thus a sense of one's own importance, weighed more
heavily than any everyday economic difficulties. "The emphasis on being prepared
to suffer and on a sense of importance on the part of the members of the lower
class in this ideology apparently can cover up time and again the discrepancy
between the expectations aroused by the revolution and the miserable actual
conditions . "‘

Today this does not seem to work any longer, however. At least the fundamentalist
camp apparently does not believe any longer that it can. In the meantime, it so
happens, there has occurred, not the hoped for more equitable distribution of social
prosperity, but a redistribution of poverty, with the criteria of distribution
deriving not from overriding postulates of justice but from the power interests of
the fundamentalist clerics.

The political program now in force can be reduced to a simple co-on denominator:
development of the country has been abandoned at the expense of development in the
capital, Tehran. In the final analysis, in a country whose area is bigger than the
European Conunity, it is the masses in the capital that decide who is in power

in Iran.

The land reform, which previously had foundered on ideological Islamic debates
about the question of ownership, has now had to be abandoned for the time being for
economic reasons. This also means that nothing has become of the plan—actually

not very realistic anyway—to lead the lumen proletariat composed of persons
having fled the rural areas and now residing in the sautl. of the capital back to
agriculture, and thus to a way of life with which it was familiar at one time.

Apart from isolated idealistic overtures, it has also been necessary to stop the
holy war for reconstruction. The center no longer distributes funds to supporters
of the fundamentalist camp who only a year ago still got whatever they needed while
working almost all over the country, in small groups, primarily on projects of
electrification and irrigation and building schools, hospitals and other social
institutions. This has not only led to the suspension of innumerable small develop-
ment projects but also has destroyed the fruits of the labor of trust connected with
them. Other cost-effective reform programs—for instance, in the cultural and
educational sector-"were also suspended.

22
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

To the extent that the remaining funds are not used for the subsidy of food

serving everyone's purpose, they are now being channeled to the south of Tehran--

in other words, to where the residuum of the Islamic revolution is located, the
Muslims whom Khomeyni affectionately calls "the barefoot." Without these the mullahs
and ayatollahs could not stay in power today, any more than the shah could have been
overthrown without them. They have no been turned into "oil rentiers"-though at

an extremely modest 1evel-in order to insure the necessary mass base for exercising
power.

Thus Iranian politics, however, are lapsing into the old mistakes which doomed the
shah's regime—-gross neglect of rural development at the expense of the Tehran
hydrocephalus so vital for power; a privileged position not of a social class but,
in terms of the entire country, of a small group of chosen people; forgoing of
reform programs and thus of a national perspective (which really was a quite impor-
tant aim of the revolution) and squander of the natural oil wealth to procure funds
for small groups with the sole purpose of promoting the rulers' power interests.

The Machinery of the New Repression

Political, economic and social injustices are the inevitable result, and this in
turn leads to discontent and attitudes against the mullah regime. Politically
speaking, the fundamentalists appear to be unable to resolve this conflict of
objectives between the struggle for a power base at the center and the need for a
balanced development of the whole country. They therefore react the same way as
others have done before them in Iran-with repression and, in part, brutal oppres-
sion. The instruments they use for this are those organizations which were created
originally for securing the revolution. They are the revolutionary courts which
were formed because of a justified distrust of the judiciary built up by the shah
and which are now under the complete control of the Islamic clerics. They are the
revolutionary committees whose task it was at one time to smash the local shah
organizations and to perform in the villages and the urban districts of the major
centers a labor of trust for the revolution closely affiliated with the citizenry.
Finally, they are the "guardians of the revolution"-the revolutionary guards who
at one time were built up as a politically reliable force vis-a-vis the old army.
One cannot tell as yet to what extent today's SAYAH, the organization which succeeded
the infamous SAVAK intelligence service, is employed in this, but one thing is
sure: some political opponents have already been "treated" at the new Tehran
intelligence service headquarters.

In the first months after the revolution, when they almost exclusively confronted
representatives of the old system, these revolutionary organizations still enjoyed
the confidence of the population as a whole, their actions being considered severe,
but just from a revolutionary point of view. Moreover the people believed the
assurances of the religious leadership and, above all, the repeated assurances of
Ayatollah Khomeyni. that all these organizations would be dissolved again once the
judiciary had caught up with the past. It did not happen that way. The revolution-
ary committees, the revolutionary courts and the revolutionary guards have been
anchored in law, and provisional revolutionary tools became institutionalized
instruments of oppression of a ruling minority. It it is the work of these feared
and hated organizations that causes a feeling among average Iranians that the third
great revolutionary aim--more internal freedom-has not been attained either, and
probably cannot be attained any longer under the present conditions.

23

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Though the ideological auspices are different, one cannot overle the parallel

to the time of the shah here either. The more the desire to stay in power becomes
a political aim in itself , the more the internal contradictions become evident. The
more articulate the opposition caused by this becomes, the more brutal are the blows
fron above.

This became apparent for the first time when the Iranian nedia were made to toe the
fundamentalist line and freedom of the press was virtually eliminated. It became
noticeable again when political developments at the universities were not taken

in hand the way the fundamentalist liked, and the universities were forcibly closed.
They have remained closed to this day, with about 600,000 young people being robbed
of their academic prospects. The whole thing was declared to be a counterrevolution.
The same process could be observed at elenentary and secondary schools; what had
started as an "Islamic purge" of the teaching staff and curriculuas ended up as

a political forcing into line and control of the schools which had nothing to do
with any educational reform. The same has happened in the plants, where the strike
councils so vital to the revolution have been dissolved and replaced by loyal plant
comittees.

Breakup and weakening of the Opposition

This seizure of power by the--at the time still solid—fundamntalist camp, penetra-
ting all social spheres, resulted in a polarization which also forced the opposition
to regroup. There too, there were parallels to the expiring times of the shah that
could not be overlooked. Representatives of opposition groupings were either driven
underground or went into exile of their own volition. The first to be affected were
the leading men of the National and the National Democratic Front, representing the
bourgeois and left-liberal camp. Then came the turn of the Islamic social revolu-
tionary mujahedeen and the Harxist-leninist Pedayeen-e Khalq. Finally, the last
prominent victim was Abol Hassan Bani-Sadr, considered to be part of the leftist
Islamic camp. He was removed from the office of president and after several weeks
underground remerged in Paris, from where, imitating his erstwhile idol Khomeyni,
he intends to organize a counterrevolution.

Bani-Sadr's removal and flight put an end to the camouflage of the differences in
the Islamic Republic, with the internal opposing positions becoung clearly apparent.
The upholders of armed resistance are the social-revolutionary mujahedeen, who are
presumably responsible for the mnerous terrorist attacks of the past few months.
But just as the most varied ideological and religious groupings united at the end

of the shah's rule in a kind of front of rejection of the ruling house, so today

too the muhajedeen are merely the label of a checkered opposition movement. Just

as then, so again today bourgeois and left-liberals, enlightened and leftist Muslims,
Marxist and grand bourgeois have agreed to the lowest co-on denominator--to reject-
ing the present rule in Iran. This means that this opposition movement too already
contains the seed of its breakup, with new political conflicts progra-ed.

This is one of the reasons why the opposition as yet has not taken a consistent
stand as an overall social counterforce. Another reason is the active terrorism
developed by individual groupings of the movement, which is also a subject of

controversy within the opposition. The radical ideological claim of the muhajedeen
acting as the spearhead and the ruthless way in which they proceed have so far
prevented the politically unorganized masses from making col-on cause with the

24
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFNJAI.USE(MVLY

opposition movement. As a result two groupings-~meanwhile largely isolated as
far as society as a whole is concerned--are fighting each other with terrorist
actions, while the frightened population is observing events from J safe distance.

The brutality with which the execution machinery was started has been as repulsive
as the ruthlessness with which the opposition placed its bombs. At the moment the
deadly merry-go—round, constantly started again by mass execution, ensuing bombings
and more mass executions, appears to have come to a comparative halt. There are
several reasons for that. Even though the muhajedeen who provide the active fighters
from their underground organisation stress their unbroken fighting strength almost
daily, they have been hit seriously by the execution of 2,000 of their members.
Hhile there are no exact data about the strength of their organization, they
probably have had at most 5,000 fighters and another some 30,000 supporters. All
their boasting notwithstanding, the fact that their leader, Hassoum Rajawi, had to
go into exile in Paris, indicates that their ogransation is not all that strong.

Making a virtue of necessity, the opposition has declared its now noticeable reserve
to be its new strategy. with the justification that there no longer exists an
unequivocal confrontation but that there is a split right through the ruling funda-
mentalist camp itself which the opposition must take advantage of. Any violent
action against the religious camp, they say, would only lead to solidarity within
that camp--a solidarity which otherwise was in doubt.

Permanent Power Struggle

The political differences within the religious camp are in fact apparent. For one
thing, there are differences of opinion concerning the handling of the opposition,
with some demanding ruthless severity and others considering a policy of reform

to be a more effective way of proceeding against the opposition than executions.

For another thing, there are fundamentally different orientations. The group

around President Hojjat ol-esluni Khamenei aims at testing a model after the pattern
of Libya or Syria, leaning on but not sumitting to the Soviet Union in the process.
The politicians around Speakerlkﬂjatol1nlmnhashemi Rafsanjani want to build up

an independent but rather Eastern oriented Islamic society. These differing concepts
become apparent in all questions of detail-from the question of ownership to cul-
tural revolutionary overtures to evaluation of the clerics' political leadership
role in government.

As in all the other questions, Ayatollah Khomeyni, as the leader of the revolution
who continues to stand above all else, avoids any kind of clear stand. In accor-
dance with the principle of "divide and role," he tries to maintain a balance
between the two competing groupings as far as political power is concerned. That
is becoming daily more difficult, however. After the devasting bombings to which
the few genuine political leaders of the religious camp fell victim, Khomeyni finds
himself increasingly constrained to intervene in everyday politics--in other words,
to deal with questions of detail and then also make decisions.

Despite the internal split in the fundamentalist camp and despite the decreasing
political charisma of the leader of the revolution, the calculations of the opposi-
tion cannot be expected to be realized in the near future. From a security point
of view, the Tehran regime appears to be able to at least curb the opposition

25
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR‘OFF1C1AI.USE€DNLY

activities as long as the opposition movement does not become a mass movement, and
for the reasons given above there are at present no indications that this will
happen. Should the muhajedeen prevail, it would be reasonable to expect an attempt
to follow the Algerian pattern. It is more likely, though, that its opposition will
fail. A breakup of the entire opposition movement and the buildup of innumerable
new opposition groups underground would then be the result. A breakup, however,
amounts to the collapse of one's own strength.

Unless there is foreign intervention (and at present there are no signs of that),
the current fundamentalist regime therefore, despite international isolation and
despite domestic political and economic political failure, will continue to be able
to make do. The only force capable of organizing a large-scale counterblow, the
army, is tied up with the war with Iraq until further notice. Moreover, particu-
larly after the flight of Bani-Sadr, there have been personnel purges within the
army which, while not bringing the forces into the fundamentalist line, broke their
political back--if indeed such ever existed.

The Iranian opposition active abroad, whether it is part of the monsrchist camp

or part of the leftist Islamic forces around Bani-Sadr, lacks any support in the
country itself. Its activities, eagerly noted by the public in the west and east,
play no part in the domestic Iranian confrontations and occupy no place in the con-
ciousness of the average Iranian. Unless there is an intervention by a foreign

power which could bring the opposition forces back to Iran, a solution of the Iranian
crisis is possible only from within; not only the people in Tehran but those in the
rural areas are convinced of that.

One can therefore not expect a consolidation of the situation in one direction or
another in the foreseeable future. Moreover, the real difficulties would only
begin after a clarification as to who holds the power in Tehran, because the power
struggle described above is limited almost exclusively to the capital proper.

The ethnic minorities living in the provinces surrounding the capital, under the
lee of the disturbances following the revolution at the center, have been able to
realize their long-cherished dream of large-scale autonomy. In Kurdistan this
virtually led to civil war, while in the other provinces it was tactly put up with
owing to the weakness of the central power. Regrsdless of who will win the power
struggle in the end, there is no doubt but that any new regime is found to follow
one tradition of the time of the shah--a centralized government apparatus and a
centralized-government claim to power, implemented by force if need be. In light
of what is already happening in this country, this is a gloomy propsect.

FOOTNOTES
1. There are no reliable statistical data in Iran. Published figures therefore
are subject to considerable fluctuations. The following data, based on internal
calculations of individual specialists in the ministries, can therefore also
be only approximate.

2. The total number of employed is about 12 million.
3. After the victory of the revolution, 4 million barrels a day were mentioned as

a politically desirable production quota. The exchange value corresponded to
the actual need for foreign currency by Iran for the country's reconstruction

26
l!”l(ﬂﬂﬂ(1Al.USE(MVLY
INJR 0P1W(]Al.lh5EI(NNLY

according to knowledge available at the time. For couparioon, daily
production during the last months of the time of the shah was 6 lillion
barrels.

4. Kurt Greusaing, "Rene Politik, alter Deapotianua. Perspektiven der ielanischen
Revolution." [Rev Politics, Old Deepotien. Prospects of the Islamic Revolution.]
In "Religion und Politik in Iran" [Religion and Politics in Iran]. Frankfurt/
Main 1981, p 25.

COPYRIGHT: 1982 Verlag fuer Internationale Politik G-bﬂ, Bonn

8790
CSO: 6620/22

27.-
FIHICMNWCJAI.USE(HVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ONGOING Ann-m MRORISH m
Brussels POURQmI PAS? in French 21 Jan 82 pp ﬁ-ﬂo
[Articlea "The massacre of the Innocents'fl

[Text] ‘lhe execution squads. the anion are not idle in Iran.
In spite of the Iranian-Iraqi war which is continuing and in-
tensifying on the Hestern border. the republic of the systollshs
hunts down its opponents, the “hypocrites“ as they are called by
the authorities in Tehran. without respite.

The Islamic revolution is wading in blood. The-blood of terror-
isn end of repression.

It is true that the governsent of the nullshs is being attacked
fro- all sides. that every day political or religious leaders
are assassinated. that innocents perish in assassination at- -
tenpts. that public buildings blow up or are titan In store.
that Pasdarsns (the revolutionary stands) up attacked. This
terrorism is echoed by the terror of the state. 'lhe repression
is indiscrininately hitting the Meheddin Heels-s. the We
of Peyksr. the bazaar tradesmen. the nonarchiste. the des and
other ethnic ninorities. Thousands of Iranians -- and not neces-
sarily opponents -- have been Jailed without charge and without
sentence. Last year. 2000 'hypocritss" were officially executed.
Henceforth. this slaughter has been breedsned to include the
mhais -- the host isportant religious ninority in Inn --. ad-
vocstes of a-politicisn and non-violence.

nonopolising of the riches by a minority can push the people tonal those whose
only privilege is the fact that they stared their suffering. he shock wave which
case down fron (ion has not finished troubling the mini Uorld. explained a parti-
cipant in the eesinar. organised by the University of the United nations, and de-
voted to "socio-culttu-sl alternatives for develop-ant.“ The ”third road." repre-
senud by the Iranian revolution. is not very telpting. Ihst is happening in Iran
is not a. stopping of the train of progress. but a retm to barbsriss. Over there,
it is impossible to mistake the revolution for a gala dinner.

28

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
uvn vrravuu. use. was:

To be sure. the governnent of the mullahs is being attacked fro. all sides at once.
By the Iraqi any as well as by the national oppositions or by the autononiet Kurds
and Baluchis. To these attacks. these acts of terrorisn. the government responds
with repression. The revolutionary guards shoot or hang people after sunaary trials
-- some last only a few minutes --. held behind closed doors and where the accused
are not allowed to have the assistance of a lawyer.

"The Islanic revolution has no other option but violent and bloody purges." adait-
ted Ayatollah Weanjani. the president of parliament.

Butwhydoes thisregine with itsbacktothewallpersecutetheﬁahais? Uhyhas
it undertaken to systenatically elininate the spiritual leaders of a non-violent
connunity which does not allow itself any political activity: why is it destroying

their places of worship. their ceneteries? Uhy is it confiscating the property of
the Bahia?

. l
The Iranian leaders are conplaining that they are being kept out of the concert
among nations and are preparing to send "goodwill niasions" throughout the world.
You do not need to be a genius to predict that their emissaries will have great

difficulty in getting people to recognize the serits of an Islanic revolution
soiled by the massacre of the innocent Bahais.

It was on 23 Decenber that ei t Bahais. nenbers of the National Spiritual Assembly
(the community's highest body were arrested while meeting at the hose of a fellow
Bahai in Tehran. Hithout notifying their fanilies. without a trial even, the eiart
Bahai spiritual. leaders were executed and buried in the "infidels' cenetery.”

A nonth-and-a-half before. six Bahais, also neabers of the National Spiritual As-
sembly. had been arrested and shot. 0n 3 January. in the face of the emotion
aroused in the Vest by these assassinations. the president of the Iranian Suprese
Court, Ayatollah Ardebili. denied the erecution of the Bahai officials and tried
to make believe that they had been eliminated by opponents. However. on 6 January
he rescinded his statelents. and confined the death of the eiyzt Bahais "executed
for having spied for Israel and the United States."

People at the Belgan Bahai Center are indignant about these accusations formulated
by Tehran:

"who will believe that spies get together before passing information on to foreign
powers? And if they were really spies. why then did the regime want to keep their
arrest. their detention and. finally. their death. a secret? m not have set up
a trial. why a hasty burial without the knowledge of the families? The truth is
that these crines are a disgrace to Islamic Justice. Henoeforth. a secret organi-

zation with support within the Revolutionary Council will attend to the persecution
of the Iranian Bahais."

The fate of the mhais -- there are nore than $0,000 of then in Iran -- has never
been enviable. In December 1978 already. 60 houses belonging to Bahu faithful in
Shiraz were looted. and 25 in Nan-is were bm-ned down. In Savistan. followers of

the Bab were taken to the mosque and forced to renounce their faith. In June 1979.

all Bahai properties. including their places of worship and their cemeteries were

29

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

confiscated. Their national center in Tehran was turned into an Islasic university.
The couercial enterprise Shirkat. established by the Bahais 50 years ago and en-
ploying 15.000 Bahais. was seized by the new regine. In .Sptenber 1979. the revolu-
tionary guards attacked the House of the lab in Shires. the Bahais' holiest shrine
in Iran. In September 1980. seven Bernie fron Iasid were executed. ostensibly for
"spying for foreign powers and anti-Islamic activities.”

New executions to'ek place in November in Tabris. In Decaber. a Bahai couple was
in Shiraz was awakened in the middle of the night. beaten. doused with gasoline and
put to death by fire.

In January 1981, Dr Hakim. professor of anatomy at the University of Tehran. was
shot down in his consulting room. The property of his wife -- of French nationali-

ty -- was confiscated. March 1981: new death sentences passed and executed in
Shiraz.

The list of Bahais who have been arrested. brutalised. plundered. assassinated. is
as long as a requiem. In the face of this attespt to elisinate Bahai believers.
the 6.000 Spiritual Assemblies spread throughout the world have lads known their
anguish to Ayatollah Khomeini. to President Bani-Sadr. to the United Nations. to
the European Parliasent. to governments and to the human rights defense leagues:

- Btcept for the persecutions in the aiddle of the 19th century. which took the
lives of 20.000 of the first believers. the current threat of total destruction of
the Bahai conunity in Iran has never been so ininent or so real.

International indignation has forced the Iranian authorities to change their atti-
tude. but not their policy. There are no longer any "official" trials or execu-
tions of mhais. But a kind of death squad has undertaken to relove the disciples
of the Bab and shoot then.

The Shiites. who are a ainority within the noslen world. have suffered fro- the
predominance of the Sunnis. It is distressing to see former victims becone the
executioners of another religious minority. and the tolerance prescribed by the
Koran goes unheeded.

The current Iranian tegiae has formulated various accusations with regard to the
Bahals.

1) The Bahais collaborated with the Pahlavis.

"The assertion that the Bahais supported the former regime.” explained a aesber of
the Bahai Center in Belgian. "comes free the fact that the Bernie never denounced
the Shah's regime. that they did not Join political organizations opposed to the
regime. and that soae Bahais held important positions in the branches of tint re-
gine. According to the teachings of their faith. the Balnis owe loyalty and obe-
dience to the govern-ant of the country in which they live. whatever its fora or
its policy. Hence. they never participate in subversive activities. Fin-thermre.
the Bahais are not allowed to become politically involved or to hold a political
function. These basic principles do not change with the governsents."

30

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
run urlivuu. oer. 031.!

During the 58 years of the Pshlavi rule. the Spiritual Assenhly of the Bahais in
Iran wade repeated appeals to the Shah. to the ministers and to the ”lie (parlia-
ment) to convince them to grant equitable treat-ant to the Bahai community. But in
vain. The authorities did not do anything to protect the lives and property of the
Bahais. whose religion did not receive 1 status. In 1975. the Bahais refused
to becose members of the Rastakhis Party single party introduced by Rena Pahlavi)
and. more recently. they refused to vote in the national referendun for the estab-
lishment of an Islamic republic. which has earned the- even lore hostility.

2) The hhais are enemies of Isles.

"The Bahai faith is usually considered an heretic sect of Isles. desiring to over-
throw Islam in its current fem. However. in spite of its roots. it is as differ
ent from Isles as Christianity is froa Judaisa.” stated one Bahai. "Our faith
teaches us that religious revelation is continuous and progressive. and that
Baha'u'llah. our founder. is the nest recent but not the last of the divine tearing
sent to guide humanity. The khais believe in the essential unity of all under
religions in the world. and honor their founders as divinely inspired prophets.

A Bani who would try to oppose Islam. to denigrate it or to destroy it -- that or
any other religion -- would be in profound disagreement with the ”basic principles
of the Bahai faith."

"According to our beliefs. all the major religions teach the same basic spiritual
principles. They differ solely in their social teachings. which change in function
of the needs of the era they were revealed in. For example. along the Rahais men
and women have the same rights. privileges and responsibilities. Consequently.

the women participate fully in all the spiritual and administrative affairs of the
community. Because they are different from the social teachings of Islam. these
practices only reinforce the accusations. directed against the Bahais. that they
are hostile to Islam.”

3) The Bahais are agents of Zionism.

Because the Bahai world Center is located in Israel. and because amorous Bshai
pilgrims visit that country. the disciples of Bsha'u'llah are suspected of having
secret dealings with the Hehrew state.

As one Bahai explained: "'lhe Bahsi Vorld Center was established in the last cen-
tury -- long before the establishment of the state of Israel -- and it has absolu-
tely nothing to do with Zionism. Baha'u'llah was exiled to the Holy Land on the
order of two Islanic governments (Iran and May). He renained there until his
death in 1892. His tomb is located in Haifa and attracts hhsi believers."

It is an irony of fate. a nockery even. to see the Bahaie of Iran persecuted. sap
tyred and eliminated. Indeed. their founder. Baha'u'llah stated: "The light of
men is Justice. do not suffocate it with the adverse winds of oppression and of
tyranny. The goal of justice is the appearance of unity aaong men."

COPYRIGHT: 1982 POURQUOI PAS?

8463
cso. u619/Iu.

31

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE OILY

mm am 'mmc' m'za,umm' mm

W of God
Psris um in Mob 22-28 Jun 82 pp 76,77

[Mich by Jsoqnss mob]

[Mt Mmmrm.00002th-in1rsn. Monstitutsthswinci-

ps1 amnimrityinthsooutty. Ana’s thqdonotuist. lPlasmas-
titotion or tbs Islnio Republic mtsots Jaws (shot

Andthouhthsydonotystvssrsysnovstsr, itissJ-sstitbss-sssit
thsydid.'rhsholoosusthssstsrtod,'ussrtssndsrotthsmiwin
Prsnos.

Sines tbs stsrt of tbs revolution, 97 Bobs'is hsvo boon mooted. About 10

non hsvs dissppssrsd, W, vsnishsd. Bsrstios, spiss in tbs m or
Zionist, cousborstors of tho tor-u- rsgils: anything is good sued: to sst
o“ s Baha'i but. am

Tbshistoryotthisnsvrsithbscinsonnmtﬁhh,«Mi-shiatsu“.
mtm,syommot25,uirssmmh-sd,smcssthsilpsodinc

mini otsnssssngsr tro- ood. asisnusdths 'Bsb,' which-snow.
rhsoosopsninatoknovlsdu. Sooo.hsom.thssrsorpsscssndjnstios
pronissdbysllthoholybooksvinbsun. For,inMsopd.nion,rsli¢ions
hsvoonlyoosOod. masbisths oontinstos.‘ot mm, Ibsss, mu,

erishns, Zorosstsr, Jesus, and lulu-st.

First oonvsrsions. First Isl-tyros 20,000 dud, it is rs‘portsd. no Bob is
shot st robs-is. His sucosssor, Bshs'u'nsh, mounts Iii-sol! ss tbs )lsssish.
8s romlstos the pﬂnciplsa or tbs 00' tsith. Bo launches on spposl to tho
princes tostopvsrs. asprsschss thssqnnityotlsnsndvo-so. Bossssrts
that Mind m bouosforth such-us Ood without an intonation, sud tskss
sdvsntscs or that to proscrihs so: (on or olsrg. thsrs is nothing vow
Shuts in s11 thst. And tbs mm», so on. night cuss, um nsm {min

32
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

this denial of their role and their privileges.

Abdul Babe, who succeeds Baha'u'llah, travels in Mops and Anerica. Hill-
ions of people throughout the uorid beco- converts. Hitb no problens.
Except in Iran.

iron the accession to power of Bees khan, in 1921, persecutions are rest-ed.
Purges in the aministration. Obligatory declaration of one's relim to
enter the cdvil service. Baha'i narriages declared illegal.

ma Rosa continues his father's policy, cleverly channels popular anger
against the Bob's follcvers, whenever the social situation because too tense.
In 1955, a fresh pogron. A vast national cupaign is launched over the radio,

in the newspapers. Military and religious leaders take part in the destruc-
tion of the Daha'i center in Tehran.

Daring periods of noderation, the Baha'is, middle-class, often enlightened,
people, again appear in the forefront of socisl life. Although their reli-
gion forbids the. to engage in politics, sons are found in the Shah's en-

tourage, like his private physician, and others in the am. Later on, they
will be criticised for this.

"rhey Are Pernicicus'

h'ith the coding of-the revolution, they believe they uill cease to be outcasts.
wild dream they constitute a political group. "the, are pernicious,“ Ines
Khoneni asserts to a Kuwaiti Journalist in 1979.

At the Iranian enbessy in Paris, a diplonat, Hussein Mashayekhi, asserts
that the Beha‘is are agents of Israel.

It is easy to accuse then of Zionism, since their holy place, share the Bab

lies buried, happens to be in Haifa, once Turkish, but new -- alas for than!
°. Iera

Here pogrcns in January 1979. Property confiscated, I!!! dragged off to the

sosque to be converted by force. Kidnapings, nurderm Custeries desecrated,
rated by bulldosers. Trials, executions, disappearancea.

Since 21 August 1980, date of their arrest, there has been no news of the
eight nonbers of the National Spiritual Ass-ably, the highest Baha'i author-
ity. Their successors, intercepted on 13 Decenber 1981 by an “unidentified
armed gang," are discovered by chance buried in the capital's cenetery for
unbelievers. m 1 January, the leaders of the Tehran cmuniw are executed.

The plan for externination of the Baha'is has begun. more will it and?
COPYRIGHT: 1982 s. a. Groups Express

33
'08 OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Hinton- cilassom in Morton
PariaL'mmmmnchzz-za Jon82p77‘
(“:93 by mum some]

Itiosnclin‘inuahohad,thoto1capiot1ranionl\mdiston. Aso-

tor has oottlod in cm tho volloyoand anddth nountain root-hills of
tho robollicus provinco. In spito cfth occld and tho doprivaticn, oovorol
thousand Pool-organ (Kurdioh rooiotonoo fightoro) aro still donning tho
rohran numb...

'D-ocrocy for Iran, autoncw tor Kurdioton,‘ an ontiro pooplo in robolliou
hos boon crying cut'i'or you". In voinl 'lho Iron-Iron conﬂict hno mun:
oclipood tho frightful roproooion mailing tcdq in our provinco. Blot-y
dq pooplo arc Mn; onid gonorol inditroronco, nrdorod 'at tho dictutos of
tho nullaho.‘ vo oro told by )lchoon Solohi, opocdal onvcv of tho Kurdioh
religion loador, Shoik ﬂoodino nomini.

Bounoo tho: duand tho right to bo dirtornt, tho Pool-oral, who ovorshodcv
o ton-itory of 100.0(1) oquaro kiluotoro, aro onaasod in a Iorcilooo tight.
ﬂu Iranian am infantry divioicuo «tho 128th, quortarod in Sound“, and
tho6hth, huodinomioho-supportodhvrodnontacthodorm (Gan-di-
ono of tho hovoluticn), air torco dotachonto, and roidcrononto from tho
ran: and ahoovin divioicns. aro pitiloool: naming up tho Kurdish aroa.
Hoovy artillory bubardnonto, poundinu tr:- holiccptoro, harvooto burnod,
vmacos I'cloaxmd up': oinco lurch 1980, hour]: 10,M pot-cons, civilians
anhgnccnbatonto, havo thus boon killod in tho nno o: 'loniont and norcim

.I

D: tho an“. of Indorghosh. nou- Xohohod, which oonod u o withdraw]. bano
for tho Pooh-onus, tho Ouanduno of tho Rowlution poocoodod to o lass lurdor.
'm h Sou-bot 1980,‘ lbhoon Salohi roccunts, 'tho Pudorano ourroundod the
littlo Met 0: 500 hcooo. Tho: cold-bloododly nouocrod ho poo-ants. in-
eluding van, childron, and old non. an 22 non-bu 1961, tho: ottockod it
uninvith-crtaroandiSSI-lininotorcanncn.‘ Moo-on Bdood, 20mm,
voundod, and 100 huoo dootrcyod. '

A largo-scolo bottlo is now boinc mod along tho Bonoh-Sardnoht road, which
io 60 kiluotoro long. an tho villagoo along this trontior road oro said
to hovo boon synto-otically ohonsd. ‘ tho Iranian w'o objection an to
finish cutting of: tho northvootxroutior, lop up pockoto of roaiotanco, and,
obovo an, preparo for a huo ottonoivo aaoinot tho Iraqi toms, which aro
withdrun to tho cost of Banoh.

Boring olroody boon subjoctod for 2 yours to o outtccoting oconc-ic blockodo,
Kurdistan 'io dying in oi.1ont:o,'l in tho Iondo of Ahdorr-ano chaosulou, lead-

or at the Iranian Kurdish Duccratic Party (PM). Horus scuo trihos in
Ironion Kurdioton .. ouch oo tho Baa-uni -- hovo alliod tho-solvos vith tho

34
1'01! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Ironisn ow to tight ossinst thoir hlood-hrothors. In Jul: 1981, indood,

the tonh of tho prostitiouo Iroqi Mob chiot, notoi’s Dorssni,uss dooo-
orstod in Oshnsviyoh. Provoostion? Prohohly. modistoly, Borsoni's sons,
Idrioo ond hsoooud, scousod tho m or ioonoolssn, snd sttsokod, with thoir
1,500 oonbstonto, supportod by tho Oosrdisns of tho novolution, tho Poohorgso'
positions in tho North of Kurdistan. “A donor in tho hook,‘ hohson Solohi
ocknoulodgos.

Politically dividod, tho Kurdish pooplo are in wt shout ono thing: tho
srmod otruulo to 'drivo as: tho nou tyront in rohrsnﬂ In s soss¢o thst
roschod Yrsnco during tho lsst tov dsys, Shoik hoodins Bosooini stroosoo
thst “tho Ironisn moss hsvo so thoir only solution tho overthrow of tho
rogino to ostshlish s doloorstic ropublio.‘

But out off tron tho world by s nilitory cordon, with no outsido sid svsiloblo
to thou, doprivod of sodiostion, of Iilk, osn tho Kurdish pooplo hold out
much longor?

COPYRIGHT: 1982 o. s. Groupo hproso

121119
050: h619/h9

35

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SYRIA

PRO-IRAQI MAGAZINE W on HAHN! INCIDENTS
31211658 Paris AL-HATAN AL-‘ARABI in Arabic 19 Rb 82 pp 18-22

[Excerpt] The Syrian city of ﬂanah has for 2 weeks been isolated free the rest
of Syria. The ugliest asssacre ever perpetrated in an Arab city in conteaporsry
Arab history is now taking place in ﬂash. The nuber of victias, according to
reports by arrivals and diplomatic sources, has thus far amounted to 3,000. The
casualties nay be more than that because the information leaked is still little.
Secret reports fron Beirut say that the lumber of victims is not less than 6,000.

The blood tax being paid by Esmah is not the first of its kind and the nassacre
being perpetrated by the special forces and the defense squads, which are reserve
forces basically forned to act as a tool to protect the ruling family in.Syris
against its political opponents, is also not the first of its kind. Host of the
Syrian cities, particularly Aleppo and lie-ah, have previously witnessed popular
uprisings which were strongly resisted by the authorities. However, these
uprisings always ended up in arsed confrontation batman the repressive military
tool and the inhabitants. There cane a time when this tool began to turn against
its owners. In the March 1980 uprising, which lasted 20 days, for crawls,
intensive units of defense squads and the 5th army division, supported by the
67th brigade, combed the city of Hamah for l nonth from 7 April to 7 Hay 1980.
These forces tortured the' people and cut off water and electricity throughout
the conbing operation. Two years after this campaign, the 47th brigade sided
with the people in fighting against the regime mtil the end.

In an attempt to retaliate for the abortive March canpaign in Hamah, which robbed
the authorities of much of their esteen, the special forces took revenge by
confronting a group of worshippers on '1d al-Pitr, killing 83 of them near one
of the Aleppo mosques. There also cane the Tudmr massacre in the same year,

in which 756 political prisoners. nost of then Syrian intellectuals, were
killed. This was followed by the ﬂamah massacre on 24 April 1981, in which 124
were killed after confronting the regime's forces in the following three Syrian
villages: Salhsb, 'Ayn sl-Kurum and Hedi sl-‘Uyun. On that day the special
forces and the defense squads besieged [leash and prevented its people froa
entering it. A battle took place and 300 were killed, as reported by unofficial
sources.. These forces also shelled the city mosques, including the ”her ibn
al-Khattah, al-Afandi, al-Dallul and al-Ahdab mosques.

36

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The recent battles in Hamah actually happened as a result of a popular decision
for general confrontation. The decision was adopted by the field co-and of the
fighting vanguard in the city on 19 January 1982. The confrontation was scheduled
to begin on 25 January, but was postponed until 2 February when the fighting
vanguard groups moved and attacked the Syrian forces stationed in the city as a
precautionary measure. Hundreds died in the first attack and the first day ended
with massive losses among the Syrian military.

Before reinforcements reached llamh, the people joined the ranks of the attacking
vanguard, occupied public buildings, ruling party centers, police stations and
military airport and gained full control of them in sonething like an armed
popular revolution. The surprise was that the 67th armored brigade, which was

in charge of quelling the uprising and which arrived in Hameh from the township
of al-Qutayfah, had divided loyalties and soon afterward joined the people. A
battle between the lath brigade, supported by the city inhabitants, and the
defense squads, the special forces and parts of the 21st brigade took place.

The fighters blew up the al-Rastan bridge so that no additional reinforcements
would reach the city.

In order to face this critical situation, the authorities resorted to the use of
the air force. At first they used helicopters in a landing operation which failed
after two had been downed. Fighter planes were then used; the first attempt
failed when the planes flew over the town and pilots failed to drop the bombs.

The second attempt was carried out under the supervision of the Syrian president's
brother, Rif'at al-Asad, and Defense Minister Gen Hustafa Tales who were directing
the operations 10 km away.

As fighting intensified inside the isolated city, the regime's forces set up
barricades on the Aleppo-Bamah highway. Hench was also besieged from the direc-
tion of lions. A nunber of military comuniques were issued by the various fac-
tions of the Islamic revolution on other clashes in Aleppo, Latakia, Dar'a and
Damascus and the state of tension in other Syrian towns. The cousuniques point
out that 3,700 officers and men joined the people of Bamah complete with their
missile units and three tank battalions. Twenty planes were ordered to bod: the
town but they remined neutral. The authorities' siege of the town extended to
over 50 km away and the people of Eamah scored many direct hits. [Sentence

as published]

In another communique, fierce clashes were reported to have taken place in Aleppo
on 10 February and the firing was heard all over the city. A group of fighters
controlled a relay station which transmitted these commiques on 1000 khz
declaring the possible liberation of the city. Clashes also took place in
Latakia among the people themselves and between them and the army. Travelers

to Turkey through Aleppo said that they heard intermittent shooting over their
heads. Other sporadic clashes seemed to have occurred in Dar'a and Damascus when
the Hamah clashes were continuing. These clashes came 1 week after the attewted
coup which was planned but had no chance of success. The coup attempt was
planned by 200 army officers from the various army corps and proved that the
opposition to the Syrian regime is not confined to a few indipant army officers ’
or to the Muslim Brothers Organisation but is an opposition which runs the

37

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

length and depth of Syria. The oppositionpemage; the armed forces and civilians
and includes entire cities. This made the Western press consider these events
the first real threat to the Syrian regime in 11 years.

he bloodbsth which began on Tuesday. 2 February, has not ended despite tons of
artillery shells and missiles which destroyed hundreds of houses in Ila-ah alone.
Entering and leaving the city was impossible for Syrian citizens and Arab and
foreign reporters even 2 weeks after the outbreak of fighting. However,

travelers spoke about ambulances actively transferring military casualties from
aamah to Km and burned army vehicles and tanks seen by first aid men themselves.
An extremely tense situation is reported among army ranks, and the naval forces
are indignant. A large masher of troops from the defense squads were deployed
aromd the capital to defend it within security measures to protect the Repdalican
Palace and government buildings.

It is naturally impossible to estimate the final casualty figures. The various
con-unique of the Muslim brothers reported 2,000 killed and 3,000 vomded among
the military forces. A commique said that units from the 5th brigade and 9th
division comprising 3,500-4.000 soldiers have joined the people. The commique
added that these units are armed with a fully equipped missile battery, tvo
artillery battalions and one tank battalion. Long-range artillery in the town of
Hasysf. near nameh. shelled the rebel artillery and the nsmah artillery replied,
silencing the Hasyaf artillery.

COPYRIGIT: 1982 AL “ATM AL ARABI

CSO: “06/277

38

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SYRIA

mun momma sou; m run-1m ma quasrzoum
Paris AL-WATAN Ant-"mm in Arabic No 256, 3-11. Jun 82 pp 18-19

[Editorial: "The 'Schemer' of Damascus and the 'Mullah' of Tehran: Hafiz al-Asad's
’Initiative'.. .Ite Mysteries and Reasons"]

[Text] Why do you think that Hafiz al-Asad is playing—or pretending to play-~a
part in stopping the Iraq-Iran war, after it has lasted more than 16 months?

Did Hafiz al-Aaad forget all this time that Iraq forms a strategic depth for Syria
and that its large, strong army is an indispensible force to confront the Zionist
entity...to now start extricating the Iraqi army from its very long battle with Iran?

Did Hafiz al-Asad forget that. the Iraqi army kept Damascus from falling in 1973,
without which he would not be in power...or at least the capital of his regime would
be a city other than Damascus, perhaps Aleppo...or Latakia?

Why did Hafiz al-Asad not discover this fact...and the fact that he is "defenseless"
against Israel without Iraq since Egypt pulled out of the battle...until the official
annexation of the Golan Heights, while he merely watched the occupation of the Golan
for many years, occupying himself by plotting and scheming against Iraq and Lebanon?

The interesting thing is that he did not discover all these facts and stir his "na-
tionalistic" conscience until his recent visit to Saudi Arabia and the Gulf countries.

These are questions. or mysteries, which political col-sentators are trying to answer
and get to the botton of.

No doubt the annexation of the Golan Heights is a great humiliation for Hafiz al-Asad.
"hat will he do? Can the Syrian president satisfy his people with decisions on pa-
per issued by the Arab League or the Security Council...how do the Syrian people

view this regime's continued support for the Iranian regime in its war against Iraq,
tying down the Iraqi army when Israel is annexing the Golan Heights and al-Asad is
incapable of military confrontation? This is one of the mysteries...

Another mystery being discussed by Arab political circles is that the leaders of San-
di Arabia and the Gulf , although out of honor they are publicly courteous to Hafiz
al-Asad, openly told him, "It is impossible to have true 'Arab solidarity' against
Israel when you are supporting the Iranian regime against Iraq, and it is also im-
possible to organize an effective confrontation with Israel while Iraq is busy with
the war with Iran."

39

MOMMUSEONLY
son omcm. uh: ONLY

The nost dangerous aspect of this for Rafi: al-Asad is what he has heard openly or
indirectly to the effect that Israel's annexing the Golan while Iraq is preoccupied
means that Syria cannot confront Israel militarily. This means that there is no
need to increase financial support for Syria.. .what would this support go for?

If Saudi Arabia and the Gulf stop financing Syria, this would be the real predicament
for Hafiz al-Asad's regime. Then how would he face his people on all his other pre-
dicaments [such as:]

1. Israel is occupying the Golan and there is no real way to confront this danger-
ous move.

2. Internal opposition intensifies daily...and the regime is foundering in the dom-
estic slaughter.

3. The regime and its military are sinking in the Lebanese quagmire.

la. The economic problem is growing and cannot be solved without a continued flow of
money from the oil countries.

These are the mysteries and reasons.

However, what is the mystery of this dramatic changeover by the Tehran regime from
threatening to occupy Iraqi territory and overthrow the Bagdad regime to suddenly
complying with Hafiz al-Asad's hypocrasy and making these flexible statements? A
few days after Hafiz al-Asad returned from Kuwait, where he discussed the so-cslled
Syrian-Kuwaiti initiative to stop the war, the Iranian Prime Minister flew to Damas-
cus. Theran has welcomed the upcoming visit by Hafiz al-Asad to Iran, although a1-
Asad wanted to make the visit and requested it of the Iranian regime.

This visit was planned much earlier, and what made al-Asad delay it was not moral
opposition to Iranian aggression against Iraq, but fear of the reaction of the Syr-
ian Arab people. This latest visit is merely carrying out a visit not made earlier.
Its purpose remains coordination between the Iranian and Syrian regimes to plot
against Iraq and the Arab Gulf.

Moreover, officials in Tehran have started speaking a "diplomatic" language which
none had spoken before. At the beginning, the Iranians fought Iraq under the mili-
tary leadership of Bani-Sadr, who depended primarily on the military and on a great
deal of political flexibility to decrease Iran's isolation. Bani-Sadr fought from
Septsmter 1980 until June 1981, when he left the presidency...without any success in
driving the Iraqi forces from Iranian territory. It became clear that his army could
not withstand the Iraqi army.

After Bani-Sadr, the mullahs took over completely. When Bani-Sadr was in power, the
mullahs said that he did not know how to fight the Iraqis...and if they were in con-
trol, they would know how to drive the Iraqis out of Iranian territory; however...

how could they invade al-Basrsh, a1-‘Umarah and even Baghdad to overthrow the regime!

After the mullahs got what they wanted, they tried their luck with the Iraqis. At
first, the battle east of al-Karun excited them...despite their huge losses there,
they applauded...and exchanged congratulations and renewed their hopes. ..they started

40
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OMCML USE ONLY

giving Iranians hope of a day of victory: they did not realise one important fact,

that the Iraqi leaders had already decided to withdraw from that area...they ignored
this fact and imagined that the situation on that front had turned around, with the

Iraqis retreating...and the Iranians advancing.

Then, in the battle of Basatin in December, the Iranians actually made progress;
however...as the regime's leader Khameneh'i said, they liberated "250 square kilo-
meters and a border village named Basatin from the 15,000 square kilometers occupied
by the Iraqi army and important cities such as al-Muhamrah [Khorramshahr] and Qasr-
e-Shirin"...the Theran regime tried to portray the result of this battle as a great
victory, ignoring the magnitude of their losses-«none than 6,000 dead and three times
this number wounded. a great number of tanks and weapons destroyed, out of proportion
to their "progress"--an insignificant progress as confirmed by Khameneh'i's speech.

In the shadow of this erroneous estimation, the mullahs decided to continue to take
risks, thinking that attacking the Iraqi forces repeatedly would confuse them and
lower their morale. turning the situation on the front to their advantage...therefore
they forced what was left of their best units...especially the volunteers whom they
spent months gathering...into a difficult battle in the area of Kilan and Sumar in
the middle sector of the front. It was impossible for the Iraqis to withdraw from
this area because it was not like east of al-Karun, which was far from the Iraqi bor-
der. The river forms an important barrier between the two armies, and this area di-
rectly overlooks the Iraqi border cities of Ihanaqin, Mandali and Raft Khaneh, which
were shelled by Iranian artillery on 16 September 1980. causing the outbreak of war
between Iraq and Iran.

In the battle of Kilsn and Sumnr, the Iraqis decided to stand fast...they did not
withdraw...and a very lengthy battle broke out which lasted about a week.

Because the Iranian's plans were based on risk—taking and on the psychological aspects
as they saw them, their losses were enormous...while the Iraqi losses were slight be-
cause they were in a defensive position, had excellent weapons and their fortifica‘
tions were strong. In this battle, the Iranians lost more than 11,000 colbattants
[killed] and three times this number wounded...the volunteer and [Revolutionary] Guard
forces were almost wiped out. The mullahs considered these forces to be their pri-
mary weapon in their new method of confronting the Iraqis...and by this the mullahs
lost their main weapon and their magic, as Bani-Sadr lost his magic months earlier.

0n the other hand, these battles forced the Iraqis into a state of watchfulness and
emergency preparedness. President Saddam Busayn and the party called for party mem-
bers and the people to volunteer to provide new blood for the battle, and volunteers
began to pour in. Many thousands of young men from all Iraqi governorates gathered
in army camps to complete their military training, and new brigades of fighters began
rushing out to the front, and while the mullah's magic was failing in Tehran, the
Iraqi forces were renewed and vigorous.

This explains the change by the ruling mullahs in Tehran from their fiery statements
a few weeks ago about entering Iraqi territory to suddenly welcoming the initiative
of their friend Hafiz al-Asad. A friend in need is a friend indeed...ﬂafis al-Asad,
who was backing up the Iranian regime in a state of war now becomes the Khameneh'i
regime's back-up to get out of the dilsnmm of war.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

If Hafiz al-Asad is in a very uncomfortable position because of the continuing Iraq-
Iran war and his support for Iran in the shadow of these circumtances which we
point out.. .he will not be able to risk the collapse of his allies in Tehran. Hafiz
al-Asad is a "scheller" who knows what side his bread is buttered on...and when to
act. lie went to Saudi Arabia and the Gulf ...heard what he heard...and decided on
the method of the "schener" to try to "rescue himself." and "rescue his friends" in
Tehran and to appear to the people as if he is doing a "nationalistic service."

However, is Hafiz al-Asad actually trying to achieve peace, or maneuvering to win
time for hinself and his friends in Tehran?

There are grave doubts about this move; however, the most obvious truth is that time
is no longer working for the "scheler" of Damascus or the "mllah" of Tehran.

comma-r: 1981 AL—HATAN AL-‘ARABI

9882
C80: “04/225

102

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SUM

muons sun 15 mo Damian mom
Perle Amen-ASH in bench So 257, 18 Jen 82 p 21;
[Article by lbou Salem 'Revolt']

Qatjrheeventethetheveoocurredintheswenthepenttewdeyeeapreee
continuoue etete or crieie ettlicting 0eeerel Win regine. Despite
the speciel lewo eneoted leet July, i‘reeh dnonntretione by univereity end
eecondery eohool etudente occurred et the end or let Dec-her in protect
egeinet the dissolution or the Pederetion ot {hivcreity students. stete
eecurity forcee hed ieeued e werning to the etudente, who were eeeeebled in
their tcderetion oti'icee, deoleringaeny meeting to be en I'i.‘|.legel ect' viewed
by the euthoritiee ee 'e eubvereive ection,‘ or even e 'plot rate-controlled
by toreignore,‘ seeking to incite the neeeee to riee egeinet the euthoritiee.

The etudente responded to thin threet by occupying the univereity, ﬁrm which
they were evicted etter e violent eeeeult led by enti-riot equede. severel
hundred were erreeted, end went off to Join the other 10,000 or eo politicel
prieonere. -

The noveeent towerd revolt wee not entirely put dun, einoe 10 deye leter,

the protect noveeent broke out egein. m. tine it wee the eecondery etudente
inthecepitel,whoetertingon8undq, 3Jenuery, heldeeerieeotnon-etop
«mutations, in which ell the educetionel inetitutione took pert, including
the girle' eecondery eohoole. in they urohed on the Bouleverd de le Depuhlique,
which leede to the preeidentiel pelece, college end nele end t-ele eecondery
echool students. end even eight- nd nine-yeer-old children ehouted elogene
queetioningtheeconodc recoverywogr-pnhliehedbytheSudeneeeheedot
etete. the nov-ent enowbelled; next deg college. end eeoondery etudente
inthelergercitieetookuptheoryoithoeeinlhertou. theduonetretione
quickly eon-ed the cherecterietioe or e weee hove-eat. leither the police
nor the ened torcee' erlored vehiclee were ehle to etop the tide of populer
diocutent thet swept, thereetter, over loot regione or the Men. i'houeende
or voioee, previouely mauled, ceneored, oppreeeed, ohellenged III-uri'e

teem 'i'he out of eteple roode net return to nor-e1" thie dnend in e
beeic one, tor it eti’ecte the living ccnditione o: the greet mority of

sueneee, cruehed by the econoeic recovery mgr. net up by mu. Thin

103
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

progran, imposed by the International Monetary hind (DIP), includes raising
the prices of sugar (62 percent), tea (213 percent), and oil (85 percent). It
was to avert any disagreement over this progr. that the authorities decreed
the dissolution of the powerful Federation of Hailroed Workers, then the
closing of all educational institutions.

In so doing, the goverment was trying to avoid a confrontation that could
well be fatal to it, especially since in the South autononistic tendencies
have been apparent for sons tine. Thus, in Juha, the capital of the South,
an opposition party dubbed Council for the Autonoly of the South has just
been for-ed. Its nain objective is to nobilise the populace around the idea

of self-determination of the southern population, which differs free that

of the North through its Christian or aninistic beliefs (the Sudanese of the
North take up the Islanic naJority). At the head of this separatist novenent,
which alum includes hundreds of professionals and intellectuals, are 17
former ministers and 3 leftist political leaders. Thirty-one nelsbers of this

new party have Just been arrested and accused of being “route-controlled"
by O O 0 “w..

Caught between popular discontent, in the north, and the separatists, in the
South, Nmayri finds himself locked in; the econonic neasures required by
the w in return for a loan of 220 million dollars for the current fiscal
year induced hi- to devaluate the price of basic raw naterials.

To this is added one fundmental factor: the withdrawal of the state subsidy
for these very same staples. new purchasing power, combined with rising unen-
ploynent, the reduction by half of cotton output, the basis for exports (hence

the prime source of foreign currencies), mount to synptons of what Immi's
fete will be in the nonths ahead.

121119
cso: h519/11S END

44
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY