FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10464

16 April 1982

Near East/North Africa Report

(FOUO 16/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers. periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as

given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.8. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP02-00850R000500050040-7

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

NEAR EAST/NORTH AFRICA REPORT

(rouo 16/82)

CONTENTS

INTER-ARAB AFFAIRS

French Agricultural Exports to Region Detailed
(AL-"ATM Ab-‘ARABI. 19-25 Mar 82) ..........

MOROCCO

rhhamcd El-Basri Looks To Unity of Maghreb, A11 Ara

(thamd El-Basr1 Interview; AFRIQUE-ASIB,
15-28 Mar 82) .........

to ....... o oooooooooooo

-a- [III-

can own t l I'CI'.‘ (\\.'I V

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007102109: ClA-RDPBZMSOROOOSOOOSMMO-‘l
FRENCH AGRICULTURAL EXPORTS T0 REGION DETAILED
Paris AL-HATAN AL-'ARABI in Arabic No 266, 19-25 Mar 82 p 57

[Text] The latest foreign trade statistics on France and the Arab world in
tho area of food exports reveal that Saudi Arabia imported the largest amount
of French meat last year and that Sudan. the land of sugar, today imports
Frvnch sugar!

We have chosen the five following categories of French food exports: grain,
meat, dairy products, grain products (pasta and others). and sugar. to show
that last year French exports of these products reached almost Fr 10 billion
(Fr 9,924,100,100). This is an enormous figure in View of the fact that the
Arab countries are preponderantly agricultural and not industrial. What
makes it even larger is that it represents Arab imports from one country,
France. It is true that France has the largest share of Arab food imports,
but even so, it is still one of a group of 30 major agricultural countries
which export products to the Arab world.

Morocco imported the highest percentage of grain (almost Pr 1.5 billion),
Saudi Arabia imported Fr 680 million worth of meat. Egypt imported the larg-
est amount of grain products (pasta and others) worth over Fr 1.29 billion,
and Sudan imported over F: 1 million worth of sugar.

Most Important French Agricultural Exports to the Arab World in 1981
(in millions of francs)

 

 

Dairy Grain products

pountry Grain Meat products SpastsI others) Sugar
Lebanon 31.8 16.3 131.5 24.5 41.5
Iraq 82.3 157.9 384.2 4.5 249.5
Jordan 44.0 1.3 43.8 10.7 42.2
Saudi Arabia 740.8 680.6 155.0 42.0 177.6
Kuwait -- 120.6 30.2 7.6 48.0
Bahrain -- 8.5 3.5 2.0 37.3
Qatar -- 12.0 3.2 1.0 14.0
UAE 5.2 98.5 21.3 6.2 82.5
Oman -- 6.6 3.4 2.6 10.4
North Yemen 2.6 245.8 65.2 4.2 77.7
South Yemen 28.9 18.0 0.3 19.4 1.7

[continued]

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Dairy Grain products

graduate gganta, others)

61.1 39.6
347.2 16.8
142.0 19.8

78.7 17.0

15.9 11.7

80.9 81.8

25.8 33.0

5.1 4.6
298.6 1,290.6
5.2 3.8
MOHAMED EL-BASRI LOOKS TO UNITY OF MAGHREB, ALL ARABb
Paris APRIQUE-ASIB in French No 261, 15-28 Mar 82
[Interview with Mohamed El-Basri by Simon Halley; date and place not given]

{Text} He is called e1 [guih1: the teacher, the wise man. And it is true.
He says that the time of "historic leaderships" is past, which is probably
completely accurate. But at the same time, it is difficult not to consider
Mohamed el-Basri as one of the last representatives of that prestigious race
of men whose history. positions and defense of the principles, rights and
dignities of nations and men have marked the histo.y of the Arab world. parti-

cularly the Maghreb. He says that he is but an "anonymous soldier“ of the
cause of national liberation and yet, is it possible not to see in him one of

the most enlightened consciences of the Arab world today?

An ardent Moroccan. unrepentant Haghrebian, resolute Arab, earnest African and
perspicacious Third Worldist, he lays claim to and assumes that multiple con-
science as a unique, integrated fact, just as nowadays, the major question of
national liberation is one and indivisible.

Thirty years of militancy and struggle and yet, Mohamed eleasri has never
granted any interviews. The only picture of him in the archives of newspapers
and news agencies is one in which he is seen on the stand, confounding the
king's prosecutor, who in March 1964 accused him of conspiracy against the
internal security of the_regime, for the mere "crime" of having opposed the
arbitrariness of a despotic regime and its repression of public freedoms, its
policy of torture.

Then why break a 30—year silence? Why would the founder, organizer and head of
the Moroccan army of liberation, who took up arms against the French colonizer
and contributed decisively to his country's independence. now believe that the
forms of struggle must no longer be what they have been so far?

1 More precisely. in the domain of Islamic theology. However, concerning
Mohamed el-Basri, this label refers to no religious function. It expresses the
respect of all who know hum for his moral and intellectual integrity, his poli-
ticnl courage, the straightness of his thought, the simplicity and warmth of

his personality, his erudition and many other qualities worthy of admiration
and cited as an example.

F!”l(ﬂﬂﬂ(1kl.USE(NVLY
“Because," he says. "these are extremely grave times. Because King Hasssn II
has sold out the country. Because the reconquest of Morocco -- American this
time —- has begun. Because every citizen, every group. every party must now
set forth before history its attitude in the face of this recolonisation. And
finally. because the myth of the "democratic opening" has died down and it is
now clear that to free Morocco from America means to free Morocco from those
who brought America in."

SI Fquih Mohamed el-Basri chose AFRIQUE-ASIE for this exclusive interview.
During the meeting he granted Simon Malley -- a meeting of exceptional length
but of real intensity which we have decided to publish as a separate section so
that it may be removed and kept as an instrument of reference for the Arab
world and particularly the Maghreb - £1 Basri exposes and tries to unravel

the intricacies of the many different bonds that either block or promote the
liberation impulses of the peoples in the region. He does it simply, without

any pretentiousness. but with that moving certainty bestowed by years and
years of struggle. prison. living underground and in exile.

Let us listen to him.

[Question] Imperialism never ceases entering into relations and agreements
with a number of nations in the Arab world. from the Maghreb to the Middle East.
In your opinion, how can progressive Arab forces view their response?

[Answer] First of all. the Arab National Liberation Movement must emerge from
the impasse in which it is in. Naturally, that impasse has several causes.
but in my opinion. the cause of causes. the major cause. is. for Arabs today.
the one that springs from the domain of culture. culture in the'broad. multi-
dimensional sense. closer to the civilizational destiny of the Arab people
than to the mere dissemination of food for the mind. For it has now become
essential, in order to move in the right direction of things and history. to
have a clear vision of the world or worlds.

Let me explain: By culture, I mean the possession and appropriation of all
those objective and subjective elements apt to create a dynamic. to play a
rule as a catalyst in the coming to awareness of the masses. In my opinion,
that is what -— that very intense effort of reflection and interrogation -—
should give rise to rigor and coherence. without which there is no salvation.
It is coherence. as we well know. which leads to a clear awareness and vision
of things. It also orders phases. defines needs. initiates cadres and trains
man in the strict deployment. well-known to everyone. of a true strategy.

And I believe that there is not, in what I say, any unbridled. metaphysical
pan-Arabian. There are only the hard lessons of immediate history. for it is
totally useless at the present time to envisage any patriotic counterstroke
in the Gulf. for example. when the other flanks. especially in the Maghreb.
are either unguarded or already undermined by the neocolonialist malady. An
cifcctive response in Morocco requires resolute, determined. positive support
from the other Arab parties for the effort being developed locally by the
democratic forces in Morocco. Otherwise. what would we see? A clearly ex—
pressed desire for hegemony. It crisscrosses the world. It is integrated.
it has its center and its satellites.

ROI OlilClAl.lEIi(NNLY
Let us take a satellite country such as Morocco. Hansen II has undertaken to
do more and to go further than America's traditional allies in the Gulf, such
as Saudi Arabia. He has clearly set the country up as an experimental field,
a laboratory, in the matter of the reactivation of American bases in Morocco.
At the same time, Saudi Arabia and certain Gulf countries have refused to
accommodate analogous bases out of fear of repercussions of different sorts.
But that refusal is in no way final. The emirs governing those countries are
actually awaiting the results of the Moroccan experiment. And there can be no
shadow of a doubt that they will in turn come over, at the proper time, at the
tune chosen.- That choice is exclusively the work of the center right, which,
by means of its incessant emissaries, will have woven the plot. Quite often,
moreover, this happens in broad daylight. Secretary of Defense Caspar Hein-
berger, on his visits to the two ends of the Arab world, quite literally has
his colleague from the State Department, Alexander Haig, breathing down his
neck. Haig tries to give the image of diplomatic respectability to undertak-
ings whose harmful effects on the entire region will soon be seen.

He must also use our memories here, especially recalling the role of inter-
mediary already played by Hansen II in introducing Henry Kissinger to the re-
gion. The result of this famous shuttle diplomacy has been the near conflagra-
tion of the region, exacerbation of the conflict between Syria and Iraq, the
conflict between Algeria and Morocco, the conflict between the different mem-
bers of the Palestine Liberation Organization, and so on. However, quite

obviously. this is not a matter of fate either. The means to respond do exist.
Correctly used, they could be formidably effective. Our absolute weapon is
our peoples. Without their irruption into the life of the country, without
their participation in decisions, nothing could be done. As you can see, we
are already quite far from the time of "historic leaderships" which acted
alone, in the name of the people, in the fight to counter imperialist plans.
For its part, the spontaneity of the people is incapable of turning the ratio
of forces in its favor. Marrow nationalism, not to say chauvinism, also proves
that in the final analysis. its essential function was to facilitate the hege-
monic task of imperialism and neocolonialism. What then is to be done? First
of all. we must make the masses aware of the exact role of the leaders who
betray them. Here. the betrayal is not an end in itself; it does not only
benefit the native guilty of it. Rather, it is above all the means by which
one enchains the entire country. As a corollary to this statement, we must
ensure that the vision of thegpvernment, its forms and attributes, changes and
evolves among the masses. "The sovereign people" is not a slogan. That must
become the absolute, sole source for designing the articulations of power of
an authentic national leadership.

There, I think I have answered your question. If I have avoided personalizing
situations, it is in no way out of a fear of hurting anyone's feelings. I
quite simply took advantage of an opportunity to say what I believe constitutes
the new aspects of a truly legitimate, advanced movement or government-in the
countries of our region.

[Question] What are your first reactions to the announcement of negotiations
between Rabat and Washington on the reactivation of the old American bases in
Morocco?

INHICINHCIAI.USBINNLY
[Answer] Actually, it is not a new question. Even before independence, within
the framework of the national movement, we considered that the presence of
American bases on our soil, a presence then "legalized" by French-American
agreements. actually constituted a violation of our national sovereignty and

a typically colonial intrusion in our country on the part of these two powers.
Consequently, fighting that presence was a national duty. That is why, once
independence had been acquired and in order to complete the national libera-
tion, the withdrawal of American forces was considered as a prime necessity.
"hat is more. President Eisenhower's visit in 1960 was for the purpose, anong
others, and the fact is well-known, of signing an agreement for the evacuation
of those bases. That is why we then thought that a phase in sovereignty was
coming to a close when. the last of the foreign forces on our soil, the Ameri-
can units left the bases of Bengrir, Nouasser, Bouknadel, Sidi Slinane and. the
Kenitra naval base, which was actually not completely evacuated until 1976.

You have given me an opportunity here to recall that the withdrawal of all
foreign forces and the consolidation of national sovereignty always constituted
the backbone of the country's policy at the time, a policy included in the _pro-
grams of the government and political parties as well. As you will recall,

King Mohamed V and the government of Abdsllah Ibrahim were in perfect agreement
on this matter and together, had signed accords with the United States along
these lines.

Remember this also: He are in the early 1960's. The great colonial empires
began to dwindle. France and Great Britain were withdrawing and the American
administration -- Secretary of State Foster Dulles, to be more precise --
thought the time had come to occupy the ground lost by the Europeans. Dulles'
idea was that the Arab world had not yet come of age. Unfortunately, one has
to admit that some leaders shared the idea. I would mention Nouri Said,
Faisal II, Emir Abdel Ilah and King Abdallah, all of whom thought that foreign
protection was necessary. This collaboration, not to say betrayal, would be
paid for with their lives. This fatal destiny would in a way shift the pole
of interest of the Americans and it was in Israel and the Shah's Iran that
America would seek the powerful bestions destined to maintain its presence in
the region.

The results of that policy are now obvious. The Shah was swept away and the
strategic accord with Israel is both an admission of impotence and proof that
the peoples of the regions resolutely reject the plans. This clearly amounts

to saying that here also. history has relentlessly ruled. It was precisely
because he failed to recognise this judgment of history that Sadat'met his fate.
And today, what could one expect of that same policy which, in order to cut

.urr and encircle the Arab world, uses that same Israel and a newcomer, Morocco?
Undoubtedly, the same fate.

That seems to me to answer the political aspect and historical experience
part of your question. With respect to the physical or technical aspect, the

United States' need for those bases in no way seems to ms to be absolute; far
from it. We are in the age of intercontinental missiles and spy satellites
capable of detecting anything that moves in regions of interest. In my opinion,
therefore, that presence has no true military justification.

FOIItIﬂﬂCIAI.USIIUNLY
what remains? The defense of "freedom"? Let us note in this case that the
operation comes at a time when the situation is terrible for the regime.

0n the domestic scene. the regime cannot even claim the legitimacy of the
democratic institutions. There are no institutions. The announcement of the
establishment of the bases was preceded and is accompanied by a vast wave of
repression that has not even spared the representatives of the political par-
ties tolerated by the regime itself. We therefore see that even according to
the American canons of the "defense of freedoms," Morocco is wide of the mark.
And that America is in a very poor position to justify, as in Poland or else-
where, that it is there to defend the right of peoples. It is impossible for
a reasonable mind to consider that official Morocco is distinguished by its
legality. Even important persons whom the throne considered as representa-
tives of Moroccan political opinion are now rotting in prison.1 We are almost
in a state of emergency and furthermore. that is how the international organ-
izations for the defense of human rights, in the West and elsewhere, view the
situation in Morocco. Actually, the American presence responds to motives of
Moroccan domestic policy and regional considerations.

The argument of domestic policy is that the regime needs an agreement of this
nature to protect it from its own instruments of power and ensure its survival.
The American presence would then be explained as an internal security operation
making the support of foreign experts necessary. If this should be the case,
and I think it is. this means that the regime is not sure of itself, that it
has lost all support of the people or even of the administration and that more
than ever, it fears and dreads any popular initiative. Does this not remind

you of the final days of Sadat, fleeing everyone and entrusting his own safety
to foreign experts?

But it was illusory: No eXpert, no arrangement, even the most sophisticated,
could protect a man or regime from the anger of an entire people. It is illu-
sory and contradictory as well: One cannot sell off the rights of the nation.
One cannot mortgage the entire country when makes the recovery.of provinces
one's main warhorse.

On another level. it is said that the purpose of the American presence in
Morocco is to counterbalance Soviet influence in Libya. Pine! But what
interest does Morocco have in restoring a balance at the cost of its sover-
eignty? Does the sovereign policy of a country not first of all consist in
defending itself, its own territory. its dignity? There is definitely some-
thing bizarre about the kingdom of Hassan II. Obstinstely refusing to heed the
lessons of history, agreeing to do for America what even the Allied governments
in West Europe can no longer do out of fear of public opinion, physically
turning over the country after throwing thousands of patriots into prison and
murdering over 1,500 others: This is to throw at an entire people the insult
of not knowing where its national interest lies. This is no longer political
blindness. it is a crime, a betrayal.

 

 

I_Three of them, including the secretary general of the USP? [Socialist Union
of Popular Forces], Abderrahim Bouabid, were freed on 27 February.

FOI'OFFKJAI.USE(IVLY
euro. non-um... a-.. u. o..-

For its part and considering its own experience in the Arab region, America
should know that the defense of its interests is always flawed when it bases
that defense on local potentates, agents and traitors. For my part, I remain
absolutely convinced of this certainty: The peoples of the Maghreb are and
will always be vigilant and they will foil all maneuvers. all neocolonial plots
found along the path leading them to edification, brotherhood, peace and unity.

[Question] Do you believe that the Moroccan people, despite the repression
perpetrated on them by a regime not of the people, have the means to fight this
new American domination?

[Answer] Let us observe, first of all. that this operation (the bases), took
place at a particularly bloody time of the repressive phase. Reaction to the
repression cannot come at one blow and all at the same time.. It will be slow
in being articulated. but what is sure is that the people will never pardon
the attempt on their dignity and their sovereignty. "hence the difference
between an individual reaction and a collective reaction, which obeys much more
complex laws. But there can be no doubt on this subject: The reaction of the
people is unavoidable and will occur when the conditions exist. The examples
are legion. Look at the Shah's Iran. Elsewhere, they have groped around for
philosophical "explanations" for a suicidal approach. I mean Sadat, his ob-
stinucy and the obstinacv of those who used practices in keeping with the,
shall we say, Pharaonic specificities of Egypt.

But let us get back to my country. The history of our people in this area is
well-known. For me, it is a simple question of time. I am deeply convinced
that the Moroccan people will know how to regain their sovereignty and indepen-
dence from neocolonialism and its agents, just as it will achieve its territor-
ial and popular unity.

[Question] You just mentioned the consequences of the new American policy
[or Algeria and Libya. What are they?

[Answer] My hope is that the Saharan affair has not, in the eyes of the
leaders of these two countries, concealed the crux of the problem. I repeat
that the heart of the matter is that for America, it is a matter of protecting
a rvgimc totally incapable of guaranteeing its existence and sovereignty.
Actually. as for the loss of its sovereignty, the Moroccan regime is rather
willing. It remains to be hoped that neither Algeria nor Libya will make the
(KPPCCOd faux pas consisting of also securing outside protection.

Hllh respect to the tharnn question, for the Rabat regime. the matter is de-
vldcd: paralyze national energies, mobilize domestic, regional and world
opinion around the question. cut off any possible dissent by giving primacy to
the slogan “No voice louder than the voice of battle," and all for a precise
purpose: remaining in power. But it is true that. in order to remain in
power, the regime in Rabat may go as far as the destabilization of all the
Arab Maghreb.

You know that one infallible way of judging the patriotism of a team of leaders
consists of measuring its degree of independence from foreign countries and its

FOR1HHHCJALIJSE(INLY
attach-eat to achieving the people's will. Our opinion has always been that
one must guard against undertaking anything in one's country that might
strengthen or give rise to foreign control over the country or region. In the
Maghreb, the future is for unity, unity of the peoples serving their interests
and aspirations. But the greatest obstacle to the achievement of that goal

has always been the Moroccan regime itself, which appears to be structurally
and fundamentally different from, even the opposite of. the other regimes in
the region. But this is not a matter of destiny. In my opinion, Algeria's
role is very important here. Algeria must give the best example. It must
constitute the rear base and the natural depths of the Moroccan people until
they free themselves from neocolonial domination-and the hold of its agents.
The Moroccan people will then in turn be able to make their decisive contribu-
tion to the building of unity.

[Question] Ronald Reagan's new policy is obviously marked by a will to counter
Soviet influence everywhere in the world, mainly in North Africa and Black

Africa. That could well lead to the war, the possibility of which you seem to
discard.

[Answer] I believe that Algeria will always maintain its independence. Al-
geria is not the USSR. Moreover, we have noted that even when it is a matter
of countries with a stated ideological choice, as in the case of Cuba, the
attitude of the two superpowers remains in keeping with rules established by
the fear of war. That is the price of peaceful coexistence.

[Question] But the Americans are nevertheless in Morocco and some believe
that there is reason to counterbalance that presence by signing analogous
agreements with the USSR or socialist France, for example. What do you think?

[Question] As I have already said, the real response to this situation is to
rely resolutely on the masses. In my opinion, it is a mistake to resort to a

series of all-points agreements. This would only confirm, both here and there,
that we have lost confidence in ourselves, in our people. My belief is that
the determination of the Moroccan people to get rid of the bases is real. It
is powerful. It goes against the decision of the king. It will win out in
the end. That is why I do not see the purpose of contracting alliances in the
opposite direction.

[Question] During his recent visit to Paris, the king of Morocco tried to con-
vince France to act as a middleman between him and Algeria. It is also said
that Hassan 11 would like to meet with President Chadli Bendjedid. How do

you View all these maneuvers?

[Answer] I believe that there is no true solution to the basic problem except
in understanding between the Moroccan and Algerian peoples. I believe that
colonialism, old and new, has succeeded in its task. Not only has it estab-
lished artificial borders that our people did not know before colonization, but
it has also succeeded in erecting a psychological wall between our peoples.

As I have already said, the question of the Sahara could have provided an
opportunity to overturn all obstacles and eliminate all agents standing in the
path of legitimate unity between our two peoples, for unity between Algeria

FOR‘OFFIJAI.USEGNVLY
sun venom” vu’l— VIQDJ

and Morocco could truly guarantee the real independence of the Maghreb, which
in turn would become a solid rear base for the Arab world as a whole. I be-

lieve that the Arabs of Africa, from the east to the west, from Bab el-Handeb
to Gibraltar, are a hinge for anything affecting the rest of Africa. on the

one hand, and Europe and the Western world. on the other. From Bab el-Mandeb
to Gibraltar, there are the same impulses, the same rhythm. in short. the same
civilization that has always lived in perfect harmony with the rest of Africa.

That is the reason why I see no purpose to the creation of a new entity that
could only constitute an obstacle to this fluidity in historical relations with
countries in the South Sahara. This is very important to take into account,
especially when one realizes that imperialism definitely intends to regenerate
itself in Africa and to find there the forces and means needed for its fight

in other parts of the world. Nature commands us to open up and communicate
with Africa through the Sahara, just as it orders us to use the Mediterranean
for our trade.

To get back to one of the aspects of your question, I believe that in order to
stimulate true cooperation with France, the latter.must be totally freed from
any neocolonialist complex. I think that France and Europe in generally have
everything to gain as soon as that cooperation becomes truly profitable for
nations. Consequently, socialist France, Mitterrand's France, must set itself
apart from the intentions of a monarch who acts more like a courtier concerned
about his own interests and those of his throne and the real interests of
Morocco and its people. How can one credit Hassan II with knowing the inter-
ests of France and of Algeria when he does not know where his country's inter-
ests lie? Actually, the only prospects that Haasan II and his regime can offer
are those of enslavement and dependency. That serves neither the interests

of the Moroccan people or those of the French people. A socialist France.
once rid of the temptation of neocolonialism, can have a place in the region.
just as it would gain another in the Arab world as a whole if its position
would evolve with more fairness and justice with regard to the Palestinian
cause.

[Question] It has been hinted that Hassan II would like to go to Algiers.
"not do you think?

[Answer] The route leading from Morocco to Algeria goes through Oujda. not
Paris or Brussels. I do not have enough elements to judge the possible posi-
tion of the high spheres of the Algerian Government. Nevertheless, given the
long past of common militant life between the Moroccan and Algerian peoples,
it is inconceivable that such a trip could take place, given the fact that
what ﬂassan would go to Algeria for would be support for remaining on the
throne and means to hold his people in check. That would be perfectly illogi-
cal.

[Question] Let us get back to the question of the Sahara. Why do you never
speak of the Saharan people, who are fighting with exemplary heroism and who
are demanding that their voice be heard? If the idea and need to unite the

peoples of the region are proper, then in my.opinion, this would in no way
prevent the Saharan people's right to self-determination from being recognized.

10
FOR OllﬂClAl.lEl5(HVLY
[Answer] I believe that we have to be frank with ourselves and with the
Saharan militants: Self-determination with respect to the monarehic regime,
agreed. That is proper. This is true for the Saharans as well as for all
Moroccans who have never ceased rising up against monarchic oppression, as
shown by the years 1965, 1971, 1972 and 1981. The establishment of a Saharan
national entity has come precisely at a time when the entire Arab world is
enduring imperialist attempts at Balkanisation and when the people's aspira-
tion to unity is the strongest. For my part, I believe that the path of unity

between peoples in the region in order to wipe out the existing borders is
proper.

Look at the number of flags in the Gulf region alone. Do you believe that
these are all expressions truly formulated by the peoples in the region?

Let us take the case of Jordan, to be precise. It has all the attributes of

a nation: a flag, an army, an administration, and so on. But what does
Jordan mean historically speaking? It is a geographic anomaly. Its main
function is to be a buffer state for Israel. a barrier to the action of the
Palestinian fedayeen and finally, an obstacle to Iraq's rapprochement to the
field of battle. Far be it from me to underestimate the sacrifice or fighting
ability of the Saharan militants, but I wonder: Is the path they have chosen
the right one? Would it not be better to see that the time has come for a
radical reconsideration of the question, more in keeping with our common fu-
ture? In other words, make the Sahara a rear base in order to free Morocco and
an avant—garde army for that liberation? Furthermore, would it not be better
to avoid the worst - that is, a break and injuries between militants for the
same cause? I believe that all of these is possible. And this can spare us

the difficulties of a reunification that I believe to be inevitable in the long
run.

[Question] But the struggle of the Saharan people has contributed and is still
contributing to a weakening of the monarchic regime. In addition,.why not re-
cognize the former Spanish Sahara as a separate country, like Tunisia, Algeria,
Mauritania and Libya, which would not prevent the formation, along with it,

as with those countries, of an Arab Maghreb? After all, have its representa-
tives not just been admitted to the CAD?

[Answer] The Sahara question has weakened the throne. One can debate it.

I personally have a tendency to believe that this matter has given the Rabat
regime a new wind. The government would not have survived its internal contra-
dictions or withstood the jolts it experienced in the 1970's if it had not been
for the Sahara question. Remember 1973 and 1976. The government was totally
isolated, from the army as well as from the political parties. Then came this
affair, which was immediately elevated to the rank of a national issue. No
more political or economic problems. The "Green March" was undertaken; social
pence was demanded. In short, the king broke out of his isolation. To answer
your question. I believe that the union achieved in the unity of combat is
infinitely easier to obtain than between nations that are already structured.
Look at the union between Egypt and Syria. It was achieved in the people's
gniety and broken by imperialism and its local agents. Closer to us, in the
Maghreb. remember the fine fighting unity that existed between our peoples,

ll

FOR‘OFFIJAI.USE(NNLY
IV- seesaw“. 01W venue

between the fighting men of the three countries. They began by pulling Tuni~
sia away, then isolated Morocco from Algeria. Today, the results are there
for everyone to see.

[Question] You refer to the divorce in the 1970's between King Hassan and the
army. Today, some speak of a laasitude and disarray in the Moroccan Army.
Should one expect a revolt by the army?

[Answer] I can definitely tell you a bout changes in the Moroccan Army. As
for the possibility of an uprising, that is another problem.

hmmediately after independence, groups were formed around former officers who
served in the French Army. The mission of the corps. which had just taken the
name "Royal Army." was clear: to protect the throne from the people. In 1959,
the congress of the Union of Moroccan Students, in one of its motions, labeled
the corps as an "Operetta army." I was myself convicted of an attack on the
army and its dignity after publishing the motion in the newspaper EL-TAHRIR,
of which I was the editor. A little later on, in 1965, the army received the
order to put down the Casablanca uprising, in a frightful bloodbath. Going
from repression to repression, it became apparent to the army that it was
being made to play a role not its own. The army therefore began to be trans-
formed and even to seek means of taking revenge for having been frequently
forced to fire on their own, a cousin, a relative.... “hence the 1971
(Skhirat) and 1972 (the Boeing affair) attacks. From that time on, the army
became a force of opposition to the regime and no longer a faithful protector
of the throne. The king perceived the danger and made drastic decisions:
retirements in the reserve, transfers in the gendarmsrie, the sending of
troops to the Golan and Senai. In the meantime, major transformations were
taking place in the armed forces. Former officers from the French Army were
replaced by young cadres from the peasantry and the middle class and trained
in the military academies after independence. That is why, when I say that
the Americans returned to protect the throne, I am referring to the protection
of the throne from the people, naturally, but also from the Moroccan Army,

which has become a national army, solidary with the people from which it
springs.

[Question] Does this mean that one henceforth has to consider the Moroccan
Army as a patriotic force?

[Answer] Hithout a doubt, the Moroccan Army has become a national army by
virtue of its makeup and structures and it no longer has as its essential
function the protection of the throne and the regime. Consequently, the
army has become a potential opponent, especially if the.wsr in the Sahara
should come to an end. There now exists an intention of sending that army to

for the king's personal purse, just as colonialism once used Moroccan soldiers

to fight in Syria, Spain or Indochina. And in fact, some regiments have al-
ready arrived in Saudi Arabia and the Gulf.

In this Operation, the interest of the two regimes (the one that sends and the
one that receives) is obvious. For the king of Morocco, it is a matter, on the
FOI1OFFKJM1.USIllVEY

one hand, of dismantling the army and, on the other hand, of deriving a finan-
cial advantage from it by "renting" it. This makes it possible to replace
these regiments with American soldiers deemed to be more reliable, especially
after what happened in Egypt (Sadat's assassination). Finally, for the
Americans, "reliable" surveillance of the oil fields has no price.

[Question] Throughout your life. you have taken a revolutionary path from
which you have never deviated. But that conduct has isolated you from some of

your comrades, many of whom are now in prison. when you look back, what do you
feel?

[Answer] Throughout my life, my constant attitude has been to help forge a
strategy of national union capable of transforming the political, economic

and social conditions of my country. I have always concentrated my efforts on
the union of national patriotic forces, based on what I have already said, with
the conviction that the future belongs to those who now march with all those
who struggle. An avant-garde capable of leading the current struggles is
generally one that will tomorrow have the clearest vision of the collective
future. Furthermore. only the reality of the struggle makes it possible to

bring about the real split and shows in a spectacular manner those who take
the side of the government and those who are with the people.

For myself, I am not convinced that the different political structures (the
parties) truly reflect the real political sensibilities of Moroccan society
today. I would even say that the people here are totally absent, both with
respect to their representation and the objectives which those structures

have chosen. The leaders of these parties are often hesitant and do not always
know which side to pick at crucial times. Even better, these vacillations
sometimes push them to the brink of crime, preventing them from making a
resolute choice and in the end, allowing then only the possibility of

pleading with the regime for moderation in the pressure put on or repression
used against the people, which also guarantees that its positions and privi-
leges will be safeguarded. These are incorrect positions! The government

has another viewcﬁ things. It knows that its interests are in violent contra-
diction with those of the people. Consequently, it leaves these elites but one
choice: immobility or cooperation. That is the situation which, through
constant work of clarification, must be made perceivable to the masses.

We must also show why this type of compromise contributes absolutely nothing
to the solution of problems. 'And it is through this long-range work that we
shall finally force cadres to choose between patriotic action. which depends
on the loss of privileges, and theclear, declared position on the side of the
regime. The position of these elites is, indeed, curious. Because they were
trained in the West or locally, but in a Western-type school, they operate

in their way, once on the job. They totally conceal the difficulties and
realities of the milieu in which they nevertheless live, to such a point that
they often resort to the media or European opinion in order to try to change
a given position of the king. But the king has a-different opinion of the
Heat. with which he maintains utilitarian relations. he takes from it only
that which is necessary to remain in power and survive: money, weapons, mili-
tary .mperts. He then turns his back on it. handling his affairs and the
country in keeping with the practices of another century.

13

F!II(IHHCIAI.IEHBIIULY
e v- van-wt- M vseus

Do you see. I should not like to remind you of what I said earlier concerning
culture, but one must nevertheless not lose sight of the profound disarray
born of the alienation that affects most of our cadres. The truth is that we
have to find other more suitable forms in which we may handle the true concerns
of our society. In Morocco, society is predominantly agriculture. It is re-
moved from the political and ideological currents of the modern Rest and is
scarcely perneable to them. And yet. it is precisely those currents which our
elites try - generally, very awkwardly - to indiscriminately impose on that ‘
society. naturally, there are the cities and the mass of educated people,
among whoa one can always try to build a few political and ideological

cliques. otherwise antagonistic. How much energy is wasted when things are
actually obvious to everyone: The real country is missing, whence the clear

interest which the regime derives from this absence of roots among our people
of most existing political groups. '

To get back to an underlying theme of your question, I would tell you this:
No. I have not been guilty of intransigence. I have quite simply avoided
group struggles. convinced, for my part. that political reality, which truly
deserves being fought for, is elsewhere. That is what I am doing.

It is true that another generation of militants, younger now, is beginning to
emerge within the national movement and to view things differently. That is
positive. The history of the national movement is rich in heroin figures, in
examples of honest patriots who sacrificed themselves for the country. The
younger generation must be imbued with the high virtues of those of their
elders who inscribed golden pages in the militant past of our people, but

it must also be careful of all those old venders of sweat, blood and tears who,

in the name of the past of the others, would try to retain control over the
movement.

[Question] Do you believe that sane of the leaders of the political structures
of which we were speaking have had their day? '

[Answer] The regime itself has answered your question. It has put an end to
the democratic illusion.

[Question] And EL-IKHTIAR EL-THAwRI,1 which you head?

[Answer] It is a platform from which we can explain our positions. It is not
an autonomous organization.

[Question] And therefore, within the national movement?
[Answer] Yes.
[Question] And not only within the USFP'.’

[Answer] The USP? is but one part of the national movement.

1 "Revolutionary Option" is a current that fits into an overall strategy
integrating both cultural and historical elements and political practice.

14

IN)! 0'11C1A1.1EIB(IVLY
[Question] who now makes up the national movement?

[Answer] The UNFP [National Union of Popular Forces] of Abdallah Ibrahim, the
USPP, the Istiqlal, the PPS [Party of Progress and Socialism] and other groups.
with the exception of prefabricated parties such as the so-called "indepen-
dents" and the "People's Movement."

[Question] It is said that the conflict between you and the USFP has to do with
the role of the monarchy. That party still believes in the role of unifier of
the nation played by the throne.

[Answer] The basic question is that of knowing how to bring about positive .
changes in our country. If the Moroccan monarchy were comparable to the British,
Belgian or Norwegian monarchy, I would see no problem. The problem is that it

is not at all like it. The Moroccan monarchy is feudal. Everyone knows what
feudalism is. It is not a state of mind; it is a form of complete organization

of society. How can you then work toward socialism and progress without run-
ning up against that obstacle, which constitutes the very basis of the current
regime?

[Question] One last question: How do you view the evolution of the Palestin-
ian question? ‘ '

[Answer] Traditionally speaking, there are two ways of asking that question.
There are those who believe that it is a Palestinian problem. The truth is
that Palestine's situation -- that is, the situation of Israel and the rest of
Palestine -- is a reality made from the outside by foreign countries. The
creation of Israel is not the work of the Jews in the Arab countries. It is
the work of imperialism and destined to isolate the Arabs in Africa from the
Arabs in Asia. Israel was built on Arab land by the guilty European conscience
and in order to contain the thrust of the Arab national movement. That is why
the Palestinian question looks like an Arab question, especially because the
massive and successive expulsions of the majority of the Palestinian people
have led to the establishment of a strong Palestinian colony in bordering

Arab countries.

Until 1960, the Arab countries felt concerned by the liberation of that coun-
try, but experience has shown that the Arab states were incapable of it. The
emergence of the Palestinian revolution was the most tangible reaction to the
inability of the Arab regimes, not only to free Palestine, but also to lead
the national emancipation movement in their own countries. That is the reason
why that revolution was hailed with enthusiasm by all nations and received
with fear by the existing regﬂnes.- The takeover of the destiny of the Pales-
tiniun revolution by its own sons will bring into a league against it not only
Israel, Zionism and imperialism, but also the Arab regimes now deprived of the
main cause which had always brought them to power in the eyes of their peoples,
as well as of a convenient platform from which they could speak to the west.

Today. we can say that the nature of the struggle has changed. It is for a
true revolutionary climate that we must work, in order to free the will of

15

FOR OIIICJAI.lEl!(ﬂULY
peoples to confuse the regimes that have joined hands with imperialist inter-
ests in the region and thereby make it possible for the Palestinian revolution
to remain a revolution and follow its path. We must also do everything to
convince the Jews in Palestine that the situation they are living through is
not being imposed on them because they are Jews, but because, like the Pales-
tinians, they are the victims of an order and a plan hatched by imperialism.

It is also true that the Arab regimes are not the product of the will of their
peoples and Israel is not the making of the Jews of Palestine. And the current

situation can only move toward these objectives through an authentically revo-
lutionary climate.

COPYRIGHT: 1982 Afrique-Asie

11,46b
CSO: 4519/150 END

16
ROI OFFICIAI.IEIE(NVLV