APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/00: ClA-RDP02-00050R000200020030-C
Near East/North Africa Report

No. 2045

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was sumarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Horde or names preceded by a ques-
tion marl: and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the U.S. Government.

PRWUREHENT 0F FUEL ICA'l' IOiS

JPRS publications my be ordered from the National Technical
Information Service, Springfield, Virginia 22161. In order-
ing, it is recounended that the JPRS number, title, date and
author, if applicable, of publication be cited.

Current JPRS publications are announced in Goverment Regrts
Announcements issued semi-monthly by the National Technical
Information Service, and are listed in the Monthly Catalog of
U.S. Government Publications issued by the Superintendent of
Documents, 0.8. Cavernment Printing Office, Washington, 0.0.
20402.

Indexes to this report (by keyword, author, personal names,
title and series) are available from Bell a Howell, Old
Mansfield Road, Booster, (mic 44691.

Correspondence pertaining to matters other than procurement
my be addressed to Joint Publications Research Service,
1000 North Glebe Road, Arlington, Virginia 22201. -
It Aulucl il-nul: 700 “to”

This serial report contains information on socioeconomic. government. political.
and technical developments in the countries of the Near East and North Africa.

 

 

ll. Document Anny“. a. 00me

___Su1tanate

Political Science
Sociology
Economics

Culture (Social

___Inter-Arah Affairs

___ﬁorth African
Affairs

__Afghanistan

Mauritania
Morocco
ple's Demo-

of Oman
Syria
Tunisia

:Unitcd Arab

cratic Republic
of Yemen
___Persian Gulf

Sciences)
Ethnology
Geography

___Algeria
___Bahrain

_Esypc

Emirates
Hestern Sahara

:Yemen Arab
Republic

Area
___patar
___§audi Arabia
___§panish North

Africa

jg_§udan

_x_ Iran
Ira
x Israel
Jordan
Kuwait
Lebanon

Techological
Military Sciences
IRAN

ISRAEL

NEAR EAST/NORTH AFRICA REPORT

No. 2045

Conn-nus

Revolution Puts Social Justice Above Individual Freedom
(Mohamd Javad Kermani Interview; ems-s ESIAMI,

5 Sep 79) ..........................................

Iran National Party To Follow Revolutionary Orders
(mam, 6 Sep 79)

Liberal Government. at Variance with Islamic Leadership
(mm, 1 Sep 79)

Influx, Drain of Citizens Following Revolution Reviewed
(mmwr, 6 Oct 79)

Role of Banks in Revolutionary Society Analyzed, Scrutinized
(mm'u, 9 Oct 79)

Rerfidy Treachery of International Drug Firm Bared
(mmmr, 10 Oct 79)

Current Situation in Kurdish Areas Discussed
(mm-B RUZ, 11 Oct 79)

Low-Cost Housing Projects Discussed
(M‘s Rm, 6 M 79) I00.0.00coo-ooooooeoooonaooo

Briers
Fligit Ho- Revolution

Real Estate Administration Accused of Discrimination in
Renting Land
(Shlomoh Giv‘on; M'ARIV, 26 Sep 79)

PAGE

1h
19
23
26

28

29

-a- [III-NEGA-lZl]
comma (cmummt)
LIBYA
Libyan Leader Afflicted With Eye Disease
(luria Luisa Luca de Tens; BIANCO Y NEGRO,
10-16 wt '79) eeoosee-oeoeeeoeoeueeoeoeeeeeeseelee
MAURITANIA

SNDI Director Discusses SNIH Deficit, Guelbs Project
(Ely O. Allsf Interview; CEMB, various dates) ...

Nation Searches for New Fishing Policy
(Mireille mten; um L'Amrous, 2h Sep 79)

Briefs
Operational Prospects of Refinery
Large-Scale Contraband
Hostility to New Govemnnt
SUDAN

Refugee Influx Aggrevstes Problems in Sudan
(AL-SAFE, 30 Sep 79) oeeeeseen-ussoeessssesossese

SYRIA

Internal Instability Said To Be Threat to Regime
(mm SA'AH, 19 Sep 79) eeeseeveeeceeeeoooooeeoeo

WNW

Ibroccsn-MISARIO Clashes Dcpected To Intensify
(18 m, 11 wt '9) eeeeoeeecs-ueueeeecoseocoeeo

POE, PCP, PCI Decide on Joint Actions To Support POLIBARIO
(L'mmm, 21 &p 79) sosees-seeseeeeeeeeeeososo

MMWC

Official Interviewed on Water Crisis in Capital
(AL-W, 22 Jul n) Geese...seeeec-seeeeseeeoe
REVOLUTION PUTS SOCIAL JUSTICE ABOVE INDIVIDUAL FREEDOM
Tehran ENQELAB-E BSLAHI in Persian 5 Sep 79 p 6
[Interview with Mohammad Javud Kermané]

1 Text_/ In the exchange of opinions and views of the three experts, which
was printed in the newspaper BNQELAB—E ESLAMI on Sunday. 11 Shahrivar

L 2 September_7, His Eminence Hohanmmd Javad Kermani's view regarding
ownership and class differences unfortunately was not printed. The answer
to the appropriate question follows:

Question: Among the causes of iran's Islamic Revolution were the existence

of severe class differences and the concentration of enormous wealth in the
hands of a limited number of people. In your opinion, how should the economic
principles pertaining to ownership be formulated in the ConstitutiOn to elim-
inate these differences and to prevent them from reappearing?

Answer: I, myself, am not qualified to respond fully to this question because
an economist knowledgeable concerning economic affairs should respond, but,

I can state in general terms that some action must be taken so that economists
and economic experts might resolve this problem in accordance with the Kbranic
principle which states "La yakon dowiatan beyn-ol-eghniya aiminkam," i.e..
property and wealth must not be rotated among the wealthy. Any system and
method of economic management that causes property to be circulated only

among the wealthy and in which the rich control and command the wealth and
under which the economy and public wealth are in fact controlled by a limited
number of people must be eliminated, and the economist must restructure it.

I am speaking as I feel and as I understand. I have reached a conclusion about
economic questions, which I have occasionally studied. and now I am telling

you this conclusion so that it might be made available to the authorities on
this subject for their consideration and so that, if there is some error, it
might be corrected. In describing the general principles of Islamic economic
justice, two points have occurred to me. The first is that the Islamic economy
is based on two main pillars, and those two pillars are social Justice and
personal freedom, with this reminder that, whenever social justice and personal
freedom clash, personal freedom must be sacrificed. This principle of social
jusrice—personal freedom prevails throughout the Islamic economv. As long as
social justice is guaranteed, we are not forced to limit personal freedom; but.
if we see that personal freedom is intruding upon social justice, we will re-
strict personal freedom. This is the standard: the individual will be
restricted to the extent that social justice is being damaged. This is absolute
and final. The second point regarding the Islamic economy is that the lslamic
economy is a flexible economy. Because of what I said in the first point, I
have termed it a flexible economy -- an economy without shape. In past times.
many pcople have asked. "Is this form of economy a capitalist economy, a
comnunist economy, or a socialist economy? what structure does the Islamic
economy have"?

I thought that the best response from my standpoint would be to say that it

is an unstructured economy because it is an economy whose foundations were

laid in the year 1400 or were molded generally in the schools of our ancestors.
Therefore. we can not give a particular shape to the Islamic economy. Any

shape that can guarantee these two principles -- social justice and personal
freedom —— and, in the judgment of the economist.is in accordance with a
judicial decree of the time is fine. I am not governed very much by structure.
In prison. when I was conversing with one of those so-called youths who had
leftist leanings, he said, "This economy of which you speak has a lot in
common with socialism." He do not deny that our school of thought might have

a lot in common with another school. He should never be afraid to take an
action. the form of which is somewhat similar to the form of their action,
because we, too. might be accused. Now. this nationalization of the industries
and the nationalization of the banks are steps regarding which, had they been
carried out 20 or 30 years ago, our thinking would not have been so mature.

He thought that such actions were the province of other schools of thought.

He should not fail to carry out any so-called action which is possible in the
direction of adjusting the so-called wealth and which can provide justice

for the Just because it might be similar to some action taken in such and such
a country or in such and such a school of thought, and we should not bind
ourselves to a particular structure. You must exert yourselves to the utmost
and make every effort to combine social justice with personal freedom in any
way you can and, if occasionally, and I an repeating this. personal freedom
clashes with social justice, personal freedom must be restricted; social
justice will not be sacrificed to personal freedom.
IRAN NATIONAL PARTY T0 POLLOH REVOLUTIONARY ORDERS
Tehran BAHDAD in Persian 6 Sep 79 p 2

[Text] 0n the anniversary of its founding. the Iran National Party issued a
statement in which. after referring to the historic struggles of the Iranian
nation and the founding of the party in Aban 1331 (23 October-21 November
1952), it states:

By following the wise leadership of the great Hosaddeq during the difficult
era of Iran's national movement, the party has always stood in the ranks of
the strugglera against dictatorship alined with foreigners. After the coup
of 28 Hordad 1332 [30 July 1953] the party made special efforts in Iran's
National Resistance Movement and Iran's National Front and continued its
struggles, together with other political organizations seeking freedom and
independence.

During the years that repression increased and the imperialists dominated

our country more and more, although the organization sustained great damage,
including damage to its manpower, it never left the battlefield to fight

the people's enemy. By broadening the religious elements in the liberation
movements of the Iranian nation and include the help of some parties, it first
established a unity of forces in the "Iran National Front" and then the new
"National Front of Iran" organization to establish national sovereignty.

In the solid efforts of Iranians under the leadership of "Imam Khomeyni" to
overthrow the "monarchic regime," and achieve victory in the Islamic revolution
of the Iranian nation, it participated sincerely. With the firm belief that
"an Islamic republic" is a government which can meet the historic demands of
Iranians and has the capability of providing full independence for the country
with individual and social freedoms, and can completely change the economic
relations of the society and put an end to colonialist methods, on the
referendum which was held on 11 Parvardin 1358 [31 March 1979]. it voted for
an Islamic republic and now it has risen to defend the revolutionary
achievements with all its strength.
The affiliates of the Iran National Party promise before God and the free
pe0p1e of this territory, on this anniversary of its foundation that they

honor, and that so long as they are alive, they wxli protect the values of
the revolution and strive for Iran's development and freedom.
LIBERAL GOVERJHENT AT VARIANCE WITH ISLAMIC LEADERSHIP
Tehran man in Persian 1 Sep 79 p 2

[Text] of all the active political and ideologies that exist in Iran's
revolution, there are two political ideologies which permeate the atmosphere:
one is Islamic internationalism whose supporters consist of clergy and true
Moslams who are sincerely active for Imam Dioneyni's revolutionary leadership
without expecting any personal gain from the results of the revolution.
Religious schools, mosques, the Guards Corps. and the revolutionary comittees
can be included in this group. The other is western liberal bourgeois policy,
which, whether we like it or not, is a policy toward which the government

is inclined. It is observed that by maintaining the same bureaucratic
framework as that which existed prior to the revolution the goverusent is
once again going to allow capitalism to dominate the economic and political
destiny of this country only by slight changes of an Islamic color. One

of the characteristics of Islamic internationalism whose range of action
goes beyond the borders of Iran is that by spreading Islamic revolutionary
ideas and creating or establishing unity among the Moslcms in the world

and the poor nations it stands as a third power against the capitalist
imperialism of the West and the social imperialism of the East, as well as
world Zionism, and is preparing the third world by relying on Islamic justice
and reviving the rights of the poor. Hithout being conservative even disre—
garding the problems that they would definitely face, and with the sincerity
and clarity of their goal as stated in the Koran, the supporters of this
ideology have risen to save the poor nations, for the salvation of societies
from financial corruption. They want to replace matter by humanity and
virtue. Disregarding the hypocrisy and the ideas of politicians of govern-
ments, they have focused their hopes on supporting the poor and are looking
for a light in the darkness.

Here, by complicating matters and failing to give the freedom that the poor
deserve, the government is pursuing its own way and with procedures which
demonstrate its inclination for the continuation and stability of capitalism
very shortly the poor who are hoping for Islamic justice and a monotheisic
society will lose their hope and if that happens the grounds will be prepared
for turning away from Islamic principles and the weakening of beliefs. This
will give an opportunity for the non-Islamic groups and propagandists of
materialistic beliefs to extend their range of activities. If so, the
policy of the leadership and the government instead of moving in parallel
and in one direction would practically be separated and move in contradictory
lines. This would not only sacrifice the revolutionary achievements, it
would also endanger both the school (Islamic ideology) and the country.

One of the most important factors that has separated the policy of the
leadership and the government is the difference between the expectations of
the supporters of these policies. In the leadership policy there is nothing
but serving the people, God's satisfactions and otherworldly expectations.
Hhereas, in government policy you can see the seeking of popularity. The
supporters of capitalism have penetrated into the government's policy and
separated it from the leadership's policy. By comparing prices before and
after the revolution, the inclination toward the bourgeoisie and the
strengthening of the interests of the arrogant is quite readily observed.

The same capitalist of the bazaar who struck a blow for Islam and an Islamic
republic before the revolution is practically stabbing the Islamic goals
with a dagger from behind and has not given up a tiny portion of his interests
and inhumane profits. Apparently they talk more of being Islamic than other
classes of society. However, their way of living is a good criterion that
they are non-Islamic and that if they spend money in God's way or spend their
property for Islam. in reality they have not given away anything from their
own property but rather from the pockets of the people to God's account. They
want both to eat their cake and still have it. (The cannot have both
alternatives.) They will not ride a car if it is not a Mercedes Benz 280.
They do not want to give up their palace in the north of the city, their
suburban gardens around Tehran and their round-the-world trips and their
children cannot live on less than $1,000 a month abroad. How can they follow
the policy of the leadership? Obviously they are looking for another
alternative.

Even against the will of the government, they will push it toward capitalism.
How do they allow themselves to defend the Islamic republic. They are the
enemies of Islam. They damage the control of the leadership and they do

not have the right to consider themselves Islamic and supporters of Islam.

A government which cannot wash out these ant nests and take their money out
of their throat cannot claim to be an Islamic revolutionary government and
sooner or later with the help of a few million other governent personnel,
the government will have to feed on what is left from the poor and inevitably
a country which wants to move toward a monotheistic, classless society will
remain with the same non-Islamic classes.

The imperialist, Zionists, capitalists, position seekers, nonopolists,
and supporters of the former regime as well as those reactionaries who
pretend to be Hoslems are not inactive and from every side they are conspiring
to make the leadership policy move the government in the direction they want
and to separate the p0.1C} of the governmen: from the policy of the leadership
and to discredit and corrupt existing values. On the other hand, lack of
unity among the clergy, the Paadaran Corps (Guards Corps) and the committees
who are part of the lmam's policy and the penetration of ambitions and
monopolistic persons who pretend to be clergy as well as elements who are

far from the true values of the Islamic revolution such as professional
criminals, those affiliated to the former regime and supporters of the
reactionary oppc;iticn, capitalists and leftist groups in the committees

make procrastint ions and obstructions in the revolutionary movement in the
policy of the leadership. wv should also mention the groups affiliated to
imperialism and zlonism and unfortunately even the national and progressive
groups have helped weaken the leadership line by making mistakes and creating
involvements in the country and lnilaming ideological disturbances. They
have made the government more panicky and perhaps the government is inclined
toward a direction that it did not want and the opportunity was given to
those with bourgeois inclinations.

if the struggling and the rt/olutionnry groups had not so much covered
themselves in their ideological beliefs in the name of the people and the
people's interest and had placed themselves in the revolutionary atmosphere
of Iran and in the arms of the nation with sincerity and had realized the
revolutionary position insiead of keeping at a distance from the people and
making criticism. the leadership power would have been strengthened and
perhaps most of the existing problems and inadequacies would not have been
created. Of course, the forces supporting the leadership did not have a
sufficient understanding of these groups and thus accepted them regardless
of their ideological differences.

The mercenary policy of Zionism and imperialism helped cause splits among

political groups. They want to weaken the leadership and for this purpose
they have used all of their economic and political forces and mass media

even by creating grounds of uncertainty toward the revolution genuineness.
they prevented the people from accepting and believing in the revolution

and they will never rennin calm. With the help of domestic reactionnries

and the negligence of national political groups of relative understanding

of the revolutionary time. they take political and ideological activities

underground. The intellectuals who should be in the front line of the people
have been placed at such an unsuitable distance because of lack of understanding
that the people consider the intellectuals as enemies. The imperialists and

Zionists want to split forces and they are hoping for the start of under-

ground activitiea. They encourage repression and terrorism in every way and

want to prevent the development of our country by any trick or conspiracy.

No matter what ideology we have, we are all responsible to the revolution

and if it is in danger. If we believe in God we will be reprimanded before

god and if we do not believe in God we will be reprimanded by the people and
istory.
So all groups and classes of society are responsible for protecting this
genuine Isle-1c revolution and they are bound to purge thenselves of beliefs
and understandings unsuitable to the revolution and not to allow suspicious
eleaents who are not worthy of the revolution to act ahead of all the
progressive and struggling clergy. They should follow such examples as lnan
Khoaeyni and Ayatollah Taleqani. The intellectuals and university students
should think of the path that the martyred teacher, Dr Shari'ati was following.
All the groups should focus their nonactive group role in producing activity
at this time for strengthening the leadership and revolutionary slogans, that
is. independence, freedom and the Islamic republic. Instead of theoretical
propaganda, the groups should be active in Jehad (holy war). for construction
considering the revolutionary position and necessity in the country. The
supporters of the policy of the leadership should also accept that merely
having nonreligious beliefs does not mean opposition to the revolution. The
true enemies of the revolution who are supported by the iaperialista and
Zionists are usually in the clothes of supporters who strike their blow
internally. The government should avoid any program that would lead to the
growth of capitalism, rather it should approach and confer-with the policy
of the leadership. By maintaining the chain of co-nand, to accept the systea
of having council as a need for the revolution. Considering the disguised
unanployuent in offices, the government can at least mobilize one-third of
its employees for the Construction Jehad. At least until the time that the
hand of inperialisn and Zionism is cut off . all groups should make peace
with one another and unite. Instead of confronting each other and asking the
front weak, they should strive to strengthen a single front. Because it is
only by maintaining unity and strengthening the leadership that the anti-
inperialist position is strengthened in all countries and victory is achieved
for the poor.

90M
(:50: 10906
INFLUX, DRAIN OF CITIZENS FOLLOUING REVOLUTION REVIEWED
Tehran ETTELA'AT in Persian 6 Oct 79 p S
latticle: "The Iranian Revolution and the Brain Drain!_':7

/jl_'ex_§/ The brain drain, which is an inevitable symptom of industrial ex-
pansion, technical development and the sciences of the era, is like the
other policies of the devastating iwerialism which for a long time has
had as its objective the world's intellectuals and specialists, especially
those of the countries of the third world--a worldwide problem and a com-
mon misery of all the countries which have risen up to deliver themselves
from the Cultural and economic imperialism of world inerialism. The se-
duction of world capitalism, which enjoys abundant material resources and
resources for prosperity, has a record as old as that of neoinperialism's
existence in the world in attracting intellectual and experienced minds
and people, and, God knows America is the master of the countries of the
world in this intellectual and cultural exploitation and imperialism.

In the past 20 years America has had a pressing need for medical personnel
and has acted with such generosity in attracting trained doctors and nurses
that for the past 2 or 3 years practically all its needs have been met in
this area. Since then it has exerted considerable rigorous efforts to
bring in doctors. Now a large group of educated Iranians, and above all
doctors, who, it is stated, total 5,000 persons, have been drawn to the
American job market. In other fields of science such as physics and math-
ematics, numerous stars like Professor Ghaffari enjoy a lofty status and
position in that country's scientific circles as well. Many countries of
the third world, besides Iran, and even European countries as well are
suffering from the syaptoms of the brain drain.

The Brain Drain--and the Brain Draw

Following the triumh of the revolution of Iran, when the bases of the
regime of oppression, tyranny and repression were crushed, nunberoua groups
of educated, specialized young people with revolutionary seal and yearning
cans hone. Fortunately, in spite of numerous obstacles and problems, a
large portion of them still are staying in Iran, with the objective of
serving the revolution, in hopes of finding appropriate work. In the
words of a Tehran University official at a television round table, about
70 Iranians who have studied abroad have been employed to teach at uni-
versities. 0n the other hand, some unpleasant events of past months have
led to the emigration of large groups of educated Iranians and the medical
comnity has been the most afflicted in this area.

In the face of this group fleeing from the inevitable events of the revo-
lution, many Iranian intellectuals and thinkers who lived for many long
years for political or other reasons as expatriates in the Heat returned
to the country with unparalleled seal and enthusiasm and sincerely took a
stand in service of the revolution.

In the rotten regime of the past, where the ruling power's pressure and
repression wrested the right to any kind of expression of ideas or freedom
to work from the people, most of the country's valuable educated and speci-
alized people headed abroad and resided in foreign countries.

Hoveyda's fascistic government, which was happy and pleased with this sit

uation, appeared on the surface to criticize the intellectuals and speci-

alists and organized fraudulent seminars and round tables for avoiding the
brain drain. However, when honest patriotic specialists did return to the
country, it consigned them in cowardly fashion to Savak's torture chambers
on the accusation of political activities or put them under such surveil-

lance fron one bureau to another, or one organization to another conpany,

that they became exhausted and left the country after a while.

The Brain Drain

In a conversation with BT'TELA'AT on Thursday 27 September, Sadeq Tabataba'i,
spokesman of the tenporary revolutionary government, declared that more
than $40 billion of the nation's wealth was taken abroad last year.

There are still no accurate statistics on the country's income for 1978-79,
but nonetheless, if we cast a glance at the country's total income for the
year 1977-78, which totalled 203 billion tomans, and cospare this figure
with the abovementioned $1.0 billion, we will arrive at a truly sorrowful
conclusion: the amount taken out of Iran just last year was 30 billion
tomans more than the country's entire revenue for 1977-78! Without a
doubt this loss was the result of the system ruling the country, that is,
subservient capitalism within its neoinpsrialist context.

\
Then again, this loo-billion figure is just the material side of the ques-
tion; if we include the material value of the brains which have been
drained off in this calculation, the figures on the nation's losses from
the satanic regime will be staggering.

There is no doubt that a great group of scholars, men of ideas and speci-
alists have left the country. However, the motives of the matter need
comprehensive evalusti m and analysis. One can break this drain down into
two groups: one, specialists who left Iran in order to escape trial for
some sort of connection with the regime which was overthrown. and two,
specialists who have sinp’y left the country on the strength of bad pub-
licity and fear of social changes.

This group Consists uwstlv of people who evaluate events not as they are
but as they themselves wish then: to be. in this respect, the propaganda
of capitalist countries is undoubtedly not without influence. Imperialism,
which became hysterical over the lrsnisn revolution, has constantly been
trying to portray our country's overall picture in such a fearsome way

thll. every battery is driven to leave his country by fear! Their reason-
ing is that fascism, with its "iron heel," is on the way, and they are
whining about the lack of freedom and the blackness of repression without
presenting a clear pacrnre of what they are saying, or adopting any reme-

dies for solving this problem. Naturally this intensifies the problems
of the brain drain.

The Return of Qualiﬁed People

in the course of the Iranian revolution, and also following the triuuph
oi ch: rtvolation, a large group also returned to Iran alongside the groups
which left the country. This group returned home solely to advance the

goals of the revolution, serve the people and be of utility within their
own limitations.

Numerous students even left without comleting their studies and made their
way :0 the country alongside exiles, enforced emigres, and members of or-
,zanizsr‘oue‘ , political parties and so on and so forth--solely t:- serve the
revolution. As s result the majority of today‘s leadership group in Iran
consists of people who were away from their homeland for l5 to 25 years.

Habib Asgeri, a youth who left his sociology studies half conpleted and
came to Iran, states, with regard to his motives for returning, "Today
more than any tine I can say we have reached the era of construction; de-
struction is easier than construction and for this reason lost of the
people who were present during the destruction have now stayed on for the
reconstruction. A true revolutionary is a person who is aware of the arts
of construction and destruction, together, and one must say that these
periods have been very comics: and complicated. Under such conditions, it
often happens that a number of people collapse under the weight of problems
and leave the country discontent since they are not able to discover and
cosprehend the lava bearing on the class struggle.

"Now, in view of combative circumstances of the struggle, one must remain

in the country, work and bring awareness and understanding to the toiling
people and the masses. One can also show dissatisfaction with a particular
development in other ways. lihat must be taken as granted is that here our
country is, and we are partners and participants in its good and bad aspects.

11
"Now one must work with all one's being. struggle and eliminate the ugly
features and inadequacies. This is the only existing reality."

Special Traders

Eng Bezargen, the prime minister of the tenporsry revolutionary government,
in raising a complaint about certain doctors, referred intelligently a
short time ago in his television interview to the other classes of society
which preferred their personal welfare to the interests of society and
stated "In the current conditions of the country it is the duty of every
individual and every group to pursue activity and work without financial
designs or inordinate materiel expectations."

Although he did not place direct aphasia on the matter of the emigration
of numerous specialists and thinkers in this interview, one may fully de-
duce from the prime minister's words that as a revolutionary who is de-
voted to the revolution he is dissatisfied and worried about this emigra-
tion and brain drain. Unfortunately the number of doctors who left Iran
after the revolution is not small and one cannot easily sidestep it, con-
sidering the shortage of doctors in Iran and the society's need for the
iuportant issue of public health and treatment.

Other specialists and educated people besides doctors have left the country
on various pretexts.

Roseyn Radpanahi, a student at Tehran University, stated in a brief inter-
view with our reporter "The flight of people with capital and the prosper-
ous classes of society in general was natural and predictable because the
class character of this group makes it mandatory that they live in a gaudy
atmosphere devoid of turmoil. However, the departure of a number of in-
tellectuals and specialists abroad is not justifiable in any way."

He added, "There is no doubt that some special class dependencies also eat-
ist among educated specialized people which assuredly will be of influence
in their life style. For exanple, a doctor who received a house call fee
of 200 toeans for a few minutes' examination of a patient under the previ-
ous regime, engaged in trade alongside medicine, enjoyed materiel prosper-
ity and abundant ease will, like others of his kind, find the current con-
ditions of society 'in no way tolerable. In reality they are traders who
go anywhere their interests may be better provided for."

Last week also a doctor said in a radio interview,

"Our people and the toiling masses sincerely gave up their beloved lives
in the course of the revolution without any ulterior motives in order to
overthrow the filthy corrupt Pehlsvi regime.

"They census-sated the revolution at this exorbitant price. How can a
doctor allow himself to abandon a country in which he was raised for a

12
greater income when the masses of the people sincerely and loyally give up
their lives for s sacred objective? In my opinion this is the greatest
act of treason against the masses of the people. In a place where people
are offering up their lives with no concern, what importance or value can
material benefits have? It is therefore the duty of us doctors to engage
in service with all the power and strength we have, night and day, and
perhaps thereby pay our real debt to the revolution and the people."

[1337
CSO: 6906

13
ROLE OF BANKS IN REVOLUTIONARY SOCIETY ANALYZED, SCRUTINIZED
Tehran BHSLA'AT in Persian 9 Oct 79 p 5
article: "Are the Banks Destroyers or Builders127

liex57 Last week the Revolutionary Council of Iran ratified the bill to
nationalize banks and ended the con-nercisl power of the private sector
over this branch of industry.

In accordance with this ratified legislation, the Supreme Council of Banks,
which is being formed in place of the Joint Council of Banks, is being
charged with carrying out the necessary studies to bring banking transac-
tions in line with Islamic criteria and have the studies ratified by the
general assembly.

“thus the issue of nationalization of banks which, for the last several
months, has been considered one of the nost controversial program of the
government, has come close to the stage of inpleaentstion.

From now on all the country's banks--specialized and cotanercial alike--
will be managed in accordance with particular provisions cowatible with
Islamic cosmsndnsnts.

In the previous regime, the bank nensgensnt system was based on nsxinising
profit and exploiting the low-income and needy classes of society, since
this sector was mostly managed with joint foreign capital, more than half
its enormous revenues flowed into the pockets of the big foreign cospsnies.

Economic subservience in bank nenagenent delivered terrible blows to the
resources and economy of our society and intensified our dependence on
Western capitalism in other areas of industry and ensures. It was for
this reason that the revolutionary government assigned special priority
to the nationalization of banks and insurance cowsnies and economic and
financial experts pursued it with exceptional speed and seriousness.

The enormous profit which the balance sheets of banks showed in the
satanic era show the depradation by the banks of our ordinary, needy

1h
people more than anything else. The majority of these people--laborors,
white collar workers and merchants--were burdened down by heavy housing
loans at weighty interest rates of from it. to 1.1 percent.

The exploitation and extortion by banks in our country, which had become
prey to the devil, was so extensive that a bank established with the nirl
of foreign capitalists in Tehran managed to return all its capital to its
owners' pockets in the first 5 years. As an expert in money and banking
has written, close to 60 foreign banks started operating in various sec-
tions of Tehran just in the past few years. Following the nationaliza-
tion of banks, an inportant issue was their consolidation, the creation of
specialised banks, and the determination of the conditions of bank employ-
ees who are under various esployment umbrellas and are subject to special
employment and retirement regulations and classifications in which discrim-
ination among employees has been conspicuous. At the present time, the
matter of the payment of a special profit which is the natural right of
bank employees has in itself added one more problem to those of the banks.

whereas some banks, including the Bank Melli, have asde payments to their
employees on various terms and conditions, this problem still remains in
other banks. The matter of formation of councils, the appointment of man-
aging boards and the liquidation of elements connected with the previous
regime and the disbanded Savak are in themselves other issues which are to
be observed in the banks as in other government organizations and depart-
ments. In any case it is hoped that with the merger and consolidation of
banks, the functions of about 62,000 bank euployees will be clarified and
they will all enjoy equal privileges and benefits.

The bill regulating the nationalization of banks and insurance companies
which became the subject of the attention of the government and the Revo-

lutionary Council some months ago was ratified by the Revolutionary Council
l week ago.

in accordance with this law, the banks are to have five main elements:
one, the General Assembly of Banks; two, the Supreme Council of Banks;
three, the managing board of each bank; four. the managing director of
each bank; five the legal examiners of each bank. The General Assembly of
Banks consists of the minister of economic and financial affairs, the min-
ister of industry and mines, the minister of cow-area, the minister of
agriculture and rural development, the minister of housing and urban devel~
opment, and the minister of state for the plan and budget organisation.

Chairmanship of the General Assembly is the responsibility of the minister
of economic and financial affairs.

In accordance with the law which has been ratified, any change in the
articles of any bank's charter, increases or decreases in any bank's cap-
ital, and the establishment, dissolution or merger of banks will lie ex-
clusively in the power of the exceptional General Assembly of Banks.

15
Regarding the new law on banks, our reporters got in touch with some men-
aglng dlrectors and employees of banks and prepared and drew up the follow
ing report in the light of their recounendetions and reform views. The
report is as follows:

The Banks' New Duties

Arebzadeh, managing director of the Credit Bank, stated, with respect to
the new law on banks, "The merger of banks has been raised in general form.
Details have not been presented in this law, but the managing director of
the Central Bank had previously made clarifications on the details of the
regulating bill which to some extent define banking policy. It goes with-
out saying that this merger met take place because it will benefit the
banking system of the country, the economy and the society from every
standpoint. One good feature of the nationalisation of banks is the cen-
tralization of bank management and administration and this will be accom-
panied by considerable savings in cost. 0n the other hand, the sole aim
of the banks in the past was to make a profit and acquire interest; how-
ever, following the nationaliaation, the principle of profit will no long-
er be the object of attention and bank capital will be used to expand in-
dustries and build and develop the country.

"Thereby the banks will depart from their profit- making condition and will
take the form of a useful center for economic and industrial growth."

He added, "It is possible, in the light of the plan to consolidate banks,
that a number of bank employees will be surplus to requirements. There-
fore it will be necessary to create new positions for that group of en-
ployees and use them in different sections in accordance with their fields
of specialization.

"To this end it is necessary that new duties be assigned to the banks.
This will be easy, since bank euployeas are well-informed on comercial,
industrial and agricultural affairs; that is, the government can consign
the administration of certain agricultural and industrial units to banks
so that the banks can make use of their specialists in managing and con-
sulting with these units.

"In this event, the problem of uneqloyment will not threaten bank ewloy-
ees and appropriate jobs will be created for surplus bank eqloyees."

The managing director of the Credit Bank added, "Another government ob jac-
tive in merging and nationalising the banks is to help people and allevi-
ate their financial problems; the banks paralyzed the people' a economic
power by receiving onerous and spectacular interest from them in the pest.
Now, though, the idea is for the banks to proceed to alleviate people's
financial problems for a reasonable emission. With the inlementation
of the merger plan, the interest rate and co-nissions throughout all banks
will also become unifor- end all kinds of overcharging and iqosed condi-
tions will be avoided."

16
Elimination of Interest

Regarding the elimination of interest, Arabzadeh said "This issue is re-
lated to the general policy of the government and the Revolutionary Council.
In any event the interest, along with the comission determined for loans
disbursed, will be equitable, and the income from this will be spent on
expanding the country's industries and agriculture.

"In my opinion, however, the interest which the banks receive from the in-
dustrial sector at the present time is great. The interest which row ap-
plies to industrial loans differs according to the size of the loan and
even reaches 13 percent on some occasions; this is exceptionally high con-
sidering current conditions and the need the industries have for money with
which to operate."

Concerning the nationalization of banks, Askarian, member of the board of
directors of the Iran Insurance Bank, told our reporter, "I am in agreement
with the merger of banks but one must see what regulations have been pro-
vided for the merger. In order to serge banks it is necessary to consoli-
date an; unify the employment regulations of banks before anything else so
that there will be no differences among bank enployees. In addition, in
order to avoid mistakes and duplication, a new system mat be created so
that the banks will have mutual information exchanges and their credit and
legal management will be interconnected. Otherwise, numerous problems will
be created which it will not be easy to solve." Gorjestani, managing
director of the Merchants' Bank, told our reporter:

"Hy information regarding the bill which has been ratified by the Revolu-
tionary Council is restricted to the news I read in the papers; until the
official letter concerning the bill reaches me, I will have to excuse my-
self from expressing an opinion on this utter."

Employment Situation in the Banks

The plan to merge banks has drawn the attention of bank enployees as well
as the nation's framers of banking policy, and the bank enployees express
different views on the bill ratified by the Revolutionary Council. He will
content ourselves here with two energies of the points of view expressed.

Seyyed Horad Hoseyni, employee of the Export Bank, told our reporter con-
cerning this matter:

“If this plan is carried out properly and with the necessary care, it will
be the best of bills because it will both ensure the people's interests
and be beneficial to bank esployees.

"when this plan is carried out, people's banking activities will be carried
out more easily and bank customers will no longer have to refer to differ-
ent bank branches. 0n the other hand the eaployment condition of bank
employees will also be clarified, all bank employees will enjoy similar
rights and benefits and the extra privileges which some bank employees
possess relative to euployeaa of other banks at the present time will be
eliminated. Host isportant of all, the interest or emissions which banks
receive from borrowers will be equalized in all banks and thus there will
be no overcharging of customers. On the basis of these fatts, I am 100
percent in agreement with the law to nationalize and consolidate banks and
hope that this mission will be consuuuated as soon as possible."

Vahedi, chief of an Export Bank branch, told our reporter "I hope that the
pressure of work in banks will be reduced with the inlementation of the
new law on banks, or at least that the amount of work will not go beyond
what it already is, and new duties will not weigh down bank esployees."

He added, "The employment situation of bank workers has not yet been de-
termined; in fact, employees who had jobs in private banks were faced with
an unknown situation following the nationalization of the banks. Now we
are neither government nor private sector ewloyees. When we request the
government to investigate the problems of matters related to us they tell
us 'You have not yet become governmental' and these evasive answers have
increased our bewilderment even more than before."

He added, "The nationalisation and consolidation of the banks will be to
the benefit of all the people because all banking activities which used to
be scattered about will be combined in several banks and people will be
able to carry out their banking activities easily. Most isportent of all,
with the nationalization of the banks some of our economic dependence will
be eliminated and this will be to the benefit of the country's economy."

11887
C50: 4906

18
PERPIDY. TREACHZRY OF INTERNATIONAL DRUG FIRMS BAKED
‘l‘ehran mum-r in Persian 10 Oct 79 p 5

llrticle: ”Foreign Pharmaceutical Firms Sell Drugs to lren for Cash Only: _
The Drug Shortage Is a Link in the Counterrevolutionsry Zionist Conspiracylﬂ/

/_:l_‘ex_t/ Some categories of vital, life-giving drugs have heconr unavailable
in Iran. Big nhermsueuticsl cowenies have laid out very stiff terms for
the sale of drugs to lren and export drugs to Iran only in exchange for
cash, whereas foreign drug manufacturing firms previously received 10 per-
cent of the price of their orders as a down payment and received the rest
in instalments over 6 months or more!

This customary conduct was observed with respect to all consnerciel agree-
ments and was not restricted to the sale and purchase of drugs. Now. how-
ever, some foreign pharmaceutical cowenies and other producers who are
linked with international Zionism and inperialism and are dissatisfied with
the Iranian revolution are looking for excuses in order not to sell their
goods to our country, and they even ignore intornetionsl comnerciel agree-
ments.

Ila-lever, this deliberate creation of obstacles and sabotage, which is be-
ing carried out connlerely with the orders of Zionist policymakers, will
not leeve the slightest influence on Iran's current policy; it will even
increase our people's anger toward the Zionist despoilers of the world.

The pharmaceutical manufecturing coupanies, which rose up in cowetition
in the past to sell their drugs to Iran, end yielded to every reconnanda-

tion by the government of Iran, are not prepared to sell drugs to Iran now
that their abundant resources have been blocked off.

More than 10 types of needed, frequently-consumd drugs have become scarce
in Iran and drug inporting firms are in financial difficulties regarding
the purchase and acquisition of drugs from abroad.

The importation of drugs from abroad takes two forms, one, that of menu-

factured and prepared drugs, and the other, that of primary materials for
the manufacture of drugs.

19
At the present time, foreign companies are proposing difficult conditions
to importing firms for the sale of each of these two types of commodity,
and most importing firms are not able to accept their proposals.

Dr Barkhorderi, director of the Bazarganan Hospital, stated in this regard:

"At the present time. the shortage of drugs is being felt throughout the
country and the sole reason for this may be sunmerized as the foreign com-
panies' search for excuses not to sell drugs to Iran.

"In the past. drug importing companies obtained the credit to import drugs
from abroad at any volume they wanted by paying one tenth the price of
their orders. Now, however, the foreign comanies do not hand over drugs
until they have received the entire price of their order in advance. These
problem also exist with regard to pharmaceutical primary materials, and
pharmaceutical blending conpanies have also met with difficulties in terms
of proCuring primary materials.

"Recently the Ministry of Health also called upon Japanese pharmaceutical
companies to obtain drugs and apparently gave orders for a large amount of
syringes and other drugs. Some foreign coqanies, for example the English
conpany Organon, basically do not export drugs to Iran, so the drugs which
those companies used to export to Iran have become exceedingly rare."

He added, "In addition to the private companies which have the duty of
purchasing and obtaining drugs from foreign manufacturers, two government
organizations also inport drugs into Iran; one is the National Drug Com-
pany Incorporated and the other is the Lion and Sun Preparations Organi-
zetion.

"The advantage the Lion and Sun Preparations Organisation has over other
private companies is that it can import drugs into the country without
paying duty, because the Lion and Sun Preparation Organisation is connected
with the International Red Cross Organization; it is for this reason that
it has been given this advantage."

He listed the names of the following 11 types of drugs which are scarce in
the market: Anpiciilin 500 capsules; Pavolon capsules; Coraton tablets;
all drugs used for the treatment of asthae,euch es Vantolin syrup,
Jantolin spray, and Phenergan cream; Bisolvan tablets; Costanin drops;
Cofitol drops; plain Selston and Coronodos capsules; and Ampicolex.

classification of Drugs

In this regard Dr Akhavan, head of the Sales and Distribution Unit of the
National Drug Conpeny Incorporated, told our reporter:

"The drugs which are rare at present on the market may be divided into
three groups.

20
"One group is drugs for which similar drugs exist in the market and in
whose place one can use the similar drugs, for example Panpartine, which
is actually rare in the market but in whose place one can use the similar
drugs Assaicine and Binotal.

"The second group is drugs which have primarily a placebo effect and whose
use, or nonuse, leaves no effect on the body. Among the capsules which
may be taken orally in the third group are drugs for which similar types
do not exist in the market and whose consumption is vital and necessary
for a sick person, such as drugs like Izordil used for heart ailments.

The Drug Coumany Incorporated has inported this group or drugs and placed
them at the disposal of pharmacies which have agreements with the company.
All in all the Drug Company Incorporated is procuring about 22 types of
rare drugs and selling them to pharmacies. Meanwhile pharmacies are being
advised to sell drugs equivalent to a sick person's consumption for 5 or

6 days in order to avert probable shortages."

He added, "Some doctors write up to a pstient's consusption for 6 months
in one drug prescription, without taking account of current drug shortages.
For exaeple, the University of Tehran, Bmam Khomeyui Medical Faculty, on
2 October 1979 prescribed 200 Diceral 500 milligram capsules for a girl

named Ha'sumeh Morsdmsnd, one capsule to be injected intermuscularly each .
day.

"However, this amount should be prescribed over five or six prescriptions,
meeting the patient's consunption for a month or «0 days each time.

"Of course this classification is not possible in the case of certain
drugs. For exasple, the minimum consumption of antibiotics is 3 days, and
less than that should not be put in a prescription. However, one can put

a time restriction on the consunption of many drugs prescribed for long
periods and make the drug available to the patient in several instalments."

Coupanies Connected with Zionism

The owners and managers of certain drug inorting firms which had special
connections with the previous regime fled Iran after the revolution and
pharmaceuticals which had been inported into Iran by these coupanies are

not coming into lran now. These pharmaceuticals have also become scarce
in the market.

in this regard, Dr Akhavan said "At the present time foreign conpanies are
asking the full price of orders in advance before transferring pharmaceut-
icals to Iran. Now the value of an order must be paid to the account of a
foreign bank which they themselves determine. 0! course some foreign com-
panies, because of their Zionist connections, are not prepared to be party
to transactions with the Iranian government and so to speak intend to put

our people in difficulties as regards drugs.

21
"Some companies also refrain from selling drugs on credit, on the assump-
tion that the Iranian nation has gone through a cataclyam and cannot set

on its financial connituents. The fallacious, prejudiced propaganda which
the foreign press, radio and televiaion have started against Iran is also

fuelling this lack of confidence and inhibiting manufacturing coupenies
fron counercial relations with Iran."

11387
680: 10906
CURRENT SITUATION IN RUBBISH AREAS DISCUSSED
Paris WEB-8 302 in Persian ll Oct 79 pp 10, 11
article: "Pile of the Day: A Trip Rsport27

/_Tex_t/ KHABARNAMEH-B KORDBSTAII is a newsletter, published by Kurdish
fighting men. Recently, issue 7 of this publication, which was reproduced
by the Organizations of Guerrilla Irregulars of the Iranian People, was
sent to NAMEH-E R02. We herewith publish part of a report by a Kurdish
worker from the town of Saqqez which was printed in this publication.

In the town of Saqqez, an apparent tranquility is to be observed. The
shops are open and one can sense traffic in the streets. Young revolution-
ary forces are not to be seen in the town. The faces of guards are to be
observed everywhere and most evenings after midnight they raid so-celled
suspicious houses. At 0100 hours in the morning Haj Hs'marzadeh was ar-
rested in bed and sentenced to 8 years in prison on the charge of cooper-
ating with the Democratic Party.

The spirit of the people is very good and the slogans on the doors and
walls of the houses and the alleys off the streets display a revolutionary,
defiant spirit. The people are indifferent toward the guards, and most re-
bel against the meetings and demonstrations they hold. The guards view
this attitude with a weak, despairing spirit and sometimes try to draw
people's attention to themselves by such theatrical acts as the distribu-
tion of oil, rice and Tide. However, the people of Saqqes, who have put
the experience of 5 days' fighting against the guards behind themselves,
in spite of the shortage of these materials and relative financial poverty,
will not resort to having these materials handed over to them under any
pretext and procure most of their oil and rice via Baneh. The hireling
guards, who also are failing in this area, have no choice but to attract
simple-hearted rural people through local reactionaries, show then off in
the main street in a long line before an army of guards and, as armed per-
sons watch over them, in order to compensate for their difficulties, say
"All right, now do you want oil, or autonomy?" upon handing over a very
small aeount of the coaasodity to them. Then they laugh and malts fun of
the helpless people. In this situation, people who coeplain are subjected

23
to the insults and blows of the hirelings (hired of course in the manner
of the Islamic Republic). This has caused rural people to come to town
less often. An old peasant man named Sufi Mahmud who has seen this situ-
ation stated, with utmost discomfort and simplicity, "Hould that our
children died of hunger and that I had not done this. I swore upon my
honor that after this if my children die before my eyes I will not refer
to them for anything."

The uninformed guards have resorted to another trick. Trying to attract
people's attention by so-called humane means and good conduct, they greet
young and old people in the streets and alleyways and pretend to be big
brothers. when this trick does not work they either attack like Mongol
troops or work out their problem by firing guns, terror and arrests. In
many places women spit on them. Most guards are unhappy with conditions
and are very discouraged with their work. One may easily observe fear,
regret, distress and remorse on their faces. People in the police are al-
so dissatisfied with them and are not prepared to cooperate with them.
when the guards visited the Saqqez police and requested that they go on
guard and on watch in cooperation with one another, they met with great
opposition on the part of police personnel.

In the afternoon of Tuesday 18 September 1979 around 2,000 young people
and members of the toiling classes set out from the belt road toward Aqab
Square with slogans for Sheykh Buoddin, autonomy and the expulsion of the
guards. The parade concluded at Aqab Square with the Kurdish national
anthem ('eri Qeyb). A few hours after this occurrence the confused
guards entered Aqab Square with a Simorgh freight van and began to fire
guns in fear. A number of young people who were reading proclamations and
newspapers on the walls were dispersed and the guards arrested four of
then. Aqab Square was enptied out. The guards, finding no one else to
arrest, started arresting uninformed, uninvolved passersby. At that time
one guard went into the Zamiran coffee house in the square and addressed
some people seated there, askim "th don't you cooperate with us and turn
the counterrevolutionaries and troublemakers over to us, we have come here
to preserve security?" Someone answered "This talk doesn't go down with
us, you yourselves are causing the disturbance and destroying the calm of
the city by shooting guns and cos-hitting terror. If you expected coopera-
tion you shouldn't have troubled yourself to preserve our safety and calm.
He haven't seen any troublemakers, nor are we the sort of people to betray
our fellow townspeople." Gradually it got dark and every place became
empty; except for a few workers in coffee shops on the outskirts, nobody
was to be seen. Thus the comedy of the anti-Islamic guards ended with the
arrest of eight people.

The morning of the following day the constant sound of gunshots around the
garrison broke the people's sweet early morning sleep and dawn tranquility.
A few hours later the people resumed their lives with a good but apprehen-
sive spirit. when they asked one another about the morning's gunshots,

2h
they told one another cooly and sometimes with a mocking laugh "it's
nothing -thcy must've acen Kurdish Piahnergas early in the morning."

Hasan Qiasi, a photographer, was arrested on the baseless charge of photo-
graphing Saqqez demonstration festivities and is in prison. Aziz Pallahi
was detained on the charge of carrying around a typewriter which was used
for making and printing Islamic proclamations; although Has'ud Alu'i, head
of the Koran office, observed that this typewriter was used for publishing
Islamic announcements, he was still sentenced to 5 years' imprisonment and
is now in Evin. Eight nurses in the hospital and the public health depart-
ment of Saqqez Shahrestan were banished, all being charged with cooperat-
ing with the Democratic Party. Observed among the banished were the Ka'bis
(two sisters), Hrs Gilani, Hrs Airs, and Balluri.

Twenty-four sincere revolutionary teachers who served the Shahrestan of
Saqqez were banished in absentia; their names are as follows: Payeq
Dabbaghi, Faruq Keykhosravi. Ata Ahmad Paoah, Tareq Dabbaghi, Aziz Resa' i.
Habibollah Ballurl, Ahmad Mortezabu /sic/, Hostafa Rahmsnian, ﬂoaeyn
Taqizadeh, Bbrahim Qaderi, Naser Ahmadi, Khadijeh Naderi, Mofideh Hotahhar,
Ahmad Abdi, Hasan He'marzadeh, Faruq Naqshi, Taher Adani, Mahmud Keyvan,
Abdolqader Ghazi, Hohannud Rahim Amini, Hohamnud Salehi, Hamid Dabbaghi
and Hohannud Reza Qaasab Azad.
Low-COST HOUSING PROJECTS DISCUSSED
“'1‘ "AMER-E 802 in Persian 6 Oct 79 pl (Annex)
article: "Construction of 6,700 Low Cost Houses in Iranf_'7

liens-I An English company has signed a contract to send machinery and
equipmnt valued at $8 million for low-cost housing construction in Iran.

In accordance with this project, 6.700 houses are to be built in a satel-
lite city in the vicinity of Tehran, which indicates that the government

0: Iran has given the construction of low-cost housing top priority in its
so ans.

A Smith Korean company signed the contract to build the first 1,000 houses;
but the greater portion of the work on this “00 Ill-1110“ ”'01.“ "“1 be
carried out by the Iranian coupeny POM-

The South Korean Ministry of Construction has announced that the govern-
men: of Iran requested South Korean coqanies to carry on with their work
on 1‘0 construction projects suspended during the February revolution.
To“1 figures for the contracts on these projects is $105 million.

The Projects under discussion consist of the construction of a chemical
plant in Shiraz and cargo storehouses in hauler Khomeyni (the toner Bender
Shﬂaunt). Prior to the revolution, South Korea held first place in the
construction field in Iran.

“‘ iﬁver-tent portion of the materials inported to Iran for the staellite
to“! near Tehran will probably be inorted from Buglend. A spokes-en for
the Mideast Consultant Company which is responsible for construction of
this town stated, "It is still early to announce the price of the required
Nteriels, but this figure will be very inortant and will include the pur-
chase of electric and sanitary materials as well. The export of these
materials from England will help the condition of the British pound."

At the beginning of the month, Hideast Consultant Coqany, which had pre-
viously performed contracts in Iran as an interaediery in the inortetioo

26
oi priumry industrial equipment, announced that it had been chosen to
select and order all ioreign services, materials and equipment for the
satellite town. This is the first construction agreement to be made with
an English company since the revolution. According to the Mideast Con-
sultant statement, the Iranian government is trying to accelerate this and
similar projects by releasing its controls on building materials.

The client which is ordering this project, which conprises the construction
of 6,000 one-story houses and all the necessary infrastructure, is the
Iranian Government Railway Uorkers' Cooperative Company. Meanwhile, the
contracting company, PDM of Iran, will construct another 700-houee project
in an area for the Iranian government near this one.

11837
C80: 4906

27
BRIEFS

FLIGHT FROM REVOLUTION-Jy the time the Iranian revolution triumphed, tens
of thousands of people, most of who. had either acted with overweening
greed or collaborated with the previous regime, had left the country. Of
these, the majority were people who had either gone abroad because some
economic and social activities had been suspended or feared that the revo-
lutiqn would take a Comwnist turn. The departure of these people was con-
sidered tmorary, and everyone hoped they would return to Iran after the
revolution. A number were also collaborators of Sevak or partners in cor
ruption who knew their trip would be a long one and therefore piled up pro
visions for the journey and filled their bank accounts abroad. It was
hoped that most of those who had left would return to the country after
the triunph of the revolution but now hardly a few months have passed since
the revolution and people who did not want to or could not leave Iran, as
well as people who went abroad, have realized that there is no place for
educated or progressive people in the fanciful "Islamic" society of the
leaders of the revolution, while many old Sevak collaborators are eqloyed
in the new Savama. The true lovers of freedom, who brought the revolution
to fruition, and people without whose aid Iranian industry and economy
could not progress, were "liquidated" one after another; the reason for
this liquidation was not cooperation with the previous regime but their
political tendencies and their professional knowledge. Now, in the past

6 months, close to 1 million Iranians have left the beloved hooeland for

a long tine, and it is expected that by the end of winter the wiser of
Iranian refugees will total 2 aillion. For this regime to establish its
triumph or failure, it is not enough for people to say how many hundred
thousand people they have placed behind a few Friday-prayer clerics; rath-
er, it would be better for then to declare how many pelple have remained
in Iran out of the hundreds of thousands of people who throughout the de-
cades mastered er_t_s and gciences through the country's money and their

own hard work. /Iex_t/ lgaris NAME-B R02 in Persian 8 Oct 79 p _1_/ 11887

080? 5906

28
REAL ESTATE ADMINISTRATION ACCUSED 0F DISCRIMINATION IN RENTINC LAND
Tel Aviv HA'ARIV in Hebrew 26 Sep 79 p 19
[Article by Shlomoh Giv'on]

[Text] .Ari'el Sharon. Minister of Agriculture, raised his eyebrows in
surprise. and it was clear that even if he had been interned of the problem
previously, it had never been presented to him so plainly, unequivocally,
and explicitly: "Hr Minister, it appears to me that you don't know what's
happening to public land in the Negev. The people of the national land
administration are not taking care of what they are actually supposed to
take care of. Instead of guarding public land and preventing unceasing in-
cursions and increasing domination of public lands all over the Negev,
particularly by Bedouins, they are busy raising the price of land, and col-
lecting the biennial rents, the approval fees, and all the other payments
that are levied on Jewish land. This leads to some absurd situations.."

The speaker was Betsal'el Gever, chair-an of the Local Council of 'Omer, the
agricultural settlement near B'er Sheva. The words were spoken directly
to 'Ariel Sharon, Minister of Agriculture. during his last visit to the

Negev, which was devoted essentially to learning the problems of the national
land administration.

One of the "Shlomtsiyon" Veterans

'Ariel Sharon and Betsal'el Cever know each other from the days of the last
Kneset election campaign. Gever was then Negev district coordinator for
the "Shlomtsiyon" election list, on which he held third place. Since the
elections, relations between the two have cooled a little, and this was a
good opportunity for Gever to renew the old ties with the head of his list,

who has meantime become Minister of Agriculture and also head of the national
land administration.

In the course of his Negev tour, Sharon was invited to a flying visit to the
'Omer local council; there, in the council meeting room, Betsal'el Gever
"let him have it" and in a direct assault explained one of the ilportant
problems that is troubling hin these days. "It is i-possible," he continued

29
directly to Sharon, "that such serious discrimination between Jews and
Bedouin should prevail in everything that pertains to land for construction.
It is impossible that a dunam in 'Omer should be evaluated by the government
appraiser at a record high of IL 1.2 million, without development expenses
(which today add up to about half a million lira per dunan). In contrast,
the government delivers land to Bedouins for the same purpose, a few kilo-
meters away from us, at IL 20,000 per dunam. Did you ever hear anything
like it? If someone has set this policy with a clear mind, that's very

bad. Because it makes construction in the Jewish sector expensive, and is
definitely in contradiction to the policy of population dispersal."

Ariq Sharon says that the words sound justified. He nods his head in agree-
ment. He glances at the land administration people who have accompanied him,
and it is clear that he has passed the ball to them.

The land administrators were not enthusiastic about hearing Gever's criticisms,
and even reacted angrily to them. They were in sharp opposition, and in
particular expressed two contrary charges:

Neither Free Hot Cheap

1) The government is not obligated to provide land at a reduced price, or
half price, since this land will be an object of speculation and will make
people rich, while the government will gain nothing.

2) The price of the land is established by the government appraiser for

each separate instance. The appraisal is a function that belongs to the
Ministry of Justice, which is independent of the national land administration
and any other factor.

But Btsal'el Gever was not satisfied with the frontal attack he had just
conducted against the land administration policy. He proposed that the
administration meet with the Jewish tenant, to see whether something prac-
tical could be done to change the present procedure.

Gever recommended that from now on the administration should collect only
60 percent of the land price (i.e., half the amount that has been collected

hitherto), and that after 5 years of occupancy the matter should be considered
as though 80 percent had been collected from the tenant.

The minister of agriculture, who as we have said showed a tendency to agree
with GeVer, concluded by saying that the subject shou1d°be brought up for '
consideration before the Council of the national land administration.

This would not be the first time that Negev land for private construction
will be considered by the land administration. Over a short time the price
of the land has gone up severalfold, and no one feels that an individual
tenant is still ready and able to pay the prices that are being asked.

30
According to Gever, a situation is now being created where the expansion of
'Omer's population is being endangered by the high land prices. As an example
he points out that only 5 years ago (in 1974) one could obtain a lot in 'Omer
for private construction for [L 20.000. Three years ago (in 1976) the price

had risen to [L 80,000. Today the price for one dunam for private construction
is over [L 1,000,000.

The land administrators, who in official conversations hide behind the broad
back of the official appraiser, have admitted lately that the new prices seem
too high to them also. They admit that last year land prices in the Negev
climbed sharply, and apparently the trend is continuing.

Even in 'Arad (which is not in the coastal plain, which is thickly populated
and subject to fluctuating land prices) in less than a year there were sharp
increases in land prices for private construction in the "Bne Veitkha" (Build

Your Own Home) program, which is sponsored jointly by the land administration
and the local authorities.

"Updating" the Price

Only 9 months ago the government appraiser set a price of IL 55,000 per
dunam in 'Arad. Some months later the price was "updated" to IL 270,000 per

dunam, and today according to the appraisers valuation it costs IL 600,000
for a dunam.

Some people at the top level of the national land administration think that
these appraisals reflect the general market situation. But in contrast others
think that increases of 100 percent within a few years (in 'Arad, less than

a year) are unjustified for land for construction, especially before the
first stone has been laid.

Temporary Relief for Tenants

Not long after the minister of agriculture's last visit to the Negev we re-
ceived the news that the land administration council had passed a resolution
saying that even though it was not announcing any change in policy, the present

policy permitted temporary relief for land renters in the Negev district, for
dwelling needs.

In 'Arad a new collection system will be put into effect, according to which
the renter will pay only half the sum determined by the appraiser. The
balance will be considered a loan over the 5 years after construction is
finished, and after that time will be written off. In return the tenant will
pay a biennial rent of 1 percent of the value of the lot.

Just recently Btsal'el Gever also received the news that the land administra-
tion was ready to accept his proposal to reduce the cost of the lots for pri-
vate construction, with one change: instead of 80 percent of the lot value
the administration would collect a 60 percent down payment when the rental

contract was signed, and a biennial rent of 40 percent of the remainder.

31
The administrators in the Negev district have tried lately to change the
appraiser's valuation, and instead of IL1200 per square meter they have pro-
posed that the value be set at IL900 per square meter.

Matters have not yet reached their final stage, for even if this proposed
change is accepted, the price of a 600 square meter lot would be IL540,000.

plus IL300,000 development expenses; i.e.. IL840,000 for a lot for one-family
dwelling.

Into the complex of prices and the lack of a clear and uniform policy by the
land adminsitration, Gever has now thrown another proposal that is extremely
far reaching.

Gever informed the minister of agriculture that he was ready to head another
agricultural settlement ('Omer B), to be called "Nahal Hevron," in the "Green
Line" area. He proposed that for this purpose the state should allocate land
at no cost, with a grant of the rights of 80 percent of the land, and pro—

hibiting transfer of the property for 5 to 7 years from the signing of the
contract.

A Historic Opportunity

Gever's detailed proposal, as presented to the minister of agriculture, speaks
of allocating about 2000 dunams for establishing a settlement of about 2,500
families. He proposes that any Jew should be able to enroll in this program,
by means of a subsidy for the first tenants based on the size of the mortgage,
such as is given to Beduins in the Negev who are ready to settle in one of

the established villages.

As Gever submits his proposal to the minister of agriculture. he emphasizes
that this is a historic opportunity to establish additional agricultural
settlements like 'Omer in the Negev. He says that the initiative and the
possibility are there, but what is needed now is a decision to implement
the proposal.
LIBYAN LEADER AFRICTED HIT}! EYE DISEASE
Madrid BLANCO Y NEGRO in Spanish 10-16 Oct 79 pp 110-16

[Article by Maria Luisa Luca de Tena: "Qadbdhafi's Eyes, Dependent on a
Spanish Opthamologistﬂ

[Tag It has been announced in official circle that Colonel
Qadhdhafi, the leader and president of the Revolutionary
Junta of Libya will soon visit Spain. This event leads us
to publish an extreuely curious story, which was completely
unknown until now, in which two totalitarian regimes, Libya
and Spain—since our story goes back to l97b--nade an agree-
ment to "kidnap" a Spanish opthamologiat and take him "blind-
ly to Tripoli to attend a mysterious celebrity, with the
whole operation classified "top secret." An Merican journ-
alist living in Libya was the only one who managed to get
hold of the story. when threatened with losing her creden-
tials, she gave up the idea of using her information, which,
after all, was of interest in Spain, where it could not have
been published thanks to censorship.

Our little story takes place in April 1974, coinciding with the official
visit to Madrid of the prime minister of Libya, "Abd al-Sala'n Jallud.

This takes place at a politically difficult moment for Spain and for Libya.
The official visit had been postponed, first by the assassination of Carrero
Blanco, and a second time by the trip of Cortina Maori, than Minister of
Foreign Affairs, who was accompanying the Princes of Spain to Saudi Arabia,
the Philippines and India.

A year before the assassination of Carrero, important changes had also taken
place in Libya. m‘amar al-Qadhdhafi, until then head of the Libyan Revolu-
tionary Council and prime minister, had been replaced in the latter post by
Jallud, who also took over the political control of Libya, leaving to
Qadhdhafi the task of being, above all, the popular idol and representative
of the revolution which had overthrown the aged King ldris in 1969.

33
Another piece of background information to keep in mind in our story is the
eye disease of Qadhdhafi. A man of the desert, a bedouin by birth, the
Libyan colonel received from his past not only his deeply rooted religious
fanaticism, but also-—it is speculated--the widespread disease of desert
Africa, ocular trachoma. This contagious disease, of viral origin, can even
produce blindness if neglected. with regard to this, in October 1971 the
Cairo newspaper AL-AHRAH published the report that Qadhdhafi had entered a
military hospital in Cairo to undergo an examination and tests; that the
initial diagnosis had been sinusitis: that he had remained a total of 25 days
in the Cairo military hospital and that the results of those tests had not
been made public. As can be seen, the disease of the then 29 year old colonel
and leader of the Libyan revolution still was secret.

Search for an Opthamologist

The delayed visit of Jallud finally was set for 23-27 April 1976, and only a
few days before on 7 April, foreign embassies in Tripoli received the follow-
ing communication: "From now on Colonel Qadhdhafi will devote himself to
ideological questions, and is relieved of administrative and representational
functions." According to this, Jallud was taking another step toward real
power, and his political role was strengthened, with a view to his impending
trip to Madrid. At that time, the free European press cements that "Qadhdhafi
is the emotion, and Jallud the brains" in the context of the Libyan revolution.
Jallud was accompanied on his journey by the Libyan director of Public Health.
while Jallud was occupied with the official business of his trip-~the exchange
of oil for technology--the latter devoted himself, in consultation with the
Spanish health director, Doctor Bravo, to looking for a Spanish opthamologist
who could be taken to Tripoli on a secret mission. But who?

They had to find a specialist familiar with the desert disease. trachoma.
There are some in Spain, in fact, since this distressing disease was brought
to our southeastern and Andalusian coasts in the 19th century by soldiers of
Napoleon who were returning from campaigns in Africa. In 1929, health teams
had been organized under the auspices of Alfonso XIII in a wide-ranging cam-
paign to combat this disease, which had become endemic. The director of one
of these teams, which had worked in areas of Murcia and Alicante, had been
the eminent opthamologist Dt Tena Ibarra, who in 1976 was the head of the
National Opthalmic Institute. These two circumstances determined the choice.
This would be the man.

According to our information, Carlos Robles Piquer, then Spanish ambassador in
Libya, was in charge of the first contacts with Doctor Tens. Also, according
to our sources, Doctor Tens resisted in principle. The identity of the patient
had not been disclosed to him, and that was not to his liking. They had only
told him that he must go to Libya in Jallud's official plane to have a pro-
fessional consultation with an important person. In official circles the re-
sistance of the Spanish doctor was opposed, since the results of Jallud's
visit had not been completely satisfactory, and they wanted by all possible
means to satisfy the minister in this other objective. The matter definitely

3h
required mediation. and thus the president of the goverment himself, Arias
Navarro. put his weight behind the affair, personally calling on Tens to
agree to the journey. Little time remained. He had to report to the
Villamagna llotel in Madrid to go with Jallud's official entourage to Barajas.
and fly with them to Tripoli.

In Qadhdhafi ' s Fortress

Even during the flight they would not reveal to Doctor Tens the exact mis-
sion that had been assigned to him. He was put up in a large hotel and was

in permanent contact with the Spanish Embassy, where the wife of Robles Piquer,
Irene Frags, went out of her way to personally look after the well-being of
our distinguished doctor.

The morning after his arrival in the Libyan capital they at last explained to
Doctor Tena the specific purpose of his journey. lie was to examine President
Qadhdhafi, as well as other members of his family and of his entourage. He
was brought in an official car to the outskirts of Tripoli, to the imposing
fortress where the Libyan leader lives surrounded by extraordinary security
measures. After numerous check-points and several lines of barbed wire, they
reached a spacious and massive dwelling which housed absut a hundred persons.
including aides, family manbers and personal guards. In the palace fortress
there are also clinics, installed so that the eye examinations of Qadhdhafi
and his family took place in absolute secrecy. Doctor Tena's diagnosis did
not leak out, and we do not know it.

One thing is certain. Trachoma, a very serious disease in the past because
of its persistence and difficulty of eradication, as well as its contagious
nature, was first effectively battled after the discovery of the sulfamides.
and antibiotics have fortunately finished it off. In the Spanish territories
which have suffered from this plague endemically, it has been totally eradi-
cated. Qadhdhsfi, as we have indicated, has undergone serious treatment for
many years, and it can be assured that at this point he has overcome his for-
mer affliction.

when Doctor 'l‘ena was taken to Tripoli in the atmosphere of secrecy which we
have tried to describe, they wanted to disguise the reason for his trip with
a series of scheduled visits to the hospital installations of Tripoli, which
in those years were beginning to be equipped, and whose doctors were almost
all of foreign origin. A great nunber were natives, and many others from
countries of the East.

As always when there is an attempt to surround with secrecy something as
simple and normal as a chief of state consulting a specialist, many false
rumors went around in those days in ‘l'ripoli's diplomatic and journalistic
circles. 'lhere was talk of an operation, of an ailment mach more serious
than the real one. The pure and simple truth, according to what we have
been able to discover, is that the Egyptian family physician who attends
Qadhdhafi wanted to confirm the correctness of his diagnosis and treatment

35
with another qualified professional. But since Qadhdhafi cultivates for his
primitive people the image of the protected of Allah, he could not nppeer be-
fore them as a simple mortal, who because of his hedouin past had contracted
such a cocoon disease as ocular trachom.

After all. democracies have their advantages. They can tell the truth.

8131
CSO: M10
sum mansion Discusses sum nmcx'r, GUELBS PROJECT
Nouakc'nott cm in French 26, 27, 28 Sep 79

[Three-part interview with SNIM Director General Ely 0. Allai']

[26 Sep 79 pp 1. 3]

[Text] In an exclusive interview which he granted us, Mr Ely 0. Allai',
director general of the sum [National Industrial and Mining Company]
revealed that the loan agreements for the financing of the Guelbs project--
which in 1983 will assume the statement of account of the Kedia of IdJilu
are practically completed with the group of lenders and some have already
signed. The others, said Mr Allaf, will do so imediately. Nevertheless
he had to point out that certain legal difficulties remain, especially at
the level of the guarantee ayeements demanded by the lenders of the kinds.

innong other things these agreements include an agreement, called a trust
agreement, which causes a bit of a problem. It concerns a system respected
by the English moneymen, which consists of entrusting to one man--the
trustee-who will pay the amunts due on the desired dates, the management
of the funds destined to repay debts. He must preserve these funds as
though they were his own property... The problem of this trust agreement
is being discussed at the present time with the lenders and when all the
details of information have been collected at the company level, the busi-
ness can be settled quickly.

Touching on the present situation of the company, Mr Allaf, without giving
way to excessive optimism, said that the prospects are not very gloomy.
One cannot yet see light at the end or the tunnel, but a slight recovery
which is beginning in the iron market-ma recovery the extent of which can-
not of course be yet measured--augurs a good year for the company.

Still more significantly, for the first time in 16 years the profit and loss
statement of the company showed a slight improvement for the first quarter
of 1979. That is something to amuse the satisfaction of the officers of
the company, which has been showing a heavy deficit since 1975.

37
1n the course of this interview Mr Allaf also mentioned the prospects
opened by the return of peace in lburitania and the abandonment of the
policy of austerity.

Hi th regard to the halting of the war, Mr Allai‘ said that there haw hem
l-cnel‘icjal results for the company.

But he had to add that it was only now, after the hostilities had ceased,
that we have been able really to measure the damage caused by the war.

[Interview with Mr Ely 0. Allaf]

The National Industrial and Mining Company, SNIM, which
took over, after the departure of ELEM, the affairs of
the sector of industry and mines, a sector which comprises
the heart and lungs of our national economy, still has not
come up to the anticipated results.

Nevertheless one recalls the comitment undertaken in the
euphoria of nationalisation by its leaders and all of its
workers to improve production and to take up the challenge
hurled to us by history.

The deficit of 700 million ouquiya which the company now
suffers can only be due to external factors, and therefore

independent of the desires of the leaders and of the
devotion of the workers of the SNIM.

In the following conversation Mr my 0. Allaf, director
general of the National Industrial and Mining Company SHIN-
Sm gives us the reasons for this deficit

[Question] Since 1975 SNIM has had a large deficit. Why does this deficit
exist and what measures are envisaged for absorbing it?

[Answer] The deficit of the company has several important causes, among
which must be included the fact that the company was charged with operating
the copper mines of Akdoujt which, after the drop in the price of copper to
a very low level, in effect became a charge on the compaw. The new company,
as you know, no longer includes this activity. It has therefore been sep-
arated frcm SNIM along with the refinery project. One of the causes of the
deficit has consequently been eliminated. The second cause is the effect of
the war.

This effect was very important, firstly because of the destruction of mater-
iel caused, the slowdown of production, and the slowdown of the transportation
of production. Therefore a complex of phenomena caused by insecurity which
considerably reduced the activities of the company during the period of
insecurity. The third cause was obviously the drop in the price of iron in

38
recent. years. If, for example, one compares the 1971; price with those of
1979 in current dollars, the 1979 price is about half the 1971+ price, and
in constant dollars that is really low.

Therefore there was this drop in the quotations for iron which was one of
the main causes of the loss in receipts, and all this means that the new
SNIM, after separating out copper, has started out with a rather large
deficit of 700 million UM which it must recover simultaneously by tighten-
ing up measures internally to lower its costs, consolidate more closely
its break-even point, organi7e itself better, and likewise by an effort

in the market in collaboration with all the ore producers to try to ensure
that the price of iron moves upward rather than downward.

[Question] In its last issue Sim-INFORMATION reported an improvement in
the financial situation on the company level. What is this exactly?

[Answer] As you know, the company in effect reports its operating results
quarterly, that is to say it balances the total of its expenses and its
income by quarter.

This profit and loss statement has been in deficit for a certain number of
years, and for the two preceding quarters the operating results have been
slightly profitable. This augurs an improvement of the financial situation
for the year or the result for the year, but not enough to cut the deficit
seriously.

We cannot know the significant results until the end of the year. Essentially
therefore the information reported the results of operations for the first
quarter, which are positive.

[Question] There is talk of a recovery in the market levels for iron. Is
this only a small movement in the market level or a trend which may accel-
erate or even be maintained?

[Answer] According to the forecasts of the producers, nomally, it is an
upward trend expected for next year and the following years. an: the problem
is to know if this rise is going to be regular on the one hand and large, on
the other.

And, as you know, the price of iron is in effect set annually. hiring the
course of a single year one cannot get a clear idea of the size of an in-
crease in the following year from the prices in effect. At the end of each
year there is an overall negotiation between the producers and the users of
iron ore which takes into account the possibilities of world production,
which also takes into account economic recovery from the point of View of
iron and steel producers, and it is at the end of the year that the nego-
tiations end in a result.

At the present time we think that this result is going to be an increase in
the price of iron ore. Several signs point to it, and in particular the

39
bids offered outside contract, what are called spot orders, made during
the course of the year indicate a stronger demand.

As a result there is a possibility of an increase in the price of iron
ore for next year, but all this is only an indication. We cannot fore-
cast the smount of the increase before the end of the year.

[27 Sep 79 p 31

[Text] In the first part of the interview which he gave us,
Mr Ely 0. Allaf, director general of the $11!, explained at
length the reasons for the large deficit of the company at
the present time. Among the reasons for this deficit the
director general particularly cited the operation of the
copper mines of Akjoudt which, after the drop in the price
of this metal, constituted a charge on sum, the effects of
the war and the drop in the price of iron.

Relieved of the charges of the SOMIMA [Mining Company of
muritanial and the cliute of insecurity which prevailed
in the region, the sum is in the process of restming its
normal pace.

Actually the operating results of the compatw, which had
been in deficit for several years, has Just shown a positive

increase. This augurs an improvement of the financial sit-
uation of the SKIN-SE“.

Nevertheless the extent of the damages caused by the var
constitutes a serious handicap for a normal recovery of
the operations of the company.

But with the start-up of the Guelhs project, financing for
which has been obtained entirely, optimism is permissible.

[Question] For almost 2 years the company has not had to suffer the blows
of the POLISARIO. Can you give us a short assessment of these 2 years of
peace?

[Answer] These years of peace, that is, from the end of the year 1978 and
the year 1979, have been extremely beneficial for the canpany in the sense
that it has been able to work in calm, although for reasons of security,
peace was not complete; there were still some complications due to the
necessity of ensuring security to the workers, particularly on exposed
routes.

Nevertheless they permitted working in calm, and which is very important--

producing quantities greater than had been possible the previous year,
namely 1978. But it must be said that it was in the course of this period

ho
of peace that the company has been ciscOVering the extent of the damages
caused, and the difficulty of resuming its normal operations. This is
explained by the fact that during the period when it had serious financial

difficulties and serious security conditions, equipment could not be main-
tained nonnally.

It could not be overhauled as it should be. Consequently it was when we
needed to operate the equipment, both rail equipment and mine equipment,
when we needed to make it produce at its normal capacity, that we became
aware that it had suffered heavy damage, that it had not been overhauled,
and that it could not produce as expected.

Consequently the lack of spare parts, the difficulty of getting the equip-
ment in order, a difficulty due both to the lack of spare parts and suffi-
cient personnel; the personnel was adequate for a rate of normal maintenance
and overhaul. And from the moment that a too large quantity of equipment

insufficient. This is why we have great difficulties in restoring this
equipment to normal operation, and consequently, production. I must point
out that in the past few years, suppliers who had not been paid in a long
time had almost terminated supply of spare parts necessary for regular
maintenance of the equipment, and the restructuring of the capital of the
company was imperative in order to cope with this accumulated debt toward

the suppliers, to regain their confidence, and to obtain from them the
spare parts ordered.

We hope to be able to restore the normal situation between now and the end
of the first quarter of next year. Meanwhile the company obviously strug~
gles in this major difficulty--working with unusable equipment with all

the inconveniences which that involves: frequent stoppages, train derail-
ments, etc.

Despite everything, until now, production has been maintained at the
envisaged level. We contemplate, if there are no great difficulties,
reaching at the end of the year the production which was forecast, which
is about 8.5 to 9 million tons. Our major difficulty is this equipment

which was used beyond its capacity without mintenance and without over-
haul during the preceding years.

the earliest possible time. I should say that, for the moment, the loan
agreements are practically complete with the group of lenders: some have
already signed, others should do so immediately. Now what remains to

1&1
start up operations is mainly the legal formalities which sometimes take
time but which do not constitute a major difficulty.

He had important legal difficulties which have been removed, particularly
the effective realization of the increase of capitalization which has Just
been achieved with the participation of Iraq. Consequently the compmty is
now a legally established company with a definite subscribed capital and
the called-for installment deposited.

He had another difficulty--the convention of establishment between the
company and the state. At the present time this convention has been signed
and presented to the council of ministers, which has approved the draft
ordinance to be presented to the cm [Military Comittee of National Sal-
vation] for its approval.

This problem has therefore been resolved. Following these problems, the
decree granting the company the permit to exploit the Guelbs will also be
presented. From that side the complex of problems has been resolved.

Practically all the loan agreements have been negotiated and we think that
with the agreement of the sources of financing we will be able to begin
operations before completing the formalities of putting into effect the
loans as a whole. Certain of them involve the possibility of repayment

to S‘IIH if it has engaged in certain operations before the granting of
the loans.

There are some agreements for which we are encountering some difficulties.
These are not the financing agreements but the guarantee agreements re-
quested by the lenders. lhese guarantee agreements are of three types:
an agreement of domiciliation on which there are no problems and all the
partners are in agreement; a surety agreement on which the partners are
also agreed; but there is a trust agreement which presents some little
problems. It presents a problem in the sense that we must have some
information on the functioning of precisely this type of guarantee, of
this type of agreement, before arriving at a formla agreeable to the
sources of financing and to ourselves.

He are in the process of searching with the lenders for a final solution
which we hope to complete in a very short time.

[28 Sep 79 p 31

[Text] The policy of austerity decided by the Military
Committee of Rational Salvation and its application to
SHIN: this is the 3d subject covered by Mr Ely 0. Allaf,
director general of this company in an exclusive interview
which he granted to us.-
-u. m- “nuns-.u Ialul- VI “LL lllL' HUI WLJL" lulultl'l-ML'II "y
the company with regard to housing. He spoke also of a
reduction in general expenses as a whole.

Would a reduction in force be envisaged? No, Mr Ely Ould
Allaf told us again, except in the event of a reduction
in operations... In this latter part of his talk, the
director general of the sum stressed the necessity for
his enterprise to start up the "Guelbs" project in 19%
at the latest in order to avoid a drop in production.

[Question] Of what does this trust guarantee which is causing a problem
consist?

[Answer] It is a system which entrusts the management of the funds destined

for repayment of the debt to a trust, that is to say a man who manages them,

who pays the installments on the date due and who guards the funds as though

they were his own property. It is therefore linked to the debt service which
the lenders are paid on the desired deadlines and for which the $1M pays in

advance the sum necessary for this debt service. Then there is a man called

the trustee who is responsible for that.

This system exists particularly in England, and it remains to obtain a cer-
tain number of details, in particular concerning the taxes which might have

to be paid in the name of sum, which must commit itself to reimbursing him.
It is this agreement which still entails certain difficulties, due essentially
to ignorance.

We therefore have legal advisers and we are discussing these problems with
the lenders in order to come up with a solution; these are agreements which
must be signed likewise with these lenders as a group and which constitute
the guarantee system for the repayment of the loans.

[Question] Recently the government, in order to restore the economic situa-
tion of the country, proclaimed the policy of austerity. How will this policy
concretely affect SNIM?

[Answer] As applied to SNIM it must be confessed that before the austerity
policy, in the framework of the Guelbs project, SNIM had been asked to take
a certain nimber of steps designed to reduce its costs: general managment,
general services, etc. 'lhere is therefore a program decreed for reducing
the aggregate of general expenses of the company, a program which will be
accomplished in a certain number of years.

his program breaks down into several elements. Firstly the external services
are to be regmuped into a single subsidiary, thereby eliminating certain
offices without disturbing the operation perfumed, and transferring the
function to a single office, which will reduce operating costs. We contem-
plate transferring a part of the activities of our Zurich office to Paris,

1&3
and ultimately all the activities performed by the Zurich office would be
carried on from maritanla. We are studying the implementation of these
measures, which would permit the considerable reduction of the operating
costs of our mrchasimg offices abroad. With regard to domestic matters,
you know that we have a headquarters in the course or cmnplctionuit will
actually be finished 2! months from nowuaml regaining or this headquuruers
will greatly reduce all types of expenses, particularly rent costs, tele-
phone, cost of local travel, particularly gasoline, and will certainly
raise the output of the agents.

The reduction of all the rentals for offices we have represents already a
Considerable reduction in expenses, and the existence of an internal system
of colununication in the headquarters will also reduce costs. In other
aspects we are not neglecting any measure which tends to reduce expenses.

Thus quite recently we have opted to replace the system of housing for
Nauritanian employees, up to now provided by the company, with an allowance.

Actually the housing was very expensive and it was practically impossible

to limit the consumption of water and electricity. 'lhis allowance system
will be more economical for the company and will make the employees more
responsible in the management of their incomes and will perhaps make it
possible to find individual solutions for the acquisition of a personal
property. This is a measure which released 30 villas. But it cannot be
extended to expatriates in the sense that the company must insure for them
housing conditions in which they can work. It is in their contracts at the
outset, and they have no particular interest in owning housing and they

would also have difficulties obtaining housing if another system were adopted.

Every time it appears to us that an action may reduce general costs, we will
study it. It is clear that we are a production company and because of this
we cannot eliminate any element unless we are convinced that there will be
no serious negative effects on the company's profit and the quality of its
operations. Therefore each case requires a special study. No step can be
arbitrary. Each time we must measure m-erically to the extent possible

the advantages and disadvantages of internal steps we take to reduce the
costs of the company.

[Question] Through reduction in force?
[Answer] No, unless a reduction in operations-which is possibleuoccurs.

For example, if there is a separation of certain operations, and I am speak-
ing particularly of the separation of the distribution of petroleum products.

It is obvious that if a unit leaves, it has its surety on the personnel
level and it will require a corresponding reduction of the cost of existing
personnel. For the moment we do not foresee a personnel reduction.

[Question] You recently mentioned the problem of 90m. Can one not
expect a resumption of the operations of that capany?

Mt
[Answer] The exploitation of copper mines is under the ministry of mines
at the present time. I am not well informed on the status of research in
that field.

[Question] You have spoken of the problem of poorly maintained equipment
which can no longer operate as required. Besides this problem, new; you
any fundamental problem which is confronting you at present?

[Answer] At the present time our basic problea is to be able to start up
the Guelbs project in time to enable us to guarantee the continuity of
production after 1983. But you know that starting in that year the pro-
duction of the Kedya is going to begin to drop, and it is absolutely
necessary that we be able to get the exploitation of the Guelbs project
going by the end of 1982 or the beginning 1983 so that production will
not drop and the exploitation of the Guelbs take over the operation of
the Kedya at the appropriate time: this is our Nor concern and it
Justifies the efforts every one of us, on the side of the government,

on the side of the company, on the side of the lenders, makes to get
bids issued as soon as possible, so that the date of getting the project
under way will be held to and that there will be no decrease in opera-
tions which would cause an extranely difficult situation for the company
both financially and in human terms, because it will be necessary to cut
Jobs, and obviously throughout the whole country, because the resulting
drop in production could be very great. All this means that our efforts
are concentrated on the start-up of the project.

6108
030: MOO
NATION SEARCHES FOR NEW FISHING POLICY
Paris DEMAIN L'AFIIQUB in French 24 Sep 79 pp 64-65
[Article by Mireille Duteil, "Exploiting Gold From the Sea]

[Text] A few canoes, fishing nets stretched out to dry on a white sand
beach oppressed by the hot sun. Out to sea a closely packed flight of
birds wheeling in the sun indicate the presence of a school of fish.

Back from the beach are 6 or 7 shaky huts where ebony skinned children,
heads shaved except for three tufts of hair in a triangle are running.

Re are with the Imraguen, the only tribe of fishermen among Mauritania's
Moorish population. At the lookout's signal the men waded into the sea
up to their waists. They emitted eerie cries and beat the water with
their hands. Soon, as though hypnotized by this call, hundreds of mullet
hurled themselves into the nets.

This complicity between the sea and the Moors, sons of the desert, has
something fascinating about it, and hardly lets us guess the lack of taste
for fishing of the Moors living on a coast considered one of the world's
richest sources of fish.

The crawlers, seiners, and factory ships swarming in Mauritanian waters

will be flying Spanish, Japanese, Russian or Korean flags. And the country's
economy, there can be no doubt, gets little profit from it. The statistics
are edifying. In 1977-78, of 1.2 million tons of fish taken off the coast

of Mauritania and Tiris Bl-Gharbia, only 64,000 tons were processed at
Nouadhibou, the country's second city and only fishing port.

To be sure the Mauritanian budget does get royalties on fishing rights
which are granted in the form of licenses to foreign ships. For the current
year the equivalent of 5.5 million CPA francs will flow into the coffers

of the state. The provisional budget for 1979 records a projected 10
billion CEA francs (2 billion ouguys), about a third of the country's total
receipts. "This projection will not be realized," a Mauritanian leader
confided to us, "unless a lot of licenses are granted. But that will
encourage even more the pillage of our shores.“

h6
Bottom fishing, fishing for cephalopods (octopus, squid), in which the
Japanese and Koreans excel, is the most devastating. Their imense
trawlers, up to 1800 tons burden, destroy the ecological equilibrium of
the sea bottom, and it takes years to reestablish it. Surface fishing
(mackerel, bonita) is less dangerous, for the stocks are enomws. In
this area, the hit parade of the biggest catch falls to Interpeche, a
Dutch firm registered in the Bermudas. its dozen ships, with a factory
ship transforming the fish into meal on the spot, can alone take away
up to 150,000 tons of fish in a year!

The golden years of foreign ship owners are over, it is believed in
Nouakchott. Already in 1977, under President Mokhtar Ould Daddah, this
licensing system was under consideration for review. After the coup d'etat
of 10 July 1978, this policy became more definite. The minister of fisheries
then decided not to renew the licenses of factory ships who did not

deliver any fish to the land. From then on, it was indicated, fish taken
along the Mauritanian coast must be conlnercialized on national territory.

In doing this Nouakchott hoped to bring the foreign ship owners to create,
alone or in association with private capital or public Mauritanian funds,
complexes for processing fish.

This policy of nonrenewal of licenses was applied rigorously during the
first months of 1979. Soviets, Japanese and Koreans who did not accept
Mauritanian conditions were asked to leave. The Portuguese, Romanians,
Swedish, Dutch and French whose licenses have not yet expired continue to
fish. 0n the other hand, after three rounds of intense negotiations
between Nouakchott and Madrid, the Spanish are keeping their licenses,
but agreed to quadruple their fishing fees. They will pay $16 million for
fishing rights in 1979 for the 260 Spanish trawlers (the most numerous)
which have, by contract, the right to all be in Mauritanian waters at the
same time. But it is true that with Spain the old neighborly ties plus
fishing clauses appearing in the agreement with Madrid provide for, among
other things, that Spain can send 800 fishing boats without fee off
Western Sahara--explain this survival.

Nevertheless, Nouakchott confronts two obstacles in applying its new policy.
Mauritania has no means of stopping the "pirates" of the sea. It is
estimated that 25 percent of fish taken escape any control. It's said that
from photographs taken from a Breguet deux ponts [translation unknown] it
was found that of 400 ships fishing, only four had licenses! The Koreans
have the reputation of specializing in this kind of "piracy." They always
navigate in squadrons and there are veritable naval battles taking place
between Mauritanian military patrols and the illegals. Yet the fine is high:

500 million Cl-‘A francs for a factory ship. In 1978 the Mauritanians took
91 ships fishing illegally.

The second obstacle is technical. "Processing plants on land are practically
nonexistent in comparison to the stock," a businessman told us. however, the
three cold storage facilities now at Nouadhibou are operating at far less
than full capacity, when they are not closed. During the 70's Mauritania
had granted licenses in order to keep the three cold storage facilities

and fish meal factory supplied. Responding to the request of the Mauritanian
government, the Japanese, the first, delivered a part of their catch to

Nouadhibou, followed by the Soviets. 0n the other hand, they obtained
licenses for dozens of freezer factory ships.

Today the Mauritanians are setting up projects to create joint companies
with the Swedes, the Libysns and the French. Some businessmen are looking
in new directions. ‘ihus the Societe des Grandas Peches de Mauritanie
hopes to conclude a contract with s French-Soviet firm which will outfit a
ship for them. On land it will process the octopus caught into meal. The
product will subsequently be exported to Zaire and the Congo. Ihis formula
of chartering from foreign firms will allow Mauritania to train its own
seamen until it gets its own. However this may be, it is urgent to secure
mastery of this fabulous treasure from the sea which should, just as iron
does, constitute an ilportant revenue source for the national economy.

8860
CSO: 41000
BRIEFS

OPERATIONAL PRISPECTS 0P REHNBRYo-Getting the petroleum refinery at
Nouadhibou into operation could be the first effect on Hauritanian economy
of resumption of relations between Algeria and neuritania. Constructed

at great cost ($66 million) under the presidency of Hokhtar mid Daddah,
it has a refining capacity of 1 million tons of crude per year, at full
operatioa. It would be supplied by Algerian oil from Kasai Hessaoud.

In fact it had never functioned. The possibility of importing Algerian
oil again has moved Mauritanian leaders to study the cost of putting the
refinery into operation through an English study group. But many problems
remain: new investment is necessary to replace old or deteriorated parts,
the cost of the production and the transportation of crude oil are too
high to allow the Mauritanian refinery to be competitive in the inter-
national market, at least not without the state adding heavily to'its
debt. [Text] [Paris DEHAIN L‘APRIQUB in French 26 Sep 79 p 66] 8860

LARGE-SCALE COﬂTBABANDnDuring the past few weeks, authorities at the port
of Nouakchott have seen objects arrive which, curiously, they have not been
in the habit of seeing unloaded on their docks, such as perfurme, transistors,
tape recorders. Nothing very mysterious, however, in this affair. These
products, quite cosmon in Mauritania, by the way, up until now sneakily
arrived from Las Palmas via Dakhla and Tiris Bl-Gharbia. Now that the
Hauritanians have withdrawn from Saharan territory, the network is no longer
functioning. Hith the merchandise leaving and arriving illicitly from
Senegal, it is estimated that close to 90 percent of Mauritanian comaerce
is by contraband. {Text} [Paris Damn L'AFRIQUB in French 23 Sep 79 p 71]
8860

“(STILITY T0 NB! GOVEWTHGraffiti hostile to the new govert-ent have

been appearing on many walls in Nouadhibouuthe economic capital of Hauritania
in the north. “any arrests and challenges have been made among the pro-
Horoccans, suspected of starting the movement. The majority of those
arrested have been released. It seems that this agitation might be connected
with the influx of Saharan "refugees," mostly small storekeepers and business—
men who followed the Mauritanian troops out during the retreat from that part
of Western Sahara administered by Nouakchott. POLISARIO sympathizers are not
likely to fold their arms. Their reaction led the Moroccan Prime Minister
Haati Bouabid to demand of his Mauritaniancoounterpart the "protection" of
10,000 Moroccan soldiers who are getting ready to leave the north. [Text]

[Paris 0mm L'AFRIQUB in French 26 Sep 79 p 71] 8860

(30: M00 ”9
REFUGEE INFLUX ACCRAVATBS PWBLEMS IN SUDAN
Beirut AL-SAFIR in Arabic 30 Sep 79 p 12

[Article: "No Hillion African Refugees In Sudan. At First a Matter Of

Security and Supplies, Their Problems Have Become a Part Of the Political
Crisis"]

[Text] Khartoun AL-SAPIR special.

The Sudan covers a vast area--l million square miles--and shares borders with

eight countries: Ethiopia. Zaire, Kenya, Uganda, Central Africa, Chad,
Libya, and Egypt.

Owing to this geographical situation, the Sudan faces the problen of the
refugees in a nanner rather different fro. other countries with similar
conditions. This is due to the large nuaber of refugees. on the one hand,
and to the fact that the Sudan lacks the forces required to regulate the
refugee influx within its own territories under ordinary conditions as well
as under exceptional conditions resulting fron famine, escape from political
persecution, or flight froa battle. The nost recent operations involving
the crossing of the Sudanese borders involved nany thousands of people iron
Uganda who were running away from the battles pertaining to the war which
overthrew the previous president of Uganda, Marshal Idi Amin Dada. Before
that, hundreds of thousands of people from Eritrea had preceded then, as a
result of the current war of liberation between the troops of the Eritrean
revolution and the Ethiopian forces, in addition to many thousands of
Ethiopians who crossed the Sudanese borders for the sane reason.

he first exodus to the Sudan started more than a century ago. when the
Sudan was used as a passage for people fro. Nigeria and other countries in
West Africa, going to “11:: on pilgrimage. who preferred-on their way back
to their native countries-to stay in the Sudan, where there were vast
stretches of unused fertile land. Those people built thier own villages,
engaged in, farming and irrigation, and were subsequently followed by others
from Chad and elsewhere.
PM i tlcal Exodus

Hhen political upheavals started to spread, the Sudan had to deal with the
refugee problem. In the 1960's the events in the Congo marked the beginning
of a massive Congolese influx into the southern part of the Sudan.

During the life and under the regime of Esperor Haile Selassie of Ethiopia.
during the persecution of the Eritrean people, the Sudan opened its doors

to many refugees. However, the human influx across the eastern borders of
the Sudan exceeded all predictions when military battles in Eritrea expanded
their scope. According to official statistics published in Khartoum, the
number of both Eritrean and Ethiopian refugees exceeds half a million.

The southern part of the Sudan recently has witnessed the arrival of many
thousands of refugees from Uganda. Although statistics concerning them are
not accurate, owing to the fact that they are constantly pouring across the
borders, the figures currently available to the executives of the United
Nations office in Khartoum indicate about 300,000 refugees. while the
authorities in the southern area of the Sudan--who are in charge of relief
and welfare matters--evaluate their numbers at 500,000 people, mostly

women and children. It was possible to gather them into special camps after
assigning various school and other facilities to provide food and health
facilities, with the participation of the United Nations Office of the High
Counissioner for Refugees' Affairs to provide the refugees with the required
assistance.

The Sudan lacks statistics about the number of refugees who have poured
across its borders for political, survival, or safety reasons. Statistics
currently available to the Sudanese authorities are merely estimates and
nothing more; according to them, the number of refugees may vary between
a maximum of la million and a minimum of 2 million. These were the figures
officially published in Khartoum before the events in Uganda.

Effects of the Exodus

The phenomenon which currently concerns the team of Sudanese investigators

at the National Research Council in Khartoum is the particular effect of

the exodus to Sudan, which obviously has become a threat to the social and
economic basics of life ever since the refugees started mving to the largest
cities close to the borders and subsequently to the Sudanese capital itself--
which recently has started swelling with huge numbers of refugees of various
nationalities in search of work.

The Sudanese authorities currently face many problems owing to the huge
foreign influx into the capital and surrounding areas, which are considered
the natural extensions of the capital itself, since it consists of a tried
that includes the cities of Khartou, Um Durmsn and Khartoum Bahri. That
is why the Sudanese capital is usually called the triple capital.

51
The cause of the authorities' concern goes back to two main factors.

One is the security aspect, followed by the economic aspect, since a rather
imortant portion of the supplies of food and merchandise specifically
destined for the capital goes to the newcomers. The medical. sanitary. and
educational services are also concerned about the breakout of diseases which.
according to the description given by the official health authorities in

Khartoum. are plagues requiring the attention of a large percentage of the
health services to treat the refugees.

The government of the Sudan is especially worried by this phenomenon. and
particularly with the security aspect thereof, because a large number of
refugees have crossed the borders with arms and amnitions. The Sudanese
authorities have completely failed to keep the refugees away from the capital,
however, in spite of the large raids undertaken at the beginning of August 1979.

Trying to keep them away, the Sudanese authorities intended to gather them
together in already existing cams, such as the present chs for Ugandan
refugees in the southern part of the Sudan. They intended to do so by
moving the refugees from Ethiopia and Eritrea to special camps in the
eastern area of the Sudan. where farming lands were assigned to them. while
moving Chad nationals to the western part of the country, and so forth.
That was meant to achieve two political goals--ensuring their supervision,
and making it easier to provide basic living requirements. This in turn

would have facilitated the establishment of statistics concerning their
numbers.

Reverse Buodus

0n the other hand, we find that the Sudan-which already provides a 1- 'ge
number of African refugees with shelter and sustenance—has in turn started
experiencing a reverse exodus, which has assumed a collective aspect since
the beginning of this decade. The Sudan has lost many thousands of its
nationals during these past 5 years. when they decided to settle and work
in a nusber of Arab countries, including Libya, the Gulf countries, Saudi
Arabia, and Oman. Those emigres include a large sector of the Sudanese
intelligentsia, such as college professors, engineers. doctors, technicians,
and skilled workers, who left their country to look for s more financially
rewarding position, or because of political persecution, or because they
could hardly find any means of living in the Sudan owing to the unemploy-
ment which affects mat workers, skilled and unskilled alike.

This exodus has deeply affected the general life in the Sudan, owing to the
heavy shortage which has to be faced by many educational institutions and
public services and facilities, such as Khartoum University, which has lost
a large nuwer of its professors, such as the electric power and water de-
partment, more than half of whose engineers have left, and such as the
telephone facility, with which less than a quarter of its staff of engineers
and technicians has remained. This is a big problem currently faced by the
Sudan. which also has to confront the problem of 4 million Africans who have

willingly or unwillingly crossed the borders shared by their countries with
the Sudan.

2693
080: 1.802 52
INTERNAL INSTABILITY SAID TO BE THREAT TO REGIME
Cairo AKHIR SA'AH in Arabic 19 Sep 79 pp 10-11
lArticle: "What Is Behind the Rejectionist Vall?"]

[Excerpts] What is the truth about the terrible struggle within the ranks
of the Alawite Ba'ath Party which rules Syria with an iron fist? What is
the extent of the internal divisions besetting its frightened leadership?
How extensive are the religious divisions within the Syrian armed forces?

The most obvious fact is that Hafiz: al-Assad's regime is beset by dissension
and threatened with collapse. The rifts are so serious that all sttewts to
save the situation appear doomed to failure. The most ominous aspect of

the deteriorating situation is that it has spread in octopus-like fashion

to engulf the party, the government, and the army. All diplomatic reports
from Damascus confirm the turmoil. The bitter struggles within the al-Assad
regime and among the leaders of the Alawite Ba‘ath Party revolve about several
fundamental points:

1 . Party Struggle

There are deep. fundamental differences between a large number of regional
leaders and Mr Rif'at al-Assad, the President's brother. mese differences
came to the forefront during the unity talks between Syria and Iraq.

Hr Rif'at al-Assad opposed the unity moves and described them as a threat

to the Alawite Ba'ath Party. lie was openly criticized for his position by

Hr Jabir Bahbuh. the party's regional secretary, and by Mr ’Abdallah al-Ahmar.
a newer of the regional leadership and th" chairman of the party's student
office. Apparently, Rif'at al-Assad has L .ome the opposition chamion
against the army and the party leaders.

He is also at odds with other national leaders, including Syria's former air
force chief, Major General Naji Jamil. It is reported that Mr sl-Assad is
planning to use the coming elections to remove a majority of the party's
leaders from power. The elections, originally sche’uled for last April.
have been postponed as a result of the deteriorating internal situation.

53
There ls also the old enmity between Rif‘nt al-Assad and the minister of
interior, Mr 'Adnan Dahhagh. The feud dates back to the last regional
electlons in 1975. Mr al-Assad charged at that time that Mr Dabbagh's
election to the party leadership was illegal. The dispute acquired added
significance in view of the fact that Mr Dabbagh was a Sunni Moslem. There
were rumors and some apprehension that Mr Dabbagh might use his position as
interior minister to split the Alawite sect and concentrate power in Sunni
hands. Even Hafiz al-Assad is said to harbor doubts about the intentions
of his interior minister. It is now expected that the minister will be
eased out of his position during the coming party and government reorganiza-
tion. Mr Hafiz al-Assad apparently believes that Mr Dabbagh was behind the
bloody turmoil in Latakia, Damascus, and Aleeppo. Rif'at al-Asaad has
evidently succeeded in convincing his brother that Dabbagh's relaxation of
internal security was responsible for the internal eruptions.

There is an ongoing struggle among the factions of the National Progressive
Front, in whose name the Alawites rule. These factions include the Cour
munist Party, the Socialist Union. the Socialists for Unity, and the Arab
Socialist. These factions, however, are powerless. Real power is in the
hands of the ruling Alawite group. There is a growing resentment over
Hafiz al-Assad's nearly exclusive reliance on the Alswite minority, a
development viewed as an attempt to put Syria under Alawite control. His
apparent reluctance to break away completely from disparate factions of
the National Progressive Front is seen as a ploy to maintain the support
of the Communist Party in order to please the Soviet Union and ensure a
continuing supply of Soviet military and econonic aid.

2. Dissension Within the Government

There is a persistent effort to reduce the power of Sunni government officials.
In particular, the effort is directed against the defense minister, Major
General Mustafa Tales, and the interior minister, 'Adnan Dabbagh. The latent
religious dispute broke into the open with Rif'at al-Assad'a public attack
against the ministers and the ministers' counterattack. Hafiz al-Asaad was
forced to intervene to resolve the dispute, but, as usual, in favor of the
Alawites. The heretofore camouflaged enmity ultimately erupted into the open
with the removal in February 1979 of 'Ali al-Madani, the director of internal
security and a Sunni Moslem, and the ouster of 'Adnan Dabbagh. the interior
minister, from his position as director of the National Security Office,
which oversees internal security operations, and his replacement last August
by Ahmed Diab, almost exactly one month after the massacre at the Aleppo
Artillery School. The current policy in "Alawi" Damascus is to rid the
country gradually of Sunni ministers and leaders. Rumors that Hafiz al-Assad
is about to remove the defense minister, Major General Mustafa Talas, and
replace him with Major General Hikmat al-Shahabi, Syrian Army chief of staff,
appear to confirm this policy.

It is no longer possible to conceal the progressively worsening divisions

within the government. The rapid changes in the latter part of last February
testify to that. First to go was 'Ali al-Hadani, director of internal security;

51*
next was Muhammad al-Kholi. the air force director of security. Less than
seven months later, a new purge resulted in the removal of Brigadier General
Nazih Zarir as director of internal security, and his replacement by Brigadier
General 'Ali 'Abd al-Karim, the former chief of the Aleppo security office.

It is also evident that the turmoil is spreading to the Foreign Ministry.
Officials of the ministry are lining up against [Foreign Minister] 'Abd
al-Halim Khaddan, who is being subjected to a bitter campaign by the
officials of the Foreign Ministry. Exploitative and opportunistic are
some of the epithets being hurled at him. Rif'at al-Assad is pressuring
his brother, President Hafiz al-Assad, to purge the Sunnis from leadership
positions in the Foreign Ministry. The President has so far resisted the
pressure, in a calculated effort to maintain the status quo and to avoid

antagonizing--and thus possibly staving off a revolution by--the Sunni
majority.

There are confirmed reports of strong disagreement between Hafiz al-Assad
and his brother Rif'at. The latter is attempting to acquire power by any
means. particularly since his position has improved as a result of having
won control of the armed militia, the so—called defense companies. which
are considered superior to the regular Syrian Army. The dispute centers
on the best method to deal with the deteriorating internal situation. The
growing opposition, the collapse of internal security, and the spread of
disorder to the larger cities, including Aleppo and Latakia. increase the
probability that Major General 'Abd al-Rahman Khlifawi will return to form
a new government in an attempt to control the situation.

There are also reports of dissention within the Alawite sect itself. The
bloody confrontations between the "Tailors" branch. to which Hafiz al-Assad
belongs, and the "Ironsmiths" branch appear to confirm these reports. In
addition, there are rumors within the army that Rif'at sl-Assad is intensi-
fying his effort to remove from command some of the Alawite officers who

may block his path to absolute control. These officers include 'Ali Doba

the chief of military security: 'Ali Haydar, commander of the Special Forces;
and 'Ali al-Salih, commander of the Air Defense Force. The three officers
have appealed to President Hafiz al-Assad and asked him to restrain his
brother. This development is one of the causes of the growing depute between
the President and his brother.

3. Dissension Within the Army

The most ambitious outcome of the internal instability in Syria is the
possible collapse of Hafiz al-Assad's regime and the spread of the religious
Sunni-Alawite struggle to the armed forces. According to rumors, the Aleppo
massacre constituted an insurrection within the army, planned by junior
officers with the direction and support of senior retired officers. This

is in addition to the primary motive for the massacre, which was to eliminate
the largest possible number of new party cadres, who were being nurtured

and prepared at the [artillery] school to take over control of the armed
forces. specifically the artillery and missile units. The goal of the in-
surrectionists was to overtax the ruling Alawites' resources by forcing them
to resort to bloody solutions.
There is growing jealousy over the roles assigned to the defense companies
led by Rif'at ail-Assad and the Special Forces commanded by 'Ali Haydar.
Simultaneously. dissention is increasing within the military comands over
Rif'at al-Assad's incessant attempts to shrink Major General Nuatafn Talaa'
influence in the army. One illustration of Rif'at al-Assad's determination
to undermine the defense minister's influence is his refusal to inplement
the minister's orders to the defense companies.

Despite persistent efforts by Haliz al-Assad to maintain control of the

army by traditional Ba'ath Party methods--i.re.. by appointing Alawites to

top army positions and strengthening the defense companies and the Sa'iqa
forces--an explosion appears iminent. The opposing Sunnis are consolidating
their strength in an attempt to reduce Alawite control of the army and
government. Their effort is aided by the Alawites' jockeying for power

among themelves and by their preoccupation with material gains derived

from iwroper use of their military positions. There are reports of numerous
scandals involving the Alawites in illegal drug trafficking from Lebanon via
the "special highway" authorized by Rif'at al-Assad in conjunction with a
group of Syrian and Lebanese traders.

A traveler recently arrived from Damascus related to me several incidents
representative of the dangerous developments within the Syrian Army. lie
confirmed that the religious conflict between the Alawite and Sunni officers.
on the one hand and the conflict over power among the Alawites themselves,
on the other, pose a real danger to al-Assad's regime. As one illustration.
we cite an episode, which ultimately turned bloody, involving Alawite and
Sunni officers in Latakia. According to reports from the scene, a group of
Alawite naval officers disarmed and imrisoned a group of Sunni officers in
a small room. A staff officer subsequently aided the captive officers to
escape. Following the escape, the officers got together to plan revenge.
and a bloody confrontation is reported to have ensued. Rif'at al-Assad
intervened by sending his defense companies to occupy the naval base and

to arrest a large number of Sunni officers and enlisted men. 0n the heels
of this episode. a pathet demanding that Hafiz al-Assad resign and stop
his brother's massacres received wide circulation within the arud forces.
The pamphlet is reported to have been issued in the name of the Syrian Army.

Observers are convinced that public wrath is forthcoming, perhaps sooner
than later, particularly in view of the proliferating signs of division
within the ranks of the ruling Ba'ath Party and the nearly complete isola-
tion of the Alawites. The potential eruption is being speeded up by Syria's
disordered foreign policy, especially the collapse of its relations with
Iraq and Lebanon.

Observers believe that the dangerous developmnts will lead to one of two
outcomes:

1. Hafiz al-Assad will make sweeping changes extending to those now close
to him, including 'Abd al-llalim Khaddan. 'Adnan Dabbagh. and some party
leaders. Oral directives to the ministers ordering them to clear their

56
desks by the end of September appear to signal that al-Assad is planning a
radical political and military reorganization to save his government.

2. Rii'at al-Assud may attcnpt to restore stability and order by force.
The attempt may take the form of a coup d'etat supported by the Soviet
Union to oust Hafiz al-Assad himself. The danger implicit in such a move

is that Rif'at al-Asssd may plunge Syria into a religious civil war similar
to what happened in Lebanon.

Based on these assessments, there is a strong likelihood that Hafiz al-Assad
might resort to radical changes--at the Alawites' expense--and offer the
Sunnis a share of genuine government control. Should this happen. two
people now close to him will pay the price. They are Rif'at al-Assad, who
is the target of bitter criticism. and Hustafa Talas, for his failure to
prevent the spread of religious turmoil to the army.

This is the reality of the situation behind the walls of the rejectioniat
state. What a shame that Damascus. the capital of the Umayyad Dynasty,

has become a den of the Alawite gang. Farewell to imprisoned Damascus and
Syria's sad hills.
DDROCCAN-POLISARIO CLASES mm) T0 IN'n-IHSIF!
Paris LB mum: in French Ll Oct 79 p 1

[Text] Whatever the actual ratio of losses-4050 Saharan dead according to
Rabat, 1269 Moroccan killed according to the POLISARIO Front,--the battle
which took place at Snare, the holy city of the Western Sahara, seems far
and away the bloodiest of the conflict which broke out exactly 1» years ago.
It also marks a new level in the escalation of this war of the sands: for
the first time the royal forces used Mirage F-l's against an adversary who
has considerably modified his tactics, if not his strategy, since 1975; the
tattered guerrillas henceforth are wearing uniforms and have become dis-
ciplined soldiers of the "Saharan People's Liberation Army." The latter is
said to contain some 10,000 men equipped with increasingly heavy equipment.
It does not hesitate to launch into battle large timbers of effectives, as
many as 2000 to 5000 men.

Morocco, which had planned to invite the international press to visit the
site starting Tuesday to confirm the falseness of the Saharan claims, post-
poned the departure of the Journalists by 1&8 hours, which leads one to
belieVe that the situation is still confused.

The broccens Justifiably stress that the recent attacks of the POLISARIO
Front were conducted for political ends as much as mili , on the eve of
regional or international meetings such as the OAU emit at Monrovia and
that of the nonalined nations at Havana. The battle of Snare also precedes
the debate on the Saharan conﬂict in the General Assembly of the United
Nations. Actually the saharans have always chosen the most favorable moment
for their cause, but since the beginning of the year assaults against large
garrisons have been added to ambushes and surprise attacks which contribute
to the demoralization of the enemy, as was the case in huritania. 'me fact
that the Saharans have attacked one of the rain points of the "strategic
triangle" Kl Aioun-anra-Bou Crab-where the phosphates are located-Allus-
trates the qualitative change which has progressively developed.

0n the diplomatic level the Moroccan: have also had to yield ground. Their
case was, however, defensible: they have not ceased to repeat manimOusly
that their-country had been dismembered by colonisation and that they have
the right to reconstitute their territorial unity by recovering "their"
Sahara. The lack of firmness in the prosecution of the war added to the
absence of follow-up and the blunders of Moroccan diplomacy have neVerthc-
less contributed to the growth of credibility of a "Saharan entity" sup-
ported by Algeria and Libya, as is proven by the recognition of the Saharan
Arab Republic by 35 states.

The POLISARIO Front believes that the prosecution of the war could lead to

a "destabilization" of the monarchy. If such an eventuality were to become
reality it would not fail to have repercussions throughout all of the lbghreb,
and it would run the strong risk of provoking a more noticeable intervention
by the great powers in favor of their respective allies. It is doubtless
because they were aware of these dangers that President Boumedienne and King
liassan II had made discreet contacts; the death of the Algerian chief of
state ended the hopes raised by the possibilities of a meeting which, if it
did not settle the whole thing, would at least have opened up the paths to

a negotiated settlement.

Since that time Algeria has discouraged mediation attempts of President
Bourguiba, Mr Yasser 'Arafat, and King Khaled of Arabia. At the headquarters
of the Arab league at 'i’unis they nevertheless do not despair of seeing the
new Algerian team display greater flexibility once its power is consolidated,
whereas brocco would likewise take a step in the direction of the POLISARIO
Front. Meanwhile they admit that there is no solution in sight and that the
clashes can only be intensified.

3108
:90: 111100
PCB, PCP, PCI DECIDE 0N JOINT ACTIONS TO SUPPORT POLISARIO
Paris L'HUMANITE in French 21 Sep 79 p 11

[Text] "Scan new initiatives will be taken to intensify our solidarity,"
said Georges Marchais to the POLISARIO's general secretary, Abdelaziz,
when they net on 28 August 1979 in Algiers. The neeting of the French,
Italian and Spanish cmunist parties on Thursday in Madrid was devoted
to the study of the situation in the western Sahara. This neeting was
undoubtedly an iaportant initiative proapted by the new situation created
by the POLISARIO in that region of the Maghreb.

This new situation is increasing the POLISARIO's international audience
allong large world organizations. In the aeantiae the Sahraoui armed forces

are taking initiatives on the battlefield and are inflicting heavy losses
on Morocco's array.

It is not by chance that the three parties net in Madrid. It is there that
the disastrous agreeaent was signed through which Hassan II allowed his
troops to occupy the Western Sahara. His agreement is now worthless, since
after their nesting in Algiers, Mauritania agreed with the POLISARIO to
leave the part of the Sahara which had been given to it.

It is not enough to acknwledge llouakchott's disengageaent, as the French
Govern-ent does, or to assert one's determination to guarantee Mauritania's
territorial integrity. The main threat against this integrity cones from
Rabat. It is thus necessary to stop supporting the aggressors politically,
economically and militarily.

0n the other hand, one cannot assert that Mauritania's borders inherited
tron colonial powers must be respected and then Iteep quiet when the
application of these principles is denanded by Sehraouis.

Upon his return from Algiers, Georges Marchais had asked Giscard d'Bstaing
to recognize the POLISARIO as sole representative of the Sahraoui people,

in order to allow France to play its role in reestablishing peace in that _
region.
The three parties meeting in Madrid decided to prevail upon their respective
governments to recognize the POLISARIO as soon as possible.

In order to support this request--which. if granted. would greatly facilitate
opening of negotiations for recognition of rights to self-determination and
independence for the Sahraoui people-Prench. Italian and Spanish communists
will organize meetings in Paris, Rome and Madrid.

To demonstrate their solidarity on the field. a delegation will soon travel
to the Western Sahara.

These decisions, demonstrating a new step toward international solidarity
for the fighting Sahraouis, were greatly appreciated by the POLISARIO. A
delegation of the POLISARIO was in Madrid today and received news of these
decisions. "He enthusiastically welcome this expression of international
solidarity from your three parties, which follows an already effective and
fruitful bilateral solidarity." said Ahmed Bokheri.

This meeting concluded with an interview with Santiago Carillo, general
secretary from Spain's communist party, who invited the three communist
party delegations and the POLISARIO's representative to lunch.

8926
CSO: 4600

61
OFFICIAL INTERVIMD 0N HATER CRISIS IN CAPITAL

San'a' AL-‘l'IlAHRAii in Arabic 22 Jul 79 p 3

[Article: "The Capacity of the Water Authority to Supply the Population
of the Capital with Pure Hater"]

[Excerpts] Talking about water has become a major concern of the people.
They do not stop talking about the inortance of water projects on the
city and the village level. about what they read in the newspapers or
listen to on the radio and television about making pure drinking water
available. about what the Hater Authority is doing. and about the coopera-
tion of the citizens in digging water wells and exploring for ground water.

The people of San'a' have a tale about the legends of the black elephant
or the water wells which were found in lost of the houses of old San'a'.
The story about that utter has becone a legend told in gatherings accord-
ing to ancestral custon. Looking for pure water these days has becone
very important because a citizen cannot dig a well by himself in his house
as he used to do in the past. lie could find water without difficulty as
soon as he dug a few aeters in the ground. Even the projects carried out
by sons capitalists are floundering since the revolution broke out and un-
til the Hater Authority was established to carry out this task.

Nowadays the citizen in our country would like to get up in the norning
to witness a new day of the era of big projects. a day of happiness on
which he does not suffer the problen of searching for water.

A citizen told no that in spite of the successive stages of the water
project which is being carried out by the Water Authority there are any
districts in the center of the old capital which have no water as yet
such as: (al-Pulsyhi) area. Hu'a-aar, Su al-Baqar. al-Shahidayn (Handel),
al-Sayyad. (al-‘Alni). al-Haftun and other districts. Another citizen

in one of the districts which water has reached coqlained of the water
crisis by saying: "The water crisis has becone in any cases one of the
most important problem of our everyday life."

The director general Huha-ad (al-Pusayl) answered sose of my questions

and authorised 'Ali al-Ansi to answer some other questions because he was
busy and had problem to attend to.

62
[Question] The first question was related to the ability of the Water
Authority to supply the capital and its suburbs with purified water for
drinking.

[Answer] At the present time the ability of the Authority is limited.

It depends in the first place on the first stage of the water project
which will meet the needs of 6,000 homes, that is, 36,000 persons if we
consider the average number of family members to be six. This is in
addition to the 11,000 persons who benefit from the temporary project

and who are supplied with water daily or every other day according to

the circumstances of the district and the old network of pipes which was
constructed in a totally non-technical way. The reason for this was the
unavailability of the needed supplies in the Yemeni markets and the insuf-
ficient funds at that time.

Secondly: The second stage which will meet the needs of 18,000 houses.
work has started on digging the wells needed to meet the needs of the
citizens. The company tenders for implementation of the civil and electro-
mechanical works were opened on the 16th of this month. This second stage
will cover all the houses located on the circular line surrounding the
capital.

[Question] Can the Authority cover all the districts of the capital and
why?

[Answer] In spite of this we do not expect that the authority will be
able to extend water to all the districts of the city. because the devel-
opment of the city is haphazard and no authority in the world is able to
give precise estimates for the expansion. You know that emigration from
the country to the city is increasing daily and it has a dangerous effect
on the services in the city because the democracy which every citizen in
our proud republic enjoys entitles him to request from the state all the
necessary services such as water, electricity and medical care on an equal
footing with every other citizen who has been living in the city for a
long time.

[Question] It is said that the first stage of the San'a' water project
cost about 90 million riyals. Is this correct? Does the Authority bene-
fit. from this?

[Answer] I have answered one of your questions by saying that the first
stage has not yet been finished and according to contracts with the
several companies we expect the project to cost 70 million riyals.

Concerning the second part of the question, that is, the benefits the
Authority will gain, I would say they are as follows:

1. Solving the present problem of making pure water available so that it
may meet the citizen's needs.
2. The Authority will meet its obligations to the state because it is a
service organization and should take care of the citizen's living condi-
tions because the goal is not material as much as it is developmental.

3. Completion of the Authority's projects will raise the health standard
of the citizen. because pure water helps to eliminate many collon diseases.

lo. If pure water becomes available the citizen will save the money he may
spend on combating illness and buying medicine. Pure water is an impor-
tant health and economic factor.

[Question] What are the costs of the new Authority building and how much
has the Authority saved over the monthly rents it was paying?

[Answer] The cost of the building may reach 10 million riyals. The sav-
ings on the monthly rents for the Authority includes the rents paid for
storage areas, the rental of our branch which cost 6,000 riyals per month,
the rental of the headquarters which was 15,000 riyals per month and the
rental of the consultation building which was 20,000 riyals a month. The
Authority intends to require the consulting and operating fins to have
their offices in the same building; this will help the Authority to meet
its obligations by making the offices available to the firms. Moreover
the closeness of the firms will facilitate comunication with them and
help the decision-making process, something no one can ignore.

The director general said concerning the problems faced by the Authority:
"The Authority has established a special department to handle home hook-
ups after a detailed technical and economic study which will help the
department to hook up as many houses as possible. This study was conducted
with the interest of the citizen and the affected areas which were in-
cluded in the first stage of the San's' water project in mind. The Author-
ity carries out the digging, makes supplies available and transports them
to the point nearest his property [words omitted] or a public project.

The department has carried out 2,000 hookups so far and the work is still
going on.

As for the second part of your question, the problems which face the
Authority when hooking up the water to citizens' houses, I may mention

the following:

Firstly: The beneficiary does not abide by the rules and regulations of
the Authority, for example by not maintaining the watemeter.

Secondly: They do not prevent their children from playing near the water-
meter.

Thirdly: Attaching the valve to the water-meter in a primitive way which
results in breaking the water pipe.

9215 END
C50: 6802