FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10101

6 November 1981

Near East/North Africa Report

(FOUO 41/81)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines. editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by e ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.8. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OUNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10101

6 November i9$

NEAR EAST/NORTH AFRICA REPORT
(9000 41/81)

CONTENTS

AIGERIA
Socialist Vanguard Party Threaten; To withdraw Support From
Bendjedid
(MARCHES TROPICAUX ET HEDITERRANEENS, 25 Sep 81) ............. 1

No Agreement Reached on Gas Negotiations With France, Italy
(MARCHES TROPICAUX ET HBDITERRANEDIS, 25 Sep 81) ............. 2

Equipment, Consumer Goods Dominate Imports From EEC
(MARCHES TROPICAUX ET HEDITERRANEENS, 25 Sep 81) ............. b

Briefs

Argentine Wheat 5
Soviets To Build Dams 5
European Financing for Fishermen 5
IRAN
Iran Arrests Prominent Intellectuals
(Liz 'Ihurgood; THE GUARDIAN, 20 Oct 81) ...................... 6
LEBANON

Arab Assista'ce Sought for Settling Country's Crisis
(AL-WATAN ALP'ARABI, 28 Aug-3 Sep 81) ........................ 8

Syrians Blamed for French Ambassador's Assassination
(AL-”ATM All-'ARABI, 11-17 Sep 81)....ooooonooocaooaoooooe00.0 11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

WEIR

SOCIALIST VANGUARD PW THEATERS '1‘0 WITHDRAW 83PM PM! ssuwsoro
Paris MARG'IES TROPICAUX s'r MEDITERRANEBNS in French No 187% 25 Sep 81 p 2431

[Text] The ”Socialist Vanguard Party" (a clandestine but tolerated comnist party"

has let it be known that it may withdraw its support for President Chadli Bendjedid.
One reason for the party's position nay be the Algerian Goverment's supposed intention
of undertaking a long-term effort to diversify its arus suppliers. At present the
USSR supplies 90 percent of Algeria's military materiel.

Discussions between Algiers and sale western countries are reportedly already under
way. The first items on the agenda are believed to be replacing the Algerian army's
Soviet 'Antonov' aircraft with Western transport planes and the acquisition of troop
transport helicopters in Europe.

Over the longer term the plan would be to replace most of the Algerian fighter armada.
which largely consists of HiG's of various types. with American or European fighters.

Another reason for the dissatisfaction of the Socialist Vanguard Party is that in
recent months several of its militants were excluded from holding responsible positions
in mass organizations, including the (INA (National Union of Algerian Youth? and van
[Ueneral Union of Algerian Workerﬂ.

COPYRIGHT: Rene Moreux et Cie Paris 1981.

9516
CSO: 4519/9

1
FOR OH‘ICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

mama

NO AGREEMENT REACHBD 0N GAS WIATIMS WITH FRANCE, ITALY

Paris "ARMS TROPICAUX ET MEDITBW in French N0 107?, 25 Sep 81 p 2‘31

[rug 'rvo negotiators for the Italian state oil group. an [National Hydrocarbons
Agency? have returned to Race vithmt caing to an agreement on the price of the
Algerian natural gas that was supposed to be delivered to Italy starting late this
year (see :m of 19. September 1981 p 2375). The initial contract provided that Algeria
would gradually increase its deliveries to 12.5 billim cubic meters of natural gas
per year over a period of 25 years.

Problems over the sale price.appeared last year and. according to Italian observers,
have becate more serious since the change of government in trance last Hay.

Algeria has formally asked Italy to agree to index the price c. the gas to the price
of oil. in accordance with a tor-ula like the me found in the agreement reached last
winter by sonar-mu [National Capany for the Transport and Marketing of Hydrocarbong
and the Belgian canpany, Distrigaz. that agreement provided for indexing the delivery
price of 5 billion cubic meters of natural gas per year over a 25-year period.

According to the Italian newspaper. REPUBBLIQ (socialist), Algeria held timly to
its original offer to sell its gas at a base price of $5 per million 310's (British
Thenal Units), to be augmented in accordance with an indexing provision that mid
gradually bring the price up to about $7.

These very figures. obtained fro: well-informed smrces early last sinner and reported
by AGENCE I’m-PRESSB, were termed 'inaccurate' by the Algerian Ambassador to Rate.
Hr Onan mssedik. Observers maintain, havever. that they are close to the Algerian
proposals. If such were the case, EN! would have to pay a yearly bill of $3.5
billion for purchases of Algerian natural gas.

REPUBBLICA explains Algeria's intransigence by the prouisity of President Francois
Mitterrand‘s upcoming visit to Algiers. “Algeria is playing for tile and betting on
an agreenent with Paris," was the paper's headline.

The Italian newspaper believes France will be forced to yield, at least in part. to
the Algerian request, and thus to accept a: increase in the price of methane.

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

France sees the problem of Algerian gas prices in the much more general context of

its overall relations with Algeria, as Mr Michel Jobert, the minister of foreign trade,
has underlined. Mr Jean-Marcel Jeanneney, the French president's personal repre-
sentative, met with Mr Yala, the Algerian minister of financial affairs, on 15
September in Algiers. According to the Algerian minister of foreign affairs, the two
I'wise men' charged by their respective governments to find a solution to the problem
of gas prices, met in a working session and 'proceeded to an initial appraisal of the
question, within the general framework of Algerian-French relatims.‘ This first

meeting was described as "cordial and useful' by the Algerian minister of foreign
affairs.

No indication was given as to the date on which Jeanneney and Yale have agreed to
meet again, this time in Paris. But it is reasonable to suppose that negotiations on
the price of the gas will be concluded before Francois Mitten-ad's official visit to
Algeria in November. Resolution of this problem, according to sources in Algiers,

"will doubtless open up new prospects for overall cooperation between Algiers and
Paris.“

COPYRIGHT: Rene Moreux et Cie Paris 1981

9516
C50: 4519/9

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

mm

EQUIRBNT, CGISUHBR COGS WINNIE moms PM! EEC
Paris MAROIES TROPICAL!!! B'i' MEDITERRANEBNS in French No 1872 25 Sep 81 p 2432

[fexg Mr Edgar Pisani, missioner of development for the European Somatic Omnity,
met with Algerian leaders during an official visit 13 Septesber to exaine the trends

in econanic relations between Algeria and the EEC. Those relations have been defined,
since 1978, in an agreement covering trade and development. The financial portion of
the agreement provides for the Cosmnity to contribute financially to various Algerian
projects in the field of agriculture and vocational training.

In the trade sector, Algeria renains the ssc's biggest custcner in Africa and the
fourth largest supplier. The balance of trade favors the BBC (by lots than 1 billion
UCE [European Currency Units 327 in 1919). Fuels account for 97 percent of Algeria's
exports to the BBC, while EEC sales to Algeria are dominated by equipment goods and
consumer products.

In a statement to BL waABID, Hr Pisani stated that the ED: would not try to solve
problems that exist "without taking into account those of Africa, especially those of
North Africa.” Discussing the consequences for the Haghreb countries of the expansion
of the BBC to include Spain and Greece, ﬁr Pisani conceded that this enlarge-exit 'night
force us to take a fresh look at our relations with the countries of the Maghreb in
particular, with the Mediterranean countries in general. Paced with the political
necessity of enlarging, we must have an econcnic policy that does not require one group
to pay for the benefits we would confer on others.‘

He said that he would examine with his Algeria: interlocutors the question of 'how the
Algerian economy will find a way to evolve in tandem with the European economies within
the new European diaensions in such a way that everyone profits,” noting the fact that
Algeria continues to naintain, as it has done for several years now, that the country's
sales to the EEC must not be dminated exclusively by hydrocarbons.

Hr Pisani also noted that the BBC was obliged, over the lug term, to "rethink its
relations with Africa, the ace [Ifrican-Caribbean-Pacifig7 countries and Algeria in

the overall context of the great North-South dialogue, in which Europe must play a
quite unique role, since it is not only a power on the world scene but also an econasic
and political force.‘

COPYRIGHT: Rene Moreux et Cie Paris 1981

9516
CSO: 4519/9

1;
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

”IBERIA

381898

ARGENTINE WEATuA $47 million contract for Argentina to supply Algeria with wheat and
corn was just signed by the two countries, according to Argentine diplaatic sources in
Algiers. who disclosed the intonation on 14 September. The contract calls for
Argentina to deliver 200,000 tons of wheat, 60,000 tons of corn and 5,000 tons of
kidney beans to Algeria in the first half of 1982. The contract is an integral part of
a 5-year framework agreement which also calls for further deliveries of wheat and corn
to Algeria, the same source said. Meanmile, technical negotiatims between the two
countries began on Algeria's purchase of lO-l2,000 tons of neat and the installatim

in Algeria of refrigeration units, slaughterhouses and cold storage facilities with
technical assistance frm Argentine industry. ﬁexg [Paris MARCHBS TWICAUX ET
mornnnmssns in French No 187?, 25 Sep 81 p 24317 [Commons sane Horeux et Cie
Paris 19617 9516

SOVIETS To BUILD DAMS--On 10 Septenber, following a 4-day nesting of the Algerian-
Swiet submission on hydraulic works. an agreenent was signed giving the Soviet
Unim responsibility for construction of Dan No. 3 at Draa Al Miran. The Algerian
and Soviet experts also reviewed progress on mpletion of fair other big dams called
for by the 5-year plan (1980-1984). In other matters, the experts exuined progress
being made on studies related to the master plans for hydraulic ilprovenents in the
Annaba region, the eastern part of the country and South Atlas. They also agreed on
a new well-drilling progra- on the scale of several thwsand linear meters, with the
sin of increasing potable water supply capacity in southern Algeria. [Bert [Paris
MARCHBS TROPICAUX ET MEDITERRANEENS in French No 1812, 25 Sep 81 p 243g RIGHT:
Rene Horeux et Cie Paris 19817 9516

EUROPEAN FINANCIK; FOR PISHBMBN—Jrhe European Cmission decided 15 Septelber to
provide Algeria a grant of 600,000 sons to help finance the expansim of two training
centers for marine fishermen, one located at Annaba, the other at Beni-Saf. Algerian
authorities have decided. in effect, to correct intersectoral imbalances brought about
by the concentration of investment in the past in the fields of heavy industry and
hydrocarbons. The 1980-1984 [5-yea57 plan calls for developlent of the primary and
social sectors as part of the effort to restore balance. In the fishing sector, the
catch currently mounts to 400,000 tons per year, and the goal is to double that figure
by 1984. This presupposes the training of additional personnel, along with the
acquisition of boats and building of infrastructure such a canneries and repair shops.
There will be training at different levels. The Omnity's project involves the
training of basic technicians, thanks to the provisim of equipment for the facilities
(technology. fishery, seananship, sheet-metal works. machinery, refrigeration. etc.)
and the sending of two teachers. The capacity of the two sdtools will thus be increased
frat 130 to 200 students. [1'er [Paris MARCHBS TEOPICAUX ST IBDITERRANBENS in French
No 1872, 25 Sep 81 p 2433] (COPYRIGHT: line Horeux et cie Paris 19817 9516

C30: 4519/9

5
roe OFl-‘IGAL us: ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

IRAN ARRESTS PRGHNMT INTELLFSTUALS
P14201427 London THE GUARDIAN in hgluh 20 Oct 81 p 9
[Report by Liz ‘l'hurgood: "nloneyni Gaola Writers “to Opposed the Shah"]

[Text] Anong the thousands of Iranians caught up in the continuing wave of mass

arrests and persecution is a snall but highly vocal group of intellectuals. Many
were anong the sore active of the shah's opponents. were inprisoned in the royals
gaols, and were tortured for their opposition.

Unlike their less illustrious call-mates. several of the writers and poets now held
by Ayatollah Khonsyni's gaolers have become well known to human rights groups in the
Rest. Earlier this month. Annesty International asked the Iranian prise niniater
to receive a delegation seeking to halt the executions in Iran.

Because of a dearth of reliable news reporting from Iran, it is now known how poli-
tically active the intellectuals have been against the regine in recent months.
Most were members of the highly-politicised writers association, whose headquarters
were seized in June.

Neither is it known what. if any, charges have been made against then, or where they
are being held. Evin Prison in north Tehran, is a possibility.

Along the most proninent is Hons Nategh. a historian and forner professor at Tehran
University's faculty of letters, who suffered badly at the hands of the shah's
regime. In one incident during the anti-shah student upheavals late in 1977, she was
kidnapped and badly beaten by police within half-an-hour of being released fron

questions.

Unconfirned reports say that her husband. Nasser Paknejad, who nade cos-on cause
with many of Iran's intellegentsia. A founder member of the leftwing Palestine
group--a guerrilla organisation set up in the late 1960's to fight the shah-he
served 10 years in gaol, where he was subjected to 18 days of torture that reportedly
included a mock execution, floggings, and finger-nail pulling.

Paknejad emerged from the ordeal six months before the revolution. An incurable
optimist, he threw his energies into new democratic front politics.

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The latest arrival in gaol is Reza Baraheni, who was seized last week as he was
leaving Tehran University. A well-known writer. he gave a vivid account of his
tine in the shah's gaols, and accoupanying torture. in the crowned cannibals. Soon
after his release, he went to the 11.8. to found CAIFI (Co-littee for Artistic and
Intellectual Preedon in Iran). CAIPI's patrons included Kate Hillett, Arthur Hil-
ler. and Ramsey Clark. a for-er attorney-general.

Other writers and poets now languishing in the Islamic Republic's gaols reportedly
include Hedhi Parhaa, Shanoush Parsipour, and Akbar Halekian. Dozens of others
have gone underground.

The only known execution is that of Sa‘.id Sultanpour, who was shot by firing squad
four months ago. The playwright had been charged with arled uprising.

The writers and poets now in gaol take up only a tiny fraction of the total arrests
made since the end of June, when impeach-eat proceedings were started against the
ayatollah ‘s first president, Hr Bani-Sadr. 1he_1nfluence of Mean rights activists
is not what it used to be. The latest meaty proposal to send a delegation for
talks has been turned down by Ayatollah moneyni. Amesty "only wanted to condem
Iran and crush the Islamic Republic." he was quoted as saying.

CSO: [4600/74

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

LEBANON

ms assurance soucur ma smmc comers cams
pm: AL-UATAN AL-‘ARABI in Arabic No 237, 28 Aug-3 Sep 81 pp i1-2a

(Article: "Ball of South Lebanon Returns to Arab Court; Sarkis ﬁngers on Final
bbnths"]

[Text] Beirut-~Is Lebanon, which is saving in the direction of the Arab family in
search of aid to dress its womds, seeking a security or a political udwella or
financial aid? why has this particular tine been chosen for the visit of Lebanese
Prime Minister Shafiq al-Hazzan to Saudi Arabia and Kuwait and for the messages
carried by the ministers dispatched to the Arab kings and president? Is there an
Arab consensus for the Lebanese security to continue in its present condition in
accordance with the Riyadh and Cairo suit resolutions?

A foreign correspondent in Beirut asked a southern Lebanese official last week:
Why this sudden Lebanese enthusiasm for an Arab suit? The official answered:

"The definite fact that stands behind all that is occurring in Lebanon is the
'catastrophe of southern Lebanon.‘ There is no way to finding a solution to the
Lebanese crisis without recognizing the dimensions and seriousness of this fact
within whose framework falls all that has happened and that is happening in the
South. In Lebanon, there is one problem. By solving this problem, all the other
problus will be solved. This problen is called the South. Unless an and is put
to Israel's ambitions in the South and mless the sovereipty of the Lebanese state
is spread over the southern territories, we will be futilely seeking a way out of
our crisis. It seems as if the Lebanese government has realized that all the cur-
rent efforts and movements will be futile unless the solution starts from the South.
I an not stressing the South because I am tied to it by auction or relationship
but because I know for certain that the parties fighting in Lebanon and around it
have used and are still using the South and its tragedy like ' 'Uthman's shirt' to
justify their intransigmt and convulsive positions on the Lebanese arena and to
cover up their strange intervention in sone purely domestic affairs. The South is
a constant pretext for these parties and the south‘s couples: situation gives the
combatants and those seeking power the justification to persist in their trans-
gression and their recklessness."

This politician's statements confirn the contents of an official report submitted
to the higher authorities and stating verbatim: "The continued presence of southern
Lebanon as a sole arena for the Arab-Israeli conflict, as a testing ground for the
disputing parties and as a field for power display will foil every endeavor to save

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Lebanon and will obstruct any solution proposed for ending the crisis, not to men-
tion the danger of failing to deal with the situation there because it is not m-
likely that the South will turn into a thunderbolt that will touch off an explo-
sion in the area whose consequences will go beyond the geographic and political
sphere of Lebanon."

The true nature of the current official Lebanese movuaent can be concluded from a
careful study of some of the details of this report. The real dimensions of the
developments and events in southern Lebanon can be concluded through examining the
positions of the disputing parties in Lebanon. The South is the main and the only
battlefield with Israel at present. It is the main pretext which Syria is using to
keep and increase its forces in Lebanon. The South has become the "barometer" of
domestic security and from the south the days of calm and the days of explosion can
be predicted.

Transformat ion , not Development

Because the Lebanese government is aware of the true dimensions of the problem of
the south, it has viewed the recent cease-fire declared indirectly between Israel
and the Palestinian resistance as an important transformation and as a qualitative
leap. If what has recently happened in southern Lebanon is considered a significant
development by the political observers, then the Lebanese government sees it as a
major transformation in the course of the current conflict between the Arabs and
Israel and as a point at which one must pause to read the implications.

Though observation of the cease-fire has restored the Lebanese government to its
senses and has drawn its attention to the need to proceed from Southern Lebanon to
urge the Arabs to formulate a unified strategy, regardless of whether it is a peace
or a war strategy, and though Israel has for the first time resorted to cutting
off the means of communication between the capital, Beirut, and the South and has
blown up bridges, struck al-Zahrsni refinery and focused its shelling on vital
facilities, Israel has also accepted for the first time a cease-fire conditional
upon Palestinian approval.

This political situation emanating from the recent events and the military situation
created by the aggression have both made the Lebanese government initiate a compre-
hensive Arab movement rising to the level of the developments. If Israel, with its
aggressions, has caused the meetings of the followup oouittee to be unable to

keep up with the crisis, then it behooves Lebanon to go beyond the conventional
methods of dealing with crises and to initiate a qualitative movement relying on the
elements that have emerged, the most important being southern Lebanon's exposure

to a real war, whether in terms of losses in lives and property or in terms of the
dimensions of this war, and Israel's and the Palestinians' acceptance of the cease-
fire. This acceptance gives Lebenon the right to make some gains in turn, beginning
with a national reconciliation protected by the uﬂ>rella of an Arab consensus.

Race With Explosion

Prime Minister al-Hazzsn has returned from his visit and sources close to the prime
minister assert that he has succeeded in persuading Saudi Arabia and Kuwait of the
need to hold an Arab summitna Sill-1t whose date is expected to be moved closer-~so
that it may be possible to deal with the developmts in the Lebanese situation

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

before it is too late and before the Lebanese arena encounters a new explosion that
may jumble the cards, upturn the roles and make it extremely difficult to find firm
solutions by way of dialogue.

It is worth noting here that the government decided on its movement only after it had
become certain of numerous facts that have nade it more strongly convinced of the
need to return to the Arab solution menacing from the highest Arab authority [Arab
emit]. This is why the call for the summit has emerged. The most important facts
that have motivated the recent movement. are the following:

First, the discovery by officials that the United States doesn't forcus its efforts
on dealing with the heart of the Lebanese crisis and that the U.S.'s sole concern is
to cool off the heated front in the area so that it may be able to set a fixed
policy toward the Middle East crisis and implement the last part of the Camp David
accords.

Second, Lebanon's disappointment insofar as expansion of the area in which the UN
emergency forces are deployed is concerned. In addition to requiring a new resolu-
tion by the Security Council, such expansion also requires Palestinian and Arab
approval, especially in the wake of Israel's demand that the Palestinians be moved
away from its borders. This demand creates new problems and leads to further obstruc-
tion of the state's authority internally.

Third, the fear of postponement of the nesting of the Arab Followup Omittee. Such
postponement leads to creating a state of vacum insofar as the state's exercising
of its responsibilities is concerned and encourages a new flareup in the situation,
especially since great hope has been attached to the Followup Connittee's activities.

Fourth, taking advantage of the situation arising in the South as a result of the
cease-fire, and exerting efforts conducive to entranching this situation and to
preventing Israel fron resuming its aggressions.

Fifth, securing a political cover capable of bringing success to the endeavors of
the Followup Comittee or of giving this committee additional Arab momentum and
support.

But admidst a number of local, Arab and international concerns and even though the
various circles are convinced that no miracles will take place during President
Ilyas Sarkis' term and that nobody will offer anything during the retaining part of
President Sarkis' term, political circles famous for being well-informed have been
propagating nnnours for sometime to the effect that the Lebanese situation is on the
threshold of numerous positive aspects and that the reports circulated by some
sources that there will be an imminent new explosion in the situation are no more
than a well-studied scheme aimed at restoring the atmosphere of fear, intimidation
and confusion. The long truce has begun and all that remains is to prepare the solu-
tions to save Lebanon and to transform its truce into lasting peace.

COPYRIGHT: 1981 AL-WATAN AL-'ARABI

8494
080: 4404/22

10
FOR OWCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

LEBANON

SYRIANS BLAMED FOR FRDICH AMBASSADOR'S ASSASSINATION
Paris AL-HATAN AL-‘ARABI in Arabic No 239, 11-17 Sep 81 pp 210-25
[Articlez "Delamare Assassinated in Zahlsh 5 Months Ago"]

[Text] Exclusive Report by AL-HATAN AL-‘ARABl—Hhm Louis Delamare, the French
aubassador to Lebanon, rested from his trouble. when a French aircraft carried his
body to his home in a village near the French city of Deauville and when investi-
gation of the circumstances of his death started, AL-HATAN AL-‘ARABI was gathering
the first threads of the incident, which was not published in the daily press. from
political and diplomatic sources and is now publishing this information here ex-
elusively.

The story begins with the events in the city of Zahlah and with the violent Syrian
shelling to which the city was exposed 5 months ago.

At the time, the French diplomacy, on the strength of the special instructions and
interest of ‘ex-President Valery Giscard d'Estaing, uerted concerted efforts to put
an end to the siege struck around Zahlah by the Syrian deterrence forces and to
persuade Damascus to stop shelling the civilians. Francois Poncet, the former
French Minister of Foreign Affairs. hinted at the time in various statements to the
need for an international initiative and for a European movement to put an end to
the bloody events in Zahlah.

In light of this French diplomatic interest, French Ambassador Delamare moved at
more than one level in an endeavor to find colmon grounds among the various parties
involved to end the crisis.

This French interest and movement on the Lebanese arena did not please the Syrian
regime, especially since Delamare had succeeded in bolstering his connections with
the various parties involved and in gaining greater friendship and appreciation in
the various Lebanese circles, which is something that gave him the ability to mve
freely and to maneuver quickly. Col Hubs-mad Ghanin, the head of the Syrian intelli-
gence in Lebanon, resented Delanare's moments in particular, considering them an
unacceptable intervention in domestic affairs and an intervention undermining the

Syrian regime's authority and schemes in Lebanon and so he hastened to Damascus to
discuss his concerns.

Relying on well-informed and indisputable sources, AL-WATAN AL-'ARABI asserts that
Ghanin met in the Syrian capital with President Hafiz al-Asad in the presence of the

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

intelligence chiefs of staff, including 'Ali Dubs and Mohamed al-Khuli, and of
Rif'at al-Asad. Muhamad Ghanim said to President al-Asad: "The matter of the
French ambassador has become a source of annoyance for us. lie moves and maneuvers
at more than one level and he has initiated a dialogue with various national and
Palestinian leaderships, especially with Halid Junblat. He has also opened other
lines with the leaderships of the eastern area, thus obstructing our work."

Ghanim then told those present: "I have come here to review this serious matter
before posing this question: 'How do we deal with the arbassador?” One of those
present suggested assassination as a fundamental solution capable not only of
bringing about the end of an active asbassador who understands the Lebanese game
but also capable of making France understand that it is not easy to maneuver behind
Damascus' back. But Hubs—ad al-Khuli objectad to this solution, saying: 'Let us
intimidate him first.’ President al-Asad nodded his head in approval."

It is thus that the intimidation of Abassador Delamare started: Threats from here
and there, shelling his residence, mining a car belonging to the embassy and so

forth.

But Delamare was not intimidated and did not back down on his consultations and
his efforts to put an end to the fighting in Lebanon. Delamare realized important
accomplishments, such as arranging a meeting between leaders from Beirut's eastern
and western areas. This annoyed the Syrians greatly and intensified their wrath

at the ambassador. They considered his movaent an intervention in their internal
affairs. The story did not end here. Sometime afterwards, to be specific, a few
days after the hijacking of the Iranian (French-made) boat which was heading from
the French port of Cherbourg to Tehran, the Iranian ambassador in Damascus met with
a prominent Syrian security official and voiced his complaints and observations
regarding France, saying: "Paris has received Bani-Sadr and Rajavi and has granted
the boat hijackers the right to political asylum. So, how should we deal with the
socialist French government?"

The Syrian security official did not hestiate in offering his advice to his
interlocutor--advice which took the form of the question:

"What do you think of kidnapping the French ambassador in Beirut? Ask your govern-
ment and then contact me."

The Syrian official then reviewed to his visitor the merits of this net:

"We will do to Delamare what we did to Jordanian Ambassador Hisham al-Muhaysin.
This act will create an uproar admidst French public opinion. Bani-Sadr and
Rajavi will consequently find themselves compelled, especially from a moral stand-
point, to leave France.

Ultimately, the French government may find itself compelled, under the prossure of
domestic public opinion, to hand over the boat hijackera.. But what is certain is
that France will think twice before receiving (an opponent of the Iranian regime)
after the ambassador is kidnapped. Moreover, France will curtail activities of
the opponents present in its territories."

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The Iranian ambassador in Damascus congratulated the Syrian security official for
this "advice" and promised to convey it to Tehran immediately. The Iranian res-
ponse came quickly: "Yes to the kidnapping."

The same Syrian security official was informed of the Iranian response and the
official proceeded to tell his superiors immediately: "We have killed two birds
with one stone. We will get rid of Delanare and please Iran at the same time.”

'This official added: "There is no doubt that suspicions and accusations will be
directed at Iran because of the tense Iranian-French relations in this particular
phase." Thus, a secret decision was issued to carry out the kidnapping or liquids-
tion operation should it be impossible for the kidnapping to succeed for one reason
or another.

Thus, the operation was carried out at a distance of just 30 meters from a road-
block set up by the Syrian deterrence forces in a crowded area where the offices of
the [Palestinian] organizations are located. Nobody from these organizations inter-
fered when the shots were heard and neither did the elements of the deterrence forces
roadblock interfere to pursue the perpetrators. The instructions were strict:

"No intervention due to higher considerations."
COPYRIGHT: 1981 AL-HATAN AL-'ARABI

8494
C50: h604/22 END

13
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY