POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10534

20 May 1982

Near East/North Africa Report

(FOUO 20/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

roamcinmouu
.ms publications contain infarction prinrily tron {oreign
nevepspers, periodicals and books, but also tron new agency
transnissions and broadcasts. Materials tron foreign-language
sources are translated; those iron English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted. with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and naterial enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by m. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original intonation was
processed. were no processing indicator is given, the infor-
ntion was sun-larised or extracted.

Unfuiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion teeth and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
iten originate with the source. “rises within itm are as

given by source .

the contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, vievs or attitudes of the 3.8. Gwen-cot.

WWIIG‘I LAWS AID REGULATION WIRING WI? 0?
“TRIALS “PRODUCED HEREIN REG)!“ THAT DISSEHMTION
0P WIS WEICA'HW I! am FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
NEAR EAST/NORTH AFRICA REPORT
(rouo 20/82)

CONTENTS

BAHRAIN

London 'TDIBS' on 'Attalpud conp' Trial
(Robert ﬂak; mm, 29”” 82) .OCOOIIOOCOOOOCOCCQC

IRAQ

'Aziz Views Nonsligned Sumit, Mideast
(Tariq .A313} WWW, 26 ‘W9 m 82) 0000060000000

mama:

Al-Hszzan Discusses Israeli Intentions, Ranch Relations,

other Issues
(Smfiq sl-Wszsan Interview; Ala-RITA]! AL-‘ARABI,

12-18 "u 82) OOOOOOOOOOOOOCOOOIOIDOIOOOOOOOOOOOOOOUOOOI

LIBYA

Al-Qadhdhafi Gives Views on Christians, Nesirites
(mem All-.MI, 16.22 Apr 82) COOOOOIOIOCQOOOOIC...

Briefs
Wage Reduction for Foreigners

SUDAN

Airport Projects Undmu Described
(MARCHBS TROPIGAUX 31' W8, 2 Apr 82) ........

Briefs
Arab Loan
Livestock marketing Project
New Banks
Japanese Aid
Air Cooperation Hith Ethiopia
Port Project
SYRIA

MOFFIGALUSBONLY

Official Discusses Proposals for Mideast Peane
(M nortimz m Tm, 22 “a, 82) ooeoeoeoeeoeeeeee

National Alliance for Liberation of Syria Pounded
(AL-HATE AL—‘ARABI, 26 Mar-1 Apr 82) ...................

Amnesty International Report on Syria
(Mm m‘m, 26 ”1 ‘pr 02) OOGIOOOOOOOOOOOOOO‘

MWWONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

LONNN 'TIHBS' ON 'Am 00!!!" TRIM.
P11291625 London ms 111138 in English 29 lb! 82 pp 1, 20

[Robert Fisk dispatch: "Iran Involvemnt in Atteapted coup barges at
Secret ‘l‘rial"]

[Excerpts] Manama, Bahrain, 28 Her-June graffiti on the walls of lab Al
Bahrain Street have been carefully doctored. he Arabic words have been

spray-painted over with childlike doodles, but just round the corner fro.
the crowded Cold Bazaar. you can quite clearly mks out the words Yasget

Nisan Al Khalifah (down with the Al Khalifeh regime) inscribed on the side
of a disused shop. .

There are black stencil portraits of Ayatollah nonayni on the walls as
well, east of then obscenely defaced. me Islenic Republic of Bahrain is a
concept which the island's ruling dynasty rather naturally wishes to dis-
courage.

Just 12 nileo down the coast free Bahrain'e futuristic capital, however. the
dangers of an Iranian-backed Shia mu- state on the island are being more
seriously debated. In the little village of Jan, 73 un—l3 of then Saudi
nationals-—are being tried for allegedly planning sabotage operations in
Bahrain. .

That. at least, is what the indict-eat claias, though the A1 Khalifah family
are well aware that the defendants were preparing a coup d'etat, a violent

and potentially bloody putach that would have narked Iran's first successful
exportation of its Isle-1c revolution ti: the Arabian peninsula.

Shaikh when-ad ibn mbarak Al Khalifah, the foreign sinister, is quite blunt

about the whole affair. "The plot," he told m TIMES, ”was against the
Arabian of Bahrain. It was foreign, non-Arab intervention in our affairs.

These people should be punished."

And so they probably will be—perhape with death—though Bahrain's sinister
of infatuation goes to sons lengths to thasiae that the Al lhelifah govern-
uent is a tolerant regine which will always consider nercy.

A far more sensitive issue for the Bahrainis. however. is the patently
obvious-«even brazen—involveeant of Iran in the planned coup. It is

“NEON!”
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

priaarily for this reason that the trial of the 73 sea, which resused this
weekend, has been held largely in secret. Journalists are politely but
firnly barred from the proceedings.

inquiries in Bahrain by THB TIMES, however. have established that the court,
where the accused are defended by 17 lawyers, has heard evidence that:

l. Alaost all those on trial were given eras and guerrilla training in Iran.

2. Host of the weapons found in carefully-hidden caches in the East nifaa
District of the island last December-including Israeli-nude UZI sub-

nachineguns, a heavy nachinegm, grenades and explosives were all brought
into Bahrain froa Iran.

3. The Iranian charge d'sffaires in Bahrain, Hr Bassan Shustari, imported
dozens of two-way radio sets for the conspirators under cover of diplomatic
is-unity.

4. here than $0 Bahraini police uniforms found with the weapons, couplets
dith the Bahraini insignia of crossed swords, were manufactured in Tehran.
This was confirmed by the Farsi identification on the back of the "official"
police buttons.

5. The conspirators expected ailitary assistance from Iranian troops were
apparently to be landed in the island by sea. One source suggested that the
Iranim Navy's British—built hovercraft was to be used in this operation.

Most of the accused are followers of Rojatoleslaa nadi lbdaressi. an Iranian
shsia prelate who is a seaber of the Islamic Republican Party in Tehran. and

who lived in exile for three years in Bahrain during the shah's reign. lie
was sheltered by Shaikh 'Isa ibn Selma A1 Khalifah, the Bahraini ruler,

who did not realize that he was secretly building up a range of contacts in
the area.

The fact that the accused use include Arabs other than Bahrainis has prompted
the cooperation of other Arab Gulf countries mder the auspices of the newly-
foraed Gulf Cooperation Security Council. Shaikh thaued Mbarak, foreign

sinister, revealed to THE TIMES that an Omani and a Kwaiti were also aaong
the defendants. .

It further transpires that Prince nayif, the Saudi interior minister, flew

to Bahrain with a squad of Saudi security nen to interrogate the Saudi
suspects.

The Bahraini authorities are aware that several dozen other Arabs are still

in training in Iran. and that the full facts of last Deceder's planned coup
nay still not be known. Officials in banana are. for instance, particularly

interested in a car bomb er-plosion that occurred in London last Deceaber, at
the time of the discovery of the coup. Three sen died in the bomb blast;
two were Iranians. but the other was a Bahraini.

FOROFII'ICIALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

-s..

The Iranian gharae d'affatras baa bean expelled from Bahrain, but the island
to alaoat defoncelcu, and tho Bahrain“ are anxious that chair unpleasant
discovery should not. be amarionauud.

COPYRIGHT: Tim Newspapara unitad. 1982

080: 61.00/23?

mommomx
'AZIZ VIEWS NGUALIGNBD SMT, m1
M91621 Paris APRIQUB-ASIB in French 26 Apr9 Hay 82 pp 13-15

[Interview with Iraqi fancy Prine Minister Tariq 'Aaia by Sinon Halley:
"The Nonaligned Hoveunt Needs New lapetqe"—date and place not given]

[Text] Sinon Halley: "hat role could the fortth nonaliyaed sunit
play in solving the conflict between you and Iran? 00 you intend to raise
that question? If other countries were to raise it, would you object?

Tariq 'Azia: He will receive any intention or plan to discuss that conflict

in a constructive spirit. There is no question of our opposing tl. t debate,
and we are prepared to put our viewpoint to all the other countries. And if
the heads of state conference intended to take an initiative with a view

to settling that conflict. we would certainly not oppose it. We see absolutely
no reason why the seventh nonaliped s\-it should not ear-inc that affair. _

Sinon Halley: Do you not think it useful and necessary for concessions to
be nade to ensure the trimh of that peace which is vital for protecting
our comtries against inperialien and Zionists and for all energies to be
nobilized against the peoples' co-on adversaries?

Tariq ’Aziz: We have no intention of keeping territories which belong to
Iran sad we have no designs on any Iranian city. All we ask is for a just
and equitable solution to be found to this conflict, whose Inderlying- causes
must be settled so that war does not break out again later. It is by
recognizing the rights of both sides that a reasonable basis for agreenent
can be fomd. Anybody who talks about "agreement" is naturally talking about
reciprocal concessions.

Sinon Halley: Let us discuss the ncnaliped suit for a mat. Iraq will
chair the novenent for 3 years. How do you view the role which President
Saddam Husayn will have to play in his capacity as nonaligned chairnan? You
know that there are two fmdasental vim which clashed in particular at the
sixth suit in havma on the very doctrine of nonslipnnt: the view which
wants nonalignnent to be "strictly neutral," so to speak, between the
socialist and capitalist cups. between West and East. and the view which
rejects that concept and instead insists that nonaliynent should be an
effective contribution to swporting the peoples against the donination of
inperialisn, its agents and its interests.

I;
MMICMLUSIWLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Tariq 'Aziz: here in Iraq we feel that the “unaligned Hove-eat needs a new
imetus in the develop-eat of cooperation and solidarity anong its nedaers.
Although Iraq is not a big comtry it nonetheless has aajor econonic, cultural
and hman capabilities. We have given substantial aid to my African, Asian
and South American countries and, although our capabilities in that sphere

are sonewhat reduced by the war with Iran, we will pursue that policy without
any hesitation. Owing to its geographical position, Iraq can for: a najor
link within the movement. It is in that spirit that the Iraqi chairmanship
will act to strengthen ties between the three continents which form the
“unaligned Hovesent.

Nonetheless, as far as the Iraqi Governesnt is concerned your question cm
only have one answer: The Nonaligned l‘bvennt shculd take clear and balanced
stances on all international questions. But the very essence of objectivity
imposes on us a fact which we cannot escape: The United States and the

Soviet mien camot be placed on the seas level. In our view the fact is that
the United States supports Israel and South Africa and its racist regime.

The fact is that the United States is doing nothing practical to oppose the
aggressions against the Arab nation, especially Palestine, the southern
African nations (Angola, Hozubiqus, Ila-ibis, labia, Zinbabwe, the Seychelles
or Madagascar) or the Latin American countries (Cubs, Nicaragua, El Salvador
and so forth). The fact is that the United States supports the anti-people
reactionary regines in South and Central Anerica.

So how can people hesitate between what you describe as the two views of
nonalignaent? In our view there can only be one nonalignnent—the one which
is a guarantee against all threats fron inerialisn, Zionisn and racisn.
Although we think it necessary to be able to establish diversification in
international relations, it is especially isportant not to alienate our
independence and sovereigity for anything.

Let us be strictly objective. It is clear that the two superpowers obviously
prefer alignment with their positions. That is a fact which nobody could
deny. But, unlike the United States, the USSRis helping my nonaligned
comtries against imperialism and against the threats of colonielist and
racist powers. It is supporting the Arab nation against the Zionist enesy.
It maintains good relations with several nonaligaed countries. The views
held by sons nonaligned countries are probably not identical with those of
the USSR, but that disagreenent cannot be conpared with the acute hostility
which exists between our countries and 0.8. inerialist policy.

Sinon Halley: Do you think that the uonaligned comtries could play a role
in reducing world tension, as they did in the period of acute crisis between
Washington and Moscow?

Tariq 'Azin: Yes, I seriously think they can. Once it has seemed chair-
nanship of the movement, Iraq will be able to play an active role in
nobilizing as nany comtries as possible espeically those whose policy is
truly independent, in order to try to reduce world tension.

Simon Halley: llow do you explain the fact that, after adopting a clear-cut
stance against the Soviet policy of aid to Afghanistan, the Iraqi Govern-ant

MOWICFALUSEONLY
is now adwtih§h more serene attitude and is no longer talking about that
problem? ‘

Tariq 'Aziz: Through President Saddaa Busayn Iraq proclaimed a position of
principle back in November 1980. That position has not changed, and the

fact that we proclaimed it neans not that we were lamching or participating
in a main against the USSR but that we were drawing up an independent aid
sovereign policy. Nonetheless the USSR is still our friend and we continue
to guard that friendship just as we will continue to make every effort to
ensure that a satisfactory solution for all the parties concerned is found to
the Afghan question, so that the Afghan people's sovereignty and dignity can
be protected.

Sinon Halley: But do you not think that Kabul was entitled to call for the
USSR intervention. as noreoyer the m Charter specifies?

Tariq 'Aaiz: Yes, but Iraq has its own political principles which it certainly
cannot ispose on others. And I tell you that if Iraq is threatened by any
force at all it will not resort to a foreign power to protect its security

and sovereignty. . ..

Simon Halley: Even if that power is stronger than the comtry's human,
political and economic capabilities and you are likely to suffer military
occwation and to lose your independence?

Tariq 'Aziz: He will never resort to a foreign force to protect our
sovereignty. We will face any foreign intervention with our own mans.
President Saddam Husayn has stated that, if a great power wanted to attack
Iraq, it could occupy the land but would find a land without people because
the entire people would fight....

Simon Halley: Sane Arab circles, including some progressives. think that
Iraq has hegemonist ambitions. what do you think of that?

Tariq 'Azir: However strong it is Iraq will never be any threat to its
Arab partners. Remember that in February 1980 President Saddaa husayn
proposed a "national pact" to the Arab nation proposing that the Arab
comtries pledge never to use armed force among thuselves. Is that pact
not therefore a guarantee of our good faith? If anybody imagines that Iraqi
forces could be used as aggression force against the Arab countries, he is
very sorely mistaken. Iraq's entire strength is and renains available for
protecting and winning back Arab lands against the iaperialist end Zionist
threats.

Simn Halley: Vital questions will once again be raised at the seventh
nonaligned emit: Palestine and the Can) David agreements. southern Africa
and Pretoria's racist and aggressive policy, Namibia, v.3. imperialisn's
threats, Kawuchea's status, North-South and South-South dialogue....

MWWONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Tariq 'Azis: First let as say that the Palestine problsn is a problen for us
all... .Hell before the suit we will start detailed discussions with our
Palestinian brothers in the Pm and the Arab nation to determine the best
attitude to adopt....

Sinon Halley: In that connection do you see an inprovenent in the prospects
for a coqrehensive settle-lent of the conflict since President al-Sadat's
assassination?

Tsriq 'Aziz: Unfortunately I do not see a noticeable inrovennt as regards
a solution to the Palestinian: problem. however, what nust be stressed is that
the Palestinian cause enjoys support which ha been considerably increased

at international level, especially in the past 3 years. That support is a
considerable contribution. an imressive psychological strength on the path
to the Palestinian people's liberation. You motioned al-Ssdat's assassina-
tion. or course that assusination was a systolic act. Nonetheless it is
still certain that Carp David has been a lamentable failure. The plan which
al-Sadat built with force and passion and which he regarded as his life's
work, collapsed with the death of its author. But what was that assassination
if not the historic failure of the "peace" to which al-Sadst devoted hisself?
Today the whole world witnesses that and will eventually admit it. Al-Sadat
is no note and his death is positive in that it aims that the path which he
took had no future and contained no hope....

Simon Halley: Do you think that Egypt will follow a more reasonable path and
return to the great Arab nation under lueni Hibarak's regine?

Tariq 'Asis: we in Iraq do not try to prophesy. Of course the post-Sadat
period is relatively better, but there can be no question of falling into
blind optimise. That is nainly because the dangers of the Can: David agree-
ments still exist and because they have not been denounced or abandoned by
al-Sadat's successors. Camp David has failed but the lhited States has not
stopped believing in it. Moreover nor has Israel or the Egyptian Government.

As for President Mubarak, we think that he is a responsible man. He can say
and do what he wants. That is why it would not be right for us or Arab
leaders to become caught up in conjectures. to say what he will or will not
do. we will have to judge the Egyptian head of state by his actions and
dealings.

Sieon Halley: what about the problems of colonialism, of South Africa and
its aggressions? Is it not necessary to go further than condemtions and
"Sunday vows." as they say in the Host? Would it not be possible to incude
the novenant to adopt and implement sore practical neasures against the
racist Pretoria regine? The African peoples and the denocratic forces are
tired of making do with resolutions and condemtions....

Tariq 'Aziz: You are absolutely right. But you know that the moveeent

adopts resolutions and that it is up to its nedaers to inplenent or forget
then. Nonetheless that should not prevent the seventh sunit tron considering

FOIOFHCJALMONLY
and deciding how it can ensure that its resolutions will be acconpanied by
practical neasures and will not ultiaetely be ignored. He knew that there
are several countries which are still iporing the resolutions which have
been adopted. The tine will cone when they will have to answer for their
respective nechiniations. That applies to South Africa and to Israel and to
all those who threaten the sovereignty and indepenhnce of oppressed,
threatened and attacked peoples.

Sim Halleyz‘ﬁ'question which the world press, notably the French press
is raising concerns your relations with the French Governnent following the
victory of the le'ftwing forces on 10 Hay 1981. You were the first Iraqi
statesnm to talk with President Frncois Hitterrand. "hat is the present
state of Franco-Iraqi relations?

Tariq 'Aair: I would like to divide your question .into two parts. As
regards bilateral relations I least say that they are good in the econoeic,
nilitary and nuclear spheres because the French Gowrnnent has officially
pledged to continue existing cooperation in those three spheres and it has
pro-ised to conclude new agree-ants. Since my visit to Paris on 18 and

19 August 1981. our relations have continued in a satisfactory way. As for
the political aspect of your question, we exuined a whole series of questions
in a constructive way during my talks in Paris and then during the visit to
Baghdad by [French External Relations Hinieter] daeysson and [French Foreign
Trade ninister] Jobert. We agree with the French Governnent on a meter of
international policy issues, especially the new government's desire to have
a policy which is independent of the two superpowers. We are fully in agree-
nent with that line. However, we are not in agreemt with Paris on the
Middle East question. The new governnent naintains ideas and defends
initiatives on which I prefer not to connect at present because they do not
seen to be very clear and we do not know where they are leading....‘Ihat is
why we informed Claude (12qu of our desire to have more political neetings
so that each can gain a better mderstanding of the other's position.

Siaon Halley: Are you neinly referring to the Palestinian affair and to
President Hitterrand's visit to Israel?

Tariq 'Azia: I sdeit that I do not yet know the real results of Mr Francois
Hitterrand'e visit. But that visit produced a generally negative iapression
which was reflected and conveyed by the Arab press. I do not want to say any
nore about that because I would first like to know the precise facts about that
visit and the allotment period. According to I; initial information;
although it is linited, President Hitterrsnd sade relatively positive state-
eents about the Palestinian problen. In my view he is the first Western
leader to have nads such statements in an official way to the Israelis and in
Israel itself. But the general inression which prevails in the Arab capitals
is that France should adopt a clearer attitude.

Sinon Halley: But you net with Claude Cheysson in Bsdadad before Francois
Hitterrand's visit to Israel....

8
FORWMONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

'l‘ariq 'Asis: Claude Cheysson did indeed inform us about Mr Mitterrand's
visit to Israel. and our answer was clear: The main thing, the essential
thing is the results of the vist, especially those relating to the solution
of the Palestinian problem. In my opinion the fundamental question is not the
visit but its results. The question is also how far the French Government
will go in its support of the right of the Arab Palestinian people, led by
the PLO, to self-determination, to return to their homeland and to create a
sovereign and independent state.

Simon Halley: What about ﬁance's reconstructing the Iraqi nuclear power
station bombed by the Israeli Air Force?

Tariq 'Azir: During my visit to Paris we reached agreement on the French
Government's undertaking the construction of a new nuclear reactor identical
to the one which was boobed by the Israeli aircraft. Since then negotiations
have been continuing and things are entirely normal... .They will be concluded
at the appropriate time. But I would like to add that» far the French
authorities have been faithful to the guidelines on which we agreed.

Simon Halley: Do you intend to reconstruct the nuclear power station destroyed
by the Israelis?

Tariq 'Aziz: He will reconstruct it and we will construct others.
Simon Malley: What about the danger of new Israeli attacks?

Tariq 'Aziz: You can be certain that since that bowing we have taken all
the necessary steps to ensure that no such attack can take place again and
that, if such an attack is ever repeated, it will be repelled and crushed.

Simon mlley: Some Israeli leaders think that their "strategic space" extends
from the Atlantic to the Gulf and also includes Africa and the Indian Ocean.
Have they not stated that any Muslim Arab comtry hostile to Israel would not
be "allowed" to possess such nuclear power stations?

Tariq 'Aziz: The Israeli leaders' Zionist mentality has a logic which prospts
them to want to control the whole world if they could. That is why they
think that there is no limit on the expansionist spirit which guides and
inspires Israel. But if such intentions became dominant in Israel and if the
Zionist leaders wanted to apply them, I am convinced that all the denocratic
forces in the world would mite to oppose them and prevent their success.

For our part we have no fear of the Zionist leaders' threats. still less of
their blackmail. The Arab nation will rise up as a single, homogeneous.
united and powerful force capable of defending its rights, its sovereigtty
and its independence.

(XJPYRIGHT: 1982 AFRIQUB-ASIB

(30: “00/267

9
FOIOFHGALIBEONLY
AL-HAZZAN DISCUSSIS ISRAELI INTENTIONS. FRENCH RELATIONS, OTHER ISSUES
Paris AL-UATAN AL-‘ARABI in Arabic No 265. 12-18 Mar 82 pp 20-21

[Interview with Price Minister Shafiq al-ﬂassan by Florence Ra'd: "Shafiq
al-Haszan Tells AL-HATAN ALn'ARABI. 'This is the Required Solution';" date and
place not specified]

[Test] Sarkis refuses an extension of his tern in office.
Deployeent of the army in the eastern section is still
being studied.

The lsraeli withdrawal fro. Sinai; the possibilities

of aggression against Lebanon; the presidential elections;
the efforts to find a successor for President Elias
Sarkis; and what is new on the Lebanese scene are the
headlines of the interview with Mr Shafiq al-Hassan.

the prine sinister of Lebanon.

[Question] Sons sources are expecting lsrael to attack in south.Lebanon before
25 April. how does Lebanon view that possibility and what preparations has it
made to confront it?

[Answer] There is no doubt that Israel’s aggressive nanner has reached a very
high degree of arrogance and haughtiness; it no longer tempers and conceals its
attacks. it is now announcing and publicizing plans of its aggressive strategy,
and it is even announcing details of its nilitary plans. including the cost
meticulous tactics and detailed instructions. Unfortunately. the Arab situation
today is the worst it has been in nodern history: there is a total breakdown and
an unjustified reluctance on the part of core than one agency and nore then one
party to confront the crucial and serious conditions that are facing the Arab
nation. these agencies and parties are not confronting these conditions with the
deter-ination. firnness and all-consuming drive they deserve to ward off the
inninent danger. it hurts ne and grieves ne to say this, but the Arab nation has
divested itself of nost of its deterrent scans. Egypt has been turned around:
Arab solidarity has been lost; and Arab energies are preoccupied with wars.
possibilities of war and violent disputes. All this is topped by an inter-
national situation that is out of control. Consequently. the entire Arab region
today lies within reach of an Israeli strike.

IOIIDFFIJA1.USIII'LY
FIII(HWNC1A1.USE(IVLY

The possibility that the ibst Bank will be annexed is a real and a serious

possibility. And here i wonder: How did the international community deter Israel
from annexing the Golan and before that Jerusalem? So far, the only deterrents
have been resolutions and denunciations. Israel's attitude about that ever since
it was created has been well-known. its archives abound with UN and non-UN con-
demnations which it does not hesitate to reject and ridicule on every occasion.
Regarding the possibility that south Lebanon may be attacked and overrun. our
appeal in this regard has for a long time sought to stir up Arab conscience
against it. There is no doubt that the possibility of an attack is greater today
based on the circumstances that you outlined in detail. You ask. what prepara-
tions have we made to confront all this?

The responsibility for south Lebanon. for Jerusalen. for the Golan and for the
west Bank is an integrated Arab responsibility because all these areas are
within the framework of the national opposition to a vicious Israeli enemy whose
viciousness and sharp grip are growing every day. He have been working in that
direction. and we did actually get a resolution at the Fe: Conference regarding
a uniform Arab strategy. A small committee was formed to prepare and approve
such a strategy. We did our best and worked as fast as we could to prepare a
working paper in this regard on behalf of the committee. That task had been
entrusted to us by the secretary general of the Arab League. we were anxious to
get a quick resolution due to the gravity of the situation and the inminence of
the danger. You know about the position that was taken. and you know that the
committee's meeting was postponed till next eonth. we are hoping that there

are factors, which may be unknown to us. to allow for such a lengthy postpone-
want. we hope that no israeli action will soon take us by surprise and make us
blane ourselves for falling to deal with the situation expeditiously on an emer-
gency basis.

As far as Lebanon is concerned. it goes without saying that Lebanon will repel
the attack with all the effort and energy it has left. and we hope that Lebanon
will not find itself alone on the scene of confrontation.

[Question] There has been talk about a new French initiative on the Lebanese
scene. What is new in that regard, especially after Hitterand's visit to lsrael?

[Answer] First of all, there are no plans for the French president to visit
Lebanon in the foreseeable future.

Second. we have no knowledge of a specific plan or plans the French president
has with regard to Lebanon. [lone has been] relayed to us during the course of a
visit or through usual diplomatic channels.

At any rate our position on the creation of a nulti-national force and our posi-
tion on internationalising the Lebanese crisis in general were declared; they
are well-known matters. These positions are manifested in our rejection of this
aim. What we see in it is not so nuch a solution as much as an increase in the
parties and the causes of complications in the Lebanese crisis. particularly
since there is a basic Lebanese group that is rejecting this aim and also par-
ticularly since at best that aim. wherever it was applied in the world, produced
no more than a stunning and a numbing effect. but no solution and no safety.

11
IIII‘OIIUC1A1.lEﬂl(l'LY
Enlarging the present area of deployment for the multi-nationsl force by turning
toward the border strip would put into effect the Security Council resolution ‘
which created that force and defined its functions and the area of its deploy-
ment. Accordingly, achieving that does not represent the plan of any one
country. it actually represents the international wish that stood behind the
aforementioned,§ecurity Council resolution. At any rate Lebanon has specific-5-
demands in this regard. and these are recorded in the Security Council. These
demands call for increasing the number and efficiency of the emergency forces.
The Security Council has begun discussing those demands. and we are hoping that

our demands "KI1§53 met. especially the one about increasing the number of these
forces. ‘5 '

[Question] There is growing talk about adding Arab forces to the Arab deter-
rent forces. Uhat chances of success does such talk have. and what is the truth?

[Answer] This talk started abroad. and Lebanon has nothing to do with its
development. At any rate. we support [efforts to] find an Arab solution to the
Lebanese crisis. The solution that is required is one that follow Arabs will
agree upon; it is one whose realisation will put an end to the crisis or at
least alleviate its burdens and woes which have almost finished off what is left
of the territory. the people and the future of Lebanon. Accordingly. any solu-
tions that can be separated from the over-all Arab framework could complicate
matters further and increase the imputation of fractiousness and perhaps [even]
explosiveness. He are hoping that all efforts will be joined together and that
Arab consensus and solidarity will be achieved through a uniform Arab strategy
on the Lebanese situation in general and on the situation of south Lebanon in
particular. This is an urgent Lebanese demand which we are striving to realize
by various means and in various fields.

what is New in the Presidential Elections

[Question] "hat are the constitutional, political. security and regional merits
of the upcoming presidential elections?

[Answer] in this regard we are facing several facts. The first one of those

is the fact that the presidential term is expiring. This requires that constitu-
tional conditions in the country continue through the election of a new presi-
dent. The second fact is that the delicacy. critical nature and gravity of our
conditions are unprecedented for Lebanon; the whole area has not experienced
such conditions in its recent history. The third fact is that President Sarkis
is refusing extension or renewal of his term for more than one personal and
public reasoni he insists he will turn over the leadership office to a new presi-
dent. ﬂence. the constitutional authority. represented by the Chamber of
Deputies. has to do its duty in this regsrd-—it is only a matter of a few
months-in the context of a full awareness of its national responsibility. in
this the Chamber of Deputies will undoubtedly have the full and whole-hearted
support of the people who today. more than any time in the past. believe that
the only salvation for this country lies in its unity. in maintaining the
legality of its conditions and in having the lawful government meet its obliga-
tions and regain its authority over all the territory of the country. and that
includes places. public facilities. fields and battlegrounds.

FOIIOIIICIAI.IEII(HiLY
Now that this small country with limited capabilities has become the principal
starting point and troubleshooter for the rights of the area. and even perhaps
for some of the rights of the world. there it no doubt that many people are

now prepared to spread news about where they stand on and what their attitudes
are about the presidential elections. Some of these methods of spreading news in
Lebanon are almost ordinary and classic. In all presidential elections held

in Lebanon under normal conditions, we came to know major voters who had an
opinion and exercised influence in this regard. Others are practicing a new kind
of participation that falls into the context of applying pressure, causing explo-
sions and dealing with others in a violent manner.

We are then in a stage that requires extreme caution, awareness and a sense
of responsibility. in saying this i am referring to all the sincere national
forces on the Lebanese scene that are interested in keeping Lebanon away from
the sites of explosions. fragmentation and destruction.

He are hoping to do this. and we are striving in different directions and
various fields to achieve it. We are hoping that [by keeping trouble out of
Lebanon], power will be transferred to a new president under conditions that we
are striving to make normal.

[Question] what has become of the attempts to urge the government to resign?
what are the reasons for these attempts?

[Answer] in democratic countries there are those who, rightly or wrongly. are
always trying to force government to resign and bring others to power.

in principle we find no fault with this matter in a country that prides itself
on maintaining a parliamentary democracy, despite the turbulence and setbacks it
has had. Lebanon has at least maintained the principal features of that parlia-
mentary democracy. As far as my own position as prime minister is concerned
regarding the resignation of the government. 1 would not accept having anything
determine the resignation of the government, especially under the crucial circum-
stances that the country is going through, except the country's supreme national
interest and what that interest dictates. The positions 1 and the government
will assume will manifest that supreme national interest. If these interests
dictate that the government be changed, 1 will not wait 1 day in office,
especially since holding office under these conditions has become a personal
difficulty and a hardship that is difficult to endure. The fact that we are
continuing to hold office amidst these storms is a manifestation of some of
Lebanon's steadfastness against storms and dangers.

[Question] There is talk about deploying the army in the eastern and western
sections of beirut. To what extent can this be achieved?

[Answer] This matter is still under consideration due to the fact that the
subject of the army is an important and sensitive subject. Because of the posi-
tions and counter positions we encounter in this regard. we are becoming more
convinced every day that this is a subject that cannot be solved so as to
benefit everyone unless there is national accord in which this matter would be
a principal article and a starting point for solving many matters that can only
be solved by a capable and an efficient power. That power is that of an integ-
rated national army whose structure is materially and morally sound.

13
INII¢HHHCIAI.UUI(NNLY
what happened géithe Fez Resolutions?

[Question] The recent Fez Summit ended in a unanimous resolution regarding
Lebanon's demands. What happened to the application of that resolution. and 1
what are the obigacles that are impeding its implementation?

[Answer] Despite the sharp and difficult disputes from which the recent res
Conference had suffered and which produced only one resolution that had to do
with the situation in Lebanon, the Arab consensus on Lebanon's demands at thit
conference was an indication of the fact that Lebanon's demands have merit. They
are an urgent and integral part of supreme Arab interests and over-all national
security. The main points of the Fe: resolutions were manifested in the appeal
for a uniform Arab strategy on south Lebanon. On that basis a small committee
was formed. No sooner had it held its first meeting than that meeting was
adjourned and postponed for reasons that were announced at that time. He do not
wish to go into the reasons or the details of the postponement. What we are
hoping for-and we have begun taking a few detailed practical steps in this
regard-is that efforts to achieve a uniform Arab strategy on south Lebanon
continue and that efforts in that regard be increased and intensified. The dan-
gers that are all around us do not wait on our own private conditions and on
our preoccupations and problems everywhere and every place. What we are also
hoping for here is that existing Arab disputes do not once again become the
reason for the floundering of this strategy. for the loss of south Lebanon and
for making Lebanon endure more damage and more tragedy.

Copyright 1981 AL um» Al. ms:

8592
080: 6&06/376

FOCioffﬂﬂAl.USl(NﬁLY
MW! GIVES VIM ON CHRISTINE, “8131118
Paris AL-WA‘IAI AL-‘AIABI in Arabic In 270, 16-22 Apr 82 p 18

[Text] During the neetin; which tookplace last March in Tripoli, Libya
between the delegation of lahanese University professors and Col E's-er
al-Qadudhafi and during which a two-stage dialogue lasting more than 20
hours took place. al-Qadhdhafi brought up a nn-her of new ideas and opinions
which aroused a great deal of sharp criticise. as well as disapproval and
conde-ution. Al-Qadhdhaii denied the existence of Arab Christians and then
said, ”‘Iheir hearts are Israeli."

M for the Restrites in lahanon, he said that they were "brigade and
frauds." About the role which Libya is playing in connection with the

supporting of group after another, he admitted the error of this policy.
however, he reflected philosophically on the nilitary support which Libya

had given in the pest, saying that it was to create "a balance of terror"
so that one group would not' be victorious over the other.

During the dialogue, nl-Qadhdhafi directed sharp criticisn at 'Ahd-al-llasir
and the Nasirite experinent. lie said, ”the leairite erperinent wee very
unsuccessful, just as the [Arab] Socialist Union as a formula for the

alliance of the working people was unsuccessful."
COPYRIQT: 1982 AL "AM AL .‘JABI

CSO: 6506/282

mummies“
mmmomx

LIBYA

BRIEFS

ma WON NR FORBIGUBRS—Ic Inc M learned that the Libyan lender-
chip, undo!- the pretext of "belt “dinning," bu docidod. boom. of the
financinl crisis from which Libya in uttering, to none: by 25 percent the
wagu of all non-Libyan workers and ”10”... Th. ujortty of these are
Arab citizen. who work. in vnrtom educationnl, adieu, agricultural. and
industrial fields and who nuﬁor mu than 1 mun. [Text] [Paris AL-HAIAN

Alr'ARABI in Arabic No 270, 16-22 ‘9: 82 p 19] (canton: 1982 AL UAW
Al. MI]

080: lam/282

16
MWWMY
unvari- noncrs trauma nsscmm
Paris mucus narrow: s'r mummms in French No 1899. 2 Apr 82 p 905

[Text] The Sudanese Departnant of Civil Aviation plsna' to extend the runway
at the existing Khartou- airport by .450 neteraL‘ An offer aubuitted by the.
Yugoslav company Partiaanaki, which has just coapleted reinfoth of the
runway, should be accepted very soon when financing (2 to 3 eillion Sudanese
pounds) is assured, probably fra' local sources. In addition. an entry hall
is now being constructed with local financing. The existing building will
then be reserved for departures.

with respect to the new Khartoum airport project, the final report and the
drafting of the call for. bids will be finished in April. It will be recalled
that the average total coat of phase 1 is $250 Iillion, $50 nillion fro. local
sources. with respect to the rest, $100 million have been allocated by Abu
Dhabi. but the remaining $100 nillion hava not been found. Despite certain
rumors circulating in Khartoun, it would be'unlikely‘ that with the funds now
available, the Civil Aviation Depart-nut would decide to‘ build the nain.rumwey
(3.700 eeters long); the taxiweys and parking areas soon. actually. the air-
port will be nonoperational (lack of services) and the obtention of the addi-
tional financing renains. rather hypothetical at present. The airport will be
located in North Khartoum 20 hilaaters from the downtown area, and will
probably require construction of a new road and perhaps. if the alternative
is accepted, of a bridge over the Blue Nile.

Regarding the new Port Sudan airport. the contract has ‘not yet been awarded.
The two conpanies that still have a chance of obtaining the contract are Sir
Alfred HcAlpine (Great Britain) or the Contain-Anny Roadstone Construction
Cowpany (Great Britsin)‘. Work is scheduled to begin in July 1982 and will
take 20 nontha. As for the ,financins. $23 nillion have been allocated by the

Saudi Fund and $7 Iillion by the Islaic Developnent bank..
COPYRIGII'I: Rene Horeux at Cie Paris 1982

11 .466
080: 4519/16}.

17
mammomx
8M

BRIEFS

ARAB Lam—the Arab Konetary Pund has just granted a long-tern loan of $18
nillion to Sudan. After neeting with the Sudanese sinister of tinance and
planning, Ibrahin nunin Haunt. who is paying an official visit to the United
Arab hirates, the president of the hind. Jared Hashin, said on 16 Hatch in
Abu mabi that the loan is intended to help the Sudanese Govern-Int carry out
its progran of econoeic and financial refore. mater-ore, 8e‘id omen,
ninister of planning of the United Arab hiratee, exeninsd with unsur the

narketing of livestock (Sudan Livestock Hsrhting Project) is to create, over
a 6-year period, a aarketing distribution chain and an industrial infrastruc-
ture cepshle or providing an adequate supply of neat for the country and of
starting a flow of exports to countries of the Arabian Peninsula. Since noet
of Sudan's livestock is in the vest of the country. the nail! problee lies in
transporting the livestock. A systen of trsneportstion by special trains will
be introduced on the rail line between Byela. Al-Dbayyid, and Kbartoue. The
project has a total cost of $53 nillion; the foreign currency portion vill be
financed by the World Bank to the tune of $25 Iillion and by the British Over-
Seas Develop-ant Adainietration to the tune of $3.1 million. me Livestock
and nest harketing corporation is the recipient of these funds. be project
includes purchasing loco-nines and cattle care. building cattle pens. creat-
ing a telecommications network and a chain of major and secondary narkets,
and acquiring vehicles for transportation by road. An additional project
(Stockroute Project) envisages the establishunt of 70 watering points (aid:-
ing wells, and imtalling pulpe and water tanks), service facilities. vets:b
inary control posts, and fodder depots slow the railroad line between lyala,
M.Ubayyid, and martoun. the seas agency vill be in charge of this project.
which has an estinted cost of $17.5 Iillion, with the World bank financing
the foreign portion of it. [Text] [Paris means mrcwx Er RENEW
in French No 1897, 19 Mar 82 p 785] [COPYRIG'h Rene Morena st Cie Paris
1982.] 8796

m W‘me national Bank of Sudan in opening its offices in Khartoum. With
an initial capital of $8.5 nillion. due to increase of $20 nillion between now
we.-.

not OFFICIAL USE ONLY

115?.
and June 198252111” bank was founded by the following partners: Petra But of
Jordan. nicro Bank of Lebanon, and a group of Sudanese businesaun. Another
banking establiehunt. the Middle Bast Bank of Dubai, reportedly vents to
um: operating in Sudan. [an] [Paris mm mncm 31' mm

39:897. 19 March 82 p 785] (mar: lane horeux at Cie Paris 1982.]

JAPMIESB Alb—At the beginning of the year. Japan granted the Sudan $12 nil-lion
in nonrepayable aid to be used to finance the following projects: food produc-
tion project, 8‘ million to purchase fertiliser. chenical products for agricul-
ture and machinery; water and electricity improvuent project. $2 nillion to
buy generators: Jebel Aulia Lake fishing project. $2 million to purchase and
supply the necessary products and services for the construction of packing
unite. boats and various types of equipment: social project, 82 million to
purchase powdered milk by the goveruent; and the-Blue Rile health project.

82 million to purchase insecticides. medicines and equipment for the prevention
and control of malaria. [text] [Paris mucus 130le 31‘ HEBREW

in French No 1899, 2 Apr 82 p 905'] [CMRIGR‘N Ilene Horeux et Cie Paris

1982] 11,866 ‘

AIR (>umle “I‘ll! ETHIOPIA—As the rewlt of a cooperation project betveen
Sudan Airways and Ethiopian Airlines. the maintenance of the Boeing 707's and
737's will be done in Bthiopia'and no longer in Great Britain and 'irland.
Ethiopia actually has the largest Boeing maintenance unit in Africa. [Text]_
[Paris means TROPICAUX 31' “NEWS in Franc}! no 1899. 2 Apr 82 p 905]
[COPYRIGR‘rz Rene Morena et Cie Paris 1982] 11,666

PORT PROJECT-Abe port that is to be built for the Sudan on the Mediterranean
at a site given to the Sudan by President Sadat (see ms 130le of

31 July 1981, p 1989, and of 1 January 1982. p 20) will be called lav Sudan.
The South Korean co-pany Daeuoo hasbeen given responsibility for studies.
which have already begun. 'The cost of these studies is an estimated $1 sillion.
However, Khartoum adnits that the project, which results free a decision that
is more political than econonic, will ,not fail to encounter financing diffi-
culties, especially since three other major port projects are planned on the
Red Sea. Fears of an overcapacity have already brought into question the
rehabilitation of Old Suakin. financed by the 33¢. and the second phase of
work to expand Port Sudan, financed by the IDA [International Development -
Association]. [Text] [Paris HARCHES TROPICAUX ET MEDITERRARBENS in French
No 1899. 2 Apr 82 p 9051 (COPYRIGHT: Rene Moreux et Cie Paris 1982] 11,666

C80: (0519/ 161

19
mmmouu
orncm. mmsts momma ma must m2
M21519 London m was in mum 22 1e: 82 p 1
[Report by Edward Norther: "Syria Dennds 'llot To Be Ignored”)

[Text] Syria cannot be ignored in the search for a peaceful settlement of
the Riddle Bast conflict. Mr Ahmd Islander, Syrian information ninistet,
told 11!! TIMES this weekend. It genuinely wants peace with Israel but sees
little or no chance of achievim it in the light of present Israeli and
Anerican policies.

his is the gist of what Lord Carriagton will hear when he visits Daeascus
next aonth having previously been to Israel, said hr Islander, who was
visiting London for a nedical check-up. He had a brain operation here
last year.

In: Iskander criticized Lord Carrington for "ignoring" Syria during the second
half of last year when he was chair-n of the European Council of ainisters.
In that capacity Lord Carrington visited the Saudi capital in October and
expressed strong interest in the Saudi sight-point peace plan. Subsequently
this was not adopted at the Fe: Arab suit, due partly to Syrian opposition.

Since then, however, Hr Iskander has restated Syria's own views on the eleaents
of a just peace which, in substance, are not very different from the Saudi
plan. In one respect they are note enlicit, since they refer to "ending the
state of war between the Arabs and Israel." where the Saudis speak only of
"the right of all states in the arse to live in peace."

11.. Syrian proposals contain only three points. These. according to Mr Iskander
are: first. unconditional and coqlete Israeli withdrawal fro- sll Arab
territories occupied during the June 1967 war. including East Jerusalem

Second, assurance of the legitiaste and inalienable national rights of the
Palestinian people. This includes the right of the Palestinians to return

to their hoses in accordance with United Nations regulations. the right of self-
deternination, and the right to build an independent state on Palestinian soil
under the lssderilip of the PLO.

”MUSIMLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Third, as a result of the first two points. "the ending of the state of war
between the Arabs and Israel."

But he said, since Israel had declared Jerusalea its indivisible capital and
had also declared the Golan Heights part of Israel, he did not see what Israel
expected the Arabs to negotiate about.

The road to a comprehensive, just peace in the Middle East was blocked by
herican support for Israel and by the silitary iﬂaalance between Israel and
the Arabs "which enables Israel 's leaders to behave with the arrogance of
power," he said. -

mPYRIG‘l‘: Times Newspapers Limited, 1982

cs0: «400/254

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
1mm ALLIAKB FOR mum 0? sun mm
Paris AL-ﬂA'rAll AL-‘ARABI in Arabic No 267. 26 liar-l Apr 82 pp 32-36

[Articles "nanscus: The Charter of the New Republic-u-A Historic Kati-anal
Alliance to Bring Down the Regina”]

[Tait] A Parliamentary Constitutional Systen Will Give Back
to Syria Its Rational. Pan-Arab. lslenic and International
Role.

Taking Up Arne Is a Natural Reaction to Political and
Sectarian Discrimination. Subjugation. and Dictatoriel

Repression.

Isles will Be the Official State Religion. [lslee Will
Provide] Strategic Depth for the Arab World. and the
[Non-Arab] mslins Hill Back the Arabs. Deep Comment.
to Total Liberation and lon-Aligneent in foreign Policy.

The creation of the Charter of the National Alliance for the Liberation of

Syria was a decision which puts a historic responsibility on the shoulders of
those who signed it. The responsibility is that of saving Syria and restoring
Syria its national. pan-Arab. Islamic. and international role. For the first

ties the real representatives of the Syrian people are getting together in a
front which is fighting to bring don the current regins end establish a

parlianentary constitutional resins on the basis of separation of powers.
granting of freedons, and respect for humn dignity.

For the first tine we find the heli- Brotherhood. Arab Socialist Sa'th
Party. Isleeic l'ront. Arab Socialists. Nasserites. and Independents alongside
each other in the seas trmch. In doing so. their purpose is to proclain
that the Arab world has rude peace with Islen. to declare their deter-ination
to rebuild the Syrian any and scone-y. and to reaffira their absolute belief
in the liberation of Palestine and theirbattle solidarity with the Palestin-
ian revolution and the struggle to achieve Arab unity and to take practical
steps of unification in this direction.

his is a pan-Arab national avakning which sins at ”saving” Syria fru rule .
by a single faeily and ﬁich also aim to establish close fraternal ties

MOMCIALIJSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

between Syria and the Muslin world. to liberate it froe the policy of
polarization. and to have it follow an independent foreioz policy which is
cor-itted to the principles of the non-aligned newnent.

It is a plan to have a new republic of Syria. and there are great hopes for
the success of this plan both in the Arab world and throughout the Muslin

world .

The charter was signed 11 March 1982. and its text was broadcast in Paris.
It had the force of an aplosion anong Arab and Muslin circles. and it also
attracted the interest of the Eastern nedia. The reason for this was that
the announcement of this charter occurred after a series of international
reports which condemed the excesses emitted by the Syrian regime and the
bloody suppression by this regine of the rights of the Syrian people as well
as the rights of the Lebanese and Palestinians. The ﬂash massacre was the
evil culmination of these excesses.

The charter also has arisen at a tine when we are witnessing a collapse of
all of the human and moral values and principles which have justified the
establishment and continuation of any gmrnnent authority in Syria. The
Syrian regime has been diverted fron its crucial national concerns by the
process of internal repression and mssacre during the [current] state of
mergency. During the last few years there has been an intensification of
the tyranny which it has been practicing. Further-ore, Syria has been
afflicted with the sickness of political sectarianise which it had never
known during its long history.

By means of this charter, Syria. which is [now] a weak country. will regain
its belief in itself and its capability to achieve advancsnent. This will

be true even though the road toward achieving this is still difficult and will
involve new sacrifices through arned popular resistance. The couplets text of
the charter is as follows:

The nore severe hardships are, the greater people's deternination becones and
the more their collective will nerges. and the more sincere they are. the
fewer differences they will have and the more their resources and potential
will cone together. Is there any cause greater than the cause of Syria-in
terns of ideology. nation. and territory-which can gather people together
and unite then?!

The glorious and independent nation of Syria has asked its loyal sons to
render their duty as sons. to preserve what is sacred. and to shoulder their
noble nission. All of the representatives of Syria's people net, held a
serious dialogue, and are impelled by great hopes and by a feeling of
responsibility for the future. They have created a charter which they have
called the National Alliance for the Liberation of Syria. Those participating

in the shaping and fornulstion of the charter were the leaders of the popular
political orientations and organizations in Syria, especially the Muslim
Brotherhood. Arab Socialist Ba'th Party, Islaeic Front. Arab Socialists.
Nasserites. and independent political personalities who represent all of the
various national orientations in the Syrian arena. The charter will throw

me omcizl. use only
4

light on and ﬂuids this alliance which has been sought both for the presut
and for the future.

The great tragedy which the people in Syria are experiencing under the heel
of the Hafiz al-Asad regime is something which is unparalleled in history.
This regime has imposed upon its people forms of bloody domination and terror
which have made this regime cease to be nationalist in nature and have made
it a real enemy of our Syrian people and all of the Syrian people's values
and aspirations.

This criminal regime has resorted to suppressing both public and private
freedoms. filling Syria's jails with arrested people. practicing the worst
forms of torture on them. and killing hundreds without either investigating

them or giving them a trial. This is what happened in the Rastan prison when
120 women were killed. and this is what happened in the horrible Palmyra
prison massacre when--by direct order of Rif'at al-Asad—‘loo detainees were
killed there. This regime has unleashed gangs of murderers and criminals,
and they have come to constitute the regime's basic support for ruling the
country. The regime has given them a free hand in Syria's cities and they
have been allowed to emit all manner of savage and barbarous acts. to rob
and plunder. to violate people's honor and dignity. to step on and tear apart
the pages of the Koran. to destroy mosques and churches. to slaughter and
mutilate Syria's citizens. to tear of women's garments of modesty. and to kill
anyone who stands in their way.

During the last 2 years this tyranny and oppression has intensified. Hhole

cities and areas of cities have been subjected to search and destroy opera-

tions. These search and destroy operations have included Damascus. Aleppo.

Home. liamsh. Dayr al-Zawr. Idlib. Jisr al-Shughur. Sermade. and Latakia, and
they have involved robbing. plundering. killing and assault.

We have clearly seen the regime's purpose in humiliating the Syrian people.
ignoring their dignity. and challenging their religious beliefs and national
feelings. The regime even went so far as to issue Law Number 69 of 1980
which stipulates the execution of anyone who is proven to be a matter of the

menu Brotherhood. and tempting rewards were offered to anyone who kills any
of the Brotherhood's members. This law was used as a pretext to kill anyone
who raises his voice or opposes the regime's crimes. The purpose of this was
to induce the largest possible nutter of the regime's henchmen and cutthroats
to participate along with the regime in these crimes.

The tyranny and crimes of the head of this regime reached the stage where they
made him unfit for any responsibility and rule when he proclaimed. numerous
times. that he would physically eliminate his opponents and those in opposi-
tion to his and pursue them both inside Syria and abroad. An abominable
statement of this sort was also made by his brother Rif'at. and the two

murderers together undertook numerous assassination operations both inside
Syria and abroad.

FOR OFFICIA USE ONLY
FOR OFFIOAI. USE ONLY

The ﬂaeah Cries

The regiee's destruction of the city of lamb was a crine which surpassed all
tyranny ever recorded by history. This city. fighting for its freedon. was
surrouneded. water and food were cut off free it. end then its buildings.
houses. leagues. and places of worship were shelled and hated by all sorts
of weaponry. including artillery. rockets. airplanes. and tanks. Whole
areas of the city were destroyed. the people in those areas were killed, end
the region's henchnen were allowed to co-ir. unprecedented acts of robbery.
plunder, and rape there. Then Hafiz el-Ased prohibited those who had managed
to leave the burning city froe returning to it. just as the Zionists had done
in Palestine.

The objective of this bloody policy of repression on the part of the Hafiz
al-Asad regine is to change Syria's historic end duogrephic character. The
regine wants to do this by asses of codetting Arabian and Islen. inposing an
alien and artificial status quo upon the country. eliainating the Arab
nationalist of the country, cutting its profound ties with Islam. and threat-
ening to diseenber it into sectarian petty states.

This regiee has afflicted Syria with the disease of political sectarianisa
which it has never known throughout its long history. In Syria relations
between the peoples of the vario.s religions and doctrines have served as the
nodal of a country where relations between the country’s citizens have risen
to the level of brotherhood and frindship.

when we say "political sectarianisn." we do not seen plurality of religions
and doctrines. That is a problee which has its roots in history and which
finds its solution in people working together and coexisting. Re are speaking
of a political sectarianise which is the fanaticise of e faction constituting
a regine which is isolated free the people and which has been utilised by the
regiee in order for it to survive. rule. and tyrannise the people. Such
political sectarianise is one of the inventions of this regineo-a seall group
of people who deal in sectarianisn and sow dimity. It is a regiea of a
ruling tribal sectarian einority which spreads terror aeong sons of the sects
and given then the inpression that they are threatened with danger iron the
other sects if they do not support the regine and rally around it. It is e
regine of opportunistic sectarianists who have occupied basic and sensitive
positions in the government. any, and security apparatuses as well as
positions of power where decisions are trade and the inlenentstion [of such
decisions] is overseen. It is a regins which has practice a policy of
sectarian discrinination which has harmed all of the citizens of our nation.
This even includes those belonging to the sect of the ruling regiee which the
regina has attenpted to uploit end has consequently put in the category of
being hostile to the Syrian people and nation.

The Disastrous Regine
The regine of Hafiz al-Asad is a real disaster which has betellen our people

and nation. It is a disaster because it has resulted in Syria losing its
pioneering role in the Arab world. bloody eilitary doninetion of Lebanon after

momcnﬁmmv
' ‘_ FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the destructibmsnd diuedernsnt of the Lebanese people. destruction of the
National Hove-ant in Lebanon. the assassination of a number of this movement's
leaders. and the slaughter of thousands of Palestinians in 'l'all al-Za'tar.
al-Karntina. the Nahr al-Barid [River]. and other places. It has also been

a disaster because it resulted in the bloody confrontation with the Palestin-
ian Resistance novenent in Lebanon after Syria closed. in the face of the
Palestinian Resistance nowenenc. its border with the occupied territories.

The purpose of this action was to curtail the Palestinian Resistance novensnt
and transfors it into being sorely a pliable tool in the aarketplace of
international bargaining which seeks to i-pose upon the Arabs {solution which
involves their capitulation and seeks to insure the existence of the Zionist
mtity.

The regine in which Hafiz al-Asad was ninister of defense. co-snder of the
any. co-ander of the. air force. and s nesber of its higher political
leadership. bears responsibility for the Arabs' defeat of 1967. Rafi: al-Asad

also bears the greatest responsibility for the disaster which occurred when
he did not per-it the Syrian Arab any the honor of doing battle with the
messy and handed over territory to the Zionists without a fight. This is what
happened when he arbitrarily ordered the array to withdraw and annmnnced the
fall of al-Qunaytirah before the ens-y had even reached it.

The responsibility which he hears concerning the 1973 Var was even greater
and sore significant. When the officers and soldiers of the any believed
that the opportunity had cone for the aruy to regain its honor. liberate all
of Syria’s territory. and contribute to the liberation of Palestine, Hafiz
al-Asad acted in a way which was against the wishes of the any and the
aspirations of the people. Hhen the courageous Iraqi army reached the battle
front and helped to repulse the Zionist advance toward Dasescus. and when the
two arniea began to prepare to undertake their counteroffensive. he gave
orders to cease fire. The practical results of this war were that the
Zionists occupied nore territory belonging to our country. is continued his
conspiratorial policy and concluded the disengage-ant agreenent with the

Zionist may. and then “observer forces were stationed inside our territory.
Hafiz sl-Asad officially accepted UN Security Council Resolution 338 which

recognised the Zionist mtity and dennded that the Arabs capitulate to it
be neans of negotiations.

The Conspiracy Against Iraq

His actions in the Arab or international arena were no different froa his
disgraceful actions against our people in Syria. Rafi: sl-Assd attached no
importance to Syria's national interest nor to Syria's Arab and haslin aspir-
ations. lie node Arab unity a gene to be fooled around with. sonething to be
indulged in and then abandoned. and soeething to be plotted against-without
any feeling of responsibility toward it. lle regarded it as soasthing to

be entered into together with this or that Arab country only to be later
abandoned and forgotten. The sin in all of this was to dilute the feeling
of Arab unity and sow the seeds of doubt concerning the possibility of
achieving it. Eva: when the higher Arab interest required Arab solidarity
which would achieve a nini-un of coherence and steadfastness on the part of

26
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL [BE ONLY

the Arab nation. Hafiz aI-Asad did not hesitate to sabotage this solidarity
and conspire against it. This is what happened when he nobilised his forces
along the border with his fellow-Arab country of Jordan. when he tore apart
the Arab ranks. when he boycotted the Arab su-it conferences. and when he
endeavored to keep the Arab nations unable to for-date any serious policy for
confronting the Zionist entity.

In view of the center of pater which Iraq represent when any Arab confrontation
is concerned. Isfis al-Assd has nade special efforts to conspire and co-it
treason against this fellow-Arab country. he entered into an alliance with

the shah of Iran. with Zionist. and with inpatialisn in order to disndsr
Iraq and keep it occupied internally. Today he is allied with the Persian
rsgiae. backed by the Zionist entity. in order to exhaust the husnn and
nateriel resources and capacities of Iraq and in order to keep the Arabs unable
to put an end to the deterioration [in their situation] and unable to resist
the challenge of Zionisn and of the snuies of the Arab nation.

The policies of the llafis al-Asad regias sunnt to the following: Its internal
policy is to weaken and exhaust Syria. to spread fighting and destruction
throughout it. to cause forced nigrstion in the country. to threaten to
disaeﬁer the unity of its people and its territory. to cowat its Arab char
acter. to attack Islan within the country. and to ruin its acadenic courses

of study. especially Islanic educational courses of study. Its policy with
regard to the Palestinians and the Arab world is to disnsﬂer Lebanon into
nutually hostile sects. to conclude agreeaents with the Zionist ens-y in order
to partition Lebanon-«s in the fanous Red Line agreenut—to conspire against
Arsb unity and effective Arab solidarity. and to ignore the profound historic
ties which exist between Isla- and the Arabs.

These policies of Hafiz al-Asad. in reality. nerely serve the interests of
Zionist plans in the Riddle Bast. turn bin into an instruaent which erecutes
Zionist policies. and transforn hia into a poisonous dagger for the Zionists
to plugs into the body of Syria as well as into the body of the Arabs and
Islan.

When this regiae deprived our people of all rights of citisenship. iaposed
this fearful poisonous ataosphere upon the country. and reads sectarian dis-
criaination its pernanent policy. our nation saw itself forced to fight for
its existence and to defend its rights and freedom-with all possible neans.
especially by neans of an arned struggle.

The fact that our people took up eras-although this is a right \dIich has been
established by all laws. both divine and nan-lads. and although this is a
duty inposed by the denande of religion. patriotism self-respect and honor-
was a natural reaction to the fact that the resins has engaged in suppression.
injustice. political sectarian discrinnatim. ailitary and dictatorial
repression. intellectual terroriu. deception by the international aedia.
confiscation of freedoas. abandoning huaan rights. causing the disappearance
of justice and law. allowing corruption to set it. and allowing the spread of
illicit wealth.

27
MWWONLY
This grave. treacherous. and criminal role which is being played by this
regime and which has inelled our people to reach for their eras. shoulder
the burden of courageous resistance. and offer up the lives of thousands of
righteous aartyrs. requires that all national figures. organizations. and
parties coapletely shoulder their responsibilities in an effort to support
the revolution of our freedoa-fighting nation. to proaote the revolution in
order to cut down on pain and suffering. and in order to enable the wounded
national body of our nation to regain its health and strength.

An Open National Alliance

For this reason. the national figures. organizations. end parties which are
detersined to save Syria—by asses of a serials and responsible dialogue-«re
in agreeaent~dbout bringing about the downfall of the treacherous regine of
mu al-Aaad and establishing a parlianentary constitutional regime. on the
basis of separation of powers. which would guarantee a plurality of parties
and orientations and which would provide equality to all of Syria's citizens
in terns of rights and duties. This regime which is aspired to would be based
on respect for huaan dignity and would guarantee both public and private
freedoes within the limits of the constitution and the law. This region would
reject all discrinination anong Syria's citizens of different religions.
doctrines. and [political] orientations. Only a regine like this would be
able to enable Syria to once again play its national. pan-Arab. Islamic and
international role. This is soeething that Syria can never do as long as it
has an individualistic orientation. tyranny. a return to a regime of one~aan
rule and political sectarianisa. repression. and terror.

Being confronted with this impending danger. which is threatening to tear
apart Syria's national unity. fragnsnt its people. and cause it to be the
target of the Zionist and inperialist onslaught. there was no doubt that all
parties would rise to the level of historic responsibility which they met
assume due to the nature of this stage [of their history]. They are casting
aside their differences. they are overconing the negative phenomena. contra-
dictions. and mirtakes of the past. and they are aeding a joint frsnework
which would include all of the citizens of this nation so that they can work
together. by aeans of com principles. in order to put an end to the
artificial separation between the Arabs and Islam, and in order to create a
national alliance of these forces which would be open to everyone. By the
grace of God. such an alliance will be able to bring about the downfall of the
treacherous Asad regiae and firely anchor the sound bases of an open and
active political life which will enable Syria to become a source of inspira-
tion in all realms- national. pan-Arab. and Islamic.

The 16 Principles ‘

In order to give expression to their lofty national aims and to their
co-itnent to then. the parties in this alliance have cone to agree-ant about
the following principles:

1. Serious and persistent efforts to bring about the downfall of the current
regiae. This is to be done by all leans-political and military asans as well

28
mmmmy
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

as using the media and the masses—in order to achieve this goal. with the
principal means being the armed popular struggle.

2. Bringing to trial the high officials of this regine because of the crimes
which they have omitted against the Syrian people and their nation.

3. Forution of an interim government wish will be established right after
the downfall of the current regime and which will endeavor. as quickly as

possible. to oversee the election of a constituent assuﬂily for the purpose
of formlating a permsnmt constitution for the country.

6. Islam shall be the state religion. and Islamic law shall be the nation's
basic source of legislation and law-siting. This is to be so by virtue of the
fact that Islamic law is the civilisational and theological-legal heritage of
all Arabs and unalims as well as being a legacy to all of mankind. The
application of Islamic law shall not affect the rights of non-laulims as far
as their convictions and religious observances are concerned. and they shall
be permitted to apply their own laws among themselves with total freedom and
security.

5. Guarantee of public freedoms to all of Syria's citizens. This involves.
above all. freedom of belief . freedom of espressicn. freedom to hold meetings.
and freedom to form political parties.

6. Rebuilding of the Syrian Arab army and all of the other institutions of

the state on the basis of loyalty. capability. and the principle of equality
of opportunity. This will restore and preserve national unity in Syria and

will guarantee its pioneering role in the region.

7. Dealing with the deteriorating economic situationand rebuilding the
Syrian economy on firm foundations. This will decisively put an end to the
[current] situation which is characterised by exploitation. robbery. plunder.
and bribery. It will also involve inviting experts and qualified personnel
who are living abroad to participate in the rebuilding of the country.

8. Saving the workers. peasants. and laboring classes fron the abuse which
the regime has co-itted against their gains and achievements. and striving
to consolidate these gains which they have been achieving during the course
of their long struggle since independence.

9. Review of the academic curricula. scientific institutes. and all state

institutions. This will save them fron their currmt situation of deteriora-
tion and enable the country to fully shoulder its responsibilities.

10. Total compmsation paid to the relatives of martyrs and those who have
suffered damage or been injured during the course of the struggle against the
treacherous regime [of llafir al-Asad].

ll. Absolute belief in the liberation of Palestine from Zionist usurpation

and inperialist domination. In order to achieve this liberation. all possible
neans which do not abuse the rights of Arabs and ”saline should be utilized.

FOIOW'ICIﬁUSEONLY
and efforts should be made to nobilise all hm. ailitary. and political
resources and capacities.

12. Solidarity in battle with the Palestinian revolution and with its sole
legitiaste representative. the P10. in order to achieve the goals of the
Palestinian people which are national liberation and the regaining of their

ho-aland .

l3. hgagin .Lin a serious struggle to establish Arab unity and asking all
possible eff to to take practical steps leading toward such unity.

lb. Serious efforts to establish close fraternal Arab ties with Syria's
fellow-Arab -. . one. and to aobilise all capacities and resources to deal
with the danger‘i'which threaten the existence of the Arabs.

15. 2stablishnent of fraternal ties with the peoples. nations. and organiza-
tions of the Islaaic world. this will reinforce the role of the niasion of
Islaa in the whole world since lalaa represents strategic and fundamental
depth for the Arab world and since an Muslin constitute a strong pillar of
support for the Arabs and basic supporting forces for the Arab people.

16. Nm-involveaent in international conflicts, non-alignaent with inter-
national bloce. co-itaent to the principlae of the non-aligned nave-mt. and

adoption of an independent foreign policy.

Syria. which was the first country in the Arab world to achieve total
independence. is a country which deserves to overch the tragedy afflicting
it. The parties participating in this alliance hope that this charter will be
the focus of this current aovenant and will be a franework for the constitu-
tional and practical future of the policies followed by Syria. All of these
parties hope that the future republic will be the cherished hope of all
persons in the Arab and lslsnic world.

a

The parties in this alliance desire. in the course of their covenant. to
pursue a policy of both authenticity and nodern outlook. of both high aoral
standards and progress. and of both justice and the freedon to utilise
capacities and resources. They ask that God grant th- succaas and that lie
grant then victory. They ask the peoples and leaders of the world to support
then in their just struggle to save Syria fro. the tragedy which it is
suffering frost. ”God will bring victory to those who are fiduting because
they are being oppressed."

MICE: 1982 AL—UA‘I‘AR Alr-‘AIABI

9‘68
090: 44061th

30
MMWONLY
FORWUSEONLY

mm mm anon W SYRIA
Patio AL-m AL-‘MI in “elite lo 267'. 26 liar-l Apr 82 p 36
[Article: "Syria As Seen in a Swiss Painting“l

[Text] ”Rights and Preedons in Syria” is the title of a report recently put
out in Geneva by the Swiss Association for the Defense of Preedon and
Political Prisoners in Syria.

The report contains infatuation: furnished by the organization meaty
International concerning the systan of suppression of freedons and tortures
which is being practiced in Syria mder the rule of Hafiz al-Asad.

Anesty International says that its reasons for being concerned about the
internal situation in Syria are due to infatuation which it has received
concerning "the lack of respect for hnnan rights. particularly when this
concerns the exercise of political rights. the long i-prisonnent of a node:
of persons in the opposition without any charges being sade against ch. end
without a trial. the kidnapping. by the syrian authorities. of s nuinr of
Syrian. Palestinian. and Lebanese person's residing in Lebanon. throwing then
into prision. utilizing neene of torture in order to obtain particular
'confessions.‘ and finally the lack of any legal guarantees-which has led to
the passage of my sentences of execution. with the crine being 'politicsl
opposition' ."

The report says that a large under of political prisoners in Syria have not
yet been brought to trial. the pretext being that of the state of enargency
law which has been in effect since 1965. The report does not say how nsny
such people have been involved in these internal developnInts.

There are various groups of prisoners involved. including those accused of
belonging to the malin Brotherhood. nders of the Arab Socialist hs'th
Party. and groups of people fron co-Inist. hasserite. and Kurdish perties.
in addition to s nusber of Palestinians and Lebanese who oppose Syria's role
as guardian of the Palestinian Resistance novaent and the Syrian role in
Lebanon.

These people have also been put in a nude: of civilian and military jails.
including the lalbuni. stun. Sheykh Essen. 8he'e‘.. Qiss'. laudeh. leash.

31
momaatussomx
end Palayre prisons. These prisons ere chemterized by s lack of sanitary
conditions and hygiene. and they leek even the aoet basic necessities.
neatly they are places for various types of brutal torture to be conducted.
The torture involved includes beeting. "cracking" (where the prisoner is
put into s rubber inner tube end is than beaten with rubber tnncheons).
electrical torture. pulling out their nails. end burning by aeens of fire
and ciaarettebutts.

The report nations the nanes of nine prisoners who has been subjected to
torture. We're 'Abd el-Hekid [as published]. Isn'il lhelif. lubery
Shnkir. szi lIuberek, Subhi Selih. Tariq lleyderi. 'Adil al-layali. 'Abd
sl'Hahid Teyib. lube-ed Asheb. and 'Abd el-Ghani 'Attar.

Further-arm?!» Syrian euthorities passed sentences of execution egsinst 17
persons between 1975 end 1978. Ten of these executions were carried out in
public squares. Also. 15 persons accused of being were of the liuelin
Brotherhood were executed in June of_1979.

The report refers to the Syrian lewyers' strike which took place in January
of 1980 so 1: protest against the regin's illegal prectices. It slso refers
to the Pal-yrs prison nessacre which clained the lives of sore then 600
prisoners.

Naturally. the report does not refer to the recent Beulah leseecre because this
occurred efter the report csne out. The horror of this ussecre wes greater
than that which is taking place inside Syria's prisons. and it cleined the
lives of nore than 10.000 Syrians!

WMIGHT: 1982 MAT“ AL-‘MI

9468
080: “04 I610 m

32
memosrouu