FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10389

16 March 1982

Near East/North Africa Report

(FOUO 10/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OML USE ONLY
m

ms publications contain infatuation primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original inforntion was
processed. were no processing indicator is given, the infor-
nation was sunaarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or nades preceded by a ques-
tion nark and enclosed in parentheses vare not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes vithin the body of an
item originate vith the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.8. Gavermnent.

COPYRIGIT LAHS AND REGULATIONS GWERNING WHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED BEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BB RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
NEAR EAST/NORTH AFRICA REPORT
' (rooo 10/32)

Coursurs
INTER-ARAB AFFAIRS:

Joint Arab Military Command, Arab Arms Industry
(”“11” AIO'JMI, 27 NOV-3 M 81) eeooeeeoeeeeeeeeeeeee

Arab Authorities Still Waging War Against Freedom of the Press
(”“11“ W'MI, '1’} Jan 82) eeeeoeoeeeeeoeoeeeeeeeeeo

Briefs ‘
Plastics Industry Developing Rapidly

OPEC AFFAIRS

Oil Exporting Countries Sell Gold in Nope
(mud Harsh; mmcln m, 26 Feb 82) OOOOOOIOOOOOO‘OO.

AFGHANISTAN

Soviets Seen Using Carrot-Stick Method on Afghan:
(N am”, 27 Feb 82) eeeeeeeeeeeeoeoeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeee

AMELIA

Agricultural Policies Examined
(MARCHBS TROPICAUX ET mums, 15 Jan 82) ..........

mm
Writer Expects Ilo Imediate Shift Toward Strong Pan-Arab

Policies .
(Anir Iskandar; AL-HATAR AL-‘ARABI, 13—19 Nov 81) .........
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500040035-4

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MAURITANIA

1982 Budget Approved, Policy Beoomendations Noted
(W335 MPICAUX 31' W3, 25 Dec 81

HOROCGO

Lumber Industry Reviewed
(mom TROPIOAUI 81' mm, 15 Jan 82

SUDAN

Briefe
Agricultural Equipment
Petroleum Products
Railvq Equiment
Transportation Bquiment
Nile Navigation Projects
Textile Study
Gum Arabic Production
Arab Aid

mm: ARABRRPUBLIC

Briefs .
ll. Yemenis Urged To Join Palestinians

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02109: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500040035-4
' FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

INTER-ARAB AFFAIRS

JOINT ARAB HILIlARY CW. ARAB Am INDUSTRY
Paris AL-HATAN AL-‘ARABI in Arabic No 250, 27 Nov-3 Dec 81 pp 28-29

.[Text] Arab relations were naturally the most prominent part of what the preparatory
meeting for the sunit studied. The file on these relations contains a number of
memoranda. most of then "top secret." as follows:

1) Hemorandum from Somalia demanding inclusion of the flood disaster on the
aumit's agenda.

2) Syrian memorandum demanding inclusion of the following four subjects at

the same time:

a) Arab-Israeli struggle and its development and the search for responsi-
ble ways of achieving a strategic balance between Syria ‘and the Israeli enemy.

b) Action to adopt a com-on Arab stand on the participation of some
European and other powers in the multinational force to be stationed in Sinai.

c) American-Israeli strategic cooperation.

d) Arab-American relations.

Within the same framework. sudan submitted a memorandum about the Syrian regime's
striking a blow at Arab solidarity and it called for the council of the League to

take whatever action it deems appropriate in this connection.

The council of the League presented an independent study on the building of the
League's new headquarters.

Libya submitted a memorandum expressing its view on "the Sudanese regime's violation
of the charter of the Arab League. joint Arab defense treaty. and decisions of the
Arab sun-sit conferences by sllying itself with the Egyptian regime and strengthening
relations with it at a time when this regime is suffering from isolation within

Egypt and abroad." Libya urged the Arab governments to recall their ambassadors and
break relations with Khartoum.

In the same spirit, Damascus submitted a nemorandum condeming President al-Numayri
for disrupting the Arab consensus.

Sudan prepared a memorandum on the Libyan Jamshiriya's providing military bases for
a foreign power.

From an examination of the Libyan complaint against Sudan as well as the Syrian
complaints. then the Sudanese complatins against boy Libya and Syria. one can judge
the extent to which fragmentation and dissension have spread among our brothers.

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ma OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Joint Coaund

Let" us now pause to consider the most significant matter raised in these memoranda
and refrain from pouring oil on the fire of the known Arab disputes. The most
important memorandum deals with the Arab-Israeli struggle and methods of perparing
the people for the fateful confrontation. We read in the recommendations of the
military advisory comittee made up of the chisfhpf staff of the Arab armies. which
met in the League's headquarters in Tunis 20-29 April 1981 to discuss the situation
in which military security finds itself . about the formation of a joint Arab
conand. The recs-aendations are as follows:

1) The joint co-and will assume the leadership of the Arab armed forces
through the command of the fronts and forces placed directly under its conned.

2) The joint command will be headed by a supreme cos-lender.

3) The joint command will prepare military plans to implement the Arab
political decisions.

lo) It will direct strategic operations in accordance with the prepared plans.

5) It will furnish the necessary instructions for operational and administra-
tive coordination between the subordinate fronts and forces.

6) It will submit an annual budget to meet the needs of the cat-hand and the
front coauands.

7) The joint Arab coamand will be directly linked to the joint Arab defense
council.

8) The principal headquarters of the joint co-and will be located near the
region of the main threat to the Arab nation.

9) The troops will be moved from the original places to mobilization areas
through the subordinate army co-ands.

10) The troops will be placed under the direct operational cot-and of the joint
consnd as soon as they reach the places assigned to them and until other orders
are issued by the comand.

The reco-endations also require that the supreme cot-ander be appointed by the
council of kings and presidents after the defense council nominates him. on the

condition that all Arab states share the responsibility with it. The period of
service in the comand is 3 years for all positions, and it can be renewed. Upon

confirmation of the formation of the coal-and. the defense council will allocate a
million dollars for the expenses involved in organizing it. on the condition that

the secretary general work out the financial arrangements.
Military Industrialization

As a step to supplement the creation of the joint comand. the secretariat general
proposes than an Arab organization he created for an arms industry in order to
limit the dependence of the Arab states on the foreign powers that produce arms and
lessen the foreiyx pressure on Arab decisions. It is stated in the plan (and it
is top secret) that this measure is aimed at saving the enormous sums spent by the
Arabs on arms. which amounted to about $20 billion in 1979. and bringing about a
large degree of integration of the Arab industrial establishments. It will also
guarantee the maxim employemant of Arab capabilities that will result in a re-
duction of costs over the long term and in the acquisition of experience...and.
consequently. transformation of the Arab states from importers to exporters of
arms.

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The plan restricts the fields of activity of the new organization to conventional
weapons and equipment, systems of integrated arms, complementary and supplier
engineering industries like specialized electronic and optical industries. and
chemical industry...It adds that the most imortant prerequisite for the continued
functioning of the Arab organization for the arms industry under all kinds of
circumstances is to secure and protect it against the danger of destruction in

case of armed conflict with any foreign enemy. The most effective way to guarantee
its protection is to distribute it geographically over a wide area and avoid concen-
trating it in any one particular region. It is suggested in this connection that
three forms of distribution be studied.

The first is distribution of parts of the single industrial system to a number of
states and setting up of an assedaly line in each one. The second is distribution
of different kinds of systems to the participating states in such a way that each
kind is specifically assigned to a predetermined state. The third involves com-
plete duplication of production lines in more than one place...1n the event that at
least lo states agree, the organisation shall be considered to be in emistence and
$14 billion will be earmarked to cover the expenses of studies and the necessary
administrative outlays to create the organization.

As for military cooperation between the Arab armies in the field of training and
exchange of information, the study suggests that the task of standardizing combat
and training methods be entrusted to the joint cot-and. which is to carry it out
provided that the technical military terms and military documents are standardized.
The military secretariat will furnish the joint comsnd with ample general informa-
tion about the Israeli enemy and other foreign armies in order to organize a
complete archive on Israel for its incorporation into the mechanical information

system now being used in the secretariat general of the League. It relies on a
cowuter to store the information.

As for the building and equipping of headquarters for the secretariat general of

the League. we read in a special memorandum that the total amount required for the
structure has been estimated to be $30 million. The secretariat approached the

Arab Economic and Social Development Fund. the Saudi Development Fund. the Kuwaiti
Development Fund, the Iraqi Fund, and the Abu Dhabi Fund to cover the financing.

The Tunisian-Saudi Corporation for the Promotion of Investment and the Iraqi Fund
agreed in principle to share in the financing.

COPYRIGHT: AL-UATAN AL 'ARABI 1981

5216
080: 4604/ 207

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0510“. USE ONLY

INTER-ARAB

ARAB AUTHORITIES STILL “AGING UAR AGAINST nmou 0? m PRESS
Paris Ala-HAW AL-‘ARABI in Arabic no 256, 8-1‘ Jan 82 p 72
[Article: "An Arab Journalist Disappears Bvery 2 Months"]

[Text] There are two new studies by the General l'ederation of Arab Journalists.
the first about "the responsibility of the Arab journalist in the Arab honeland,"
and the second about ”the responsibility of the Arab journalist in bringing about
world peace and solidarity." ﬁle-will cover just the first study in a quick survey
of the relationship of the authorities with the press in the Arab countries.

The study says that the campaign by the authorities against freedos of the press
has been unceasing and attths to replace a dialogue of words with a dialogue of
bullets have been constant. the nudaer of Arab journalists killed during the past
2 years is higher than at any tine in the past or in any place in the world. The
best way to express the present state of our Arab press is the response of one of
our journalist colleagues when he was asked to discuss a report by the cousittee
on freedoa of the press. Our colleague responded: "Hhat will you say? I suggest
that you subsit 10 blank sheets of paper."

Despite all the expressions of amethy with freedom of the press put out by gov-
ernnsnts. the facts show that the war against this freadon has not stopped and
that Arab journalists constitute its primary arena. It should be noted that the
study drew on official intonation made public by the unions of journalists or
news agencies and newspapers and. consequently. is not all the intonation about
incidents involving attacks on freedon of the press. Also. this study did not
cover the situation of Arab journalists inside occupied Palestine.

1. Assassinations: During the past 2 years. nine Arab journalists have been
killed; this figure is higher than the under of journalists killed at any tile in
the past and also is higher than the nunber of journalists killed anywhere else in
the world. A nuﬁer of journalists have been the target of assassination attewts
and sons preferred to cover then up.

2. Kidnappings: Sons have been the target of kidnappings. Sons returned. the
fate of two is still unknon and one case back as a corpse.

So, statistics show that us are losing an Arab journalist every 2 nonths as a
victin to the climate of freedom and denocracy prevailing in the Arab homeland.

1;
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

3. Arrests and erpulsions: Arab prisons have received many journalists. Al-
though the bulk of the arrests take place in secret, dozens of journalists have
asked the federation to intercede to save than free prison.

6. A number of journalists have been subjected to exile from their place of
residence. In some Arab countries, the authorities have barred journalists fron
entering and have refused to grant then visas.

5. Arab "democracy" has not spared press establishments from closure and confisca-
tion. During the past 2 years. the following establish-ants have been shut down:

The luwaiti magazine AL-TALI'AI! has been closed three times.

The Kuwaiti magazine AL-BADAP was shut don. .

The negazine AL—AZHINAB AL-‘ABABIYAE (published in al-Shariqah) was closed.

The offices of the newspaper AL-MDBARRIB in Beirut were blown up.

The pressed of the newspaper Al-SAPIR in Beirut were blown up.

The presses of the newspaper AL-BA'Y AL-‘Alﬁ in Kuwait were blown up.

Three newspapers in Tunisia were closed.

The offices and presses of the ngasine AL-KIPAH AL-‘ARABI in Beirut were the
target of more than one attack.

The union organizations have encountered ferns of pressure and suppression all to
prevent then from exercising their demcratic rights. This year has witnessed the
heroic battle waged by the Egyptian union and also the attack against the journal-
ists union in Sudan.

The report gives enanples of press conditions in certain countries. including:

The Lebanese press: The press of Lebanon used to be given the label "the face of
denocracy in the Arab homeland" because of the climate of freedom that it enjoyed,
in addition to its technical accomplish-ants. The tribulations of this press began
at the Riyadh sum-it conference in 1970 when Egyptian President Anwar al-Sadat
accused it of being responsible for the civil war. Decree No l of 1977 was the
first step in imposing military censorship on Lebanese newspapers and magazines.
The Lebanese journalists and press establish-ants were early victims of the civil
war; during the past 7 years, 80 percent of the press establishments have been the
targets of robbery, looting, bombing. shelling and intinidation. Up to now, the
Lebanese press has given up 60 nartyrs, including its late dean Biyad Tabs, who
fell a few hundred meters from his union headquarters. Edward Sa'ab also fell
victin to a eniper's bullet which ended the work of dozens of years and the photog-
rapher. Blyes al-Jawhari fell on top of the tool of his trade with which he had
been trying to capture this state of decline being experienced by the Lebanese
citizen. Also in Lebanon fell the Bgyptian journalist. Ibrahim 'Amir, throttled
by the bless of ink and paper. The Palestinian journalists. Nayif Shiblaq and
Talal Bahmah. fell victim, as did others, brought together by their one profession
and their one Arab democracy;

The declared war against Lebanese journalism uses various forms of coercion, terror
and enticement and this war has not let up for a monsnt. even with any halt in the
civil war or with any ceasefire in Lebanon. The press in occupied Palestine: The
condition of the Arab press in the shadow of the Zionist occupation can be
sun-arired as follows :

5 _
roe omau. use ONLY
INJR OFFiCIAI.IJSEZ(NVLV

1. Papers published by anti-regiae forces. principally AL-ITTIEAD and ALPGEAD.

2. Papers published by puppet and pro-establishnent forces. principally AL-ANEA'.
3. Daily papers in the Heat bank and the Gaza Strip which have been published in
the shadow of the occupation in Jerusalem. namely ALPSEA'B and AL-EAJR, two
nationalist papers that have constantly been subjected to threats by the Zionist
authorities because of their nationalist stands. Then there is the newspaper,
AL-QUDs, which is doainated by a materialistic, opportunistic and political cliaber
stamp, and the newspaper AL-TILI'AB, which speaks for the Palestinian Com-unist
Party (fornerly the Jordanian).

6. Monthly and serialized magazines specializing in literature, religion, industry,
agriculture and womens' affairs which are aperiodic.

Since 1967, the press throughout the Heat Bank and the Gaza Strip has been sub-
jected to various types of coercion. It is subject to the publications law that
was passed by the British Iandate in 1933 and which imposes censorship on all
articles and advertising naterial.

This press is deprived of facilities enjoyed by other papers in the occupied
territory. taxes. fees and official announcements. and the newspapers, AL-PAJR and
ALPSBA'B are barred iron the Zionist jails. while Hebrew newspapers and AL-QUDS are
allowed in, on the argument that those two newspapers incite against the occupa-
tion and pose a threat to the nation. All these papers are subject to harsh
military censorship.

Palestinian journalists have been the targets of killings. kidnappings and expul-
sions. The latest incident was the imposition of house arrest on the editors of

AL-FAJR, AL-SHA'B and AL-TALI'AH.

The Tunisian press: Last March. three papers were shut down at once for periods
of 6 months to a year.

In addition to consfications and shutdowns, journalists in Tunisia are the targets
of much abuse, such as arrests and prison which have hit nany. Egyptian journal-
ists working abroad. namely:

1. They view their struggle as part of the struggle of their colleagues working
in Egypt on the prsnise that the battlefield for all Arab journalists is a pan-
Arab areas, not a regional one.

2. Their position outside the constraints of the al-Sadat regime per-its then to
speak out nore frankly because they are free of the extraordinary laws under which
the writer inside Egypt suffers.

3. Newspapers of the nationalist Egyptian opposition constantly face forcible
shutdowns as happened to all opposition papers when a decree closing them was
promulagated last September.

4. There are more than 1.5 million Egyptians working in the Arab world outside
the borders of Egypt and they need inforaation media linking them with their
nationalist and pan-Arab cause.

The activity of Egyptian journalists working abroad is an essential activity
coaplenenting the patriotic work inside Egypt.

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The Sudanese press: President Gaafar Nimeiri has taken an array of arbitrary
actions against the journalists' union. After the union sent a note to the
president last August protesting the law imposing press censorship, the author-
ities fired the journalist, 'Umar 'Abd-al-Tam, from his job as a reporter on the
newspaper, AL-AYYAH, and retired three members of the union council.

When the elections of the journslists' unions were held during January of last
year, the elections that resulted in the victory of the members of the opposition
in the old council, the president responded the day after the results appeared by

issuing a decree dissolving the union in his capacity as cheirman of the Socialist
Union and forming a committee to reconsider the press law of 1977 so as to ensure

that the union would adhere to the political line dictated by the government.

The decree to dissolve the union came as a response to its rejection of the
regime's policy and its adoption of a clear stance condemning the Camp David
agreements and denouncing al-Sadat'a actions in normalizing relations with the
Zionist entity. Also. in its note. the union had revealed the regime's responsi-
bility for the deteriorating economic, political and social conditions and had

denounced its information policy which misled the masses and concealed facts from
them.

Hence there have been the attempts to contain the Arab press to justify the
cspitulatory solutions which have been a prime objective the conspiracy has been
working to achieve and hence the suppressive measures in various forms which have
been applied against the journalists who have rejected these capitulatory solutions
and have tried to expose them to Arab public opinion.

COPYRIGHT: 1982 AL-WATAN AL-'ARABI

8389
080: back/269

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
lion orncm. us: on:

331338

PLASTICS INDUSTR! DEVELOPING RAPIDLY—-In 1985. the Areb countriee will be able to
export manufactured plastic goods worth $550 nillion and will export $1.8 billion
worth of theae uteriale in 1990 out of a total production which at that tine is
estimated will exceed $5 billion. The Iaperial British Chenicel Corporation ex-
pecte Arab plaetic products to cowete with European and Alerican production in
Third World nerkete. [Text] [Paria ALPHAIIﬁ ALP'ARABI in Arabic No 256, 8-16 Jan
82 p 56] [COPYRIGlrz 1982 ‘LPWATAN AL-‘ARABII 8389

080: 6406/269

8
1’03 OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

OPEC AFFAIRS

OIL EXPOR'IING WMIBS SELL GOLD IN EUROPE
M61637 London FINANCIAL TIMES in English 26 Feb 82 p 38
[Report by David Harsh: "Gold Sales by Oil Exporters Depress Market")

[Text] Oil exporting countries, headed by Iran have been selling gold in Europe
in the past few weeks to alleviate balance of payments difficulties caused by
the sharp fall in the oil price.

Persistent sales from the Middle East, combined with offloading by the nain
producers. South Africa and the Soviet Union, have been a principal factor
driving the gold price down to a 2 1/2 year law this nonth, according to inter-
national bullion dealers.

Apart from Iran, Iraq is also thought to have been selling gold although details
are unclear. ‘Ihese two comtries led a string of buyers tron the Organisation of
Petroleun Exporting Comtries (OPEC) in 1980, when the gold price was about
double its present level of $360-$370 an ounce.

A Zurich dealer said last night: "They did not asks a very good investment."

Dealers do not rule out the possibility that Libya—which bought a lot in London
at the beginning of last year-nay also have been selling recently.

News of the sales has energed as the OPEC surplus has been rapidly diminishing.
The oil states as a group are now again not borrowers fron the international

banking system.

Apart fron the falling oil price both Tehran and Baghdad have been hard hit
financially by the 18-month war between then.

The change in OPEC's fortunes is having widespread repercussions on financial
markets. Yesterday fears that Kuwait night start selling Japanese stocks because
of its weakening finances were anong the factors behind a sharp fall on the Tokyo

stock market.

According to one dealer the Iranian gold has been duped on the narket by Bank
Harkazi, the country's central bank, in a "rather uneducated" fashion.

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Irm and several other OPEC nations-including Indonesia, which also made big
bullion purchases in l980--have been sounding out Western banks about raising
gold-backed credits.

Bank Markazi would prefer to use its gold as collateral rather than selling it
outright. in order to avoid further downward pressure on the price.

Many European banks approached by Tehran have been reluctant to lend because of
fears about the country's ability to repay. The advantages of gold collateral
are greatly reduced when the bullion price is weak.

A London bullion banker said: "I wouldn't like to be sitting on a pile of gold
' from Iran. They don't know where their next dollar is coming from."

According to one estimate of the 60-90 tonnes of gold Iran previously had stored
in Burcpe-sone of which was held at the Bank of England-35 tonnes nay have

been used in collateral deals. The rest is being sold. and nay be almost
exhausted.

The Tehran government is believed to have at least 200 tonnes nore in Iran. But
the comtry's rulers are not likely to move this "bedrock reserve" to the West
for selling or collateral use unless all other financing channels are blocked.

The large anomt of gold bought by both official and private investors in the
Middle East in 1979/80 was seen as a significant prop for the price at the ties.
But it is now regarded by bullion dealers as a dangerous overhang threatening
the market.

A European dealer said: "As soon as they (OPEC) started to buy, they became
potential sellers."

Another said that the further the gold price went down the more bullion would be
sold by disappointed Middle East holders. "There are certainly investors around
wanting to buy—but they are waiting for the price to becose cheaper."
COPYRIGHT: The Financial Times Ltd, 1982

C50: 4600/1103

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
sun mas o! and an

 

28g§a§§23§§=

Egéisgiésgsggg
: 5. 5' E:-' .i
§§=EE§§‘%§§§§§
ggéfzaggiiézzﬁ
§:§§§§§§§§§%§§
ﬁg}? gal-5.5.5
iéa“3i§ ggzsa;
$3§§2§§§§§§§§5
lea’e‘d. Other: want more raids on gov-
ernment installationa and attacks on con-
voys. But the Russians are improving
their delences: theee days convoys are
usually escorted by helicopter wnahlpe.

The resistance is split hetween moder-
ates and fundamentalist. who are then-
aelvea divided. Throughout the winter
high-level meeting have been hela in
Peshawar to tone cone kind ol unity.
vetticularly within the lundamcntnlisls'
ranlu. They now have one ﬂag and one
than. and soon they will have one
headed notepaper.

The tear in Peshawar is that guerrillas
in the field will so their own way. Alli-
ances have been created among ﬁghting
men which bear little relation to the
lactiona in Peshawar. which many con»
manders regard as simply a source oi
arms.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

AGRICULTURAL POLICIES mm

Paris HARCEBS TROPICAU! 31' mxrmms 1n 1’7:th No 1888. 15 Jan 82 p 125

[Text] In early autumn, the National Agrarian Revolution Omission (an) node a
practical evaluation of the agricultural sector. This evaluation showed both
significant results and serious deficiencies.

Slightly more than 1.5 million hectares were recovered in the first 2 stages of
the agrarian revolution; 93 percent of this area was redistributed to nearly 100,000
recipients; 132 tern villages were built and 224 are under construction. Nine-tenths

However. any deficiencies still exist: Except in the governorate of Algiers. where
first- and second-stage operations were cmleted as planned. survey and dean-cation

stepping up inspections. he has given apecial attention to the problem of supervi-
sion in particular: Engineers and technicians are apparently not always welcone

achieved for the sake of the public interest. Modern production will require not

only specialists in agronony and hydrology. but also nechanics; as a result, tern

equipment will no longer be unavailable and each reorganized fern will be required
to outfit its own repair shop. .

exasple, truck terns of spproxiastely 100 hectares and grain ferns of about
1,000 hectares.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the agricultural infrastructure must be restored. self-construction nust be launched.
and workers lust be provided with parcels of land to nobilire the f-ily's work
potential. All of this is intended to inprova living and working conditions and

to achieve production that is better planned. Ialting it possible to reach the targets
established by the plan.

Presidential Support

One result, anong others, of President Chadli Bendjedid's inspections inthe
governorates of Annaba and Guelna in early autusn was to stress the necessitv of
giving priority in development to agriculture. the “priority of priorities the
true wealth of future generations." A native of the Annaba area. having grown up

in the agricultural eta-unity, the president is actually particularly well qualified
to point out the agricultural orientation of the region and to stress. more generally,
the najor role which agriculture nust reams in the Algerian econony.

Thus it has been found that despite the wealth of land, in the governorate of Annaba
agriculture has been sacrificed to particularly intense industrialization. The
capital of the governorate. which has become overpopulated and surrounded by shanty-
towns. has drained the rural population. who have been attracted by the prospect

of steady. and hopefully well-paying, jobs; the countryside has been deserted, sous
villages are almost empty and there is no fern labor available.

The ninister of agriculture and agrarian revolution emphasized the constant reduction
of land under cultivation to the Council of Ministers. which net to evaluate the
results of the president's inspection. In 3 years, from 1974 to 1977. agriculture
lost 21,000 hectares of irrigated land. Fern area per inhabitant dropped from 0.75
hectare in 1963 to 0.40 hectare in 1979 and if this situation is not rectified,

this figure will be only 0.14 hectare by the year 2000. The Council of Ministers
has therefore decided to strictly apply legal neasurea for conserving farmlands.

to eliminate encroaclnents on the agricultural sector. to provide for the resettle-
nent of people in rural areas, in particular through the allocation of land for
building, dwellings and self-construction facilities.

In sole ways. the struggle of farnworkers to prevent their lands from being used
for construction has already begun; such is the case of a fern in the comune of
Change, a portion of which was allocated to a building cooperative. There is
actually talk in Algiers that the entire Hitidja may well be buried under a slab
of concrete in 20 years; it currently provides one-third of Algerian production
of vegetables and citrus fruits.

All leaders are now contributing to the agricultural campaign. Opening the Seventh
Congress of the National Union of Algerian Farners. Hr Mohamed Cherif Hessadia.
the regular secretary of the m Central Comittea. stressed the need for cultural.
political and ideological training of farmers: "The agricultural comunity must
be turned into a real revolutionary force." Recalling that the agrarian revolution
was aimed particularly at abolishing nan's exploitation of man, he concluded: "One
year we will unite a profit, whereas another year we will have a loss, but that is
not the nest important thing; it is human development which nuat be considered."

11;
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Hr Selim Saadi stated that in the future. each far-vorker will have a parcel of
land to cover his family needs: "This sight must be eliminated in the future:

A farmer returning through the fields to his home. carrying a carton of eggs pur-
chased in the capital of the governorate."

Farmers "ill Retain Tax Exeaptiona

In his "Speech to the Nation" of 20 December 1981. President chadli Bendjedid stated
that "Algeria's future basically lies in the dynamiration and development of agri-
culture" by youth. who will be trained to work the land. In this regard. the presi-
dent's tone was optimistic. lie said that he believed that the agricultural sector

is undergoing "a considerable improvement" as a result of recent neasures: reorgani-
zation of the socialist sector, allocation of material and ht-an resources. particu-
larly technicians and professionals. etc. The growth rate of agricultural production
is new higher than the rate of population awth.

The president expressly confined that "the farmer will continue to receive tax
exceptions and material and financial services"; theearnings of farmers will not
be affected at all,'regardless of the profit they make as a result of honest work
devoid of all exploitation, increased production and ilproved productivity and the
search for new resources in the context of direct or indirect agricultural work
or traditional crafts."

These remarks give the impression of encouragement for the agricultural sector.
but it is not the only ore being considered: "These are," the president concluded.
"the ultimate goals of the Agrarian Revolution," in support of which new efforts
must be made.

COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux et Cie Paris 1982

11915
C50: 4519/103

15
ms omcw. use on“
FOR OFFIGAL USE ONLY

HRITBR mac'rs no IMMEDIATE SHIFT MARI) STRONG PAN-Am POLICIES
Paris AL-HATAN AL-‘ABAJI in Arabic No 268. 13-19 Nov 81 pp 78-79

[Article by Anir Iskandar: "Future of Intellectual Currents in Egypt"]

[Text] Perhaps talking about the future of the pan-Arab current in Egypt entails
considerable risk because any words not carrying the emotional enthusiasa dis-
played by most of the Arab infornetion nedia in the wake of al-Sadet's assassina-
tion or any words that do not follow the oratory processions urging the need of
Egypt's return to the ”Arab ranks" and that at tines even hail "ngpt's actual
return" on the basis of some public press atatansnts. sole tumors or sons facts
concerning secret contacts and visits-any such words any shock the reader who
dreams of Egypt's resumption of its vanguard role in the Arab procession and who

hopes that the Arab conflicts say have ended with an opportune strike of fate or
luck.

I want to reassure the reader that this issue is not exactly what these lines
seek to tackle. The series of events that have taken place and that are still
taking place in Egypt haven't ended yet. The "scenario" whose iaplenentstion
started on last 6 October-regardless of its author or authors-«till has chap-
ters that have not been comleted yet. leeting these chapters nay take acne
weeks or sons months, regardless of the return of Egypt or of the return of the
Arabs to Egypt in the coeing days under the canopy of the existing political and
social given facts. This helps to confirn or to doubt sone analyses which assuss
that the events in Egypt will follow specific scenarios with the elimination of
sl-Ssdat. The sore important question pertains to Bgypt's sresuwtion of its w'an-
guard pan-Arab role in the future that is sore distant than the next few weeks

or maths. What are the possibilities of such resmtion, what are its internal
and external requirements and what spheres are open to it?

In fact, this question raises the issue. or dile-a. of the future of the pen-
Arab current in Egypt because this current is the one that was linked. at least
in the past, to the central role which Egypt played insofar as the Arab honeland
as a whole is concerned. The defeat of this current has been accowaniad by
Bgypt' a retreat to within its shell. to its dessrtion of this role, or to with-
drawing this role from it, and to the subsequent multiplicity of the centers of
polarization in the Arab arena.

From the aid-1950's and until nearly the and of the 1960's. this current was tied
to Nasiriss. The current found in the personality of Jenal 'Abd el-Naeir the

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

practical political leadership that proved its ability not only to crystallize
this political current in Egypt alone but also to extend it beyond Egypt's borders
and to penetrate with it the Arab homeland from one end to the other. Egypt's
Arabism is definitely not of 'Abd al-Nasir's making. Even the very ideology of
Arab nationalism is not his personal innovation. Moreover. at the outset of dAbd
al-Naair's procession, Arabian was no more than one of three circles through which
'Abd al-Nasir believed Egypt had to move. But when the development of events and
the progression of his own thought motivated 'Abd al-Nasir to consider Arabism
the fundamental circle of Egypt and when he threw all his weight and all of
Egypt's weight behind the center of this circle. the major transformation took
place, not only in Egypt but throughout the entire Arab sphere. Egypt consti-
tutes one-third of all the Arabs in terms of population. In terms of the old and
contemporary cultural criterion, Egypt is the most advanced Arab country. It has
a position and a status that have enabled it to be not just an Arab "country" but
an Arab "role." Jamal 'Abd al-Naair was certainly a great leader. But he would
not have achieved a part of what he did achieve had not Egypt been behind him with
all its historical. geographic, human and cultural weight. The essence of his
greatness lies not only in the fact that he knew how to touch off all the latent
capabilities but also in his enlightened awareness of the given facts of a spe-
cific historical moment at both the Arab and the international levels.

The Arab reality suffered at the time from some sort of ideological vacuum and
lacked the leadership persoaality capable of uniting the Arab voice. The Arab
reality [world] was a vast and tumultuous ocean seeking a "center." Cairo was
able at the time to play the role of the center. It extended its hand wherever
it could to every Arab uprising. movement and spark of struggle. Sparks flew off
everywhere from Algiers to Baghdad. The reactionary forces retreated to their
dark cells and the arena became free for the Arab liberation forces to wage their
triumphant battle against imperialism and colonialism. The Egyptian media were
not the only extremely sharp weapon brandished in the face of the nation's ene-
mies. The military ammunition carried by the [Egyptian] military instructors and
advisers [was another such weapon]. 0n the mountains of Yemen and the hills of
Aden fell thousands of the martyrs of freedom and of enlightenment who had come
from Egypt. However. it must be said that the historical monent was totally op-
portune at the international level. not only for the Arab homeland but perhaps
for all the Third world countries. It was the moment of exact and precise inter-
national balance between the two superpowers and the blocs behind them. The
fires of the Korean war had been extinguished in 1953 and the winds of the cold
war began to blOw actively in the international sphere, giving rise to the sharp
rivalry between the two blocs-a rivalry which tickled the feelings of the Third
world and whetted the appetite of its national liberation movements to make na-
tional gains through the cold-faced but raging conflicts between the two super-

powers.

It was thus that the world witnessed at the time the birth of Bandung [conferc
ence], knew the breaking of the arms monopoly for the first time and heard the
phrases of positive neutrality and independence of the national will from voices
coming from the heart of the old continents. It was also thus that the world

cleared a large and lighted part of its theater for personalities with dark,
black and yellow faces to emerge surrounded by the halos of the struggle for
liberation from the oppression of long centuries of colonialism. Perhaps it is

17
roe OFFICIAL use ONLY“
FOR OFI1CLKLIISEINNLY

not incoapatible with the inevitability of that historical noaent to say that the
first modern Arab unity found under the canopy of the restraining international
balance its secure way to realization and acceptance.

80 in one sense, 'Abd al-Nasir, like Lunumba. Sukarno, Nkrcna. Sekou Tours and
even Nehru (nay we add to then even Tit07), was a natural and logical product of
certain international conditions and certain strategic balances. Naturally, all
this doesn't abolish the individual's distinctive historical role and doesn't
dininish the depth and importance of the popular or mass will. But it places the
current in its true course. with the current's movement being governed by the
distance between the two banks.

gle from the phase of peaceful coexistence to the phase of detente. The curtain
began to fall slowly on the successful and exciting acts during which the skil-
ful players reaped the fruits of their dazzling aovenents on the tightrope strung
over two abyssea. The rope was no longer as strong as it had been and those who
tried to continue their gaae, being unaware of or ignoring the changes of the new
historical aoaents, were heard falling hard in Africa and Asia. The dark shadows
of history prevailed over their actual or symbolic ends. '

Janal 'Abd al-Nasir did not fall at the tine but preparations were being nade for

dition that Egypt leadership role in the Arab world be cut down to size and con-
fined to Egypt's geographic borders. Naturally 'Abd al-Nasir refused to bring
about his own and or to commit suicide willingly. Only 2 years later, Israel per-
formed the role and the task for which it had been created and the catastrophe
occurred on 5 June 1967. The painful catastrophe revealed not only the faulty
internal calculations but also the destructive international calculations. In-
stead of continuing to play it coquettishly against the two camps, as he had done
in the past, the lost skilful player who had been weakened by his wounds had to

had suddenly opened their eyes, while still in the trance of their faith in the
historical hero and in the inevitability of the victory, to the debris of the
dream. They also started to exert their pressure to demand their (relatively
significant) and indefinitely suspended role.

The truth is that the historical hero exerted superhuman efforts in the 3 years
following the 5 June defeat to rebuild his armed forces. He did actually realise
an anazing acconplishment whose results emerged 3 years later in October 1973
when along with the Bar-lav line, the myth of the invincible Israeli army was
destroyed. But fate did not wait for the hero to see with his own eyes his forces
move to the usurped bank of the canal. He died at an inopportune assent. That
was not the tine for death but for living. or perhaps for regaining life. But
who knows! Perhaps he preferred to depart. having become aware. through his bit~
ter experience and his penetrating perception, that he could no longer continue
to play the international gene which had brought him at a historical aonent the
wreaths of victory fron the ocean to the Gulf.

18
INDR (MHﬁtJAl.lﬂ§lI(ﬂVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Did Nasirism end with the end of its hero? Throughout the period in which he was
in control of power, al-Sadat sentenced Nesirism to death. He tried to destroy it
completely, holding it responsible for the mistakes of its domestic actions and
for the sins of its era. Al-Sadat then pulled Egypt's reins. taking it out of

the Arab homeland's broad spheres and leading it back to its isolated cocoon. A1-
Sadat thus fulfilled all that Mason had demanded before-and carried out the 0.8.
conditions in full. he even begged and tempted the United States to impose on
Egypt harder conditions than the previous ones. He turned Egypt into an extremely
pale star revolving without any will in the imperialist-Zionist sphere. Al-Sadat
reduced to the point of feebleness Egypt's progressive Arab role. Thus. the
tumultuous ocean lost its noble and influential center and numerous islands re-
volving around conflicting-et times to the point of armed hostility-centers
emerged amidst the waves of this ocean. International polarization then started
to play its ever-present gene for further parasitic fragmentation and division.

But if it is true that talking about the modern pan-Arab current in Egypt means,
in one way or another, talking about the Nasirist current. can it be said then
that this current has reached a deadend? The posing of this question should not
be understood to mean in any way casting doubts on Egypt's Arabian or its pan-
Arab. civilizational or cultural identity. It should not be even understood to
mean casting doubts on Egypt's suspended role in the Arab homeland. The question
does not pertain to the Arabian of the masses or their emotional and intellectual
inclinations. The question pertains to the pan-Arab intellectual current crys-
tallized by Nasirism in a number of ideas, visualizations and concepts and trans-
ferred by Nasirisn from the sphere of thought to the sphere of action, even though
the current, as thought, preceded Nasirism by generations of thinkers and by sev-
eral decades of time.

Al-Sadat is no more. The "family head," as he used to call himself, has died in
the middle of his real family-the representatives of the imperialist and western
interests and of the multi-national companies. But has al-Sadatism ended? Has
Egypt's isolation ended and is the road open to Egypt to regain its pan-Arab role?
The answer to this question is not connected with the hopes and not even with the
reports leaked here and there about secret visits and tacit agreenents. All these
[leaked reports) are the highest phase of al-Sadatism, if we may use the phrase.
What do we see at the domestic level? 'The social structure-in its comprehensive
sense-~which projected, nurtured and brought to bloom the progressive pan-Arab
current in Egypt in the 1950's and 1960's has been exposed, like it or not, to a
complete domestic coup. The middlemen. speculators. representatives of the for-
eign monopolies and other parasitic groups-which altogether form the first base
of al-Sadatist regime-have expanded the membership of society's top club. There
are now in Egypt hundreds of millionnairea who have gathered, or looted. their
fortunes in numerous spheres. such as financial firms, banks, tourism, consumer
trade and fares within the framework of the so-called food security. This is in
addition to the monies plundered from the Western aid, loans and grants. Behind
these groups, there are the broader groups of the wealthy rural people who own the
fruit, vegetable and medical and aromatic herb farms. Behind all these, there is
an army of bank and tourist establishment e-ployees and workers of the various
service projects which pay high wages and which are connected with al-Sadat's
"open-economy" era. If we add to all these the army of Egyptians working in the
Arab countries and the families related to them inside Egypt and including

19
FOR OFTWCJAl.lEﬂ§(NNLY
millions of members. we can ultimately understand the extent of the change which
has affected the Egyptian social structure fron within.

Even though emphasis must be laid on this "internal picture," the dimensions of
the external picture are also extremely influential and significant. With the
strong international polarization. especially in the Reagsnite phase, the ener-
gence of the oil center tied to the West and embodied basically in financial-
bsnking structures that are tantamount to stations [branches] of the major capi-
talist financial centers-the emergence of this oil center pulls strongly at the
reins of most of the area's countries, bringing them closer together and driving
them toward stronger ties with imperialism and stronger imperialist domination
of their political, economic and ideological fates.

This certainly doesn't mean confiscation of the future because ultimately, history
progresses from its worst sides. But the price being paid by the peoples seems to
be more exorbitant than ever before. The image of the pan-Arab and progressive
Egypt does definitely appear in the distant horizon. But the path toward this
Egypt does not rely on a fortunate or lucky strike and is not expected of a new
phase in which, sone people dream, history will repeat itself. Egypt's army is
certainly a national and pan—Arab army. But this army alone will not make the
desired change that is compatible with the changes in the world and with the re-
quirements of the phase. The army is truly the striking arm, but only in a body
of forces led by a progressive national and pan-Arab front.

When this is realized. a new Horus will be born naturally and Egypt will regain
its previous heart. its ever—living heart.

COPYRIGHT: 1981 AL-UATAN ALP'ARABI

8694
cso: 4506/110

20

FOI'OFFKJAI.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

LIBYA

sums

CZECH ROAD CONTRACTs-The bulletin ECONOMIC DIGEST, published by the Czechoslovak
Chamber of Commerce and Industry, emphasises in its December 1981 issue that the
construction of highways is one of the areas of collaboration between Czechoslova-
kia and Libya. This job is being done by the Strojexport foreign trade enterprise
in coordination with the Olomouc Transport Construction Enterprise and the Dopras-
tav Transport Construction Enterprise of Bratislava. One of the results of their
co-on efforts is a section of 350 kilometers of road linking the towns of Rslut
and Ghadames. Other contracts were signed between Strojexport and its Libyan
partners, dealing with the construction of six highway sections with a total
length of about 270 kilometers. The first section of 22 kilometers has already
been completed; three sections are in the process of construction and the remain-
ing two sections are in the preparation stage. The work is being done according
to a specific work plan and will be finished by the specified target dates. that
is, during 1982 and during the first half of 1983. Czechoslovak and Libyan offi-
ciels are looking into possibilities of signing a new agreement under whose terms
the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic would build an additional 250 kilometers of
roads in Libya. [Text] [Paris MARCHES TROPICAUX ET HEDITEKRANEENS in French

No 1888, 15 Jan 82 p 133) [OOPYRIGﬂTz Rene Moreux et Cie Paris 1982] 5058

DEVELOPMENT BUDGET-Eudget for 1982 trimmed. Libya's development budget for FY
1982 will be smaller than the one for the preceding FY, in other words. 2.4
billion Libyan dinars (about $8 billion [as published]), as against 2.7 billion
diners (about $9 billion [as published]) in 1981. The reduction of this budget
was decided in view of the prospects of petroleum revenues. Petroleum exports,
which had dropped to 600,000 barrels per day last October, have however been going
up again since then. The sectors that received the most allocations under the
1982 development budget are agriculture (347 million dinars) and the heavy indus-
try (493 million). [Text] [Paris HARCRES TROPICAUX ET MEDITERRANEENS in French
No 1888, 15 Jan 82 p 133] [COPYRIGHTz Rene Horeux et Cie Paris 1982] 5058

PROJECT T0 TRANSPORT HATER-Libye is thinking of carrying out a vast project for
transporting sweet water fromthedesert regions of Tasirbu and Sarir toward the
Gulf of Sidra for agricultural production and urban food supply. This project,
which will be covered by between 100 and 200 contracts, is broken down as fol-
lows: equipment for 270 wells (a certain number of which has already been drilled);
interconnection of various wells by means of a pipeline network with a diameter
between 80 centimeters and 3.40 meters, made of prestressed concrete or steel

21
FOIGMHHC1A1.USE1ONLY
ms OFHCIAI. USE ONLY

(all pipes will have to be nude in Libya; bidding invitations will be issued in
the near future for the construction if six plants); construction of tanks; in-
stallstion of all necessary secondary equipment for the generation and trans-is-
sion of electric power, pmpins stations, etc. New tom have also been planned
(Tezirbu and Sarir, in particular) as well as roads, schools, hospitals, etc.
[Excerpts] [Paris NAMES TROPIGAUX ET HEDI'rl-JRANBENS in French No 1889, '

22 Jan 82 p 193] [COPYRIGKR Rene Moreux at Cie Paris 1982] 5058

CSO: 6519/1110

22
”OFFICIALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MAURITANIA

1982 BUDGET APPNVKD, POLICY RWTIOMS mm
Paris MARCHES TROPICAHX ET “Elm in French Mo 1885, 25 Dec 81 p 31024

[Text] Adoption of the 1982 budget, 11.66 Billion Mauritanian Ouguiya (4- 11.3
Percent) -

The Military Goa-ittee for National Salvation [01311) which net under the chairm-
ship of the Mauritanian head of state Lt Col Mohmd lhouna Ould Baidalla, has
adopted the state budget for 1982. This budget has taken into consideration all

of the reconnendations contained in the plan for econoaic end financial recovery
adopted in 1978 by the OMB“.

The 1982 budget of incoae and expenses amounts to ll,‘66,329,320 Mauritanian
ouguiya, or an increase of 1,166,329,320 Mauritanian ouguiya in total value and

11.3 percent in relative value. The increase in anticipated incone in 1982 involves
customs receipts and direct taxes. '

Placing the tax rolls on a conputer. authorized auditing of collection, and in-
proving taxation division operations justify an increase in tax revenues. Further-
aore, actions will be undertaken to effectively codat tax fraud.

Reform of the general tax code tends toward a simlificetion of the tax base reg-
ulations and to tax relief by raising the incone level eaeqt fron general incone
tax from 65,000 to 80,000 Mauritanian ouguiya. lowering the BIC [Expansion unknown]
rate, and lowering the property tax rate on rental properties from 15 to l2 percent,
and on principal residence properties from. 15 to 6 percent.

Social neasures have been taken for 1982. They include a special increase in wages

applying to all wage earners. as opposed to the contractual increases granted in
1980-81 which only involved those warning less than 10.000 and 15.000 Mauritanian
ouguiya.

0181!: Recomdations on the Economy, Adninistration and Housing

During its regular session from 8 to 11 Decanter, the GMSN examined the overall
situation of Mauritania and defined the booed lines of the political, economic and
social prograa for 1982.

The CNS“ reconsnded the inediate implementation of administrative decentraliza-
tion initiated by the governnent, the nethods for which have been defined by the

23
WI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

interninisterial commission created for this purpose. the comittee further
recs-ended that the govern-ant prepare econonic progress of community interest
for the regions and rigorously executed then.

The CHSN was obliged to note the disastrous situation of neat public institutions:
banks and other Mauritanian public coq>aniee. According to the conittee, the
financial difficulties in which the state cospanies find the-selves are basically
due to laxness and to granting abhor-ally high salaries and econ-Mating advan-
tages such as high compensation benefits. ' 111a m col-its the govern-ant to take
i-ediate steps to review the texts dealing with the deliberative assesbliee of
national enterprises.

Regarding housing, the OISE] finds, on the one hand. an alerning increase in rent
from year to year, asking gradual absorption of the budget deficit more difficult
and, on the other hand, the existence of close to a thousand persons occupying
gavernnent or official housing illegally under the terns of regulations currently
in force. while thousands of others with legal clains are without housing. This
situation is contrary to the (ﬁsh's reconsndations and has been since October 1979.
Consequently, the CASH requests the government to furnish a study proposing a

final solution to this problem as quickly as possible.

COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux et Cie. Paris 1981

9693
C80: 6519/89

21;
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

mooco

Lm INDUSTRY REVIEWED
Paris HARCEBS 130le 31' mnmmms in French No 1888, 15 Jan 82 p 131

[Text] The Moroccan lumber industry is still characterised by the existence of my
small and India-sins sanufact‘n'in; plants and sons large conpanies. It is neverthe-
less a relatively developed industry which has grown considerably over the last 10
years, particularly as a result of the expansion of the construction sector, which
detenines the developnent of this industry to a large extent. In its study of the
industry. the Moroccan Foreign Trade Bank (BNO!) lists detailed figures which cannot
be reproduced here. however. the bank's introductory state-eat contains a emery
of the report. which we have provided in full and which successively describes the
industry's sources of supply, its structure and production. applications and narket.

Sources of Supply

The lumber industry is supplied prisarily by imported tinber and secondarily by
tinber produced dossstically.

The domestic source of supply is )Ioroccan forests. with tisberland of 5.282 nillion
hectares. Natural forests cover 10.912 nillion hectares. or 93 percent of wooded
areas. comprising 2.730 nillion hectares of hardwoods (cork oak, evergreen oak.
argan), 1.422 nillion hectares of conifers (thujas. juniper. cedar. pine ...) and
760,000 hectares of minor species (pistachio. tiara ...). Artificially planted
forests cover 370.000 hectares or 7 percent of tisherland. with 222,000 hectares

of hardwoods (eucalyptus. poplars) and 1108.000 hectares of conifers (pines).

This sizable potential helps to satisfy only a snall percentage of structural and
industrial tinber needs. since nost Moroccan tinber is unsuitable for industrial
use, with the exception of walnut used for veneerinz, eucalyptus used for pitprops
and Zeen oak used for railroad ties. Thus nost donestic production is used nainly
to satisfy firewood needs. '

One result of this situation is that inported titer plays an inportsnt role in
supplying the lube: industry. Such inports mount to 300,000 to 400,000 tons
annually and include conifers. co-on woods and nahogany in particular. Thus fron
1976 to 1980. Moroccan imports of rough tisber rose fron 319,311 tons valued at

246 aillion dirhans (or an average price of 770.71 dirhens/ton) to 370.088 tons
valued at 634 nillion dirhans (or an average price of 1,173.16 dirhans/ton). This
was an increase of 15.9 percent in weight and 76.4 percent in value. Inported tinher

25
£03 omcuu. use ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

is subject to a customs duty of 10 percent upon entry. or 1.8.12 percent ad valorem
with all taxes included. and comes from the 0881. Ivory Coast, Spain. Portugal,
Gabon, France and Yugoslavia.

Structure and Production

Them-bar industry is comprised of the following operations: production of dressed
timber; veneering and production of plywood and panels; structural woodwork; manu-
facture of packing items; manufacture of furniture and padding.

All of these operations combined include 113 manufacturing plants. employ 5,683
persons and utilize the following equipnent: conveyor-belt barkers for dressing.
rotary lathes. slicers. presses and dryers for veneers and plywood, automatic staplers
for packaging in wooden crates.

Based on the latest survey of processing industries. the luber industry uses 56
percent of mechanical production capacity on the average and requires 23,550 dirhams
to create 1 new job, whose apparent expected productivity is 21,260 dirhans/year.
Lube: industry operations in 1977 had a turnover of 501 million dirhsme. production
of 1.82 million dirhams and investments of 22 million dirh-s. This sector is charac-
terized by a high concentration of its operations in large plants. of the 113 plants
mentioned. 12 companies accounted for 66.7 percent of sales. 65.6 percent of produc-
tion and 64.6 percent of added value. Each of these 12 companies had a turnover

of sore than 10 nillion dirhaas.

Following processing. the lusber has several applications. As a packing material,

it is used to manufacture crates of em or reinforced lumber and blocks for packing
citrus fruits. early fruits and vegetables and beverages. This nsrket is estimated
at 40/60 million units and is experiencing problems as a result of competition from
cardboard and plastic. In the construction sector. which represents a very large
outlet. the luber is used to manufacture doors. windows. partitions ..... This
market is also experiencing a recovery. Finally, lunber is also used to manufacture
furniture (wardrobes. armchairs. sofas, tables. desks. etc.). This market is ex-
periencing substantial development. with a turnover of more than 188 million dirhams.
accounting for nearly 30 million dirhans of exports.

COPYRIGI'I‘: Rene Horeux et Cie Paris 1982

11915
(:80: 4519/103

26
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SUDAN

RIBS

lent. This project would be financed by Dealer-Dena, the Gezira Faraers Associa-
tion, the government of the central region. and the Tractors and Agricultural
Equipnent Assembly Conpany. We recall that the Hassey Ferguson Coupany in 1980
conducted talks and studies along these lines with the support of the Sudanese
Developnent Corporation which however did not lead anywhere because of essentially
financial problens. [Text] [Paris mas TROPICABX 81‘ Elm in French
No 1888, 15 Jan 82 p 136] [OOPYRIGHT: Rene Moreux et Cie Paris 1982] 5058

government, intended for the purchase of a dozen 8,000-gallon tank trucks which
will be assigned to the transportation of petroleum products between Fort-Sudan
and the capital. Parallel to this, negotiations were started to transfer the share
of 25 percent, held by the province of Khartun in W00 capital, to the General
Petroleum Company of the Ministry of Energy and Mines. The other two stockholders,
the People's Cooperative Bank and Total, will retain their shares of 37.5 percent.
[Text] [Paris HARCIBS TROPICAUX ET HEDITBRRANMS in French No 1888, 22 Jan 82

p 193] (COPYRIGHT: Rene Horemc et Cie Paris 1982] 5058

RAILUAY mummusqmpun: purchase. Among railroad equip-ant purchases an
announced in recent months by the Sudanese Railway Corporation, we note the
following: 300 cattle cars (supplied by Belgian); 100 wheat [hopper] care (Korea);
300 freight cars (Portugal); 30 locomotives (Banachel. FRO): spare parts from
Egypt worth $813,000. [Text] [Paris “ARMS TROPICAUX ET HEDIWENS in
French No 1889, 22 Jan 82 p 193] [COPYRIGRB Rene Harem: et Cie Paris 1982]
5058

TRANSPORTATION mUIPMENT--Bquipment purchases. The Shaykh Metafa al-Amin busi-
ness group. wholesale Sudanese exporters of peanuts and vegetable oils, negotiated
with the American Hack Company for the purchase of 100 trucks to be used in trans-
porting export products between Ghesira and Port-Sudan. 0n the other hand. the
Sudan ken Chenicals Company is looking for the best solutions for the transport

of basic products for the fertilizer plant located south of Khartun, to go into
production next May. At full capacity. this plant will annually consume 100,000
tons of naphtha and 106,000 tons of fuel imorted through Port-Sudan. [Text]
[Paris HARCIIES TROPICAUX F.'r HEDITERRANEENS in French No 1889, 22 Jan 82 p 193]
[COFYRIOBT: Rene Morena et Cie Paris 1982] 5058

2?
POIOFI’ICIALIBEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

NILE NAVIGATION PROJECTS--Projects for Jonglei. The Sudanese-Egyptian Technical
Authority for the Nile Hater is studying a progra- for industrial facilities to
be established in the zone through which the Jonglei Canal flows; this canal is
now being improved in the southern part of the Sudan. The projects among other
things would involve the construction of a lock, a pier, and bridges for a total
of sonething like $50 nillion to be financed through the BBC. [Text] [Paris
ms TBOPICAUX ET mums in French No 1889, 22 Jan 82 p 193]
(COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux et Cie Paris 1982] 5058

TEXTILE STUDYnDevelopment of weaving industry. In cooperation with a teen of
German experts, the Sudanese Industrial Research and Consultancy Institute is
conducting a study dealing with the development of the cotton weaving industry.
The German technicians belong to the Ger-an Institute of Developaent, an agency
specializing in the industrial problems of the Third World. [Text] [Paris
MARCHES TROPIGAUX ET MEDITERRANEENS in French No 1889. 22 Jan 82 p 193]
[COPYRIGhTz Rene Horeux et Cie Paris 1982] 5058

GUM ARABIC PRODUCTION-wotput up, development projects. Sudanese production of
gum srabic should. for 1981, be 10 percent higher than what it was during the pre-
ceding year. we note in this connection that exports of gun for the period of 12
nonths from September 1980 to Septenber 1981 ease to 39,000 tons as against 35,000
tons for the preceding 12-nonth period. Various projects were launched in recent
months in connection with gun arabic. In addition to the two projects financed

by the BBC (Sudanese Gun Belt and North Kordofan), we can report two others. The
first one is financed by Finland and involves the introduction of new production
methods in the province of the Hhita Nile. If the results of this experiment are
satisfactory, it will be extended to the entire Sudan. The second one consists of
indirect aid [or this production effort since it involves food donations under the
HF? going to farmers who are interested in cropping gun. [Text] [Paris HARCHBS
TROPICAUX ET MEDITERRANBBNS in French No 1889, 22 Jan 82 p 193] [COPYRIGHT:

Rene Moreux et Cie Paris 1982) 5058

ARAB AID--The Sudan on 15 December obtained a loan of $6.5 million from the Arab
Monetary Fund to sake up for the deficit in its balance of payments. Since its
establishnent in 1977. the Arab Monetary Fund. whose headquarters is at Abu Dhabi,
has granted Sudan loans in the amount of $70 million. [Text] [Paris MARCHES
TROPICAUX ET MEDITERRANEERS in French No 1889. 22 Jan 82 p 193] [COPYRIGHT:

Rene Horeux et Cie Paris 1982] 5058

cs0: 4519/114

28
POI OFFICIAL [BE ONLY
N. mums URGID ‘10 Jon PMS?DIIMS-Beirut. 17 Feb (norm-«out: Yetta in
encouraging ita nationale to join Paleatinian guerrilla groupa in ubanon. North
Yeaeni President Ali Abdallah Salih was quoted as aaying today. Pruident Salih
said in an interview with the Beirut magazine um that e delegation tron
San'a' viaited Lebanon recently to lake arrangementa for the tranater of ouch
volunteers. "In the fact of Iaraeli intrenaigence and- reputed Zionist aggree-

aion against the Arab nation. it has been-e crucial that able numbers of the
Arab nation should join the battle of destiny,” he said. Travellere in south

Lebanon have already reported North Yenenia leaning Paleatinian checkpoints.
[Text] [JNI71123 Inndon m in Ingliah 0967 can 17 tab 82]

080: “00/167 3ND

29
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY