FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10539

25 May 1982

Near East/North Africa Report

(FOUO 21/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR 0mm IS! ONLY
m

ms publications contain information primarily from foreign
nauspapers. periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those fro- English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief. indicate how the original information was
processed. were no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mstion was summarised or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or nanes preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as

given by source .

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies. views or attitudes of the 0.8. Goverment.

COPYING“ LABS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING M33881? 0?
mans “PRODUCED HEREIN REWIIIE m1“ DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION 8! RESTRICTED P03 OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
NEAR EAST/NORTH AFRICA REPORT
(rouo 21/32)

Coureu‘rs
INTER-ARAB AFFAIRS

Paris PLO Bapreaentativa Questions French Policy
(Ibrahin al-Sua Interview AL-HAIAN AL-‘MI. 19-25 Mar 82) ....

IRAQ

Hinistar Con-unto on Country'a Problau
(Toyih 'Abd al-Karin Intarviav; AL-HAIAN AL-‘MI.

2.8 ”r 82) oaaaoaaaaooaoooaoat.aoaaoaaooaaoaoaaooaoaaooaooooao

JORDAN

Chairman of Press Syndicate on Arab. Jordanian Rodin
(Rakan al-ﬂajali Intorviou; AL-HAI'AN AL-‘AIABI. 12-18 liar 82 ....

Infighting in Nation'a Praaa Batabliohaant Raviavod
(Florence h’d; Mam “0-.MI. 2-8 AP: 82) oaaao oooaaaaauaca

Hiniator of Information Diacuaaoa Praoo Controvaray
(Florence h'd; Ala-“HAN Ala-.ml. 2-8 Apt 82) act a a 000.0... coo.

LEBANON

Canilla Shan'un Diocnaaaa Syrian Rolo. Praaidantial Slactiona
(Ca-111a Shan'un Intarviav; AL-HAIM Ala-'AIABI. 19-25 Hat 82) ...

LI BYA

National Oppoaition Stataaant
("dil .1ﬁ.‘“1; ‘10me A10. .MI. 19.2, m 82) v o o o o 9 9 9 o a o 9

Intalligance. Security Organization Deacribad
(AL-"Arm AL"MI. 26 m‘l Apr 82) ooaooooooaaaoaaaoooa-oooaoo

15

21

23

27

31
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

INTER-ARM AFFAIRS

nus 9w REPRESENTATIVE ours-nous men Pout!
Paris upwxrm AL-‘ABABI in Arabic No 266. 19-25 liar 82 pp 18-19

[Interview with PLO director in Paris Ibrahin al-Sue by AL-HA‘I'AII Ala-'ARABI:
"Does Paris Think 'Arafat "111 Visit as a Tourist?"; date not specified]

[Text] Hr Ibrahim al-Sus. director of the PLO office in Paris, escalated his
attack on the trends in French policy-making regarding the Riddle Best. In
this interview, he eaphasised that Mr Yaeir 'Arafat will not visit the French
capital without an official invitation fro. the highest level.

[Question] what is your evaluation of French President Hitterrand's visit to
Israel?

[Answer] President Hittervand's visit has revealed that the French stand is
prejudiced in favor of the Israeli-Aurican stand.

We have a few remarks on this visit.

First. official French sources had notified us a few days before the visit that
Mitterrand's speech in Israel would be general, that its tone would be hunani-
tarian and philosophical, revolving around the these of two peoples for one
land, and that the French president would not address political issues as his
foreign minister. Mr Claude Cheyeson had done in the UAR.

We were surprised that the "bu-anitarian" tone of the speech was simply con-
tent to talk about the probla of the Jews during World war II.

Second, President Hitterrand addressed the Palestinian state by saying that the
Palestinian Arabs in the ﬂeet Bank and Case would be able in the end to estab-

lish their state if they linked their rights to the rights of others, that is.

Israel.

With these sentences. he ignored the Palestinian people. the unity of the
Palestinians who live under occupation with those who live in the Diaspora
and the hopes and ambitions of this people.

Third. President Hitterrand's aention of the PLO as the sole legitiaate repre-
sentative of the Palestinian people was conditional on the Pm's recognition
of Israel and the abandonment of its struggle. as a prelude for joining the

l

FOIOI’FICIAIJJSIONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

negotiations. At the same time, he failed to ask the where of the Israeli

Knesset to recognize the existence and right of the Palestinian people to live
in peace and dignity on Palestinian land.

[Question] Do you believe that some French statements that were pacifying for
the Arabs were meant as a camouflage of the true French stand?

[Answer] We had no illusions about the reality of French policy. and we are

very mch aware of its strategic links with American policy. especially since

the present French administration is more Atlantic-oriented than the preceding
ones.

[Question] How, then, do you explain the contradiction between President
Hitterrsnd's statements and those of his foreign sinister?

[Answer] The Quay D'Orsay is traditionally more understanding of Arab problem
and more knowledgeable about French interests in the Arab world. But it seems
there is sole sort of. role allocation between Mitterrand and Cheysson lately

[Question] Is it possible that Hitterrand's visit to Israel might pave the way
to a revival of the European initiative, or did It remove this possibility?

[Answer] Through his visit to Israel, President Mitterrand provided Israel

with great support for its aggressive policy towards the Palestinian and Arab
peoples. lie also helped renove the international isolation Israel suffered

when it did not have another ally but the United States. New Israel has a
potent ally, France.

This role was manifest, for example, in Hitterrand'a promise that France will

play the ambassador for Israel in reestablishing its relations with the African
states.

As for the European initiative, we never had any illusion about the ao-called
European initiative. The European states have to realize the reality of Zion-
ist ambitions and Israel's aggressive plans and work to establish justice. that

is, to support the Palestinian people in their legitimate struggle to regain
their lost rights.

[Question] "hat happened to the invitation tour Yesir 'Arafat to visit Paris?

[Answer] The way President Hitterrand addressed this subject during his visit

to the Zionist entity injured the "pride of the Palestinian people and the
Arab nation."

[Question] Does President Hitterrand believe that Yasir 'Arafat is begins

his to invite him to visit France or that he wants to visit France like a
tourist?

[Answer] Abu 'Amar will not come to France except at an official invitation
addressed to him f row the highest level. Such an invitation entails France's

recognition of the PLO as the sole legitimate representative of the Palestinian
people.

2

FOR GFF'ICL‘L USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Question] would such a visit be a positive indication of French policy
towards the Palestinian cause?

[Answer] An official invitation to Yasir 'Arafat and recognition of the PLO

night be considered an indication of a correct trend in French policy towards
the Palestinian people.

I would like to refer here to the state-est of Prench Prils Hinieter Pierre
Hauroy in Tunisia when he said that France is a friend of the Palestinian
people; and we wonder: Where has this friendship gone? And does it mean
supporting the stand of those who occupy its land and disperse its people?

[Question] "hat is the basis you consider right for establishing positive
french-Arab relations?

[Answer] There iss clear basis for isprovins relations with the French shin-
istration:

l. Full recognition of the PLO as the sole legitimate representative of the
Palestinian people and an end to answer on this subject.

2. Making clear the French stand towards the Middle East problem by asserting
that Israel's withdrawal fro: the various occupied Palestinian and Arab lands
is a precondition for any solution.

3. Pull recognition of the legitinste rights of the Palestinian people, for
which these people are fighting. and their right to establish an independent
Palestinian state in their homeland.

lo. That France adopt a Security Council draft resolution that states the
rights of the Palestinian people the way they were stated in General Assembly
Resolution 3236.

COPYRIGHT: 1981 AL-HA‘I'AN AL-‘ARABI

9945
080: 4606/386

”WIMONIN
MINISTER means on COUNTlY'S mums
Paria AL-VAIAN AL-‘ARABI in Arabic No 268. 2-8 Apr 82. pp 56-55

[Interview with Hiniater of Oil. Teyih 'Abd al-lari- by Salib Zaytun: "He will
Overcone Export ‘bataclee"; date and place not apecified]

[Text] Iraqi Minister of Oil. ‘I'ayih 'Abd al—Xarin. in a apecial interview with
AL-HATAN AL-‘ABABI aaid that the Iraqi oil aituation ia now better than before
and that hia country in determined to carry out new projecta to increaae oil
exporta. he eade thia atatenent in a naeting with a group fro- AL-HA‘I‘M AI.-
‘ARABI attending the conference.

The Iraqi niniater aaid: Our oil poaition ia now better than it waa laat year.
Iie are etill producing nuch leaa than before the war and what we are export-
ing ie atill linited becauae of Imitation on the neana of export. which

are now restricted to the pipeline acroea Turkey and Syria. It ia not enough
to hold the total Iraqi production capacity. but we are hoping after the war
atopa to reaune puping at a greater rate. Ha ahall begin by repairing the
daeage done by the war."

[Question] Aeeuning the war continuea. what eaana ia Iraq thinking of uaing
to overcome the obataclea to export?

[Anawer] I'n not giving away any aecret when I aay there are altarnativea to
exporta that we have thought of end need like fleeting docha. but thia ia no
longer enough. He therefore each agreenante in principle with [wait and
Saudi Arabia to extend the two networke of pipelinea to than to help in export-
ing Iraqi oil. 9e are linited in our export capacity to the Turhiah pipeline.
which carriaa about 60 eillion tona annually. and to the I'ripoli pipeline.
which carriaa 70 million tone a year. He diacuaaed with our brothara in Saudi
Arabia and Kuwait a plan to entend the two pipelinea. And we obtained the
agree-ent of Saudi Arabia for the pipeline which will carry Iraqi oil to one
of the porta on the Red Sea with a capacity that nay reach 80 aillion tone
annually. Our big hope ia to coupleta thia pipeline before the end of thia
year. All for the aecond pipeline. it will paaa through Kuwait atarting at
Baara. He expect to need through it a nillion barrela a day. We have obtained
the agree-ant of our Kuwaiti brothera. we atil). have to work out the detaila.
bearing in nind that the pipeline lay take 2 yeara to couplcta.

FOR OFFICIAL USE OKLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Question] Don't you think the completion of these two pipelines will increase

the volume of production in Iraq at a time when you are calling for less pro-
duction by OPEC in order to end the oil glut in the international market?

[Answer] We do not doubt for a moment that the glut is artificial. The
foreign companies are undoubtedly helping to sanctify its existence by dump-
ing extra quantities (on the market). When the glut ends. the balance between
supply and demand will be restored. We are bound by OPEC's decisions. Our
current production due to the war is less than that before the war. All that

we are doing is to maintain the former level of production.

[Question] It was decided to hold an OPEC summit in Baghdad more than a year
ago, but the war with Iran put it off. Is there now an opportunity to hold it?

[Answer] The invitation to hold an OPEC sumait in Eaghdad still stands. And
we hope suitable circumstances will allow it to be held this year.

[Question] Is it possible. for example, to hold a summit conference of the
nonaligned nations in connection with it?

[Answer] Everything is possible... if there is a readiness and consensus to
do so. He welcome it before. during, or after (the OPEC meeting).

[Question] Does the oil weapon still have a role to play in the Arab cause?

[Answer] Oil is without doubt an effective weapon in Arab hands, but it is
sometimes used, unfortunately. against the Arabs and against the exporting
countries and against the developing countries. Some want the oil weapon to
be stripped from Arab hands so that it cannot be used in the national struggle
with the Israeli enemy and imperialism. we believe oil provides bargaining
power for the developing countries In the dialogue between the North and the
South. In addition to oil helping the Arab and world economy with energy for
a long time. it is a strategic commodity that can be exchanged for technology.

which is the basis of the development process.
[Question] What is the energy situation in Iraq today?

[Answer] Oil is considered the primary source of energy in Iraq. It was

used to build an integrated industrial base. We are expanding explorations
and developing fields to increase our reserve capacity. Natural gas is second
in importance. He have carried out a number of projects to exploit the gas
efficiently. including the northern and southern gas project. The period of
flaring the accompanying gas in Iraq will end in 1984 when it will be

completely utilized.

Electric power is considered especially important along with solar power, wind
power. and tidal power. All this requires more attention. scientific study.

and concentrated exploitation.

[Question] What proposals did Iraq make at the Arab Energy Conference
recently held in Doha?

[Answer] He invited our brother Arabs to exploit our natural gas that is in
excess of the producing countries' need for it and to bring it through
pipelines to the other Arab countries. He also proposed the exploration and

5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

identification of Arab reeoursea in the way of raw naterials used for nuclear
power. This will require unified efforts to build nuclear stations and
plants to treat the radioactive aaterials on special natural bases. In addi-
tion, we urge the creation and develop-ant of an Arab heavy industry to
produce the machines and equip-ant used in energy industries. oil and gas in
particular. He favor the acquisition of experience and conducting of studies
to support Arab econoaic integration in order to carry out the process of
gradual conversion to alternative for-s of energy when the oil is used up.
And we have called upon our brother Arabs to adopt the idea of creating an
Arab oil reserve for the purpose of assuring ourselves of the energy needed
for the integrated Arab econoly.

COPYRIGHT: 1982 AL-HATAN AL-ARABI

5214
cso: 4&04/428

FOR OPVICIAL USE ONLY
me OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JORDAN

CHAIRMAN 0? PRESS SYNDICATE 0!! ABA). JORDANIAN mu
Paris AL-HA‘I‘AN AL-‘ARABI in Arabic No 265. 12-18 liar 82 pp 80-81

[Interview with Rskan al-llajali by AlrﬂA‘l‘All AL-‘AIABI: "Our levspepers Are
Like Solething Out of the Middle Agni")

[Text] [Question] How do you evaluate the third advisory nesting of the
International and Regional Organisation of Journalists. in which you parti-
cipated as vice president of the Union of Arab Journalists?

[Answer] This nesting was extremely iaportant. since it was a continuation of
the international neetings of journalists' organizations on the widest scale
and the highest level. Besides. the Baghdad state-ant that was issued at the
end of the seating is a profound elaboration on the Enrico statement and the
Mexico declaration on intonation. This seating between various international
journalistic bodies representing 200.000 Journalists was a practical achieve-
aent. especially with the successful adoption of the special article concern-
ing the establish-eat of an international comcil to include international
and regional organizations of journalists. and vith the special efforts
exerted by the Union of Arab Journalists to lake it a success.

[Question] Did the Union of Arab Journalists have a special role in this
meeting. and what are the lost prolinent activities of the union in the field
of international communications?

[Answer] The Union of Arab Journalists is the one that called for this nect-
ing and succeeded in holding it with representatives froa all of the inter-
national organizations to confront the vicious campaign launched by the poli-
tical and Iilitary industrial aonopolies. vhich want to frustrate the efforts
to establish an international inforaation systan. find solutions for the
proble-s of the profession and challenge the obstacles that stand in the way

of a citizen's right to free expression.

The Union of Arab Journalists has carried out a series of activities in its
current session on the international level that sought priaarily to achieve
interaction with the international journalistic organisations and explain our
just causes. The first neeting was with journalists of the nonaligned coun-
tries, as well as the dialogue betvsen Arab and European journalists. An
Arab-African dialogue of journalists is also along the activities of the

“NEWLY
FOR OFHCIAI. USE ONLY

union. This year we will have another dialogue with the journalists of Latin
America. This continuous communication is the real success of the union.

[Question] This is on the international level. But what is the role of the
union on the Arab level, and what do you think of the real conditions of Arab
journalism?

[Answer] The role of the union on the Arab level lies particularly in the
fact that we succeeded in preserving the unity of the union. and that it
passed through all obstacles in spite of the difficult conditions. But the
real condition of Arab journalism is as painful as everything in our lives.
It is painful because journalism is no longer a mission or a standpoint of
free expression or honesty; it has turned into business, hypocrisy and the
practice of mercenaries. Inthe absence of public freedoms generally and of
democratic and political institutions. the Arab unions of journalism become
incapable of doing anything in response. He do not want the unions to turn
into mere formalities. We want them to be an active force in defending the
profession and promoting it. we do not want the heads of the unions to become
notables. We want them to be in a position to defend the honest word.

[Question] Amid this Arab reality, where does Jordanian journalism stand?

[Answer] The reality of Jordanian journalism is painful and sorrowful.
Regretfully, it is not a reality in line with the general progress or with
the moral standards of our people. The reality is a feudal situation that is
far behind the feudalism of the Middle Ages. The feudal lord of the middle
ages used to give the serfs and lackeys some financial rights and some degree
of free will, based on his own self-confidence.

[Question] How is this translated into reality?

[Answer] It means low wages compared to the high income of the only two
newspapers in Jordan. It means preventing the editors from enjoying any rights
whatsoever, including their participation in union elections, under threat of
hmmediate dismissal. This monopoly of the two newspapers that form an alliance
against journalists is the cause of all the problems...as there is agreement
that whoever leaves one newspaper would not be accepted by the other.

[Question] Are you telling us that journalistic competition is nonexistent?

[Answer] It goes deeper than that. There is practically only one newspaper,
because both newspapers have a canon administration: one advertising agency.
joint distribution and coordination in even the most trivial of things, and
the only objective is profit. Each newspaper makes about 1 million diners
annually in profit, from distribution and ads alone. These large sums go to
a handful of people. who no doubt have a vested interest in perpetuating this
state of affairs and opposing any journalistic attempt or effort to publish a
new newspaper.

[Question] How long has it been like this?

FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE(NVLY
F0! OWCIAL USE ONLY

[Answer] During the fifties and the sixties there were always five dailies.
at least, in addition to the weeklies. Since then, journalism has been subject
to conspiracies and plots from people who could not overcome their failure to
publish a newspaper called AL-HAIIAB. Since then. they have borne a grudge
against all that is Arab. starting with Abd al-Rasir. They put on the cloak
of Islam and hid behind names such as The Malia Brotherhood and The Islamic
Conference and the lhomeyni... etc....

[Question] From your description. where does journalism in Jordan stand?

[Answer] Weekly journalism is contained and suffocating and can hardly. even
to preserve their royalty, as is the case with Al. W, for enmple.

[Question] What do you think is the solution?

[Answer] The solution is clear: Encourage the publication of new newspapers.
The government has begun to see the importance of such a step, hence the deci-
sion to publish AL-SEA'B, with a capital of 2 million [diners], two-thirds of
which was a goverment investment. As a matter of principle, I believe this
is a good trend. but I am against the dual experience in one country. Either
apply this formula to everybody or leave matters to the private sector. as is
now the case.

[Question] Do you think the goverusent is willing to own the press, and what
do you think of such a possibility?

[Question] I do not believe the government wants to do that. But there is

a general feeling for the need to change this closed monopoly, and the gov—
ernment wants to participate in this change. There is no doubt that publish-
ing a new daily would be an actual effort to break this monopoly. But the
renedy must be a thorough one and to the benefit of the journalists. This
means that the new trend that aims at having journalism as simply a «martial
investment owned by government investment agencies or private mania or
big merchants is an unhealthy trend. I prefer that the government directly
own the press, which would be better than what we now have, or that the take-
over be done through various govermental agencies. as with AL-SHA'B. although
I believe the latter would be successful. since the existing mnopoly has so
far prevented the success of the experiment. and it has been 3 months now
since Ab—SHA'B obtained its royalty. and its board of directors so far has
not done anything. '

[Question] Then you support the press being a governaent enterprise?

[Answer] No, of course not. not on principle.... But compared to what we now
have in the field of journalists. the press would be a lot are free than it is
now. As far as dealings go, the editor would rather be an eqloyee at some
official agency than be a hand in a farm or in the house of somebody who
controls him.... I would like to mention an example here: A colleague fr:-
AL-RA‘Y signed a letter asking for a meeting of the general assei’ly. Now,
that person was the editor-in—chief. One of the owners of the institution
called his and asked him: "no you stab me in the back when you are in my

“WWW!”
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

house and eating my food?“ That is why a government press would be much more
merciful than this feudalism, although we hope not to reach that stage since
the solutions are clear and available....

[Question] It is said that thedecision to publish AL—SHA'B was to co-opt
AL-‘AKHBAR. which has stopped appearing?

[Answer] Some might think so, some might even have planned it. But I am con-
fident that AL—AKHBAR, and I am the owner of its royalty, will soon start pub-
lishing, and this is based on official promises, of course. There is nothing
to stop it from appearing, because it stopped according to an agreement
between us and the Ministry of Information, simply to solve a preexisting
situation. So far there has been no decision to withdraw or cancel the
royalty, but the forces of feudalism have managed so far, with their wide
influence, to prevent the appearance of this newspaper.

[Question] Do you feel you have been the victim of some plot?

[Answer] Not exactly. But there was some backstabbing, meanness and maneuver-
ing on the part of some people; I would like to point here to the minister of
information, whose stand was, and still is, honest and clear. Hany other
official parties had an honest and moral attitude. It would be no exaggeration
to say that this problem, as well as the media situation in general, is one of
the concerns of His Majesty King Hussayn;. which guarantees that injustice will
be removed .

[Question] What about the fuss that rose concerning the union of journalists
and the concentrated press campaign that went on for several weeks in the
Jordanian press and even in some Arab newspapers?

[Answer] It was a fabricated fuss. As you know, any elections would have to
include more than one party. I believe success is not merely success in elec-
tions, rather it is success in holding the elections and allowing people to
exercise their democratic rights. Any honest professional would have as his
first concern the exercise of this right.... I personally feel I would have
achieved a great success if elections were held democratically and in a

spirit of camaraderie, even if I failed to win this particular post. I also
believe we have to ovarcome selfishness and egotistical interests. Therefore,
the whole thing was a problem of elections, and it was rooted in the fact that
the symbols of press monopoly wanted the union to reflect the painful feudal
situation of the press. We do not want to recount history from the beginning
in this respect, nor do we want to reopen the story of the AL-MANAR, or recall
what happened to Salim al-Shsrif, owner of AL-JIHAD and the actual founder of
AL-RA'Y, or what happened to the journalist magnate Ibrahim al-Shanti, the
first journalists' union leader in Jordan, or his brother Sadiq al-Shanti,
hoth owners of AL-DIFA', or to mention what happened to the people of

FALASTIN and the founders of AL-SHA'B; nor do we want to explain how these
became owners of newspapers and how they came to be journalists. This is a
story known to everybody in Jordan.

[Question] But the press campaign concentrated on the law of organizing the
profession?

10

FINICNﬂﬂCIAL USEICHVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Answer] The law was the basis. Last year the union leader was one of the
owners of the two newspapers. They wrote that law under the slogan of modern-
ization. He all support the laying of anew law. But this one was written in
secret and everything about it was kept in the dark. He asked for nothing
more than to present it to the general assembly and discuss it according to
the laws and accepted procedures. They were estimating that the law would be
issued before the elections, to guarantee their hegemony over the union.

That is why they built their electoral campaign on mnecessity of canceling
the elections or postponing them until the new law was issued. Thus, the
press campaign before the elections was based on the call for the new, modern,
progressive. advanced law. But after the elections, when the law was exposed,
they conducted a more violent campaign to cover their position by attacking

the vast text of the new progressive law, as they themselves called it in the
beginning.

[Question] The campaign also addressed the question of government interference
in the elections?

[Answer] In all fairness. the government did not interfere in the elections.
The campaign became concentrated in one miserable point: why doesn't the
government use martial law and the authority of the military governor to
cancel or postpone the elections, since they are not in the interest of the
campaigners?

[Question] What about suspending your meltership in the union?

[Answer] This is untrue. Nobody asked that his mesmership in the union be
suspended. We were, and still are, extremely concerned about the unity of the
union and about not retaliating to the press campaign. He knew beforehand
that his provocation aimed at more than doing damage to the unionuit aimed at
destroying it.

[Question] Are you, and the present council of the union, for the proposed
law or against it?

[Answer] we are against the spirit in which the procedures were conducted

for issuing this law. In its present proposed form we consider it an open
conspiracy against the union, the press and the'other unions as well. He
consider that passing the law secretly without taking our remarks into con-
sideration is an undemocratic procedure. He even agree with the owners of the
two newspapers on rejecting the proposed law in its present form; that is,
there is now a consensus on rejecting it and the attempt to impose it on the
press. But we disagree with the other opponents in the approach: They attacked
this law with violence, intensity and emotion. we presented a study of each
article, and we believe that it rust be discussed and must be pused to the
general assembly of the union, and throughout all the legal stages. in the
spirit of the constitution and basic legal principles.

[Question] What stage is the proposed law at now?
[Answer] we believe in just and quiet dialogue, and there is still hope that

that can be achieved in the national council. I am confident that the national
council will reject this law.

11

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FORIMHWCJALIRHZONLY

Frankly, we believe it is better to dissolve the union than be subjected to a
law that would effectively negate the meaning of a union. This is a forgery
that cannot be accepted. Still, we are talking within the framework of prin-
ciples and exact definitions of journalism and journalists, the safeguarding
of the union structure and the unity of the journalistic body represented by
the editors and correspondents who work solely in journalism and within the
news agencies.

[Question] Has the subject of the journalists union brought before the third
consultative meeting of the International and Regional Union of Journalists.
in which you participated, or before the Union of Arab Journalists?

[Answer] No, this subject wasn't discussed because, as I already said. we
still have not lost hope. This subject is still an internal affair of the
Jordanian Union of Journalists, but it wouldn't be surprising if something
happened that required us to raise our voice.

[Question] You have said some serious things: That you would prefer the gov-
ernment to own the press in view of what is now happening; that you would pre-
fer to dissolve the union than have the law passed.

[Answer] I said that on principle I an opposed to the goverment owning the
press. But the situation is extremely bad.... For example. AL-RA'Y was a
newspaper owned by the government; then a deal was made in the dark in which
the newspaper became owned by a group of people most of when are from outside
of media circles. When the prime minister decided last year to return the
ownership to the government for 26 hours, the decision was then postponed or
canceled; this was natural because it is retrieving a right on the one hand
and ending an immoral situation, and it is better that things be clear, on
the other, thereby having the name correspond to the reality of the content.
I prefer that the newspaper be owned by the govertnent and not by a minister
or an official or the relative of an official. This is the basis for my
reservation on the formula of AL-SHA'B.... Why should the government partici-
pate with this huge financial share in this newspaper while the government's
newspaper AL-RA'Y exists and would cost the government nothing more than a
decision to reinstitute it....0f course, there are many details involved, but
in short the condition of journalism is extremely painful, more than you can
imagine. Therefore, in comparison. and since the decision is in the hands
of the government. the best thing would be to clarify everything.... That is.
if the goverrsnent wants to own the press, let it do so. This is not simply a
reaction, but things have reached a stage where an end must be reached. The
solution is clear: let the journalists have the right to publish newspapers.
As for dissolving the union, what I said is clear: I prefer a public and
effective cancellation to removing all actual content from the union.

[Question] You have been presiding over the union for a long time; this is
your fifth term, I believe. th don't you give someone else a chance?

[Answer] I was elected president of the union for the first time in 1977 and
was reelected to four consecutive terns, after which I decided to give someone
else a chance. When I decided last year to withdraw and not run as a candidate,

12

FOR omcm. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

I was determined not to return to the presidency. But circumstances beyond my
control. the illegalities and mistakes that occurred last year and especially
the sttespt to pass the law secretly nade ns bow to the wishes of ray colleagues
and return to renedy this difficult situation, despite what is involved in such
a return to taxing exertions on my part. I only hope not to find Iyself in
such an dsrrassing situation in the coming years. five terns are enough.

[Question] Hhst are your roles in journalism?

[Answer] I still have not lost hope despite what I was subjected to, which
some people thought would be a killing blow to me. Here I would like to len-
tion the saying "The blow that does not kill as pushes se forward." I an
certain the case of AL-AKHBAR will soon be solved the way AL-SBA'B was.

[Question] Do you have any other options?

[Answer] To tell you the truth, I don't. I was asked to be editor of AL-SBA'B
and I refused before I discovered the formla. I was asked to be part of the
monopoly in the two existing newspapers and also refused. There is no place
for negotiations or "give-and-take," end by nature I an not susceptible to

containment.

[Question] Why don't you start a project abroad?

[Answer] This is the last straw. But I don't believe that circmstances have
reached a stage that would require me to emigrate. I understand that what
happened in Lebanon led to the diaspora of Lebanese journalists so that they
now work abroad. Could it be that I would leave and those who are strangers
to Jordan and the journalistic profession rennin there.... I hope this does

not happen.
[Question] What are the union's plans and projects for the future?

[Answer] When I was elected for the first time in 1977 I said that we did not
want the union to turn into a charitable society. Unfortunately, that is how
we operated, because it was the only way to address the deteriorating living
conditions of the journalists. The union prepared two housing projects that
covered the needs of 122 journalists and their families, the securing of
scholarships for their children, reductions on some airlines and help in some
needy hmnitarisn cases. The newspaper booths project that the union estab-
lished achieved a good financial income for the union, which enabled it to
carry on some of its plans. We do this because the press institutions, which

nske hundreds of thousands in profit, do not provide anything for the journal-
ists. and had these institutions ispluented sons of the ebove-nentioned pro-

jects, we would have saved ourselves a lot of trouble.

[Question] But AL-DUS‘I'IIR and AL-IA'Y provided nedical insurance for their
workers? .

[Answer] In fact, it was a neager insurance and an inhulan one. They pro-
vided insurance only for those journalists who were registered in the union,
in order to keep the. away Iran the union, whereas there were tens of other

13

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

workers that the insurance did not include. For example, the number of people
benefitting from the insurance provided by the union. from AL DUSTUR, was the
same number as last year. Those who were included intheheslth insurance (of
the newspapers) can be counted on the fingers. There are over 300 eeployees

in both institutions who were not included in the insurance. He would be very
happy if they continued with this insurance and expanded it to cover everybody,
so that this step not be simply a reactiontothe elections.

[Question] You still have not answered the question about your plans for the
future?

[Answer] He will prepare a study on the conditions of journalian and the in-
come of the newspapers and journalists. This is the first step. We will con-
tinue to seek a new fair law that represents the wishes of the journalists.
and there is the third phase of a housing project and the second phase of the
newspaper booths project in the capital and a number of towns.

COPYRIGHT: 1981 AL-HATAN AL-'ARABI

9965
C50: 5604/386

1b

F0.‘0FFKJA1.USE(M§LY
WWW m mum's PIISS MI.” W
Pario AL-HA‘l‘Ali AL'MI in Arabic Bio 268, 2-8 Apr 32 n 60. 61
IZrticlo by rloronca la'd: "rho “or of Uorda in tho Jordanian Prooo27

lions] ‘l'ho intorviow which tho hoad of tho Jordanian Journalioto' Union, Mr Iakan
al-Hajali, gavo to AL-Haw AL-‘mn (Iowa 265) otirrod up Inn-arm roactiono
in tho Jordanian prooo. ‘l'ho oditoro in chic! of [tn-mm and AL-IA'Y. lioooro
Halal-1d al-Sharif and Hat-and al-Kayid, ropliod forcafully to al-Hajali, who Ind
diroctod aany chargoo againot tho Jordanian pron, tho loaot of which woro that
it woo "fundaliotic and backward."

ﬂora in a roviaw of tho opiniono of tho ownoro of tho paporo roganding tho
"otrugglo" going on botwoan tho: and tho Journalioto' Union. “Miami AL-‘MI
io publiohing it. putting tho froodon to roopond into practica and bolioving in
tho importanco of mltitacotod amnion.

Tho Jordanian prooa io not of racont origin. ‘l'ho firot paporo hogan to appaar undo:
tho lniroto of Tranojordan in 1927. Iirot JARDM‘ Al-‘M, balonging to luau-al-
Din al-Khatib, appoarod, along with AL-MI'AB. balonging to [anal 'Abbao and
Holland al-Karani. ‘l‘ho o-o yoar SEQ no'm, balonging to tho lawyor 8alih al-
'Inodi, appoarod, ond tho nagarino “om novad tra naifa, Palaotino to Ann
undo: ito ownor. Khalil Roar.

ﬂowovar, tho nain papar. which boo-o an official journal in tho hiroto of
kanojordan, wao tho nawopapor AL-sm AL-‘MI, which opocialiood in publiohing
official docrooo and otticial coma-oration ovonto.

Aftor tho smart-Ion: anondod tho Otto-an moo Law oo that it would bo in Roaring
with now otatutoo for mroooing thooo poriodicala. tho Jordanian paporo ronainad
in a otata of flux. In tho thirtiao, thoy rooa to tivo in III-tor, than to 20 in
tho fiftioa. ha tho otart thoy took part in prooonting Arab iswoo of a nationol
charactor.

llowavor, thio tuna-station waa not adoqnato; tho tranchioao of on. paporo woro
abrogatad, whilo othoro protorrad to coaao appaaring for ono raaaon or anothor.

Now paparo. ouch aa huh-ad al-l'hatib'o AL-M'! (196$). Iaja al-‘laa'o PM”!!!
DAILY NW8, iaouod in Jaruaaloa (1967), and tho mm m bolonging to

15

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
'UK Uff'LIAI. use. UI‘LI

Mahmud al-Sharif and kaja el-‘Iea, appeared. Some newepapere were merged, ae
happened with Alum, whoee franchiee owner wee Kanil al-Sharif; thie ceaeed

appearing when it wee urged with the newepaper PAUSTIN. and the nevepaper M.-
wsm came out in ite place in 1967.

While in the eixtiee the newepapere numbered 14. of which three were official, in

the early eightiee only a cull mnber of newepapere remained, no lore nuneroue
than the fingere on one'e hand:

AL-M'Y, owned by the Jordanian Preee Organization, which ieeuee another publica-
tion, THE 3m THIS, in Bnglieh. Hr Hehned al-Kayid, former head of the
Journaliete' Union. ie the editor in chief of AL-IA'Y.

AL-DUSTUR, a daily owned by Mr Hale-Id al-Sharif. one of the major preee advieore
in the Arab nation. The al-Duetur organization ie now preparing to ieeue an
English-language weekly, JERUSALEM STAB, and another epecialieed weekly, AL-UI’DQ
AL-IQTISADI. In addition to theee two daily publicatione, which ehare the
Jordanian market . the Jordanian Preee liouee bought out the negatine AL-ITEMYN
(in 1976), while the newepaper Mam, which wee ieeued in 1975. wee ehut down.
Its editor in chief wae Rakan al-Majali the preeent head of the Journaliete' Union.
Here people are talking of the likelihood that it will ream-e appearing under ano-
ther name, and they are aleo talking about the likelihood that the newepaper Al.-
SHA'B, whoea editor in chief wee Ibrahin Sakajha, will reappear; that etopped
appearing eone tine ago and nay reappear with nixed government-private eector
capital. There ie one magazine concerned with affaire of waen and the fa-ily,
AL-BAYT AL—‘MI; ite editor in chief ie Hre Leyla Abu Bab. In addition there
are other weekly papere euch ae AL-LIWA‘ and m AL-USBU'.

Pepere that come out in lnglieh, ouch ae TH! Joann T1388, are cloeer to teeting
and training grounde for Inglieh language editore.

The people who read the latter are eoetly touriete, officiale in foreign daeeiee
and foreign workers. Their ownere etate that the goal in putting the. out ie not
materiel, since they run at a co-eercial loee, but that they meet a preeeing need.

The Union Law

Although the preee ie of long etanding in Jordan, the law regulating it ie new.
In nany people's opinion, it hae ceaeed to keep abreeet of development and re-
eurgence in the Jordanian preee and hae become deficient in regulating the
affaire of the vocation, now that the meter of journaliete haa rieen and the
fielde of the profeeeion have proliferated.

However, the draft aged-ant to the profeeeional etatute. the Union Lew. epecifi-
cally, haa etirred up great uproar, and it haa provoked a bitter. thorny etruggle
between the ownere of the papere on the one hand and the journaliete on the other.
The government hae choeen to take a neutral etand and Iediate if aeked to do to,
in order to bring people'e wiewe cloear together. lakan al-Hajali, the chair-en
of the Journaliete' Union (in AL-HATAI! AL-‘MI, III-bar 265), launched a violent
attack on the ownere of the papere end accueed the. of “feudalieo” and "backward-
neee.”

' 16

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
A Her of Distortions

This interview stirred up a broad media uproar on the local and Arab levels, in
view of the gravity of the "accusations." AL-HAW AL-‘ARABI received two cements,
from our colleagues Hahn-ad al-Sharif, editor in chief of AL-WSM, and Hal-ed al-
Kayid, editor in chief of AL-BA'Y, on the interview with our colleague Rakan al-
Hajali, and we are publishing these in mrcise of the freedom to reply although
the "battle" seems to have gone beyond the bounds of equitable discourse.

Halemsd al-Kayid says :

”I was certainly astoniehed while reading the next to last issue of AL-RAIAN Al.-
‘ARABI when my eyes alit on the article published over two full pages under the
title "the Jordanian Press In Experiencing the Backwardness of the Middle Ages.‘

1 was astonished. not because the author of the 'article' was someone who is
esteemed in the Jordanian press and has worked in it for a while. but because this
'mseting,’ with the distortions end slanders it contained, had found a place in the
pages of our fellow organ AL-HA‘rAN ALo'AlABI, which we respect and esteem.

"The Jordanian press which the writer of the article claims is experiencing the
backwardness of the Hiddle Ages is not clandestine; it is well know to Jordanian
and Arab citizens, who read it every morning and know whether or not their
country's press is backward and living in the Middle Ages.

"we in Jordan can assert and claim that our press, like many domestic institutions
in our country, has reached an advanced professional, technical and human level
which puts on a par with the press institutions in our region, if not above many
of them, both in terms of the press services it provides and the honor, sincerity
and independence of its comnitnent to the causes of the country and the nation.

"Regarding the allegation that the condition of the Jordanian press is 'sad and
painful to the heart,‘ I do not imagine that it is anything but the success and
triunph that our preso has achieved that pains the people circulating that state-
ment, provokes the spite of the arrogant and sti-slates the jealousy of persons
who have failed and pains their heart.

"The writer of the article, named Bakan al-Hajali, pretends to weep over the
conditions of his colleagues who work in the Jordanian newspapers, stating, with
respect to their situation, that it is 'more backward than the feudal conditions
of the Middle Ages' and that the conditions of Jordanian journalists resemble the
conditions of 'hired magicians and boon coapanions' from those eras. That is idle
talk, as if no one could read, write or hear, and as if he was addressing people
who lived on a different planet from ours. This talk is devoid of responsibility
and devoid of all rules of propriety, comradeship and respect, whether to the
people in the profession or the truth itself.

"The author of the article claims that the 'syﬂaols of feudalism,’ by which he
means the owners of the papers, have managed, by means of their broad influence,
to prevent the newspaper AL-AmAl from coming out. what is this confusion, this
soporific argument? "hat is the comection between the 'symbols of feudalism'
and the fact that the appearance of the newspaper AL-AIIIIAI was stopped? bid

17

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I‘Klﬂ \I'ld\ In]. In“. |IIVLO

they stop it, or was a governnental decree issued stopping it? No, no, everyone
in Jordan knows about this. AL-m was stopped purely of its own choice, em!
its franchise was abrogated by decree, by law, because it failed to appear for a
number of months. ‘Nonetheless, the goverment did not issue a suspension decree,
and this issue did not concern or preoccupy the 'synbols of feudalisn.’ Even the
reel owners of AL-MOIBAR newspaper realize this, and declare that the reason for
the suspension was a deficiency and shortening. the major share of which belonged
to the writer of the articles, that coupelled the owner of ﬁrm to resort to
this option--the option of suspending issuance of the paper.

"As for the issue of AL-RA’Y, to which the writer of the article referred, I do not
believe that I need to refer to that; AL-M'Y, today, is a major fact, a prominent
landmark in our country, a distinguished citadel of journalisn which lmndreds, in-
deed thousands, of brothers and colleagues have erected through their effort, their
vigilance and their sweet over the lest 10 years. Only ingretes, recalcitrant
people and the jealous can deny that or feil to recognize it. This also goes for
the fraternal AL-wsm, which. thanks to the people who run in it end work in it,
hes participated in the realisation of a journalistic resurgence in Jordan and the
development of the notion of a free independent press which is self-reliant end
always aspires to advance itself.

"We cherish our press for the good level it hes reached, and the Jordanian
Journalists who have exerted every possible effort to uplift this profession end
protect it from every artery: to destroy its dignity and the dignity of the people
working in it will remain loyal to the sanctity of the written word and freedom
of the press. There will never be anyone in their nidst who does not werk.,end
contents himself with lolling ebout here end going there in order to win big re-
wards or gain a fat foreign agency.

"In addition to the open distortions which appeared in the 'interview,‘ which are
an obvious violation of the truth, a point appeared which I would have liked to
avoid referring to, had it not been for the moment end astonishment it provoked
in the spirit of everyone possessing sincere nationalist end patriotic feelings
and in the spirit of everyone who knows the truth of the state of journalism in
Jordan, end had it not also been for the questions and doubts it raised concerning
the real nature of the motives that pronpted the person conducting the interview
to address himself to it.

“He described some journalistic colleagues as foreign to the profession and foreign
to Jordan. I believe that it is not worth my while pausing before either of the
'alleged states of foreignness.‘ The facts are well known and obvious: the people
who are foreign to the profession (as every Jordanian journalist knows) have been
engaged in the profession of journalism for yearsnyears perhaps as mroue as

the age of the person who ventured to describe then as foreigners to the pro-
fession. In fact, a large portion of the present lofty structure of the Jordanian
press was built through their efforts and their pens.

"As for the 'people who are foreign‘ to Jordan, that thinking is alien to our
people and the morals of our society. If it exists, it exists only in the minds
of people who puff themselves up with the perverse tendentious regional tribal
superiority that our people hsve rejected and all of whose symbols and claims they
have rejected.

18

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
"As for the issue of the Law on the Jordanian Journalists' Union, the position of
the journalists working in the press on that is fully known; they want the Journal-
ists' Union to be truly for the journalists and want an acceptable formula to be
found which will guarantee their colleagues in the press the participation their
colleagues in the official media enjoy. To have the union belong to official
governnent employees, as is the case now, is sonething no one accepts and sale-
times logic cannot find pleasing.

"I do not want to go on at length in discussing this issue; the Jordanian press

has been adequate for us, and most of our colleagues have written mnerous articles
in which they stated the journalists' position on the union and the law explicitly
and objectively, showing that adherence to the old law or the insistence on issuing
a new one which would treat goverunent ewloyees on a par with journalists is sons.
thing that would involve a great injustice and would bring on the cooptation of the
union and official dominance of it.

"It remains for me to mention that it is the truth, and only the truth, that lasts
and endures, that sincere, honest words are what deserve to be spoken and written.

and that the true journalist is the one who works. and works silently, without
pretensions . "

Al-Sharif: we Hill Prosecute Rim

Responding to the statement by Mr Rakan al-liajali, our colleague W sl-Sharif
says:

"I was saddened that a distinguished magazine such as AL-HA‘IAN AL-‘AMBI would
offer its pages to Mr Rakan al-l'lajali, who calls himself the 'union chief of
Jordanian journalists,’ so that he could heap vile curses and lowly iwrecations
on the owners of the two newspapers AL-RA‘! and AL-DUS'NR in the issue of Satur-
day 13 March 1982.

"The interview the magazine held with Mr al-liajali certainly goes beyond his right
to present his viewpoint concerning the problems of the Jordanian press and the
existing dispute on the union in an objective scholarly fashion and brings the
person giving it into the realm of slander, defamation and vilification which is
the province of the law and is not worthy of an ordinary journalisto-not to speak
of a person who claims to be 'the union chief of Jordanian journelists.’

"We would have hoped that Mr al-Hajali’s talk would be confined to his view on the
subject of the 'monopoly.‘ newspaper profits which, he charges. are in the
millions, and the manner in which the newspapers treat their eqloyees. which is
worse than the way feudalists treated their slaves in the Middle Ages! we would
have hoped for that because it is easy to discuss this sort of anpty charge and
expose it.

"limr, for Mr al-Hajali to deal with the owners of AL-BA'Y and Ai-wsm on
the pages of AL-HA'MN AL-‘MI. a smetines levelling accusation against their
Arabhood. sonstines accusing them of being followers of Wei, then accusing
then of being 'foreign to Jordan and foreign to the profession of jwrnalisn.’

19

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
fun ”If". '4‘. nae. VI‘LI

though they have founded giant newepapere of which Jordon and the Arab world are
proud, while he has not known the concerns and vexatione of the profeeeion, beyond
experiencing the pleasure of tripe. enoking cigars, and the prestige of the peei-
tion of union head five tines, then for him to proceed to claim thet the eole
objective of the owners of AL-RA'Y and autumn ie profit end that they are etend-
ing in the way of the ieeuance of new pepere becauee they ere 'eywole of nonopoly'
end feudaliete. then for him to hint thet they are reeponeible for the fete that
befell the late Selim al-Sherif and Ibrahim al-Sheneti and the diaeppearenee of the
newepapera musm, AL-DIPA‘ and AL-SRA'B. without offering a eingle iten of proof
on all theee aerioue capricioue chargee, and without the negatine AL-RATAN AL-‘Amr
taking the trouble to eel: him for e eingle item of proof to eupport theae allega-
ticne, or at leeat gettim in touch with the 'people concerned' to give then their
natural right to reply to Mr el-Hajali'e allegatione in the ease erticle--that ie
eomething which goea beyond everything we have come to expect in the norality of
the journelietic profeeeion end it contradicte the meet beeic principlea of equity.

"AL-HAHN AL-‘ARABI ia norelly and legally reeponaible, in ny opinion, for correct-
ing the tendentioue picture that Mr el-Hejali'e interview hae created in the ninde
of Arab readers concerning the Jordenien preee, ite hietory end the etmggle of
the peeple who run it. Since I an heetening to eend thie reeponee to you for pub-
lication in next week‘e ieeue of AL-WATAN AL-‘ABMI, I cannot find the time, nor
do I have the intent, in reality, to reply to the campaign of cureee which Mr el-
Nejeli hes unleashed against the Jordanian preee and Jordanian journeliete. The
place for that is the realm of the judiciary."

COPYRIGHT: 1982 AL-WATAN AL-ARABI

[1887
C50: 6404/425

20

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
MINISTER a7 mum 018608888 P3888 cm
Poria AL-HAW AL-‘AIABI in Arabic no 268, 2-8 Apr oz p 61
lzrticlo by tloroaco u'o: "'Moon Ahu 'Audah: 1'ho Gown-ht Ia laotralfi

liaxﬂ Hharo doao tho Hiniotry of Mutation otand on tho dioputo botvaaa tho
mapapor moon and tho Journoliato' Union?

The Jordanian oiniator of information, to What: Aha 'Moiah, roplioa,

"Ihoro are clearly two oidoa to tho iaouo. ‘rharo hao boon ropootod talk about
thio iaouo in tho poporo. Tho baaic diopoto ia batooao tho odoro of tho
Journaliato' Union, which, in tho oootoxt of tho old lav, inclodad tho aqloyaaa
of mm “BUS m. tho wloyaoa of tho ptivata aootor. and tho ovnoro of
tho paporo, although tho ounora of tho paporo all! oao ptivata aootor awloyooa
do not want tho owloyooo of tho mo ogoucy and tho anloyoaa o! tho oificial
oactor to join than in tho union.

“the torn“ grasp'o org-out io that tho union to not juat a protouionol body
but that it providaa oorviooa tor ito o-boro with tho oomuaot, not tho union.“
ouppoood to offor pooplo working in tho official aoctot', oinoo tho qloyor hora
io tho sworn-ant. ‘l'hat io moot. rho othar party raplioo thot tho union to o
profuoiooal growing that cannot bo roatrictod to privato ooctor qloyaoo an!
that tho paoplo working in tho public oottor hova tho tight to balm to thio
grouping. that to aloo corroct. ‘lhio io hov oath aida proooota ito tau and
trioo to mm and dotond it. uhilo failing to minor tho orguonta proaaotad
by tho other oido. As for tho smut, it otaulo in arbitration. tryim to
proparo tho orait of o haloncod lav. Ho aro not ontiroly in favor of ooo aido or
the other. ‘rho haw lav will try to toko tho two Winn into couoidoration.
rhoro oro throo protooaionol or trado union oodalo in tho world. tho nodal in
tho Wooten countrioo to that tho privoto ooctor m tho oodio; thorotoro. in
thio caoo, thoro i; ”)2051. of having mt uployooa and privoto ooctor

uployooa in tho [goal union.

"lhon thoro ia tho oooond pattarn. vhoro tho yrooo io oatiooalioad and tho oodia
thoroforo balms to tho gown-oat. ‘rho third pattoro or oodol ia hind mohip
of tho oodia, in tho oonao that tho sworn-oat and tho privota aootot participato
at tho oaao ciao. aa to tho can in our country.”

21

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I‘UI Ul' POLIRL UM UI‘LI

l§uestiog7 But how is it thet the eqloyees of 3mm NEWS AGENCY belong to the
union. while redio end television ewloyees heve not joined it?

linear-I. They will in the new lev, but the situetion will be confined to people
working on news, docmsentery end editoriel progru.

l§uestiog7 There ere people who ssy thet the ensll masher of pepers subjects the

editors to pressure fron eqloyers; whet is the goverusnt's position on this
point?

[gang-7 ‘rhs fect is thet esch side clsim thet it is subjected to pressure. how-
ever, it is necessery to heve e disloguo end errive et en egreensnt. lie will go
in es en internedisry, if they went our nsdistion, or es s third perty, but us will

go in only sfter they give their egreensnt, es s body seeking whet is beneficiel,
end nothing nore. -

/§uestio_t_t7 Hhet provokes one's sttention is the feet that you supported Yusuf Abu
el-Lsyl, director generel of the JMANIAN mus AGENCY, in the previous Journelists'
Union elections. The nevepsper owners supported hin st thet time, but todey they

ere objecting to JORDANIAN REVS AGENCY eqloyee newership in the union.
linsweﬂ rhst hes sctuslly heppened. libero «£7 freedon of choice end respect

for the denocrstic nsjority. That person believed in elections. The proof is

that Yusuf Abu sl-Leyl lost the election, end this is further proof thet there is
democrscy end freedom of choice.

COPYRIGHT: 1982 AL-HATAN AL-ARABI

11887
CSO: “4010/1425

22

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOI‘OFFKJAL.USE¢MVLY

LEBANON

CAHILLE SNAH'UN DISCUSSES SYRIAN ROLE. PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS
Paris AL-HATAN AL-‘ARABI in Arabic No 266, 19-25 Mar 82 pp 26-25

[Interview with Camille Sham'un: "Camille Shau'un Tells AL-HATAN AL-‘ARAEI, 'If
There is war. It will Be in the South, in al-Biqa'3‘ the Next Political Formula

will Be One of Three: an Amended 1943 Charter, a Federation or Decentralizationg"
in Beirut]

[Text] The political career of Camille Shau'un. past president of Lebanon and
current president of the Lebanese Front, has been longer than the life of the
"first republic" in Lebanon. His allies as well as his adversaries believe that
he may be the most intelligent politician of his generation. Shsn'un had the
experience of living half the past century [immersed] in Lebanese and Arab
politics, and he is still capable of assuming the initiative. His perspective on

politics is a historical one, and his historical intuition has always been
astounding.

we interviewed Hr Sham'un in his home in Beirut. He asked him about the charac-
teristics of "the Second Republic" at a stage that could provide solutions to

the Lebanese crisis. He asked him about war and peace in the area; we asked him
about the 0.5. position, the Syrian role, the battle for the presidency in
Lebanon and briefly, the immediate present in the history of Lebanon and the area.

A few hours earlier Philip Habib, U.S. envoy to the Middle East had ended his
fifth tour in the area and returned to Washington. Those who had met him in
Beirut after his talks in Damascus relayed that he had the impression that his
talks with Syrian officials there had been the most tense of his trip. he was
talking about one thing. and the Syrians were talking about another; and the
longer they talked. the gloomier the atmosphere becsae.

The annexation of the Golan. the alarming events of ﬂanah, the new forsulas in
south Lebanon in addition to the new 0.5. logic that is being used in dealing
with the Syrian role are all considerations that increased the complexity of
Philip Habib's mission. Despite this complexity, which surprised no one. the
parties to the fighting in Lebanon went back to set up their guns on the hills
and on the traditional contact lines. Meanwhile, the Lebanese people who want to
live began taking advantage of the March sunshine and to engage in their favorite
sport of skiing near the forest of large and small guns.

we asked President Shan'un. "A basic question is being raised about the cease

23

FOIICIHICIAI.IIII(I‘LY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

fire in south Lebanon after Philip Habib's recent tour in the area. Do you think
that in the next few weeks or months this cease fire will actually be in
jeopardy?"

[Answer] The cease fire is still in effect on the borders. Today, however, it is
likely to collapse because of any Palestinian action which Israel may consider a
violation of the agreement, just as it considers any incident inside or outside
lsrael. whether or not the perpetrators come from inside the borders of Lebanon,
Jordan or Syria. israel may also consider the increased arms supplies for the
Palestinians and the stepped-up military preparations near the borders a form of
challenge or a threat to its borders. In Israel's view this may constitute an
excuse for launching a war that it would consider preemptive.

Local War

iQuostion] If there should be a war in the south, can it start a broader war

in the area and against Syria in particular, or does the question of Syria's
missiles and role in Lebanon constitute two problems that are independent of the
Israeli-Palestinian confrontation in south Lebanon?

'Answer] If an invasion of the south does take place, it may be confined to
Palestinian and Israeli forces, unless Syrian forces were to oppose Israeli
iorces or if Syrian missiles in al-Biqa' became engaged in the military acti-
vities. in both cases I believe that the war would not go beyond the local areas,
south Lebanon and al-Biqa'. I also believe that the Arab countries will not take
part in this war, it it does break out.

:Question} To digress Zherez, there are those who say that the withdrawal from
Sinai was the last step in the Camp David process and the first step in Fahd's
plan ior peace. ls war strategically necessary to ensure a minimum consensus
among Arabs and Palestinians about Fahd's plan? Doesn't the Saudi plan require a
basic change in existing formulas in Lebanon, Syria and Palestine?

{Answer} The withdrawal from Sinai constitutes the last stage in the Camp David
process unless the West Bank autonomy talks continue. However, both the near and
distant past indicate to us that one cannot hope for anything beneficial to come
out at these talks. lsrael does not agree to the establishment of a Palestinian
state in Palestine unless the Palestinian Resistance recognizes Israel as a state
in the Middle East that has a right to live in the area within secure boundaries.
is tar as Prince Fahd's plan is concerned, its inevitable fate will be that of
Camp David itself because both plans are facing the same difficulties.

QQuestionj There is a growing feeling in western circles, following the events

in Hamah. the explosions in Beirut and the battles in Tripoli, that Syrian
seturity is now threatening Lebanon's and not the other way around. In your diplo-
mutic contacts with Arabs and foreigners did you sense that there was a convic-
tiun that the Syrian role in Lebanon had lost all its fundamentals and that it

had also lost its ability to assume the initiative?

iAnswer] The gory events that occurred and are still occurring every day proved
that the Syrian occupation constitutes a threat to Lebanon's security everywhere:
in Beirut, Tripoli, al-Biqa', in 'Ayn al-Rummanah, al-Ashrafiyyah, Upper al-Matn.

2b

EOIIHHHCIA1.USE(HVLY
FORiOFFKJAl.USEioﬂlY

al-‘Aqurah and in the north. The Nest and most Arab countries as well are now
convinced of this. however, these people lack the courage to declare this offi-
cially, not only in defense of Lebanon. but also out of their commitment to inter-
national law. to the lawfulness of the United Nations and to the charter of the
Arab League.

[Question] The battle for the presidency in Lebanon, which will take place soon,
constitutes the most important order of the next political stage. Hhat Lebanese.
Arab and international factors are controlling the destiny of this battle, and
how do its approaching prospects appear so far?

[Answer] The election of a president is a significant event in the public life
of the Lebanese people. especially under the present conditions that Lebanon is
experiencing. What matters to us is that this take place in a noruul fashion and
that there be no interference or coercion by anyone who is not Lebanese. This
would then constitute the beginning of Lebanon's restoration to a normal state.
and Lebanon would regain its vigor and its full sovereignty over its territory.

[Question] Is the need for a new president of Lebanon paving the way for a new
formula for Lebanon, or have the federalism, confederalism and partition programs
been forgotten? Is the restoration of the spirit of the charter now possible?
Briefly. which president is being sought now and for which Lebanon?

[Answer] it is not important now that we think of a new formula; but what is
important is that understanding, harmony and fraternal cooperation between all
the elements which make up the Lebanese family be restored. when this is accom-
plished. the Lebanese people themselves will choose the regime that they want.
They will either choose the 1963 formula with whatever amendments it needs; they
will choose a federation; or they will choose an expanded decentralization.

[Question] How would you describe relations at this stage between the National
Liberal party and the Phalangists? Have these relations been established on clear
foundations, or do their form, content and principal directions require reconsi-
deration?

[Answer] There were painful incidents between the two parties, and the National
Liberal party was not responsible for them. However. despite these incidents the
spirit of cooperation between the two parties is prevailing so that the harsh
conditions of Lebanon can be confronted in the present and in the future.

Good for the Iraqis!

[Question] What is the political significance of the fact that the Iraqi Embassy
moved from West Beirut to al-Hazimiyah--a subdivision in East Beirut--and how
would you describe relations at this stage between you and the present leadership
of Iraq?

[Answer] 1 do not believe that the move of the Iraqi embassy from west Beirut
to al-Hazimiyah has any political significance. The decision was dictated by
purely security reasons. We all know, unfortunately. what happened to the buil—
ding of the Iraqi Embassy and to the late Iraqi ambassador and the employees who
lost their lives as a result of the criminal attack that had targeted them. He

25

IN)! OIGHCIAI.IIHECIVLY
FOI:0I1HC1AI.[EHB(N§LY

also know the identity of those who carried out that attack; they are the ones
who claim to be in charge of security in Heat Beirut. But relations between me

and Iraqi leaders are excellent, and the purpose of those relations is to serve
both countries loyally and courageously.

{Question} Do you think that the war between Iraq and Iran is about to end soon?
And is the religious tide (the reform movement) in the Gulf and in some Arab coun-
tries a factor for stability in the area or an explosive factor?

[Answer] It is being said that there are negotiations to end the war between
iraq and Iran and that these private initiatives may soon produce a cease fire.

what matters here is that Iraq fought to regain its legitimate rights over some
iraqi and Arab territory. The sacrifices Iraq made for that objective were

crowned by military success. I hope Iraqi officials enjoy their success!

[Question] There will be a new stage in Egypt after 25 April. Do you believe
that Husni Mubarak will go back to the Arabs or that Arabs will come back to
Egypt? What are the effects the changes in Egypt will have on the Lebanese crisis?

LAnswer] it would be natural for President Husni Mubarak to try to return to
the Arab fold. and it would also be natural for some of the Arab countries to
think that restoration of Arab cooperation would strengthen the Arab position
in the Middle East. However. Egypt did voluntarily sign a peace treaty with
lsracl, and this must be taken into account so that there would be no confusion
in telations between Egyptians and Arabs in the future.

Copyright 1981 AL HATAN AL ARAB]

8592
650: thb/393

26

IKHICNHICIAI.IEIE(HULY
FOIiﬂﬂﬂClkLlﬁﬂloNlN

LiBYA

NATIONAL OPPOSITION STATEMENT
Paris AL-HATAN AL-‘ARABI in Arabic No 266. 19-25 Mar 32 p 30
[Article by Fadil al-Mas'udi: "Demands of the National 0pposition"]

[Text] in a statement to the official news agency JANA on the occasion of his
oiiicial visit to Austria. Col Hu'ammar al-Qadhdhafi announced that he wished

to meet with his political opponents abroad. he said he wanted to talk with them
for the purpose of reconciling with them and making it easier for them to return
to Libya.

in the past al-Qadhdhafi had refused to admit that there were Libyans who opposed
him. and he insisted on ignoring the national opposition inside the country and
abroad even as he was dispatching execution squads to the capitals of the world
where they carried out the physical elimination of many elements of this oppo-
sition.

Al-Qadhdhafi always insisted on not referring to the hundreds of national

figures, students and army soldiers and officers who were being held in his deten-
tion camps or in the dungeons of his jails in Tripoli, Sabha and Benghasi. "any

of those people lost their lives while they were being tortured, and many of

those innocent people were killed on hanging platforms on 7 April 1917 or were
treacherously gunned down inside the camps and the secret and public centers of
repression.

Less that 1 month ago the agencies of repression carried out broad operations

in which they arrested and kidnapped scores of students. soldiers and a few army
officers under the pretext that an attempt to assassinate the colonel had been
discovered. The colonel was to be assassinated while inaugurating a public market
in ﬂenghazi.

As usual. such investigations are not conducted publicly; they do not take place
in the presence of an attorney ior any of the defendants; and they are not neces-
sarily restricted to a specific legal period. it was inevitable that the investi-
gation with the defendants ultimately result in some of the defendants being
eliminated and others condemned to serve sentences the least of which was a life
sentence. This came about after the "necessary confessions" were wrested from
those defendants to justify the sentences against them. This was done by means of
advanced and new methods of torture carried out by the lackeys of al-Qadhdhafi's
power under the supervision and expertise of experts from clandestine government
agencies in East Germany and North Korea.

27

IOC<DIIIJA1.UBIGINLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Hhile execution squads are still touring the capitals oi the world. even at this
hour. looking for the regime's real opponents and planning their physical elimina—
tion. "our brother" Col Hu'ammar al-Qadhdhafi invites his Libyan opposition to

sit with him and to talk during his visit to Austria as the guest of the leader

of international socialism. Dr Bruno Kreisky.

As long as public opinion circles continue to comprise people who have some
ability to be discerning and to use logic. Hu'ammar al-Qadhdhafi's invitation to
hold a dialogue with his political opponents-~an invitation which came unexpec-
tedly and at this time in particular--must arouse in everyone's mind considerable
suspicion that it is not serious and not sincere.

Al-Qadhdhaii's invitation was extended to "Libyans abroad." This is deliberate
distortion because Libyans abroad are actually only a small part of the large
numbers oi those who disagree with al-Qadhdhafi and oppose his regime.

The real. serious and broad opposition to al-Qadhdhafi's regime is that which
is still in Libya. A large number oi its leaders were hung or treacherously elimi-
nated by the bullets oi the lackeys of oppression and terror. At this hour hund-

reds oi them are still in prisons. in the dungeons oi military intelligence and
in the institutions of repression and terror.

if al-Qadhdhaii were actually sincere in looking for a national reconciliation
formula. it would have been logical and reasonable for him to go first to his
political and national opponents who are still alive in his prisons despite the
forms oi terror. torture and suffering to which they have been subjected. and

to release them all immediately. He should have revoked all the sentences that
were issued against them by his puppet courts. After that he can turn to his oppo-
nents abroad and ask them to take part in a sincere dialogue to close the book on
the past and restore the country to a climate at peace. safety and security where
the law is sovereign. The foundations of democratic government would be estab-
lished. and this would guarantee public liberties. respect for human rights and
ensure justice for all.

Nevertheless. . . . .

Despite everything that happened. if Col Hu'ammar al-Qadhdhafi wants the Libyan
opposition inside the country and abroad to take his call to a dialogue ior
national reconciliation seriously and if he wants people to believe his inclina-
tlun toward peace and his desire to close the book on the past with all its

evils. its misdeeds and its gloom. he must immediately implement these national
demands:

1. Release immediately the various political prisoners. those who are detained
pending investigation and those who have been condemned by the tyrannical "revo-
lutionary" and puppet courts. This includes the group oi lieutenant colonels:
lormer minister oi defense Adam al-Hawas; former minister oi the interior Husa
Ahmad; all the delendats and those convicted in the case of the August 1975
uprising; the student groups who were victims of the repressive campaigns oi 7
April; the deiendants in the case of the Fifth Brigade uprising that was led by
the late al-Shahibi; and all those who are still in prison or under house arrest.
Respect must be restored to all those people; all their rights and compensations
must be settled; and all injustice that befell them-their imprisonment and
harraSsment--during the previous period must be lifted.

28

FOI:0IIIC1A1.U§EGIULY
INJI'OFFICIAI.lEIE(NVLY

This measure must include Libyan citizens-former civil servants. suspended stu-
dents and leaders oi the political opposition who are being targeted for harrass—

ment. persecution and repression--who were forced to leave the country and to
choose life in exile.

2. issue an order disbanding people's and revolutionary committees. According-
ly. the General People's Congress is to be dissolved. and all the unjust
measures. tyrannical practices and arbitrary decisions that ensued from what our
brother the colonel called the proposals of the Green Book and the Third World

Theory are to be repealed. These measures had hurt vast groups of citizens and
damaged their legitimate interests.

3. Form an independent civilian government led by a national iigure of integrity
item a previous or a subsequent administration. This government would restore the

rule of law to the country. and it would achieve democracy and the sovereignty
oi law.

It would be a ioregone conclusion that upon assuming power the function oi this
government would be to hold general elections to form a national assembly that
would write a new constitution which would realise ior the country a civilian
government that would enable our people to express their choices freely with
regard to their political. economic and social regime. This constitution would
ultimateiy provide the people with stability and peace and would ensure (or them
justice. ireedom and the sovereignty of law.

We may then say. "May God grant forgiveness for the past." Our brother the colo-
nel and his colleagues in the military will have to take 0!! their military uni-
forms and take part in the next legislative elections as ordinary citizens. if
they were to carry out this national reconciliation honestly. Courageously and
with integrity. they may win positions oi leadership and they may assume the
reins of power again. but then this would be based on the people's consent and
the tree will oi citizens.

Other than that. . . . .

This invitation to a dialogue which al-Qadhdhaii is casually extending now only

to the Libyan opposition abroad without being prepared to realize the aforemen-
tioned people's demands gives anyone who has a mind and the ability to discern

the right not to take the colonel's invitation seriously. it also entitles him to
consider this invitation. which comes at this time in particular a blatant politi-
cal maneuver whose purpose is to decieve Arab and international public opinion

and to lead it to believe that Libya's colonel is not like the image that every-
one has oi him.

Hence we have no misgivings about any Libyans inside the country or abroad being
taken in by this trick or having doubts about the tact that it is not sincere

or serious. International public opinion [will undoubtedly come to the same con-
clusion]. Public opinion has been watching all the colonel's suspect actions. The
public knows all the previous incidents and facts about the colonel's political
and international conduct in the past 12 years of his rule over ill-fated Libya.

29

Illltlﬂﬂtlhl.usliﬂitY
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Fadil al-Mas'udi

--A well-known Libyan journalist.

--Pub||sher and editor-in-chief of the newspaper AL-HAYDAR which has ceased pub-
lication.

--He was lorced to ilee the country after a military order ior his arrest was
issued on 8 December 1969. He has been living in exile ever since.

--His property was contiscated by the regime; he was stripped of his Libyan citi-
zenship; and he was sentenced to death. The revolutionary committees have been
hounding him to carry out the sentence against him. So far. three attempts to
assassinate him abroad have tailed.

--Chairman of the Libyan Commission for Defending Democracy and Human Rights. The
commission was formed on 17 April l973.

--$ecretnry general of the Libyan National Democratic Movement until 17 December

I981 when the movement was merged with the Libyan National Coalition to form one
organization.

COPYRICNT: 1981 AL HATAN AL ARABI

8592
C50: h50h/262

FOI10FFKJA1.UBI(HNLY
IIIICHNNCJAI.IIHICIVLY

LIDYA

INTELLIGENCE, SECURITY ORGANIZATIOﬂS DISCIIIID
Paris AL-HATAN AL-‘ARABI in Arabic No 267. 26 Mar - 1 Apr 82 pp 30-31

[Articles "Report from al-Qedhdhafi's Jamehiriyah: Libyan intelligence: Nemes_
and Assignments"]

[Text] Those who saw Col Hu'ammar al-Qadhdhafi in his elegant military uniform
during his recent visit to Vienna. surrounded by ”the royal family" were un-
doubtedly reminded of one of the phenomena of al-Sadat's rule among whose fore-
most critics was Libya's president. [We are referring to] an upstart. parade-like
appearance. Under these elegant appearances. however. lie a set of gloomy facts
about the "rule of the masses." Some of these facts ere reflected in a report
about Libyan intelligence with names and assignments that is being published for
the first time.

How does Col Hu'ammar al-Qadhdhafi rule Libya? Hany people know the truth about
what lurks beneath the cover of the "People's" and the "Revolutionary" committees
which were formed by the totalitarian ruler. before and after these committees
were formed. intelligence agencies were being managed by a handful of
al-Qadhdhaii’s relatives. the essential backbone of the regime. The colonel's
attempts to check these agencies under slogans of the people's rule and under
the colored paper and green banners that were unfurled by the "set designs" of
these multi-neme committees did not succeed.

But who are those relatives and arrogant followers of al-Qadhdhafi who are run-
ning Libya's intelligence agencies? ﬂow are they running these agencies?

AL-UATAN AL-‘ARABI received from Libya a report that reveals the secret makeup of
these agencies. their operating methods and the real names of those who are in
charge of them. AL-HATAN AL-‘ARABI is publishing only parts of this report for

numerous considerations. most important of which is its concern for the source
of this information.

The basic group of this "elite" upon which al-Qadhdhafi's rule is based consists
of [the following]:

--Hustala aI-Kharubi. chief of staff and chief of intelligence. he is one of the
most iniluential members of the regime. He strengthened his position by unco-
vering most of the attempts to overthrow the regime that were planned in the
ranks of the armed iorces. his favorite tactic is to leak news every now and then

31

IUIIOIIICIAI.IIII(IWLY
FIMICMﬂﬂCJAl.USIZ(MVLV

about his grievances against the colonel's "madness“ and his dissatisfaction with
his policies. This enabled him to make contact with many members of the opposi-
tion who took the bait and met their fate.

it is known that al-Kharubi leaves Libya only once a year to perform either the
pilgrimage proper or the minor pilgrimage. however, he did travel to Syria
numerous times to coordinate efforts with Syrian intelligence for tracking down
the opponents oi al-Asad and al-Qadhdhaii in Europe.

2. Sayyid Qadhdhaf al-Damm is the colonel's cousin and a former police officer.
He heads the general intelligence agency alternately with Hustafa al-Kharubi.

He also works as a journalist in his spare time. Sometimes he writes in the news-
paper AL-ZAHF AL-AKHDAR. or he writes some of its articles. For a period of time
he also wrote in the magazine AL-KIFAH AL-‘ARABI. it is known that Qadhdhaf
al-Damm has a special budget for "foreign operations” and that he spends lavishly
from that budget. he used to travel frequently to the capitals of Europe until
Blitish authorities accused him of taking part in plotting the assassination of
Dr Mahmud al-Haghrabi. Libya's former ambassador in London until his resignation
in 1975 to join the ranks of the opposition.

However, British authorities allowed Qadhdhaf al-Damm to enter Britain 6 months
ago for "humanitarian reasons." This was explained in terms of a special relation-
ship which the man has with British intelligence.

Qadhdhaf al-Damm had traveled to the Austrian capital a few days before the colo-
nel's arrival there to receive treatment for cancer of the bladder. he was in
the hospital throughout the colonel's visit to Austria.

3. Col Mas'ud 'Abd-al-Haii: (60 years old) is also one of al-Qadhdhaii's cousins.
and he is the one responsible for political assassinations and for special
security missions in the area of Sabha. he is the one charged with the task of
winning the sympathies oi the al-Qadhdhafi tribes. ensuring their loyalty and
watching those in the tribal ranks who appear critical of the colonel. he is also
the one who Is charged with ensuring security in all the tribes of Sabha.

4. Cpt 'Abdallah al-Sinusi is'the chief of armed forces intelligence. he is one
ol those who accompanied al-Qadhdhafi on his visit to Austria. He is from the
area oi Fazan.

S. Cpt Ahmad al-Qadhdhafi is the colonel's cousin and the closest relative to
his alfections. it is being said that Hu‘ammar al-Qadhdhafi considers Cpt Ahmad
his "invorite son" because he sees himself in him. Ahmad al-Qadhdhafi travels
olten to Europe. he does not go anywhere without a special guard, and during his
visits to European capitals he spends large sums of money which are believed to
come lrom the country’s security allocations.

6. Col Ynnis Bilqasim is a police colonel. He was one of the most energetic oili-
cers serving King idris al-Sinusi before 1969. Ai-Qadhdhafi kept Bilqasim alter
coming to power: he transferred him to Tripoli and appointed him department chief
in the Ministry of the interior. He soon promoted him assistant deputy minister
and then deputy minister. Then he promoted him Minister of the interior. Three

years ago al-Qadhdhall appointed him chief of the al-Jamahiriyah Security Organi-
lotion.

32

I0.‘09FKJAI.USE(HNLY
NI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Four Agencies

Al-Qadhdhaii sits in his seat of power quite confidently over this group after
developing tour agencies that share the task of executing security functions. The
first agency is the al-Jamahiriyah Security 0rganisation-—Bilqasimi the second is
the intelligence agency--al~Kharubi and Sayyid Qadhdhdaf al-Damm; and the third
is the General investigation Agency which is led by each of [the following]:

--Police Col Muhammad al-Ghasali who is also one of the officers who served
during the royal administration.

--Sa'd ibn 'Umran from Benghasi was recently "divested of his powers" when a deci-
sion was made recently to push him aside without ousting him [from his job].

--Then there is Lt Col . . . from al-Barkah in lenghasi. There is no need to pub-
lish his name now for special considerations.

The iourth agency is directly subordinate to al-Qadhdhafi. There is no interme-
diary for it. and not enough information about it is available.

Operating methods have recently developed quite noticeably. After actions against
the opposition had consisted of sending elimination missions to assassinate the
most visible and most iniluential members of the opposition. Libyan intelligence
is now using a more "sophisticated" method. it is using a number of businessmen

as a iront to open what are presumed to be trade offices in European capitals for
the purpose of using these offices as the foundations for the activities of intel-
ligence agencies abroad.

One of the prominent examples of the fact that Libyan intelligence is adopting
this method lies in the activity of Libyan businessman 'Ali al-Nayis who opened

a contracting office in Rome. The Department of Military Operations which is affi-
liated with the Libyan army gave him the right to execute a number of trans-
actions in its behalf.

Although this new method is the latest method utilised by Libyan intelligence
abroad. these intelligence agencies are still following the method of physical
elimination in Libya. here several names emerge.

--Haj Khalifah Banish. who is also from the al-Qadhdhafah tribe. is the one
behind the elimination of 'Amir al-Daghis in February 1980. Al-Oagnis was a sym-
bol for the national opposition in the royal age and then in al-Qadhdhafi's age.
Haj Khalifah claimed that al-Daghis committed suicide in his cell.

--Cpt Hasan Ashkal. al-Qadhdhafi's cousin. was a police officer in the royal age.
"is predisposition to showmanship is hnown. and he is well-known for his haughti—
ness. his ignorance and his predisposition to provoking others. especially intel-
lectuals. Ashkal also supervises the projects of agricultural planes in the area
oi Surt.

Cpt Ahskal is married to an Egyptian who now owns two buildings in Cairo.

33

IORiDFIIClAL.U§l(INLY
FOR OFFIGAI. USE ONLY

The "asked [Force]

One oi Ashkal's most prominent accomplishments which made him eligible to win the
confidence oi the colonel is the iact that he iormad a special group oi masked
men. This team became iamous after its members broke into the home oi al-Haj 'Ali
Zawawa at night and arrested al-Haj Zawawa who was known for criticising the colo-

nel's policies. They took him to a forest on the outskirts oi Benghasi where they
beat him up. He died later.

Then cubes Cpt 'Awad lbrahim irom military intelligence; he is chiei oi the mili-
tary intelligence branch in Benghasi. Lt Col Bilqasim al-Qanqa who is in charge
oi the investigations for the military prosecution in state security cases holds

a prominent position on the list at al-Qadhdhafi's regime. he is responsible for
investigating security cases.

The city at Tripoli is still talking about the wedding oi Cpt Bilqasim where
extreme pomp was evident. It was said that this was his reward from Col

al-Qadhdhaii for his devoted role in "preserving peace and stability" through-
out al-Jamahiriyah.

This is the elite that undertook the task oi eliminating the opposition inside
the country--chiei among which were Muhammad 'Amir al-Daghis. Husayn Saghir and
Muhamnad Fara} Hami--and assassinating the opposition abroad. chiei among which
were Muhammad Ramadan. Muhammad al-Khazmi, 'Abd-al-Jalil 'Arif. 'Abd-al-Latif
Nuntasir and 'Umran al-Mahdawi.

It is in this manner and under the slogan ol "absolute authority for the masses"
that Col ai-Qadhdhaii is ruling Libya. 1! this is the case. it may be necessary
to Ask: how is the colonel continuing in power? in whose interests is he in
puwet? Hhut ioreign role has been assigned to his so he can continue in this
power?

The answer naturally requires a more detailed inquiry and a more adequate histo-
rical reading into Libya's conditions. However. some answers do thrust themselves
in the course of these questions.

--The iirst answer is that al-Qadhdhaii is surviving because he is the primary
"hero" in aborting attempts for Arab solidarity between Egypt, Sudan and Libya;
between Libya and Tunisia; or between Libya and Syria, ad infinitum. He is the
central party in every inter-Arab rapprochement. he is a party to the lraqi-
Iranian war; he is a party to the Arab oil policy; but he is not a principal
party in any Arab strategy against Israel.

--He iinJ the second answer in the Libyan president’s interest in charging the
Egyptian-Libyan atmosphere with tension every time Egyptian-Libyan relations take
a course toward liberalisation. The evidence tor this lies in the fact that he
increased his military troops on the Egyptian borders in the past 2 weeks. What
applies to Egypt here also applies to the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia which was not
spared the Colonel's attacks during the same period after he had made considerable
eiiorts to settle his difierences with it.

He iind the third answer in al-Qadhdhaii‘a sudden liberal attitude toward some

310

FOIiDIFIJAl.UBl|0NlN
FOI‘DFFKJA1.USE(H‘LY

Arab capitals and in the fact that for some tine now he has been asking for a
date on which he can visit Haahington. After accusing Chancellor Bruno Kreisky
0! being a broker, he went to hin personally on a ceremonial visit during which
it was noticed that he was careful to promote the role of the family (his wife

and his son) at oflicial meetings, and this is a role for which he used to criti-
cize President al-Sadat.

Naturally. this is a case which international decision makers strive for in devi-
sing the formulas ol struggle according to their interests in the Arab area.

COPYRIGHT: 1981 AL HATAN AL ARAB!

8592
050: 6505/262

35

IOOiOFFKJA1.U§l(l‘LY