APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: CIA-RDPOZ-OOOGOROOO‘I00020032-3
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100020032-3

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/8287

26 February 19 79

TRANSLATIONS ON NEAR EAST AND NORTH AFRICA
(FOUO 3/79)

U. S. jOlNT PUBLICATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100020032-3
NOTE

JPRS publications contain Information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[l are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by s ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.3. Government.

COPYRIGHT MUS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING WNERSNIP 0P
HRTERIALS R£PRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSENINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOROFFICIAL USE ONLY.
IIILIOGRAPMC OAYA " 3'9“ N°~ 3- Recipient's linen-m No.

. u re \ nne . Repeat ale

TMNSMTIONS 0N NEAR 681' AND NORTH AFRICA. 26 Februer 1979

"’°"° 3”” _

I. Seducing Quaint-en kept.
o.

‘0. Paoien/Tesh/Vod- Una No.
II. Contract/60am No.

l). Type cl Repou I Pernod
Coveted

    
     
  
  

   
  

9. Perla-in. Orgaalsaulon Nev-e end Address
Joint Publicstions Research Service
1000 North Globe Mad

Arlington. Virginia 22201

      
   
        
   
 

‘2. Sponsor“. Olaasiulien None sod Mavens

As above

 
 
   
 

IS. Supple-rusty Notes '

6. lib-mete

no serial report contsins intonation on socio-econo-ic, government, political,
and technical develop-ants in the countries of the Near Esst and North Africa.

    

. ey ‘ sssd wee-est Asslysis. o- Descriptors

Political Science __inter-Arsb Affairs _l.ibys _Su1tenete
Sociology _North African _X_Hauritenis of can
Economics Affsirs __Horocco _Syria
Culture (Social Sciences) _Af3hanistan _ People' s Demo- X_'runisis
Ethnology _A13eris cratic Republic _United Arab
Geography _nahrain of Yemen Emirates
Technological Lagypt __Persisn Gulf _Rescem
Hilitary Sciences _Iren Area Sahara

_X_Ireq Qetar _Yenen Arab

'75 “WW"VON'E'M 7"” _Israel 1-Seudi Arsbie Republic
_Jordan _Spenish North
Kuwait Africs
ILebsnon __Sudsn

m. continue/cm. so, so, 5K, 15

Avsilsbility Stole-es! I . See-thy Clan (This II. No. °£I 30mm
For official Use Only. ""m _
Lillted Number of Copies Available From JPRS. mm

'°"" """' "“" “" me some an at ntnoouceo ""°“‘*°‘ "‘” "’
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/8287
26 February 19

TRANSLATIONS 0N NEAR EAST AND NORTH AFRICA

(moo 3/79)
Coureurs PAGE

Heykel Co-ente on 0.8., USSR Middle Beet Policies
(lube-ed Ilenneyn hyhl Interview; m MIDDLE
wt, F.b 79).IO0.05.0.0.0...0..OIQUOIOOOCOOOOOOOOOOOO 1

Al-Sedet'e Negotiating Tactics Oppoeed; Atteupted Coupe
Reported
(WTANMP'MI, 21086 78)eeoteeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeee 10

Leftist Lender Diecueeee Ilene-neat by Regine
(mud mini el-Din Interview; AL-HATAN Ab-‘ARABI,
28 kc 78).I0.06.0.0IOOOOOOOOOOOOOODO0.000.00.00.00... 18

Secret Supple-ent- to Camp David Accorde Uncovered
(smug al-aut; Wm Ab-‘ARm. 28 Dec 78)........ 28

IRAQ

Top-Level Delegation Vieite Soviet Union
(AL-HAHN AL-‘ARABI. 21-27 Dec 78).................... 36

Press Attache in Paris Describes Pen-Arab Nemre of Hedi.
Effort

(Sui Mahdi Interview; All-HAHN AL-‘ARABI,
15-20 Dec 78)......................................... 63

LEBANON

Interview Hith Any Comnder Gen Victor Khuri
(Victor Khuri Interview; 11!! MIDDLE EAST. Jan 79)..... 66

Interview Hith Lebanon UN Representative Gheeeen mmyni
(chemn Tunyni Interview; m XIDDLB EAST.

J.“ 79)eeeeeeeeeeeeeeetoeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeoe 50
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CONTENTS (Cont 1mm!)

MAURITANIA

Interior uni-tel: Bveluetee New Regi-o'e Positive. Negative
Points
(Jiddou Ould Seleck Interview; AL-HATAN Ab—‘ARABI.
“.10 J.“ 79).!oooonoee-Ioeno.oeeeeeeeeoeeeeeeeeeeeeeee

SAUDI ARABIA

Inpluentetion of Hunitione City Project in Doubt
(m m0“ 3m. JOB 79)Ieeeoooeoeonce-eeoeeleoooeoee

TUNISIA

Future of nourguihiu Threatened by Opposition Forces
(AL-HAHN Ala-mun. 28 Dec 78-3 Jan 79)...............

-5-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MM]. enema-rs on 0.8., USSR MIDDLE EAST POLICIES
London was HIM! EAST in English No 56. Feb 79 page number not given 1.0

[Interview with liuha-ad llasanayn Saykal by roving correspondent Pulvio
Grin-aldi on a "recent" visit to London]

[Text] Grinsldi: now do you evaluate present Soviet policies toward the
Middle East, in the light of Canp David, the Egyptian-Israeli peace nego-
tiatione and the Baghdad Ste-it?

ﬂaysal: It is s wait-and-see position. The Soviets have been through
several shocks in the Middle East. Host of the arms they ever gave to
the region went to Egypt and Syria between November 1972 and June 1973.
Then cue the October Her, and Soviet spirits were very high. he biggest
shock was experienced after the war, when they were expelled from Egypt
and Kissinger managed to seriously i-psir their options by the situation
he brought about in the area.

Since 1975 the Soviets have been re-evaluating their ideas on the Riddle
Best. But these new developents. which are pert of a huge American offen-
sive. one too early. They weren't ready yet, engaged as they were with
nos- of their energies in the east. where they face Chine, and in Europe.
And they were still licking their wounds after the failure of whet had
been their own offensive in the Middle Seat, previous to the abrogation of
the Soviet-Egyptian heaty in 1975.

Iheir reactions are therefore limited, for the tines being, to exploiting
the opportunities being offered. They have reconciled themselves to a

tactical defeat and are waiting for upcoming chances. I believe that the
general situation is bound to offer than these changes. When, I don't
know.

Question: but are you really convinced that the Nest is on the offensive
and is successful in its offensive?

Answer: In 1955 the Host was neatly concerned with the northern part of
the region and it established a series of alliances to stabilise that part:

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

NATO, SBATO and the abortive Baghdad Pact. they appeared to succeed,

as Turkey, Iran, Pakistan seemed pretty stable. But they didn't succeed
in drawing Iraq into the systen and they needed Iraq for strategic depth.
The degree to which things can go wrong in such operations is shown by

the fact that now the whole northern area is collapsing. There is serious
trouble in Pakistan, Iran and hrkey, and Afghanistan has been lost.

You can see that the Americans are making incredible nistakes, and they
keep making them now by pushing things as they are doing, particularly by
concentrating all their efforts on pence between Egypt and Israel alone.

The north is in disarray already and this strategy is now going to destabil-
iso the southern part as well.

Question: In that case one would imagine that the opportunities for a

global Soviet strategy are ripe. Or are they perhaps not too unhappy with
Camp David?

Answer: I don't think they are at all happy with Camp David. But their
subdued reaction to the agree-eats and even to the subsequent Baghdad Susuit
of the countries opposed to Sadat's policy doesn't constitute a strategy.

It rather shows a lack of strategy. The USSR realises that the situation
is still extremely fluid; things are happening all the time, and it wants
to keep its options open for a while. It is not as yet ready to move full
blast in one specific direction; it hasn't worked it out yet, So the

Soviets limit themselves to watching the developing situation closely, and
until the situation becones clearer their isn't much they can do without

risking mistakes. However, I don't think they will have to wait much
longer.

This of course doesn't mean that they don't have a general strategic con-
cept. The strategic concept is there and won't change. what they are
hesitating about is putting all the necessary power behind this concept
and gathering the readiness to get out and implement its next parts. But,
make no mistake, this hesitation doesn't mean that the Middle East isn't
inportant to them. whenever I had meetings and discussions with Soviet
authorities at the highest level I felt clearly how important it was to
them. The people in the Central Coastittee of the Soviet Cmnist Party
dealing with the Hiddle East have always been, and are, one of the most
powerful pressure groups in the establishnent.

Question: Do you therefore fee? that the Soviet Union has learned its
lesson from its Egyptian experic-zce?

Answer: In the course of the years the Soviets have made enomous invest-
ments in the Middle East, in political, econonic, ideological, nilitary
and other terns. Gradually they have developed a set of rules which has

changed with the tines and has certainly adapted itself to the new circus-
stances in the light of the experiences nude.

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

However, differences over dealing with the area exist within the leader-
ship, mainly between those that tend to opt for a wore adventurous, dynamic
policy--and these are the generals and achirals obviously--and those who
favour a note cautious and rational approach. Nobody. among all these

people, however, questions the general strategy that acknowledges the
absolute need to be there. The arguments are mainly about timing.

Question: llow do the Soviet Union and the United States development aid
policies for Egypt coapars?

Answer: Free the point of view of cash, the United States and the west
generally may be more useful. But for development, the USSR contribution
is by far better. The 0.8. for instance, would have never helped us to
build the Aswan Dam. The Soviets, in helping us in our industrialisation,
might have hoped to build up a strong labour force which they expected to

carry out a revolution along their lines, but this kind of developent
fitted our requirements well in those days.

what the United States can offer is a very expensive and discriminatory
pattern of censumption and, though I have criticised many aspects of Soviet
policy towards Egypt, their contribution was much better for our development.
llasir used to say that Egypt and the USSR could walk together for 50 per-
cent of the road, particularly for that part of the road that was needed

to get rid of the colonial heritage and to put down the basis for industrial
development. From that point onward our ways weren't the same any norc.

Question: But several economists in the West say that only through close
econonic links with the U.S. can Egypt's problems be solved.

Answer: Not at all. Our first need is development in agriculture and
industry and this can only take place within the framework offered by the
Arab world. Ok, so the 0.8. gives us $1 billion a year. But I fail to
see one single country where 0.5. aid went into real development. Us don't
need to be flooded with Coca-Cola, Cornflakes or Kentucky chicken. In 1977
we received $5.5 billion in foreign aid. $4.5 came from Arab sources, and
only one from the U.S. or U.S.-related bodies, such as the World Bank or
the IMP. On top we have to pay back those loans.

There is only one class, and a snall one, of people that make huge profits
out of Cornflakes and the like. There are of course people who can afford
to eat Cornflakes at breakfast or smoke cigars at press conferences, but
they are not the ones that matter. The real decisions are matured elsewhere.

Question: The big dispute going on at the moaent is whether the Camp David

agreement will lead to stability or to destabilisation in the Middle East.
"hat is your view?

Answer: Cup David as such is of little consequence. Hhat will upset the
area will be an effective separate peace between Egypt and Israel. And I

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

don't think, as many do, that destabilisation will come from the possible
breakdown of the peace negotiations. I see it as an internal Arab danger,
not as an external threat. for at present there is no possibility of war
with Israel. the inter-Arab qmrrel that would steal from a separate peace
could cause the greatest dangers to the whole area.

Question: But the Egyptian people seem to expect things to improve greatly
for than, particularly at the socio-economic level, if there is peace.
A diseppointaent could be very upsetting, don't you think?

Answer: I don‘t think so. Egypt's problems need nore than a separate
peace with Israel. The only chance for Egypt to solve its problems and

to develop effectively lies in its connection with the Arab world. Nobody
can replace the Arab world for Egypt, not even the United States. Further-
more, the United States will not give all that Egypt needs. Nobody, in
fact, will give us as nuchuend on such easy terns-~as the Arab world has
given us between 1973 and 1977.

Question: Were you surprised to see Saudi Arabia take a different stand
free al-Sedat on Camp David?

Answer: Not so much. One tends to divide everything into white and black
blocs, as Nixon used to do. One thinks that a rsgine. being Ioderate, will
accept any A-erican diktat. And one overlooks that certain basic require-
Isents are extremely ilportant to the Saudis--Jeruaalem, for one. The
struggle for Jerusalem and getting Jerusalem back for the Arabs and Muslims
legitimises the Saudi regine.

Nowhere in the Arab world are there people that would tolerate rulers who
don't satisfy this nininuss requirement. It is therefore central in Saudi
thinking. ‘Ihey will never follow a line renouncing Jerusalem.

And, I tell you, the lore the United States tries to pressure them, the
more impetus 'will be gained by the destabilisation process in the area.
We are all heading towards a very important and crucial period in tine ,
the Saudis like the rest of us. 'Ihere is a critical stage in development
where you siaply can't suddenly freeze it. I believe that overdue changes
are going to happen in Saudi Arabia. and they would be accelerated by
capitulation on Jeruselms.

Question: In a way the Camp David agreement and its follow—up have had a
unifying effect on the Arab world--of course against Egypt-wouldn't you

agree ‘.'

Answer: Yes, these developments have been leading to something of that
sort. but Egypt has been central to the Arab world for centuries and its
defection .-ill have negative repercussions on the balance of power, what-
ever the others do, and will therefore lead to a more precarious situation.

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I want to say that I find it very strange that l’resident Carter should
have pushed so hard for a separate peace. In the past American adminis-
trations didn't believe in it, for they knew it would affect moderate
policies in the area. I really can't understand such a line. Many be-
lieve that it is based on strong American internal needs and conditions.

But how can a superpower sacrifice its global interests for transient
domestic purposes?

Question: Most of the western press seems to believe that in the end the
conservative Arab states will accept Egypt's peace.

Answer: We in CLQ Arab world very often fail to explain our point of view
and existing realities. Things are much more complicated than opting for
one policy or the other. Here we have a conflict between two civilisations
for a piece of land, Palestine. But Palestine is not only a piece of land.
It used to be the bridge between Asia and Africa. And Egypt has tradition-
ally always looked cast for an outlet. It tends east, and this is a his—
torical necessity, and historical necessities must be respected. Every-
body wanta peace, but on what terms? At the risk of going against reality?
The conservatives want to join Egypt, all right, but they won't join a
peace that leads to a highly precarious situation. Any Tel Aviv-Cairo
axis is impossible, artificial, absurd.

Question: In recent weeks al-Sadat has clearly stiffened his attitude.
Article 6 of the Cusp David agreement, which gives priority to peace with
Israel over Egypt's co-itments to the Arab world, became a major obstacle
at one stage of the negotiations. Is this the result of the isolation in-
posed by the Arabs on al-Sadat?

Answer: Egypt has made mistakes. The fact that at a certain stage Egypt
refused to accept Article 6 is a good sign. The chances to correct further
mistakes are still there. In any case, I pray that this attitude is not
only the result of Arab opposition prompted by the Baghdad Sta-sit. I hope
that it is the result of some real rethinking. And we have to sit down and
think some more.

Question: that is your evaluation, in political and military terms of
the revived "Eastern Front"?

Answer: The Eastern Front was always a very important component in the
confrontation with Israel. But nobody should make the mistake of thinking
that it is enough to have a confrontation on the Eastern Front. I think
that the Eastern Front can achieve a certain independence and freedom of
action, even without Egypt, but only in 10 to 15 years. What this front
can do is a holding operation. Let's face it; the local balance of power
since World War II was based on Iraq, Syria, with the Arabian peninsula
on one side, and Egypt on the other.

As for the Baghdad Suaaait, I think that those who expected very much from
it were mistaken. They were looking at things as they should be, not as

5

Nil OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

they are. But what happened in Baghdad is nevertheless important, and it
is important that Iraq and Syria found it necessary to overcome their
feud, and that the countries of the Arabian peninsula found it imperative
to back all this. This is going to start putting in place a new balance
of power and new equations. But it will take the long time I nentioned
before. in any case, with the human, political, economic and military
potential of Syria, Iraq, Jordan and the Palestinians, backed by the
Arabian peninsula, we will be able to finally have a viable and strong
front.

Question: Do you think that the Palestinians have been given a fair chance
of joining the peace progress?

Answer: Hell, we 'll have to see the peace agreement, which, however, to
my mind is not a peace agreement. As to the texts that have been published
so far, I den' t think that they offer the Palestinians anything. I can't
see that adsiniatrative self-rule neans anything at all, especially in the
light of the balance of power inside Palestine or around Palestine.

Question: So what options do they have?

Answer: You know what advice I give--as a friend--to everybody in the
Arab world? We are going towards a very important turning point, and in
front of such turning points, historically people tend to rush into action.
If I an allowed, as a friend, to say anything, I would tell the Palestin-
ians that we are facing a nonent in history where we need to think before
we decide on the course of action. All the Arab world needs to think. We
are facing a situation that could lead to Egypt's isolation or to Egypt
opting out of the Arab world, which would be a very dangerous thing for
both Egypt and the Arab nation.

The Baghdad conference ef'the rejectionista was a success, because it
showed an Arab position that does not accept the Cusp David agreement, and
took decisions pending the implementation of that agreuent. it was a
rejection and it was a warning to Egypt not to go it alone. liore than
that, it was a warning to- the United States not to pursue this dangerous
path. All of this was still on the passive side. After the signature of
the peace you can implement what was decided upon in Baghdad. But the big
question is: Then what? H'hat we need is a viable Arab strategy before
rushing into action. This was a necessity when Egypt was still there. It
will be even more necessary without Egypt. Naturally there will be a ten-
dency to condemn, accuse, insult. But this would be merely a hysterical
reaction. What we need is a rational reaction. This is why the Pales-
tinians and the whole Arab world must sit down and think what can be done,

what sins we must have, for the short and long terms, and how we may reach
then.

Question: But the dynamics of the situation seem to inpose certain choices
upon the Palestinians, for instance regarding the Palestinian state in the

6

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

West Bank and Gets. It has been reported that 'Arafat aasured an American
congressman that he is prepared to recognise Israel if he gets this state.

Answer: this is what this congressmen said, but what have the Palestinians
publicly stated? 1 think that if the Palestinians were offered an indepen-
dent state in the Heat bank and Gate with a link between the two, as well
as East Jerusalem, obviously everybody would tell than to go ahead end
accept. This however is a mirage, a dreu, not a concrete option.

Question: You have written that the United States is trying to replace
the concept of an Arab world, with the concept of the Middle East, which
envisages an alliance of Arab and non-Arab countries. Has one of the aims
of Camp David to further promote this strategy?

Answer: llot only of Camp David. Ever since World Her II America's aim
has been to break up the Arab world by isolating Egypt from it. So far
they have failed and I think that the objective conditions are such that
they will continue to fail. I am always asked whether I think that the
Soviets have learnt their lessons, but the real tragedy is that the United
States has learnt nothing from the last 25-35 years.

Question: The concept of an Arab nation seems to be undergoing a change.
Nationaliu used to be the big driving force, whereas now several Arab
regimes are trying to unite the Arabs around Islam.

Answer: I don't think that it has changed so much. Isln has always been
and still is one of the ingredients of Arab nationaliaa. But it alone
cannot create a nation. Hhat lakes a nation is not religion; it's a connon
language, a cannon” nind, a canon interest, a cannon culture, a cannon
security. Religion is but one aspect of all this. In Malaysia too the
people are Muslims, but what else do they have in cannon with the Egyptians?
However, the idea of Islam an a unifying factor is not new. The idea of

an Islamic ca-onweelth is a legacy of the Ottoman Empire and after the

end of World War I, with the fall of the Ottoman bpire, it was superseded
by the concept of nationalist.

In the developing world religion alone cannot be a progressive force.

There Inst be other ingredients, such as independence, social emancipa-

tion and so on. But these ingredients don't appeal to certain forces in
the area. The supreaecy of religion is the result of an instinct of self-
defence, to the point where Islanisation should neutralise Arab nationalism.

Question: But where, would you say, does the idea of an Arab nation exist
today?

Answer: Everywhere in the Arab world, with the exception of same conser-
vative leaders. Societies must organise their lives beyond religion and
its rules. The period of religion-danimted societies is gone. Today we
don't have a Christian entity, but Europe, which is something lore tangible.

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OVFKCIAL USE ONLY

Question: Would you say that today in Egypt there are forces at work
that aim at the de-Arabisation of the country. by, for instance, stressing
its Pharaonic heritage, or its African links?

Answer: Something happened in Egypt that was part of a general movement in
the Arab world during various centuries. huhaassad 'Ali was the first who
saw the need for an independent Egypt, for a diffe"ent Egypt. At the end
of the Ottoman aspire. Egypt went through a search for identity. It was
the tile of all the Pharaonic discoveries and Europe did its best to suite
the Egyptians feel that there was their identity. The l’haraonic legacy
ms the intellectual link with Europe. But 'Abd el-Nasir realised that
our true identity was Arab. lie nade one mistake; this fact was not suf-
ficiently discussed on a wider scale. It was taken for granted without
helping it to sink into the consciousness of the nasses, together with its
socialist corollary.

Revisionisa disputed this identity, particularly the classes that had been
hit by our measures of nationalisation. In a way it is a good thing that
the whole question is being discussed again. The final result will cer-
tainly assert our Arab identity and place it on a firner base. The trouble
is that, while doing so, we are losing tins and introducing doubts about
our Arab identity when we most need the awareness of this identity.

Question: Fifteen years ago Egypt cause to the_help of the revolutionaries
in Yemen. against Western-backed feudalism Today Egypt, after having

intervened in Zaire, is reported to be in North Yemen again, but this tine
on the side of the conservatives.

Answer: I am not sure that Egypt is in North Yemen; I have no proof of
this. Anyhow, I as: very proud of our first intervention in Yemen. As to
the' second, I can only pray to God that we are not there.

Question: How do you think the upheavals in Iran will affect the Middle
Best?

Answer: 1 consider myself nore or less a Nassarite. 'lherefore you can
imagine what I feel about today's events in Iran. I wrote any first book
on Iran, along other things. Of course, I can't tell what's going to
happen, but I have the iapression of being before a deja-vu situation.

I was in Iran during the first anti-shah insurrection. in 1953. Now the
conditions are very different. The popular forces learnt their lesson,
they are better organized and note detemined.

The historical friction that always existed between the Arab world and
Iran has been accentuated by the shah and his policies. This is a pity.
Even if there are contradictions, on the Gulf a-ong other things, they
could be contained. We are neighbours and should live together in peace.
I an sure that if, as I pray, there won't be a prolonged nilitary dictator-
ship in Iran, if things follow their right course. a tine for real

8

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

cooperation between Iran and the Arabs will come. And I hope that the
Arab world will then be in a condition to use this great opportunity.

Question: How do you view your future role in Egyptian politics?

Ansuer: This is a difficult question. I really don't know. I have always
tried to be a journalist, able to say everything I feel. This is still my
ambition. Recently I have been offered many chances to go end work abroad.
But for ne there is no place if not in Egypt, whether at hone, in the office.
or in prison. Let's hope for the best.

Question: But somehow your position was a bit special. You were the
closest adviser to President 'Abd al-Nasir.

Answer: You must understand that the situation of the press in the de-
velopieg countries is different. Given the probleue of the Middle East,
you can't just be carriers of news. You are in the uidst of events and.
thus, you are obliged to take sides. Before your revolution there was a
parliamentary debate in Iran which went against the shah. I reported
this, adding but one little sentence: This is what happened in Iron.
This caused me to be arrested for 24 hours, but, according to the law. I
could have got 12 years. Re are not as privileged as you here; we cannot
afford to be detached. It's a nutter of to be or not to be.

COPYRIGHT: 1978 I c Hagazines Ltd.
080: 6820

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
{UR Ul'llbhllo UDB WI.)

EGYE’T

AL-SMMT'S "NOTIATING TACTICS OPPOSEO: ATTEIPTED COUPS REPORTED
Paris AL-HATAN Ale-"ARAB! in Arabic 2]. Dec 78 pp 16-18

(Article: "Al-Sadat in the Negotiations Cauldron: 'A Hot Pan and a Cold
Pan'; Regime Escapes “mo attempted Coups: One Failed Because officere'
Intentions Here lite in:erpreted; Al—Janasi Has Revved from his Poet Because
lie was Suspected of Covering Up the Second Military Attenpt: the Predicanent
of Iran's Shah ls ﬁshing the United States Reconsider the Experience of
Egypt's 8hah"]

[Text] On the basis of intonation obtained from well-infomd Egyptian
sources AL-HA‘IAN AL-‘mnl can confin that two successive military attempted
coupe that sought to overthrow al-Ssdet and his regime were eaong the
principal reasons that led the Egyptian president to lake up a crisis that
he had agreed to beforehand with Hashington over the lin'tage between a peace
treaty with Israel and a schedule for autonomy on the West Bank and Gaza.
‘l'his fabricated crisis served local political purposes in Egypt and in the
Arab world. It sought to contain any resentnant towards the concessions made
by al-Sadst by neans of nsking up "intrasigsnt" position.- 1!. accordance to
the tactics of shifting from a "hot pan" to a "cold pan." Al-Ssdat cane
upon this concept in the many of book about the French-Tunisian negotiations
by Mr Christian Pinaud the former French sinister of foreign affairs.
Naturally, the sumary was the work of Dr lutrus Ghsli the minister of state
for foreign affairs.

Heanwhils infoned observers are saying that al-Sadat is conducting himself
in government and in official life as though he were the autocratic chief

of a village in the tenets areas of upper Egypt who rules according to his
fancy.

It is on this basis. when his assistants began to be shaken by pessisism as
a result of the aedia magnifying the new: about the Israeli-Egyptian dispute
and the news about Vancs's faltering mission. that el-Sadat would assume the
posture of a village chief in his palace at al-anatir al-Khayriyah [the
Barrage]. he would reassure his assistants and the editor-in-chief of his
newspapers. who were disnayed by the Egyptian-Israeli conflict which appeared
to be brewing. that everything that was taking place was occurring according

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

to a carefully drawn-up plan. he hiaself had suggested this plan to Carter
who became enthusiastic about it and. after such effort. had persuaded

begin to go along with it up to a certain point. This plan is based on
shifting the Egyptian-Israeli negotiations rapidly. continuously and without
interruption free a cold pan to a hot pan for a certain period of ties.
Instances of pessiaisa and optimise with their increasing psychological
pressures on all would ensue. If a paacy treaty containing the stipulations,
that were agreed upon in Washington were to be signed. everybody would have
a sigh of relief and consider it "an accomplishment."

Al-Sadat said that it was the book by Pinaud. the forner French ninister of
foreign affairs. that suggested this policy to hin. Pinaud had said that
the French and the Tunisiana who negotiated the independence of Tunisia had
adopted a plan "of continuously shifting the negotiations from a hot pan to
a cold pan" by holding official sessions for the negotiations and then
asking up a crisis that they had agreed to beforehand. Afterwards, through
unofficial censunieations and the mediation of third parties an announcement
would be aade that the crisis had been overcone. Then the door would be
opened for the resuaption of public official negotiations. Then another
crisis would take place, and it would be followed by another shift to new
negotiations and so on until an agree-eat granting Tunisia autonony would be

reached after having exhausted all the factions of Tunisian and Arab oppo-
sition. Ultilately, the entire natter would appear to have been a major

victory that was very hard to pull off.
The Principles of al-Sadat'a Analysis

Although there is a raiical difference between the subject of Tunisia-France
and that of Egypt—Israel. al-Sadat did adopt Christian Pinsud'a tactics with
Carter's approval. This was done to confront obstacles and difficulties
that had not been taken into account when everybody sat down to draw up the
terns of the Case David deal.

During his chieftancy session at the al-Qanatir al-xhsyriyah palace al-Ssdat

would identify to his assistants three levels of these obstacles and diffi-
culties:

The first level of difficulty was that of the increasing opposition in Egypt
to the Egyptian-Israeli agreement.

The second was that of absolute Palestinian rejection on the west Bank and
the Gaza Strip of the autonoay project.

The third level of difficulty was that of the Arab rejection of the Coup
David accords. At the Baghdad Suanit Conference this rejection produced a
broad front that politically encoapaeses Iraq, Algeria, Syria, Libya,
Denocratic Yemen and the PLO as well as Saudi Arabia, Kuwait and the United
Arab Bairatee.

11

FOR OFFICIAL USE GREY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The fact is that el-Sedat's supporters and the Mafia in the government of
Egypt tried through their total control of all the nedie--television. radio
and the prose-to give the inpreseion that all the Egyptian people, except
for a snail ainority of leftists who are opposing Camp David on orders

fro- Hoscow [were supporting el-Sadat's efforts].

however. foreign journalists and observers in Egypt soon noticed that this
"seall minority of leftists who are Moscow's agents. according to al-Sadat's
definition. were holding popular eeetings under the nane of the United
National Progressive Grouping Party" and that thousands of citizens fron
Alexandria in the north to Aswan in the south were participating in those
neetings. The foreign journalists and observers noticed that el-Sadet's
regins end government were not able to tolerate the opposition of "this
snall ninority of leftists." Govern-ant agencies were continuously confis-
cating their newspaper AL-AHALI. Afterwards. the state owned al-Ta‘awun
Publishing Pirn, whose board of directors is chaired by Mr Handuh Ride.

was advised to cancel its contract to print and publish the newspaper on

the basis of the fact that the newspaper was costing the publishing firs
considerable daasge end was hurting its reputation.

Opposition from the Right end free the Left

The observers noticed that the United National Progressive Grouping nay
have been the first to condemn the Camp David accords and the direct nego-
tiations with lsrael decisively end clearly. But they were not the only
opposing force on the political scene. There were the Monica Brothers
with their three organizations end factions. They announced their fire
opposition [to the accords and to the direct negotiations] on a religious
and a political basis. They expressed their opposition clearly in the two
newspapers ALFDA'HAN and AL-I'TISAM and also in the public prayers on
feasts where they advocated such opposition at the square facing 'Abdin
Palace which el-Ssdst is using as the official seat of his regine.

There is also the Hafd party. Although the party decided to disband

itself six aonths ego to protest the [government's] unconstitutional,
terrorist, repressive neasures and the political isolation of its leaders--
these asasures are contrary to the siaplest rules of denseracy-it is still
operating and active on the political scene. with regards to Cenp David
the wsfd party is divided into two factions. The first one, which that

of the majority, is strongly opposed to Camp David. It is led by Fu'ad
Siraj aloDin who announced that Israel was Egypt's direct eneny just as

it was Palestine's and that Egyptian security could not be separated from
total Arab security. The second faction is led by Dr Huhaanad ﬂilni Murad
aenber of the People's Asssnbly. Although this faction has not expressed
its clear opposition to Ceap David. it did submit 17 reservations which
undernincd the foundations upon which the Coup David accords are based.

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL l'SE ONLY

Liberals and national technocrats also, who are led by Hunts: Nasser a
proninent attorney. a forner president of the Lawyers' Club and nenbor of
the People' a Assembly and Dr Engineer Hahnud al-Qadi member of the People' a
Assembly who is described as the nest skillful contcnpornry Egyptian
parliasentarian, are condeaning the foundations of the Camp David accords
and are considering their action to be the principal preface to their
attenpts to fora a new party in Egypt under the nane "National Front."

In addition, the novenent to oppose Canp David and al-Sadat's policy,
which does not serve national and pan-Arab interests, includes the indepen-
dent Nesiriets who are led by Kanal Ahnad, the only nasirist representative
in the People's Aasenbly. This novenent also includes all the coenunist
organisations which are not legally pernittsd but which pursue their
activities in secret. The nueber of these organisations anounted to six;

nost proninent anong than are the Egyptian Omnist Party, the Conuniat
Labor Party and the 8 January Organization.

All the living nsnbers of the 23 July Revolutionary Council are going along
with the opposition. They are 'Abd-al-Latif Daghdadi, Zakariya Huhi al-Din.
Hussyn sl-Shafi'i and Renal al-Din llusayn. The only one who did not go along
with the opposition is "seen lbrahin who preferred to naintain silence and
refused to sign his colleagues' statenent so that al-Sadat would not attack
his connercial interests. Two nan who had served as prias ninistars in
al-Sadat's adninietration have also joined the opposition novanent. They

are Dr Hahnud Pawri and Dr 'Ariz Sidqi. The third prine sinister, Dr Hijzi,
has kept his peace. Dut al-Sadat got the support of the former prine ninister
Haeduh Selin. a forner investigative officer, who was rewarded by al-Sadst:

he was renewed free the ninistry and appointed as al-Ssdat' a assistant. It
is a ”cerenonial" job, and the only work he has to do is accept on behalf

of his “boss" the prizes that have been pouring on al-Sadat fron Zionist

and 0.5. organizations.

The Ruling Mafia

It is thus that today all the vital and active forces on the Egyptian
political scene are variously activated to denonstrate various degrees of
opposition to al-Sadat's policy of capitulation to Israel and the United
States. These forces have cornered al-Sadat politically and have isolated
his and the group that has benefited financially, economically and bureau-
cratically fron his regime. According to official statistics issuec by the
Ministry of Planning in January 1977, this group of beneficiaries repre-
sents the interests of 2.353 fanilies whose average size is five or six
individuals. Thanks to the cannercial openness each fanily earns an annual
incone that varies fron 55,000 pounds to over 2 nillion pounds.

Squatting on top of the pyranid of the ruling Mafia faniliea are al-Ssdat's
fanily: 'Uthnan Ahead 'Uthnan; Sayyid Har'i; 'Abd-al-Chaffar (the president's

in-laws); Huha-ad Shahin; Ahnad Sultan, the forner vice president and
niniater of electricity who was accused in the United States of accpeting

13

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

a bribe; Dr Mustafa Khalil, the current prime minister who is considered

one of the most prominent representatives in the Middle East of the well-
known conglomerate ITT. the company that financed Chile's bloody coup
against the government of Chile's late President Allende; Mahmud Abu Hafiyah.
the president's brother-in-law and husband of Kamiliys, Jihan nl-Sadat‘s
sister.

This Mafia assumes political form in two parties. Al-Sadat is proud of
having established them at the same time--according to him-~by plowing the
political mainstream. The ruling official majority party is the Democratic
National Party; and the official opposition party is the Socialist Action
Party. To load this party al-Ssdat chose his brother-in-lew Mahmud Ahu
"afiyah and Engineer Bbrahim Shukri the former minister of agriculture.

The two parties tried to convene popular meetings under the slogan "Peace
with Israel is the way to democracy and prosperity.“ But they soon suspended
these meetings on orders from al-Sadat himself after it became clear that
the masses were raising questions about the Camp David accords even though
they were concerned in a primary degree about solving their accumulated
economic and social problems whose tight grip was affecting undersecretaries
of ministries, not to mention workers. farmers, junior and mid-level em
employees. These reservations were expressed with so much hostility that
Fikri Makram ‘lbayd the secretary general of the president's party said

they were "very disturbing."

And even inside the small circle of government observers noticed that all
the members of the People's Assembly who participated in the discussion

of the Camp David accords, especially supporters of the regime, were careful
to underscore their reservations. This came about in view of a general
trend in public opinion. People are becoming increasingly aware of the
gorwing link between the fierce hardships of life they are experiencing

and the economic openness policy and the political opennes policy with
Israel and the United States. The people have become aware of the fact that
Camp David net only isolates Egypt from the Arab community, but it is also
making it poorer and increasing the fierceness of its economic problems.

On a personal level some individuals who are close to al-Sadst were advising
him to ponder the matter somewhat and to reconsider the situation. when
this advice was repeated. al-Sadat became very angry end sharply accused

his advisers of cowardice and disloyality. Even his wife Jihan was not
spared this accusation. She had conveyed to him obervations opposed to the
accords made by professors of the College of Arts where she recently gradu-
ated. Even Sayyid Mar'i the former speaker of the People's Assembly was
accused of becoming the prisoner cf his relations with some "leftists who
are agents for Moscow and for the Palestinians." Me was removed from his
position as speaker and was replaced by ”the exponent" of the new regime
Sufi Abi Talib. [Meanwhile] Sayyid Mar'i cowered in the "presidential
warehouse" like his arch enemy Mamduh Salim as an assistant to the president.

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Two Attempted Coupe

There is also the position of the army. Hell-informed sources affirm that
there were two attempted coupe against al-Sadat during the last six months.

The first attempt was carried out by . group of young officers. Their
purpose was to kill al-Sedat and his assistants when they met at one of

the meetings. Forty-eight hours before they were to carry out their plan.
some of them contacted the Mesirist representative Kasai Ahmad end asked
him to set up meetings for them with some nationalist politicians who belong
to different factions. But the Nssirist representative suspected that the
matter might be "a trap prepared for him by the investigative police."

He reported the incident to the police who arrested those who planned the

attempted coup. They were 63 officers. and the highest ranking officer
among them was a colonel.

The second attempt was carried out by a group of mid-level and senior
officers. There were major generals and brigsdier generals among them. They
distributed handbills inside the army in the name of the New Pres officers

in which they condemned the policy of impoverishment and subordination

to u.s. colonialism and Israel which is being pursued by al-Sadat. They
criticized his military ventures against the Palestine Liberation Movement
and against Libya and Africa.

It has been said that that attempt was reported by a pro el-Sadat secret
organization in the army which is supervised by husni Mubarak end that the
investigations which included 14 officers who had been arrested led inves-
tigators to suspect that Lt Gen Muhammad 'Abd-al-chani el-Jamasi the former
minister of defense and commander—in-chief did know about this organization
and was covering up for it. This may have been the principal reason for his
sudden dismissal from his position after the officers were arrested.

Some sources add that al-Jamasi had expressed his opposition to the position
of "liberated Sinai" as stipulated by the Camp David accords with regard to
Egypt's military security. Militarily speaking, Sinai would actually be
under Israel's control. It seems that this view which al-Jamasi expressed
on the question of Sinai was widely shared in the army and that Lt Gen

Kamal Hasan 'Ali the new minister of defense had to inform al-Sadat about it.

In view of this internal situation in Egypt which constitutes the possibility
that a broad opposition front may be established on the political scene

on the basis of the opposition to Camp David; in view of the activities in

the army; in view of the damage to the unity of the existing relations between
al-Ssdat and a number of people who are in close contact with him. al-Sadat
did adopt the [alternating] "hot and cold" tactic in the Israeli-Egyptian
negotiations to try gaining time, to prevent the formation of political and
military opposition factions within a unified movement; and to appear to be
the one who was drawing from Israel concessions that are consistent. at

least in form. with the reservations of some people in his regime.

15

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFiCiAL USE ONLY

Al-Sadst is also facing the problem of his open and secret pledge to go
over the PLo's head as the sole, legitimate representative of the
Palestinian people. Hith leading personalities of the Heat Bank and the
Gaza Strip he would create a united Palestinian-Egyptian force that would
be capable of carrying out the [plan for] autonomy in accordance with
the Caap David secords. when al-Sadat was confronted with the firm
rejection of the people of the West Bank and the Gaza Strip, he asked
Carter and Begin for the freedom to maneuver to the point of making up
imaginary crises with Israel about "the legitimate rights of the Pales-
tinian people; the possibility of the Palestinians establishing their
nationalist state in the future; and the possibility of linking the Sinai
agreement with the autonomy agreement. He also asked them to support him
financially and politically in his efforts to use all means to create in
the occupied territory a climate that is favorable to Camp David.

According to the most confidential sources Carter has expressed his under-
standing for “al-Sadat's difficult position" and has supported all his
demawis. Ltgia, however. expressed serious reservations over what is
called el-Sadat's freedom to maneuver. He based his reservations on the
fact that this would create serious problems for his inside Israel. He
did, however, approve of the financial and political support for al-Sadat's

action inside the occupied land in the attempt to recruit some mercenaries
who would support the formula of autonomy.

Egyptian Action on the Gaza Strip and on the Heat Bank

It was in this context that al-Saiat escalated his campaign to link the
Egyptian-Israeli agreement with the autonomy agreement and to affirm at

the same time-in order to reassure Begin--thst regardless of the circum-
stances he would not abandon the letter and the spirit of the Camp David
accords. He also obtained monetary financial support from the United States
estimated at 60 million dollars, and he obtained political support from
Begin that took the form of travel facilities for about 12 or 15 Egyptian
intelligence officials who would travel to the Gaza Strip and the West Bank
under the guise that they were Egyptian businessmen. They would work under
the leadership of Col Hahasin who has close personal contact with al-Sadat.
It is said that he is the cousin of Vice President Huani Mubarak.

The purpose of this mission is "to buy some prosinent personalities in the
occupied homeland: by financing a number of joint projects with Egypt,
especially in the area of trade transactions. These would later spread to
Israel. Consequently, "new interests” would be formed that would be
favorable to and harmonious with the autonomy and would at the same time

be inconsistent with the course of the revolution which is representec by
the Liberation Organization.

16

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Information from knowledgeable sources indicates that this mission did
actually begin about a month and a half ago. But it seems that this mission
is severely floundering end has not yet achieved. according to Prime Minister
Hustafs Khalil. as he told Carter when he visited Washington recently. the
required minimum. it seems that the aatter requires more time. more support
and deeper Israeli understanding for the objectives and means of the mission.

The unity of all political and social trends in the Arab homeland which was
produced by the Baghdad Summit Conference with regard to rejecting the Camp
David accords and all their pertinent implications and results intensified
al-Sedat's crisis. This matter was the furthest from the cslcuations of

the Camp David people who had basically depended on el-Sadat's analysis. He
had stated that he was capable of attracting the Arab oil countries at least
to follow in his footsteps and to isolate and surround the progressive
countries. Hence.the resolutions of the Baghdad Summit Conference did pro-
duce a stunning blow to el-Sedat, to Carter and to Begin.

In view of this too al-Sadet was asking his two Camp David partners to give
him more time and freedom to maneuver and tu use the “not and cold“ tactics
in an attempt to bring about division in the Baghdad front and to break the
siege of Arab isolation from his regime.

however, observers are noticing that in spite of or perhaps because of the
hot and cold tactics, el-Sadat is aggravating the historical crisis in
which he is floundering.

Sources close to the 0.8. embassy in Cairo are stating that in view of

facts and reactions that have emerged after the Camp David accords in Egypt.
in the occupied land and in the Arab world, Hashington was reconsidering

the capability of al-Sadat and his regime to continue on the Camp David
course and to implement it. Today, the factual view of al-Sadat at the
white house is that al-Sadat is the one who is torturing himself and his
regime with his acrobatic shifts from a hot pan to a cold pan. The question
now requires serious thinking about another al-Ssdet.

COPYRIGHT: 1978 AL-UATAN AL-‘ABABI

8592
CSO: 6802

17

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

EGYPT

LEWIS! LEADER DISCUSSBS HARASSMENT BY REGIME
Paris Ali-HAHN MF'MI in Arabic 28 Dec 78 pp 18-20

[Interview with Khalid Muhi al-Dln by Salah ﬂashin: "The Unofficial
Opposition in Egypt: Khalid Muhi al-Din; Governnent Has host Respect
of People; We Reject the Canp David Accords and Us Believe that
Egyptian Character of Egypt to Confined Through Its Arab Character;
There Is Not One Person in the National Party (al-Sadat's Party) who
Would Support llin in a Crisis; He Adlit There are Differences over the
Palestinian Question within the Grouping Party Between the Pan-Arabists
and the Marxists”

[Text] The court sessions to try the defendants who were accused of
creating the disturbances of the 18th and 19th of January 1977 are raising
isportsnt questions about the reality of current Egyptian political life
and about the opposition under President al-Ssdat's regime which is pur-
suing an increasingly individualistic trend. President al-Sadat's regise
is trying to contain any open or secret opposition; it is trying to
soother it in its early stages or contain it in a manner that would prevent
it froa being heard by the leases and iron affecting their inclinations.

Opposition to the Egyptian regime still constitutes an unknown quantity
whose effectiveness and strength cannot be determined until all the con-
ditions for testing this strength are conpletsd as a result of an internal
crisis that would affect the citizen's daly breed or the sources of his
security. This is because the opposition amount has in lost cases chosen
silence; there is the labor opposition that expresses itself in union un-
rest; there is the opposition of ease factions of the Moslen Brothers;
there is the opposition of the rightist religious groups that are resisting
any concessions on Jerusalea and Palestine; there is the comunist opposition
that is working in secret and is trying to infiltrate different opposition
groups; and there is the silent opposition in the armed forces. This
opposition began to ensrge in different forns and precipitate actions which
led to arrests, releases and extensive transfers.

An there is an official opposition which was appointed by al-Sadat by law.
It is represented in the Socialist Action Party which has become the source
and the butt of jokes.

18

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The only open opposition that has scrapes with the regime and has maintained
its resilience is that which lies in the Grouping Party that is led by Mr
Khalid Muhi al-Din.

In an attempt to clarify the true nature of this opposition and to evaluate
its true strength before the agencies attack them-and observers expect

this to take place soon-the correspondent of ALPHATAN ALP'ARABI Salah hashis
conducted this interview with Mr Khalid Huhi al-Din, a reporter [himself]

and president of the Grouping Party. In his answers to the following

questions he presented significant facts about the party, the opposition and
the current political life.

Letter to the Ministry of the Interior

[Question] Police and intelligence agencies intervened to prevent the
commemoration of Palestine Day at party headquarters. You complied with
the orders of the sinister of interior, and the nesting was broken up even
before it was held. Don't you think that this position will incite the
leftist forces outside the Grouping to rally against you because your
party was avoiding a confrontation with the government, avoiding making it
angry and submitting to its orders?

[Answer] I am asking you to read the letter that we wrote to the minister
of the interior. I believe that we stated our case fully. The forms of
opposition differ and vary from one situation to another. It is the party
that determines when to enter into a confrontation with the government.

It is careful to give good consideration to circumstances. I believe that
not since the age of the first liberalism in Egypt has a political party
sent the minister of the interior such a candid letter. we know how angry
he is with this letter which we printed and distributed in large quantities
to news agencies, correspondents of world newspapers, members of the People's
Assembly and ordinary citizens. It was also distributed to the newspapers.
This letter expresses a very disdainful and a very harsh position against
this decision. Reading the text of the letter will indicate this.

Your Excellency, the Minister of the Interior

Greetings

The United National Progressive Grouping Party received notice from one of
your assistants that he had orders from his superiors to cancel the obser-
vation of International Palestine Solidarity Day which was to be held
Thursday evening December 7, 1978 at party headquarters.

Whereas the party regrets and rejects that large numbers of your policemen
gathered in the street leading to the party's headquarters to carry out
the decision to cancel the observance; and whereas the party views this
cancellation as a blatant violation of the party law which gives party
headquarters [certain] immunity determined by law, the party wishes to

put the following matters on record:

19

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
mvae vanguaam «an vasua

First, those who issued the decree to prohibit observance of International
Palestine Solidarity Day which was declared by the United Nations and
observed by it are only placing themselves in a curious position via a via
the national and pan-Arab question and the statements and interviews

about the Palestinian question that abOund in the newspapers.

Second, the fact that your policemen have violated the law--in fact, they
derided the law when we reminded them of ituindicates that a real threat

to the laws which must be respected and abided by does exist. This is
because the habitual violation of the law by policemen is a very serious

and dangerous matter. It begins with a step or a position which if opposed
becomes [a matter of] public policy frOu whose consequences no one is imune.

Third, if some people imagine they can easily disregard the law, past and
recent experiences affirm that time moves in cycles and that the law will
in time regain its power no matter how long that span of time may be. The
law is always capable of holding people accountable.

Finally, Your Excellency Hr Minister, we are making these quick observations
as we hold on to all our cons itutional and legal rights that were deliber-
ately violated by your policemen. We want to mention in closing that this
is not a letter of protest. This letter is a reminder; memory may perhaps
be useful to the faithful.

God will provide guidance.
The United National Progressive Grouping Party

The Rules of the Grouping Party

[Question] Some are saying that the fact that the Grouping Party has not
identified its social identity has caused it numerous problems with the
Egyptian Government. To what extent has the Grouping Party succeeded in
mobilizing the labor forces that it has the power to represent, and what
is the role that you are assuming at the present time?

[Answer] bat me first explain two points. First, it is difficult to say
that there is now in Egypt one Egyptian party that represents the interests
of the working class only. This is because we cannot separate, especially
during a stage like that which we are experiencing, between the interests
of the working class and the interests of the other classes.

Second, ideological membership in e party—any party-dc a relative matter.
Practical experience in Egypt has proven that people join a party first,

and then they understand its ideology afterwards and not vice veraa as is
the case in Europe. In Egypt one joins the Conunist party and then becomes

a Harriet; and one joins the Hoslem Brothers and then understands their
beliefs.

20

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The actual reality about the Grouping Patty affirms the following: the
total nuaber of Marxists, Nasirists, pan-Arsbista and all other ideo-
logical components inside the party represent approximately 10 percent
[of party members]. The rest are ordinary citizens who criticize the
government policy and the policies of the government. They generally
critize the methods, approaches. priorities and directions of the
government in Egypt. It is possible to consider these people Grouping
Party eeebers. They constitute the majority of the party's aid-level

cadres, and they are also capable of deteruining the general course of
the party's action.

We are the only party in Egypt that is based on elections from the base
unit to the top. It is through the process of preparing for the party's
general conference and through its democratic practices that different
factions deal with each other within the party without any friction.
The leadership does not select. discriminate or favor one faction as
opposed to another. He welcome any faction that wins in the elections.

Pros the organisation's central office we observe the course of events and
we correct their balance by giving other political factions an opportunity
to be :epreaented whether or not they obtained a majority of the vote.

The ract that 51 percent. 52 percent or even 90 percent of one faction are
represented does not seen that representation for the remaining 10 percent
is to be cancelled. This is because the presence of the 10 percent is also
legitimate, necessary, urgent and pertains to the party. Hence, we resort
to :ne method of representing the other factions that were not represented
in the elections.

Differences within the Party

{Question} Can it be said that the sharp differences that could develop
between the different political factions within the party on a specific
issue like President al-Sadat's visit to Jerusalem or the party's position

on the Camp David agreement do not impair the existing balance and iapede
the progress of the party?

[Answer] First, we have not had a difference that split the party. In
case such a difference does occur, every faction is to make some con-
cessions. There have been differences that no one cay deny. They are
differences between the pan-Arab view of a solution to the Palestinian
question and the Marxist view of this solution. Some Nasir.sts nay agree
on this subject with some pan-Arab factions. For example, when we
established the party we had a difference about UN Resolution 242 and about
the Geneva Conference. On the other hand, there was a difference about
how the full liberation of Palestinian soil was to cone about. But we
were all able to approach one idea which different factions could agree
upon even if they did not subscribe fully to it or to this position or the
other. This means that we find the formula upon which all parties can

agree without all these parties being fully satisfied.

21

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
HM Ufl'lblnl. 03b UNLI

Re have. for example, spoken about the legitimate national rights of the
Palestinian people and of their right to establish their state on those
parts of their land that are liberated. He did not say this was final.
and we did not say it was not. Instead. we said it they can liberate their
land, let them establish their state on it. And at the same time we said
that we recognized that the PLO was the sole legitimate representative of
the Palestinian people. From the point of view of the Marxist elements

in the party this means a commitment to the statements of the Palestinian
people. This is because there are no people or natural powwera who have
the right to claim to speak on behalf or another people or another natural
power. This means that if the PLO says it accepts a certain solution, we
can only in this case accept what the PLO says because speaking for people

is not an ideological luxury that I expect of my opponents and do not
practice myself.

He support principles, and we determine them. Among the principles is the
right for self-determination of the Palestinian people. If the Palestinian

people ch-ose a course and an approach, we support then. I believe that
this would solve many of the disputes that emerge.

The Party, Defamation Campaigns and News Blackout

[Question] Hhat posture is the Grouping Party taking vis a via the defamation
and blackout campaigns that are launched by the governmental press in Egypt
against it and against its role on the Egyptian political scene?

[Answer] The ruling party's position on the Grouping Party has changed from
one stage to another. The first stage was one of dissatisfied acceptance;
that is. it was a de facto acceptance of us. This acceptance was accompanied
by the ruling party's displeasure that we were not up to forming a responsible
opposition. an opposition that they call honest. that is, a skeleton of an
opposition or an opposition in form.

The second state [of the ruling party's posture towards us] assumed the form
of blatant attack against us. But the regime failed in both cases. I think
that the media campaigns to which the party was subjected were intended to
harm it. They have been unprecedented in Egypt's history.

Yes, we were sharply and impudently attacked. Nevertheless, this attack

produced a very strange result. The party's popularity appeal increased
for a very simple reason: the government has lost the respect of the
public and the government's propaganda machinery has not been successful.

For example. during the events of January 1977 the genius of the government
media contrived to place the responsibility for the popular uprising on us.
They tried to protrey this uprising as "an uprising of thieves."

But the attack against the party only aroused the derision of the Fasses
who had no longer any respect for the media agencies and for the authors
or writers who write and attack without having the public's confidence.

22

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Hence, the ideal solution-«his is what the government thought-was to

make the masses forget the Grouping Party. This meant that all discussion
of the party in the newspapers would cease. No mention. either good or bad.
would be nsde of it end the masses would forget that there was a Grouping
Party. The government tried to stop the natural processes whereby the
opposition would give vent to its views in the newspapers M- W! and in
the conference of the assess. A vicious campaign was leuncned to intimidate
_ nenbers of the Grouping Party so they would stop boasting about being
nenbers. There were 150,000 members who talked in side-walk cafes about
the harassment they were subjected to by government agencies. The means
nust be found to silence those people so as to diminish the conmon feelings
that exist between the party and the masses. It is my opinion that this
nation is both intelligent and stupid. It is intelligent in so for as it
achieves tenporary results and calms the nerves of the ruling gentlemen

who imagine that the matter had ended completely for the Grouping Party

and that the party. thank God. had gone forever. It neither noves. acts
nor publishes a nagezine; it does not hold its conference for the unseen;

end we are leaking no mention of it. Then it follows that the Grouping Party
is no more

Does not this position resemble that of the ostrich which hides its head
in the send?

The Grouping Party is e nationalist progressive party that does not depend
on outside forces or on notiveting agencies. It is a party that does
depend on collecting its power from the power of its 150.000 nsmbersueven
if that power were snall. It organizes its menbers end draws free the: a
large strong tool with which it can take action among the masses. He are
strong even without AL-ABALI newspaper. It is enough for us that we
mobilize 150.000 fighters among the Egyptian people who spread their views
in the midst of the living reality. It is enough for us to say that as
far as the masses are concerned no when a problem surfaces and emerges.
the ordinary citizens asks. what is the opinion of the left?

This is enough for us. The left expresses its opinion verbally. on a small
piece of paper no larger then one's palm. or in statements. conferences or
party debates. The question is not one of a comparison between us and
government sgeicies. The government one three daily newspapers, and it
owns weekly magazines; it owns ratio. tele ision and other nec'ia. The
ordinary citizen in Egypt now can read a daily newspaper regularly for

a whole year without noticing any truth in it. Such a newspaper cannot
have any effect on this citizen, and the model for that is evident.

Government agencies have all the capabilities. but I did not have enyting
when I published AL-AEALI, which is the only newspaper in the history of

Egypt that did not pay one nilliue to an editor. ﬁveryone who wrote for
the newspaper did so as a volunteer. and everyone who worked on the news-
paper worked as a volunteer. Nevertheless. its circulation was 150,000

23

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and that is the total circulation of R083 AL—YUSUF. SAM}! AL-KIMYR,
AL-HUSAWAR, OCTOBER, AL-AHRAR and HISR. The circulation of these
sagasines depends in a large on government subscriptions and public
sector subscriptions. why is this so?

This experience has given us the opportunity to perceive the possibilities
of our sovement even under a news blackout. He are now publishing a
bulletin, Ala-TAHADOUH [Progress]. Nevertheless. I maintain that Ab-TAQADDUH
scares the governsent in spite of the fact that it is formeabers only and

is printed on a small husble press in numbers that are not sany and solo

not few. however. we do succeed in issuing it regularly every Vednesdsy.

Every Hednesday eveing. it can be found in Aswan, Qina, Alexandria,
Dsanietts and Port Said.

Our ability to carry out this organized action which also depends on the
enthusiasm of where gives the nssses a sense of the Grouping Party's
sincerity. If, as they say, we are an insignificant group without offices
or Iedis tools, let us ask together what do the others have? I say nothing.

that can a aesber of the Nationalist Party tell the ordinary public? I say
he can tell then nothing.

The practical experience which hes earned for the members of the Grouping
Party the respect of the public has proven that the other parties have
nothing but those cadres which ravaged the country and becase a burden on
its administrative agency. They are the use cadres that transfer ed their
loyalty very sisply (and perhaps naively) from the leaders of the Socialist
Union to the leaders of the Hay hove-ant. Then they transferred their
loyalty to the Hisr l’arty and then to the new party, the Nationalist Party.

But if the Egyptian rulers believed that there would be one person in the
Nationalist Party who would support them in a crisis, I think they would
be suffering free a major misconception.

lie went on to say:

Our party has withstood cruel experiences.

In January 1977 we had 120,000 members. During that month 2,000 of then
were imprisoned, or 2 percent of the total members. They were charged with
disorderly conduct or inciting isorderly conduct. But the party, neverthe-
less, continued to cling to its positions. Its organizational structure
was continuously becoming stronger, and its organizational capabilities
were increasing. It was treating the governmental pressures with disdain.
These pressures are quite numerous and very bitter and assune the forms of
the arbitrary transfer of officials who are suspected of being seabers of
the Grouping Party. For example, they tried to evacuate all employees who
are Grouping Party nembers from Port Said and transfer then suddenly to
remote towns.

24

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ORLY

One of those who was loved from his position to another cans to us to
attend the neeting of the constituent agency. He said. ”I congratulate
you because I was transferred to Safajah from Port Said so I established
a party chapter in Safajah. I hope they will continue their favor to no
and transfer as to another place so we can coeplete laying down the
organisational structure of the party in other areas.

The process of presenting the ideological opposition is a dangerous

gene and a double-edged sword because. first. it scares other parties of
the opposition. There are those who have disappeared from the scene
because they felt that if they said less than we were saying. they will
be subjected to less than what we are subjected to. And they are not at
all ready to subject themselves to a little or to a trifling aaount of
what we are being subjected to.

It is for this reason that other ppposition parties like the Free
[Citizenu'] Party disintegrated. The Free [Citizens'] Party tried to
publish ALPAHRAR negatine. but government agencies prohibited its publi-
cation. "hen the students' branch of the party published Ab-HAQIQAR

[The Truth] nagssine. it was confiscated. end its publishers took no action.
action. This is the kind of opposition that the legile wants. Today no-
body can say that there is a party called the Free [Citizens'] Party. It

is expected that the Socialist Action Party whose opposition to the regine.
it is said. does not exceed the limits of honest opposition will be subjected
to one of two situations: either its destiny will be the sane as that of
Hustafa Kalil Hursd‘ or its destiny will be siailar to ours. It does not
have any other solution.

[Question] Are you thinking about resuming publication of ALPAHALI?

[Answer] He believe that the Egyptian character of Egypt is part of its
Arab character. He don't find any inconsistency here. The real Egyptian
character of Egypt is the reel Arab character of Egypt. Any claim that
there is an inconsistency between Egypt and the Arabs is a fabrication
that is theoretically and politically erroneous.

'Soae rulers iaegined that it was possible to say that the Arab character
was burdensome to Egypt. They said we fought three tines for the Arabs:
we sacrificed and we worked a great deal for the Arabs. we sacrificed
our blood. and they sacrificed money. In fact. sane of then were not
ashamed to say that they-i.e.. the Arabs-did not pay us the noney in

a good, satisfactory tanner. Instead. they spent it in nightclubs. resorts
and dance halls.

 

*Hustsfa Ksnil Nurad was appointed leader of the official opposition
at the suggestion of Jihan sl-Sodat. In this capacity President el-Sadet
gave hin a private office in the People's Asseably.

25

FOR OPPICIAL USE ONLY
The recent einple experience has proven that the Arab character woe not
burdensone to Egypt. Quite the contrary. the Egyptian regine did not
becoee stronger after it god rid of thin burden; it grew weaker.

Most certainly Egypt did not become stronger when it eet aside the burden
of the Arab character. It did not epring lightly when it set aside the
Arab character so soleone would epring lightly and heave a sigh of relief
after aetting aside his heavy burden.

It is our view that the Arab Bgyptian direction ie a question of deetiny.
Just so auch as Egypt cannot relinquish the Arabs. the Arabs cannot relin-
quish Egypt. we reject all attenpte which different partiee resort to
create a barrier that would iaolate Egypt from the other Arab countries.
and we think that it is not in anyone's power. not ie it anyone'e right

to try and separate Egypt free the Arebe. Thie proceee ie no longer in
the hands of the rulers. In spite of what soee people are careful to
epell out. the Bgyptian cititen ie note aware of thin matter now.

He Reject the Camp David Accords
[Question] "hat ie the party'n poaition on the Camp David accords?

[Answer] Out of its sense of national reeponeibility and its eenee of

ite pan-Arab obligatione. our party in announcing its rejection of the
Camp David accords. It in announcing that it in continuing its opposition
to the policy of separate Egyptian-Israeli negotiations and whatever reaults
these negotiations nay produce. Our party is asking that Egypt and the
Arab countriee adhere to the approved Arab poeitione. Chief along theee
are the al-Rabat resolutions. Our party ie calling for euepeneion of the
aeparate talks with Iarael and ie also calling upon the Arab confrontation
countriee and forcee to hold an urgent neeting that would pave the way for
an Arab conference. It is eahing that there be the broadest posaible
dialogue on the Bgyptian and Arab arena. It is aeking that all political
factione in Egypt. especially the opposition. be guaranteed an opportunity
to expreae their opinione freely for the purpose of actually participating
in formulating the final reeolution.

It ie also calling upon the netionaliet Arab forcee within the Arab front.
which they ehare with the Paleatinian revolution. to conduct a dialogue
illediately that would nobilite the forces of the Arab nation for the
purpose of overcoeing the general negative aspects of the eituation and
achieving the col-on unity of action in the atruggle that would be capable
of initiating and taking action. It ie also aeking that oil be used ee a
political weapon along with other weepone to achieve Arab goals. especially
with regard to Jeruaalen. in opposition to the American-Ieraeli conspiracy.

The party is calling upon the noble el-Aehar and the Egyptian church to
fulfill their religioue and pen-Arab reeponeibilitiee; to defend the
"colon-Christian Arab character of Jerusalee; and to oppose the Zioniet

26

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USP. ONLY

plot to turn it into a coapletely Jewish city. It is also calling upon
Egypt's three ministers of foreign affairs who resigned to protest this
approach of direct negotiations with Israel and the Camp David accords to
testify in public sessions of the People's Asseably about the full data

and inforaation that led then to resign and to explain their position to
Egyptian and Arab public opinion.

Falling back upon the Egyptian people with all their political tendencies
in these decisive noaants is the only way to sake every Egyptian citizen--
regardless of his orientetion-bear his historical responsibility before
the country becoles entangled in the final signing of a peace agreement

between Egypt and Israel that vould have direcconsequencee on the future
of the entire Arab hoaeland.

COPYRIGﬂT: 1978 AL-HATAN AL-'ARABI

8592
cso: 6802

27

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I'UK UH'LUIAL 031‘. mm

EGYPT

SECRET SUPPLEMENTS TO CAMP DAVID ACCORDS UNCOVERBD
Paris ALPHATAN AL-‘ARABI in Arabic 28 Dec 78 pp 16-17

[Article by Shafiq sl-ﬂut: “Secret Supplements to Casp David Accords:
Israel Is To have Air Cover in Case of war with Arab Countries"]

[Text] 0.8. diplomacy is making desperate efforts to contain the double
dispute.

1. The Egyptian-Israeli dispute regarding the conditions for signing a
separate peace treaty.

2. The 0.s.-Israeli dispute which is the result of Israeli intransigence
that took Washington by surprise. This Israeli intransigence stems fro-

the Israeli allegation that existing 0.8. bias was sorrying President
al-Sadat.

In order to contain this double dispute and keep it from turning into
a gap through which embarrassing secrets about the Camp David accords say
be leaked. 0.8. diplomacy is trying to arrange a tripartite impromptu
seating in Brussels between the United States, Egypt and Israel during the
travels of 0.8. Secretary of State Cyrus Vince in Europe. This would be a
last-ditch effort to revive the Egyptian-Israeli negotiations and to pro-
tect the Camp David arrangements that pertain to the secret political nap
of the Riddle Bast. This is the sap that proposed in accordance with

the "0.8. peace plan" which is based on a separate peace between Egypt and
Israel.

In spite of all precautions the broad outlines of these sonsntous 0.8. plans
began to leak in the form of information from confidential sources about the
contents of the secret protocols that were attached to the Camp David
accords. This information appears logical in light of the standards of the
American viav of the Middle East problem. In spite of superficial variables,
these standards have a persanent core.

28

FOR OPPICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

It has been observed that ever since the Camp David accords were signed.
”.8. diplomacy has been carrying out an energetic campaign. which has
been described as unprecedented in the history of the State Department.
for the purpose of gaining approval and international support for these
two agreements. In addition to the swift action that characterized this
campaign and the enormous media resources that it had at its disposal.
the purveyors of the State Department used most of their resources
according to the needs and the conditions of the party with when they

were talking. They would sometimes tempt and at other tiasa threaten
the international coammnity.

Due to the opening of another session of the UN General Assembly 0.8.
activity reached a peak during the month of October. A large number of
senior world diplomats were in New York to participate in the general
debate of the General Assembly.

Cyrus Vance, who had chosen to stay at the UN Plaza Hotel, which is only
200 asters from UN headquarters, was like the mother of the bride on the

eve of her daughter's wedding. He was hardly along even when he ate; all
his meals-~breakfaat. lunch and dinner-were working meals during which he
would explain and advocate the Camp David accords which he regards as the
achievement that distinguishes him from his arch enemy Zbigniew Breeeeinski.
It was the Camp David accords that promoted him to the opposition of the
president's first adviser.

People who are close to Vance say that he is a "good salesman" and that in
view of the fact that he was originally an attorney, he is a good conver-
sationalist and can say what will please his audience without conceding
anything to them.

In the context of arousing his interest Vance met with an Arab diplomat
who is known for his contacts with the PLO and his persistent efforts to
lay bridges between Hashington and the organization.

Vance began by telling his diploeatic friend. "I know beforehand what

you will tell me. Hithout the Palestinians and without a solution to their
problem. permanent peace will not be achieved. I agree with you on this
and, even more. I will confess to you that I don’t want anything more mew
than to meet with the Palestinians and explain to them the matter to pre-
pare for their participation in the ongoing process."

When the Arab diplomat told him that a meeting with the Palestinians
signified a meeting with the PLO because it is the sole legitimate repre-
sentative of the Palestinian people. Vance replied apologetically, or
perhaps he was pretending to be apologetic:

"But I cannot do that. Hhat can I do on this matter in particular when my
predecessor" (referring to Kissinger) "tied our hands with the commitment
he made in the name of our country?"

29

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Then Vance turned to Harold Saunders a senior State Department official

and expert on Arab affairs who was attending this nesting and asked him
"innocently:"

"Is there anything we can do?" Saunders shook his head to indicate that
there wasn't anything that could be done and said, "If the Israelis were
to hear about what's being said here. they would go out of their ninds!"

The rest of the dialogue that took place is not relevant because what I

want to ascertain is whether or not Vance, while complaining about Kissinger
to Justify his position. was not at the same time playing the role that his
predecessor had played during the Sinai agreements. In other words I want
to ascertain that Vance too did not provide "some secret supplements" as
payoff for the Camp David accords just as Kissinger had done previously.

We all reaember what was said in the days of the second Sinai agreements
about the existence of secret supplements. and we remember statements that

were issued to deny their existence. These denials were later proven to be
false.

And these days are like the others: there is talk about secret supplements
but we have not heard anything to deny or to confirm their existence.
They are as follows:

First, Between the United States and Israel

l. 0.8. airplanes will provide air cover to Israel in case a new war
breaks out between it and any confrontation country--or group of countries-
which opposes the Egyptian-Israeli negotiations. If the Soviet Union were

' to interfere on behalf of these countries. Usahington would put is troops
on alert and would be ready to undertake a venture in opposition to Moscow.

2. The 0.8. government agrees to use its influence to prevent western

weapons from reaching Arab countries that are opposed to the Camp David
accords.

3. During the next five years (those that were determined as a transition
period to explore the destiny of the Heat Bank and the Gaza Strip) the

0.8. government will supply Israel with loans amounting to 5 billion dollars.
In addition. the Israeli armed forces will be supplied with very advanced
weapons. especially airplanes and missiles which have not yet been made
available to NATO countries. Such a comnitaent naturally requires the
approval of the 0.8. Congress.

4. The United States will try to persuade its western allies to support
the Camp David accords. and it will encourage Third ﬂorid countries to
resume their relations with Israel which had been suspended after the '56.
the '67 and the '73 wars.

30
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

5. U.S.-Israeli negotiations for a common defense pack are to continue.
This agreement which will provide U.S. guarantees for Israel's security

will definitely be accomplished before the end of 1983.

6. Cooperative arrangements are to be made to liquidate the radical
elements in the PLO and to turn it into a "peaceful" organization.

Second. Between the United States and Egypt

1. Negotiating an agreement that would enable about 5.000 military advisers
and technicians to assist in the organization and the training of the
Egyptian armed forces.

2. Egypt will be given U.S. military protection in case of any conflict
between it and one of its neighbors. In case of war with Libya the Egyptians
can depend on 0.8. intervention on their behalf.

3. In order to prevent the creation of any strong alliance between its
Arab opponents, the United States will support Egypt in actions to instigate
local struggles that would reduce the pressure on President al-Sadst.

6. President Carter's administration will exert every pressure possible

on moderate Arabs to gain their support for the Camp David accords or at
least to obtain their support for a separate peace between Egypt and Israel.
The Aahington government also commited itself to persuade the Arab oil
countries to continue providing Egypt with financial support in the neigh-
borhood of b billion dollars annually.

5. The United States will supply the Egyptian army with modern weapons to
guarantee its defense capability and to enable it to intervene in Third
Hbrld countries that may be threatened by internal revolutions or inter-
national communism.

6. The United States and Egypt will strengthen the cooperation between
their intelligence agencies in the United States and in Egypt so as to
enable al-Sadat to receive regular information about local and international
events and occurrences that affect his policy.

7. The United States will help Egypt establish a "Marshal Plan" with U.S.
and western financing. It will provide Egypt with several billions of
dollars over the next five years.

Third. Between Egypt and Israel

1. A joint military political agency is to be established to confront any

actions undertaken or instigated by the Arab countries that oppose the
Camp David accords.

31

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

An actual military alliance between Israel and Egypt will be establish
after Israel withdraws froa Sinai; the bases of this alliance will be
determined before that tine.

2. In the case of conflict between Israel and any Arab country or group of
countries. Egypt will not interfere against Israel. In addition, al-Sadat's

government will help the Israelis uncover terrorists' bases whereever these
may be for the purpose of liquidating them.

3. An agency for cooperation between the intelligence agencies in the two
countries is to be established for the purpose of sharing infatuation that
affects the security of both countries. This agency will have eight liaison

offices: four in Europe. two in Asia; one in the United States and one in
Africa.

lo. Egypt and Israel will take joint measures to force Syria to leave Lebanon
in 12 months.

5. Egypt comits itself to stop insisting on giving the PLO a role in
determining the future of the Rest limit and the Gaza Strip. It cos-its
itself to encouraging efforts to establish a "third power" that is aads up

of Palestinians who are willing to cooperate and who can accpet the Camp
David accords.

6. "lies of friendship" between the Egyptian and the Israeli armies are
to be reinforced through an exchange program for officers. This program

will be designed when diplomatic aission begin in carrying out their
functions.

If the existence of such supplements is proven, and most probably they do
exist because what they contain is consistent with what is contained in
the proclaimed accords, this would mean that the 0.5. conspiracy against
the Arab cause is not the exclusive province of any 0.8. administration
in particular or a specific president. It is not a matter of policy with
one party and not the other. nor of a certain secretary of state. This
conspiracy is a constant and a continuing position which constitutes the
backbone of the American regiae's policy whose monopolistic economic
interests require that it pursue a colonialist, racist policy regardless

of what its fronts and its writers claim about its conitment to democracy
and to human rights.

If Kissinger omitted the United States to deny recognition of the no

and not to talk with it, it is Vance who. while coaplaining about his

predecessor. is emitting his country to liquidate the organization from
its base.

32

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

And then... There is nothing surprising or astonishing in these supple-
ncnts betusen Israel and the Unitnd States. But whet breaks onc'a heart

are those supple-onto between Egypt and the two historical ensnies. Is it
true thst sl-Ssdst did sign such papers?

COPYRIGHT: 1978 AL-HATAN AL-‘ARABI

8592
080: 6802

33

FOR OPPICIAI. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

IRAQ

TOP-1.3V“. DBLBGATION VISITS SOVIET UNION
Paria AL-HATAN AL-‘AMBI in Arabic 21-27 Dec 78 pp 30-33
lirticle: "Saddam Ilueayn on a Hietoric Trip of Solutioneﬁ

IIextl An element of eurpriae accompanied the trip which Mr Saddam hueayn,
vice-chairaan of the Revolutionary Conuand Council. made on a eudden long-
range international move that took him to Hoacow. and, alao auddenly, from
the froate of Hoecow to Ravane. the war- Cuban capital which he left with-
out forewarning to aurpriae Baghdad with hie return at an early hour on
Monday morning after an exhauating Ila-hour flight between Havana and
Baghdad.

however, the real aurpriee. according to what informed aourcea relate.

liee in the reeulte Hr Saddam ﬂuaayn achieved on the international and
Arab levala and in the context of consolidating Iraqi-Syrian defenee capac-
ity. Theee are reaulte which will be revealed when the time comea.

hr Saddae Hueayn'a vieit to Hoecow wee ahroudcd in political circuutancee
which aaauned a dra-atic character in the context of Iraqi-Soviet rela-
tiona in particular and Soviet-Arab relationa in general. The Sovieta did
not coepletely underetand or digeet the legal procedurea which overtook
the Coo-uniat peraonnel who tried to violate the terne of the National
Compact in Iraq in order politically to infiltrate the Iraqi army. Cloude
of blame were atill gathered in the firnalnent of Iraqi-Soviet relationa.
in epite of the fact that the two partiea agreed to conaider what hed hap-
pened aa a paaeing matter.

Iaeuee were hanging aolnewhat ae regarded the reeponee to the requeete for
aupplying area to the Iraqi aruy-~requeate on whoae account the Iraqi nin-
ieter of defenee, the Revolutionary Cor-mod Council neuter Staff Lt Gen

Hr 'Adnan Khayralleh, traveled to Moecow, where his presence coincided

with that of He) Can Hikunet Shihebi, chief of war ateff of the Syrian

aruy on a ainilar vieit which aeeuned a crieia-wracked character because

of e diepute over the interpretation of paragraphe in previoue agreernenta
on the am Syria needed to conaolidate ite national defence in the light
of changee in lgypt'e departure from the front of confrontation with Ierael.

36

NR OFFICIAL I58 ONLY
av" Val ¢V-uu wu VnuA

The Syrian-Soviet Nisundcrstanding

The Syrian-Soviet difference in viewpoint appeared openly when Maj Gen
Hikmst Shihabi decided to terminate his visit to Moscow and return to
Damascus. once it had become clear that the agenda which had been prepared
for him in Moscow involved no working meeting with Marshal Ustinov, the
Soviet minister of defense, as opposed to the program set forth for Staff

Lt Gen 'Adnan Khayrallah, which involved a number of working meetings with
Marshal Ustinov.

These developments occurred at a time when the movement toward union be-
tween Iraq and Syria had become a strategic fact in the Arab world. Con-
sequently it was not reasoneble that Iraq should pretend to disregard the
Syrian-Soviet misunderstanding, especially since it dealt with the defense
aspect of Syrian military power at a time when agreement had been reached
to close the Egyptian breach in the confrontation front through total
Iraqi military participation with Syria.

Thus the matter of Syrian-Soviet relations was the subject of a special in-

quiry from Baghdad, supported by the impressions and information from
Damascus.

As a result of that, urgent contacts took place between Moscow and Baghdad.

In the light of these contacts, which concluded on the eighth of this month
with a personal letter from the Soviet leaders to Mr Saddam llusayn inviting
the latter to Moscow to discuss various subjects "of con-son iwortancs to
the two countries," the vice chairman of the Revolutionary Command Council,
after consulting with President Ahmad Hasan al-Bakr and members of the
Revolutionary Comand Council. took the decision to travel to Moscow on

the llth of this month.

The expression "subjects of com-on importance to the two countries" means
many things and includes a number of issues with Arab and international
dimensions.

Precautions were taken to prevent the leak of the news, which came as a
total surprise to all observers. The trip occurred at an early hour in
the morning, without attention-getting measures.

Saddam llusayn's Trip was a Surprise

Observers in Baghdad did not know that Hr Saddam Husayn had traveled to
Moscow until Moscow broadcast the news of his arrival on the afternoon of
that day at the head of a large Iraqi delegation which was welcomed by

Hr Alexei losygin, prime minister of the Soviet Union and member of the
Political Bureau of the Central Comittee of the Soviet Communist Party,
at the head of a group including Mr Vaseili Kutnetsov, first vice chairman

35

M OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of the Connieeariat of the Supreme Soviet Preeidium, and a maea of senior
officiele and membere of Arab diplomatic miaeione accredited to Hoacow.
They were informed at the laet moment of the viait, for whoae eake Soviet
protocol made a big effort to give it a dietinctive character.

The temperature in Hoecow wae eeveral degraee below freezing. from the
atandpoint of the climate the Soviet capital hae been experiencing theee
daye, but, on the varioue levele of diecueeion, it wee highueepecially
after the firet working eeaeion between Hr Saddam llueayn and Preeident
Leonid Brezhnev.

What inverted epecial eignificance to theee diecueeione wae the fact that
thia wee the firet time the leadera of the Soviet Union had lietened to a
direct etatement by a great Arab leader who had played a major. hietoric
role in directing the couree of evente in the Arab world through two hia-
toric initiativae: that of the joint national action charter and that of
the Baghdad euumit to confront the coneequencee which had arieen from the
Camp David eumit.

Therefore the mediation Hr Saddam liueayn performed in order to diepel the
cloude of mieunderetanding between Syria and the Soviet Union aeeumed
apeciel, effective eignificance.

One could etate, relying on information from reliable eourcee, that

Hr Saddam Hueayn, in hie diecueeione on thie eubject with the Soviet lend-
era, Preaidente Brezhnev and Koeygin in particular. inaieted that he had
not come to preeent an actual fact. namely that the union between Syria
and Iraq had become a reality on the political, military and economic
plenee, that there wee no room or place to retreat from it and coneequent-
ly that the coneolidation of the defenae forcee of either party would im-
mediately, without preparation, be reflected on the other.

The Soviet leadere lietened with the utmoet attention to Mr Saddam nueayn
ee he deecribed the etegee which unificationiet action between Iraq and
Syria waa going through and hie conceptione of future conditione and prob-
abilitiea in the light of the orientation of the Baghdad eunnit reeolutiona.

Hr Saddam Hueayn etreeeed Iraq'e concern for the treaty of friendehip and
cooperation with the Soviet Union and the development of mutual relatione
in varioue fielda of cooperation.

In the light of theee baaic facte. during the vieit. which took 3 daye,
Hr Saddam Hueayn and the Iraqi delegation reviewed varioue aepecte of the
problems outetanding in the Middle East, among them the Lebaneee problem
and the need to prevent any development which might threaten the unity and
aecurity of Lebanon and coneequent ly expoee the Syrian- Iraqi confrontation
front with Ierael to any danger fr0m aeparetiet elemente in Lebanon or
Israeli plane encouraging eecterian divieione in Lebanon.

36

NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
awn veegvgaeu at“ v-oua

In addition, Mr Saddam Hueayn put the finiehing touchee on the work Steff
Lt Gen 'Adnan Rheyrellah, the Iraqi ninieter of defence, had done to meet
the Iraqi armed forcee' need for advanced weepone to coneolidate their de-
fenao capability, eepecielly in the light of their expended Inieaion ae e
reeult of the joint national action charter with Syria.

Although the Joint conrnunique contented iteelf with alluding indirectly to
thin aepect, and aloe to that of the diecueeion on Britrea and the African
Ilorn, informed eourcee underetand that other inportant concluaiona re-
eulted fro. the Iraqi-Syria talke on the defence level.

Anong theee conclueione wee the guarantee that within ehort periode of
time Iraq would obtain defeneive niaeile ayateme which would meet the re-
quire-ente of defending Iraqi airepace in addition to an unapecified num—
ber of the soot advanced mc aircraft, eepecially the cleee known by the
name "Bat," which ie two and a half tinee greater than the epeed of aound.

One could eey that the joint cmnique, thie tine. choae a preciee formla
for preaerving a number of the iqaortant reeulte the vieit realized, eepec-
ially during the aecond working eaeeion in Preaident Brethncv’a office.

Bilateral Relatione Since l972

In any event, an enlarged review of the Joint coaunique may point to many
important conclueione on the political and military levele and can explain
the ieportant expreeeione which appeared in etetenente Hr Saddam nueayn
teede at a dinner party the Central Comittee of the Soviet Coal-mist Party
held in hie honor in participation with the Soviet government. At thie
dinner, which wee attended by Koeygin, heading the Soviet officiale, as
well ea all the nembere of the Iraqi delegation, Hr Saddam hueayn gave a
talk aaying "It hae become a pernenent fact in relatione between Iraq and
the Soviet Union that we carry on coneultetion between oureelvee on baeic
ieeuee concerning ue jointly, ae regerde both bilateral relatione and con-
ditione in the Arab netion,the Middle Beet region, and international in-
euee and conditione.

“Experience hea confirmed the truth and neceeeity of thin evaluation."

He added, "(Mr bilateral relatione, aince the eigning of the treaty of co-
operation between ua in 1972, have been diatinguiehed by the fact that

they are baaed on fixed foundatione of principle which etend on true friend-
chip and mtual reepect with principles of eovereignty and concern for the
cannon intereate of our peoplee."

After he expreeeed hie aatiafection with the level bilateral relatione
between the two .countriee had attained, he etreeeed that both the Iraqi
and the Soviet partiee were anaiouw, during the diecueeion of ieeuea re-
lated to the juet etruggle the Arab nation wee waging againat the

37
ran OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Zionist eneey. "to understand the circunstencue end coneideretions of
the other side in accordance with the principles it believed in end the
responsibilities it bore."

Hr sedden lluseyn wee thus referring to the feet thet differences in the
deteiled philosophicel interpretetion of nettere releted to the principles
end beses of e settlement in the Middle Best did not prevent cooperation.

Therefore. Mr Sedden Huseyn espheeieed the fiesco of sl-Ssdst end the
nuricen forces in persueding the Areb world of their pletforln end the
Gene) Devid sunnit egreensnts. esying:

"The Areb eu-it conference held in leghded hes cone es en effirnetion to
the world thet the overwhelning nejority of the Areb people reject these

egreenents end do not egree to the pletforn by which the Bgyptien regime
is proceeding.

"The Areb eunit conference elso effirnsd thet the Areb netion is eble to
edopt e united etend end errive et e sound progren which represents e min-
iueun joint Areb position for protecting just Areb rights end demends."

lie edded, ”On this occesion. we esteen the position of the Soviet Union,
the friend who hes supported the resolutions of the eusnit conference in
Beghded end hee becked the orientetion this conference expressed in con-
eolidsting joint Areb ection sgeinst Zionist eggression."

A Digression of Significence

Prom thet he Iede e digression of significence, onphesieing the echieve-
cent which the joint netionel ection cherter between Ireq end Syrie repre-
sents in embodying the netionel hopes of the nesses in both countries.
which coincide with Areb netionel hopes. pointing out thet "The Soviet
friends heve elweys eppeeled for soliderity between Iraq end Syrie."

The joint cor-unique issued following conclusion of the visit on the even-
ing of 12 December stored, at the outset, thet "Deteiled. fruitful discus-
sions took plece in en etnosphere donineted by friendship end mtuel un-
deretending between Conrede Sedden Huseyn, deputy secretery of the Region-
el Con-end of the Areb Socieliet ae‘th Perry end vice cheir-en of the
Revolutionery Com-end Council, end Conrede Alexei Kosygin, member of the
Politicel Bureeu of the Centrel Connittee of the Soviet Conunist Perty
end Soviet prine minister. The discussions deelt with the situetion in
the lireb region, the results of the ninth Areb suueit conference held in

Beghded, the development of bileterel reletions end e nunber of issues of
concern to both sides."

Geode-netion of the "Coup” Agree-ents

Following thet, the joint co-wnique conteined the following generel
points:

38

M OFFICIAL IBE ONLY
.. ..... as .u_ on...

"In their discussions. Iraq and the Soviet Union expressed special inter-
est in the tense situation in the Arab region.

"They expressed their extra-e anxiety over the constant tension in the
region resulting from aggressive, expansionist Zionist policy supported
by inerialist circles.

"The two sides severely condeened the Camp David agreements concluded be.
tween the 2ionist entity and the ligyptian leaders, with the active partic-
ipation of the United States of America.

"The two sides condeened the egreenent which is being propounded in
washington on this basis, which constitutes a plot being hatched behind
the Arsba' back. conflicts with their interests. fundamentally relies on
resistance to the Arabs, sins at the attainment of partial, separate agree-
eents which will enable the Zionist entity to retain the occupied Arab
territories and prevent the Palestinian Arab people from obtaining their
legitimate rights, and consequently obstructs the establish-ant of a just,
permanent peace."

After the con-unique had condeened the Bgyptian leaders' capitulstionist
smasures. which were aimed at splitting Arab ranks, it sent on to refer
to the statements Hr Saddam liussyn had made concerning the steps Iraq is
continuing to adopt to “plant its relations with Syria in the context of
the seal of leaders in both countries to continue along the road to total
cooperation in accordance with the joint national action charter. The com-
munique proclaims a Soviet position on this developoent. since the Soviet
party had praised the lreqi and Syrian leadera' decision to consolidate
their efforts to cause the capitulationist schemes to fail and develop
unificationiet relations between themselves for the sake of strengthening
the unity of the Arab countries. counterattacking the Zionist aggression
and guaranteeing legitimate Arab national rights.

The Soviet party praised Iraq's initiative and efforts in holding the
ninth Arab sue-it conference in baghdad; it participated actively in unit-
ing Arab ranks. standing up to the Zionist schemes and their aggressive
sine, and thwarting schemes for e capitulationiat settlement. The two

parties stressed the importance of applying these Baghdad conference rea-
olutions.

The Soviet Union and Iraq also expressed their firm conviction that a just.
stable peace in the Arab region can be established only through the liber-
ation of the occupied Arab territories and full attainment of the fixed.
legitimate national rights of the Palestinian Arab people. including their
right to determine their destiny and establish an independent Palestinian
Itlte.

39

M OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL [BB ONLY

Content of the Comnique

An regarda aeating requirements for strengthening Iraqi defence capability,
the comniqua contained a paragraph with long-range eignificance, atating:

"The two partiee once again atreaeed their readinaae to continua to coop-
arate in the apbare of etrengthening the defence capability of the Republic
of Iraq. in view of the fact that it in an inportant factor in atrengthen-
ing the national independence and aoveraignty of the atate.

"The two partiea praiaed the iuportant gaina which have been achieved in
the field of autual economic cooperation. obaarved that there etill are
broad pouibilitiea and horirona for thia cooperation, and will exert ef-
forta to devalop it."

In hoacow. the Iraqi ainiatar of planning and member of the Revolutionary
Conand Council. hr 'Adnan lluaayn. joined the Iraqi delegation; Hr 'Adnan
Iluaayn had preceded the delegation to Moecow on a viait which had been de-
cided upon earlier to diecuee neane of expanding econonic and technical
cooperation between Iraq and the Soviet Union and reviewing the etagea of
iapleaentation of the projecta Soviet organizationa are carrying out in
Iraq. eapeciaily in the context of oil inatailatione.

The delegation which accoapaniad the vice preeident to Hoacow, then Havana.
included Heaera 'Irrat ibrahin.aeaber of the Revolutionary Comand Council
and interior niniater of Iraq. rariq 'Arir, nee-bar of the Revolutionary
Con-and Council, lurhan-al-Din 'Abd-al-Rahnan and 'Abdallah Fadil. who are
both nambera of the Revolutionary Con-and Council and the Regional Cowmnd
of the la'th Party, and Dr Sa'dun uauadi. niniater of foreign affaira,
in addition to a number of eenior Iraqi government and party officiale.

When the official viait ended. there was no indication of Mr Saddam lluaayn'a
nova to Cuba. Nancy-four houra before leaving Hoacow Hr Saddam Huaayn «net
with Mr Carloa Rodriguez. vice praaident of the Councila of etate and min-
iatere in the Republic of Cuba. who had alao been making an official visit
to the Soviet union.

It appeara that the principle of accepting the previoue Cuban invitation
to viait Cuba waa decided at thia neeting, particularly in view of the im-
portance of coupleting the diacuaaione which took place with the Soviet
leadera regarding a reaeonable nettle-ant in lritraa and the African horn
in the context of the expanded African role Cuba played and the care Cuba
bad ahown not to aubject ite relationa with the countriea of the Arab
world to edaarraee-ent.

Prone the Poret of Hoecow to the Warmth of Havana

‘l'hua, on the evening of the 13th of thia month. while Mr Saddam llueayn
and the unbera of hia delegation were receiving a warn farewell, all

60

M OFFICIAL L68 OﬂLY
avee vaaavuw bent veaue

observers thought thst he was going back to Baghdad and news agencies actu-
ally cabled their correspondents to get ready to cover the return and try
to interpret the results of the Moscow talks.

however. Mr Saddan ﬂusayn's airplane left the frost of Moscow for the
war-nth of Mavana without previous anmunceuaent. The vice chair-nan of the
Revolutionary Couand Council was thus responding to an official invi_t_a-
tion tendered by the Cuban government and the Cuban Con-unite Party Ito
his-l in his capacity as assistant secretary general of the Arab Socialist
he'th Party and vice chairman of the Revolutionary Command Council.

At the down of the 14th of this month. Mr Saddam Ilusayn's plane landed at
Mavana Airport in the midst of a great mass gathering headed by Fidel Castro.
president of the Council of State and secretary general of the Cuban Con-
nunits Party and Raul Castro, minister of defenee. in addition to members

of the Political bureau of the party's Central Comittee and nembers of

the Arab and foreign diplomatic corpe.

Por Mr Saddam Mussyn. the dark-haired Arab leader coming from the cradle
of ancient civilization in the Arab east , llavana truly had prepared a re-
ception whose features were distinguished by the wareth of Spanish blood.
and beghdad's words inspired in people's minds many neanings linked with
the country which had imparted its character to the fables of the Thousand
and One Nights and given its news to brilliant Arab civilization.

This concern to honor the Arab guest was crystallized when the papers came
out with headlines bearing expressions in Arabic, alongside the Spanish.
welcoming Mr Sedden liusayn end the members of his delegation.

The masses were out eager to express the wareth of the meeting on every
occasion Sedda- Mueayn was invited to meet and encounter.

The Iraqi-Cuban Talks

In epite of the great distance between Moscow and Mavana. official talks
between the Iraqi party. headed by Mr Sadda- llusayn, and the Cuban party.
headed by Mr Pidel Castro. started on the afternoon of the lloth of this
nonth.

In an etoosphere described as "extremely friendly." the two parties re-
viewed Ireqi-Cuben relations of friendship which had made repid, fruitful
develop-ant in various spheres. The two delegations then turned to review
the situetion in the Middle Seat end the Probabilities accruing front
President al-Sadat's continued isoleted platform. This discussion was

the prelude to a frank tell: on the iwact of the recent developments in
the region of the African Morn, especially lritree.

AL-HA‘rAM AL-‘ARASl's information has it thst the lraqi delegation insist-
ently stressed. as it hed in Moscov, that it was essential to deviate

Isl
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

from the attenpt to aolve the problem of the relations between tho
lritrean revolution and the Ethiopian regime militarily. for the aake of
reaching a reaaonable. viable mtuel underetanding with the detachoente
of the lritreen revolution in a manner which would conetitute a conpro-
niae eolution between lthiopian etrategic raquirementa and the require-
nenta of lritrean national eoveraignty.

Informed circlee predict that Mr Saddam liueayn'e talke in Hoacow and
Havana will have poaitive reaulta which will becone rapidly cryatallited
in Britrea. aince they contain an atuoephere which will help a aettlenent
through negotiatione.

In addition. the two delegationa alao exchanged intonation regarding the
experiencae of both the Iraqi and the Cuban revolutione and their achieve-
nenta in varioua epheree.

‘l'haae frank. amicable diecueeione led to eupport for underatanding between
the two countriee and conaolidation of their joint actione in facing Zion-
iat aggreaaion and actiona of the inperialiet forcee in the Arab world.

Mr Saddam lluaayn'a Cuban vieit offered a new international forum for net-
ing Arab viewpointe in the broad fora with which hie vieit to Hoecow waa
characterized. In addition to the political gaina fro- thia vieit. there
waa the economic gain of developing the growing cooperation between Iraq
and Cuba. The two countriea aigned a detailed economic cooperation agree-
ment between thamaelvee. Signing the agreement for lraq wae Hr ’Adnan
Iiuoayn, niniater of planning and uenber of the Revolutionary Col-and
Council, and, for Cuba, hr Carloa Rodriguez. vice preeident of the coun-
cila of etate and ninietere. who had returned from Hoacow at the am time
at the Iraqi delegation.

Obaervara who have been informed of acne of the reaulta of Mr Saddam
llueayne'a trip to Moecow and llavana have deacribed it ae a hiatoric trip
of eolutiona. by which they mean that nuneroua aigna ahow that Saddan
lluaayn managed to mobilize further international forcea for a aolution to
Arab problem in accordance with the requiretnanta of Arab national inter-
eata, going beyond the text of the Hiddle Beat to Arab portione of Africa.
Theee aigna alao point out that he attained aonething iwortant in the
field of aupport for the defenaive capability of the Arab front. which
will not accept non-Arab eolutiona to Arab probletaa.

comma: “AMT”! Ito-MIMI, 1978

11887
CSO: 1.802

62

M OFFICIAL IBE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

IRAQ

PR8” ATTACRI IN PARIS DISCRIIBS PAN-ARM NATURR 0? MEDIA EFFORT
Parie AL-HATAN AL-‘ARABI in Arabic [lo-20 Dec 78 p 6

linterview with Salli Hehdi, Iraqi Prue Attache in Paria, by Ibrahin al-
Sayyah: "Hith the Preae Attachee in Paria (3): 891 Mahdi. Bnbaaay of
free: ‘Our Media Bffort la Nationaliet and Arab':/

may Aa part of the interviewa with preee and cultural attachee of Arab
enbaeaiee in France, Hr Sui liahdi, preae attache in the Iraqi enbaeay and
director of the Iraqi cultural Center in Perla, ia talking thia week to
AL-HATAN AL-‘ARAII about Arab media activity and the center'a activity in
l'rance.

l aeked Hr Sand Mahdi. “1a there a general idea about Arab information in
France? what are your reconnendatione?"

/§newe57 Arab information in Prence ia etill week and limited for nuneroue
raaaone. eoat iaportant of which ie the lack of agreeaent anong Arab media
about minimal co-non nedia goale and action to achieve theae goale.

It ehould alao be obeerved that theee Arab eedie are concerned with what

ie regional, if I nay uee the expreeeion. more than with what ia Arab in
general. They look for regional nedia gaina more than they aeek to perform
the general Arab inforeation eiaeion in france, which leada to a fragnentao
tion of efforte on the one hand and the creation of contradictiona which
are perceived by our French frienda, who talk about how to create a cannon
ground on which to nova without toning up egainet the eeneitivitiee of one
Arab body or another.

The greateat and soot obvioua exanple of thia ia the Arab-French Solidar-
ity and the difficult circuaetancea facing it aa a reault of thia eort of
fregeentation.

The Arab League Office wee to have drawn up and defined cannon goala and
worked to carry the- out. but, for one reeeon or another. the office doea
not aeea able to perforn ite obligationa.

103
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

I§uestioﬁ7 Hhat about Zionist information?

[Answer] Zionist information has organizations which cooperate with one
another. sons of which conplansnt the others' work, behind it. Then, the
Zionists are organized and have their influence within the aedia. Facili-
tating their activities further is the fact that some of thee are French
and enjoy all the benefits of french citizenship.

The National Goal First of All
I§uestiog7 what is Iraq's mission in the information field?

lénswegl Despite the fact that our organizations are those of an Arab
country. naaaly Iraq, we do not so much work with an Iraqi spirit as with
an Arab spirit. That is. we strive to keep the greatest possible degree
of integration and haraony between what is Arab and what is Iraqi in our
action. This naturally is an aebodieent of the principles of the Arab
Socialist Ba'th Party. the coanendar of the revolution in Iraq.

This applies also to press dapartaents as ouch as it applies to the activ-
ity of the cultural center. whose activity is plainly obvious as it is
oriented toward the public.

l§uastio§7 what are the center‘s spheres of activities?

[Answer] The center's activity is of a cultural character. since culture
has a public and also because we aspire to have French public opinion
realize that the Arabs are not just "oiluen" but that they are also a nation
with a deep-rooted civilisation. a rich heritage and a developing modern
culture. Therefore. we are anxious to present the French public first of
all with the wherewithal of Arab civilization and present-day Arab culture.

He want Greater Activity

I§uestio§7 Are you satisfied with the activities of the Iraqi Cultural
Center in Paris?

IAnswesl So far we are not satisfied with the level of the center's activ-
ities and work. and we believe that the center can perform broader. sore

effective activity. For this reason we are now intending to reorganize its
status. starting with a search for a building in a suitable spot and ending

with the organization of seasonal programs absorbing diverse cultural activ-
ities open to the broader french public.

I§uestio§7 what did you do last season? what do you intend to do in the
near future?

linswe§7 He presented a program covering a period of 6 months. Every
month there were two sections. This program was carried out with

46

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

- conepicuoue eucceee, but we believe, ee we hed previouely pointed out. the:
we cen perform better. more broedly effective ectivitiee, end if we get be-
yond the etege of reorgenieetion in 2 uonthe' time we will heve node e eub-
etentiel etride elong the roed to echieving the center'e eepiretione.

The ectivitiee the center cerriee out include lecturee, preeentetion of
docunentery end hietoricel film. eetebliehment of diveree ertietic exhib-
ite, end culturel. literery end poetic eoireee. In eddition, the center
preeente lreq end the Areb netion. dietributee newepepere end publicetione.
end enewere lettere end queriee from the French public, which ere very
nuneroue.

He eleo perticipete in French culturel end even non-culturel ectivitiee on
eoee occeeione in order to highlight the principlee we ere telking ebout.
An exeeole of thie in our perticipetion in the Rheine Connerciel Exhibit
end the look Peir in Nice. we eleo try to conduct ectivitiee in other
French citiee. end we try to offer our eeeietence to Areb orgenieetione
which eel: for film, picturee end documente.

l§ueetiog7 Hhet ebout the Center Librery?

lAneweg/ He ere intending to reorgeniee the librery end eet up e lending
eyetee ee eoon no we eove the center (in ebout e nonth). Port of our tech
ie to follow up on inplmntetion of the technicel end culturel coopere-
tion egreenent between Ireq end Prence. Among the progreae ere bringing
ertietic groupe frog Ireq, euch ee the Netionel Folklore Troupe end the
Hueicel lleritege Troupe. end eetebliehuent of Ireqi dreee exhibite end folk-
lore exhibite. In our eetinetion. none of thie will echieve the deeired
eepiretione on long ee there ie no Areb ectivity cooplenenting oure.

COPYRIGBT: AL-UATAN Ab-‘MMII. 1978

11887
630: 4802

45
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! ONICIAI. USE ONLY

LEBANON

INTERVIEH "IT" M COMMANDER GEN VICTOR KIIURI
London THE MIDDLE EAST in English Jan 79 pp 28-30
[Interview with Gen Victor Khuri. date and place not giVenl

[Text] The Co-ander of the Lebanese Araed Forces, General Victor Khoury.
holds one of the lost sensitive posts in Lebanon now. lie is responsible
for rebuilding the Lebanese Army fro- scrateh despite the odds against him.
with the military assistance prouised President Bliss Sarkis by the French
Goverment. In this exclusive interview. General Khoury discusses some of
the probleaa he had to face when he tool: up office just after the Civil Her.
tie also describes his relationship with the Syrian-dominated Arab Deterrent
Force. expresses his determination to build up an army representing all the
Lebanese. and voices support for the new Array Dill now before Parliaaent.
"Nothing will deter us from bringing all renegade officers to trial." he
adds. General Khoury also expressed his readiness to collect all the area
in the country once he is asked to do that but only after the any has been
coapletely rebuilt. Excerpts iron the interviod with rm; MIDDLE EAST follow.

0 You took over as Commander o! the
Lebanese Arraed Forces lost after the
two-year CivIl War. What IxInd o!

Rdm"m$ “"m'
I or totnyappmnl
menL Thar even unminatedln the

eltuatlon dldyou Inherit tromyou abortive attempt on the life at the foreign
predecessorﬁeaerelllaeaa Seer-d1 Minister. Food Mm, when to tile. ol
OWell. perhap theerlstenoeoleolneny Th'l‘waepleredhhbhomeztlﬂewaedone
Iartioruand mp5 lmidetheamed hmtheldshtbetoretheaomeilol
Ionavasthenntdilhtultpmblemllated Minhtersmduetomoettodeddeon my
at the time. There was the [sham Nob 'ntrncnt.
Armylnrmtrnlolmepsrtolthecomlry twaswtdertuchtondltionsthatltooh
anditmjnyedtheeunretofmepartlea wthetmhofrebuildins theannedfortul
mrlmmlmmre-aathem-enlled ﬁnlbdtnappolnleChHolStaﬂ. Became

lebeneae Army. hitched by partial lrmn the

othereidr.
'I'lldivergenotdvieweandevenlulred

between the diﬂerent fertile inside the

ennywaureellty whoehesmotbedented I

hebehuedmapenitulueettlevenhad
to tale over the respum’lility d appointing
(“Natl pends to drive him to the Och-ore
hlmiato We then app-intal olheers and
heal.- iu the variant bramhes of the armed

even had to bring In my pereonal guards Run-rs. This ea: lollmed by the rebuilding

withmeslmldnottnatanyone Ididnot attention-directorate: horn people

IT;- -threplItoﬂoyaItieswasatron¢INht mtinullthe ndmuaechandereede.
66

FOR OWICIAL 082 ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02108: ClA-RDP82-00850R0001000200324

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

’l'lw tlme m tent-nod l‘ue wlemtaly enllet-
tnent. A new hteetl of mm to 21m enldien
hlned (nun nll eta 0t lehannn and they
(«meet the not «a ot a helaade dltertly
nmltatnl to the Anny Command. The
MIlitaey School wee also opened and nearly
mum oﬂleen tealatetedﬂheyuenow
atthetndotthelr ﬂeet . Wealeoton-
tlnuedtealn ae-lmaa mad.8ohaeleelly
one can t the holneleal tactote
which! todealwlt lntetntsolthetnen
ml thelt morale and the dh'hhtnmotthe
anned tome m the mat difﬁcult peo-
hleena laden; me at thetlme.
D What made you accept eueh a
aeneltlve end unmaedlnc taeh at eoeh
dime tleneo?
0 Well. It waa haeed on my eonvkllm that
"thete la no homeland vlthnot ln-
tlevrndenee and no htlepentletm without
tleeamy".lwaaaleoeonvineetlthata
homeland eannot he hath Mthout eacellleee.
Natneally. I greatly awreeleteet the enn-
t'ltlenee that Penldent Sathla and hla
Owennnent heel ln ene and I
atetl the tact that the «ﬁne no
ltoehaveotthetocdtkedeepltethe
meal and phyaleal mute! It had been
' to

uhreteo .
a You My. wee been In ofﬁce neaer a
you and a half. How much have you
heen able to aehlm In the eehutldlngof
the new Lebaneoe Amy and what are
aotne otthe ohataclee that have etood In
meway?
oftonltheheattlaylammedoﬂkeJ
nailed that any any met he mm end
not patched up. That'a why I mutated
on not tacititettne themhofthe etal't.
ant-ninth; lte chic! and then mew-inc m to
enabling heads ot‘ the othet cit-mum
onllditeettnta. lmnhodtohulldow
m and Inn-e tn meet the Defence
Minktlyu that all the! nhnehmve tn help
us- in the eehteildinmmmunmandeo
. (mt, aitlwt any that or «law. We
mum. the tea Camp. um
eotdim fol-m Ill vetted Ithanon. e also
hunted we W Wm 8‘“
(Muhalnhel M enahlu t Amy
t‘nmmantl to adopt dn-iamwlthout leave!
any m at thteat. Freedom of ehotce
mtnt ht'pntededhyloeu.

llasleelly. all I hendmeaofavhtopaee
the nay he a eehltlhling panel- that will
meealthellheneaetenitutthava
appointed men-nudes foe eoeh "do" and

67

new tmlta have been not up 11
the armed lnteea to ahead) In
eelae the combat tapahllltlea o
to face the lnunenelty o! the
u. Pmo‘thlolﬂhhuheem
eutmhtlly.

D Prealtlent Bavhla haa em
numeroue oecaelone that
foeoee In Lehanon are h
requeat of and undee th
authoelty ot the Lehaneee l
Syelane have alao neentlone
tlenee. ﬂow would you he
you: eelatlonehlp wlth that
how do you foeeeee the fut
mpect. tahlng teto oonald
elewa and etantla of the tree
Involved In the uhaneee con
0 Expetlenee haa taught tea 0
he no mmment Mtuout at
eeene expetlenee haa ahown u
can he no mm with ten
lehaneee Anny uhieh ie now h
and the Arab Detenent Pon
auppaed to he mponelhle k
maintaining mmh'l‘lzyé
m to t
«hm the lahaneae ol
authoeity. deeplte the (act on
eotnetlmea hedlcate othemiae. I:
ouch incident an hut padnp
aimitloance Aa Cone
Lehaneae Armed Pm my
eith the Arab Detenent Pan
mutual teem; out untaeta
thnmh bhanaae anny calm
the Anny Command who ham

0 One aectoe of the Leha
olatlan haa hee- charging
Lehaoeee Anny Command l1
eepeeeentatlva o! all the belt
that the altuatloe haa not
deeplte the two-year Clvll \Va

roe OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDPOZ-OOGSORDOO100020032-3
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02108: ClA-RDP82-00850R0001000200324

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

your tuponoo to ouch chouoo?

ONomeandonythotdurlmthotlmool
tho Punch mondoto thooo woo o
dlﬂetentlotlon In tho meptonco of
owlkontotothoMllltary Acadomy honed
on tholt ooct; ovon tho oppllconto
thomoelvoouodtomhomonoooctunly.
mannandomhoummhenthuw
woo hbonloed. move of a holanoe woo
oehloved.bohanonoontthvou¢l|olotofup-
heoyolo todllfetontltomthopoefentm
chum; lehthoomwoomoxomploof
notional unlty. could only ho
otttibuted to tho holanco whlch alloted

hard to
Mmthobalancoondtomllothomen.
lmldvoty muchlilto to huethot

thatdltoctlm tntlljuotkohubeen

D Tho now Lehoaooo Am Blll hao
Do- hooa hot‘oro Poollamoot for «no
tlmo without ntlhootloa. Thlo hao
couood o opllt laoldo tho oountry'o
leclolatlvo and oxocutlvo moon. Do
you thlnh tho hlll ohould go though
Parllontoat do It lo and would you thlalt
ofmoltlu any ouoeodnento to It. I! on.
what hltod «change?
0 l on Wood of tho need to undo
amendmta ht tho Anny Bill. I woleomod
tho ldoo d the stabl‘ahmont o! tho High"
Doleoco Cotmcil whlch will ho with
fadvawlu outtho ootattI-y‘o defuooo icy.
lmmdtlnooohoptopooodltln that
place. becauao tho awtdmenta
will ﬂotilla“ tho out [at tho mmondet
audhlouhoodlootoo.’ ‘-
loooalooatooltlmwhopnwdtho
opp-nintment a! low donation to the Chiefol
Stall heauoo whatapplied in Melon not
holdln 1m. _

But what I am appuhenoivo olwhen it
moon to limith; thoauthoolty of the Amy
Command by the pliticiano io that the
may can heeomo mote at leoo neutroliaed
thut hing it: comltot ability. One must

1.8

Funemhct that the aim beh
dunno emu bo olmply u
lot one potty and o Iooo I
ohould oolely mold thooo c
lot the may. 'l‘ho ument d‘
Army Bill no I ntleetlouc
‘m’r‘li: m'
At at one:
meat to mufﬂe: Itself I
qua on on In
view- whea mult on u
but polltla ond leglolot
handled by tho competent a
D Dovolopmoato oftho lo
that tho anay lo now olo
even by rl‘htwlnc Inllltl
homo la Amohoot hao l
Thlo lo a mooltod cho
oltuotloa In tho not w
uood to com under otta
tome. To what do you a
chouo and would lt
pooltloa on tho pomnall
AmConmondlovol‘l .
O ‘l‘ho Monnotlon and mi
ond attach thot on
the army on well I
pdnciple. 'l'hio lo duo to t1
oocurity plan aeoted a F
ow in moo when tho mi

from any oomplo
oven tho Nab Amy. Tho
thatiothat myolltaoml
have rejoined us in the out
all tofuined from Mun
oltuotlono whiehhteolt thoo
All these compolcm heln
\- vill only make no molt
mtinue tho match. The c

bebop only to tho molest

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: CIA-RDP82-00860R000100020032-3
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007I02108: CIA-RDP82-00850R0001000200323

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

doeetlieplnteetiondtheoomu-ybln-

dependence end euetenteein; the eelety 0" ‘0 txuo that the deeis
endeorueltyofthedtlmMyeoleobjeetlve ‘WlowetotheSouthin
b to build e non-pettleen end euny MD. We the lat-henna.
mmelteehowotheepewle‘eetende go. a" ho!” ““9 The belting
0 Under the recent decielone tehen by Kowltebedounot rneenthel
the Army Commend it wee decided to enter the south hee been
bring to juetlee ell tho renoudo omceee detmninetion le etill then
who hevo led their own fectlone o! the I("We WM out ouch e
enny during end enee the civil wee. pun! militexy. The etnppe
Theee heve leoluded euch oﬂlcoee ee thee . thet took plecei
Ahmed Khetlb. Seed Hedded. Semi tlleoonﬂlcungpettiee involve
Chldlelt end othere. Whet brought Whit i an etme hete h the
ebout the doclelon end ere you VII may tecticel end ten
determined to bring them to leoo In“. the South mneine our
tnilltery Item no nutter whet the MW in colleboretion wit
memﬂ‘hgmwh? Netione fence When lhc
o ln‘nlliteey tame. the m to each e wltgble we will enter, no in
m m“ W W “m”-
Inuet be by .D At ell tho conferenoee l
mmmuweeonthetbeele «heck-munchi-
thet I took the decleiom. The timing for Areb. w lntoenetlonel -
cenylne out theee dechim le not intooo "Wheeled thet no eolt
tent. . ctleie cen be reeched unlee
Butlwouldllketopointouthen-end '05 le elven to "the
' not no it ulticioln - diet the mooneiblllty Mllﬂdﬂl” Lobeneee
foe thoe decieione ehouid have been tehen “Wu vleueliee ouch etolt
by my peedeoeeeot. The mieteltee toe which couldmtlon the «pollen
' they heve been aloud to the Inilitery (ew wonthe when you (I
come were committed during the paiod in!!! In “ch ﬁlm I!
m my mg m “M Ag (.3 PM me. end ll ”I9 “It!
eel em comet-nod. I did not heeiteto to telte the “DIM before thet?

qdchenddedelveectlonwhenelnlller OWanein-enuen
beacheehewmeddunn; mytennololﬁoe. “Uhndeolthecountxy'epolll
'lhuwhenwewetefeoedwitheceeeeimﬂu Mmuetwhetdecleioneetee
.tothetofthelqbeneeekebk'myinthe conferenujeeemeot‘theoon
. armdMMnedSeﬁnltooh llbﬂtgeabtemdbeceuee
nudieteeetiom'lheeemeeooliedtothe Wilmmwneionln
' Dbeneoeltevolutionerykmy.whldtwee mmweyoutunieeetheen
ledbyCeptehIAehlterJelrnplynlppedtho mekltlmefeltlneill
mmthulewiilnotheeitete thhetweereworltingm

o It le generelly eoceote
Lebeneee conﬂict will no
until a dey coma when ell

to
to
he
Ae'io whether the may i. cepeble of woman: erecoilocted."
on
of

my
implementing theee decision. thet in tel: ll elven toyou. how willym
foe rented. An m b elweye apeble Inddomthlnkyoucenew
otttteehmuchbiuetthenih'me OWhentheennyiecompletel
_ deeieione will be implemented It the light 3 able to way: every citizen
time. One unit not (cent thet our objective PM)”. then I Will work on coill
letocauolidetemityendtonbuiidtlu mm‘hh‘ﬂdiolthelgb‘
m.w.mmwjm mtodothltthhel heppe
oueeoreepemmpinneambe “mmdb'wmwum
new Lebeneee Anny when you eent M 0°" Mal because the;
unite to South Lebenon. But thee the went ‘0 W06!- them i 1
force wee etoooed et Kewltebe. Why my people Mllget nd oftheil
didn't you push eheed to eeteblleh your Wily when the euthoritiee en
pmenco in the some no Inettee whet to W“ 8W mute: min:
the price. end no N am determined do ngat obey the. luv, eepcci
to deploy any unite In the South in tho one-hon «pr-«emu; and any
nee: hture?

COPYRIGHT 1978 10 Magazines Ltd.

49

CSO= “20 FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00860R000100020032-3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

LENNON

lNTERVlﬁl lil'i‘ll LLMNN UN REPRESENTATIVE GliASSAN ‘l'UlMYNl

London ‘ms RIDDLE EAST in English Jan 79 pp 31-30

[interview With Lebanon UN Representative Ghaasan 'i‘uvnyni. by Judith Kipper.
date and place not given]

[Text]

Ghassan 'I‘ueni. Lebanon's
Permanent Representative at
the United Nations. reﬂects on
his action-packed year there» a
year of conﬂict and tragedy for a
country that was once
considered the bastion of
liberalism in the Middle East. f
Philosophically. Ambassador
Tucni believes that "history in. .
the region is an encounter me»: a
between thehulnan and the ;_-“-"'
divine". ills human talents? '
were tested within months of his

arrival at the UN when he found
himself pleading Lebanon's case
before the Security Council
during the lsrseli invasion of
Southern Lebanon. His personal
command of the situation is
credited with the [is-sponsored
resolution to reafﬁrm and
protect Lebanon's territorial
integrity. sovereignty and
political independence.

50

No newcomer to politics. ' .

_ 'i‘ucni has been a minister

several times and was a member
of Parliament and Deputy
Speaker of the House in
Lebanon. lie served as Special
Representative of the

President of Lebanon to
Washington in i976 and of the
Arab League to the US in i911.

Before embarking on his
current diplomatic mission.
Tueni was well known as the

publisher and editor of the hard-
hitting Beirut daily An-Nahar,
considered the most
authoritative newspaper in the
Arab world. An Nohar was

published continuously
throughout the Lebanese civil
war which 'l‘ueni claims was a
result of its defence of Lebanese
u t y.

Ghasssn Tueni does not avoid
hard questions. Here he
discusses some of the most
difﬁcult with Judith Kipper.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
w“. .V
mew

W 1033mm“
.w
1W!

3%; a??? Egg;
egg; Egiggggg £33.

géiig‘ﬁ; ag‘:
3-3

':??¥?i? ???

Hmﬂllulm“

am! "I tan-13m» rm mo

”- ‘I'W‘IW‘H'V‘I 'Wl’
miuntkow

3:“. 'II'PIN

'WIINOQ‘

u
quv
3....5 33:2- 8 3...
G as... p.23. t... 93.8 £5. 7.3.
.55 e: :3 638.- o.. 32.2...." .a.
.a................ 1.: a. .
o B. €833... o a
:3 >37 12.... a...» URI-2.. 2.33: :8
.o .8 3.5. I a 39.51:. :3 3.85.33.
2:. .. 3.2 so. 238 .55. .3: .p .5. =-
33... 381.2. a... Ea: =5 val—.83..
=8 gu..5.—5~= v33 .2. 23¢ .a
.3: £32. .33 LES: L. 3.25.3...
«33.2. 3......“ 23:. :8 >33.
agar-26:33 ..8..30..§..2=8
>37. .38 >3..- 8303! .83 2812.
.53. Boson—tyxrrzxa. .23... six...
94%;...3 San-.1.z.3...€ =5.
.5- .852. :8: 2:. 33.52. - «03.3
525223. =9:- 3 8 .8 .880 .2. .
3:53.18: 0.. 3.28.3. 7.3.. 1... 1-3 8

ml the Cruaademwerethe undenieve led. ti 7
Bonnie t‘actua will play a teammate In one

0 notion
rule. We will never mate a Weatem t ”117“,, g
enriety inthehehwoeld 1hetnneleeol’ mhevetlu
tartan-ling ie a multidimmeional uhlem world. Then
whirl: ennui-It be handled artiﬁcialy. Arab knowledge nix
eociety will be a eoelety that belong yto thie d a" weelth}
century, one that will be able to Invent Flﬁa m am
and Cadillac. importing technology will be“, u! u,
give way to a new era of invention and. givingtheirm
creativity. It la a natural bywoduet of ".50...“ M,
“*W could have
D What to the baaie of thle American development.
reelatanoe to the Araba‘l - My. not toun
0 Ml. C ”lid d American "0' mew“...
vineialiemwhiehienotreellylnharmotw Deﬁant]
with America‘a international lole. 'Ihera la atrncturel ||
atlll the leniatltco of the Image of the Arab hae called
an the villain. the man who can Manger ieation. a”
Milly-Mm“ - aﬂoctiveneee
0 "IV. ’0“ aeen W cite M”? II thle OII guwfpo‘
American reeietenee being aobdued magma,“
eornewhat? o 11.. United
0 You do one eome ehongee .F‘oe instance. There i. . car
there are more and time mldkatim and ”ﬂaw
Ittu lre aim: the helm aepecte om.» lite. would make i,
1Mieanentmrimitywhlchhaepm- wouldnoteay
dtuedmanyboohtilmeandtelevieionp pun; areeaitiepan
uammeeonAnbotiituee. "hubby; haan'tbeenao
independence. aomehow mic nelitie'e' been ineapab
doheoomepolitieelnaiitieautimetelyitle uhm itlu
intheArahe'intenettob-etmdeeetmdinthe thieunioue at
UnitedStetee. the PLO he!
'DYeo reoantly referred to a new peacekeeping.
equation which emerged after the m: Mal t. in pa
'l' by earl“: ”The world had been act on my
governed by the balance otponer. but "may who
elnoe tm it to governed by the balance W ﬁnlﬁﬂ
ofweelth. The paradox o! thie altoatloo I" may.
ia that for the ﬂeet titna the war ofetnail “med by l
natione peetaebed the tile at his mi (
natione. " Do you atlll hold thla .view? by the UN in»
What to the way ontolthie dilemma for erieeadetrlmet
both the entail and the bi; netione‘l D The Soviet
0 Yea. ao much an that when there no on Africa. in Y4
. wealth. butonly an ammanlnveetment _l with eome dl
olweeltthbhtilltmeJlbanot-tiaenee theltey.ln:
ample. loontinoe to believe that the balance verelvo inﬂue
ot‘weelthhaealteredalltheoldummed! ioiwouldnot
thebeianceotpenerlnthevaetde butSovietinll
nntime were the rich nations and the WV. that
3"‘WWW ""“him '33 "' "F”
wentot l ceice cot
on the induetrielleed. but today the in- havenotbeenl
dmtrielioed are dependent on the develop dent Certer'eh
in: nation noton for module, but for appealed at ‘
netumlondt‘l ' mourveeeewell ideolo‘lceiap;
0 la thle true throughout the Third eietentlyobeen

World or only among the oil-rich

56

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: CiAROPdZ-OOGSOROOOiOOOZOO32-3
FOR OHIO!“ USE ONLY

I Walt demo: II I Went ls blmud lo -
Ruin behind Wm. WW‘. pm-
hurl.» molutlawy 0139'“:th amid _
at] a molmlmuy awn-uh album" If

ywmwmddedllnfmc.hluhn
whommduncdvlngddeallun

nvolulhnuy numhlp When do]
wally-unﬁldouotumdmthdde

dM-nbun.bulluceptllmmmodnmn
animated“. u

3 Magazines Ltd.

55

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MAURITANIA

MINOR HINISTIR EVALUATB wrv MIHE'S MITRE. NATIVE POINTS
Perle “PHAT“ Ala-’ARABI in Arabia “-10 Jen 79 P 23

Enter-view with neuritsnisn Interior hinister Jiddou Ould Seleck. by
an Hsghribi]

[Text] Everything ebout his revesls seriousness end discipline. He is sur-
romded by e specisl sir of dignity. but his friendliness encourages whoever
is with his to be cospletely st esse. He is heuritenisn Interior hinister
Jiddou Ould Seleck. who plsyed s vitsl pert in planning end csrrying out the
10 July refcrn novenent, end who hes crgsniuticnel sbilities the effects of
which ere not beconing evident in heuritsnis.

This interview took piece in his office in the lieuritenisn cepitsl cf houn-
chott. I hsd intended thet the interview etsrt off with s provocetive ques-
tien. not in under to find out if he could reply objectively, but beceuee he
hed told no thst he would speck with couplets frnnlmess once he decided to

spsek.

I selced Interim: hinieter Jiddou Ould Seleck, “In light of your bseio pertin-
ipsticn in the 10 July refnrn novenent end your experience in the pnctioe

of suthcrity. could you give Ali-innit Ali-mum‘s renders an evolution of
the results. inclining "self-criticise" if need be?"

he replied oslnly, es if he hed been expecting such s question. "let us stsrt
off with the positive fectcrs. The reforn novenent hes succeeded in direct-
ing the people's forces .1“ s course lending to the echievenent of definite
goele. The new gevernnsnt hes else worked to cleenee these forces of the
previous regine's filth. which wes hindering progress end wee in feet etsnding
es s berrier to develop-eat.

“m the ecmonic level. the country wss on the brink of bankruptcy when we
took over the govern-mt. The new leadership he successfully fornulstsd
new econonic guidelines which heve ado it possible to nske s stert on
reclining n30:- developsent projects.

56

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
'01 the edeinietretive level. we heve worked to revitelise the edeinistreticn
in order to bring it in olceer contect with the citieene' daily problem.

'01 the foreign level. the new governeent hes successfully edopted e dyneeic
thrust towerds peeoe. which hes enebled it to teke inportent steps in the
seerch for e conprehensive solution to the western desert problee.

"Not to nention the feet thet the 10 July eoveeent prescribed the etete‘s
dosestio end interneticnel presence. eeking the issue of preeerving sover-
eignty en introduction to the eeteblisheent of perellel releticne with other
stetesureletims serving coeeon interests on en equel footing.

"this belsnced role will help expedite the desired solution to the desert
problee. for it seriously end effectively eerves regionel etebility.

”In light of these new developeents. the new leederehip hes been eble to
redouble its efforts in sesrching for solutions to the eoonoeic. sociel end
politicel problees which we inherited froe the previous regiee.

"Now we coee to self-criticise. es you proposed. 1 hsve no objection to

spsekim ebout the negetive espects which heve eccoepenied the refor- nove-
eent. indisputebly. every regiee in ite eerly steges hes to feoe difficul-
ties which light hinder its efforts to cleense itself of sons of the filth

with the neoeeeery speed.

“I believe thet the edlinistretion (its orseniseticn end injectim with new.

efficient persmnel) still needs coeprehensive. redicel refers. to elieinete

eny etteepts et opportunis- end profiteering end to infuse the edninistretive
egencies with new blood end sincere dynenisl. which will bring it in greeter

ccntect with the problem being brought up.

”this phenceenon is due to e leek of personnel. or proficient elenents cspsble
of replecing the ossified elenente who did not pley the role required of then.

“the new regise nust be ewere of the dsnger of this problen. end eust give it
the study end concern it deserves. This cen be done by conducting rsdicel
edninistretive refore in order to put the right Ien in the right piece.
Then ere esployees who hsve been treeted unjustly end who heve not been on-
trusted with the responsibilities they deserve. Therefore. eppointnents must
be lede ecoording to objective etenderds."

The Interior Rinistry'e Nueerous Activities

Question. with respect to the Interior ministry. whet heve you eccoepliehed
to deto?

Answer: Ile here coepleted the edeinistretive refor- nf the ninistry's agen-
cies. not Just to eeke then responsible for sociel end pcliticel stebility

but to nice this leed to pertioipetion in echieving neticnel growth. A
politicel deperteent hes elso been esteblished. concerned with the culturel

57

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE: ONLY

and politicel activitiee ci‘ craanieatime end eocietiee. we have decided
to eateblieh a eecticn to look efter foreignere end regulate their entry
into and exit {roe the country.

He Will Accept llo Solution For which we have To Pay e Price
Queetiom Do you pereonally have any epecii'io ideae about the deeert problea?

Mower: Our pceition. ea eteted by the Military Couittee for National Re-
covery. ie plain and united on thie eatter. we are now waiting for the
"emittee of Juiaee" to tinieh ite work. To date. we have not approved

any epecitic. final eolutim. One thing that ie certain ia ea follow”
huritenia cennot accept any eolution for which it has to pay a price. It

to alac oppceed to any eilitary eolutim. end calla for a Juet solution which
will peeerve the righte of the partiee concerned.

‘l‘wo Year-e Before Deeccd-eoy ie lleetored

Queetimn when you tool: power you proaiaed that deeooratio oraniutiono
would be eetabliahed in the oomtry and that tree electiaae would be celled.
when will that happen?

Anaweru At thie etage. the treaewcrlze of the etete are being rebuilt on
eomd eomoeio baeee. Thin fundaeental etep auat be taken before any po-
litical etepa towarde eetabliehing deeocratic organisation ie taken.

Queetiom ﬂow auoh tiae do you think is needed to eeteblieh theee deeocratic
political omnieaticne?

Anewer: It. will be at leeet 2 yeere before general electione are called.
Thie tiae period is needed to anchor the pillare of the etete end reconstruct
it. ae I rave aentioned. according to new beeee.

Queetion: It ie eaid that there is eoae claeh at opinione about certain
topice within the hilltery Coalittee for liatimel Recovery.

Anewer: Soae weetern newepapere are trying to daaage the conittee'e unity
and coheeiveneee by epreeding euch etateeente. 1 con eeeure you that the
coeeittee aeabere are in ooeplete emeaent on every eajor topic that has
been brought up. It eoee arguaente have taken place in the coeeittee ebout a
certein topic. thia ie a healthy phenoeenon indicative of deaoa-etio dielog,
which we approve of in diecmeing propooed iaeuee.

ﬂeeir. Seddaa Rum. and al-Shedhili
Queetionu Jiddou Ould Saleck ie a proainent personality in Ham-ltenla. You

have played a dietinguiehed role in organizing the downfall of Ould Dada.
Ilho are you?

58

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Anever. I nae born in l9b5. I believe in liberaliea and reject Marxian.
although I reepeot ite dotendere. for every Ian ehould have hie political
choice. I ea baeioally a eilitary n. I believe in radical eolutione. and
I reject half-way eolutione.

The political figuree I adaire are the late President 'Abd-al-Naeir and
Saddaa Hueayn. vice preeident or the Iraqi Revolution Coeamd council. and
the unitary leader I adaire in Lt Gen Sa'd-al-Din al-8hadhili. Ie this
enough to give you an idea?

The fate of Nukhtu‘ cum Dada

Queetiau In your oapcity ae interior ainietor. are you looking into the
circuaetancee at For-er Preeident nukhtar Ould Dada. uho in in detention?

Answer. I vieited hia once in n capacity an interior ainiater. He ie not

in prion. but in under houee met. I info'ned his that it had been decided
that he uculd ultinately retire tron political life and live an an ordinary
citieen.

Question: Hill you releaae hie?

‘l'he you); ainieter eailed before aneuering. "If no eentence ia paeaed
against him!”

COPYRIGHT. 1978 ”Al-Rm IleAI'Ibi"

3559
GO: ““2

59

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
IMPLEIEN‘I’ATION 0P HUNI‘I‘IONS CITY PROJECT IN DOUBT
London THE RIDDLE EAST in English Jan 79 pp 120. 122

"ml 11» mm mm ml «puma... In oddlllon a

l... M... .... nammwwsm:

(w to O I - not Q“

blo. Riyadh. and. Illhoudl lllil

of WMMMWﬂn.“

annual In lhl mm d any mmwdbletlmlhmlo
at

3
%
5'
E
3

I

2
’3

Wu m In the Mlmpuufullloplhml.
«£dede “nu mmlllonu cily m
dedn-Mw mlyMMuulm

ulthOudlMloﬂwﬂtx m undu the «do me
uh» ' Mll‘alHlm-tollwldta
COMM and Cm ﬁlm mmfwuoducimlmlul

PM nun: Nun Mild-u: nlnlln and calm mlllwy
(ﬁlth. Kl" Klnhd'o onu- equlpmml al I Italian w
«lacuna h Hunk“. 0n Riyadh.

mmmwm The plum Win at
m «pull it. and. all mmumoloomlmu
[I‘m lulu it amicably bin"
a all. lhmllnwudm.mum
Immdhyuududhapdty King KW Milimy Cityund
mhtummm the limo tlnduolcitha
Wind by m: 0‘ TM 0: Khmili-hayt.
- 01m mm in link Wot-
""":..'"s.'::. wh‘lhﬁm"
m in» .
www.mm. Wht'ukmhllmtlu
' ' o- . unlimlnuy dam «Intact
ullcd lulllwy duo In W lot the min no)!“ lo the New
throughout the Yakmhiuuwnlmdeuim-
Km lulitcwldbtthn ingﬁm adv-downlSm
lunch-twink“: mmmmnloln-
lhwuwlﬁduhuclllu Wmmmwldnm
mhﬁlLMlnchndolhKlm whenbmlmdullnApdllm
Il- Ind the will“! VI. lo be
Both.mthoﬂholnqlbovdu. mddlnSeptcmber.
TIMI. our Junk». and It w- lluoqlu likely last
out the mlhlldnmmionjob
thYmbadu. would :0 u» an lnumulonnl
Mmuaump- miumwbySunP.
WNMWI wan-a Company 0! Dull-o.
well a a mlliluy mm Tummy;me
equipped with air-mike Glam. Plat-on. the Juan.

i
3
all

60

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
M-K incl! ha a
victim “yum Mill) and":
ﬂuid “In «about of

in a (mile Mural
mm Hummu- liolian
Ind

‘820

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

can: the Defence Mini-try IN.
(may. mummy mm a tipping and
In M
building. I mm

bit-tin “on unplu-
my WM. I Imug'lﬁkmuhdAl- hat].
Indium and homing fut Bot and

mllmymdlmdiulmmi. the Omv
h” ”an by 0:83: mm of
m can- .m
WINd Kliiln only M" 0‘ the
tin Wu Gum cal-huh en
PHiippHohmmdib 0‘ no N
msooaco material- by th.
mwmwpmd Miniouy «maid in:
mmmmmw "Miami!!!“
WNW Nd-Ihmlipbniyoimlmm
Bhnbuwdinm.dmm to build the
muctlon “:9an
mud. n .
x. mm «mm? 2mm“;
. no
”3:”. Karl .‘ I. it“. If"! Gmmmminumb

mu.

mm.

61

M OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

TUNISIA

mu 0? WWIBISH I'IIRBATBNED BY OPPOSITION FORCBS
Paris AL-HATAN AL-‘ARABI in Arabic 28 Dec 78-3 Jan 79 pp 21-23
[Article: "Tmisia: Hill Bourguibism Last When Bourguiba Is Gone?"]

[Text] There has been a noticeable improvement in the health of the

"Great Fighter." President Hebib bourguibe. who is more than 80 years old
and who is undergoing treatment at the vniversity Clinic in Bonn by a group
of German doctors, one of whom discovered the causes of the joint inflam-
tion-which for a long tins prevented him from sleeping and getting around.

Hhether President lourguiba is sick or well. whether he is present or not,
the big question which has begun to present itself with increasing urgency
at all levels of Tunisian political life is: what comes after Bourguiba?

Hill Bourguibism continue without him. unlike Stalinism without Stalin or
Haoism without Han Zedong?

There is such discussion revolving around the heart of this question, which
involves the continual "presence-absence" balance in current Tunisian poli-
tical life, and everyone is trying to find a satisfactory answer to it from
the standpoint of his interests and socio-politicsl tendencies.

Bourguiba himself is taking part in the attempts to find an answer. present-
ing in this context as incisive slogan: Let Bourguibism continue without
Bourguiba. This slogan of his. as he stated it in his meeting with the
members of the political bureau of the ruling Destourian Socialist Party,
means clinging to Tunisia's special position in Arab North Africa as an
Arab-African naditerranean state firmly linked to both the European Cannon
Herket and the United States of America, without becoming entangled in

sharp struggles with any of its sister states to the west or the east.
Further-sore. Tunisia also has a definite couitment to the Palestinian cause.
based on recognition of the PLO and the national rights of the Palestinian
people in the context of international law. International law, as Bourguibs
understands it. means adherence to the 19107 United Nations resolutions per-
taining to the partition of Palestine between Arabs and Jews. Therefore,
Tunisia's reservations about the Cssp David agreements ates basically from
this concept. which Bourguiba feels Camp David totally ignored.

62
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

At the same time. Bourguiba sees no future for Tunisia after he is gone
outside the context of the politicsl-social-economic framework which

was arrived at especially after the elimination of the Ahmed Ben Ssleh
cooperative experiment (an experiment based on a type of "cooperative social-
isn" inspired by underground organizations in a nunber of North European
countries). The Destourian Socialist Party should continue holding the
reins of power. while granting limited opportunities to a nunber of other
political forces and currents, as well as relative freedon of movement in
order to "let off steam." The regime should be given an appearance of li-
beralism which would not threaten the regime's foundations. and it should
approve the building of the Tunisian economy on a fundamentally service.
trade, financial and tourism basis, in view of Tunisia's lack of signifi-
cant natural resources.

The Succession of the Nouira-Sayah Duo

In order to ensure this, Bourguiba is throwing his weight into supporting
and strengthening the "party apparatus," which is forcefully controlled
by Minister of State Mohamed Sayah, who was a leader of the Marxist
students before Bourguiba picked him up and propelled hin into a position of
responsibility in the regime. As he has said more than once, Bourguiba
sees an extension of his own personality in Mohamed Sayah, who is only 43
.years old. Bourguiba's technique for designing the future of Tunisia
once he is gone is based on Party Secretary General and Pri-e Minister
Hedi Nouira's succeeding him to the position of president of the republic,
and on Sayah's taking the post of prime minister in addition to his party
responsibilities.

It appears that Majidah Haasila Bint Ammar, Bourguiba's wife, who has a
forceful political personality, has not concealed her strong reservations
about both Hedi Nouira and Sayah, and includes them among the "hidden
enemies of Bourguibism." Consequently she does not thing it unlikely, once
Bourguibs is gone. that the two will play the same roles played by Bus
Guofeng and Deng Xiaoping in China. after the death of Mao Zedong. in eli-
minating Maoism under the guise of fervent support for it while overlooking
the extent of the attacks and criticism of Mao in the famous wall newspapers
of Peking.

Thus Majidah Hassila calls the Hedi Nouira-Sayah group "the wall newspaper
writers of post-Bourguiba Tunisia." In her estimation, this group is pop-
ularly despised and has no skill in governing, and will be worthless when
Bourguiba's patronage is removed.

Therefore, the group will try to gain popularity through criticising and
renouncing Bourguiba and wiping out his heritage.

63

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The Role of Hajidah Hasslla

in this connection. Najidah Haunila is trying to for: a new group with cannon
interests based on sodern national capitalism. especially in the light
industries field. out of a number of technocrats and politicians either in
power now (the sinisters of health. interior and justice) or out of power
(such as Hoha-ed Hassoudi. for-er foreign minister and godfather of the
Tunisian-Libyan unity agreement which lasted only one day and which re-
sulted in the ﬂedi Nouira-Sayah group's successfully purging his and banish-
ing his abroad. the object of Bourguiba's anger. This was before HaJidnh
Hassila brought about a reconciliation between his and the president and he
returned to Tunisia.).

This new political-econosic group headed by Hajidah Hassila intends to
strengthen its positions within the party. the ruling regime and socio-
economic life. in particular the banking and light industry fields. It

also intends to bring about strong contacts with Libya. Algeria. Morocco.
Syria. Jordan. Saudi Arabia and the PLO. Hassila herself initiated these
contacts by making numerous visits. under various pretexts. to these count-
ries. The pivotal plan presented by this group is that once Bourguiba is
gone. Tunisia will be exposed to fierce social and political pressures

which the Hedi Nouiro-Sayah group would be unable to weather because of their
lack of popular bases. Salvation lust come through supporting a modern
enlightened group with technical and econonic ability and some measure of
popular trust. which would lead the country by modern. sore open methods
while preserving the essence of Bourguibisn. Otherwise the radical elements.
whether religious or communist. will have a great opportunity for activity
and direct or indirect control over Tunisia's destiny.

As proof. this group offers the huge labor-popular demonstrations which
spread their radical slogans throughout Tunisia and which almost threatened
to topple the regime in January 1978. at which time the radicals exploited
the purge struggle between leaders of the ruling party and Labor Leader
Achour. Outside the circle of power. there crystallized an increasingly
strong opposition intent on bringing about essential changes in the system.
especially its political form. whereby the multi-party system would be re-
placed by s one-party systes.

The Opposition's Hake-up

Obviously, this opposition consists of a number of independent groups. all
of which spring up within the ruling Destourian Party through their colli-
sion, for various reasons. with the absolutist personality of Bourguiba

and the arbitrariness of his representatives in the ruling party apparatus.
This opposition centers basically around three groups.

66

FOR OFPICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The first is the Ahmed hen Saleh group. which in Tunisia is called the so-
cialist-cooperative trend. Its power is based on intellectual circles.
beneficiaries of the cooperative movement. and some labor sectors. The
party apparatus has concentrated its efforts. making use of police repres-
sion. on wiping out this group and imprisoning its leader. Ben Saleh. who
later was able to flee to Algeria and then to Austria. w' ‘1 the "socialist
international" received him with open arm through the influence of his
friend. Austrian Chancellor Bruno Kreisity.

This group intends repeating the cooperative experiment after ridding it
of the mistakes and negative aspects which contaminated it. It has de-
clared its willingness to enter into alliances with any other forces in a
political fruework based on the multi-party system. The Tunisian authori-
ties have ruthlessly pursued the mentors of this group who are in-Tuniaia.
and have thrown most of its leaders in jail. The group has suffered con-
tinusl repressive campaigns to limit the influence and effectiveness of
this movement.

Then there is the group of former Defense Hiniater Ahmed hestiri. who on

10 June 1978. along with some of his friends. announced the establishment
of the Socialist Democrats Movement and issued two weekly newspapers. One
is in Arabic and is called AL—RA'I. the chief editor of which is Mohamed
Honda. one of Tunisia‘s outstanding democratic intellectuals. and the other
is in French and is called DEMOCMTIE.

This movement has attracted effective. active elements from the middle-

and petty-bourgeoisie and from intellectual circles-writers. university
professors and technocrats. not to mention small- and middle-class peasants.
Its power comes from the forceful personality of Hestiri. who won a majority
of votes over ﬂedi "suits in the central coamittee of the last Destourian
Party conference. which forced Bourguiba to personally intervene on
Nouira's behalf. So Mestiri announced his withdrawal from the party. and

a number of party leaders and members went with him. most importantly

Beji Caid Bssebsi and Boulares. Also. the movement's leaders insisted

that the entire leadership should stay in Tunisia and to be willing to pay
the price for their opposition to the ruling regime. and that their news-
papers should be open to all other movements. including the Tunisian
co-unists. so that they might express their views in spite of the ideolo-
gical and political differences between them and the movement.

The movement officially requested the Tunisian authorities to permit them
to become a legal. recognised party. But the authorities refused to grant
this permission. on the pretexts that the constitution. which does not
mention either a single-party or a multi-party system, does not grant it
the authority to permit the establishment of a party. and that the ruling
Destourian Party itself has no permission to do so, and that whoever wants
to establish a party should bear the personal responsibility. however
Hestiri, who is a lawyer. stresses that the government's non-issuance of

65

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

such permission violates the law on establishing societies. which the courts
have ruled applies to parties as well. and that the government. by refusing
to issue this permission. intends to deter the people and the masses which
support the movement from joining it or taking part in legal political ac-
tion.

This movement's i. 'sclaimed program is based on rebuilding the Tunisian
regime according to democratic principles. party diversity, the indepen-
dence of the labor union. peasant and student movements. and approval of
a centralised economic development plan for building economic infrastruc-
tures which would guarantee the growth of national production and the im-
provement of the people's standard of living without impairing national
capital's freedom to invest privately.

At the same time. the movement stresses Tunisia's need for an independent
foreign policy based on non-alignment and for an Arab policy revolving around
the building of a greater Arab Maghreb which would be part of a democratic
Arab union. starting with some type of economic integration. unification

of educational and cultural programs among the Arab countries. and closing
ranks with the Palestinian people and the PLO against Zionism.

Thirdly. there is the group of liabib Achour, meter of the Destourian
Party's political bureau and president of the labor federation. At pre-
sent he is in prison, having been sentenced to 15 years on he charge of
having led the January strikes. It appears that ﬂabib Achour. who has
followed a policy of changing the regime from within. depends on the power
and influence of the labor federation. for it has become a power center
which seriously threatens the Nouira-Sayah party apparatus group and which
therefore must be eliminated.

his supporters stress that the party apparatus concocted the bloody sabo-
tage incidents which developed within the demonstrations. in order to justi-
fy the severe police repressive measures taken against them. In spite

of the small number of Achour supporters. they include popular, political
and union circles which are highly aware and organised and are able to
maneuver. Consequently the movement is attracting all political opposition
forces so as to benefit from their experiences. It appears that the move-
ment is basically inclined towards cooperation with the Socialist Demo-
cratic Movement led by Hestiri, by virtue of their similar methods and
goals.

Reliable sources confirm that serious negotiations are taking place today
among these three opposition forces. in order to establish a strong front

to confront the ruling party apparatus, and in order to be ready to fill
the vacuum when Bourguiba disappears from the political arena.

66

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The Nuulrn-Sayah Scheme

The party apparatus is aware of the danger of this front's being formed,
and has therefore concentrated its activity on confronting it on two
axes:

l. Reconstituting the Destourian Socialist Party at its next congress in
September 1979, so as to ensure the loyalty of its entire leadership to
the Nouira-Sayah group on the one hand, and to reinforce it with new ele-
ments on the other hand, especially intellectuals and national capitalists.
and to consolidate its political and administrative control over the labor
federation.

2. Continually sowing conflict, by various methods. among the three oppo-
sition forces in order to disrupt them and keep them from uniting into

one front. This is being done by increasing the degree of repression
against them and discriminating among them in granting freedom of ﬁve-
meat and expression, not to mention using the authority of the state to
permit and prohibit commercial and economic activities and giving preference
to some newera over others of this group or that.

Opposition From Outside the Regime

After this there remains the opposition from outside the regime. Despite
their limited nature, the forces making up this opposition are remarkably
active and effective. 0n the other hand, some are so incompatible with
others as to come to the point of violent collision.

The first of these forces is the Hoslem Brotherhood, which has begun openly
spreading its appeals in mosques and rural mass meetings, calling for the
establishment of an Islamic state and criticizing some sectarian manifes-
tations and liberalizatioas of Islamic Shari'sh'principles which the
lourguiba regime is bringing about in Tunisian society. The Brotherhood
also criticizes the regime's stand on the Palestinian issue and its
approval of the 1968 W resolution on partition, and demands the complete
liberation of Palestinian soil.

In governunt circles it is frequently said that this group is receiving
sore political and material support from a neighboring Arab country, and
they cite as evidence the fact that in its publications the group is
always referring to the "true Islamic regime" experiment in Libya.

The second force is the Communist Party, the legality of which the regime
withdrew in 1965. Its influence is concentrated in limited intellectual

and labor circles. Today, after the violent schisms which shook it, it
is raising the slogan of a broad front for democracy and social justice.

67

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The third force is represented by the People's Socialist Party. which in-
cludes New Left groups demanding arned struggle to change the system by

force. It is an extremely limited party. the majority of whose leaders
the regine has been able to imprison.

And so. after a long recuperation in Heat Ger-any. Bourguiba is about to
return to Tunisia, where struggles of a severity previously unknown to the
country are in progress. Hhat will be his attitude towards them?

'lhoae closest to Bourguiba stress that he considers the Socialist Deno-

cratic Hovenent the real danger to the regime and to Bourguibisn after he
is gone, and that he is thinking of confronting this danger by trying to
cesent Iutual interests between the party apparatus (Nouira-Saysh) group

and the new political-economic group supported by his wife, Hajidah Has-
sila Bint Amer. Hill he succeed?

The answer to this question depends on the results and the quality of leader-
ship of the Destourian Socialist Party's political bureau, which will be
chosen at the next party congress in Septesber 1979.

All that President Bourguiba can do today is hope that God will let his
live until then.

COPYRIGHT: 1978 "AL-UATAN AL-ARABI"

- 8559

080: 4402 END

68

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY