NI OMCIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10666
16 July 1982

Near East/North Africa Report

(FOUO 26/82)

FBIS FORE!GN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR omcw. USE ONLY
non

.ms publications contain infatuation prinrily from foreign
newspapers. periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those fron English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted. with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Beadlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[) are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each itaa. or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Hhera no processing indicator is given, the infor-
nation was measured or extracted.

Unfamiliar nanes rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within itusa are as
given by source.

lhe contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.8. Government.

COPYRIGIT HHS AND REGU'IATIONS GOVERNING WNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEKINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02109: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500080040-4

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLV

NEAR EAST/NORTH AFRICA REPOR1

(1000 26/32)

CONTENTS
AFGHANISTAN

Gunilla Leader Evaluates unitary Situation
(llaji Manual Buaayn lntarviav; 10m sum

MR“

Aftamth of 061A Raorsaniaatiou Raviavad
(HARRIS macaw: rr tantrums. 7 l1

ISRAEL

Approach to Zaire. Other African Nations Analyaa
(Sermon Andriaaitado; am AlllQIB. 2 Ju

JORDAN

Quacn Nu: Interviavad on lolc in Society
(Ploranco la'd; AL-HAIAN AL-‘AIABI. 16-20

Country'a Widening 3010 in Gulf. lagional Affair
(AI-Id unfit; AL-HA'I'AII AL-‘AIAII. 21-27 H

- a - [111
Ml OWNAL USE (WIN

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500080040-4
roe OFFICIAL USE ONLY .

AMI?!“

mum more BVALUATIS HILITAIY SITUATIM
01051912 Tokyo mno swam in Jepeneee 3 Jun 82 lbrning Bdition p 5

[Interview with ﬂeji bagel Bueeyn. externel effeire officiel of the leleeic

Allience of Afghen heedoe Pightere, by reporter Yoehio Keeehere in Tokyo-
dete not indiceted]

[Text] 1t hee been 2 end 1/2 yeere eince the Soviet Union leunched ite
nilitery intervention in Afghenieten. . The Afghen ieeue tende to eecepe the
people'e ettention. being overehedoved hy the recent new develop-en“ in the
Fe1klende diep ute end the Iren-Ireq ver: but there in no denying the fect
thet "mother, yer" in going on in thet country. lngeged in e determined

guerrille verfere egeinet the eeeeive Soviet forcee ere lelenic fightere
celled Hojehedin. The guerrille forcee recent1y etteined their cheriehed

deeire. unity. which booeted their fighting epirit even lore. Thie reporter
hee celled on Heji ibngel lhneyn. one of the guerrille leedere now vieiting

Jepen, et e Tokyo hotel end eeked hie ebout the leteet developeente end
proepecte in the Afghen wer.

Queetion: low fer hee the unificetion of the guerrille orgenieetione pro-
greeeed?

Aneuer: Leet Septeeher eeven ujor groups egreed to bend together. They
then ude efforte to unify the verioue orgenieetione, end eet up the

"Allience of Afghen Freedon Fightere" on 16 larch. The lergeet guerrille
orgenieetion. "Ie1enic Front" (the lehetyier fection). neturelly joined

thie ellience. The nev ellience hee eet up 12 co-itteee. including the
eilitery. educetion end refugee neeeuree co-itteee, under it. The heede of

theee co-itteee end the cheireen. vice cheirnen end eecretery generel of the
ellience eeke up the lS-nn eupreee leederehip.

Queetion: Thue fer the guerrille orgenieetione heve gone through a repeeting
proceee of mificetion end division. In there no chence of enother eplit?

Aneuer: The ellience thie tine ie very fire end leeting. There wee the
queetion of who ehould be nened cheireen of the unified orgenieetion. but

thie tine we decided on e mnthly roteting eyeten beeed on voting. Beelec-
tione ere eccepted. The preeent cheireen ie Profeeeor (Beif) of the
leleeic levelutionery Front. Hr Eek-etyier. the etrong In. -de e

POIOFFICIALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

concession and. became vice chairman. This shows consideration for the sake
of keeping unity.

Question: How are you going to coordinate differences in campaign policies
and views among the-various groups? "hat is the basic strategy of the new
alliance?

Answer: The internal differences within our organization have largely been
exaggerated and are contrary to fact. Our aim is to chase out the Soviet
forces and establish a true Islamic government in Afghanistan. The Soviet
forces control "points" (cities) in Afghanistan only during daytime, and 90
percent of the territory is under the control of the guerrillas. local
governments have been established in the liberated areas. We enjoy the
support of the entire people. He fir-1y believe in the victory of the
resistance movenent.

Question: How are you going to chase out those mighty and huge Soviet
forces? Do you not think that it is militarily impossible?

Answer: we do not think so. Afghanistan did not yield to Alexander's
expedition forces. nor to the repeated attacks by the lritish forces. He
will absolutely not lose. The morale of the Soviet officers and men is

extremely low, for from being mighty and huge. They have doubts about what
they have come to Afghanistan for. In comparison. the Islamic fighters

engaged in carrying out Jihad (holy var) have a firn belief. The weapons
used by the guerrillas have been mstly seized from the Soviet forces. He
will accept assistance froa outside on a case-by-case basis.

Question: How do the guerrillas view the present situation? Can you give
figures? ~

Answer: The Soviet forces stationed in Afghanistan nunber 150,000 men sizing
up 17 divisions. Thus far they have suffered 40,000 men killed in action
with the number of wounded many times that number. The Afghan govern-eat
forces have been reduced to between 20,000 and 30,000 men. Armed members of
the guerrilla forces under 200.000 sen. There are 3 nillion refugees in
Pakistan and another nillion in Iran.

Question: How do you evaluate the plans for a political settleaent of the
Afghan issue or for a neutral Afghanistan?

Answer: They are totally out of the question. He do not want to be swayed
by the big powers. As a matter of fact. is the Soviet Union. a superpower,
not carrying out aggression in Afghanistan? Hhat we seek is not neutrality

for our fatherland but true independence and the establishnent of an Islamic
government.

Question: My last question. What do your people want fro. Japan?

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
i0. OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Maven The purpoae of q vlalt to Japan thla tlae 1a to let tho Japaneae
people koov about the pment altuatloo of the Mojahedlu. I as not to a

poaltion to adv-tot aaautance to: the Afghan refuge”. but I alncerely
thank you. the people of Japan, for the var- aeaiataoca you have given.

mmum: Ownichl Shlﬁuo Tokyo Emho 1982
$0: ‘120/ 31‘

”OFFICIALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ARM“! 0F WA MIMIC“ 11mm
Peris mes TIDPICAUX B'l' mum in French lo 190‘. 7 Hey 82 p 1188

[Text] An inortsnt speech by President Gasdli Bendjedid opened the Sixth
Congrees of the UGTA [Genersl Union of Algeria Workers] on 6 April. The
heed of stste did not lieit bind! to deeling with the problem of workers
and work fro- s very pronomced production perspective: he devoted pert of
his speech to foreign policy. end especislly to reletions between Algeris
and Libys.

The WA. so such. hsd only s linited plscc in the president's speech.

"Its effective contribution in the struggle to build the nstion" wee Ilen-
tionsd. and this wee the only preiee bestowed upon it. Then "its everydsy
activities within the context of generel worker ststus end strengthening
eoeielist megs-out of oowenies" wee briefly noted. Pinelly, its subordins-
tion to the perry wss forcefully recslled: The WTA "is in the forefront

in being responsible for spplyi'ng end spresding the perty's ideology snong
workers." resulting in its "inortsnce es s perssnent Inn-n resource for

the petty. end its responsibility in developing swerensss enong workers end
nobilieing then.”

A Strong Appeel to Production

The president strongly ewhssised the personelity end the role of the Algerian
worker es being "fundsnentelly different tron those of s worker in e cepi-
telist econo-y." In tect. he ssserted. "the worker who lebore in the enter-
prises of the Algerisn revolution is en integrel pert of this revolution
endof the politicsl lesdership.... The Algerisn Governnent is e govern-
eent of workers.... The worker in our country csmot be considered es just
e wege earner, but lust be considered ss responsible for production at the
work ststion which he occupies.... There cen be no 'Iseter' or 'subject'
here. but only s distribution of responsibilities sccording to the type of
work end the obligstione connected with it. Besides. the rights of the
worker ere gueren teed by the lsw." Consequently, contrsry to whet hsppene
in the cspitslist systel where the worker struggles to seize his rights.

"in our socislist systen. there cm be no reeeon for conflict. end coo-
plenenterity end unifornity nit be inperetive."

FOR OFFICIAL [BB ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Making several references to errors, shortages. overaights and mistakes,
the president justified the capsign to inrove sanitation and the insti-
tut ion of quality control; he will not hesitate. he said. "to take the
necessary steps. despite the atmosphere of confusion that some people are
trying to introduce amng activists and citizens."

Social developments in progress were then reviewed: overall statue of the
worker, socialist unagement of enterprises, restructuring of enterprises,
social legislation, wage increases and so on: as well as the measures taken
against those in charge who have tried to delay application of these pro-
visions. The president particularly stre-sed the restructuring of enter-
prises for better management, along with decentralization of the headquarters
of national enterprises. lie endeavored to dispel workers' fears in this
regard and asserted that this reform is not at all intended to cause lay-
offs; quite to the contrary, 160,000 new jobs were created in 1981.

Housing. reintegration of emigrants. wages and price control were also
nentioned. But, the president noted. the cost of subsidizing the vital
necessities rose free 900 million diners in 1979 to 2.35 billion in 1981.

and could reach lo billion in 1982. As we cannot comt on petrolein revenues
indefinitely. it is essential to increase national production and to eliminate
waste. If not. the speaker stressed, in a few years the consumer will per-
haps have to pay four or five times as much for his sugar as he does today!

Union ' Confederation Reform

with an emphasis intended to be noted, the president therefore recouended
an increased production effort. For the workers are generally dissatis-
fied, especially in the national companies, and strikes have increased
over the past 2 years. The UG‘l'A has not been able to discourage, or even
to moderate, these protest tendencies; furthermore, many of its members
have incited then. This seems to be the consequence of the policy of open-
ness toward the extreme Left which the union federation followed not long
ago mder the influence of forest party coordinator, Hr Hoha-ed Salah
Yahiaoui. who is no longer part of its administration. Although the
secretary general appointed at the tine, Hr Abdallah Denene Debbih. responded
strongly to accusations directed at him. and succeeded in having his noral
report adopted. he was not reelected; nor was the national secretary long
responsible for socialist smagement of enterprises, Hr Houstafa Bondina.

Thus, in the opinion of the president and the Central Co-ittee, the per-
manent secretary of the FL" Central Cousittee, Hr Hohanned Sherif Messadia,
the party's true motivator. has succeeded in reorienting the union con-
federation along orthodox lines. Cleverly coached by his. the congress
replaced the UGTA's Executive Committee with a mostly new national council.
decided to eliminate the large union federations (energy, education and the
like) and to emphasize conunal unions and other store manageable horizontal
structures, and created national "professional sectors" directly inspired
by federation leadership.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

It would therefore appear. once again. that the party will now more clearly
laposc its authority over lass organizations. Thus the revival and the
strengthening of the M are following their course.

Meaningful lapprochenent with Libya

The president took the opportunity offered by the UGTA session to bring
up sons inortant international matters. The problen of the Hestern Sahara.
through political prudence no doubt, was untioned only discreetly: "As
for the question of the region. our position is well known and there is
no need to go over it.... In regard to our region. our policy is clear.
as it is based on the principles of a good positive neighborly relationship."

After having asserted that revolutions could be neither exported nor in-
ported. the president dwelt at length on relations with Libya, several of
whose leaders net with their Algerian counterparts on 3 April in order to
build a conlenentary econony. While conceding certain "differences of
opinion with our Libyan brothers, "Hr Chadli Bendjedid firmly declared
that any attack directed against Libya today will be directed against
Algeria tonorrow, for it sit. at the progressive forces in the region."

Due to a clearly recomized co-aon destiny. Algeria and Libya have there-
fore begun to prepare a joint program econolic cowlenentarity and rap-
prochenent of political points of view in favor of the Maghreb and Arab
unity. They will proceed toward these goals in stages, through Algerian-
Libyan neetings at all levels, with the Algerian people obviously having .
to have the last word as far as the decisions to be made.

A briefer reference was nde to cooperation with Tunisia. which has been
pursued sincerely despite "disagreements on several political points."
Good relations with our "brothers to the south" are being ilplenented
through the letting of Algerian borders which is in progress.

COPYRIGHT: Rene Morena et Cie Paris 1982.

9693
(:80: 6519/1”

NR OHICIAL USE ONLY
FOIOW'ICIMJBIONLV

ISRAEL

APPROACH 1'0 ZAIIB. OTHER AFRICAN «mans ANALYZID
Paris er AFRIQUB in French llo 1117. 2 Jun 82 pp 28-31
[Article by Sennen Andrianirsdo: "Bow Hobutu Rae lured”]

[Tent] "There still rensins one racial probln to solve. Only a Jew can
understand it completely. I an thinking of the African problea." These words
were not spoken by Henachen Begin. whose intimacy with the only political sys-
tea in the world openly based’on racial discrimination. apartheid. is well-
known. They were written at the beginning of the century by Theodor Herzl. in
"Altneulsnd," in a sense, the bible of Zionisn.

Later, nuch later, an African state's-an would echo him: "Israel has becoae a
place of pilgriaage for African nations seeking a source of inspiration in

the building of their country.” It was not Hobutu Sass Seko who delivered
this credo in order to uplain his decision to restore diplonatic relations
between Zaire and Israel on 16 Hay 1982. Rather. it was foraer Italian Preai-'
dent Hodibo Keita. who. at the beginning of the 1960's, wanted to breathe into
his country a ”pioneer spirit" inspired by the Iyth of the ties: that of the
Israeli pioneer who "made oranges grow in the desert."

Twenty years have gone by. The eyth has evaporated. The Sahel does not pro-
duce oranges. to say nothing of the Sahara. because Africans do not have the
aeans of the Jewish Diaspora that financed the orange groves in the Neguev in
such an exorbitant asnner for the sole purpose of glorifying Israeli technology.
Israel has been "found out" by Africa: intransigent.'doninating. snug. The
October 1973 War put an end to Israeli-African relations. Out of solidarity
with Egypt. part of whose territory had at that tine been occupied since 1967,
and with the Palestinians. deprived of e honelsnd because of Tel Aviv'e will,
Africa drove Israel out. At the beginning of 1982. except for South Africa.
only two nations were still hosting official Israeli representations: Malawi
and Swaziland. Everywhere else. the front of solidarity with the Arab coun-
tries and against Israel held firn. Zaire has opened the path to a new Israeli
foothold in Africa. It is s diplonatic success of Israel, which sees in it
the culmination of a ca-paign to char- launched less than 2 years ago and con-
pleted by sustained pressure lasting scarcely 6 months. '

The signing of the Camp David Accords in 1979 ratifying the Egyptian-Israeli
peace would serve as a basis for the Tel Aviv offensive ained at Black Africa.

rosoencutuaeouu
FOIiOFﬁKJAl.USIIONLY

In March I980, Special Ambassador Elisshiv.3en Horin made a visit to Zambia and
the Ivory Coast to test the water. his message to the Africans: You have bro-
ken with us out of solidarity with Egypt. Now that Egypt has dealt with us.

you are freed from your commitments. The response: A resumption of diplomatic
relations is still untimely. 0n the other hand. the DAB chiefs of state stead-

ily refuse to condemn Camp David. to the detriment of the hard-liners in the
Arab League.

Other (secret) contacts were made. always at Israeli prompting. revealed by
words dropped by African officials. In December 1980 in Nigeria. the principal
leader of the opposition. Chief Obafeni Awolowo 2- who had lost in the presi-
dential elections the previous year -- came out for a "resumption of diplomatic
relations with Israel in the country's interest.? Two months later. in Febru-
ary l98l. Kenyan lawmakers invited to Israel by Labor Deputy Moshe Shahal can-

celed their visit at the last minute. Israeli radio had triumphantly an-
nounced their coming.

This blunder did not discourage Tel Aviv. At the beginning of March. Rahamin
Timor. director of'international cooperation. discreetly toured Africa from
east to west. His objective: to strengthen Israel's economic cooperation with
Kenya. Lesotho, Malawi (which has never broken off relations). Nigeria and the
Ivory Coast. In mid March 1981. the JERUSALEM POST revealed that David Kimche,
general director from the Israeli Ministry of Foreign Affairs. had made an un-
published visit to Kenya but had not been able to go to Zimbabwe. Formerly
director of the African Department in the Hinistry of Foreign Affairs. he was
at the time expected to head the Hossad (secret services).

This long larch toward Africa would end with a sprint. In mid November 1981,
Ariel Sharon, the hard-line minister of defense, headed a large delegation
(from 5 to 15 high officials, depending on the source) to "African nations
that might be the target-of Libyan'expeditions": Central Africa, Gabon and ‘
Zaire. The trip would not be confirmed in Jerusalem until 3 December, after
the Zairian president had said in Hashington, on 2 December 1981, that "we
could immediately renew relations with Israel." At the same time, Israel

made a decision that would only embarrass African candidates for reconcilia-
tion: the annexation of the Golan Heights. Even Kinshasa had to get its back
up and on 5 January. its representative in the United Nations. Kamanda Ha Ka-
manda. voted that Israel should be condemned by the Security Council. Be was
sharply rebuked by President Hobutu. who. the American press revealed, wrote
to Ronald Reagan saying that his aabassador to the United Nations had misunder-
stood his instructions. Since that tine. Zaire has abstained from participat-
ing in any vote against Israel.

The process continued its inexorable marcn and the evacuation_of the Sinai on

25 April 1982 removed the last scruples. No parcel of territory of any African
nation was occupied any longer. as the OAU had demanded. But it was forgotten
that the CAD was also demanding "that the Palestinian people regain their legi-
timate national rights in full." Hobutu had said in December: ”Zaire is not

alone in Africa. There must be consultations with other African nations. For
the time being, I am waiting to see what the others do.“

8

FOItOFﬁKJA1.USE(NNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

He would not wait. JBUNB APRIQUB's weekly TELEX CONFIDENTIBL revealed (No 30
of 7 May 1982) that President Hobutu could "announce the restoration of diplo-
matic relations between Kinshasa and Tel Aviv on 20 May, at the time of the
congress of the HPR (Popular Movement of the Revolution). the single Zairian
party." The congress of the NPR was postponed until November. The restora-
tion of diplomatic relations with Israel was moved up to 14 Hay and greeted
with a general outcry in the Arab world. especially since the Zairian Govern-
ment had first of all decided to set up its embassy in Jerusalem. Al-Qods,

the holy city seized by the Jewish state._ This was a supreme offense to the
Muslim world. Kinshasa took a half step backward. announcing on 20 May that
its representation would definitely be opened in Tel Aviv out of respect for
UN resolutions condemning Israel's decision to make Jerusalem its "eternal
capital." The Arab countries were not thereby appeased. Pyad broke with
Kinshasa and others followed. The P10 demanded a boycott of Zaire. A11 Arab
aid was suspended, a serious warning to anyone tempted to follow the movement.

Precisely what other African nations night widen the breach opened by Zaire?
The question does not even concern members of the Arab League or those which
are strongly Islaaized. as.in the.case of the Comoro Islands. whose government
has taken an indignant stand. Also excluded are those which pass for revolu-
tionary or anti-imperialist. To believe Jerusalem. several so-called moderate
states were only awaiting the first step'taken by Zairian. In the confusion
following Kinshasa's decision, names were mentioned: the Ivory Coast, Gabon,
Togo. all of which vigorously protested their loyalty to the position taken by
the CAD in 1973 and which, because of having been thus singled out, would
probably not decide to immediately renew relations with the Jewish state.

For the time being. Israel wants to push its advantage and has revealed that
6.000 of its advisers are reportedly still on African soil. The absence of
diplomatic relations has not prevented commercial trade: from $30 million,
Israeli exports to Africa have risen to $100 million in 7 years, according

to Naftahil Blumenthal. general director of the Kerr Industries, the top-
ranking Israeli industrial firm. In many countries. Israeli enterprises are
opening up. particularly in public works and building._ In Tanzania. it is an
Israeli fire that will build an international hotel in Arusha. It is true
that President Julius Eyerere has always demonstrated great independence in
the Arab-Israeli conflict: "He shall not allow our friends to choose our
enemies." he has said. Less doctrinary but more direct. Gabonese President
Omar Bongo hopes that Arab-African solidarity will operate in both directions:
"Arabs must understand that the African countries have broken with Israel
solely out of solidarity with them. They must in turn put their money in our
countries and not in Geneva or the United States."

Arab money has truly not been lacking in Black Africa. From 1973 to mid 1981,
the total commitments of Arab countries or institutions in the South Sahara
amounted to $6.67 trillion. The main beneficiary, Guinea has received credits
amounting to $604.6 million, 85 percent of it on preferential conditions.
Senegal has reportedly received $613.3 million and should expect additional
efforts in its behalf. Hall has commitments of $365.5 million and Niger
$273.8 million. Mathematically speaking, these figures seem to explain why
certain countries are not willing to stand in Zaire's way.

9

FOR1OFFKJAI.USE(NNLY
mu WI-RJAL USE ONLY

And yet. it would be unfair to maintain that African solidarity with the Arab
countries -- and against Israel -- is based solely on praises of financial
aid. Proof of this is that after Guinea, it is Zaire that has obtained the
largest commitments from the Arabs: $444.4 million in less than 8 years.
three-fourths of it already paid. The remaining one-quarter will notbe and

there will be no new commitments. Hobutu knew this and took the risk. There-
fore, money does not explain everything.

Although contrary to the Zairian path, Senegal's way also shows that money

alone does not determine solidarity with the Arabs. Here, religion is an
important factor. The social influence and individual nature of Senegalese
[slam give to the religious brotherhoods, particularly the Hourids and the
'ridlans, a quasi political dimension (see JEUNI! AFRIQUB, No 1096). Solidarity
with Arab countries is religious and is instinctively expressed against the
"sacrilege" of which the Israelis have been guilty against Islam. Thus. follow-
ing the massacre in the courtyard of the Al-Aqsa and Our mosques in Jerusalem
on 11 April. the protest strike decreed by the goverment was widely followed.

Other countries do not have such large Muslim calamities to deal with. Or
subsidies to expect from Arab funds! This is the case of the Ivory Coast,
which, of all the countries having broken with Israel in 1973, has received

the least from the Arabs - and has askedi'or nothing: a total .of $58 million
in credits in 8 years, little more than what Cameroon received in a single
year ($55.8 million in 1981). What is more, the Ivory Coast received no favors
I' or the total: Some 89 percent of the credits were obtained at market rates.
The United States would have done better. But llouphouet-Boigny will not
therefore decide to renew relations with Israel -- inediately. lie has still
not forgotten that the Israelis "betrayed" him in 1977 when Jerusalem published
the contents of his talks with Yitshak Rabin. Nor can Begin calm the "01d Han,"

who has never liked the arrogance of the current Israeli prime minister.

Then who will follow the Zairian example? Togo and Gabon, to which Israel

has proposed to supply with military equipment and the construction of e muni-
tions plant in Libreville, have denied having any such intention. So has
Zambia. Nor will Cameroon take the step. Nigeria, the ailing OPEC giant,
cannot now market its oil on the world market without Arab pressure on Western
buyers. In short. Zaire has gone too far -- too soon -- to he followed

en masse. even if "only" to Tel Aviv.

Despite certain fairly embarrassed denials, a few nationsare awaiting the

proper time to renew relations with Israel. The Central African Republic is
tempted. In Bangui in Noveaber 1981, Ariel Sharon, flanked by Ariet Ganger,
specialist in Israeli arms exports, spoke the same language as in Kinshasa:

"You are threatened by Libya. Comandos from your country are being trained

with Qadhdhafi or in Palestinian camps in Lebanon. Entrust your security to
us. We are used to terrorism." Gen Andre Kolingba still hesitates: 'His

country receives too much aid from Iraq. particularly to resume uranium mining.
to decide to give it up. But two other factors work in Israel's favor: The
Central African Republic now has the feeling of being the poor cousin of French
cooperation. It therefore seeks an alternative which, if it is not Libyan

nr Soviet. could be American and Israeli, especially since the Central African
regine has privileged links with that of Hobutu, once again the friend of the
Israelis. '

10

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Another country tenpted ia Kenya, which it naturally denies. at least until
President Daniel Arap Moi is no longer president of the ow. Then he will
feel free and will have tine to recall that it was in Nairobi - with the
consent of the Kenyan Government -— that col-andos fron Tel Aviv set up their
rear base at the beginning of July 1976. at the tine of the freeing of the
Israeli host held at the Ugandan airport of Bntebbe. Kenya has received
a great deal 0 money from the Arabs? Yes, aone $339.6 sillion between 1973
and lid 1981. But Israel and especially, the Zionist lobby in the United
States will sake a sajor effort to take the Arabs' place because for Israel,
Kenya is the naritine port of a key region: East and Central Africa.

The political-strategic interest of the region ate-s fron two considerations.
in the eyes of the Israelis. First. it is the least Islamised of Africa and
Muslin solidarity would therefore not work in favor of the Arabs. Second,

it must stand up to the Soviet belt which. it is thought in Jerusalen. is
tightening sore and nore. iron Angola and Hora-bique. Third. it is the
closest to South Africa. whose objective and subjective alliance with Israel
is ignored -- or denied -- by no one. Hith Kenya. Zaire. the Central African
Repuhl ic, Malawi and Swaziland - the two eternal loyalists -- the Hebrew
state intends to start or consolidate privileged relations. for in its opinion.
the region is part of the "Western defense arrange-ent" against what Ariel
Sharon calls "Soviet expansion in Africa." In an interview granted to the
French weekly PARIS-HATCH in February, the Israeli niniater of defense be—
trayed his true obsession with the subject. Ten times he pronounced the word
Africa to wield the Soviet threat. In France, Ariel Sharon criticizes its
"passiveness 1’ East Africa." And Henachen Begin proposed French-Israeli
cooperation (including military) on the continent to President Francois Hit-
terrand. According to some information, he reportedly even asked him to help
Israel renew relations with French-speaking African nations. Hitterrand re-
fused. On 17 May, when questioned by Radio-France Internationale, he responded:
"I do not see why the countries of Black Africa that recognize Israel could
be (prevented) fron recognizing Arab countries or the reverse. having said
that such, it is their business. It is not my job to give than advice on
their conduct on the international scene. That would be a conplete violation
of the way I proceed and especially of sy convictions. Every one of those
countries is an adult."

Re are willing to believe the French president. especially since Israel might
becone an awkward partner (or even dangerous rival) of France on the political
and even nilitary level. Nenachem Begin does not conceal the fact that
Israel's return to Africa is part of the Israeli-American strategic cooperation
agree-eat signed in the me of the defense of the Rest. France will get
nothing out of it. for its reputation as a great power is also based on its
influence in Africa. And what about Africa? which Africa? It cannot be
viewed in the singular. but only in the plural. The current crisis in the OM]
has divided it .ven further and has undoubtedly helped Israel because the
crisis has encouraged individual noves.

COPYRIGHT: Jeune Afrique GRUPJIA 1982

11.466
080: “19/19

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

oommmnnmounommsocm'!
Paris AL-wxrm AL-‘Ml No 274. 16-20 May 82 pp 19-22

[Interview with Queen Nur of Jordan by Florence he'd: “Every Hanan Ilsa a
Destiny and nine la Wyn”; date and place of interview not givm]

[text] "the cost beautiful word in Iy life is Busayn. the nost enjoyable days
are those I spend outside Ann and the palace. I neat with ordinary. older

people and talk with then. I believe in God's will nore than in destiny...‘ro
be a queen was wy fate!"

These words of Queen Eur. Nur el-ﬂusayn. and these spontaneous confusions in
MAT“ AL-‘Arebi were part of a long interview in which she says. ”Anyone
who is afraid will not do anything in life, and I will not let fear enter as
either as a citizen or as a queen."

However. in “or al-Busayn's life and the happiness that radiates in the
Jordanian court. there is eons regret: “Neither of us has enough tine for
the other. u. do not have tine for our hobbies. I share all of Busayn's
problene as a trusted wife."

She is straight-forward when dealing with others. warn when she nsets then.
quiet. a deep thinker. elegant and she has a anile on her face that rarely
disappears. These are sone of our initial inpressions of the lady of the
Ilaehenite court. Queen Blur.

She is a graduate of an Anerican University. Princeton. in the field of
architecture. She participated in international city planning projects in
Anerica. Australia and Iran. She worked for the Royal Jordanian Airlines.
ALIA. in 1977 as director of planning, a year before her marriage to the
Jordanian nonarch on 15 June 1978, and has been blessed by two children.
Hanan and Hashim.

Between Quaen hur's nesting with the anchors of the Higher Co-ittee for the
Environ-cut to study the pollution problen in the city of al-‘Aqabah,
attending the celebration to award prizes to the top Jordanian children

in Princess 'Alia College and supervising the Spanish art exhibit in
al-‘l'haqafah Palace in Ann. we were able to nest with her in al-la-r Palace.

which is located 15 kiloneters fron Amen. He had the following conversation
with her:

12

MOFl-‘ICIALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Question] You not lusayn before marriage. and you got to know him better
after marriage. what is the difference between the king that you set and the
one that you married?

[Answer] The most important difference is the depth of feeling. I have
now become more understanding of the various problems which his Majesty has
faced for 30 years.

I as happy that he shares in our family life as the father of our children.
His giving is limitless and increases daily. I can't imagine a better father
for my children. nor a better partner until the end of my life.

Al-Husayn is still the same man I loved at the beginning. but our love has

grown and developed with time. the friendship that brought us together before
marriage arose from his agreeability. warmth. sympathy. selflessness in his
work and responsibilities and noble feelings toward everyone. me or his
children. or anyone else. I love him as a husband. respect him and admire
his characteristics as a man and a king. In my entire life. I have never
shared this feeling with another human being. We are partners. and I will
stay at his side. working with him until the and of my life if he asks me to.

[Question] In every woman's life there is one word which she considers the
most beautiful. In you life with husayn. which word is the most beautiful?

[Answer] It is the word "Husayn."
[Question] But when a man calls to his wife. he doesn't use his name...

The Queen laughed and came back to me with the question. "If someone loves
you what will he call you?"

I said. "He will call me 'sweetheart' or 'my life' or..." The Queen

interrupted with a laugh to add. "You just said the word for me. The word
'ﬂusayn' includes all these words..."

[Question] Before marrying al—Busayn. did you have other ambitions? What
were they and what are your ambitions today?

[Answer] My ambitions before and after marriage are the sans-to help in
development and in making life better on this earth. to do something good
(or the inhabitants of the world and to inprove their lives in any way

possible. This idea still attracts me. and I ask God to give me the ability
to do any job for a better life and future for the people of my country and
through this for the Arabs and the world.

Not a Prisoner

[Question] Are you a prisoner of the rules of protocol in the palace. and
what are these rules specifically?

l3

FIHI(Hﬁﬂ(JAl.USEINNLY
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Answer] In Jordan we do not have protocol controlling our daily lives
because we are still one fanily. Hy husband feels responsibility toward his
people in the same way he feels it as a father.

He do not need protocol. However. there are a mist of principles throughout
the world which are not difficult for a person to heed because they are
natural. 1 can go wherever I want and talk with whomever I went. whenever

tin allows.

[Question] "here do you stand with regard to Jordanian wonen and Arab woman
in general? If you were asked to categorize the problems of Arab women.

whet would you say?

[Answer] Honen throughout the world face nany similar problena. Jordanian
women face sons of the same problem as European and American wonen. now-
ever. there are some issues that Jordanian women alone face. and others which
Arab woman. or women all over the world. face. Host of these problem stem
free the limitation of the role of women and how this ties in with the
economic situation. working women are the result of historical models through-
out huaan development and growth. In Jordan we are trying to give woaan
opportunities to choose suitable ways of life that will balance their family
and working lives. We are concentrating on the necessity of keeping the
strength and cohesiveness of the faaily. which characterize Arab society.
without ignoring women's role in developing themselves as individuals and as

partners in national developnent.

[Question] I repeat...how would you categorize the problena of Arab women?

[Answer] It is difficult to categorize these problems because each country

is different. I do not think that I could define the most important problems
that Arab women face. There are nany problems which boil down to finding the
opportunities for then to play their role in developing the Arab world along-
side nen. This is the problen that men and women in every country must strive
to solve. Every woman has her on situation and circumstances in her develop-
ment. and I can't say that the most inportant problem that confronts Arab
women is the one that I see as the nost inortant Jordanian problem. This
isn't right because I don't think I have the right to speak for wonen in all

the Arab countries.
Uonen and Traditions
[Question] Hhat about Jordanian women?

[Answer] Re are passing through a special stage in development. "open have
their civil and political rights. like men. and share in development. The
Iain problem is in their joining with men. Jordanian wonen are now passing

through a stage of education and training to participate and find the
opportunities to prove their ability to take part in different spheres.
Today women bear the responsibility of proving their ability to share in
development in the Arab world.

16

MOI'HCIALUSEONLY
FOI‘OFFKHAI.USE(NHLV

[Question] Hhat Arab women complain about primarily is that they have been
cheated. Because you are the first lady of Jordan, if you were asked to draw
up a new law to eliminate this unfairness. what would it be?

[Answer] Roman have begun exercising their rights. a draft law for political
rights has been submitted and we are struggling for women to be equal with
men in development. There is no doubt that traditions have prevented
Jordanian women from exercising these rights. which are fairly recent rights.
There are good opportunities for Jordanian women. However. the problem '
concerns their exercising other rights. which is of great concern. This
applies to women in other countries of the world. and women must strive to
prove their abilities to men. I worked before my marriage. and therefore I

know the true situation and my opinion of these letters comes froi my own
experience.

Daily Problems

lQuestion] "hat is your role as a queen and as a woman in projecting a clear.
accurate image of Arab women. and how do you represent these women?

[Answer] My role as a queen is a complement to my husband's role in special
situations that concern me as his partner and as a woman. My role as a queen
uses my experience to find solutions to citisens' daily problems because H.H.
the King deals with the large problems. draws general plans and devotes most
of his time to establishing the general principles for political activities
which affect all walks of life in the Kingdom. I hope to round out this work.
but on a narrow scale. through tending to the shell details in citizens'

lives and working to establish social and cultural foundations for a better
future.

I also hope to play my role as a queen to make the Jordanian people feel that
their lives are an expression of their legacy and hopes. As far as repre-
senting Arab or Jordanian women on the international level. I work hard to
carry the message of the Arab world and Arab women. which is linked to our

great legacy. our aspirations for the future and strengthening our ties with
women all over the world. I try to confront the Hestern images of Arab women

that are not positive. These images are a result of inaccurate information
about the situation of Arab women in Arab society. There is no doubt that

this mistaken view of Arab women has negatively affected relations among the
cultures of the world.

[Question] Leadership is a responsibility and a trust in the ruler. Through
your sharing. do you feel this responsibility and to what degree?

[Answer] I share my husband's concerns and I bear with him the burdens of
leadership through my role as a loving concerned wife. I share his happiness
and sadness through his past and future accomplishments. However. my
participating is not through political activity. but as the trusted wife of
the king.

15

FOI‘0F1NCJAI.USE[DNLY
I'I‘Oll OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Flying Airplanes
[Question] What hobbies do you and al-ﬂusayn share?

[Ana'er] Unfortunately. we don't have enough tins for our hobbies. However.
we do participate in sports. especially tennis. skiing. water sports and
flying airplanes. The king finds that very enjoyable. Hhen he is under
great pressure. he flies the plane hinself. which calls and stimlates the
nerves at the seas tine. '

Hhen I was a child. I used to go with ny father on his trips. and he also
loves to fly airplanes.

Another of our hobbies is traveling. which is no longer a hobby because we
usually travel on official visits. He also enjoy taking the children to the
zoo or mean or to any place for children.

[Question] Does his Majesty set aside a great deal of tins for you?

[Answer] Neither of us has enough tins to give to the obther because the king
is preoccupied nost of the ties with his responsibilities. 1 divide Iy tine

between sy official work and ly fanily responsibilities. Despite this, we
always find sons tins to spend together.

[Question] Do you share your problens and responsibilities with the king or
do you try to face then yourself?

[Answer] I always try to avoid sharing then with hin unless I face a problen
of great importance and I feel that I need his advice. Anny. I try not to
add new problem to his on because he already has enough. I also try to
lighten his burdens by solving those problens that I can.

[Question] What have you gained from your nrriage to King llusayn?

[Answer] I have gained a great deal froa ay aarriage and from any special
position with its responsibilities. 1 have gotten to know llussyn's character-
istics well and hope to be able to incorporate then into my personality. In
the end. I have gained a good sample in my life to emulate.

[Question] Officials' lives are exposed to dangers such as assassinations.
Do you feel this fear as a wife?

[Answer] The lives of officials are cleicated end full of problems 1nd
challenges, but these dangers are part of our lives. no sore inortent then
any other part. In fact. they are the least inortant. “hen sy tins cones.
1 hope that I have helped do sonsthing and have lived a full life. For this
reason. I will not let fear control use at any tins. The nost inportant thing
is to make a sari: in this life. and anyone who is afraid cannot do anything.

[Question] which Arab or international figure has earned your adniration?

16

FOIOWIOALISEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL L‘E ONLY

The queen laughs. trying to avoid the question. then says. ”If I have to

answer. the Arab personality who has impress as is my husband. This is of
course not objeCLive."

[Question] 0n the international level?

[Answer] I an impressed by any person who has the courage to make difficult

decisions. I will give as an exanple the for-er Anericsn president Dwight
Eisenhower. was was able to do what no president has been able to do since.

He had the courage to stand by his principles and bear his international
responsibilities and those to the Arab world. This has not happened since.
Remeaber that he was the first to face lobbies and private interest groups
and the first to say. "I an doing this because 1 as right." I an impressed
by his. especially after seeing recently how difficult it is for a person in
his position to take such a stand and maintain his principles.

[Question] And if you were asked to name a woman?

[Answer] I would not select anyone in particular. The women who impress ne
are those who «levote their lives to taking part in something and to giving
that goes beyond their family circles to touch on the interest of society and
the nation as a whole. Yes. I adnire wonen who devote themselves to the

interest of society. Arab wonen who give thenselves and their families to
serve society's interest deserve admiration.

[Question] who are your friends?

[Answer] Our friends are the people we get together with for hobbies and
comon interests. We have friends in various countries. anong then kings

and presidents. Our friendship with them is not just personal. but is linked
to the relationships between us as officials at the same level. I also have

my childhood friends in the United States and other parts of the world.
[Question] "hat are the nost beautiful monents in your life?

[Answer] The most beautiful moments of my life are those when I. share my
husband's problems as a wife and mother.

They are simple noments. For example. a few days ago. Issue back with the
king from al-‘Aqabah to Anna in our small car. The trip took 6 hours. It

was a very beautiful trip that gave us the chance to be together and to see
up close the villages which we passed through.

[Question] Queen Nur is an educated. purposeful young womn. How do you
see yourself helping develop the Jordanian Arab society?

[Answer] Arab women had a large role during the spread of Islan and even

until the 15th centruy. They played an important role in the events of that
period. Today. as the Jordanian queen and an Arab queen. I carry the Arab

legacy in my heart. and I identify with Arab wonen. I work hard to help
develop my country as Arab women helped during the spread and conquests of

Islan.

17

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The Queen 's Letters

[Question] Do you receive any letters? Ira when? Do you always answer
then?

[Answer] I receive a large nudaer of letters fron all over the world. Hany
of these letters cone fron people who want pictures. s word or an autograph
f ron us. Sons have suggestions and projects to help solve the crisis in the
region. He also receive my letters with various co-ents shout an official
visit that we nsde or a press interview. He also receive requests to help
individuals or areas that need sonsthing specific. He usually try to find

general solutions instead of dealing with a linited private natter. There
are also sons trivial letters.

He always try to help whenever we can. to answer all letters and to keep in
touch with the people who show sincere interest in and concern for Jordan
and its future.

[Question] How do you deal with the children in the royal fanily?

[Answer] As you know. the fanily is large and I do all I can with all his
Majesty's children to rear then to he like hin. endowing then with the
characteristics that have nade hin a loving leader to his people.

I try to rear then like other children who do not have the titles of prince
or princess. to be hushle. sywathetic and sincere and to learn to treat

others as they treat each other. This way in the future they can help build
Jordan as their father and grandfather did before then. Their titles nust

not be what distinguishes then. but their deeds and characters.

[Question] Do you select his Majesty's clothes yourself? Do you find this
difficult?

[Answer] Host of the tine we select his clothes together. He like to try
new things. and I try to bring new colors and touches to his clothes. Men
are like wonsn. they enjoy change. His Majesty is flexible in this regard.
In the norning I choose his clothes. as well as when we travel abroad.

Most Enjoyable Days

[Question] How does the queen spend her day? Does she follow a specific
routine?

[Answer] Every day has its own schedule and rules. For exanple. Friday is
devoted to the fanily in principle and as mch as possible. There are days
that we spend traveling or on official duties. spending the entire day
cenenting our relations with one country or another and opening new fields
for the exchange of ideas. groups and expertise. Sone days we stay in the
office until late at night. Sonatines I work in the afternoon so that I can
neet with ninistera and officials since they are busy in the norning. The
nest enjoyable days are those that I spend outside A-sn neeting groups of
older people and young people and talking with then.

18

FOIOI'HCIALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Question] that countries had you visited before?

[Answer] Before ay marriage I worked in the field of architecture in Iran end
Australia and had done research in the Arab world. visiting Iraq. Kuwait.

Lebanon. Syria. Egypt. Jordan and also visiting Europe. After Iy nrriage
I got to know most of the European countries. Southeast Asia and America. I
would like to visit the rest of the Arab countries to know them better.

[Question] Do your official visits give you an opportunity to know the true
situation in the country?

[Answer] Official visits do not give you the chance to know the actual
situation in the host country. nor to get in touch with the ordinary people.
My visits before ay marriage were aore useful because I got to know the
people from my own point of view. not the official one. Personal contacts
reveal the truth of the country's history and future. I have visited sole
countries with a. H. the King unofficially. and it was very enjoyable because
we were in direct contact with the public.

Politics
[Question] Does the king talk to you about political matters?

[Answer] Yes. and this is part of the understanding and harnony that brings
us together as husband and wife and as two people. lie talks to as about
things that worry him, and 1 pay attention nest of the time. I consider this
part of my responsibility as a wife who is concerned about her husband and
considers his part of her life.

[Question] How do you assess your recent visit to the United States?

[Answer] The visit was wech by the Arab calamity and by many Aaericans
who are interested in the Hiddle Bast. My role cane as a surprise to sons
people because they considered it political rather than traditional. At any
rate. this doesn‘t mean that my future visits will be of the sane nature.
although I am willing to play any role that the king and the Jordanian people
ask of as.

The speech which I made in Hashington was the essence of the king's concerns
and opinions about the present situation. I think that Iy visit in general
was an unusual way to represent Arab women. Being an Areb-Anerican. I grew

up with a special understanding and ideas. Being the Queen of Jordan. I
understand the relationship between Jordan and the United States very well.
My visit was a challenge to the widespread. mistaken idea in the United
States about Arab women and their marginal role in developing their countries.

[Question] What is your opinion of Lebanese woosn?
[Answer] Lebanese wonen have faced a continual state of war for 7 years. I

as sure that they live through heartbreaking events unable to do anything
except maintain their courage. faith and faailies. They deserve adniration

19

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POROFFICIAIJJSEONLV

and sywathy for their great suffering and loss. We are ready to give any
kind of aid to the wonsn and people of Lebanon as individuals or groups.

[Question] Psychiatrists say that colors reflect personality traits. Hhat
are your favorite colors?

[Answer] I can't narrow it down to one color. However. the impression which

colors leave on your psyche is inortant. Anong Iy favorite colors are the
colors of the desert. a sunset on the beach and the sunrise.

I Believe in God's Hill
[Question] Do you believe in destiny?

[Answer] I believe in God's will nore then in destiny. when I conpare Iy
life before and after earriege. I feel that any of the unconscious decisions

that I eede were in preparation for ey earrings and ny life now. Therefore.
it scene to es that it was my destiny.

[Question] Do you think that you are lucky?

.[Ansver‘ Life has blessed us. However. life is full of blessings and
challenges at the sane tins. I an very fortunate of course. and the east
inportant blessing is that l have learned fron the challenges to live a
fruitful life.

[Question] Do you want to say a word to the readers of AL-HA‘I'AN AL-‘ARABI?

[Answer] I want to tell then that I hope sy answers were clear and expressed
.37 feelings for ny country. Iy fanily and ny people. I an sure that the
readers of AL-HAIAR AL-‘ARADI share these feelings with us and that we have

any things in com. not the least of which are our hope for a better future.
our striving for a better presut end the necessity of our vorking together

for this.
Chairwonen
A list of Queen ﬂur'e honorary and actual responsibilities:

Honorary Chairwonan of the Rational Federation of Business and Professional
bio-en

Honorary Chairwonen of the Working Honen's Club

honorary Chairwonsn of the Quad! hur Plying Institute

Honorary Chairwoman of the Jordanian Natural Medicine Association

Honorary Cheirwosan of the Royal Society for Jordanian Arts

Chairman of the Royal Foundation for Culture and Education

Chairwonn of the higher Orgeniration for the Protection of the Environment
Cheirwosen of Princess 'Alia Co-Jnity College '
Chairwonn of the higher Co-ittee for the Jeraah Pair

Chaim-an of the Ma‘an housing Project

20

MWMONLV
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Cheirvonsn of the ”Jordan Society” in Anerice. which includes my Ansricens
interested in improving Areh-Ansriesn relations.

She also supervises the construction of severel hospitels. sections of the

Jordanien Dehke fair. the encwreging of exchenge visits between Areb children
and preserving erchitectursl end engineering nonunents in Jorém end the Areh

world .

COPYRIGHT: 1982 AL-HATAN AL-'Am1

9882
080: 6606/ 581

21

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
MWLMONLV

cmnu'u's "DINING ROLE IN GUI], norm AFFAIRS ammo
Paris AL-HA‘I'AII AL-‘ABABI in Arabic lo 275, 21-27 May 82 pp 28-29

[Article by Ahnad Hafiz: "Qabus' Egyptian kip within the Logic of llistory
and Geography"]

[Text] The Sultanate of Onan is active these days on the Gulf and Arab levels.
The Onani concept of Gulf security, and the pan-Arab nature of the battle

with Iran. are anong the clearest concepts recently. AL-HATAII AL-‘ARABI

sent a correspondent to Oaan to try to connect Onani logic with history and
geography. in an interview with several Onani officials.

There is nothing new under the sun. History repeats itself, and positions
essentially are repeated through developing forne that scconpsny the
vissitudas of the tines.

In the 19th century, when the Persian Safavids attenpted to occupy Basrah.
the Oaani arny opposed than in defense of the religious protection that
conposed the basic factor of Arab solidarity. than received cowpensation in
the fora of a generous ”financial grant" froa the Otto-an authorities at
that tine, who ruled the entire Arab area, with the exception of Onan. which'
had cone to the aid of its Arab brothers in Iraq. It did that out of its
spontaneous feeling of Arabian and its col-on destiny with Iraq, and not out
of anticipation of a gift fro. the Otto-an authorities.

Officials in the Sultanate referred to this historic fact in submitting their
interpretation of the active initiative that Sultan Qabus has carried out on
the Arab scene, through his recent official visit to Egypt, and his surprise
private visit to King Husayn, for the purpose of sending the rift in Arab
relations and taking a decisive Arab position with respect to the Iraqi-
Iranian war, whose continuation threatens the entire area with flames.

The Omani initiative was tantanount to starting over.

The fact is that the visit of the Sultan of Oean to Cairo, and fro- there to

Jordan. stirred up far-reaching reactions in Gulf and Arab capitals. and
litical predictions on other levels, especially since it coincided with

eated political events in the Gulf. Certainly the nost inportant of these
was the confirnation to everyone of Iran's intransigeance in its rejection of

22

summon“
FOR‘OFFKJAL.US£IIHLY

all offers of international and Arab mediation. and prior to that, the state-
ments of President Husni Mubarak, in which he made a connection between

Egypt's security and Gulf security, and described the Gulf states as "Egypt's
strategic security dimension."

Hubarak's statements were accompanied by semi-confirmed information absut

Egypt supplying Iraq with various types of arms. and about the Omani role in
this regard. There were rumors in Gulf capitals about a new Omani role
which this time took the form of arranging the restoration of bridges or
relations between Egypt and a large umber of Arab states, especially since
Oman was one of the Arab states that did not sever relations with Egypt.

"by?

Political observers in the Gulf area give great pause these days to the
intensive political activity on the Arab.level, which the Sultanate has
carried out. It is the active member of the Gulf Cooperation Council [068],
especially since it is well known for being cautious about interfering in
Arab disputes, and for confining itself to announcing its pan-Arab support for
Arab issues, and especially the Palestinian question. Its rulers devoted
themselves to the important matters and issues of internal growth and the
development of the Omani society. This had been the case since Sultan Qabus
assumed power in his country in 1970. Perhaps the question that is currently
being asked in the Gulf area, apropos of this Omani political activity, is
why. at this particular time, did Sultan Qabus begin to bring Oman out of

its well-known role into these spasms of activity on the Arab scene?

I asked this question of more than one high-level official in Oman, and I

heard the same reply from all of those I interviewed: "We in Oman, after
completing constructing the basic infrastructure of the state. and establishing
the basic pillars of the political. economic and social sectors, have begun

to look more to the outside, especially toward our Arab brothers, in order

to carry out our pan-Arab duty with respect to their issues, which are our
issues as well, fateful issues of an indivisible Arab Nation."

Sultan stus himself recently expressed this position in a press statement:
"Oman always wishes to participate, if it has the opportunity, in any good
endeavor. We sanction any effort by any Arab, Islamic or non-aligned nation,
or by any other state, to solve a problem between two Huslim neighbors, to

restore right to its normal position and spare the blood of Muslims. He are
prepared to make any effort in this regard."

When the Sultan of Oman was asked about the facts of his country's role in
mediation between Egypt and Iraq, he said: "The matter of mediation to
purchase arms for Iraq can be summarized in a few words: when one asks us
to do a service for any brotherly Arab nation, we do not hesitate to do it."

Return to History

Those who follow Omani activities on the Gulf scene can confirm that a new
stage in Omani-Iraqi relations and Arab-Omani relations has crystallised and

23

F0. OIEHJM1.USI(MWLY
FOR<OF1WCJAI.LEﬂE(HVLY

its basic features defined. On this level, the question that must be answered
is: If what is rumored is true about "new Omani mediation" between Egyvt and
the Arab states to restore relations between the two sides, what is the
essence of this mediation and how is it proceeding?

In their response to this question. Omani officials are inclined not to
describe the efforts being undertaken by Oman as mediation. They prefer to
term this as "an effort to unite the efforts of brothers with respect to
mutual dangers."

They say that, if Egypt has a view regarding solving the Arab-Israeli dispute,
it is still impossible to forget the role it could be playing in confronting
the dangers surrounding the Gulf region and the Arabian Peninsula. It is

-the only Arab state qualified by virtue of its large population to be the
natural strategic depth for that region. Political observers feel that when
Egyptian President Husni Mubarak recently declared, yet again, that Gulf
security was a part of Egyptian security, it was not in the interests of
anyone to neutralize Arab Egypt in this struggle that threatens the Arabian
of the Gulf. Hhen Egypt expressed its desire to assist Iraq militarily in

its war against Iran, out of a pan-Arab sense of its Arabian. would it have

been proper to reject this assistance on the grounds that al-Sadat signed the
"Camp David" accords?

Those observers add that the Omani point of view regarding the development of
recent events in the Gulf region was governed by the logic of history and
geography. The Gulf states and the Arabian Peninsula, including Iraq, form

a homogeneous security belt for the Arab Nation, with its natural and strategic
depth being Egypt. Based on this premise, the Omanis do not see any difference
between Iran's occupation of the Lessor and Greater Tumb and Abu Muss islands
in the Arab Gulf and its war with Arab Iraq, and Turkey's occupation of Arab
Syria's province of Iskandarun and Israel's occupation of Arab Syria's Golan
Heights. Occupation is occupation, and a threat is a threat, whether it is
Israeli or Iranian. Moreover. the Iranian threat to Iraq is a threat to

the Gulf's Arabian. Iranian designs on the Gulf states are historic and well-
known. If it happens-—God forbid-~that Iran is victorious over Iraq, who

can guarantee the Arabs that a new Persian imperialism will not sweep the

Gulf, and who would be able to prevent the Iranian advance after that?

Defining Positions

Perhaps this interpretation of the reality of the situation justifies the
intensive Omani activity on various levels. Fortunately, matters currently
have become clearer in the Gulf region more than at any other time. The two
enemies of the Arab Nation, who war against it every day, are Israel and Iran.
Consequently, those who support those two, whether Arab or non-Arab, are in
turn enemies of the Arab Ration. Based on this premise, a conviction has
formed among the ace nations that certain rulers of Arab states, who are
aiding Iran in its war against Iraq, are working against the basic interests
and sentiments of pan-Arabian. In this regard, the GCC nations are

currently working to make those rulers, led by Hafiz al-Aaad, radically
re-consider their position regarding the Iraqi-Iranian war. In concert, they

24

FOIIOFIICIAI.UBIIIULY
me OFFICIAL USE ONLY

sent al-Asad a letter to this effect. The GCC foreign ministers conference,
held in Kuwait last week to discuss taking a positive and unified position
regarding the development of events in the Gulf. wns aiaed at showing every
Arab party from outside the Gulf region that it has pan-Arab responsibilities.

Gulf sources, who closely followed what went on behind the scenes of the Kuwait
conference, say that the Syrian position was the object of harsh criticism
from the ace nations. However, most of the foreign ministers preferred to
give the Syrian regime another chance to back away from its support of Iran.
which is not aimed just at Iraq alone, but also at the Gulf nations as a

whole. Accordingly. it was decided to postpone the conference until 25 Hay,
under the pretext of “more consultations with other Arab nations." If

to be more precise, in reaction to the Gulf position regarding the Iraqi-
Iranian war. This would then split the Arabs into two camps: the'Arebs
committed to defend Arabian and the Arab Nation from east to west. regardless
of who the enemy is, whether Israel or Iran. and the Arabs who cell for an
attack on Israel, but who at the cane time are cooperating with Iran. who

is supported by Israel against Iraq, and against all the Gulf states and the
Arabian Peninsula.

COPYRIGHT: 1982 AL-UATAN AL-'ARABI

7005
C80: 4404/505 8ND

25

FOIflﬂﬂCUU.USIIMNLY