APPROVED FOR RELEAOE: 2007/02/00: CIA-RDP02-00000R000‘I00020037-0
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100020037-8

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/8292

27 February 1979

TRANSUITIONS ON NEAR EAST AND NORTH AFRICA
(FOUO 14/79)

U. S. JOINT PUBLICATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02108: ClA-RDPBZ-OOBSOROOM00020037—8
more '

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books. but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

headlines, editorial reports, an. material enclosed in brackets
[l are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by s ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items.axe as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the u.s. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAHS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OUNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF TIIIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED MOFFICIAL USE ONLY.
3- Reripieat'a Atrrnwu Nu.

  
   
   

 

muocnrmc can I. Rm" No-

TMNSMT lONS 0N NEAR EAST AND NORTH AFRICA. (P000 4/ 79)

   
 

tron 'lif

27 Februarv 1979

Na.

  
 

O. Pellet-m. (humunoa Name and More" l0. Poona/Tanned Can No.
Joint Publicationa Research Service
1000 North Glob. Road ll. Concern/Gnu Ne.

Arlington. Virginia 22201

1. Spanner-n. Organ-um- Nae-e aad m... l}. Type :l‘lepen a Penn!
om

Aa above

'3. Supple-manly Notes

l6. Abamru

The aerial report containa information on aocio-economic, government, political.
and technical developmenta in the countriea of the Near Bart and North Africa.

. Key tom and oral-m Analyria. a. Deactiptan

Political Science _5_1nter-Arab Affaira ___l.ibya _Su1tanate
Soeiology ___North African Linux-Rania of Oman
Economics Affairs _x_Horocco ___Syria
Culture (Social Sciences) _Af3haniatan _Pe0ple'a Deno- _x_‘i'uniaia
Ethnology __Algeria cratic Republic _Un1ted Arab
Geography _Bahrain of Yeuen Emirates
Technological ___Egypt __Pernian Gulf ___Heatern
Military Sciences _x!ran Area Sahara

Jlraq _Qatar __Yeaen Arab

m. “¢""""’°P""°‘“ 7"” _larael _Saudi Arabia Republic

_Jordan _Spanich north

__Kuuait Africa

_i.ebenon __$udan

IMCOSATll-‘kH/Gu' SD. SC. SR, is

".Aunlab-l-Iy Scale-near .Serumy lua( bis
For Official Use Only. "W." 3‘ .
Limited Number of Coplea Available From JPRS. W

"W "'""' "‘1 ""' rue ronu um at atvaooucm

2|. .\o. oi Page!

65

   
   
 

 

 

gacouv-og won-"l
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/829
27 Pebrusr

TRANSLATIONS 0N NEAR EAST AND NORTH AFRICA
(rouo 4/79)

CONTENTS

INDIE-ARAB AFFAIRS

Nicotine Resistance tenders Asked Reasons for Disunity
(mu ai-numm; mum m'mr, val-1m dates)

IRAN
Correspondent on SAVAK, Corruption as Causes of Present
crmzm-nom ﬁottinger; mom-mam, 25 Jan 79)
IRAQ
Vice President's Recent Trip to hris Analyzed .
(AL-mm w'mr, 11-17 an 79)
MAURITANIA

Current. Developunta Discussed Hith muritsnisn Lssders
(mum 0am Mohslsd Ssleck, (ma Mohamed
hands! Interviews; AL-VATMI AL-‘ARABI, 28 Dec 78,

3 Jan 79) «nosessou-nosooeeooos-ssoeosoeecssesos-esss
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

couram's (Continued)
TUNISIA

Operating, Capital Budgets Up for 1979
(MARCHES TROPICAUX Br mm, 19 Jan 79).....

. b ..
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
M OFFICIAL USE ONLY

INTER- ARAB ANA [RS

PALESTINE RESISTANCE LEADBRS ASKED REASONS FOR DISUNI'H
Paris AL-HATAN AL-‘ARABI in Arabic 6-10, 11-17 Jan 79

Izrticle by Payiz al-Hur‘ibi: "0n the Occasion of the Approaching Nation-
al Council Session: AL-HATAN AL-‘ARABI _A_sks Resistance Leaders "by
Palestinian Unity is Not Being Attainedﬂ/

{5-10 m 79 pp 26-337

ljexsl Eyes are riveted on the caning session the Pslestinien National
Council will hold in Damascus around the middle of this month. The re-
sults the council produces will constitute the true indices of the size
of the step the detachments and organizations of the revolution have taken
and will take toward nationsl union. in attainment of the ‘l‘ripoli Charter
and the recosuendations which came after it.

In the light of the new variables in the Arab situation and the general
conditions in the area resulting iron the Joint national action conpact
between Iraq and Syria, and as a result of the Baghdad sunmit conference
resolutions, the need for unity within the resistance has beco-e more

- pressing so that all vacuums .in the conseon Arab front which has resolved
to countersttack the two Camp David agreesuents and the effects which could
arise from then- may be filled.

Relying on and proceeding from the Tripoli Charter, meetings took place
between resistance leaders which led to promlgation of a draft political

program and an organizational and unificationist fomla which the Nation-
al Council will discuss.

In response to any queries on the tendencies of the dataclsnants of the
Palestinian revolution. and their viewpoints regarding these historic
steps. AL-HATAN AL-‘ARABI's correspondent, Payiz el-Mur'ibi, conducted a
series of interviews with five leaders.

Three of the interviews are published herewith--those conducted with:

Salsh Khalaf (Abu lyad), FAT".

l
M OFFICIAL USE GILY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

'Abd-al-Rahim Ahmad (Arab Liberation Front).
Zuhayr Huhsin (al-Sa'iqah).

This ie.in the form of an indirect dialogue setting forth viewpoints on
the pages of AL-HATAN AL-'ARABl.

Salah Khalaf (PATH Organization): National Unity Is Not Possible

l§uestio§7 Let us begin with a question we have asked of the other resis-
tanco leaders: how far have efforts to achieve national union, which
began after al-Sadat's visit to the occupied territories, gone?

IAnswegl Let us begin by talking about the notion of national unity, lest
the Arab citizen give this issue more than its due. National unity, in
the sense that organizations are to dissolve intellectually, politically
and militarily into a single framework, in order to become one movement,
is impossible for many reasons. However, national unity in the sense that
there be a single commend within a single national front as part of an
agreed-upon political program. along with unification in the areas of the

military, finance and, if possible, the medie--thie unity, for example,
can be achieved. -

There remains the organizational and intellectual issue. Bach organiza-
tion has freedom with regard to means for acculturating its staffs and the
nature of the organizational frameworks it approves; in this sense. I be-
lieve that national unity is possible, indeed must be achieved.

The reetings which occurred on the level of the Central Ccuncil and the
secretaries general in past months confirm that it is possible to estab-
lish such a unity, in the sense I have propounded. Agreement was made to
a political platform and organizational principles, and the coming Nation-

al Council is to approve these plans. Let an important point begin, which
is the matter of practice on these bases.

if the confirmetion of practice and commitment to the political line and
organizational plan does not occur, national unity will be afflicted with
the same catastrophe it experienced in past years. In addition to that,
it will be necessary to stress the issue of confidence among Palestinian
detachments. on grounds that all information within the Palestinian com-

mand be provided so that decisions may be issued from within this con-end
in the light of this information.

in addition to practice, and comeitment to practice.-and in addition to

confidence--it is necessary that the Arab states, or some of them. cease
their guardianship over or interference through some organizations, be-

cause without this it will not be possible for national unity to last or
be established, basically.

2
FOR OPPICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Organizational Fanaticism

/§uestio§7 what in your opinion are the obstacles which prevented estab-
lishment of national unity during the previous stages, in spite of its
importance for the Palestinian cause?

lgnswerl The real reasons why national unity has not been established lie
first of all in organizational fanaticism. It might be permdssibla for
such fanaticism to exist within the context of each organisation's ambition
to be paramount; this is very legitimate, since it is obvious that each
organization should strive to be paramount. However. on numerous occasions
this organizational fanaticism has been without real justification. In
spite of that, given organizations have intended to educate their staffs

in unjustified fanaticism.

The second reason for the obstruction of national unit, is Arab regimes'
intervention in Palestinian action, and their interests in maintaining a
number of organizations which they can each deal with as they like.

I believe that many of these regimes find a direct interest in keeping
Palestinian action constricted. He find some of them choosing the organ-
ization which will deal with them the way one sometimes chooses songs,

from the standpoint of mood--from the standpoint of "what the listeners
want."

Unfortunately, some organizations respond to these divisive appeals for
monentsry,trivial material benefits.

-The third reason is an objective one related to the intellectual and ideo-
logical disputes among organizations present on the Palestinian stage,
which cause the process of thinking about methods of action to differ from
one organization to the next. This, in my opinion, is by far the easiest
of the reasons, because it may be solved through correct relations within

the context of the front and agreement on a common minimum among these
detachments.

PATH Is the Backbone

IQucstion7 There are people who say that the PATH organization's inclina-
tiou to dominate and monopolize power is one of the major reasons why
national unity is being obstructed.

lénswerl There must be collective leadership and there must not be dom-
inance in the strict sense of that word. However, at the same time, I
state most frankly that if the leaders do not have a head which will con-
sequently bear resonsibility for decisions and responsibility for carry-
ing out decisions, there will be no revolution. Show me one revolution
in the world which emerged without having a head; show me any revolution
in the world which was established on the basis of alliances among a num-
ber of organizations or parties yet did not have a major party represent-
ing the backbone of that revolution.

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONL!
ma OFFICIAL IBB ONLY

The issue is clear. from the standpoint of principle. There should be a
hand leading these organisations within the context of collective leader
ship, but it is in no way permissible that the revolution be governed by
its weakest ally; otherwise. action will be disrupted and there will be
no serious revolution.

It is true that there has been somemonwolisation of power on Pam's part
in some institutions of the Palestine Liberation Organisation, and it is
necessary that this phenomenon be corrected. however. in my opinion this
is a secondary matter because there must ultimately be a body which is
able to adopt decisions within the context of unified front action and is
not condemned to failure by any link with weak allies. lie who pays the
price for decisions, materially and morally, must have a part in decision-
making which is cosmsnsurate with the extent of his responsibility.

There are people who call this dominance and there are people who cell it
guardianship, but in reality it is guardianship over the weakest links in
the alliance which exists on the Palestinian stage.

For example, but not exclusively, PATH, by virtue of its position in the
Palestine Liberation Organisation, is coqelled to deal with all Arab re-
gimes, except for those which have been convicted of treason against the
nation. such as al-Sadat's regime. for exesple. The others can attack
Arab regimes as they like and can categorise them as they wish. Ultimately
they know that responsibility for the families of martyrs. for exanple,
lies on PA'm's shoulders, and that this budget comes to more than $15
million a year. Let me ask where this money would come from if we follow-
ed the same techniques as other organizations which categorize regimes as
reactionary or non- reactionary.

what we are getting from some progressive countries in the form of finan-
cial support can be described only as a tragedy, but this in no way means
that the conservative states are paying what they should.

We are compelled, for exasple, to finance the Palestinian Red Crescent,
which offers services to all Palestinians without exception and to any
organization they belong to. Hhere should we get the money for this?

This is a responsibility which on most occasions causes us to be silent
about facing up to regimes. Should we stand behind microphones and tell
all the facts we know about these regimes, leaving the families of martyrs
to eat these words instead of bread?

It is sad that most Palestinian leaders know these facts and feign ignor-
ance of them in their talk or when they stand behind microphones.

These are some oxsuples which we are presenting in order that the picture
may be clear. This does not mean, by the nature of the case, that the
participation process must not exist. This in no way means that we do
not honor the opinions and positions of our brothers and comrades in other

h
M OFFICIAL USE ONLY
M OFFICIAL [BB ONLY

organizations. Although we appreciate their role within the framework of
the Palestine Liberation Organization institutions, these people must com-
mit thenselves to the resolutions and positions which are adopted and they
must catsuit themselves to what is said inside closed rooms.

If there are some errors which may be interpreted as dominance, we are
ready to correct these errors, on condition that it be known-whether some
people wish it or not-~that PATH will have s large share in Palestinian
decisions because it is the largest organization and bears the responsi-
bility for these decisions. This is not narcissism or conceit at all, so
much as representation of a reality which exists in the context of actual-
ity.

A Dispute on Technique

I§uestiog7 There are people who say that it is the political disputes
which have arisen in the past period that have obstructed national unity.

lznswe57 Let us ask ourselves what political dispute is. If we want to
be more exact, we can say that there is a dispute on methods for dealing
with political events, but not a comprehensive political dispute.

If we admit that there is a political dispute inside the Palestinian stage,
this means that we admit that there are people who want to liberate all of
Palestine and people who want to liberate half of it, or a quarter of it.

The dispute concerns the method and not the substance. Before the October
war, what was the political dispute?

There were. naturally, ideological disputes. Before the l973 war no
political disputes concerning major issues had yet appeared on the stage,
and there was no national unity.

The ideological dispute exists; true. However, i am convinced that three
quarters of those who claim to be Marxists do not understand or practice
Marxism. The quarter that does practice it practices it erroneously, be-
cause it has not assimilated it or has tried to adopt it out of whole
cloth; Marxism is a guide to action for every situation and not a carbon-
copy guide to action which people apply in its original form in every
country. China speaks of Marxism, yet its relations with the United
States are stronger than its relations with the Soviet Union; which of
the two is the proper Marxism? I am convinced, though, that the Soviets
are very Harxist.

Thus the issue of the political dispute is a lie through which some people
try to make fun of the masses.

After the October 1973 war we propounded a stage-by-stage solution which
holds that a Palestinian state must be established on any square inch of

5
m orncm. (BE om
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Palestinian territory which is liberated, or from which Israeli forces
evacuate. He are now in [978, and what has happened? We told the rejec-
tionlsts, (’He have been rejected but we are not rejectioniats.') and time
has actually proved that we have been rejected and are not rejoctionists.

A devastating war passed over us in Lebanon; if the statements of surrender
and of the capitulationists had been correct, we would not all be in one
trench now, agreed on one political plan which all organizations, as well
as the Central Council, have approved.

The Basis for National Unity

lguestiog/ Some people propound the notion of working to establish military
and organizational unity, provided that the door be left open to the forces
to struggle politically with one another in accordance with democratic
principles. What is your opinion on that?

IAHOVQEI There cannot be military or organizational unity without political
unity. However. if the intent is to attain a form of military and organi-
zational unity within the framework of the Liberation Organization, while
retaining ideological disputes, that is possible.

we want Agreement

l§uestiog7 Do you believe that the scope for attainment of national unity
has now broadened?

Iénswegl We wish and hope for this with all our hearts, provided that the
conditions we previously mentioned be taken into consideration, that is,
trust, practice, and abandonment of organizational fanaticism, as well as
the need for every unit to realize its actual, real material potential.

We are optimistic as far as the coming national Council goes; our people
have had enough of the experiments we have made, especially since the
people are not on their territory but are in exile.

The Important Thing to That There Be Trust

l§nestion7 Do you consider that the new political and organizational pre-
uram has transcended the weak points of previous programs. which did not
lead to establishment of the requisite national unity?

lgnsweg/ I stress once again that it is not the political progr ~ which is
hmnortant, and it is not the organizational programs that are important-~
although I believe that they are necessary and that it is necessary that
there be agreement on them; rather, I believe that what is most important

ls trust, practice and a readiness to sacrifice within the framework of
joint action in the Liberation Organization.

We have flexed our muscles enough and everyone has become familiar with the
size of given organizations and their resources and powers; there is not
roason--after the passage of these long years--for us to continue adhering
to names and slogans.

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
M OFFICIAL USE ONLY

If we make the Liberation Organization predominant, we, our people and
our Arab nation will be at ease and we will enjoy greater respect from
our friends and enemies alike.

The Minimum Required

l§uestio§7 Do you believe that there is now a real seriousness on every-
one's part to realize national unity?

IZnsweﬂ I do not believe that there is now a real seriousness to realize
national unity in accordance with the concept I have mentioned, which is

that there be the highest level of political, military and organizational
coordination.

He want everyone to be guided by a serious attitude this time, lest we
continue to be the laughingstock of Arab and international public opinion
and in order that the slogan of democratic dialogue may dominate the
Palestinian stage so that we may achieve what we all aspire to.

The luportant Thing to the Application

l§uestiog7 Hill the National Council be an index of the seriousness of
moves toward national union?

IZnsweﬂ The convening of the National Council is not in itself an index
because it convened in the past, more than 12 tires, and always produced

serious resolutions and good programs agreed upon unanimously, or almost
unanimously.

Hhat is important, in my opinion, is the application. I an often amsed,
during the convening of the National Council, to turn on the tapes of
sessions or previous councils and see how similar the discussions were,
how similar the dialogues were, and how similar the interruptions were;
almost the identical sentences were repeated, the same words, the same
notions--even the people were always the same, and the same is true of
the resolutions and concluding statements.

We hope that a. quantitative leap will occur this tins and that the talk
or the dialogue will not be the same.

The Iraqi- Syrian Coopect

l§uesti097 Do you not believe that the national action charter between
Iraq and Syria has helped create suitable ground for Palestinian national
unity, by virtue of its repercussions on the stage?

lénswegl what is certain is that the charter has probably helped generate
a new climate for mutual understanding among the detachments of the resis-
tance, in view of the fact that the dispute between Syria and Iraq was

not just a dispute between two Arab countries but was also a dispute

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

between two parties and consequently between two organizations present on
the Palestinian stage; this naturally had a negative influence on the rev-
olution and on national unity specifically. Therefore. in my opinion, the
value of the lraqi-Syrion meeting lies in closing on important breach on
the road to national unity; this might be the ilportant positive aspect of
the charter, in addition to the other national and domestic positive fea-
tures with which it has been distinguished.

miat ls Desired
/§uestiog7 "hat in your view is the prncticsl way to attain national unity?

[Answegl That the detachments of the Palestinian-revolution cause the
masses to have confidence in this unity and its benefits, without any
chicanery or behind‘the-scenes maneuvering, and in its importance as far
as the national cause and the question of continuing the struggle are con-
cerned; that certain Arab regimes take their hands off the Palestinian
revolution; and, lastly. that each unit be humble enough to stay within
the limits of its capabilities for participating actually and sincerely

in creating unity.

'Ahd-al-Rahman Ahmed (Arab Liberation Front): He will Not Accept Co-
option, Dominance or Guardianship ‘

l§uestiog7 Hsny people see, in Palestinian national unity. a real bulwark

for and guarantee of the triumph of the revolution; how for have the efforts
to achieve this unity gone?

IAnswegl During the convocation of the first Perseverance and Counter-
action Conference in Tripoli. its intrinsic circumstances, and objective
Arab circumstances: coepelled the detachments of the Palestinian resis-
tsnce to meet among themselves on the sidelines of the conference to dis-
cuss the specific Palestinian situation following the develop-outs which
al-Sadat's treasonous visit to occupied Jerusalem had created. Following
this meeting, there wss issued what it was agreed would be called the
Tripoli Unificationist Charter. This charter was drawn up in order to
form a common denominator among the various Palestinian detachments, and
it was to have been translated into action and practice by everyone.

however, as usual. some people determined to dilute this compact on various
pretexts and excuses, among them the fact that it had not been signed by
the Palestinian National Council, that it was not binding on the Executive
Committee of the Palestine Liberation Organization (which commute itself
only to the resolutions of the Palestinian National Council, which had not

yet ratified the charter), and so on and so forth. and we kept going around
in a vicious circle.

Then came the signing of the two Camp David agreements, which iaposed a
new state of affairs on the Palestinian stage and the Arab stage in general;

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL 083 ONE!

this of necessity led to e meeting euong the detechnents of the resistence.
in order thet the neens for coping with the probeble sudden danger to the

Psiestine ceuse end the overell netionel ceuse of our Areb people be
studied.

A series of meetings took piece, during which e feeling of denger wss ep-
perent on everyone's pert. At the end. efter long meetings, egreenent

wee reeched on e politicel progren representing e minimum end on generel
orgenizetionel principles:

The politicel progrem concentreted on neens of resisting the conclusions
of Cemp Devid, especielly es regerds its Pelestinien portion, end the need
to counterect the eutonowy conspirecy, which is one form of Zionist occu-
petion. The orgenisetionel principles defined the fremework of future
joint ection end the nenner of developing thet through the perticipetion
of ell detechments of the Pelestinisn revolution, in the contexts of
Pelestine Liberetion Orgenisstion institutions end leeders. by forming e
front con-end. comprising ell detechments, on condition thet this be gov-
erned by democretic reletions so thet the einority would be subject to the
view of the nsjority end the nejority would serve the view of the minority.

thet is, thet ell wOuld heve room to teke pert in the edoption. end else
the ieplenentetion, of decisions.

This is whet we heve come up with so fer. However, in gensrel the orgen-
izstionel principles need greeter explenetion end deteiling. end this
should heve been the subject of discussion emong the leeders of the detech-
rents of the Pelestinien resistence or the netionel Union Counittee formed
by the Centrel Council of the Pelestinien Revolution. Unfortunetely. this
connittee hes not yet begun its meetings to consolidete the verious notions
on orgsnizetionel principles, especielly since this dilution etteupt could
influence the rste et which netionel unity is etteined. Also edding to
doubts is the feet thet we ere moving towerd s new Pelestinien Netionel
Council end thet the objective of these dilution ettempts could be to de-
ley convening of this council by the stipuleted dete on the pretext thet
egreenent hes not yet been reeched end thet we must therefore not go to
the council es disputsnts lest it blow up from within.

Netionsl unity, es we heve viewed it, hes node greet strides, but it still
is in need of numerous finishing touches. politicelly end orgenizetionslly,
end this still conflicts with some people's efforts to obstruct, dilute
end deley totel end finel egreeeent on overell deteils before the deteils

cen be discussed conclusively end given s leg-l form in the coming Pelee-
tinien Netionsl Council meetings.

The Obstscles Are Always the Same

I§uestiog7 Is this the first tine the issue of netionel unity hes been
propounded end yet reel, pelpsble results for the seke of etteining it heve

not been reelizedf Hhst obstscles heve obstructed, or still ere obstruct-
in“, netionel unity?

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

/Answe5/ In my estimation, the obstacles to unity have not changed in the
past or the present. These obstacles for the most part arise from the
particular nature of the Palestinian scene. It is true that everyone on

the Palestinian scene realizes the importance of national unity, in view

of the fact that it is a basic condition for safeguarding the Palestinian
revolution, not to mention that it is one of the conditions for its triumph.

it is well known that the Palestinian scene has its particular character-
istics, by virtue of the dispossession of our Palestinian people and the
nature of the struggle they are waging on behalf of their cause. These
characteristics have led to the emergence of a number of intellectual cur-
rents which have become embodied in one form or another in the detachments
of the revolution, and this of necessity has led to disputes on the over-
all general political situation, especially after the capitulationist set-
tlement platform was clearly propounded on the Palestinian stage following
the October 1973 war.

however, despite the existence of opposing intellectual currents and polit-
ical disputes, it would have been possible to bring national unity about,
because this kind of unity has been achieved in various revolutions, in
the Arab world and internationally; we have a clear example in the exper-
iences of Algeria and Vietnam.

In most countries which have embarked on a people's war, roughly the same
situation has been faced, either from the intellectual or political point
of view. however, there always was one general danger and one goal, namely
liberation, which drew the forces engaged in this people's war together.

Therefore I believe that the basic obstacle in the way of national unity
assumes the form of an erroneous understanding, on some people's part,

of the means for attaining national unity. There are people who under-
stand it as co-option and dominance over and guardianship of the Pales-
tinian revolution, in the sense that they have the right to have the first
and last opinion on the totality of issues and that the others have only
to implement it.

Naturally this is not a national unity founded on democratic bases, nor
can this understanding encourage others to rush forward on the road to
true national unity. This understanding thwarts many people's concerns
and makes them unenthusiastic about attaining national unity. Unless this
understanding is eliminated. it will be difficult to attain true national
unity.

In exchange, there are people who consider that a diminution of their so-
vnntaues and their presence at the center of the stage will result from
national unity, and they therefore fabricate pretexts to avoid rushing
onto the road to national unity, especially since they find, in the former
group's conduct, an excuse to evade the issue of attaining national unity.

10
FOB OPIICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Political Disputes Exist

lguestiog/ There are people who say that the basic reason for the failure
to attain national unity lies not in political disputes, because these do
not exist, but in the extensions of Arab regimes onto the Palestinian
stage. "hat is your opinion on this statement?

[Answeg/ I do not believe that this contention is valid and I do not be-
lieve that it is accurate, either in its premises or in its conclusions.
They say there is no p-litical dispute, while we say, yes, there is one,
and the crucial point a not in the texts which are written or the resolu-
tions which are adopta . It is true that these texts and resolutions, in
their final version, rvflect an agreement among the detachments of the re-
sistance concerning the political issues at hand, but the disputes become
conspicuous in an obvinus way in isplementation, when some of them are
ignored.

There are people who try to conceal this state of affairs, which is un-
natural, unhealthy and inappropriate for national unity, by claiming that
if it were not for the interference of Arab regimes, there would be no
political disputes on the Palestinian stage. This talk in reality is an
evasion of the truth, and I do not believe that this issue would be an
obstacle in the way of national unity if those who made allegations of this
sort were serious, in deed and not word, about attaining national unity.

This excuse and pretext has been exposed, especially since what is meant
by this statenent are the progressive and national Arab regimes which have
experience in national action and know that no achievement or progress can
be realized except through national unity. however, if what is meant by
this statement are regimes which endow some people with dominance and
power, this talk is really valid.

From the standpoint of us in the Areb Liberation Pront, we consider that
we have been pioneers of true national unity since the establishment of
the front. The programs which the front has presented to the Palestinian
National Council in its various sessions bear witness to that, and all our
positions, forms and formula for expressing this position have been pre~
nented in the framework of consolidating and strengthening national unity.

we, as a national liberation movement, know the nature of the alliances
which we must achieve at every stage of our struggle; but what we know is
one thing and what some people practice is something else, because these
people practice policy through tactics. I do not believe that this kind
of policy can lead to a real national unity because it shifts every day,
according to emergency circumstances. Real national unity is agreement
on strategy concerning overall issues. Tactics remain subject to circum-
stances but unfortunately some people in the Palestinian arena practice
exactly the opposite.

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[ﬁnestiugi Some people say that those who bear the responsibility of imple-
sentation must have primary responsibility for leadership and decision-
making; what is your opinion?

Ignswegl in my opinion, here is the disease and the source of the malady.
It is true that there nust be a basic organization which constitutes the
backbone of Joint action in any real national union. However, this organ-
ization uust understand national unity in the true sense, and the other
parties must realize the extent of the seriousness of their participation
in setting out decisions as well as in carrying them out. This talk about
primary responsibility for leadership and decision-making cannot encourage
other Palestinian parties to proceed in the direction of national unity.
because one cannot accept dissolving them in the interests of one party.

Naturally we all aspire ultimately to become one detachment, but the pre-
sent reality dictates that this is out of the question at the current time.
Therefore, adherence to and insistence on this viewpoint inspires a lack

of desire to attain national unity in proper form. As long as everyone is
not convinced that national unity will offer them scope to play a role and
have active, influential positions in the framework of Palestinian action.
it will he inpossihlo to achieve true national unity and induce other par-
ties to emerge from their intellectual, political and organizational struc-
turns into structures and ideas which are still unclear. Revolutionary
experience in all corners of the world has confirmed that no power, however

great, can achieve serious accomplishments alone on the road of the struggle
toward liberation.

Naturally we underline the importance of PATH and its pro-eminent role in
any Palestinian national unity. The greatest detachment is supposed to be
the pioneer in providing concessions which will encourage the other detach-
meets to cove toward national unity. The PATH noveaant, by virtue of what
it represents on the Palestinian stage, must be the one to take the initia-
tive to impell others and encourage them to achieve national unity through
correct democratic practice based on respect for all parties' role in de-
cision-nmking and implementation.

Unsuccessful Experiments

I§uestlogl Some people propound the idea of working to achieve military
and organizational unity within the framework of the Liberation Organiza-
tion, on condition that there still be room to continue the political

struggles in a democratic manner. What is you opinion on the outlook for
attaining this sort of unity?

lénswegl it is true that we can envision the possibility of attaining many
things, but envisioning is one thing and reality is something else. Mili-
tary unity through what vision? Organizational unity through what vision?
We have experience in this, experience on the Palestinian stage, and what

has the result been? we have experimented with some forms of military

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
M OFFICIAL WE ONLY

union and have tried some forms of organisational unity; of these, only
the nane has remained. th7 Because the same causes which obstructed
national unity also obstructed the attainment of lesser unificationist
steps of this sort. Us have the experience of the unified media; is this
the media of the whole Palestinian revolution? We have unified security;
is this security for the whole Palestinian revolution?

These small unificationiat experiments occurred as the result of agreements,
but, because there were no sound visions of unificationist action, these
bodies became stripped of their meaning and content and remained as slogans
seen on television, a smell experiment on the road to national unity.

The malady is the same in the case of small steps end big ones; if we over-
come this malady, it will become possible to achieve national unity with-
out it being necessary to carry out small steps. He went complete. total
unity on the various levels-opolitical, military. organisational, media,
financial, popular. and trade union--founded on bases of democracy in de-

cision-making end democracy in implementation. supported by the broadest
participation of all Palestinian detachments.

The Seasonal Nature of National Unity

lguestiog/ It has been observed that the issue of national unity is always
raised in a seasonal fashion, especially following the crises the Pales-
tinian revolution passes through; why is talk about national unity stifled
in ordinary circumstances and intensified in exceptional ones?

Ignawegl The reason for this seasonal approach may be attributed to the
fact that there is no ;erious, real orientation toward national unity;

the situation consists of nothing but an attempt to exonerate one self
before the masses, especially during crises. by a show of anxiety over

the course of the revolution, and by struggling for the sake of the cause
and the objective of liberation in such a way as to attempt to absorb the
masses' resentment over the current state of fragmentation and rally around
real national unity programs. us have been accustomed to this style since
the days in Jordan, and nothing has changed but the details.

Oops Still Exist

[Question] Have the new political platfora and the new organizational
principles succeeded in transcending the gaps in the political and organ-
izational platforms which were set out on previous occasions but did not
result in the attainment of national union?

lgusucgl The [act is that the gaps of the past have not been transcended.
The organizational principles could have partially transcended the gaps in
the previous platforms, but that is not the case with the political plat-
form. During the transactions on political conditions. we were all con-
demned to failure by a Camp David complex and there was a perception on

13
FOR OFTICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL 088 ONE!

everyone's part of the gravity of the new stage. Therefore talk was almost
entirely fixed on means for resisting the results which characterized the
two Camp David agreenonts.

However. in spite of that, the program was not fully censolidsted--rather,
it was greatly deficient. He agreed to it because we were convinced.
through experience. that the lesson lies not in texts which ere written
down but in real practice. Therefore our efforts were directed to the
organizational platform. on the basic of which we could translate the
political platform texts in the best possible way.

The significant thing is that the political and organisational platforms
are still ink on paper and consequently still need to be translated onto
the ground of actuality and daily practice. This is the practical touch-
stone of the sincerity of intentions and directives on attaining of nation-
ol unity, if only within the lowest limits of this unity.

The Coming National Council

l§uestiqg7 Hill the Palestinian National Council be an indication of the
seriousnesu of directives and the sincerity of intentions regarding the
issue of national unity?

lgnswegl In brief, we can say yes. The coming session will be one of the
very most iwportant sessions of the council, because if during this session
we are able to achieve what has been agreed upon. either politically or
organizationally (which is were inortant). we sincerely believe that we
will have achieved a quantun shift in Palestinian action. however, if
ettetpts t-v dilute and then delay the council continue. as sous people

are seekin to do. in spite of the lava-hing of official appeals. we be-
lieve this will be a sign which is not to the benefit of national unity
(even if tie council is held at the stipulated tins). and if we do not
attain the achievements reached during meetings anong resistance leaders,
that will have a negative reflection on the overall course of the Pales-
tinian struggle during the next stage, which is to be considered one of
the very gravest the Palestinian cause and the national cause have passed
through. Therefore the council which is to be held oust adopt clear. firm,
decisive decisions and a collective. homogeneous leadership capable of
boating the serious responsibilities cast upon its shoulders in the next
stage must emerge free it.

The Iraqi-Syrian Cot-pact

I§uestiog7 has the Iraqi-Syrian cowact costs about as a step which will
promote the road to national unity, through its positive repercussions on
the Palestinian stage?

[Znsweﬂ Naturally we look upon the Iraq-Syrian national action charter
as n solid wall buttresaing the Palestinian revolution. because, following

i“
M OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL UBE OBIS

Egypt's departure from the arena of the Arab-Zionist struggle, a psycho-
logical disruption occurred within the Arab citizen in general and the
Palestinian citizen in particular. This compact has come to constitute
a great bulwark in his behalf, in the form of a front of confrontation
with and resistance to the Zionist enemy through revival of the northern
front and consolidation of the Arab position--as was clearly and plainly
manifested through the recent Baghdad summit.

The positive effects of this new rat Zty, which has been made mandatory by
the lraqi-Syrian compact, must be highlighted on the Palestinian stage and
must impart to the Palestinian revolution more confidence and optimism for
the future and the ability to emerge from the circle of mistaken gambles
on various Arab powers revolving in the firmament of a settlement, so that
perhaps the revolution may be able to achieve something.

The Palestinian revolution ought to benefit from the combative, fighting
atmospheres with which the conpact has been and is distinguished, in order
to strengthen the context of confrontation with the Zionist enemy by con-
solidatlng the Palestinian stage. strengthening the internal unity of rev-
olutionary Palestinian forces. and moving on to new levels of relationships
governing these forces-~as far as they themselves are concerned and as far

as their relationships with the masses and their popular bodies are con-
cerned.

Zuhayr Huhsin (al-Sa'iqah): Everyone Bears the Responsibility for Falling
Short

I§uectiog7 The results which have arisen from al-Sadat's platform have in-
tensified the need for attaining Palestinian national unity; how far have

attempts to achieve this unity, and to transcend Palestinian disputes,
gone?

lgnswegl In the past a years. two groups which believed that a settlement
was close or inevitable have appeared on the stage. One of these tried to
adjust its wavelength, and the other undertook to fight that group. Thus
the two parties became lumersed in a deepening internal crisis founded on
illusory bases, because the objective conditions for realizing a settle—
ment were in no way present during these years.

This was proved in the practical sense at the end of the journey, when the
two parties discovered-~after not a brief time had elapsed--that they were
fighting one another over an illusion. Then al—Sadat's repeated acts of
treason took place, particularly through the Sinai agreement and its after-
math, giving a clear idea of the form of settlement which was possible in
the light of these circumstances and the reliance of al-Sadat's Egypt on
the United States of America, and also drawing an accurate map of the place
the Palestinian party might have in the American settlement program--s
formula which no Palestinian combatant, or any citizen possessing a mini-
mal national conscience, could accept.

15
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
run uruuuw Dob WM

we can say that the blunder of those who bet on the attainment of a bal-
nnced or reasonable settlement through the movements of sl-Sadat and the
United States was a great one. but the blunder of those who believed that
America's will is a power which must assert itself. and that such settle-
ments can be iaposed on our nation or our people, was also great--perhsps
greater.

He are divulging no secrets when we say that sl-Ssdat, American imperial-
ism and their allies in the area aspired to exploit the early internal
Palestinian disputes, then disputes fabricated among various Palestinians
and various national Arab governments from time to time, in order to im-

pose the settlement through the breach they had succeeded in creating once
upon a time. -

we cannot ignore that this schism, at specific times, created improper con-
ditions within the Palestinian nationalist man in the street in particular,
and the Arab men in the street in general, and spread about a broad atmos-
phere of despair and dissension among the Palestinian and Arab masses.

This played a basic role in causing the reactions to al-Sadat's visit to
Jerusalem to be less violent and extensive than those which high treason
of this magnitude should have stirred up. In fact, in the framework of

the atmosphere of despair and dissension, we nust suppose that many Pales-
tinians themselves prefered to wait, since they were hoping that al-Sadat
might achieve a miracle for them through the adventure in which he placed
himself and with which he proceeded to the end. Perhaps some of these
people were within the very ranks of the revolution, increasing the scope

of chaos in people's spirits and the intensity of doubts and fears in the
ranks of the revolution.

Let me say here that the first perseverance summit, held in Tripoli a few
days after sl-Ssdat's visit to Jerusalem, was the first step toward salva-
tion for both the Palestinians and the Arab citizens as a whole. 0n the
sidelines of that conference, in order to sake the conference succeed, on
top of the growing feeling of danger, responsibility and the need to close
tanks to confront the danger, the Palestinian leaders managed to formulate
a united position which was established in the'unificationist compact
known as the Tripoli cenpact. We believe this still is valid as a basis
for starting to set forth an organizational and political platform which
meets the requirements of this stage.

Therefore we have been anxious to establish a conmitment to this compact

in the detailed national action platform approved last October by a special
committee formed by the Central Council which last no time in ratifying
the platform a short time before the convening of the Baghdad summit, and
even before the great historical transformation in Syrian-Iraqi relations,
which must have important repercussions on the overall situation in the
region, including the internal Palestinian situation and the relations be.
tween Palestinians and others, could take place. '

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
IKE OFFICIAL 053 0RD!

chronic Palestinian Disputes

l§uestio§7 What are the obstacles preventing the attainment of national
unity?

lgnswegl The subject of national unity has always been discussed, even
before a rift became crystallized in blocs, which happened after the idea .
of the Geneva conference was propounded. Stumbling and disputes have been
endemic and old in the Palestinian stage, and have accompanied the revolu-
tion almost since its beginning. I do not want to justify this sort of
phenomenon, although by the nature of the case there has been an explann.
tion for it; foremost among its causes was a feeling on the part of some

detachments that attempts were being made on the part of some people to
engulf and dominate them.

In addition, political disputes, especially in tactical, everyday matters,
have existed since the beginning. however, whatever the dimension of these
political disputes, and in spite of the difference in the ideological foun-
dations of most organizations, it would not have been difficult to attain
national unity in the framework of balanced relations of solidarity, on the
basis of a front, had there been an adequate amount of seriousness, desire
and sound appreciation for the national interest and the greater interest
the revolution, and every detachment by itself, could reap through a
national_union.

Perhaps the element of fear of dominance and arrogation of authority still
has a greater effect than that of political division in obstructing nation-
sl unity. while it is necessary to impose the responsibility for this
shortcoming on everyone without exception, each detachment's share of this
responsibility must be proportionate to its size and resources; therefore
the greater responsibility lies of necessity on the shoulders of the larg-
est detachment, which is supposed to assume the greater share of responsi-
bility for leadership and a serious desire to establish relations of close
adherence and stability among all detachments.

The Basic Complex

we have said this more than once to our comrades in all detachments. We
have demanded a start toward the solution of the organisational problem,
on grounds that all should be given their roles and their rights and that
they should be required to commit themselves to their obligations and re-
strict themaelves to the principles of unified action, on the basis that
the principle of collective leadership and democratic relations within
the revolution should be respected, in exchange. At that point, we would
find ourselves discussing political propositions among ourselves openly
and with full ease as to intentions, without being compelled to go to
great lengths of doubt and suspicion.

1?
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE OﬂLY

The Texts Are Not "her Is Important

l§ueullo97 This is not the first time platforms to attain national unity
have been set forth; have the draft political platform and organizational
principles recently set forth transcended the gaps in previous platforms?

lgnswegi Unfortunately there has not been sufficient surmounting of these
gaps. While efforts were directed toward formulation of a political plat-
form with complete, accurate details, talk about the organizational aspect
was restricted to general outlines.

in any event, it is not what is written in texts that is important but what
lies in people's spirits; since 1968 we have written many texts but all
these texts taken together have helped the advance toward national unity
only in small, limited measures.

we hope that the experiences of the past will have convinced everyone that
no one organization, whatever its size and resources might be, can lead
alone. that the process of establishing an axis to cope with an axis is
also an operation lacking justification which benefits no one, and that
this stage requires a serious pooling of all efforts and powers. The bat-
tle needs all these efforts, several times over, and does not need to have
them stumble and lose much of their effectiveness in internal wars of
attrition.

l§uestiog7 what is your evaluation of the chances for success in applying
the political platform and other organizational principles?

lgnswcgl be hope that the destiny of the platform and principles will be
different l:om that of many previous platforms, especially since a big
basic problam was solved after the Baghdad conference--thst of financing,
which was (d9 of the major reasons organizations had become alienated from
one soothe: and disputes among them had become aggravated. The desire to
please soutces of financing had overcome all other factors.

This is a new opportunity for the revolution, and its detachments must ex-
ploit it to the utmost, in order to liberate themselves from mortgaging
themselves to sources of financing in every form and in order that we may
be zealous of solidarity with one another, in order to ensure the use of a
single fund, and consolidation of the role of this single Palestinian fund,
in achieving Palestinian independence and bringing to prominence a Pales-
tinian national will which is not stained by any blemishes.

A Decisive Arab Shift

I§uestiog7 Now can the Iraqi-Syrian agreement contribute to the attain-
ment of national unity through repercussions on the Palestinian stage?

18
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

IAnswegl The decisive shift in Iraqi-Syrian relations, which has occurred
to fill the void which had resulted from Egypt's shift from Arab ranks to
the ranks of the enemy, has had .ts direct effects, which will increase
and escalate with every passing day in the "psychology" of the Palestinian
Combatant and the ordinary Palestinian citizen, both inside and outside
the occupied territories.

This agreement has reinspired hope for the future, self-confidence and con-
fidence in the inevitability of victory against the enemy, in addition to
the guarantees it has provided that the revolution will prevail and the
feelings of self-confidence it has inspired that a positive spirit has be-
gun to replace every form of negativisa and pessimism engendered by the
withdrawals of past years--especially the treacherous acts of el-Sadst,
from the second Sinai agreement up to the Camp David agreements, via the
visit to Jrrusalem.

This important positive shift, which has been the beginning of a new re-
surgence movement in the Arab region and a basic step along the road to
creating a new "geopolitical" reality- as it has been a basic achievement
toward correcting the balance of power in the region between us and the
enemy, after this balance had been blatantly disrupted to the enemy's ben-
efit~-today places all Palestinian leaders before a responsibility of a
completely new kind and dimension, since it is no longer justifiable or
reasonable in the eyes of the Palestinian man in the street or of the Arab
men in the street that Palestinian detachments should continue to be pre.
occupied with organizational competition and maneuvering against one anoth-
er, tr with any illusory struggles of the kind that had previously dom-
inated.

All this of necessity requires an unflinching initiative to cut off all
connections with the American settlement plan and its proponents and
symbols and the closing of ranks of the forces of the revolution and the
masses of the Palestinian people in order decisively, absolutely and rad-
ically to oppose the American settlement plan, of which the Camp David
agreements are an expression. This all requires as well that one hasten
to establizh serious, firm relations of strategic alliance with Syria and
Iraq in a manner enabling the revolution to assume a greater role in con-
fronting the Zionist enemy and to increase its activities in all fields.
This rare, historic opportunity, which the masses of our people have been
dreaming of for a long time and which will recur again in history only
with difficulty, is an opportunity which the leaders of the revolution
must have the awareness to snatch and keep from losing.

This opportunity must give birth to a new pattern of thinking on the part
of the leaders of the revolution, and it must impart a new sense to
Palestinian national unity which is more positive than it has.been in the
past. [ mean that while feelings of fear were the basic motive behind
national unity, prior to the Syrian-Iraqi meeting, with the result that
the notion of unity was depicted as guaranteeing the means to protect the

19
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPTICIAL USS ONE!

revolution and thwart attempts to liquidate it, the motive following the
Syrian-Iraqi meeting must be first of all the restoration of hope in the
attainment of victory and optimism regarding the inevitability of the
triumph of our national cause. Thus the new notion will be offensive and
not defensive, active and not passive, positive and not negative.

The emergence of this new situation facing the Palestinian revolution co-
incidea with the imminent convening of the lath session of the Palestine
National Council. Thin will help the leaders of the revolution to offer
the National Council. perhaps for the first time. an integrated political
and organizational platform which will take the initiative of planning

for the future and attaining achievements along the road to the triumph of
the revolution and restoration of the homeland, rather than revolving
around ways to protect the Palestinian revolution and cope with the dangers
surrounding it. '

The Role of the National Council

l§uestion7 will the Palestine National Council, which is supposed to meet
the middle of this January, be an indicator of the seriousness of the trend
toward national union?

Ignekegl 1t is well known that the National Council is no more than an en
lsrgcd map of the Central Council and the Executive Committee, and what the
detachmentt of the revolution cannot realise among themselves, the National
Council cannot realize. The National Council might be able to vote on a
specific organizational resolution, but it is more important that the de-
tachsents thich are requested to implement this resolution have conviction
in it.

We do not intend, generally, that the National Council should achieve our
unity for us; we ourselves are supposed to go to the National Council
united or agreed on achieving unity, lest the council loss much time in
sterile debate over issues which can only be solved in a practical way by

direct mutual understanding among leaders of the detachments of the re-
slstnncc.

The rational Council's time must be wholly dedicated to a discussion of
the political situation and the political platform of the coming stage,
and this is a matter in which every Palestinian rust have his opinion.

The National Council generally blesses all steps taken by the detachments
of the Palestinian revolution along the road to unity; when these detach-

ments fall short of achieving this kind of step, the National Council does
its duty by inviting these detachments to resolve the organizational prob-
lem among themselves.

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFTICIAL USE ONLY

Giving Everyone "is Role

l§ueatiog7 What is the practical method for achieving Palestinian nation-
al unity?

[Answegl I am still wholly convinced that any serious step to achieve
national unity must start on the basis of solving the organizational prob-
lem, first of all, and giving everyone his role and his rights, provided
that he commit himself to his duties and confine himself to the principles
of unified action.

it is impossible that the day could come when political positions and ideas
will correspond completely; rather there is nothing to prevent differing
political ideas from being subjected to democratic organizational relations
which guarantee that Palestinian efforts will be wholly directed toward
facing the enemy and at least guarantee that sporadic instances of armed
clashes between two or more detachments be avoided and that all forms of
mutual vitnperation and slander and hostile political mobilization on the
part of one detachment or another against certain other, or all, detach-
ments be eliminated.

The Requisite Positive Development

It is the lrogressive formulation of national unity on democratic bases,
alone, whirh will enable the revolution to gain time and fully exploit the
opportunit‘ea available in order to serve its combative purposes in a men-
ner enablirg the Palestinian revolution to gain greater respect on the
Arab and international levels, official and popular simultaneously.

The future which lies before our people is brilliant and the fact that the
triumph of our cause is inevitable is beyond dispute. However, this all
requires that positive development within the Palestinian arena be wedded
to poaitivn development on the Arab stage, as represented fundamentally by
the histor.c meeting between Damascus and Baghdad.

41-17 Jan 79 pp 30-337

0n the eve of the convening of the lath session of the Palestine National
Council, AL-UATAN AL-‘ARAHI is continuing its dialogue with three leaders
of the resistance--Hesars Nayif Hawatimah, secretary general of the Demo-
cratic Front for the Liberation of Palestine; Ahmad Jabril, secretary gen-
eral cf the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine, General Com-
mand; and Ssmir Chewshah, secretary general of the Front of the Struggle
of the People of Palestine--thus completing the dialogue it started last
week with Messrs Salah Khalaf, 'Abd-al-Rahim Ahmed and Zuhayr Muhsin, in
order to set forth the viewpoints of the leaders of the detachments of

the Palestinian revolution regarding the national union plan which will
head up the National Council session's agenda and the variables presuppos-
ing attainment of the goal of unity within a clearly-defined organisation-
al political platform.

21
.FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Fill OFFICIAL USE “LY

Nuyll llnwntllnnh (Democratic Front for the Liberation of Palestine):

we mmt a National Fighting Front

lgunatiog? al-Saclat's visit to occupied Palestine has again raised the
(sum: of national unity on the Palestinian stage. How far have efforts
none in this direction?

[answer] National unity is a major. pressing issue for a small people.
more than two thirds of which have been dispossessed and are facing an or-
nanised expansionist colonial Zionist invasion supported by the forces of
world imperialism, in particular American imperialism and the world Zion-
ist movement. Therefore one of the most important essential ingredients
for victory over this vicious hostile front is attainment of the unity of

the peqnle and a national revolution in the context of the Palestine Lib.
oration Omanization in this stage.

To this end, the Democratic Front has taken the initiative of offerinr, the
l'nles'.ine National Council and all detachments of the revolution more than
one plan for national unity. The first plan was in September [969. the
second in July i97l, and the third in March 1972. The latter was the first
inteuratcd national unity plan offered by any detachment of the revolution.
The National Council recoauended it . but none of these plans have seen the
linht of day despite the daily urgency of the necessary ingredients for
national unity.

This year. following al-Sadat's capitulationist visit to occupied Jerusalem.
the seasonal spirit of propounding the issues of national unity was renewed.
The Tripoli unificationist compact was a preliminary framework along this
road. prior to the convening of the banner of the National Unity Comittee
corposed of the Executive Cmittee of the Liberation Organization, the
secretary generals of the revolution. and a number of members of the organ-
ization's Central Council.

rhree unity plans were before this National Unity Comittee: the first
from FAT". the second irom the Demcratic Front. and the third from the
Palestinian Rejection Front. He ourselves proceeded to publish these three
plans in the Lebanese magazine AL-liURRIYMI so that they would be in every-
ouo's grasp and so that judgment, in times of confusion, would rest with
the court of the masses and the fighting men.

FATII'S Plan: Military Unity
Mr Nnylf llewetimoh went on:
Here we must observe, first of all, that Pam's plan was not politically

npvrific but reduced the whole national cause to a unity of military
forces along. in addition, a spirit of domination emanated from it

22
FOR OFFICIAL [BE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

again, along with the appeal to give PAT" wide powers in forming the
Bxecutive Conmittee of the Palestine Liberation Organization.

The Democratic Pront's plan relies on the primciple of national unity by
merger. on the basis of proportional representation, in accordance with
the resolutions of the Palestinian National Council held '- April 1972.
This plan deals with the unity of forces, the militia, the media, diplo-
matic representation, the national fund and the mass, trade union end vo-
cational organizations, via organizations which will result in the evolu-

tion of the Liberation Organization and its institutions into a national
liberation front.

In Its political aspect. it relies on the atage-by-stsge national platform
ratified by the detachments of the revolution at the National Council held
in June 1974, which set forth realistic, positive solutions to Arab-
Palestinian political relations and international-Palestinian relations,
through reliance on Arab sunnit end United Nations General Assembly reso-
lutions since 1976, ell of which approved the historic rights of our people
and the national platform to return, determine our destiny, and establish

a national state without condition or restriction.

' The Rejection Pront's plan propounded long-range political strategic prin-
ciples, thus jumping over the issues and tasks of the revolution, our
people and the Liberation Organization of the present and during this stage.
0n the organizational aide, it was also confined to principles for coordin-
ating the detachments of the revolution.

The National Unity Coonittee discussed all this and concluded by approving
a jollt political platform which in essence conformed to the political
plan the Democratic Front had presented, which was fully harmonious with

the Phased National Platform of the Palestine Liberation Organization which
was approved in l97h.

This means that the correct political platform our people have chosen and
rallied around, the platform of the return, the right to determine one's
destiny and the independent state, will succeed. The resolutions of the
Algiers, Rabat and recent Baghdad summits were obtained under its banner,
nlonr with the resolutions of the United Nations General Assembly, in a
manner guaranteeing the emergence of our national cause in npecific polit-
ical language into the conscience of the world and its adoption by all the
forces of democracy, progress and peace in the world.

The approval of this plan means the defeat of the tendency which leaves
antlers unspecified and is content with long-range strategic slogans.

0n the organizational side, matters remain within a framework of general
principles, such as approval by the leaders, collective resolutions, the
refusal to deviate fromnthesc resolutions, minority commitment to the
position of the majority, and strengthening of coordination among

23
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Nil OFFICIAL USE ONLY

detachments of the revolution. These organizational limits were a response
to the position of the majority of the detachments. whereas our plan pro~
pounded the unity of all common national instruments through incorporation
by proportional representation .

We are now awaiting the convening of the Palestinian National Council in
the middle of January for the political platform and organizational prin-
ciples to be legislated, now that they have been ratified by all Palestin-

ieu detachments and approved by the Central Council of the Liberation
Organization.

However, on this occasion we must point out that efforts to violate this
platform and the desire to rush away from it will continue, as a result of
pressure from Arab regimes. on the one hand, and the inclination of some
detachments of the revolution to commit themselves to their private polit-
icnl platform and commiting themselves to it in letter and spirit.

An exemle of that is what is going on in the first rounds of Palestinian-
Jordanian talks. since something called the framework of common action has
been formed and this constitutes e violation of the joint platform of
nntionel unity. which specified the palpable national foundations for
Palestinian-Jordanian relations.

The Main Contradiction

l§uestiog7 There are people who say that it is political disputes which
have prevented national unity and can prevent the establishment of this
unity as well; what is your opinion about that?

IZnsweg/ Our people, like any people on earth, consist of numerous nation.
el classes which express themselves through organized political and intel-
lectunl tem'encies. also numerous. This is not odd-~indeed all revolutions
et all stages of their struggles, especially in the stage of national libo
crntlnn, have recognized it. These intellectual and political contradic-
tions have been resolved for the sake of the main contradiction with the
national enemy. This has happened in China. Vietnam, Angola, Algeria.

Cube and other countries in Asia, Africa and Latin America.

The contradictions in the ranks of the people and the revolution must con-
stantly give way to the major contradiction with the enemy and it has there-
fore always been our appeal that the contradictions within the ranks of the
revalutinn should be put in their true place, as secondary contradictions,
and they should give way to the major contradiction with the national enemy.

lrnqi~Syrian Relations

[Questi997 ﬂow will the Syrian-Iraqi agreement contribute to moving the
wheel of national unity forward, through its positive reverberations with-
in the Palestinian scena?

2”
FOR OFFICIAL USE ML!
NR OFFICIAL [BB ONLY

IZnsueﬂ He in the Democratic front have struggled for the past 10 years
to rectify lraqi-Syrien relations, and we hevo paid an exorbitant price
for this principled stand.

we have struggled on behalf of a united trnqi-Syrinn-Palostinian advence
front constituting the main axis of the Arab perseversnce front: the strug-
gle with the Zionist enemy must be along an sdvance front within the occu-
pied territories and along lines of center: in the Arab encirclement
countries, especially the Syrian northern front. Our slogan is. "Let all
Syrian-Iraqi-Palestinian powers be united along the advance front against
the Zionist enemy, the Case) David conspiracy and autonomy."

The unity of these three forces in the context of the Arab rejection front
will guarantee the restoration of a strategic balance with the imperialist-
Zionist-resctionary enemy, following its disruption by Egypt's departure.
at the hands of al-Sednt, from the front of confrontation with the enemy.

Ahmed Jabril (General (foamand): is There Middle Ground between llnity and
the Preservation of Organisations?

l§uestiog7 "hat is new as regerds the attainment of Palestinien national
unity, following the long journey?

IZnswegl There is no doubt that the issue of national unity is an old one;
it has been prominent since the birth of the revolution. although at the
beginning it was restricted to the detachments which were present on the
scene. Here we might reesmber that with the launching of PATH in I965 we.
as a front, tried to get in contact with it. It is well known to all that
revolutionary action at that time was secret, so we did not know the lead-
ers of PATu,and PAT" did not know about us. The nesting between us took
place after FA'nl‘s first operation; then we held a number of meetings which
resulted in the establishment of joint leadership bodies, including the
Bmerroncy Comittee, which took charge of comending action. the Central
Consnittee, which planned the general movesents of the revolution, and the
:icdia and liilitary Coeaitteces.

This continued until the end of April 1966, when opinions became divided,
and that led to the end of united action.

After thstuspccirlcelly, after the June 1967 defeetuwe in the front had
the honor of calling for establishment of a Palestinian national union
coon-risinn the detachments which were prominent on the scene. Thus the
first «seating was held in Dsmsscus. in response to this invitation. and
it was sttended by representatives of our front, PATH, the Revolutionary
Youth, the lleroes of the_Return. the Palestine Branch of the Ba'th Perty
ljlfext ends at this poiny

COPYRIGHI': All-Hotel: el-'Arobi
1188’!
(:50: M'fr‘
25
ma OFFICIAL USE GIL!
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

IRAN

CORRmPONDM 0N SAVAK, connuvrma A8 CAUSES Oi" mmm CRISIS
nonn EUROPA-ARCHIV in German 25 Jan 79 pp hJ-SZ

[Article by Dr Arnold hottinger. "305 ZUBRCHER ZBITUNG correspondent for
Spain and the Arah countries. written at the turn of the year following a
trip to iron: "The Crisis in lran--a Consequence of the Secret Service
Regine"!

[Text] The old Ayatollah Kate-i. who has been resisting a particularly hrutal
nilitary regiment in lsfahan for aore than S nonths and has encouraged the
population of his city to offer resistance until the overthrow of the shah.
interrupted his aides and interpreters in the course of an interview in
neceaher 1978. as they were expounding to his foreign guest the origin of the
unrest in Isfahan, and said: "First of all it needs to be stated that the
cause of the evil and its real root are to be sought in the shah's autocracy."
And indeed there is no better point of departure for explaining the unrest

and ills that have befallen lran since the beginning of January 1978. Until
that tine Shah Hoha-nad Reta Pahlavi had shown a tendency aaounting to an
increasingly absolute and arbitrary rule and to s growing unwillingness to
listen to the opinion or others-~whether high-ranking advisers or aen-in-the-
street-~daring to exercise criticisa of any aspects of his regime.

This unwillingness on the part of the aonarch even to take note of voices
other than those of pure flattery can be explained primarily by the fact that
his secret service and intelligence organisations--particulsrly the secret
security service. SAVAK--had got to be bigger than he was and were able to
prevoat hin eVen from seeing any longer the social. political. econoaic and
Inmnn reality in the country under his rule. Suffice it to recall the ruler’s
well-known remarks ahout the "great civilization" he thought he was building
or. for instance. his predictions that lran would "overtake" Great Britain

in a few years.

1he activity of the secret services really was what set the strategic course
leading to the aonarch's disorientation and isolation. They had always
justified their actions hy the alleged need for fighting subversive leftist
groups and as early as in 1953 (the tiae of the coup under General Zahedi

26
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0??!CIAL USE ONLY

which brought the shah back to power) extended them to the media and
university life. There their domination was so complete that they not only
proceeded against people who voiced opinions which the secret police did not
like but. in addition to that. told the newspaper people whet to write and
forced many professors. over and above their subject matter. to deliver
encomlums of the shah and his regime to their students. whoever did not
follow the orders and suggestions of the gentlemen of SAVAK had to expect
gradually increasing persecution. starting with chicanery and financial
losses and. in case of persistent refusal to "cooperate." ending in severe
torture and quite frequently secret service murders.

The Gagging of a Society

Pursuing the somber logic characteristic of such services. the SAVAK people.
with the shah's consent. exacerbated their regime even further when in 197]
the first fruits of an increasing prosperity. due to the export of petroleum.
began creating a kind of middle class. A reasonable policy. of course. would
have proceeded the opposite way: it would have had to grant the better
tducated members of a gridually growing middle class a greater say. and thus
a growing concern in the interests of the regime. The birth of violent
revolutionary groups caused by the repression of SAVAK. gave the latter
further excuses for gagging Iranian society ever more completely. The shah
at the top apparently. to a far-reaching extent. harbored the illusion that
the lack of any debate in the country was due to the fact that the great
majority of Iranians agreed with his government. Shnilsr illusions apparently
spread to numerous foreign observers. Actually the lack of any criticism and
the seemingly universal consent were nothing but the result of SAVAK's
virtually perfect methods of repression.

The secret services extended their control to more and more spheres; after
intellectual life and the media. it was the turn of the economy. At the same
time a ban on parties and the founding of a government party caused all
political activity to come under the strictert control. Through courts-
martial. special courts and state control over the appointment and removal

of judges. the whole legal system was turned into a caricature of a judiciary.

with the judges increasingly becoming more recipients of orders of the all-
.mwerful secret services.

ﬂevelopment Underlined by Corruption

Corruption increased accordingly. manifesting itself most grossly at court

in the immediate environment of the shah but taking in just about everyone in
power down to the most remote provinces. Corruption became the actual
"economic motor“ of irnninn "development." Thanks to the foreign currency
obtained from petroleum. it was possible to import enormous quantities of.
goods and whole manufacturing processes. but corruption led to a situation
where the bribes received by leading government and industrial pcrsonagea
from interested firms abroad and at home increasingly played the main role.

27
FOR OPPICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL 098 ONLY

when at the beginning of l97b the shah made the crucial mistake. against

the advice of experts. shaply to double lran’s existing 5-year plan in

light of the country's quadrupled petroleum income. he furthered the already
planted trends of corruption and inflation to an enormous extent. The
country did not have the human. institutional and physical infrastructure
enabling it usefully to spend twice as much money as originally planned.

The result was a jump in the growth of inflation. corruption and failures.
hut all these facts were swept under the rug by the secret services. and

the question today is to what extent the monarch in fact realized what the
problems were that actually had been created for the country by his rule and
the rule of his services.

Loss of Quality as a Result of Lack of Information

The regime of the security services thus led indirectly to the destruction of
the country's economic base. Agriculture suffered particularly. because. as
the product of a land refor- placed especially under the ruler's aegis (part
of the so-called White Revolution). it had to be a priori above any criticism.
with any objective information about its actual state of health or slow

death becoming impossible. The result was a migration of the rural population
to the towns. rapid reduction of agricultural production and. for years on
end. "successful” attempts by the civil services (always under the overall
supervision of SAVAX) to conceal and gloss over the actual situation in the
countryside.

The opaqueness of all life in iron perforce affected also the quality of the
administrative and econoaic officials and also led to disastrous results

in the quality of instruction in all Iranian institutes of learning. Increas-
ingly so-called "loyalty" to the regime became the criterion of selection in
all state institutions--in other words. the desire and ability of the
individual to come to be on good terms with the omnipotent secret police.
Personal qualities or abilities of any kind were secondary. and in practice
often even obstacles. when it was a question of obtaining an official position.
Just as poor money drives out good money. so poor administration drives out
the good administrators.

it may be said in general that the quality of the entire life. including the
ethical and intellectual but also the physical side of it (e.g.. air pollution.
housing problems and traffic congestion in Teheran) and the econoaie aspect.
became the main victim of the failures and the corruption of the last 6 years
of the rule of the shah. This is a particularly deplorable result. because
[ran is an extraordinarily complicated country with an ancient and highly
sophisticated culture. based on delicate substructures and extremely sensitive
and subtle people. The destruction of the quality of their previous life
through the uhah's so-called modernization. which in reality_amounted to the
east large scale corruption and devastation. was increasingly regarded by

the lranian population as a destruction of their entire previous existence

and culture. And so it was. to a disastrous extent. In light of this
preliminary history. it is no wonder at all that the population Iran in

28
FOR OPPICIAL US! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL 088 ONLY

resisting the destruction and corruption imposed on it sought refuge in the
actual center of its previous cultural life-~Shiism.

Resort to Clerics

The situation wlth which the population was confronted actually offered it no
other way out. Only the many thousands of clerics that exist in Iran had

the opportunity to address the population from a platform which was not a
priori occupied and controlled by SAVAK. The more it became apparent that
this was a way which allowed them to obtain the assent and support of the
population. the more the clerics were willing to put their network of
information and their platform--the mosques--at the disposal of the critics

of the regime. The ever-increasing popularity of the Ayatollah Khomeini.

who had got into conflict with the shah and SAVAK as early as 1963 and
theroaiter attacked the regime from exile. was apt to orient the other clerics
about what the population expected of them. when the clerics themselves at
the end of l977 again found themselves in the firing line of the secret
services. which had forced the paper ETTELAAT to print an article representing
an insult to them. they decided to confront the regime. The first demonstra»
tiona against the regime and its henchmen took place in the holy city of Qum.
The repression following it led to new demonstrations and new repression.

at flrstat 60-day intervals determined by Islamic mourning customs but becoming
Increasingly frequent and violent as of the summer of 1978.

“Liberalization" of the Shah

Even before that unrest the shah had tried to introduce some minor political
liberalization. In the course of 1977 something had become possible which
previously had been unthinkable: to reach the monarch with petitions informing
him confidentially of all kinds of bad situations without such action imme-
diately leading to intervention by the secret police against the sender of the
petition. It is not quite clear why the shah had decided on this minimal
relaxation of the system. Perhaps there were a number of reasons why he did
so. Under the pressure of inflation and corruption. economic development had
come to its first halt in the suuer of 1977. The previous prime minister.
Amir Abas "oveyda. had been dismissed. and the new development plan. which

was to have started in [977. was postponed indefinitely. The economic
diagnosis read "overheating of the economy." The new prime minister. Jamshid
Amuzegar. was asked to fight inflation and "consolidate" the economy. Perhaps
the first setback. after all. gave the monarch a first inkling of the aetual
situation. In addition there was the human-rights policy of the new 0.5.
President. which the shah evidently was prepared to follow to the extent of
improving the image of his regime a little. finally. there were deliberations
about the succession to the throne; as he had stated publicly on several
occasions. the shah held the view that after some years a consolidated empire
and one based more on consent than on constraint should be made over to his
son Rcza. In the course of 1977. it thus became possible for intellectuals
and members of the middle class for the first time in a long time to voice
their romplnlntl discreetly about unsatisfactory states of affairs in the
field nflnmnn rights. the judicial system. the economy (corruption). academic

29
FOR OFYICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

life and the like (with none of this being allowed to appear in the news-

papers). and in some cases even to circulate copies of their petitions among
like-minded people.

The fact that the shah permitted ouch activities and encouraged them to a
certain degree. incidentally. is yet another indication of how little he
realized what the true situation in Iran was. Clearly he regarded this
start of liberalization as hardly dangerous precisely because he did not -
realize the mount of hate his regime had caused among the population and the
extent to which the slightest relaxation of the previous gagging by SAVAK

was bound to lead to the eruption of long built up resentment and longing for
freedom.

A Setback for SAVAK

The key strategic position held by SAVAK in the whole regime up to that time
became apparent once more when the shah--probably angered by the failures of
the secret police-~deeided to remove the man who had been the head of SAVAK

for many years. Gen Nematollah Nassiri. and in general started to curtail

the responsibilities and standing of the secret police. This in fact signified
the beginning of the end for the Iranian regime. which previously had been

held together by the secret police by force. But the eh1h apparently believed
the pretenses of his sycophants who told him that the loyalty of the people
toward him was the most vital factor that held his empire together.

In the wake of the unrest in Qum. there was worse and bloody unrest in Tabriz
60 days later. with the shah blaming his secret services for having neither
predicted them nor effectively prevented them. Due account must also be

taken here of the dark chapter of provocations. There is serious evidence
that the people of the secret services time and again before and during the
unrest engaged in provocations and themselves put fire at least to part of

the movie houses. banks. restaurants. etc in Iranian towns in order to "prove"
the allegedly destructive character of the opposition movement.1 Possibly

the shah too got wind of such actions (which Iranians down to the most
ordinary shopkeeper knew about). and perhaps he therefore decided to place his
secret services on a tighter leash. It is also possible that the Americans.
whose CIA was always in contact with SAVAK. influenced the shah to that
effect.

Disintegration of the Regime

Already last summer one could sense in Teheran that the population had shed
its previous almost desperate fear of the secret services. SAVAK suddenly
was no longer surrounded by the previous aura of alarmed silence. Its
brutalities did not cease by any means. But more and more Iranians. particu-
larly among the young. were no longer prepared to be terrified by them.

In the summer of 1978 it became gradually clear that the previous government
party. Rastakhiz. had lost all credibility. The shah himself encouraged the

30
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

formation of fractions within the government party (for instance under court
malltleian Nahawandi). and sone of the more independent senbers of parlia~
neat (all appointed by the shah. not actually elected) left the government
party.

But the shnh‘u concessions. the disintegration of the once powerful secret
police. the disintegration of the government party end soon thereafter the
resignation (read dississel) of the Amuzeger government in the eyes of the
opposition were concessions which the monarch priaarily had been forced to

make under the pressure of its sacrifice-laden desonstratioaa. The leaders

of the opposition concluded from this state of affairs that the shah was on

the defensive end could be forced to make further concessions by their pressure
just as long as this pressure was exercised consistently given the ispression
of a ruler surprised by the turn of events. a ruler who apparently had no
choice but to give in ispassively. his concessions again and again had cone
too late and had been too small to satisfy the wishes of even the sore moderate
parts of the opposition.

Distruut Toward Any Government of the Shah

Little credibility. concessions granted too late (though these now even
concerned lnportant matters. such as prosecution of corruption. the promise
of freedom of the press, freedon of parties and future "free elections."

and though former SAVAK chief Nasairi and former Prime Minister Hoveyda were
now indicated) also characterized the next government appointed by the shah.
headed by Jnfar Sharif-lnami. Under the influence of the uncompromising
Ayatollah Khomeini (who now was living as a tourist in Paris after the Iraqis
had renoved his from his nany years' refuge in Rajaf). the opposition agreed
on the basic formula that the shah himself and his dynasty would have to
disappear before the protests and unrest could end. The standing of Khomeini
rose steadily. and his leadership was recognized sore and more clearly by the
other ayatollahs in the country-had to be recognized by them unless they
were prepared to lose their popularity. which traditionally forms the basis
of their standing. And under Khomeini’s influence protest strikes began
throughout the country-—in the ministries, the large enterprises. the state
hanks, power plants. refineries and (more important than anything else) in
the petroleua industry. Only at this late stage. when the petroleum industry
was being affected. did the public in Europe and the United States wake up

to the extent of beginning to take the Iranian crisis seriously. notwithstand-
ing the fact that. as everyone could see. it had assumed acute aspects for
more than a year.

Unsuccessful Military Govern-eat

The military government under Gen Qolam Reta Azhari which relieved Sharif-Ehani
(as of 6 November) and which had come to power through provocations.2 proved
incapable of fulfilling the main task it had been charged with--to put an end
to the strikes and restore peace and order. By the time Azhari resigned in
early January. some thousands of unar-ed Iranians had been shot. but the

31
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

strikes were continuing. the unrest had not stopped, and the drilling of
petroleum had reached the bare minimum of 230,000 barrels a day (compared
with a normal 6 million barrels a day). And this despite the fact that the
generals under the sign of a state of emergency had tried to intimidate the
towns by force and the troops had plundered some places.3 and despite the
fact that the petroleum workers had been punished by being deprived of their
jobs and being driven from their (company owned) housing. The only clear
result the army had reached with its brutalities was that the wrath of the
population against the regime had risen enormously and that also an ever-
increasing number of members of the middle classes (typically. doctors. for
instance. who had witnessed the consequences of the repression in the
hospitals) joined the popular movement of Khomeini and his clerics.

The end of the military government of Ashari probably was caused primarily

by the allegedly mild heart attack suffered by the prime minister around
Christmas. But. this coincidence aside. it had been clear for some time that
the shah was trying to revert to a civilian government because his advisers
insisted that the country was facing a political problem which had to be
solved with political means. and also because certain phenomena of a crumbling
of discipline had become evident in the army. The soldiers more and more
often were refusing to fire at demonstrators. and desertiona were increasing.

The Search for a New Civilian Government

At first the shah tried to negotiate with the veteran former Prime Minister
Ali Amiai. but apparently this attempt failed because Amini demanded the
full powers to which the prime minister was entitled under the constitution.
and which the shah had seized increasingly during the decades of his regime.
later the monarch felt he had to ask Qolam Hussein Sadiqi to form a govern-
ment. A retired professor of sociology. Dr Sadiqi had been minister of the
interior under Hossadeq and in 1953 had conducted the plebiscite on the basis
of which the shah had left the country at that time. The attempt at a solu-
tion with Sadiqi failed as well. The opposition refused to cooperate with
him as long as the shah remained in the country. and reportedly there were
also difficulties between the monarch and Sadiqi concerning the question of
the delimitation of full powers.

Then the shah asked Dr shapur Bakhtiar. a former deputy president of the
National Front, the most important political opposition. to form a government.
Imt the front expelled Bnkhtiar when he put himself at the shah‘s disposal.
uakhtiar managed to play up the possibility of a "vacation" by the shah

abroad and the formation of a regency council to take the place of the monarch
(temporarily?). although spokesmen of the palace in constant denials claimed
that the shah had no intention of leaving the country for an extended period.
let alone for good.

The Uncertain Future

At the time when this is being written. several possible solutions of the
crisis are apparent. The shah either will revert to his constitutionally

32
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

limited role or will have to remain abroad for good. The army either will

have to submit to the civilian government or sooner or later will try to

carry out one or several coups. In doing so. it may either remain united

or fall apart. This last possibility is probably the worst imaginable
alternative as it would amount to civil war and inevitably would pose the
question of whether the two big powers. the Soviet Union and the United

States. would be involved in it or would be able to avoid doing so. The best
possible outco-e probably would be the forming of a constituent assembly

after the shah's departure and the conducting of a democratic experiment.

This in not bound to fail. After all. Iran is a rich country. whose riches
only need to be administered a little better and more honestly than heretofore
to havu a stabilizing. rather than destabilizing, effect. Iran also definitely
needs a free debate about its main domestic political and cultural questions.
including primarily the basic question as to how Islam and modern life can be
reconciled.‘ This question remains unsolved throughout the Huslim world and
can be brought closer to solution only if the societies concerned are allowed
to express their opinions. The fact that this ceased to be possible altogether
in Iran nfter 1953 probably lies at the very root of the current problems.

What probably is now no longer possible is a continuation of the regime of
the shnh in its previous form. The main instrument which upheld it. SAVAK,
has been broken. and it appears hardly possible that this somber institution
will return to power.

The whole population. under the leadership of the clerics. is determined to
make sure that this does not happen.

In addition to the best and worst imaginable solutions, there remain a fair
number of compromises which invariably are connected with the de facto power
of the officers. Through pressure or attempts at a coup. these could inter-
fere in politics. with the shah becoming their earnest. or their victim. The
question as to whether. how long and under what circumstances the officers
would then be able to rule the country must. however. remain open. Their
first experiment with the Azhari military government cannot be regarded as

a success by any means. But this failure can be a cause of encouragement as
well as a deterrent for those eager for a coup--a deterrent rather for high-
rnnklng generals. a cause of encouragement perhaps rather for officers of

the middle ranks who think they can do better than their superiors managed to.

The shnh's departure on 16 January 1979 for the moment is only a trip abroad.
not an sullention. Therefore his leaving will not yet put an end to the
struggle In lrnn. There are followers of the shah remaining in Teheran.
particularly the so-called hard-line army officers. who became hated during
the state-of-emergency period because of their executions of demonstrators,

and the agents of SAVAK and other previous instruments of the regime. Once
the shah goes for good. all these must expect to lose their previous privileges
:uwl possibly to he called to account for their misdeeds.

So far the pro-shah officers have retained control over the army. The attempt
by Prime Minister hakhtisr to appoint as minister of defense Gen Fereidun Jam.

33
ms orncm. use om:
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

a respected officer who had been removed by the shah from his post of chief

of the general staff. did not succeed. The monarch refused to concede to

him the full powers over the armed forces to which a minister of defense

is entitled. Jam thereupon declined the ministerial post offered to his.
compelling the shah to give it to Gen Jafar Shafaqat. a follower of the shah.
The new chief of the army. Badrahi. named by the shah himself. is also
regarded as one of the shah's followers. And leading officers of the imperial
guard. the air force and the commando forces too are considered unconditional
supporters of the shah. They too in many cases would have to figure on being
tried I' or corruption and abuse of power if the regime fell once for all. They
are therefore interested in the return of the shah. It therefore has to be
expected that they will do all they can to prevent the Bakhtiar govermentu
weak. anyway. because disavowed by the opposition-from governing successfully
and to spread further the climate of insecurity and economic stag-nation. and
thus to prepare the ground for the monarch's returning as a savior. whether
or not they will be able to block Bskhtiar decisively depends in part on
whether the army will continue to obey thoaand.on the other hand. on whether
nakhtiar will manage after all to get some support from the opposition. whieh
so far has rejected him.

FOOTNOTES

1. In the view of various Western military attaches. the arson in Teheran,
Isfahan and other towns bore the marks of professional work. Reports
about the alleged activity of provocateurs can easily be gathered in all

Iranian towns. cf 1.! FIGARO. Paris. 6 Nov 78. "Teheran at the Mercy of
Rioters."

2. The military people administering martial law had clashed on several
occasions with the Sharif-bami government. most palpably concerning the
question of censorship and freedom of the press. While the military
tried to exercise censorship. Sharif-Emami promised "full freedom" to the
press. 0n the day before he assumed power--on 5 November-the army for
the first time had fired on students on a large scale on the university
campus. killing numerous students. The day thereafter. it cleared certain
parts of the downtown area. while at the same time organized arsonists.
widely believed to belong to the secret services. began their activity.
Masses of students penetrated the parts of the downtown area that were
not covered by the officers. The British hbasay and numerous other
buildings were set on fire. The 0.8. Dnbassy was protected by the forces.
After i day’s arson. the shah decided to dismiss sharif-Bsami and to
appoint a military government. Thereupon the troops returned to all parts
of the town. Gen Qolem Ali Oveissi. the administrator of martial law in
Teheran known as a hard-line activist. went abroad after a new civilian
government (Bakht inr. in January 1979) had been named--officially for
reasons of health and reportedly because he did not concur in the
reappointment of a civilian government. Cf LE FIGARO. loc cit. Concern-
ing provocateura in Amol who were seized and taken to court but then freed

310
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
3.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

by the arny by force, see LB Mans. 20 Nov 78, "The Judiciary Affirms
Its Opposition to the Regine."

Cf report by this writer in NB!!! 2113mm ZEI‘I'UNG, 12 Jan 79, "Punitive
Expedition in Rejerabad."

In this connection the fate of the Islamic philosopher Ali Shariati needs
to be recalled. Shariati, a professor in ﬂeshed and probably the foremost
mind concerned with the problem of. Islam and the modern age in the Islamic
world since the time of the Egyptian Huhauad Abduh. for years was
imprisoned and tortured. "hen his heart grew week. he was released. and

in 1976. at the age of No, he died in London from a heart attack. Sharisti
today is the most i-portant intellectual figure behind the Iranian upris-
ing. His writings (he left behind 153 books and pamphlets) today are being
sold in duplicated editions in the streets of all Iranian towns.

COPYRIGHT: 1979 Vcrlag fuer Internationale Politik Gab“. Bonn

8790
C80: 1.403

35
ran orncm. usn ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

IRAQ

v1cr. rncsmsm's mm 11m T0 PARIS 111111111230
ram AL-VATAN AL-‘mll in Arabic 11-17 Jan 79 pp 2a. 25

lirticle: "Hhat_ls behind lraqi Vice President rah» Huhyi-al-Din Ha'ruf's
Visit to Parislﬁ/

llextl 0n the eve of his official visit to France this 9 January. Hr Tahe
Huhyi-al-Din Na'ruf. vice president of Iraq, made statements to the cor-
respondent of AL-HATAN AL-‘ARABI concerning some aspects of his mission to
Paris. in which he praised the understanding reply which French President
D'Estaing sent in response to a letter from President Ahmad Hasan al-Bakr
on the meanings and goals of the Baghdad summit and its resolutions.

The vice president of the Republic of iraq confirmed that he woulu examine
the development of conditions in the African Horn with the French party
and would discuss developments of the situation in Lebanon.

There follow herewith Mr Tnhe Huhyi-al-Din Ha'ruf's answers to some of
AL-HATAN AL.'ARABI's questions.

lguestion/ Your visit to France is occupying a large portion of the at~
tention of observers. in view of the fact that it is considered an indica-
tion that lraqi-Prench relations have not been affected, in essence or de-
tall, by the well-known incident in the embassy. In what context do you
place this visit? uhst major objectives are expected of it?

Innawegl As a matter of fact, it had been determined that our visit to
France would take place inst December, 197", but it was postponed to its
present dntc because of emernency circumstances. Iraq, whether through
this visit or through visits by responsible officials at various levels
in the country's political leadership, is facing the requirements of this
stone, and the issues distinguishing it which are of concern to lraq and
the region, in a spirit of national responsibility. in this context.
lraq has stated its position of principle to diplomats with couplets
frankness.

36
I'm OFFICIAL (BE ONLY
rm Ui'i'Lbou U55 Uﬂhl

France's Jth Positions

lijuentioﬂ Cen it be said that lrsq. through your vleit to France, la
dedlcetlnn its movement in the international context early in the new
year, es previous reports have mentioned?

Ignawegl Our movement toward France is in harmony with trends which por-
tend well. toward the union between the natione of Syria and tree and with
the joint agreements the Baghdad summit propounded in order to confront
the plots hatched against the Arab nation and its central cause by the two
Camp David agreements.

when l eaid that our movement toward France ie in harmony with this propo-
eltlon. there is nothing strange in that. because France is to be consid-
ered an international force whoae just poaitiona we hope will develop. in
view of the good they hold for Arab-European relations in general and Arab-
t‘rench relations in particular.

I§uestio§7 How would you describe the current etatua of lraqi-Prench
relet lone?

IZnswoﬂ Our bileterel relations are excellent, as everyone knows; they

are developed relations which we hope will be the model for relations be-
tween the Arabs end the Heatern world.

In the context of demands for uutuel understanding, we consider that ouch
in repented of France the genuine, which has been endowed with a human
cultural heritage and European moral influence. in the context of creating
the wherewi'hel (or understanding. on the pert of the countries of western
Europe, of the justice of our national causes and the causes of the third
world.

It is no secret that contacts are constantly being made between Baghdad

and Perla. The letter which President Ahmad Heaan al-Baltr sent to President
Valerie Giscerd D'Bscaing on the results of the Baghdad auenlt and its obo
jectivcs was frank, detailed and Justified.

The French president‘s response to the Ireqi president's letter was the
object of amzemnt and eeteee, in view of the good sentiments end objec-
tive understanding it contained.

Issues at the African Horn

Iguestlog/ Observers in the French capital conclude that you will present
ireql points of view for discussion regarding the African Horn and as well
as developments in the situation in the Hiddle last. in the light of the
remedies epproved hy the Baghdad sumlt and the facts of the visit which
Mr Saddam unseyn, vice president of the Revolutionary Coenand Council,
recently made to Moscow and Ilevana. Is there any accuracy in these
conclusions?

3?
M OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

IZnsweg7 Iraq supports African liberation movements and their demand for
the right to determine their destinies. and there is no doubt that what is
happening in the African Norn enjoys Iraq's attention. This will be among
the issues to be discussed with the French party. which has broad concerns
in this part of the world. i an anxious to point out that Iraq is stress-
ing its position of support for the Eritrean revolution and stands along-

side its leaders in their demands for the right to determine their destiny
and their future conditions.

The Lebanese Issue Also

lﬁuestiog7 It has been said that the issue of Lebanese developments.
especially in the south, has started to occupy part of the mutual interest
of Iraq and France. Will your discussions deal with the French role in

Lebanon. within the United Nations forces. and the context of efforts to
create a Lebanese political solution?

/Answer/ Yes. we will describe our position on the crisis in Lebanon. for
one noble objective, w1ich is to maintain the unity of Lebanon territori-
ally and in terms of its people and to maintain its sovereignty and its
Arab affiliation. ard we will describe our efforts to support Lebanese
legitimacy and our initiatives as regards Lebanon during the ninth Arab
suamit conference. He will encourage and support France's international

efforts aimed at strengthening Lebanon's sovereignty on its territory in
the face of well known Zionist ambitions.

we have lost auch of what Lebanon represented for our Arab nation. but we
have great confidence in its people and the reconstructed united. prosper-
ous Democratic Lebanon they will achieve. The people of Lebanon have paid
a lot. and we have lived through their sorrows with then and will force-
fully support the reconciliation agreement which the Lebanese parties are
appr«ving, which will achieve the objectives we have sentioned.

Long-Term Agreements

Iguestiogl will your mission in France deal with followup on certain arms
agreements. in view of the fact that France is considered a relatively
secure backup source of eras? In this regard. it has been said that you
will. in your discussions. raise the subject of Iraqi-French cooperation
in the context of nuclear research, in accordance with an agreement in
principle to establish nuclear reactors for research in Iraq. Consequent-

ly. will the task of getting this agreement going enter into the frene-
wnrk of your discussions?

[Answer] I believe that it will be feasible for our delegation to discuss

the development of nutusl Iraqi-French cooperation and its expansion on
various levels and in various sectors.

38
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NM UH‘Mo‘UU.‘ Ubﬂ Ulla!

Iraq has long-range connections and agreements. In this regard, I do not
need to say that we are faithful to all our international commitments. as
regards both oil and other matters.

Iraq Does Not want an Energy Crisis. nut

IQnentinn/ It has been said that the French party night raise the issue

oi returning to a developed system of bartering oil for goods and services
in the discussions with you. What is your basic position on this matter?
no you consider that French anxiety on the teeporary suspension of Iranian
oil production has any relationship to this trend, bearing in mind that
French movenent which the French minister of foreign affairs made in Kuwait
and the Arab Bnirstea was aimed at gaining assured oil supplies for France
and the Heat and at filling the Iranian gap in oil supplies to France?

Finally, what is your position on the idea of increasing your oil produc-

tion in this period, in order to help eliminate disruptions in the nove-
nent of oil supplies?

lénsweg/ There is a fact which is worth mentioning and enphaaising, which
is that Iraq has demanded and propoundcd in detailed form the idea of pro-
granntng oil production in OPEC states in order to meet the real demands
of the market and to prevent the fabrication of a surplus which will put
pressure on prices, as it did in the past.

In this context, the requirements of the national development plan are what

dictate our oil production policy and consequently we invest our revenues
to achieve development goals.

we do not possess cash surpluses deposited in the coffers of international
banks, although we could. for our oil reserves are great and isnenae.
However, we deal with this situation with a great feeling of responsibility.

While we refuse to squander this national resource, we are not trying to
create what might be alleged to be an energy crisis. Us have emphasized
this and have proved it.

As the industrial world trembles in fear over the occurrence of anything
which might obstruct the flow of oil--as is currently happening in the
course of the events in Iran-~it is quickly pretending to forget the in-
portsnce of this resource, which is prone to depletion in a short time,

an! is once again causing us, the oil producing countries, to suffer all
the disadvantages of the international economic system.

Fortunately. however, we find that France totally understands what is go-
ing: on in this regard.

As regards barter, we have refused to deal through that, in view of the
(act that oil never has been an unseleable commodity. I personally have

39
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Hal OFFICIAL USE ONLY

no information on a "developed barter system" or the details of such a
system; however, I would like to point out that Iraq has for some time as-
siduously been demanding that the prices of imported goods and services
he linked to oil prices, but so far without avail.

we do not know how long we must lose an increasing percentage of the buy-
ing power of our revenues as a result of inflation in world prices and the
repercussions which have resulted from unemployment compensation in the in-
dustrial countries and the artificial decline in the price of the dollar.

In addition, the visit to France by the Iraqi delegation. heeded by Hr Tsha
Huhyl-al-Din Ma'ruf, assumes special importance in the eyes of observers
not because it comes in response to an invitation sent by Mr Raymond Barre.
the prime minister of France, but because it represents the first high-
level Iraqi movement in the context of Iraqi-French relations since the
press conference in which Mr Saddam Husayn, vice president of the Revolu-
tionary Command Council. faced the largest press delegation ever to visit
Iraq, and since the important changes which have appeared as a result of
the national action charter between Iraq and Syria and the Baghdad summit.

Saddam "usayn's Appreciation of the French Role

Mr Saddam nusayn singled France out for an appreciative statement at the
beginning of his talk, in which he said,

“In French policy, Iraq has found a desire to cooperate with the Arab world
and the third world in a new context different from that of the antiquated
mentality with which the behavior of some western countries is character~
ized." Saddam ﬂuaayn reminded his listeners that France's relations were
not disadvantageous ones for the French by material or moral criteria.

Iraq supported French interests by choosing to develop relations with
France at a time when the scope for numerous alternative choices was open-
ing up before it.

Therefore he stressed the fact that "The exchange of view between us and
France since the era of President Pompidou has been continuous, and it is
our intention and plan that this exchange continue."

Regarding the issue of Iraqi military transactions with France. ﬁr Saddam
Nuanyn said,

”At the press conference held on the periphery of the July anniversary
celebrations, I said that we intend to buy military equipment [rem France,
not because we are complaining about disruptions in equipment supplies

from the Soviet Union but because, when relations between two countries
grow, the dcvelopnent of relations should comprise various fields and there
should be no vetoes over specific areas. France's share in Iraq's weapons

supply is very modest, because the basic military equipment comes from
the Soviet Union."

ho
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Avu VA‘ALvuw v0» Von“

In the lluht at that, observer. any that the development of coopoutlon
ln tho nrmmnt contnxt will depend on the French party and on tho crltorla
of just, rcnllltlc prlclns.

COPYRIGHT: Ill-Hutu!) al-‘Arabl

ll3-‘l7
080: 63:02

'51
M OFFICIAL WE ONLY
FOR DEFICIAL USE ONLY

MAURITANIA

CURRENT DEVELOPMENTS DISCUSSED HIT“ MAURITANIA“ LEADERS
Paris AL-HATAM AL-‘ARABI in Arabic 28 Dec 78 - 3 Jan 79 pp 26-26

[Interviews with Moustapha Ould Mohamed Saleck and Ould Mohamed Laghdaf
by Mobil al-Msghribil

[Text] The Mauritanian desert nights are apparently Just like the Nile
River waters. hithat anyone who savors them once must return again.

The Corrective Movement led by Moustapha Ould Mohamed Saleck over 5 months
ago clearly put Mauritania on the chart of general Arab concerns. lt
transformed Mauritania from a state sleeping in the shadow of reality

and collapsing under its security and economic probleaa without moving a
muscle while waiting for a miracle out of nowhere.to a state which has
become infused with the dynamics of change. with a rebellion against its
situation and with a search for Mauritanian solutions to Mauritanian prob-
less.

it was this development that led me to Mauritania. where l was the first
journalist to interview and question Colonel Moustapha Ould Mohamed Saleck.
as previously indicated in issue 78 of AL-HATAN AL-‘ARABI. dated 22 August
1978.

But the political nature of a news assignment encompasses more than just
persons. for it extends beyond them to the environment and circumstances.
Hence. my meeting with the Mauritanian desert and the wonderful. serene
desert nights. which are sleeping over the treasures of mineral resources
without that detracting Iron their enchantment.

The shift from the abundance of tumultuous noise in Paris to the symphony
of fine silence in the Mauritanian desert was the beginning of a love
affair with the desert and with the desert night. It was that enchant-
ment that led me to spend a few days of vacaion this time in the meadows
of the desert. But the cares of my press work penetrated the walls of the
vacation. especially since l arrived on an evening marked with great poli-
tical significance, with the Mauritanian leaders possibly deciding to
release SI Pollsnrio prisoners captured by the Mauritanian forces years

142
ros orrtcm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ago. That was the second opportunity for a new meeting with Colonel
Moustapha Ouid Mohamed Saleck and a number of authorities in the new
era.

As usual. Colonel Ould Mohamed Saleck was forthcoming, and it seemed to

me that the months of rule. though short. had made him grayer, but they
had not affected him as a modest man who does not erect barriers. created
by intoxication with power between him and the others. And he smiled shyly
when i told him that I had come to get the news right from its primary
source. The interview went as follows:

[Question] Five months after the rise of the Corrective Movement that swept
Moktar Ouid Daddah out of power. what has been changed in Mauritania?

[Answer] Indeed. many things have been changed through the effort to im-
plement a new policy of recovery to free the country of the accumulations
of the past. Not many accomplishments have been attained thus far. for
the simple reason that the legacy we inherited was burdensome, weighed
down by wrongdoing and corruption. It is not easy to extricate ourselves
from that situation with the necessary speed.

The stage we are in now is still one of examination. study and deduction,
taking into account the conditions that produced the experiences of the
previous regime. As far as we--that is. the authorities in this country--
are concerned. we are determined more than ever to proceed on the path of
recovery and to apply the principles of the movement for which we have
come, by which i mean the following:

i. Achievement of the national recovery in two stages. economic and social;

2. Finding a just solution to the Saharan question. one that will preserve
Mauritanian sovereignty and rights;

3. Consolidation of that sovereignty. and strengthening the basic elements
of the Mauritanian existence by means of consultations and negotiations
with the various parties.

we are giving priority to the economic and social problems. because under
the previous regime the country reached the limits of bankruptcy.

[Question] Are you optimistic with regard to the solution of the economic
problems?

[Answer] Naturally. none of us should founder in the sea of blind opti-
mism. Certainly not! But that is no reason for us to be filled with
unjust I f ied pessimism.

You know that the heritage is a heavy one. He must work hard to rescue
the country from yesterday's legacy, after most Mauritanian citizens
have been freed of the decline of the economic conditions.

53
Iron orncm. use can
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

For this reason. we attach special iaportance to improving those condi-
tions. During the course of the recovery. we are working to make the
others see that Mauritania can regain its vitality. Mauritania is rich

in its history. culture and resources and in its privileged position. and
these facts will help speed up the journey toward restoration and construc-
tion.

A Surprise Every Day

You know very well that until now we have not yet taken a complete account-
ing of the mistakes of the past. Every day. we come upon a surprise. Each
day. hidden things are maled to us. Thus, the uncovering of the contin-
ued existence of such things is fore-oat in the developments and concerns
that have characterized the new stage. i tell you frankly that the work
here is going along without any fuss, for fussing and yelling do not mean
anything to us. The iaportant thing is that we develop the country. that
we succeed in rebuilding the state on a sound foundation in accordance with
clearly defined goals.

[Question] How much time. in your opinion. is needed to solve all these
problems?

[Answer] I tell you candidly that we must not expect to perform miracles
in this small stage, that is, we must not be absorbed with fantasy and
imagine that structures will rise here and there or that factories will
be built by the tens. But we can say that between now and next July (the
first anniversary of the Corrective Movement). we shall succeed in asking
inventory or a general list of the goals we intend to achieve, after pin-
pointing where the malady exists in various fields.

To make it even clearer, I will say that between now and next July we shall
arrive at a clear outline of the goals and guidelines with a definite
schedule for carrying out the projects that will be approved.

Our Deadline Next Julyi

[Question] Then you mean that you are making next 10 July a new turning
in your course?

[Answer] i hope so. in any event. that date will be a deadline by which
to begin the implementation of the plan for complete recovery.

[Question] There is another important development the country has wit-
nessed recently: the start of the withdrawal of the Horoccan forces. what
does that withdrawal signify? And within what new circumstances is that
withdrawal taking place?

[Answer] Yes. of course. that is a new development. That is. the 10 July
Movement would be aimless if necessary steps were not taken to strengthen

lob
FOR orncm. use 0qu
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

our sovereignty. Morocco shares this view with us. and we agree entirely
on this point. with regard to the withdrawal of the Moroccan forces when
the Mauritanian forces will be in a position to undertake the role that
the Moroccan forces have been playing. That is what the Moroccan monarch
assured ne at our recent meeting. Moreover. that is what we perceive in
the statements made by the Moroccan authorities to the Moroccan and inter-
national press.

Thus. the Moroccan forces have begun withdrawing. But that does not mean
we would refrain from asking for assistance if that were necessary in the

future. The withdrawal coincides with the dynamisn of the peace we are
achieving.

[Question] "as a specific timetable been set for the withdrawal of these
forces? In other words. will it take place in stages. and how?

[Answer] Not at all. We have not set a specific timetable. The with-
drawn! is being made on the basis of a simple balancing: whenever there
are sufficient Mauritanian units to replace the Moroccan ones in a given
sector or barracks. the withdrawal will take place there.

[Question] when will there be enough Mauritanian units to take the place
of the Moroccan forces now in Mauritania?

[Answer] On a zonal basis. matters suat proceed rapidly. For our part.
we have taken and are new continuing to take the necessary steps toward
having enough units. forces and commanders to assume the role of the
Moroccan forces. I believe we shall reach that stage within a short time,
not more than the first 1 months of 1979.

A Different Kind of French Aid
[Question] What about French nilitary aid?

[Answer] Here it is of a different kind. There are no French forces sta-
tioned on our land. French military support is limited to offering advis-
ory services in military training. and nothing more. Under these circum-
stances. it is merely technical assistance. But this does not mean that
Mauritania is suffering from an "inferiority complex" or "guilt complex"

if the defense of our sovereignty were to necessitate our asking for French
specialists in one field or another so that our forces would become able

to ensure the necessary formations and cadres reinforced with the neces-
sary equipment.

[Question] Uhat about the role of French aircraft in supporting Mauritan-
ian sovereignty in the Mauritanian airspace?

[Answer] That is a circumstantial (and therefore temporary) matter relat-
ing to factors involved in the Saharan issue.

“5
son ontcm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Question] Hhere specifically are the French aircraft stationed? ln
nnkar. for example?

[Answer] In Dakar or France, it does not matter. That is not the problem.
"hat is important is the emphasis on the fact that that aid is circumstan-
tial. changing as the need for it changes.

[Question] As long as we are talking about France. there is a question
that arises in this context. You met French President Ciscard d'Estaing
recentlyforthe first time. Nhat did you think of him?

[Answer] I have great respect for French President Giscard d'Estaing.
There is no doubt that he enjoys a shrewd view of current international
events. He has a great knowledge of problems that are raised.

[Question] You know. Mr President. that d'Estaing had a firm relation-
ship with Noktar Ould Daddah. Candidly speaking, did the French president
intercedc for Ould Daddah's release.

[Answer] Certainly not! Our talk only touched in passing on Hoktar Ould
Daddah's present situation. nothing more.

[Question] Then he is still under detention?

[Answer] Hoktar Ould Daddah's status will be considered at the appropriate
time. There are more urgent matters before us at this time. concerning
the Mauritanian people as a whole. and not just one person.

And a Certain Stage After Boumediene?

[Question] Regarding the recent Algerian developments. particularly the
question of the succession to Boumediene, are they causing you apprehen-
sions?

[Answer] Apprehensions? Why? It is difficult to predict now what may
happen. But what is certain is that the problem is related to purely in-
ternal matters. I respect Algerian sovereignty and the right of the
Algerian people to make its choice. I hope with all my heart that the
people's will and the question of sovereignty will prevail over every
[other] consideration in regard to President Boumediene's succession. As
for the people competing for the presidency, that does not concern us.

As I said. it is an internal matter.

80 That the Pan will Not Burn

[Question] "hat is the latest news of the Saharan issue? There is a
popular saylng that "too many cooks spoil the broth." and there have
Indeed been too many cooks these days: from the Committee of African
Sages to the OAU. occasionally French and Arab interventions, etc.

M6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

(minnel Honstnpha Ould Snleck laughs heartily and says:

[Answer] l'll set your aind at ease. He will not let the broth burn.
The Canaittee of Sagea is now engaged in studying natters and viewpoints
from all aspects. The committee is placing all its influence and reputa-
tion in the hnlnnre. i an confident that it will arrive at fruitful.
positive results, at a solution that will save the broth from burning.

it is assumed that the committee will draw up the essential part of its
study within a few months. He hope that the sides concerned will succeed
in removing the obstacles.

th haven't You Shown Your Hand?

[Question] Haritanian policy is being criticized for thus far not having
presented a carefully studied. practical plan of action to solve the prob-
low. in all candor. how do you envision the solution? “hat is your plan
of action in this regard? why haven't you shown your hand thus far?

The colonel answers candidly:

[Answer] if the latter were up to Mauritania alone, it would be easy to
_ present a clearly defined plan or idea.

You know that the problem does not concern Mauritania alone. "by do you
want us to disclose our papers and present a plan for solution before the
other parties concerned present theirs? Lat then offer their solutions
and let us give our view. Then let us discuss those solutions and present
our ideas on the problen.

Our objective now is to reach a practical. tangible solution; theoretical
solutions and ideas are of no avail.

Yes. [There are] Li-its to Patience

[Question] Even diplonatic patience has its linits. Consequently. how
long will you be patient? how long will you wait for the other parties
to present their solutions?

[Answer] There certainly are linita to patience. For our part. we set
a anxious tine limit. The ball is not in the Mauritanian court now.

we are waiting for the idea or plan that the others will propose.

in other words. we are now awaiting the report that the Coanittee of Sages
will caaplete in a few sontha. Of course. the discussion of those results
should not take long. He are optinistic. on this basis....

|1pcstlanl if the parties concerned do not reach a solution. what is the
alternative? 00 you believe. for exsaple. that the failure to arrive at
a solution will place the region in danger of sane explosion?

#7
Iron omcm. use on“
IOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

lAnuwerI In any event, I do not expect things to go that far. Our goal
now Is to work for a solution to such eventualities by finding the appro-
priate solution before things get out of control.

The replies of Colonel Moustapha Ould Mohamed Saleck explained such of

the general frasework of the Mauritanian orientations and policies being
decided upon through consultation snong the sembers of the National Coun-
cil for Recovery. who established the Corrective Movement and harmoniously
shared. and are continuing to share, the roles and functions.

To round out the picture. we held the meeting reported below with Foreign
Minister Sheikh Ould Mohaaed Laghdaf. who fortunately happened to be in
Mouakchott. his duties have necessitated a good deal of travel asong the
Arab. African and European capitals in a series of dynamic contacts which
apparently will crown his the "No l globetrotter“ in Mauritania. This in-
terview with the foreign sinister took place in his office, characterized
hythcascctlcisn that marks everything in Mauritania.

lQuestionI After 5 nonths since you cone to power, what are the broad
guidelines of your foreign policy?

[Answer] The new regise's foreign policy is ained at achieving nany goals
at the ease time:

I. Act to restore the distinct Mauritanian independent personality to
the country. because it did not enjoy coeplete independence and sovereignty
under the previous regiee;

2. Act to have Mauritania restored as an element of balance in the region,
and not have it side with one country against another;

3. laprovc relations with the various other countries, both in the North
and South, and retain good neighborly relations with the adjacent coun-
tries:

4. Strengthen Mauritanian's special, distinctive role as a link between
Africa and the Arab world;

5. Assn-e an effective role in international organisations and associa-
tions;

6. llpoac the Mauritanian presence on the international forum, and inter-
art effectively with Arab world issues. That is to say. Mauritania is
endeavoring to play its role in the Middle East crisis, has participated
hlthe Baghdad susmit conference and has criticized the Camp David accords,
clarifying Its position on the question of the partial solution, asserting
that such solutions cannot further peace in the region or restore the land
and rights to the Palestinians.

1.8
son orncrn. use our
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Question] tht steps are you taking under the present circumstances to
resolve the thnran question? '

[Answer] The Saharan question concerns the Mauritanian people, naturally,
but it certainly concerns Morocco and Algeria at the sane tine. We
therefore aim at a complete solution and spare no effort that can bring
the points of view closer in order to find that solution.

[Question] what stage do you expect to come after Bounediene? Are you
anticipating something in this regard?

[Answer] This new stage may be reflected negatively or positively by the
Saharan question. He cannot now indulge in preaature judgments or expec-
tations. Hhat can be said at this time is that Mauritania is seeking to
establish good relations with all [states]. in order to serve as a balanc-
ing element between Morocco and Algeria.

[Question] As for the Connittee of Sages, do you personally have broad
hopes for it?

[Answer] Personally. I am optimistic on that account. It is assumed that
the committee will present its study and ideas on the problem no later than
next July. We hope that the committee will succeed in presenting a tine-
tnhle on the stages for settling the question.

[Question] what concessions might Mauritania end up offering?

[Answer] Re have made a number of concessions since 10 July 1978:

First. placing the question of peace foremost among Mauritania's concerns;

Undertaking many intensive efforts to bring the viewpoints closer together.
efforts that led to the fornation of the Committee of Sages;

Achieving a cease fire.
[Question] Do you desire to receive Arab economic aid?

[Answer] why not? He have received considerable aid fron Saudi Arabia,
Morocco and Libya, and Iraq has indicated its readiness to carry out a
number of Mauritanian development projects and to provide Mauritania with
the necessary aid in various fields. The country's financial situation
has improved due to the assistance of sister nations. '

[Question] it has been said that France has made a great effort to assist
you. what has France provided?

[Answer] France has set aside 50 nillion francs in aid for us. and of that
sun 20 million has reached us thus far.

(XlPYRlCHT: AL-HATAN AL-‘ARABI, 1978

5366 “9
cso: 1.1.02 For orncm. use om:
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

WROCCO

BRIEFS

l'liTllOLlsm PRODUCTS REFlNiNGuDuring its twelfth meeting in Rabat on l8 December.
presided over by Mousse Saadi, minister of Energy and Mining Resources, the
board of directors of the National Petroleum Products Company (SNPP) studied
that company's activities during the year l978 in comorcial, financial and
social areas. The study revealed that during last year the domestic petroleum
products market experienced an increase of 8.5 percent, the same rate as the
preceding year. The needs of the market were supplied at the rate of 74 per-
cent from the national refineries. the reaainder having been imported in the
form of refined petroleum products. The situation will change in 1979, the
refining potential being sufficient to satisfy over 90 percent of the country's
needs. Concerning equipment, 1978 saw the beginning of work on several storage
projects, maritime transportation and road and distribution projects; some
were recently inaugurated. The value of these projects is figured at
75,000,000 dirhans. The board also examined and adopted the operating and e-
quipment budgets for next year, in the light of new comercial and economic
data. it is estimated that there will be development in this sector's acti-
vities. in other matters, the board studied the principle for organizing a
national campaign to achieve economies in energy consumption in the various
sectors. [Text] [Paris MARCIES TROPICAUX ET WITERRANEENS in French

5 Jan 79 pp 22.23] 8946

ISLAMIC BANK LOANuThe islamic Development Bank decided on 2 January to grant
Horocco a loan of approximately $4,500,000 to finance the purchase of cars

to transport cement from the Oujda production centers to the distribution and
loading centers at For. [Text] [Paris HARCIIBS TROPICAUX ET HEDITERRANEENS in
French 12 Jan 79 p 70] 8946

srnmasun four-day general strike was launched on 4 January by the Moroccan
Federation of Rail Workers, involving the whole system. This federation is
affiliated with thc Moroccan Labor Federation (M), the country's most power-
{ul union group. The railwaymen, who are demanding among other things a 15-
percent salary increase, announced they intended to extend their movement be-
yond 8 January, 48 hours at a time. if they did not get satisfaction, They
recalled that an agreement had been concluded between the Confederation office
and the Labor Ministry. by which a salary raise of 15 percent had been promis-
ed them, to catch up with civil service pay. Other strikes are scheduled in
Morocco to protest the austerity policy followed by the government, and the

'0
FOR Offlcgkl. USE ONLY
POI! ONICIAL USE ONLY

resulting wage freeze. This is the case in Fez. where civil servants affil-
iated with the UMI‘ have been observing a 48-hour strike since 3 January, as
well as in Mehumedla, an oil port noar Casablanca, where workers in industri-
al establishments on 4 January, again on the UMT initiative, launched a 24-
hour work stoppage in sympathy with General Electric Coapany's strikers, whose
movement has gone on for over a month. [Text] [Paris MARClliis TROPICAUX ii'l‘
iiiiDiTiiRMNliiiNS in French 12 Jan 79 p 70] 8946

AGRICULTURAL SITUATION IN 1978--Aftor the bad 1977 season the Moroccan har-
vest of four principal cereals, estimated at $0,000,000 quinteis, represents
nearly double the preceding harVest. linwever. increased needs, linked this
year with the need to reconstitute the stocks exhausted by the earlier bad
harvests has enforced recourse to importing nearly 13,000,000 quintals of
wheat. In industrial crops the harvest was 2,400,000 tons of beetroot and
318,000 tons of sugar cane, giving rise to a production of 375,000 tons of
sugar, an increase of 00 percent over the 1977 production. [Text] [Paris
MARCIlIiS TROPICAUX ET WDITBRMNEENS in French 12 Jan 79 p 70] 8946

MiltlalitliNT NITII BELGIUM 0N KENITM-Jhe Moroccan minister of ilousing and Terri-
terial Development, Ahhes El Fassi, and the ambassador from Belelum to Rabat.
i.ut: Puttman, on 6 January signed a draft cooperation accord dealing with the
establishment of the management plan for the city of Kenitra. 0n the other
hand, Gustavo Boeykens, vice president of the Belgian Parliament. in
Marrakeeh for a private visit from 2 to 7 January, mentioned the plan to cre-
ate a Morocco-Belgian interparliamentary co-ission, to promote development
of relations between the two countries. [Text] [Paris MARCHES TROPICAUX ET
MiilliTiERIiANliiiNS in French 12 Jan 79 p 71] 8946

AIR AGREEMENT WITH NETHERLANDS-Jhe Dutch airline KLM on 4 January resumed its
regular flights to Casablanca. after a two-month interruption. For its part,
Royal Air Maroc, beginning on 9 January, was to resume its service to
Amsterdam. This resumption followed on an accord between the Moroccan and
Dutch authorities and will be in effect for one year. it is recalled that the
Dutch-Moroccan difference on air transportation began last 2 Move-bar, the
day the bilateral landing authorizations were suspended. For years the Dutch
company has been requesting the Moroccan rights for a connection between
Amsterdam and Tangier. The Dutch government‘s aviation department had pro-
posed to Moroccan authorities that Royal Air Maroc's sinner 1978 schedule be
extended for one month while awaiting negotiations on the requested connection.
Royal Air Maroc then suspended its Netherlands flights. KLM, which touches
down at Casablanca twice a week, was authorized to open a Tangier connection

beginning next 1 April. [Text] [Paris MMCHES TROPICAUX ET BDITERRANEENS
in French 12 Jan 79 p 71] 8946

CITRUS I'ROI)UCT1W--Horoccan exports of early citrus, which as we recently
pointed out made up for their slowness. at the end of 1918 revealed only a
rather limited difference over the preceding season. In fact. as of last

31 December clementine exports amounted to 129,000 tons (against 133,500 tons
at the end of Deceaber i977) and navels aaounted to 43,090 tons (against
48,800 tons). 0n 7 January the export programs handled 15,000 tons of cle-
mentines and 12,900 tons of novels. On this same date the export cumulative
total was 144,000 tons for clencntine and 56,000 tons for novels. However. it

51
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

———_._

should be pointed out that Moroccan exports of clementlnes and novels for the
current 1978-1979 season will ultimately be less significant than estimated.
According to a report published in Rabat a downward revision of the estimates
took place last month. putting back the estimated tonnage for clementines from
184,000 tons to 105,000 tons and tonnage estimated for clonentines from

144.000 tons to 132.000. [Text 1 [Paris 10111de TROPlQMIX ET MEDITERRANEENS
in French 19 Jan 79 p 13'] 8946

COST OF LlVlNGnThe general cost of living index for November 1978 was estab-
lished in Morocco at 183. against 182.7 the month before. or a 0.16-percent
increase. against 0.88 percent in October over September. Thus, on the basis
of the average of the January to November 1978 indexes. or 175.9 for the whole
of Morocco, the evolution of prices in the 11-month term in realtion to the
average index for the 11 months of 1977 (or 161.2), marks an increase of about
9.12 percent. This rate is clearly lower than that recorded during the same
period of 1977 in relation to the average index of the 11 months of 1976
(143.2). or an increase of 12.7 percent. For Casablanca, the average index
for the 11 months of 1978 was established at 177.2. marking an increase of
9.72 percent in relation to the average of the 11 months of 1977 (161.5).
There to.) the rate of increase appears to be lower than that recorded for the

same period last year. or approximately 13 percent. [Text] [Paris MARCIIES
TROPICAIIX 151‘ WDITERRANISENS in French 19 Jan 79 p 131] 8946

SIGNS OF MIN-Encouraging signs of uranium have been found in the Upper
Atlas. the Moroccan minister of Energy and Mining Resources. Moussa Saadi an-
nounced in Marrakech. The discovery was made in the lmintanout Circle, south
of Chichaoua. Other signs had previously been discovered in 1977 by drilling
in the Middle Atlas (a region of Upper Mouleuya). it is recalled that
Morocco envisages. in the next few years, extracting uranium oxide from phos-
phoric acid, of which it has become a large producer, thanks to its phosphates.
The minister made these state-eats on the occasion of the dedication on

19 December of the Draa Sfar mine, 15 km northwest of Marrakech. The mine's
present installations are designed for extraction of 81,000 tons of crude ore
per year. yielding after processing 3,000 tons of lead concentrate and 7,500
tons of zinc concentrate. Marketing of the processed product will permit an
annual turnover of 10,000,000 to 12,000,000 dirhams. Equipment cost amounts
to 22,000,000 dirhans. in his speech Moussa Saadl stressed the importance
or the mining sector in the national economic area, stating that the sector
had participated in 5.6 percent of the gross national production in 1977 and

that it employed some 40,000 workers. [Text] [Paris MARCHBS TROPICAUX ET
HilliTERMNliENS in French 29 Dec 78 p 3555] 8946

Oil. BASIN-din oil basin has just been discovered in the Sidi-Kacem region,
150 km northeast of Rabat. the Moroccan minister of Energy and Mining Re-
sources, Mousse Saadi. announced during a dinner-discussion on 23 December in
Rabat. arranged by the former pupils of the Oujda high schools. The minister
indicated that a first stratum of oil was found in this region at a depth of
2,060 meters at the time of prospecting undertaken by the BRPM (Moroccan
Mineral iixpleration and 1nvestmcnt Office]. Mr Saadi, who did not state the

52
son orncua. use out»!
l'OR OFl’ICllil. USE ONLY

importance of this deposit, added that his department had recently appealed to
international companies to proceed with broader prospecting in this region
where they confirmed the presence of ell basins. After recalling the recent
discoveries of gas and oil deposits. particularly in the Tnza region and off
hssaouirn, Monssa Sandi indicated that Morocco's efforts are now oriented to-
ward increasing the drilling: in depth by over 4,500 meters. estiaating that
"the chances for oil discoveries are proportionate to the effort agreed to in
this area." King Hassan ll. an APP dispatch frol Rabat recalls. recently
stated that Morocco was going to begin exploiting its oil resources before
next March. However. he did not go into detail as to which of the deposits

discovered would be put into exploitation. [Text] [Paris MARCﬂEs TROPlCAUX
AND MEDITERRANBENS in French 29 Dec 78 p 3555] 8946

COPYRlGlr: Reno Mercux et Cie. Paris. 1978

C50: 4400

53
ron orncm. as: can
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

TUNISIA

OPERATING. CAPITAL BUDGETS UP FOR 1979

Paris HARCNES TROPICAUX ET HEDITERRANEENS in French 19 Jan 79 pp 129-131
[Article: "Tunisia's 1979 Budget")

[Text]

I. The State Budget

On 28 December 1978 Law No 78-59 constituted the finance bill for fiscal
1979 and Law 78-60 bore on the capital budget for the same fiscal year.

A. The Operating Budget

The total of expenditures authorized by the finance lav exceeds by 15.5
percent that of the preceding fiscal year. that is. a higher rate of in-
crease than that of the Gross Rational Product [GNP] at current prices
(see HTH of 2‘ November 1978. p 3085). Prom 561.2 million Moroccan
dinars (one Moroccan dinar equals 10.60 French francs. approximately)
this amount rises to 625.1 million dinars. The increase of 83.9 Iillion
dinars involves the instrumentalities of the public services (49.2 mil-
lion dinars), arrears and contingencies (14.6 million dinars), and in-
terest on the public debt (16 million diners).

Direct taxes are raised by 16.7 percent compared to 13.6 percent for in-
direct taxes and 9.1 percent for local dues. As for revenues from oil
products. they are up by 6.1 percent.

The budgetary balance is practically the same. The ordinary budget allo-
cates 163.5 million dinars to the capital budget as against 120 million
dinars in 1978. that is, a coverage of 37.4 percent of capital outlays.

Credits pertaining to current expenditures of state agencies with an in-
dustrial and commercial nature and endowed with a supplementary budget
are set at «0.4 million dinars. Revenues and expenditures of public en-
terprises have been set at 89.7 million diners.

5"

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

0. The Capital Budget

The law setting the capital budget determines both the state program credits
(162,256,600 diners). pledged credits (380,950,000 dinars). as well as pay-

ment credits (383,500,000 dinars). Capital funds total 383.5 million dinars.
up by 9.6 percent compared to the revised level of 1978 (350 sillion diners).

Following repayment of the debt, the available margin tones to 327.5 million
dinars. that is. an increase of no sore than 8.1 percent. The fact resains,
however, that this level calls for an important effort backed by the reduc-
tion of operating expenses and the increased mobilization of current reve-
nues.

Recourse to outside capital is estimated at 110 aillion dinars cospared to
nearly 101 million diners in 1978.

The allocation of so-called capital credits is established with a concern to
favor the productive sectors and to limit infrastructural investments. That
is why a slight increase in direct investments (up 4 percent) and a rise in
financial operations (up 12.6 percent) usre approved.

Revenues of the State General Budget
(in millions of Moroccan diners)

 

1978 1979

1. Ordinary revenues:
Direct taxes 111.1 129.6
Indirect taxes 302.66 363.9
Imposts 11.0‘ 12.0
Revenues from the state domain and fro. revenue-

yiclding state services 6.10 10.1
Revenues from financial interests and profits of

state enterprises 95.31 _ll3.5
Miscellaneous products 15.0 16.0
Total Title 1 541.2 625.1
2. Capital funds:
Contribution of the ordinary budget 120.0 163.5
Allocated tax revenues 17.5 19.5
annstic loan funds 92.0 101.0
Surplus of the Postal. Telephone and Telegraph Service 7.5 9.5
loan funds and foreign gifts 131.0 110.0
Total Title 11 368.0 383.5
Total Titles I and II (general budget) 909.2 1,008.6

55
iron ontcm. use outr
Brenkdoun of the Budget by Departments

(in thousands

1?
resident of the

rine Minister
rice

:ign Affairs
:rior

lonsl Defense
aning

:nce

astry. Hines

asrce
[culture
[plent
Isportation
:iona

ions! Education
Icr Education
: Research
:rnation
:ural Affairs
lie ﬂealth
lal Affairs
:h and Sports
raditures

of Moroccan dinars)

State Budget

(operating)

1978 1979
709 770
2.470 2.720
5.470 5.920
6.571 5.250
9.598 10.730
35.483 60.900
35.163 40.300
1.532 1.670
195.237 227.175
5.117 2.590
- 3.355
31.815 36.100
13.200 14.670
6.172 6.330
118.300 110.700
-- 28.050
5.865 6.757
6.262 0.845
66.130 51.662
10.563 11.860
8.583 10.016
3.000 3.000
551.200 625.100

Capital Budget

(equipment)
1978 1979
50 --

988 628
250 200
1.400 870
1.000 650
9.950 7.870
23.500 22.171.
174.300 177.200
69.893 57.509
270 600
-- 119
19.600 19.513
30.700 38.900
1.990 987
26.500 8.589
-- 16.791
216 169
1.649 1.080
9.700 14.100
150 71
1.600 1.315
A 4.32
355.757 370.866
FOR OFFICIAL USE OMLY

Budgetary Capital Expenditures
(in millions of Moroccan dinars)

1978 1979
Total 350 383.50
including
Direct invest-eats 161 167.5
Financial operations 162 160.0
Repayment of the debt 67 56.0

The 1979 budgets of nest of the ainistries show a drop compared to 1978 with
the exception of that of the Ministry of Equipment.

As regards financial operations. the approved anount totals 160 million
dinars. This figure aakea it possible to support the productive sector
by insuring the necessary funds for it for the realization of its invest-
ments program:

Financial Operations
(in millions of Moroccan dinars)

1978 1979
Agriculture and voter 29.3 35.8
Mines 7.8 10.6
Energy 6.0 21.6
Manufacturing industries 26.5 22.3
Transportation 15.1 22.7
Tourism 16.9 10.6
Housing 20.0 20.0
Sanitation 6.0 6.5
Thermal power 0.6 0.5
Family planning 2.6 2.3
Occupational training 2.8 6.0
Miscellaneous 10.6 3.7
Total 162.0 160.0

I]. The Administrative Budget

The year 1979. third year of the execution of the Fifth Tunisian Economic
and Social Develop-eat Plan for 1977-81, is designated as the year for

the revamping and revision of certain choices. In fact. the plan's take-
off occurred under hardly favorable conditions because of the difficulties
in marketing Tunisia's major export products (edible oil. phosphates and
byproducts. and textiles), the deterioration in the country's terms of
trade. the insufficient rainfall and social demands.

57
Ion ontcm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The aggregate economic plan approVed for the year 1979 has the following
features:

1. Growth of the Gross National Product at 6.9 percent.

2. increase in public and private consumption of 6.2 percent (national
savings rate of 20.8 percent).

3. Total investments of 852 million diners at current prices.

6. Increase in exports of goods and services at the rate of 7.8 percent
in volume (11.8 percent in value) and an increase in imports at a rate of
5.7 percent in volume (10.6 percent in value). This would result in a
deficit of 285 million dinars in current transactions in the balance of
payments.

5. The creation of 65.200 jobs in the nonagricultural sectors.
A. Gross National Product

The prospects of production during 1979 make it possible to extimate a 6.9
percent growth of the GNP in real terms. This estimate reflects a decrease
in the rate of growth compared to 1978 (8.9 percent) and is explained by the
prospect of a lower production growth rate in the agricultural sector (up
3.2 percent) followed by a decline in the sector of agricultural and food
industries {down 2.8 percent). It is expected that the other sectors will
grow at an overall rate of 8 percent, which may be brought about by an in-
crease in the manufacturing industries other than food (up 16.5 percent)

and notably construction materials and mechanical and electrical industries.

in a general way the various sectors of the economy apparently should ac-
count tor the following shares in the increase of the GNP:

Growth rates in percent*

1977 1978 1979

Agriculture and fishing - 8.9 6.7 3.2
Hines + 2.8 - 3.6 12.0
Hydrocarbons 11.6 11.1 7.1
Electricity 6.6 - 3.7 9.7
Manufacturing industries 6.2 11.3 8.8
Construction and public works 10.5 9.6 6.3
Transportation and telecommunications 16.6 10.6 7.7
Tourism - 8.1 6.6 6.2

* Source: Hinistry of Planning

58
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Thus. then. some sectors seen to fall short of target compared to the
estimates of the plan. They are agriculture. because of weather condi-
tions: mines and textiles. because of export difficulties; hydrocarbons.

because of the delay in the putting of planned new facilities into pro-
duction.

1. Agriculture and fishing.--A grouth of 3.2 percent is pro-
jetted for the agricultural sector overall on the basis of prudent hy-

potheaes regarding weather conditions and the estimate of olive produc-
tion:

Agricultural Production
(in thousands of tons)

1978 1979
Cereals 900 1.000
Olives 625 600
Citrus fruits 200 170
Potatoes 105 120
Tomatoes 280 320
Meet 187 195
Milk 270 300
Sugar beets 80 600

increases in production are expected in market garden crops (up 8.9 percent).
livestock raising products (up 6.2 percent). fishing products (up 6.3 per-
cent). and cereal crops (up 10 percent). but their effect would appear to

be offset by the poor harvest of olives (500.000 tons compared to 625.000
tons in 1978--doun 36 percent).

2. Hines.--In this sector the value added should increase by 12
percent in real terms. uhich reflects a drop of 3.6 percent compared to
[978. The production of phosphates reached no note than 3.6 nillioa tons
in 1978 (estimates of h.l million tons for the same year). but reactiva-
tion is anticipated in 1979 with 6.3 million tons. The production of iron
may increase by 2.9 percent (to 360.000 tons) while that of nonferrous
metals may see a rise of 22.7 percent thanks to the entry of a new zinc
mine into full production (22.000 tone).

3. Energy.--The administrative budget anticipates an increase in
the value added of this sector in the order of 7.7 percent in real terms:

1978 I979
Crude oil (thousands of tons) 6.800 5.200
Gas (millions of cubic meters) 256 290
Refining (millions of tons) 1.1 1.35

59
FOR orncuu. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The production target in terms of volume (up 15 percent) was not reached
in 1978 when it comes to the two products. gas and crude oil. undoubtedly
because of the delay in the development of three essential projects.

As for electric power. its production is slated to increase by 11.3 per-
cent.

4. Manufacturing industries.--As far as these industries are con-
cerned a growth rate of 8.8 percent is anticipated in 1979 compared to 11.3

percent in 1978. The industries other than food are expected to advance at
the high rate of 14.5 percent.

Estimates for 1979 regarding growth rates (in percentages) stack up as
follows:

1978 1979

Z 1

Agricultural and food industries 13.9 - 2.8
Construction materials industries 19.8 30.2
Mechanical and electrical industries 15.0 13.8
Chemical industries 16.9 9.2
Textiles and leather industries 0 11.3
Lumber, paper and miscellaneous industries 18.1 13.5
All manufacturing industries other than food 10.0 1b.5
All manufacturing industries 11.3 8.8

The growth rate of the construction materials industries (30.2 percent) may
be justified by the entry into full operation of two new cement plants. As
far as textiles are concerned. the latest agreement with the European Eco-

nomic Community would suggest that the recession in effect since 1977 may
be partially checked.

5. Transportation and communications.--The prospects of this sector
are as follows: A 9 percent increase of production in terms of volume (as
against 7.8 percent in 1978); a 7.7 percent rise in value added in real
terms (10.6 percent in 1978). Production is expected to grow at a rate of
8 percent in the various modes of transportation. with the exception of

maritime transportation for which a growth rate of 1k.3 percent is antici-
pated.

6. Tourism.-The established estimates are based on a rise in ac-
commodation capacity of 2.000 beds (66.097 in 1978 and 68.097 in 1979) and
the consolidation of the improvement of the occupancy rate (39.2 percent in
1979 compared to 18.7 percent in 1978) so that the number of nights spent
in hotels by patrons would increase from 9.2 million in 1978 to 9.6 million
in 1979. corresponding to the arrival of 1.15 million tourists. Revenues
from this sector may reach a total of 173 million dinars of which 160 mil-
lion would be in foreign currencies.

60
ran omcm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

0. investments

The administrative budget for 1979 brings out a step-up in the investment
effort to which both the public sector and the private sector are slated

to contribute. An investment total of 852 million dinars at current prices
is anticipated and represents 30.9 percent of the GNP (750 million dinars
and 30.6 percent of the GNP in 1970). This figure is up by about 13 per-
cent conpnred to 1978 and is significantly close to the projections of the
plan (067 million dinsrs).

The table below indicates the breakdown of the aggregate package among the
various sectors:

investments by Sectors
(in millions of Moroccan dinars)

1977 1978 1979

l. Agriculture and fishing 70.5 90.2 109.0
2. Mines 26.5 35.3 33.6
3. Electricity 35.6 38.2 59.0
6. Planning 21.7 28.0 33.7
3. Hydrocarbons 66.0 58.0 86.5
6. Manufacturing industries 126.1 166.9 168.0
7. Transportation 116.0 99.6 130.8
8. Tourism 10.6 17.2 9.5
9. Housing 91.5 113.0 127.0
10. Equipment 77.5 96.8 91.0
11. Other 5.0 10.8 - 6.1

Total 665.0 750.0 852.0

Delays were noted in the realization of a certain number of major projects
initially planned for hydrocarbons (exploitation of offshore gas. Isis oil
deposit. refinery. etc) and for manufacturing industries (ammonite plant,
iron and steel. etc). ﬂat the effect of these delays is in part offset by
the re-evnluntion of investments in other sectors.

The structure of the projected investsents has been modified as a result
compared to the projections of the plan. The manufacturing industries and
hydrocarbons evidenced a weakening so that the share of the productive
nroiectu is no longer 66.5 percent as anticipated by the plan but only 61.7

Pl‘fi‘cl‘ll 0

Here. by sectors. are the major projects planned for 1979:

1. Major hydraulic projects: Dams of Sidi Salem. Sidi Sand and Joumine;
outfitting of the irrigated areas; improvement of the herd.

61
ron omcuu. use our
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

2. Expanded capacity of the ore-washing facilities.

3 and 5. Oil exploration and development of the exploited deposits; build-
ing of the Sousse thermal power station and startup of the Italian-Algerian-
Tuniaian gas pipeline.

4. Hater lines (Tunis-Cap Ben) and Sahel; water supply project of the Cebu
industrial region.

6. Tobacco plant of Kairousn: western and central cement works; phosphated
fertilizer complex.

7. improvement of the highway infrastructure; construction of agricultural
trails: building of a Gafsa-Gabes railroad line.

8. Acquisition of two aircraft. two ore boats, and two coastal vessels.
9. Construction of 24,000 housing units.
10. Urban water sewers; rural development.

C. Financing

In order to realize the level of necessary investments an appeal was launchd
for the mobilization of resources. both domestic and foreign. National sav-
ings will have to increase by 17 percent so that their contribution to the
financing of the administrative budget may be raised to 65.5 percent (64.5
percent in 1978).

The government has directed its budget toward a limitation of operating ex-
penses and an increase in the share of budgetary savings assigned to the
operation of the capital budget. This assistance will be increased to 163.5
million dinars (120 million dinars in 1978), that is. a rate of coverage of
capital outlays of 37.6 percent (36.3 percent in 1978).

As far as outside funds are concerned, assistance of 355 million dinars is
required. This corresponds to a net inflow of 285 million dinars represent-
ing a rate of outside financing of 33.5 percent. The external debt would be
increased to 1.222 million dinars (1,002 million dinars in 1978).

The prospects for 1979 evidence a balance of payments involving a balance of
trade showing a deficit of 660 million dinars (up 8.5 percent compared to
1978): a balance of services evidencing a surplus of 1&5 million dinars (up
10.7 percent); and a balance of current transactions closing with a deficit
of 285 million diners.

62
Iron orncm use on!
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Priority Action

The year 1979 will have to witness the implementation or failure of the
goals set and to consolidate the growth process. The actions and measures

to be taken. involving all the sectors of economic activity, consist of the
following:

1. The promotion of the industrial sector by the consolidation of the in-

tegration of existing industries and the reinforcement of the effort of
.identification and realization of projects.

2. The promotion of the agricultural sector by the realization of major
hydraulic dams.

3. The improvement of the balance of payments by stimulating exports and
limiting the importation of nonessential consumer goods.

h. The consolidation of jobs and promotion of incomes.

COPYRIGHT: Rene Horcux et Cie., Paris, 1979

2662
630: 5600 END

63
FOR OFFICIAL US: ONLY