FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10443

9 April 1982

Near East/North Africa Report

(FOUO 14/82)

FBIS FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPBS publications contain inforntion primrily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. mere no processing indicator is given, the infor-
Imtion was sumarized or extracted.

Unfaniliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 11.8. Goverment.

COPYRIGiT LAVS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING WHERSRIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED “EREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BB RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
PERSIAN GULF AFFAIRS

Status of Women's Rights in Gulf States Enmined
(AL-"AT” AIP'MI, 12-18 Feb 82) oooooooooeoeoooooooooo

AIﬁBBlA

Energy Policy Repercussions Examined
(MARCHES TROPICAUX ET MBDITERRANBENS, 12 Feb 82) ........

EGYPT

Fahmi: Egypt Must Avoid Signing Any Document of Autonorv
(Isma'il Fahmi Interview; AIr-WATAN AIr'ARABI, 26 Feb-

’4 m 82) OOOOOOOCIOOOOOOIOIIOOOODOOOOOOOOOOOOOIOOOOII...

IRAN
Ahvaz Liberation Front Leader Cannents on Oppression of Arabs
(Ahuaz Hshmzd Hasheri Interview; AIr-HATAN AL-‘ARABI,
12-18 Feb 82) COCICOOOOOCQOOOOCOOOC.000000000003000000000
KUWAIT
Investment Strategy Discussed
(AIPHATAN AIP'MI, 5-11 Feb 82) oooeooooooooeooo'ooeeee
SUDAN
Internal, External Forces Affecting “W's Survival
('Isam 'Abd-al-‘Aziz; AL-HATAN AL-‘AEABI, 11 Her 82) ....
SYRIA

Al-Asad Brothers Feud Analyzed
(‘11-me AIP'MI, 5.11 Mar 82) OOOOIIIOOOIDOOIOOIOOOOO
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500050019-1

FOR OFFICIAL [BE ONLY

Deterrent Force Activities Criticized
(mum AL-‘AHABI, 5-11 Her 82) .........

TUNISIA

General, Economic Budget Reviewed
(HARCHRS TROPICAUX ET mums, 12 Fe?

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500050019-1
STATUS OF HOHEN'S RIGHTS IN GIL? STATES man
Paris AL-UATAN Ala-'ARABI in Arabic No 261, 12-18 Feb 82 pp 18—21

(Article: "They Refuse to Give Her the Right to Vote, to Travel or to Drive;
The Argument between Conservatives and Liberals: Gulf women Are a Burning
Political and Social Issue")

[Tat] In Kuwait the parliament has refused to give women the right to vote.
In Saudi Arabia, His hinence the lllufti has issued a decree prohibiting them
from driving. and in some Gulf countries. women are not allowed to travel
abroad to complete their education. A correspondent from “PHAT“ AL—‘ARABI
who visited the Gulf recently wrote this report about the political and
social aspects of the Gulf women's issue in the midst of the controversy
between traditional. conservative institutions and liberal social circles.

The women of the Gulf are a touchy political and social issue. They are part
of a confrontation that is sometimes silent and at other times vociferous
between conservatives and liberals in the Gulf countries. They are always
in the line of fire, a fact which educated, learned Gulf women know quite
well.

They join in the current controversy and have ambitions and hopes to see to
fruit ion their progress and liberation. However, the majority of average,
uneducated or slightly educated women are satisifed and content with their -

marginal role in a society dominated by men, both in political and religious
institutions and in the spheres of labor, economy, business and intonation

media.

Even educated, learned wonen who participate in this controversy do not
hasten change, for they know the limits of their abilities and prefer to let
:ime play its role, for opportunities will undoubtedly come in succession
for them to achieve their rights and equality with men.

Perhaps the Gulf women are slow and deliberate because Islam itself upholds
the woman's posit ion in the family and in social institutions, gives her
respect as a mother and a wife and guarantees her divorce and inheritance
rights.

There are also unwritten, inherited traditions and customs which make women
realize that their ability to asks changes is limited. Gulf society is still

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL usr. ONLY

a society of tribes, bedouin and large families where men are dominant. A
woman's role in this family society is still the role of a wife who devotes
her life to housework, rearing children and taking care of her husband. He
is the only man in her life and she does not talk to any man other than her
father and brothers. Associating and meeting with men are prohibited. How-
ever, the religious establishment issued a decree last April permitting a
suitor to see s girl's face. but forbidding forcing her to any against her
will. Nonetheless, young men are turning away from marriage because of the
high cost of dowries, and polygamy is on the wane. One can thank the tele-
phone, the only means of contact. for a quick conversation between the new
generation of boys and girls, far removed from the eyes and ears of others,
or perhaps for a date to meet at a distance in the supermarket or library.

The tremendous speed of development in Gulf society, which has skipped the
lengthy, traditional stages gone through by other societies. is the cause of
all the controversy surrounding the role and position of Gulf women. The
abundance of oil has spurred a great leap in economic development, but has
not yet succeeded in imposing social and political development at the same
speed because of tradition and customs.

The Gulf women's problem is that they see the econony and development growing
faster than social freedom. They find themselves in the society of the modern
city with all the housing, cars, videos and televisions provided by civili-
zation, but their role in society is still backward and marginal and does

not parallel the role of their Arab sisters in countries which are still
economically underdeveloped, such as Egypt and Syria. It is also not com-
parable to the role of women in a Gulf country like Iraq, where women have
obtained all their rights, and educated women carry out this role in complete
freedom under the auspices of the government. without any opposition from
conservative institutions.

Confusion and Concern of Gulf "omen

This confusion about the Gulf women's position in political and social forces
and the concern about their political and social role dominate the thoughts
of educated. learned Gulf women today.

In spite of all this and despite the common characteristics of Gulf women,
there are minor differences in their vials from one Gulf country to another.

In Saudi Arabia for example, women are hostages in the home before and after

marriage, even when they have obtained the highest level of education; they
devote their lives to rearing their children. and if they go out, the aha
covers than from head to toe.

This almost total absence from productive society makes them the subject of
controversy between conservative institutions and liberal circles in society.
The liberals want to attract educated Saudi women to the work force to fill
the deadly unoccupied time that the women have and to make up the shortage
in the Saudi labor force. However, the conservatives disagree and see the
role of women as Islam defines it, in the home, and believe that their
associating with men at work is temptation for both men and women.

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Saudi women are in the line of fire in this ongoing argument. In general,
they are satisfied and do not see themselves as repressed socially. The excep-
tions to this are educated, learned women who have completed secondary or
higher education. They are anxious for change, but know that they cannot
challenge customs and powerful traditional institutions. They are optimistic
that change will come slowly, but through persistence. One indication of this
is that the field of banking has been opened for then, as the teaching and
nursing fields were earlier.

The lack of opportunities for social activity and jobs make Saudi women spend
their lives waiting-waiting for the husbands that their mothers try to find
for then or that their fathers will choose for then. This waiting may be
filled by means that the electronic revolution has afforded--videos, tele-
visions and radios. They prefer waiting to breaking with tradition and cus-

toms. They do not want to bring shame upon themselves, their families or their
fathers.

Saudi women do not go out often. If they do go out, they go in their cars
which are driven oy their husbands or the family driver. To go on a trip,
they must consult a religious advisor, and going out does not mean associat-
ing with men. If they have to frequent public buildings, banks or universi-
ties, they must use special entrances, nesting with men in any way is for-
bidden and the punishment for fornication is death, if there is a witness.

The ruling family in Saudi Arabia takes taking a noderate position on the
argument which occasionally heated arguaent about women's role in society.
In general, they encourage a gradual widening of opportunities for women,
but this within the franework of religions law, tradition and customs.

King 'Abd al-'Aziz, the founder of Saudi Arabia, took the first step in this
respect. his son, King Faisal, reaffirmed this position when he argued with
the people of Baridah in the Najd who were protesting the opening of a girls'
school in their city. He asked then to find one Koranic passage that forbade
educating women. He was supported in this stance by his wife 'Iffa, who
deserves the credit for opening the first modern girls' school in 1956. She
still oversees a number of social and educational centers dedicated to
serving Saudi women.

Although the trend toward opening up opportunities for women grew after the

death of King Faisal, it has slowed down since the spread of the Salafi move-
ment.

His Eminence Shaykh 'Abd al-'Aziz Bin Bar, the Mufti of the Hahhabi sect
followed in Saudi Arabia, recently issued a religious decree forbidding women
to drive cars or hire foreign drivers or servants of a different religion.

In Qatar, where the Hahhabi sect is also followed, the law does not forbid
women to drive, but they do not do so out of tradition, while in Kuwait,
women take pride in driving their Mercedes.

In the United Arab Emirates, women live outside the society of men, but do
so more freely than their Saudi or Qatari sisters and less freely than their
sisters in Kuwait and Bahrain.

3
FOR OFTNC1A1.USE(MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In Kuwait, you find yourself in a completely different society. The Kuwaiti
women you see are often unveiled in the markets, government offices, compan-
ies, banks, shops and universities. They wear the most up-to-date European
fashions, yet the parliament recently refused to give them the right to vote--
vhich it did for the second time in less than 10 years--so astonishing and
angering them that they protested and demonstrated. Here, women are the
ladies of the house and of society also, they enjoy wide social influmzce,
their voices are audible and courageous and their power to challenge men is
stronger in a more flexible and lessstrict society.

Education Is Universal, but Associating with Hen Is Generally Forbidden

Education is one of the true instruments of change which work like f its in
straw. The first girls' school in Saudi Arabia was founded just a quarter

of a century ago. The credit for this goes to 'Iffa, the wife of King Faisal.
Today the number of girl students has grown to 700,000, and the number of
female university graduates will reach 40,000 in 1985.

Associating with men is forbidden in the various levels of education in-‘ZSaudi
Arabia "because it deprives women of their femininity," as the conservatives
say, and schools are usually surrounded 5y high walls. A sharply-worded
warning was issued recently to students and young men against gathering in
front of girls' schools and harrassing female students. Statistics show that
50 percent of Saudi young women finish elementary school, 60 percent attend
junior high school, 20 percent reach high school and a minority attend
univers it ies .

There are four vocational institutes for women in Saudi Arabia giving them
the opportunity to study home economics, nursing, accounting and secretarial
skills. At 'Abd al-‘Aziz University in Riyadh, female students can study
arts and sciences, including medicine, taught by female teachers. If a male
teacher is required, he will give his lecture through closed circuit tele-
vision. There is a plan to combine the scattered university colleges in one
location, but mixing of the sexes will of course raisin forbidden.

However, female students in the UAE can travel abroad for their education,
usually at govertuaent expense. In Bahrain, education for women began in the
1920's. Coaducation there is cor-non, especially at higher levels. Two-
thirds of the 3,000 students at Qatar University are females. This develop-
ment occurred when Shaykh Khalifa Bin ﬂamed al-Thani sent his two daughters
to study at the university. In Kuwait there are a quarter of a million male
and female students in 600 schools. Sixty-five percent of the 20,000 students

attending Kuwait University are fmnle, and this large university is co-
educational.

A Diversion and Profession, but Forbidden

Although the field of education is wide open to Gulf Women, the work force

is relatively closed. Nonetheless, work would fill the deadly empty time
that educated, learned women have and is the goal for practically every
educated or university graduate woman. In Saudi Arabia, for example, it is

1;
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
a diversion more than a source of income, but is not available except in the
fields of education and nursing, which the government mcourages, and in the
banks for women which new number 13.

Educated Saudi women are anxious to work, but husbands forbid it, families
refuse, society does not approve, religious institutions fear that they will
be tempted and the Saudi labor law of 1970 forbids women from working if they
would be forced to associate with men. There are inspectors who make sur-
prise visits to companies and institutions to arrest women who work as secre-
taries. Fines are large, sometimes as much as 60,000 riyals.

Despite these restrictions, Saudi wonen are gradually moving into the work
force. The trend for the future is women working in the private sector by use’
ing the wealth that they have attained through inheritance, for example.
There are scores of specialty shops for women which were opened and are
managed by womel, such as those for fashions, perfumes and "nouvesutEs," as
well as beauty salons and perhaps even restaurants. There are respected
veiled women in this field, such as the wife of Mr Nabih Pir'awn, who has
opened a shop to sell objet d'art, and Mrs Layla Yusuf Bin Ladin. who has
opened a shop for Yves Saint Laurent fashions.

Female students go to their schools or universities wearing the most fashion-
able Buropean clothes under their abas, including jeans, as do working women.

The debate about women's working is furious. The problem is no longer "Should
women work?" but "What should they do and in what field! Would their working
limit the increasing imnigration of foreign labor, especially from Asia?"
Even the present 5-year development plan encourages opening the work force to
women, and it is expected that the number of working women will reach 120,000
in 1985.

Saudi women have recently entered the field of journalism. Some are editors,
authors, writers and editors-in-chief for women's magazines. However, pic-
tures of women are forbidden in Saudi newspapers and magazines, although
love poetry is not. Arab and other foreign newspapers are forbidden if they
exceed the standards for publishing pictures of women.

Saudi men generally, as fathers, brothers and husbands reject the idea of

women working and consider it a step down for thanselves and their wives
socially, aside from their being influenced by the religious establislnent,

which rejects working with men in any way.

University women in the UAE are able to find jobs, but finding husbands is
much easier. Women in Bahrain are 20 percent of the work force, and the
government encourages them to work. The percentage of women in the govern-
ment has grown to 40 percent, and women even serve on the police force.
Women there generally receive equal pay with men, even if they do not have
equal opportunities for promotion to the upper levels of employment.

Educated Bahraini women are very courageous, despite their respect for the
conservative family systc. They can go out un wiled if they wish, and
husbands have started accepting the idea of their wives' working to help
them economically.

5
FOR omcm. us: ONLY
In Qatar businessmen petitioned the government several years ago asking that
women be encouraged to work, but the government is still hesitant to approve
the petition. The conservative families in a stall society guided primarily
by wahhabi ideology refuse to accept working women, and therefore, woman
here constitute only 2 percent of the total work force.

The picture is completely different in Kuwait. women here make up 12 percent
of the labor force, and there is no discrimination between men and women

in government. “omen receive equal pay with men, have equal opportunities
and can be promoted to the highest positions, becoming undersecretaries,
directors general, foundation directors or factory managers.

For the above reasons, Arab women in the Gulf countries are one heated aspect
of the political and social issues in the area and are always the subject

of debate and argument between proponents of the old and proponents of what
is net, between the-nonservative, traditional school and the liberal, emanci-
pated social and political circles.

The future of the Gulf rests to a great extent on this argument and debate,
as a society which will progress politically and socially to the same degree
that it has progressed economically. In the framework of this future, the
position and role of Gulf women will be defined socially and politically.

Foreign Women in the Gulf

Arab women who come from Egypt, Lebanon or Syria and non-Arab women who come
from Europe to the Gulf countries to work or to accompany their husbands
will feel a jolt. They must follow the customs and traditions that Gulf
women are bound by, especially in Saudi Arabia, as far as complete separation
from the society of men and wearing the abs, which covers the face and body
down to the feet.

Arab women usually follow tradition and accept this situation, while European
women rebel, especially if they have been subjected to punishment in the pub-
lic street by the stick of a volunteer who will not hesitate to hit a woman
on the back if her face shows, part of her abs is turned up or if she bends
to check whatever she is buying and part of her body shows.

In Saudi Arabia the issue of associating with men is very diffith for
European women, even in the large hotels where nixed swirling was forbidden

recently.

The problem of European women has increased with the influx of tens of
thousands of Europeans and Americans. An interim solution has been found to
this problem by the creation of closed societies, or "ghettoes," for these
conunities where women can exercise a large part of the social freedom
which they enjoy in their own countries.

Within these closed societies, women mix with men, go out unveiled and also
work with men. However, if they go to the local Saudi market, they must
follow tradition.

Nevertheless, some European women rebel, unable to tolerate these restric-
tions, and return to their countries without their husbands.

COPYRIGHT: AL-HATAN AL-'ARABI 1981

9882 6
680: “W30" son OFFICIAL use ONLV
ENERGY POLICY RBPBRCUSSIONS EXAMINBD
Paris MARCHES TROPICAUX ET MBDIIBBRANBENS in French No 1892, 12 Feb 82 p 359-360

[Text] Coming a few days after the signing by France of the contract for the sup-
plying of gas by the USSR, the agreement with Algeria for delivery of liquefied
gas has given rise to passionate commentaries and criticism. Relations between
France and Algeria have apparently retained their emotional content on both sides

of the Mediterranean. In the case of both agreements, it is a matter of a politi-
cal decision on the part of the French Government, despite the embarrassed explana-

tions of the prime minister. Although commercial conditions obviously cannot be
ignored, it is therefore essentially this policy that must be judged and free this
standpoint, the contract with Algeria must be approved because it translates into

fact the stated determination of the government to make overtures to the Third
world.

It is not customary to officially divulge certain details of such agreements, par-

ticularly prices and indexing clauses. Consequently, the precise cost of the
Soviet gas was not given by the French Government. Nevertheless, official state-

ments and indications from various sources enable one to have a rather accurate
idea of the terms of the contract.

The latter provides for an annual shipment of 5.1 billion cubic meters for 20
years, adding to the b billion cubic meters supplied by Algeria in accordance with
the 1964 and 1972 contracts. The first deliveries under the new contract should
come in March, but it will not be until the end of the year that the annual
"cruising" rate of 5 billion cubic meters will be attained. About half of the
deliveries will be carried by Algerian methane tankers.

The prlce that will henceforth apply to all gas from Algeria is reportedly $5.10
per million BTU (FOB price).* This is the figure given by the MIDDLE EAST ECONO-
MIC SURVEY published in Nicosia. which is generally well-informed, and by the

French and international press, including the FINANCIAL TIMES of London. To the
price leaving Algiers, one must add about $1.00 for transport and regasification

in France. The cost price for France is reportedly about $6.00, very close to the

 

7—I million BTU (British Thermal Unit) represents 293 kilowatt-hours and 25 cubic
meters of gas in the gaseous state. 1 cubic meter of liquefied gas represents
600 cubic meters of gas in the gaseous state or some 7,000 kilowatt-hours.

FOR1OFFIJAI.USE(INLY
IV“ Wfﬂlhh U8!— UNI.‘

price charged by SONATRACH for contracts now being carried out but which the
French Gas Company (GDF) never accepted, content to pay an advance on the increase
demanded by its supplier. Recognizing the worth of part of SONATRACH's arguments,
the French Gas Company did in fact agree, through a 1979 rider, to arrange a
price higher than that in the contract. According to the general manager of
SONATRACH, Yousfi, the new price should apply retroactively to deliveries made

for the past 2 years, but Yousfi gave no details on how the retroactivity would
be calculated.

The price will be indexed on rates for eight crudes to be chosen by common agree-

ment between Paris and Algiers. Finally, payment will be made by the French Gas
Company (86.5 percent) and the French Government (13.5 percent).

French Minister of Foreign Relations Claude Cheysson said that the price was
"higher than certain long-term contract prices, but lower than that of certain
deliveries now being made." The general manager of SONATRACH said, for his part,
that the price "is at the level seen on the international market."

Why should this contract, whose financial conditions are not particularly favorable
to France - according to semi-official estimates, the price is some 15 to 20 per-
cent higher than the price of the contract signed with the Soviets - nevertheless
be considered beneficial to France, despite the fact that the agreement in no way
forces Algeria to use all or part of the "surbonus" accepted by Paris upon the
purchase of French products or to go to French firms in order to carry out its
equipment program? The response is obvious: for political reasons whose advan-

tages will, in the opinion of the French Government, largely make up for the
financial effort made.

First of all, France has long wanted to diversify its sources of energy and reduce
its dependency on oil for security reasons. It now depends 50 percent on imported
oil, mainly from the Near East, a particularly unstable region and one with vul-
nerable lines of communication. The government wants to reduce that oil dependency
to 42 percent by 1985 and 32 percent by 1990, by which time oil imports should
represent only 75 million tons, compared with 93 million today. This concern for
security is one of the constants of the French policy and was shared by previous
governments, which planned for the development of alternatives to oil and began
the now-completed negotiations with the Soviet Union and Algeria.

For the French economy, the "fallout" of the Algerian contract must be substantial,
independently of the startup of the Hontoir-de—Bretagne gas terminal, representing
an investment of 1 billion francs and unused since its completion in 1980. With

a capacity of 10 billion cubic meters, it will not only receive gas going to

France. but 2 billion cubic meters that will cross French territory on its way to
Belgium.

There was concern immediately following the signing of the contract regarding the
will of Algerian authorities to entrust contracts to French industries. On a Febru-
ary, Beregovoy, secretary general of the Elysee, stated that the contracts already
"acquired" numbered about 15, according to a list drawn up by the Ministry of

Foreign Trade, and that they represented some 12.5 billion francs. This statement
was disputed by members of the opposition and part of the French press, emphasizing
that Algeria has entered no agreement to give counterparts to France and that the

ITIIIDFIICIAI.IISI:(HULY
firmness, not to say ruthlessness, of Algerian negotiators in the past did not
augur well for the future. These doubts are being wiped away. One after another
came official announcements of the successful conclusion of an agreement with
SOFRETU [expansion unknown], a subsidiary of the RAIP [Independent Parisian Trans-
port System], for the study and engineering on the Algiers underground railroad
for 150 million francs, the signing of a contract for 525 million francs with
TECHNIP [expansion unknown] and Saint-Cobain for construction of a plate glass
plant at Jijel, while NBCIH [expansion unknown] obtained a 450~million~franc con-
tract for an aluminum anodization and extrusion plant at Stress. In evaluating
this contract, one must therefore consider fiscal income received by the French
Treasury and the social security for workers extended to French personnel, as well
as the cost of unemployment compensation thereby avoided.

That the signing of these initial contracts with French firms has closely followed
the signing of the gas agreement means that Algeria and France share a determina-
tion to give their relations a much broader significance than that of commercial
trade carried out strictly according to the rules of the market.

lt is this determination, clearly stated by the French Government, which has
clearly resulted in the successful conclusion of negotiations underway for 2 years,
negotiations that were particularly hard and during which French authorities went
far in trying to understand the Algerian point of view. Andre Giraud, minister of
industry under the previous government, revealed in a Parisian daily that he had
already accepted the principle of the equivalence of the price of gas with that of
oil, increased by a quality factor, one of Algeria's essential demands.

In the definition of its policy regarding Algeria and developing countries in
general, the French Government was inspired by long-term considerations.

The first stems from an analysis of the results of France's foreign trade in recent
years. Our commercial trade with other industrialized countries regularly results
in a net deficit. In contrast, we register a positive balance sheet (20 billion
francs in 1980, essentially due to manufactured products) in our trade with devel-
oping nations, trade that represents one-fourth of our foreign trade. According
to all commonly accepted projections, the economies of those developing nations
must, in the years to come, enjoy stronger and more rapid growth than those of

the industrialized countries, meaning that their import needs will offer promising
prospects for our own exports. It is therefore in our own interest to broaden

our commercial relations with them and to assure ourselves of solid positions for
the future, trying to join with them in defining a real co—development policy.

Speaking more generally, France is convinced that the world will not emerge from

the current economic crisis except by helping the development of the Third World.
This conviction, based on an economic analysis and not moral considerations, is

also shared by many independent economists, specialists from the major interna-
tional institutions such as the IMF and the World Bank, and by World Bank President

Clausen himself, who said, at the time of his Paris visit in September, that the
development of economically less advanced countries is in the interest of the West.
That is what the French president has constantly repeated since he came to power,
trying to persuade the heads of other industrialized countries in Ottawa and Cancun.
Going further, Hitterrand tried to translate into action the French determination
to help improve the operation of trade between the North and the South by upgrading

9
FOI!OIFHJA1.USE(NNLY
I U“ U. I l‘rll‘la v9... Ul‘ul

the natural resources of countries which derive most of their exports from one or
a handful of basic products, as is the case of Algeria.

This is the essential reasoning behind the French decision to sign the contract
with Algeria, which for its part will derive substantial profits through greater
returns frou its gas exports, not only to France, but obviously, with other buyers
as well, particularly Italy, buyers that will probably be forced to accept condi-
tions comparable to those in the French contract. Should one then accuse France

of having failed Western solidarity? If the French analysis is correct, the other
industrialized nations that buy Algerian gas will find in Algeria a solvent partner
whose equipment and consumer goods needs are enormous, as are those of any develop-
ing country whose population is growing at a very fast rate.

Finally, the new relations that France has tried to establish with Algeria fit into

a much broader political picture. An average—size power, it can becone a pole of
attraction for Third World countries desirous of reducing their dependency on the

two superpowers. As the new secretary general of the United Nations, Javier Perez
do Cuellar, recently said in an interview with a French daily, "One undoubtedly

expects, more than in the past, that France will be a link between the North and
the South. Nothing would be more pleasant for me than to see that hope confirmed."

COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux et Cie Paris 1982

11,464
cs0: «519/130

10
FIHICNWHIJAI.USE(N‘LY
FAHHI: EGYPT MUST AVOID SIGNING ANY IDCUHKNT 0h AUTONM
Paris AL-HATAN AL-‘ARABI in Arabic No 263 26 Feb - 4 Mar pp 33-35

[Interview with Former Foreign Minister, Isma'il Rah-i, by Al-HAIAN ALP'ARABI
in Cairo; date not given]

his trim jacket. They have said of him that he was the engineer of Egyptian-
American relations and that he was the skilled architect who rebuilt the
bridges of the relationship between Egypt and the United States after years
of hostility and lack of trust. In fact, they have gone further than this
and have said that he was America's man in Egypt and, in fact, was the man
through whom Washington was able to move Egypt from the stage of absolute
hostility to the stage of a strategic alliance with Sadat's Egypt....until he
surprised the whole world with his famous resignation in opposition to
al-Sadat's visit to Jerusalem. To the same extent that the resignation was a
surprise and embarrassed al-Sadat's regime, it also made the chair of the
Egyptian Foreign Ministry an undesirable seat for a multitude of politicians
for almost 2 years. He made his resignation a tradition the basis of which
were laid down and reaffirmed by the late Muhammad Riyad and which reached its
peak during Camp David when Muhammad Ibrahim Kamil also resigned (see his
important interview in the previous issue of ALPUIIAN AL-‘ARABI.

Isma'il Pahmi appeared to get very emotional when we asked him about the
mistakes he should have avoided when he was Egyptian foreign minister; his

diplomatic phrases with a golden polish turned into punches and bullets,
relating his achievements and successes during those critical years in the life
of Egypt. and then closed off the dialogue. saying: "Enough, I'm tired."

However, we did not get tired during our important interview and here is the
text of our dialogue with Isma'il Fahmi:

[Question] If the Israeli withdrawal from the occupied part of Sinai is
completed of 25 April, how do you view Egypt's relationship with the Arabs on
the one hand, and with Israel on the other, and how do you view the map of
relations in the area in the post-April stage?

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Answer] the key to building bridges in the Arab world is in Egypt's hands.
Consequently, the issue depends on what decisions Egypt makes from now on and
until the date of the complete Israeli withdrawal from Sinai on 26 April. I
mean, to be precise, if Egypt concentrates on implementing the clauses of the
peace treaty with Israel fully, some bridges can then be established, not all
bridges with the Arab world. To put it more clearly, if Egypt signs no paper
of any kind involving autonomy before 26 April, then a start can be made in
building bridges with the Arab world. If Egypt puts its signature on a
document involving autonomy in any form and under any name whatsoever in the
form of general principles or special principles or with any approach of any
kind accomplished as an American-Israeli departure, then I do not believe
that bridges can be restored with the Arab world. The reason is clear--Egypt
signed a unilateral peace treaty with Israel involving only the Sinai. Any
evaluation of the Camp David agreement outside this context is to be regarded
as incorrect on the level of politics or international law. The overall
framework of autonomy was originally, as is well known, Begin's plan which he
presented to Carter in November 1977 and then raised in al-Isma'iliyah when he
came to visit Egypt for the first time. It is an Israeli plan, and Begin's
plan in particular, designed ultimately to enable Israel in stages (over a
period of years) to wipe out Palestinian rights, the Palestinian entity and
any process whatsoever that would help to form the Palestinian state or help
to enable the Palestinian people to exercise its right to self determination.
It is clear that since the visit of the late President al-Sadat to Jerusalem,
Israel has been continuing intentionally-~not before the visit--to take steps
which it had never taken since the 1967 war, including, by way of example

but not confined to this, increased building of settlements, plans to annex
Jerusalem and Golan and the process of changing the military government system
to a civil system by applying Israeli law in the West Bank and the Gaza Strip
and changing the geographic and demographic character of the Bank itself.
These are actions which Israel had not been bold enough to take and, in fact,
had not taken any of them whatsoever before al-Sadat's visit. Why? For the
obvious reason that before the visit, the southern front of Israel was open
because Egypt was in the battle with its power, strength, army, potential

and radiating influence. After the visit and after the peace agreement was
signed, Egypt was no longer present as a threat to Israel from the south, the
strongest front that Israel could fear.

80 Israel secured the southern front by Egypt's total departure from the Arab
cordon and from posing a threat to Israel. This, as everyone knows, was
Israel's goal in making peace with Egypt and, to be more precise, removing
Egypt from Arab unanimity, from Arab solidarity and from the Arab front, so
that the entity would collapse since the Arab entity cannot stand without
Egypt except through a new miracle.

Israel succeeded in this as the result of the unilateral peace agreement it
signed with Egypt (Article 7). So, Israel's fundamental goal behind peace
was to remove Egypt from the world and isolate it from the Arab world and to
destroy the Arab structure from the bottom. For this reason, we find that at
the start of the peace process and after the signing of the treaty, Israel
was affirming that there was no connection between the peace treaty and
autonomy, while at this time Egypt was so emphatic that there was such a

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

connection that it appeared as if it would not sign a unilateral peace.
However, Israel has recently begun-to be precise, during the past 6 months--to
revive the linkage theory. This means that it urgently wants to obtain
Egypt's signature to a document involving autonomy prior to the withdrawal.

If Israel is successful in this, with support from the United States, it would
mean that Egypf had left the Arab world. Why? Because Egypt will have

signed a document involving the future of the Palestinian people and it cannot
sign anything or speak in their behalf. This means that Egypt would enable
Israel to obtain this document and to begin the policy of de jure or de facto
annexation over S or 10 years, and Israel would confront the Arab world. the
western world and the Arab Islamic world with the statement that Egypt had
signed so why all the emotion and clamor since it is the largest Arab country.
So. Israel would begin to implement its policy under the protection and
umbrella of the Egyptian signature, interpreting it as it wished, and then
would enter the mazes of interpretation and vague. elastic formulae.

This objective finds acceptance in American policy in the sense that it is in
America's strategic interests in the Middle East, and in the Arab world in
particular, for Bgypt not to return to the Arab world nor to restore solidarity
to the Arab world not to have an Arab-Egyptian front established that would
cope with problems and discuss them from the Arab angle and from the standpoint
of Arab interests. we, therefore, find that the United States has suddenly
begun to get active after having been snoring in a deep slumber. The American
secretary of state has come to the area twice during one month and is beginning
to talk about new plans and about hope of coming up with a plan on autonomy,

or at least general principles, shortly before or during the withdrawal stage.

So. the issue is clear. The important thing for Egypt is to digest all this.
We know precisely the nature of the factors hidden behind this rapid movement
and heavy pressure which I expect to increase. If we assume that Egypt-—
justly--were to refuse to sign any agreement whatsoever on autonomy or even
the Israeli withdrawal from Sinai, there is no American, non-American or
Israeli power that could coerce Egypt into signing any document of any sort
concerning the Palestinian people following the withdrawal.

[Question] How do you think Egypt can get out of this dilemma?

[Answer] By not signing anything and by urging Israel to apply and respect

its obligations regarding Sinai, an international agreement or treaty that seat
be implemented and adhered to unless one of the parties shows bad faith. The
agreement is international and has absolutely no connection with the subject

of the Palestinian autonomy agreement.

[Question] You have profound and lengthy experience in dealing with American
foreign policy. In fact, Isma'il Pahmi built the bridges of Egyptian-American
relations after the October 1973 war. Given this experience and this role,
how do you evaluate the policy of the Reagan administration compared with the
ecurse of the Carter administration?

[Answer] During the era of Nixon, Pori or Carter or even now. there has been
no pure American policy on solving the Middle East crisis. Anyone who claims

13
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

otherwise knows nothing at all. Here Reagan to have a policy on solving the
Middle East problem, he would have presented it. Where is this policy? If
we go back to the platform of his Republican party during the campaign, we
find it to be a disaster for the Middle East crisis. Anyone, even from the
American side, who claims that they have a policy is evading the truth. I
challenge any American whomsoever who claims that they have a definite
American policy in the area, based on the principles whica America advocates
in other areas and for other peoples. The fact is, America has at no time
presented a specific policy. I used to deal with them on this basis, that
is, on the basis that everything they submit and propose had been discussed
with the Israelis and that they had reached agreement with then on it and that
it was originally an Israeli plan on which the Americans have put some
embellishments and justifications. presenting it as an American plan. I know
that it was not originally an American plan because there was not originally
any American policy.

[Question] Is the lack of this specific American policy toward the area in
itself a policy or is it a real inability to formulate a specific policy in
the area and with regard to the Middle East crisis?

[Answer] We can view it as a policy and an inability simultaneously. It is

a policy in the sense that America has felt and still feels that Israel is its
extension in the area, strategically, militarily and psychologically from the
standpoint of regional political geography and from the standpoint of political
geography internationally. All of America‘s committmenta to Israel are quite
clear, starting with what Egypt promised Israel and America's full committment
to it which was primarily against Egypt and going on to the rapid deployment
theories and military strategic cooperation agreements. The basis of all

these things is that there is a policy supported by the Pentagon people which
states that Israel is America's extension in the area and ultimately America
can depend on no one but Israel. So, it is a policy. At the same time, it

is an impotence since America is now unable to freely reach a decision. Things
have developed to the point that any American decision on the Hiddle Bast
crisis, supposed to emerge from Washington, now is issued from Tel Aviv. The
United States cannot move unless it is completely confident that Israel is
satisfied with this movement, in total and in detail, even if it is an interim
movement.

American-Israeli Fraud

[Question] In the light of this analysis, what is the importance of the
abrogation of the strategic cooperation agreement between America and Israel?

[Answer] Nothing was abrogated. This alleged abrogation is nothing more than
an American-Israeli fraud. The agreement stands. This decision to suspend it
temporarily is a public relations decision to influence the Arab world. as
usual, and to polarize it. Secondly, because the Americans knew that the
proposal to impose sanctions on Israel would be submitted in the Security
Council where Washington has the right of veto, they did what they did from
the public relations standpoint. Behind the scenes, they apologised to Israel
and gave it sufficient guarantees, following the same approach as when they

11‘ I
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHGAL USE ONLY

postponed delivery of acne aircraft to Israel after the boabing of the Iraqi
nuclear reactor. So, it is a publicity operation with a specific. dedicated
objective which has absolutely no effect nor will it have any effect on the
American-Israeli strategic relationship.

[Question] Can Egypt continue to ignore the Soviet role in- the peace process?

[Answer] The Soviet role can absolutely not be ignored and America itself
cannot ignore it. It is not in the interest of the Arab parties, including
Egypt, to ignore the Soviet role. The Soviet Union is a great power like
America and has more than one overt and covert policy in reaching its
objectives and to protect its strategic objectives. If we move beyond the
boundaries of the regional coapetition in the area between the Soviet Union
and the United States to the competition between the two big powers cu the
broader scale, we find that the relationship between the two is very close and
there is no separation between them. You may renenber when Carter began
preparing for and advocating the Geneva conference (before he did this with
the parties to the dispute), he consulted with the Soviet Union and cane up
with the announcement which was released on 1 October 1976 and which defined
the overall framework of the conprehensive peaceful solution based on the
perspective of the two big powers. In other words, they reached agreement
between themselves on the Anericans' initiative without consulting with the
parties to the dispute. The gene of the big powers in the Middle East is an
inseparable part of their gene on the broader international scale.

[Question] So America will go it alone in the area?

[Answer] Wrong, wrong. That is not in the interest of the Arab countries or
of Egypt itself. Rather it is in their best interests that there be a non-
aligned country, a country with its own capabilities and its own international
weight in the area and that country is Egypt. It is able to play the gene of
benefitting from both big powers and to deal with then at the sane tine on the
basis of preserving the international balance in the area. It is not essential
that the benefit be equal as it is very difficult to deal with the two
countries on the sane level of relationship.

[Question] Has Egyptian policy at any time able to operate under this balanced
formula?

[Answer] We almost accomplished that at one period of tine but special
circumstances then arose that were not conducive to this. During the time of
the late leader, Jamal 'Abd-al-Ussir, Egypt threw its weight on the Soviet
side and during the time of Anwar al-Sadat, particularly in his last years
after I resigned, Egypt threw itself completely into the arms of America.

[Question] Do you see in the Egyptian-Indian-Yugoslav dialogue that took place
recently any attempt to revive and renew the nonaligned novenent and to revive
the Egyptian role in it?

15
ma omcut use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Answer] The nonsligned movement is passing through a very grave and sensitive
phase. The reason first of all goes back to fundamental changes in the
countries that pioneered the nonsligned movement. Radical changes have
occurred in Egypt, India and Yugoslavia which have had an impact on the
nonaligned movement and its philosophy. Therefore, I feel that the nonaligned
movement needs a new conference designed to evaluate and improve the movement
itself. Bilateral conferences will only be a repetition of what is happening
in the UN or in other international conferences. Therefore, as I view it,

the nonaligned movement needs new preparatory conference of no less importance
than the first conferences.

[Question] Do you feel that the faltering of the policy of nonalignment now
goes back to the lack of clarity of the formula itself or to the fact that

the movement was born in conditions of the cold war and has not adapted itself
to the formula of international detente or international relaxation as a new
characteristic?

[Answer] No political movement whatsoever on any level whatsoever can dis-
regard existing international political conditions. The era of colonialism
had its own values and manifestations. During that time, colonialism gave
birth to the reasons for solidarity among the small countries and this made
peoples "explode" toward independence and freedom and to sacrifice themselves
and adopt clear and explicit positions. The independent sources of wealth

of peoples, the exploitation of the peoples themselves and international
monopolies--all these things were in themselves sufficient to strengthen the
solidarity of the peoples of the Third World, making them forget their local
and regional disputes to counter the sense of being threatened. As part of
these specific components, a new system was born called nonalignment, a
system created by changes and crises of that time. When that time with its
own conditions ended, a sort of lsssitude occurred, as if the world had
become clean and free of the approaches involving subordination, exploitation
and colonialism, despite the existence of something called nee-colonialism,
colonialism wearing various hats, a Russian hat, an American hat, a French
hat and a British hat, as well as the hat of technology and exploitation of
the need for it on the part of countries of the Third world and the
exploitation of the resources of small countries in a cowetous, delicate
manner.

We say again that nonalignment needs a new preparatory conference, not for
reaching decisions but to study the nonalignment philosophy, what has happened
to it and what methods and decisions need to be adopted to cope with
developments, both negative and positive. in order to reevaluate the policy

of nonalignment. This is what I advocate.

[Question] What is the thrust of Egyptian policy toward Africa? Is it an
attempt to escape the isolation Egypt is suffering in the Arab homeland?

[Answer] I view any talk about Egyptian—African relations from the political
standpoint as constructive. Africa needs Egypt politically, and as a model
as well, in the sense that if the African countries see that Egypt is a truly
nonaligned country and gives special status to neither the Soviet union nor

16
903(ﬂﬁﬂClALlEEZONLY
the United States, Egypt becomes a model to the emerging African countries
politically, especially if these countries find that Egypt still retains its
power to radiate influence both in Africa and among the Arabs. If Egypt
loses some or part of this ability to radiate influence in the Arab world
and to adhere to it. in this event the African countries will search for
another lighthouse or in another direction.

Besides the political and psychological aspects, we will find that from the
practical aspect the African countries need real technical and technological
assistance. This is what used to happen under the aegis of the leadership of
Jamal 'Abd-al-Nasir. During this time, Egyptian-African relations received
very large appropriations-to be precise, millions of dollars-both in.the
budget of the Foreign Ministry and the Presidency for development of bilateral
relations in the form of missions and scholarships. There were Egyptians sent
there, working in all fields as technicians and experts so that Egypt could

in fact be with the African on the farm, in the factory and at the hospital.
This was the Egyptian-African connection and there is no other approach. A
simple comparison of numbers of heads of state and foreign ministers who

used to visit Cairo in those years with the number during the last 5 years
reveal some alarming indications; the issue is not merely one of attending
African conferences. voting with their countries and giving speeches and
reiterating slogans about incontestable facts.

[Question] How do you view the Arab League outside Cairo and the Arab summit
without Egypt?

[Answer] The issue is not whether it is outside or in Cairo. Let us suppose
that the Arab League still were in Cairo with the situation between the Arab
world and Egypt just as it is now. Of what value would the Arab League he?
The effectiveness. the positive or negative character of any regional
organization depends on the actions of the countries which formed it.

Here the Arab League now in Cairo, would it be reasonable for it to hold any
meeting whatsoever there? Even were some meeting held, could any decisions
emerge from it if they were not in agreement on the ABC's of Arab policy?

Egypt in itself is the cause of all this. There is not doubt about that. The
reason for the deterioration of the Arab situation is attributable to Egypt

and to its departure from the Arab ranks. If the Arab world is unsuccessful,
we are a part of it. No one can claim wisdom unless we are with the Arabs.
Egypt claims that it established the Arab League and that there is no Arab
world without Egypt. The story is not words. mere words. but action and policy
and adopting positions. I would add that even if I combined with by brother
and my colleague on an error. when I tried to correct the error, I would have
to consult with him, talk with him. Al-Sadat should have consulted with his
Arab brothers, not adopt a position and communicate it to al-Asad at the last
moment. It is not essential to get their views but they have to be put in

the picture. Al-Sadat did not do this. After he returned from Israel and

from giving his speech in the Knesset, he could have called for convening an
Arab summit conference before the situation deteriorated any further. he could

17
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

have convened an Arab summit conference and related to the kings and heads of
state what happened, that he had challenged Israel, as he claimed, on its own
ground, that this was the situation and that we must reach agreement, unite and
impose a comprehensive peace on Israel. Al—Sadat did not do this although he
announced that he would convene an Arab summit conference after he returned
from his visit to Israel. He was unable, no, was unwilling to do so. Those
are the facts.

[Question] If we can go back to the year when you had the Egyptian Foreign
Ministry, what are the mistakes which should have been avoided at that time
and which led to what we are facing now.

[Answer] In my days, when I was minister, there were no mistakes, not one. I
would remind you of an example to show you how our policy was. Go back with
me. I am ready and I challenge you or anyone in this regard. He achieved

the first disengagement and Syria got a little upset. We worked out the
disengagement on the Syrian front and then accomplished another one and Syria
also got upset. Then al-Asad came to Cairo after Syria had been so vexed and
we were able to reach agreement on establishing a unified political con-emu
between Syria and Egypt. I then went to Khartoum with al-Asad and al-Sadat
and we were able to bring Khartoum into the agreement on the unified political
command between Egypt and Syria and the agreement became tripartite between
Egypt. Syria and Sudan. In my time, we signed the first, and most significant
mutual defense treaty between Egypt and Sudan to run for 20 years, something
that had not happened in Egypt during the past 50 years. During my days '
there. Egypt did not sever relations with any Arab country. Then there was
what Egypt saw approved at the Tunis conference in November 1977. At that
time, the Arab countries approved everything to the letter that Egypt
advocated. Those at the conference praised the resolutions and said that

the credit went to Egypt's representative. This was before al-Sadat's visit
to Jerusalem. In the past this is how Arab solidarity was. For this reason.
I could not take these positions and then go back to Cairo from Tunis and get
on a plane to go to the Knesset. What a thing to happen. That's not Isma'il
Pahmi. I'm not like that. It was Isma'il Fahmi who worked out the program
for Egyptian-Sudanese integration and then the Sudanese treaty, the basis of
everything you see today that is unprecedented in Egypt's history, even in the
days of the King, the days of the British and after the British and the days
of the leader, Jamal 'Abd-al—Nasir.

Lebanon? who stopped the fighting in Lebanon? Egypt. He held a six-party
conference in Riyadh and from Riyadh we returned to Cairo. In Cairo we held
the Arab League conference which brought stability in Lebanon and formed the
Deterrent Forces and....and....in Cairo.

There's more. The first Arab—African conference for economic cooperation in
the history of the area and of the world was held in Cairo. It was a highly
successful and constructive conference at Egypt's initiative in which all the
Arab and African countries took part. The record speaks for itself. Up to
now they study him and what Isma'il Eahmi did. This is history. It will tell
you that no one did this except Isma'il Pahmi. I can‘t go any further into
detail. Egypt did not sever relations with any country whatsoever, be it Arab.

18
FOR OMCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

African, European. American, Latin or even the Soviet Union at any time
whatsoever, even after we abrogated the treaty of friendship with it. Al-Sadat
abrogated the treaty with Moscow but Egypt did not break off relations. I met
with Gromyko in Sofia 6 nonths after abrogation of the treaty and I went to
Moscow and then Brezhnev was coming to Cairo. The decision to visit Egypt was
reached in January 1975 with Isma'il Pahai, no one else. It had been 10 years
since he visited Egypt. After this the nan became ill and I met with him in
the hospital. After the abrogation, it was decided that he would cone to
Cairo.

[Question] how do you view the Saudi role in bringing peace to the area?

[Answer] The Saudi role is fundamental and is to be regarded as the focal
point in the area. It is a natural transformation following the slackening of
the role of Egypt. It is quite natural for Saudi Arabia, with its potential
and its special relations with America and the West, to be a vital and positive
focal point. The issue is: How should Saudi Arabia exploit this situation?

I think that it is important for Saudi Arabia to continue to play its role.
Prince Eahd's plan should be pushed, with a possible rephrasing of Paragraph 7.
I don't know with any certainty what the Arab world can do without Saudi
Arabia. Saudi Arabia paid for the rearming of Egypt in cash and without any
argument whatsoever, even after the Egyptian-American aircraft deal (it was
abrogated after Camp David) for which Saudi Arabia paid in full. It paid the
full cost of the French aircraft for Egypt. Any eras requested by Egypt were
paid for by Saudi Arabia and the Gulf countries without argument and the sums
of money were not recoverable. These are facts attested to by history. The
statenent that Saudi Arabia or the Gulf countries were reniss with regard to
Egypt are wrong. It should suffice for us to recall that Saudi Arabia and the
Gulf countries were also helping Egypt economically. when Egypt wanted to
replace the short-tern high interest debts with short-term low interest debts,
Saudi Arabia and the Gulf countries agreed to earmark a sort of balance
totalling $2 billion to be collateral for Egypt in the international narhet.
This happened and we cannot deny it.

Yes. 1ndeed....and as of now...they say that Saudi Arabia is helping Egypt,
they do say that.

The interview ended when Isma'il Pahni said: ”Enough....l'm tired." he stood
up and we shut off the tape recorder.

COPYRIGHT: 1981 AL-HAIAN AL-‘ABABI

8389
C80: 4504/226

19
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
umz usemuon mom mm concurs on oppmsrou or mass
Paris Mfume: AL-hmr in Arabic No 261. 12-18 Feb 82

[Interview with Secretary General of the Arab Front for the Liberation of
Ahwaz mbnud Pusher-i, by Ahmad Hafiz in Paris; date not specified]

[Text] The Arab Front for the Liberation of Ahwaz recently organized a trip
to Europe to explain its cause to Western public opinion. AL~UAIAN ALPARABI
net with the eeebers of the delegation in Paris and had an interview with
Mahmud Husayn Hashari, the front'a secretary general, regarding the libera-
tion of Ahwaz. the Iraqi-Iranian Her and the Arab situation in general.

He shook hands and I studied bin closely. His face bore genuine Arab features,
and I was surprised at how well he spoke Arabic.

Question: Is it true that the Iranian authorities have endeavored to wipe
out Arabic in Ahwaz, or is that merely a rumor?

Answer: It is not a rumor; it is the painful truth. Ever since 1925 when the
forces of.Enperor Reza Pahlavi, the father of the late Shah, arrived in the
Arab principality of Ahwaz. which was then ruled by the last of the Arab
rulers Shaykh Khaz'al, Persian colonialism has spared no effort to wipe out
all traces of Arab culture, including language, customs and traditions. It
has even replaced the Arab style of dress. This went on during the reign

of the Shah--both the father and the son--and it continues in such the same
fashion under the Khoneyni regile. There are harsh laws banning the establish-
ment of any school for teaching the Arabic language. Moreover, the laws

ban the speaking of Arabic, which is the language of the Koran, the message
of Isles and the voice of heaven on earth, despite the claim of the rulers
of Iran that they are the "defenders of Islam."

Question: Nevertheless, nany Iranian nationals. including those of both
Persian and Arab extraction, speak Arabic. You are the beat exanple of this.
Is that notso?

Answer: This is true; however, it is due to the fact that many Iranians
have emigrated to neighboring countries. especially Iraq, where they learned
Arabic in the schools and universities. The people of Ahwaz also do their
best to teach Arabic to their children at hone since it is a crime to speak

20
ROI.0FNKJAI.USEIJNLY
PUK UFI'ULIAL LDI‘. ONLY

it in public in the streets or markets. To sun up, the people of Ahwaz have
a very intense passion for their national language. This is what has helped
to keep Arabic as the primary language in every home in Ahwaa.

Question: What did you cone to do in Europe?

Answer: Our mission is limited to acquainting officials and public opinion
in Europe with the cause of the Arab people of Ahwaz. Actually, this is not
the first trip to Europe. A delegation representing the front previously
attended the conference on "The Struggle in the Arab out," which was held

in Spain in thy 1980. Now we are in Paris, after having completed a success-
ful trip to Austria where we took part in the "World Youth Conference" and
net with a number of Austrian officials. In Paris, we have held talks with
officials in the Gaullist Party. We also held other talks with the Franco—
Arab Friendship Society and some of the French liberation organizations in-
side France. Our trip will also include a number of other European capitals,
following which we will return to Ahwaz.

what About Ahwaz and the Arabs?

Quest ion: That was in regard to your activity in Europe. What about the Arab
world?

Answer: Bonds of friendship and understanding link us to our sister country
Iraq. It is the neighboring Arab state and the one to which we have joined
in close bonds for some tine. Pbreover, we are fighting against one eneay,
that is. the Iranian authorities represented by the Khoneyni regime. As for
the Arabs in general, we have contacted Arab organizations, starting with the
Arab League, and we have submitted memoranda to the recent Arab Summit Con-
ference in Fez and before that of the Ta'if Conference.

Question: what exactly are your basic demands? Are you, for example, demand-
ing secession from Iran and the formation of an independent state?

Answer: Our basic demand is the right to self-determination. He are an Arab
people occupied by the Iranians. Re are living just like any other occupied
people and we are treated as second-class citizens in Iran. Therefore. we
are demanding the right to our own self-determination. Our strategic goal is
the establishment of a progressive national Arab society in the Ahwaz through

the liberation of the land and the people.

Question: Is the Arab Front for the Liberation of Ahwaz the only political
organization involved in political activity inside Ahwaz?

Answer: At the present tine, yes, although political organizations had been
established before the Arab Front at different periods. All of them were
aimed at liberating Ahwaz from the Persian occupiers.

Question: Why had Arab public opinion not heard of the danand to liberate
Ahwaz until the outbreak of the Iraqi-Iranian "at?

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Answer: The fact is that the Arab people of Ahwaz never stopped demanding
this, nor have they ever stopped trying by every means to liberate them-
selves from Persian imperialism ever since the Persians tobk our territory
in 1925 and abducted Shwkh Khaz'al, the last Arab ruler of the region. Our
Arab people in Ahwaz have never stopped struggling against their occupiers
and the usurpers of their land. Less than three months after the Iranian
occupation in 1925 the "Youth Revolution" broke out against the occupiers.

It was so celled in reference to the supporters and helpers of Shaykh
Khaz'al who launched this revolution. They were called the young people.
However, this revolution was met by the harshest typo—of violence, mass mur-
der, and deportation. Nevertheless, Ahwaz witnessed a second revolution in
the very next year (1926). This was known as the "Bani Tarf" Revolution. Then
came the "al-Hoveyzeh" Revolution in 1936, the "al-Hirav" Revolution of 1960,
the revolution of Shaykh Rasib, the son of Shaylth Khaz'al, in 1953, and the
revolution of Shaykh Abdullah in the following year. In 1946 there was the
"al-Nussar Revolution" and in the same year came theifirst of the political
party organizations. Some of the young people and the tribal heads formed a
party known as el-Sa’adah Party and were based in Abadan. They sent letters
and envoys to the Arab countries. However, the Persian authorities, in
coordination with the British Petroleum Company and elements of the Iranian
Communist Party, attacked the headquarters, killed at least 30 Arabs and put
an end to this group. Beginning in 1956, revolution consciousness began to
take on a new form of organisation. In that year the "Arabistan Liberation
Front" was established. This was followed by the "Popular Front for the
Liberation of Ahwaz" in 1958. The Popular Front for the Liberation of
Arabistan was established in 1960. but changed its name to the Ahwaz Libera-
tion Front. In 1968 the Popular Front for the Liberation of Ahwaz appeared.
and so on, until the "Arab Front for the Liberation of Ahwaz" was formed. It
issued its first historic statement on 22 September 1981.

why Did the Revolution Pail?

Question: But all these revolutions and political organizations have not yet
achieved the aspirations of the Arab people in Ahwaz? What are the reasons?

Answer: (Another member of the delegation, who was obviously completely
conversant with the history of the revolution in Ahwaz, responded. He pre—
f erred not to give his name, for security reasons.) There are many reasons,
but they can be amused up as follows:

-- these revolutions did not rely on a comprehensive precision organization;

-- morale was weak and material, educational and other resources were also
weak and limited;

-- revolutionary activity was limited to smll specific geographic areas
and did not encompass the entire region;

-- careful and attentive revolutionary thinking was not used as a guide for
keeping the revolution on the right track since positions must be determined
and conditioned by events;

22
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I'UI UPI'ILIAL Ubl'. ONLY

-- the establishment of these revolutions occurred when the Arabs in general
were weak and off balance, with the result that these revolutions lacked any
possible material or moral support which they might have had from Arab
organizations which existed at that time;

-- the Persian government did not hesitate to use any method, no matter how
harsh or barbaric, to stamp out all elements which were suspected of belong-
ing to these groupings;

-- the authorities relied on a plan of penetration into the ranks of the
strugglers by planting suspect elements inside the organizations to strike
them from within.

lie went on: In any event, we in the Arab Front for the Liberation of Ahwaz
are attanpting to learn from all the mistakes which were col-titted. he are
doing our best to take advantage of the new realities in the arena of the
struggle in order to create a spirit of revolution among the ranks of the
masses in Ahwaz. Perhaps what we have done so far against the Khoneyni regime
provides reliable and reassuring evidence that the policy which we are pur-
suing to achieve our goals is sound.

Question: Throughout Iran at the present time there is more than one movement
opposed to the regime. What are your relations with than. Specifically, what
are your relations with Abol-Hasan Bani Sadr and Mas'ud Rajavi?

Answer: We are meeting on a common ground with all movements which are cur-
rently opposed to the Khomeyni regime regarding one strategic goal, that is,
the downfall of the Khomeyni regine. From this standpoint, there is no dis-
pute with Bani Sadr, Rajavi or others. The important thing is to bring down
the regime; after that, we can talk about everything.

Black Wednesday

Question: But did you not join up with all the Iranian parties and organiza-
tions in the struggle to bring down the Shah before that? And did you not
form an alliance with various factions of the "Islamic Revolution Under the
Leadership of Khomeyni," which turned against you as soon as it achieved
victory? Could this situation not be repeated?

Answer: Naturally‘it could be repeated. However, in order for us to reach
the strategic goal, we must work in stages. The first stage is the downfall
of the Khomeyni regime, which is against us, which does not hesitate to em-
ploy all sorts of bloody measures against us, and which has rejected all
attempts at persuasion and dialogue which we began with than on the eve of
the take-over by Khomeyni. He asked for no mre than the recognition of our
national rights as Arabs, such as permitting us to teach Arabic to our sons,
reviving our Arab traditions and customs, and developing the Ahwaz region
with economic and social projects, because this region, unlike mat regions
in Iran, suffers from severe backwardness, poverty and illness, despite the
fact that it is one of the richest regions in Iran. Iranian oil, for the
most part, comes out of the land in Ahwaz, but the people of Ahwaz do not

23
won oman use ONLY
benefit from the bounties which God has bestowed upon it. Thus we find our-
selves in the situation described by the Arab poet:

Like camel dying of thirst in the desert,
While carrying water on its back!

The Khomeyni regime has rejected all forms of dialogue. In fact. he refused
to meet a delegation of inhabitants of Alan: which went to congratulate him
on the success of the revolution and the end of the Shah's regime; inatud.

he sent us Rear Admiral Adhnad thani, the col-ender of the navy, who com-
mitted mass murder and wreaked havoc in every region. He was no sore merciful
to us than the army of the Shah before hin. Khomeyni crowned his methods

and his crimes with the bloody and harsh slaughter connitted by his "Revolu-
tionary Guards" in the city of al-HuhaI-areh [Khorrmhahr] on Black Rednesday,
25 Hay 1979. On that day, more than 100 Arabs were killed and 500 were
wounded. In addition, a large number of thn were arrested, most of whom
were executed later.

The official from Alma: added: If you go to Ahwaa and to the areas which have
not yet been liberated, you find that the policy of persianization which the
Shah pursued against Arab nationalism was pursued and is still pursued even
more harshly and more viciously. One example will suffice: the people of
Ahwaz, as I said before, were not allowed to speak Arabic; moreover, they were
not allowed to learn to read and write since only very few schools were
opened in the region. They were also forbidden to wear the Arab style of
dress, and the Arabs were deprived of the right to work, hold positions, or
own property. In addition, comerce and co-ercial dealings depended on-the
native Persians. The Khomeyni regime has already begun to launch organized
campaigns intended to weaken the Arabs economically in the long run. The
government out off the water supply to any areas in the Hoveyzeh sector and
other rural sectors .in the Iraqi border area and they diverted this water to
the areas where Persians lived. Their netl'nds also included the encouragement
of foreign establishments to eXploit arable land and to deprive its Arab
people of its use. In addition, they continue the policy of forcing the
Arabs to emigrate to other areas inside Iran and resettling Persians in their
place .after building than modern villages, including the village of Yardasav
in Hoveyzeh and the village of "The Crown Prince" in al-lhhamarah
[Khorramshahr]. He should also add to this the persistent attempts to re-
place the Arab names of cities and villages with Persian names.

For all these reasons taken together, says the official from Ahwaz, the road
is now closed to any dialogue or any dealings with the Khomeyni regime.
Therefore, our strategic goal is to use every possible method to bring

down this regime regardless of whom we night ally ourselves with. If a new
regime in Iran were to give us our national rights, then there would be no
problem.» If that does not happen, we will continue our struggle until the
end. We are Arabs; we cannot be anything else. We have been in Ahwaz for
hundreds of years. This is what the history books say, and they stress that
there was a strong Arab state in this area throughout history. It radiated
its own distinct culture and it was a strong state. If we were to conpsre
the presence of the Arab and Persian races in Ahwaz, we would find that the

2);
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE. ONLY

Arab race is more deeply rooted, for the Persians came to the area only as
invaders. They occupied Ahwaz as they occupied the Middle East in the days
of their kings Cyrus the Second, Darius and Cambyses until they reached
Egypt. The Arabs lived with the Elamites, who were not Persians. In both
civilization and government, ancient Iraq and Ahwsz had a COIlan history and
were joined by events which were all intertwined by virtue of many factors,
including similar topographical features since the area includes the level
plain between the southern part of Iraq and Ahwaz. "hen the rule of ancient
Babylon ended. there remained Arabs in Ahwaz who had their Semitic laws in
Susah, one of the most important cities of Alma: at that time. When the
armies of the Arab conquest arrived at the time of 'Umar Ibn mttsb, they
found support among the Arabs there since these were genuine Arabs.

All He Know Is Ahwaz

Question: Your country has more than one name; sometimes it is Arabiatan,
at other times it is Khuzistan, and now it is Ahwaz [with Arabic spelling
in text], or Ahva: [Farsi spelling in text] as the Iranians call it. What
is the reason for all the different names, and which is the most correct
one geographically and historically?

Answer: whatever the case, all these names attest to the Arab character of
the region. In ancient times, 3,000 B.C., it was called the "Land of the
Elamites," a reference to the Elamites who inhabited the area; they were Arab
Senites. There is still an area in northern Ahwu called "Elsa" to this day.
As for the word "Aimee," it harks back to several centuries before the dawn
of Islam, when Arab tribes of the Bani Harrah, Al al-Ksthir and the Bani
al-‘Amm came to the region. They established sites and farms and divided
the: up into plots md called each plot a "hawz" and they gave each such par-
cel of land to the tribe whose members farmed it or to the individual who
owned this parcel of land. It was called the parcel of so-and-so, or the
so-and-so parcel. "Haws" is from the root "has" and denotes possession or
ownership of a specific piece of land by an individual. It belongs to him
and is known by his name. The plural is "ahwaz," and this name gained
currency in the area. It is a genuine Arabic name since the original Arab
inhabitants called this land by this name. As for Arabistan, it is a non-
Arabic designation. It is said that the Ottomans, when they controlled most
of the Arab nation, applied that name to the lands of Greater Syria, the Hijsz
and Ahwaz to distinguish them from their own territory. The name means

"Land of the Arabs" and consists of the word Arab, which is understood, and
the word "ostan," which means province or region in Turkish.

In any event, it is a word which indisputably attests to the Arab character
of the area. The Persians used it as an official designation of this region
during the rule of the Safavids and the Qajars :and continued to do so until
1925, that is until Emperor Reta Khan, the father of the late Shah, occupied
it and imposed his military control over it. He then began planning to wipe
out the Arab character of the region and incorporate into the melting pot of
the Persian state. The first step was to change the name of the region from
Arabistan to lmuzistan, since the word Arabistan indicates the Arab charac-
ter of the region and since the word "khuz" has a number of meanings in
Persian. including "al—khuz," which means '-'the place" or "the site." It also

2
FOR Oli‘l-‘ICI L USE ONLY
means faction or group or mixture. Thus the foreign name of "Khuzistan"
was circulated as part of the plan to persianize the area. The original
Arab designation remains Ahwaz, which is the most correct historically,
culturally and socially. when the Iranians do sometimes say Ahvaz [Farsi
spelling in text], the letter "h" is softened because there is no Arabic
"h" in the Persian language.

The Pailure of Persianization

Question: "hat is the Arab population of Ahwaz at the present time and how
large is the area in which they live?

Answer: According to the latest census, which the Iranian authorities con—
ducted im 1962, it appeared that the population of Ahwaz was 10.7 million,
including both Persians and people of other nationalities. The Arabs consti-
tuted 70 percent of the population, that is, there were more than 3 million
Arabs. But those were just the ones who had Persian identification and
Persian birth certificates. Host of the population in the countryside do not
have Persian identity papers. Thus it could he said that the Arab popula-
tion of the region at the present time ranges between 3.5 million and 6
million peoplednhabiting‘ an area of approximately 159,600 square kilo-
meters. It should be noted that the Arab area before the Persians came to
settle it was 185,000 square kilometers. In the framework of the policy

of racist persianization by the government of occupation, it was decided to
cut off part of the territories of the Ahwaz region and join it to Persian
provinces, the provinces of Isfahan, Pars and Khorramabad. “hat remains

is the area mentioned above.

COPYRIGHT: 1982 AL-"ATAN AL-'ARABI

6945
C50: 6606/19

26
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
INVES'MKNT STRATmY DISCUSSED
Paris AL-HATAN AL-'ARABI in Arabic No 260, 5-11 l'eb 82 p 55

[Art icle: "Kuwaiti Investments in Britain Expanding and Diversifying in
Industrial and Financial Spheres"]

[Text] Kuwait is expanding and diversifying its investments abroad by not
limiting them to one industrial country. but dispersing them throughout my
countries and in different financial, conercial and industrial sectors.

The Kuwaiti Investment Office in London is considered one of the most active
and secretive outside Kuwait. It is managed by a group of eminently quali-
f ied British financial experts, the foremost being the two Scotsman, Bruce
Dawson and David Buchanan.

Kuwaiti investments in Britain have multiplied during the last 5 years and
are estinated at about 661 million pounds sterling ($900 million). The
office usually prefers not to help direct or manage the companies in which
it is majority stockholder, and its representatives do not always attend
board of directors' meetings. However, when it is necessary. and in rare
situations, it will exercise its right to vote to prevent transfer of owner-

ship of some of the companies in which it has stock to other companies or
investors.

Th is secrecy and centralisation have helped the office to expand investments
without any clanor in political and media circles, which are usually
sensitive about Arab investments, especially when Zionism plays an inportsnt

role in inciting political and public opinion against the Arabs. Howaver,
financial and industrial circles in general welcome Arab capital and consider
it new blood circulating through the almost dry veins of British industry.

Kuwait's public investments in British stocks and bonds are estimated at

200 million pounds sterling and control a large part of a great nuaber of
real estate companies, textile mills, banks and fuel and electronics distri-
butorships.

In West Germany, [await owns a significant share of the largest German com-
panies and industries. For maple, it owns 25 percent of the KORP STAL AG,

10 percent of the Hetallgesellschaft Ag [Metal Company Ltd.] and 10 percent
of the Daimler-Benz (bmpany.

FOR OFFICIﬂ USE ONLY
I'UI UI'I'ILIAI. U§L UNI-I

Kuwaiti investments are also expanding in the American narket, where they
recently purchased the Santa Fe Oil Oonpany for $2.5 billion, but failed to

obtain 16.6 percent of the Getty Petroleun Company although they offered $1
billion.

Kuwait also owns the Western and Trust Banks in the State of Arizona, which
are valued at $40 million, and owns 10 percent of the Rest German Volkswagen
subsidiary in Brazil.

COPYRIGT: 1981 AL-WATAN Ala-'MI

9882
680: Molt/306

28
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
INTERNAL. EXTERNAL FORCES AFFECTING NUHAYRI'S SURVIVAL
Paris AL-HATAN AL-‘ARABI in Arabic ho 266. ll Her 82 pp bO-bl

[Article by 'lsam 'Abd-al—‘Asiz: "The Game of Chicanery between Hashington and
Khartoum: 'The Palace Coup' Is Coming from Outside the Palace"]

[Text] The question that is being raised today in Sudan is this: when will

Lt Gen 'abd-al-Hajid Khalil return to the presidential palace in Khartoum. not
as vice president but as president? Ja'far Numayri is finished. and the preven-
tive ouster of Khalil has increased Khalil's popularity and "saved" him from
the responsibility of taking part in the new austere economic measures. "The
palace coup" is being postponed. at least this time. from outside the palace.

what has been said about "a palace coup“ in Sudan led by Lt Gen 'Abd-al-Hajid
Khalil has been magnified and re-broadcast directly to the presidential palace.
Maj Gen 'Umar Muhammad al-Tayyib did not have a good relationship with Khalil's
grOup in the army. When Numayri's fears about a blow against him coming from
within his camp increased. al-Tayyib's broadcast news about Khalil's communica-
tions on the side with the Muslim Brothers became clearer. The Sudanese presi-
Jent preferred to begin with his vice president rather than have his own fate
sealed by his vice president.

However. Khalil's political demise did not come about with the decision to
remove him from office. nor has al-Tayyib advanced a step closer to succeeding
Numayri. Despite the close surveillance imposed by Sudanese security on the
home at the former first vice president. a group of Sudanese politicians see
in ‘Abd-al-Hajid Khalil a possible successor to Numayri. Regarding al-Tayyib.
Numayri knows that his popularity in the ranks of the army is at its worst.
and he l8 confident that Hashington which finds Maj Gen al-Tayyib "a suitable
man" may not think of making him president because he lacks the necessary
popularity to manage affairs In the armed forces.

A review of recent events that took place on the scene of power in Khartoum
nillrms that Maj Gen 'Umar al-tayyib "played his hand." or rather played
Numayri's hand. as a professional would. Lt Gen '12: al-Din 'Ali Halik. chief
ul general staff and 'Abd-al-Hajid Khalil's best friend was quickly surrounded.
and a number of "trusted" officers was charged with serving notice to Lt Gen
hudawi. commander of the presidential guard and to Lt Gen Nasr al-Din
al-Muharak. commander of the armored division about the decree to remove them
llum olfice. All of them were then placed under mandatory house arrest.

29
FOI‘OFFKJAL.US£(NWLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

But ior how long will al-Tayyib's fortunes continue to climb? There are limits
which Numayri himself defines carefully, and these cannot be overlooked by
aides. First, he tempts one who is far [from power] to move towards one who is
closer [to power]; then he uses [the former] to get rid of the one who was
close [to him]. sending him to a new “farther" position so he can repeat the
same old-new game. Proximity and distance are measures used in calculating the
distance between the men of the regime and the seat of Numayrl himself.

in Khalil's case the game was more complicated. Despite his limited intelli-
gence. Khalil was able to establish his own following in the Socialist Union.
in the ministry and in the army. Uhen the situation became critical on the
economic scene and Numayri was forced to accept the conditions set by the lBRD.
conditions which began with removing the subsidies on popular foods, the
Sudanese president was faced with harsh choices. He could either accept having
Khalil and his group continue in office. or he could remove him from office and
dismiss his group.

it was obvious that Ja'far Numayri could not accept the continuation of
Khalil's group for a simple reason: the president's position had become so weak
after the outpouring of popular displeasure because of the economic measures
that the existence of a relatively homogeneous group in the highest levels of
power could not be allowed without risking liquidation by that group at an
opportune moment.

Numayri thus chose the second solution: to weaken everybody because he had be-
come the weakest. he removed Khalil from office, disbanded the Socialist Union
and accepted the resignation of government.

it is certain that Numayri thought many times before removing his first vice
president from office. The political moment in Sudan was extremely volatile.
There were demonstrations in the streets, and the voices of the opposition were
being heard even inside state institutions. There was nothing to induce opti-
mism regarding the future of the regime. However, all this affirms the fact
that Numayri chose the road of a calculated risk by making the decision to
remove his vice president from office. he had not been able to postpone this
decision. for every day that went by brought more support for Khalil and his
group.

Pitting People against Each Other

The [act is that the Sudanese president excels in the art of pitting his aides
against each other. At the outset he backed up the communists. and then he cut
off their heads after the coup of ﬂashim al-‘Ata. He cooperated with a division
oi the religious movement and later had airplanes bomb them in Aba island. Then
he began the maneuvers of national reconciliation to cover up later the fact
that he kept the decision making power to himself. He promoted Khalil only to
remove him from office [later]. and he is now promoting Maj Gen 'Umar al-Tayyib
and moving beside him Maj Gen 'Abd-al-Rahman Sawar al-Dhahab. if it occurs to
him one day to remove al-Tayyib from office. Sawar al-Dhahab will be there to
carry out the operation and to get the promotion in preparation for the moment
he too will be removed from office. It is a moment that will undoubtedly come
about. for Numayri does not like to change his habits in the political game.

FORIOFFHJA1.USE(NVLY
This reminds one oi a story about a monkey who was sought to serve as an
arbiter and divide a piece of cheese into two equal halves. He brought the
scales and divided the cheese into two unequal pieces and placed each piece on
one side of the scale. Then he cut himself a large piece of the heavier piece
of cheese and ate it saying, "He must make this piece equal in weight to the
other." when the other piece turned out to be heavier. he cut another piece of
that and ate it making the same statement. he went on doing this until he ate
all the cheese.

Numayri "balanced" the political forces so he can devour a portion of them each
time until he liquidated them or almost did. Now he finds no one who will coope-
rate with him except those with raw opportunism. that is, those who have reached
the point of risking themselves for a position. Everyone knows that an alliance
with Numayri is a temporary alliance no matter how much the Sudanese president

insists that it will continue. Thus the cheese was finished, but how can Numayri
go on?

it is evident that the Sudanese president's "cleverness" in the balancing act
[in which he is engaged] will bring about his downfall. This cleverness which
can reach unexpected limits in the small details that have to do with the daily
management of power is a cleverness that can serve Numayri in his efforts to
overcome tactical crises. but it cannot get him out of the strategic crisis in
which he has hurled his entire regime.

The Crisis Policy

There is an economic crisis [in Sudan], some of whose principal features are
debts which exceeded 3.5 billion dollars; a deficit in the balance of payments
that amounted to 630 million dollars; demonstrations in the street protesting
the high prices of popular foods; and "development" projects which have become a
reason for backwardness with the opportunities they created for the inter-
national companies and the "fat cats" inside the country to plunder the
country's resources.

There is a political crisis that manifested itself in the fact that all the
pullthdl iorces, except for a limited exceptions. moved to the ranks of the
opposition. Even al-Sadiq al-Mahdi who was part of the national reconciliation
purl with Numayri in 1971 announced that that pact had come to a dead end and

that "the Sudanese president's program was economically erroneous and socially
destructive."

There is a national crisis that began to unfold in the south after the re-
lormation of the South Sudan Unity Council. Then 17 provincial leaders were
arrested. and this was accompanied by the separatist tunes which surfaced [on
the scene]: the oil of the south tor the south; the poverty of the north for
lhv north and Numayri for no one.

Finallv. there is a military crisis that Numayri has not been able to solve
unslly. The Sudanese president's reliance on Cairo's military support is provo-
king some old sensitivities with the Sudanese people, especially since this
reliance is not proceeding on a road that would serve the interests of the
Sudanese people themselves. Furthermore, Numayri was forced to pay the price for

31
Ftﬂl(lﬂﬂC1Al.USE(MVLY
F!”l(ﬂﬂﬂ(]Al.USEfDNLY

his reliance on the United States: he met with the israeli minister of defense
Ariel Sharon in Khartoum; he shook hands with Prime Minister Menahem Begin in
al-Sadat's funeral in Cairo; and then he accepted the Bright Star maneuvers
which brought to the area the largest U.S. military presence in the region‘s
history. This provoked the staff officers and the junior officers in the
Sudanese army.

Numayri's reliance on Cairo and Washington is naturally not confined to the
military field. Relations between Sudan. Egypt and the United States are reflec-
ted first on the political scene inside Sudan. Numayri finds no one he can count
on inside the country. so he counts on people abroad, but to what extent can

he trust these people he is counting on?

Egyptian Support

On 28 January, at the height of the Sudanese crisis. Numayri traveled to Aswan
to meet with Mubarak and took Maj Gen 'Umar al-Tayyib with him. The principal
purpose of the meeting was ior the Sudanese president to explain to Mubarak the
reasons for removing 'Abd-al-Majid Khalil from office and the effects this
action could have in the ranks of senior army officers.

But can Cairo offer Numayri disinterested "fraternal" support if the army were
to take action after the removal of Khalil?

The reply to that question is the same as that [one would give] to a question
that pertains to the extent to which the Americans wish to keep Numayri. This is
because the fact that the Sudanese president has fallen into Hashington's and
al-Sadat's arms has made the U.S. Central intelligence Agency the only source--
at least at present-~that can reply to the question: who should rule Sudan?

Numayri asked Mubarak to rest assured about the safety of conditions in
Khartoum. However. this is not the question. The Sudanese president asked his
Egyptian "brother" to affirm this to Hashington and to persuade Washington that
only Numayri can restore matters to their former state. He would thus intercept
any Hashingtonian ideas of having him replaced. He himself had intercepted such
ideas be removing Lt Gen 'Abd-al-Majid Khalil from office.

it seems now that Washington did agree to give Numayri a chance after he
observed all the conditions of the lBRD. Hhat would he do now?

The question of all questions in Sudan now is that of the Socialist Union:
whether that organization is to remain or be disbanded is not the problem. but
the problem is briefly that of the political formula which Numayri will try to
put into effect.

The Socialist Union is finished. Everyone knows that it is "a prop" whose pur-
pose is to confiscate political freedoms in Sudan. except for those of the
ruling group like Dr Baha' al-Din idris and Muhammad 'Abd Rabbuh who are among
the millionaires oi Sudan; Mustafa Numayri; Maj Gen 'Abd-al-Salam Salih 'Isa;
and the brothers of Brig Gen Mustafa Kamil who are related to the president and
married to his relatives. This is the only "party" that has full freedom in
Sudan.

32
FOR OFFICIAL.USBiMNlY
FOR OPHCIAI. USE ONLY

Vllh the outbreak oi events early this year Numayri came to a crossroads where
he iouud himseli lacing the problem of the political formula that was being
applied in the country. He could either accept the opinions proposed by some
members of the independent popular committee which he had formed to reorganize
the Socialist Union and which went as far as calling for multiple political
organizations even within the Socialist Union as a way for solving the problem.
or he could insist on the narrow formula that is being applied now and presided

over. bihind the scenes. by a group of millionaires who are actually ruling [the
country .

Numayri chose to keep the Socialist Union, and he called those who suggested
that there be multiple organisations within the organization cowards. Then he
continued to sympathise with the religious groups and said. "Some people want
me to become prince of the faithful and to rule an Islamic society. He have
not yet achieved such a society. but we are proceeding in that direction.“

Such "jests" are not good enough to persuade even elementary school children in
Sudan who demonstrated last January. Despite his cleverness in maneuvering.
Numayri is falling into the trap into which any dictator before him fell: the

trap oi imagining people to be so naive as "to swallow" everything "the leader"
says.

AI-Sadat. for example. used the enormous Egyptian propaganda and iniormation
machine to set forth similar tunes. but in the end he was felled by the bullets
ol a religious group. Numayri has not only overlooked this lesson. he has also
overlooked the fact that his position on the Socialist Union Committee means
letting a rare opportunity go by for persuading Washington that he deserves to
be charged with the task of managing the "Sudanese ranch."

The Sudanese president thus proved that he is less intelligent than al-Sadat.
when the question of democracy became an urgent question in Egypt and a source
to: domestic disturbances. al-Sadat permitted the formation ol independent plat-
lorms within the Socialist Union. He preserved these platforms despite the tempo-
rmry political thrust that he realized after the October war.

Nummyri does not have an October war and does not have an opportunity to catch
his breath. Nevertheless, he insists on rejecting impulses for reform tendencies
lhal can prolong the life oi the regime at least for a few months. This alone

is enough to make one expect the tail of the Sudanese president. His hardening
position may prove to be the strong good fortune of the Sudanese opposition.

COPYRIGHT: AL-HATAN AL-'ARABI

3592
650: asoa/233

33
IN3Ii0F11ClAI.lﬂSIZ(HULY
AL-ASAD BRUI'HBRS FBUD ANALYZED
Paris Air-"ATM AL-‘ARABI in Arabic No 2“, 5-11 Mar 82 pp 21-22
(Article: "The ‘l‘wo Enemy Brothers”]

[Text] The internal crisis in Syria has reached into the ruling family.
Western diplomatic reports assert that mre than one reason is deepening the
dispute between Syrian President Rafi: al-Aaed and his brother, Rif'at al-
Asad, commander of the Defense Companies and the actual commander of the
Syrian army and that loyalty to the Syrian president in some aspects is
opposition to his brother and vice versa. Why are the two brothers disagree-
ing after the llamah volcano has quieted down?

A Western diplomat in Damascus was quoted last week as having told a under
of businessmen from his country who had been visiting Syria: "The country
is experiencing a bloody tragedy and the family of President al-Ased is
suffering from a serious problem. The regime is staggering between the
tragedy and the family problem."

The Western diplomat had been speaking after the recent events which 'had
exploded in the city of Hamah to the businessmen who had sought his advice
as to whether they should continue with completing their projects in Syria
or put them on hold. While making his statement in detail, the Western diplo-
mat said that the civil war which had flared up in ﬂamah had not been the
first nor was it the only one in Syria during the last 2 years, although it
was the most violent and widespread, because the authorities had used
various weapons, the air force, artillery, armor, and snipers against an
armed populace which had defied it in groups resembling guerrilla groups

in what could be termed a long-lived suicide operation. This is to be
regarded as a special type of development in the approaches of the popular
movement which opposes the regime and which has gone beyond the Muslim
Brotherhood to various overt and secret groups alike of all orientations.

In a related vein, it has been established that numerous army personnel of
various ranks joined the army popular groups for the first time, the number
being from 300 to $00 officers and men with their arms. Accordingly, the
bloody crisis has gone beyond civilians to reach into the ranks of the army
which warns that there may be a split in loyalty in the armed forces and
that a point of no return may be reached between the regime on the one hand,
and a large segment of the army which supports the popular movement.

3h
roe omcm. us: ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The problem in the al-Asad family is expressed in the struggle over the exer-
cise of real authority in the country between the President of the Republic
and Cos-lander in Chief of the Army, Hafiz al-Asad, and his brother, Rif'at
al-Asad, Commander of the Special Defense Companies which have a special
character inside the armed forces, not to mention the "Red Knights" from

whom personnel reinforced the Syrian Deterrent Forces in Lebanon, effective-
ly assuming responsibility for command. According to information from a number
of sources, Ilif'at al-Asad has revolted and has begun to rake unilateral
decisions on his own, implementing them despite the opposition of his brother,
the president. At the same time, Rif'at al-Asad is accusing his brother of
weakness and the president, in turn. is charging his brother of recklessness,
adventurism and lack of appreciation of responsibility, saying that he is

like the bear who killed his master on the grounds he was protecting him from
the fly which was flitting about his face. Some sources say that when Rif'at
al-Asad heard what his brother was saying about him and comparing him to the
hear, he said that the disaster was that the bear's master (meaning Hafiz
al-Asad) was actually dosing away in a stupor.

This ends what the Western diplomat was telling his compatriots, the business-
men, in Damascus.

Syrian and Arab sources say that there is some basis to the Western diplo-
mat's story and also his way of portraying the real situation in Damascus
today. These sources confirm that relations between Hafiz al-Asad and Rif'at
al-Asad are now sort of relations of "enemy brothers." The fact is that
when enmity arises between brothers, it becomes so vicious and deadly that it
cannot be compared with enmity among strangers and the viciousness mounts
uncontrollably when the enemy brothers are in power and are competing in
dividing it up and trading charges about win was causing power to slip from
the ruling family through his recklessness or adventurism.

Observers have a stock of evidence about this struggle in progress between
Hafiz al-Asad and his brother, Rif'at al-Asnd. One item is the fact that it
is now noticeable that pictures of Rif'at sl-Asad are now competing with
those of Hafiz al-Aaad, President of the Republic, in governmental and party
offices and various establisbents, in addition to army units. A second item
is that Rif'at al-Asad held a meeting of some of his supporters from the
party leadership and his military aides before the Fez conference convened in
Morocco in November 1981. He affirmed to them that President al-Asad would
participate in the summit conference himself , supporting Prince Fahd's
initiative, and this was comnicated officially to Prince 'Abdullah. “hm
President al-Asad suddenly decided not to take part in the conference, after
his private bodyguard had preceded him to Morocco, and returned from Libya
without going on to Fez, Rif'at al-Asad convened another party, military
meeting and publicy criticized his brother's non-participation in the con-
ference, viewing this as a grave mistake which Hafiz al-Asad had slipped
into under pressure from Libyan President Hu'allaar al-Qadhafi without taking
Syria's vital interests into account.

President Rafiz al-Asad was in turn forced to convene a counter-party,
military meeting in which he launched a harsh attack on his brother, viewing

35
son OFFICIAL use ONLY
him as a "politically misled child" and compared him with the bear that
killed his master. That situation put Syrian party members and military men
in a terrible dilemma and they wondered: "Hith whom should we proceed
safely, with Hafiz or Rif'at?"

Al-Khawli Saved Jamil

A third item: After Rif'at al-Aaad discovered the "Free Ba'th Officers"
organization whose co-nander, Col "Sax-Ian," cosmitted suicide, he instructed
forces from the defense companies to arrest Naji Jamil whom be accused of
having been aware of the organization but not reporting it. Rif'at al-Asad
issued a decree to execute him. Just a half hour before the execution. Presi-
dent Hafiz al-Asad learned of this and ordered a force under the comand of
Muhammad al-Khawli to free Naji Jamil from the hands of Rif'at al-Asad's
group and to save him from execution at any price in order to avoid the grave
complications that would ensue from this "stupid, irresponsible behwior"
which would reveal to the world that there were people conspiring against

the regime from within and this would wreck what power it had left to claim
that it was stable and in control of the country. “aha-sad al-Khswli sur-
rounded defense companies' barracks where Naji Jamil was scheduled to be
executed and threatened to blow them up unless he was handed over at once.

A clash almost took place between al-Khawli's forces and those of Rif'at
al-Asad but al-Khawli'a strategm succeeded in persuading Rif'st al-Asad that
President al-Asad was not opposed to executing Neji Jamil but only wanted to
interrogate him himself to find out what secrets he might have. By this
means Naji Jamil was rescued from the hands of Rif'st al-Aaad.

A fourth item: It is understood that Rif'at al-Aasd was intent on assassin-
ating Khalid Bskdash, secretary of the Syrian Communist Party, by a faked
automobile accident in retaliation for criticism and attacks taking place in
closed meetings of the Communist Party over illegal commercial deals Rif'at
was personally concluding against the interests of the country and over his
encouragement and protection of a number of friends and relatives who engaged
in the export-import business in return for huge commissions. Rif‘at felt
that Khalid Bakdash was responsible for the smear campaign against him and
issued orders for the defeat of all candidates of the Communist Party in the
pro forma parliamentary elections which were held recently, despite that
fact that the party was in the so—called "Progressive Front." He sent some—
one to Khaled Bakdash to tell him that this was his first and last warning
and that "it will not help that you are in the front and are meeting at the
same table with President Rafi: al—Assd." When the Communist Partyissued a
a statement of criticism after all its candidates were defeated and the
regime had not respected the agreement with the part that no less than seven
members would win, Rif'at al-Aaad felt that the warning he had sent to
Bakdash had done no good and issued orders to assassinate him in an auto-
mobile accident so that it would appear that his death had no connection with
the establishment or politics. when Hafiz al-Asad learned of this, he rushed
to instruct the presidential intelligence machinery to safeguard Bahdash' 3
life and to move him somewhere else under the protection of the president's
bodyguard and to spread a report that he had gone to Bulgaria while he re-
mained in Damascus under the protection of the Syrian president, having not

36
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

luf t the country at all. Khalid Bakdssh has made only a few appearances,
surrounded by the bodyguard of the president of the republic for fear of the

vengeance of Rif'at al-Assd.

The Hamah Volcano

Finally, when the Hannah incidents flared up, Hafiz al-Assd felt that the air
force should only be used to terrorize by dropping bombs around the city, not
on the residential areas. However, Rif'at al-Asad jettisoned his brother's
decision and refused to carry out his orders to surround the city and starve
it out and then to use the military forces to assault the city. Rif'at a1-
Asad took col-land himself, feeling that it was a life or death issue for the
regime and the ruling family and that it would be useless to treat it in any
way but to use the maximum degree of violence and slaughter in "extinguish-
ing the Hanah volcano," even if this were to cause the death of half the

population. 50 Rif'at al-Asad took sound of the army with all its weapons

in the battle against the people of llamah in a war of total annihilation

which stirred up any nationalist elasents in the armed forces, including some
officers who were themselves 'Alawites, who joined the popular uprising.

Since the Hamsh battle, two poles have been formed in the establisluent and
the ruling family, the Hafiz pole and the Rif'st pole, and, as the Western
diplomat put it, the regime has entered the stage of staggering between the
bloody popular tragedy and the quarrel of the "two enemy brothers" in the
ruling sl-Assd family.

COPYRIGHT: 1981 AL-WATAN AL-‘ARABI

8389
C80: “010/368

3?
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
DEFERRENT FORCE ACTIVITIES CRITICIZED
Paris AL—UAIAN AL-‘ARABI in Arabic No 264, 5—11 liar 82 pp 22—23
[Articlez "Three Anerican Steps in Preparation for the Third Republic"]

[Excerpts] The story goes that the Syrian Deterrent Forces entered Lebanon
first to prevent partition and secondly to restore caln. What has happened
now that 7 years have passed since the beginning of the Syrian "mission" in
Lebanon is that it is these deterrent forces that are preventing the unifi-
cation of Lebanon and Syrian internal security is now the reason the Lebanese
scene is exploding. Kuwait, probably before anyone else, has recognized this
dangerous transfer-nation and has decided to stop financing the Syrian opera-
tion. However, where is the Syrian role in Lebanon headed?

Persons who have followed the impact of recent events in Syria on the
Lebanese scene-exploding vehicles in Beirut and bloody clashes in Tripoli—
have rapidly perceived how there has been a reversal of the equation that

states that "Syrian security is part of Lebanese security and that the
Syrians entered Lebanon to quiet it." Events in Beirut and Tripoli have
shown that what is going on in Lebanon is now part of what is going on inside
Syria, not the reverse, and that the need now is to "deter" the deterrent
forces more than it is to deter the Lebanese and Palestinians. To put it
more simply, it is necessary to end the Syrian role in Lebanon if it is not
possible to "strip it down."

The explosion of denoainational strife in acne Lebanese cities recently is
not directly-,attributable to Lebanese-Lebanese disputes but rather to
Syrian-Syrian disputes. Those Lebanese who had not yet been convinced are

now sure that Damascus has in fact turned to a dangerous gene, the gale of
igniting sectari’an conflict between the Sunnis and Shi'itea in beirut and

the South and between the Sunnis and the 'Alawites in the North. In each
instance it is trying to drag the Palestinian resistance into these devia-

tions so as to make it appear as if the resistance is the cause for the tur-
moil which Lebanon is experiencing.

However, the black thread and the white thread are no longer nixed together

for all the Lebanese and Arabs, or even for the Syrians themselves. Those
who have taken a close look at the situation in Tripoli (the second capital

of Lebanon) will testify that the recent clashes began when a group of

38
ton omcw. us: ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

armed men, the 'A11 'Ayd group (,the pro—Syrian regime 'Alawite organisation)
opened fire on unarmed citizens in the old markets with the objective of
pushing the people of Tripoli into an open confrontation with the Syrian
forces which would naturally lead, though it might take a while, to 'Alawite
control of the city. The confrontation night spread to the Palestinian
resistance which woule ensure that the Syrians (1') could enter the Pales-
tinian camps in the north (al-Badawi and al-Barid).

However. the alertness of sons political organizations in Tripoli frustrated
chis Syrian plan. The populace stood firm in the face of the Syrian attack
and they issued statelents denanding that the Syrians withdraw fron the city
and leave the way clear for the Lebanese legitimate authorities to restore
their control in the North in order to put a stop to the arbitrary killings
to which the people of Tripoli had been subjected and to save than fron the
"kickbacks" which had been imposed by the deterrent officers in their
sectarian capacity on shops, businesses. plants and factories. as well as the
port and homes.

This alertness cut the ground from under the Syrians in their atnupt to turn
Tripoli into another Hamah since the Syrian forces were unable to twist the
arms of the people of Tripoli and were unable to enter any quarter controlled
by the popular resistance and the nationalist forces. When mhalmnad Ghanim,
chief of Syrian Intelligence in Lebanon, realized this, he hurried to get in
touch with the Palestinian leadership and the leadership of the nationalist
novenent to set up a meeting at the hone of Rashid Karani and to settle the
probles, if only in an interim manner

At the meeting held at the hone of Karami, forner Lebanese prine ninister,
Huhamad Ghanim tried to enploy a deceptive approach by proposing formation
of a nonitoring comittee which would include representatives of all factions
and which would patrol various streets mdquarters to prevent new strife.
However, the representatives of the Palestinian resistance at the meeting
demanded that the job of this connittee be confined to nonitoring the quar-
ters where the Syrian arny was present because only these quarters were ex-
periencing continuous unrest and disturbances were not seeing so much as

the slap of a hand.

It became clear to the Syrians that the Palestinian resistance would refuse
to let the deterrent forces have a precedent for entering the Palestinian
camps so the Syrians gave up any intentions about the monitoring comittees
and reignited the situation. This detonation bounced back on then negatively.
The "old gentleman" kept to his house. thinking that this would be the best
way to persuade the Syrians to refrain from carrying out their plan. When
the situation deteriorated dangerously, President Sulaynan Franj iyah has-
tened to urge holding a "nationalist conference" in Tripoli after which it
would become a "northern nationalist conference" to isolate the area of
northern Lebanon from the Syrian internal climate.

At the same tine, Franj iyah asked his group not to leave Zgharta for Tripoli
because the explosive situation Tripoli was experiencing could lead to a
clash between the people of Zgharta and Tripoli.

39
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The Hellish Vortex

Before things calmed down in Tripoli, the turmoil had again spread to Beirut
to sow death in the secure areas through a series of bloody explosions target-
ing Syrian military centers and centers of their allies in Lebanon and reaping
a harvest of dozens of innocent victims. The Syrian army intelligence center
in the al-Rawshah area (West Beirut) wae the target of a tremendous explosion.
This was followed by -the blowing up of a center of "Arab Army of Lebanon" in
the same area, an organization which receives assistance, training and orders
from Damascus. In the meantime some streets in Beirut were filled with
graffiti on walls demanding the withdrawal of the Syrians from Lebanon.

The Lebanese capital had not yet collected the corpses of its victims when a
third charge went off in a mined automobile in the Talah al-Khayyat area in
west Beirut. It once again appeared that the open war between the Syrian
regime and its opponents in Syria, as well as the "secret war" between this
regime and the Palestinian resistance in its basic factions had begun again
in the Lebanese noose tightening operation that had begun 7 years earlier and
had not yet ended.

A Lebanese security report was prepared on the Tripoli clashes which incon-
testsbly revealed that what had taken place in this city was a direct result
of the tension which prevailed in all Syrian cities after the hamah events.
It also stated that large numbers of those persons who had fled Hamah had
taken refuge in Tripoli. there being extensive family ties between the people
of Tripoli and hamah, not to mention the climate of revenge which had been
stored up in the populace against the activities of the Muslim elements who
were proteges of Syria and other direct activities of the Syrian intelligence
machinery. The report pointed out that these activities had been accumulating
since 1976 because the special forces which had entered Tripoli at that time
had not been replaced while other troops in various Lebanese areas had been.

A report eating that the relative calm that Tripoli has been experiencing
the past few days is very fragile; is it possible to predict new bombing
incidents?

COPYRIGHT: 1981 ALFHAIAN ALP'ARABI

8389
C80: 6404/368

ho
ma omcm. use ONLY
GENERAL, ECONOMIC BUDGET REVIEWED
Paris MARCHBS TROPICAHX ET HBDITERRANEENS in French No 1892, 12 Feb 82 pp 383-385

[Text] The first year of the Tunisian Sixth Economic and Social Development Plan,
1982 fits into the framework of the guidelines for the 5-year period.

The Tunisian economic budget for 1982 is characterized by the following elements:
growth in the GNP on the order of 5 percent (6.7 percent annually for the 5 years

of the plan), but the agricultural sector will have growth of only .4 percent; 9
9-percent growth for the manufacturing industries, with resumed growth of the tex-
tile sector; investments of 1.4 billion diners (1 Tunisian dinar - 11 French francs),
or 30 percent of the 68? (25.6 percent for the entire Sixth Plan); growth in con-
sumption limited to 5 percent, a rate equivalent to that of the growth in the GNP;
and control over imports of consumer goods, making it possible to limit the increase
in the deficit by some 70 million dinars. Some 54,700 jobs would be created.

A. General Government Budget

The 1982 Budget sets the general government budget, in resources and spending, at

1,442,000,000 diners. up 17 percent compared with estimates of the supplemental
budget for 1981.

1) Regular budget: Regular expenditures are an estimated 797 million dinars

(up 119.2 million, or 17.6 percent, compared with 1981). This level takes into
consideration the creation of nearly 13,000 jobs, the evolution in the wage mass,
an increase in payments of interest on the public debt (up 21.3 million dinars),
and an endowment of 30 million dinars for the General Compensation Fund.

Spending for the operation of the ministries would be some 630 million diners and
interest payments about 86.5 million.

2) Capital budget: Capital spending is set at 645 million dinars, up 91 million,
or 16.4 percent. compared with 1981. The rate of growth seems lower than in the
general budget and the regular budget, due to the reorientation of certain finan-
cial operations, which will henceforth be taken over by the financial system and
not the government. These operations total nearly 47.3 million diners for 1982.

3) Resources: Concerning financing of the budget, the plan consists of increas-
ing regular receipts to 1,168,000,000 dinars, up 16.2 percent over 1981.

kl
FOI‘DIFKJAI.UBE(NVLY
I-OI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Resources in Tunisian Budget for 1981 and 1982 (in millions of diners) .

1981 i 1982 1
Fiscal Receipts 711.4 70.8 809.0 69.3
Direct taxes 202.5 20.1 225.0 19.3
Indirect taxes _ 494.4 49.2 569.0 48.7
Duties 14.5 1.5 15.0 1.3
Nonfiscal Receipts 293.6 29.2 359.0 30.7
011 revenue 236.0 23.5 290.0 24.8
Other 57.6 5.7 69.0 5.0
Total 1,005.0 100.0 1,168.0 100.0

Fiscal receipts should rise 13.7 percent and nonfiscal receipts 22.3. The latter

would substantially evolve as a result in s foreseeable improvement in oil revenue
(up 54 million diners), the increase in profits paid by the Central Bank of Tunisia

(25 million diners) and the contribution of the insurance and social welfare funds
(15 million diners). The regular budget would therefore contribute sons 371 mil-

lion dinars to the financing of the capital budget (330 million in 1981).

Budgetary savings will represent a rate of 32.5 percent of regular receipts and
the budget deficit for 1982 will be increased to 261 million diners, representing
5.6 percent of the GNP. This deficit will partially be absorbed by the issuance
of a domestic loan of 166 million diners and the rest from foreign resources from
international cooperation (50 million diners) and borrowing on the international
financial market (45 million).

Resources in the capital budget are as follows (in millions of diners):

Contribution of the regular budget 371
Resources from domestic loans 166
Surpluses from Post Office, Telegraph and Telephone" 13
Resources from foreign loans and gifts 95
Total 645

8. Economic Budget

Updating the estimates of the different branches of activity enables one to situate
the real growth in the gross national product at 6.5 percent in 1981 and 5 percent
in 1982. This last rate is under that retained in the preliminary draft of the
Sixth Plan (6 percent). The drop is explained by the stagnation of agriculture

and fishing (.4 percent), a foreseeable decline in crude oil production, and takes
into account a 9-percent rise in manufacturing industries and 5 percent in tourism.

Sectorial Estimates

Agriculture: The rate of growth predicted (.4 percent) does not seem easy to at-
tain, considering the fairly poor prospects of oil-yielding crops (90,000 tons

h2
I!Il(lﬂﬂ€1hl.USE(IVLY
of olive oil). Fodder production will be affected by late rainfall and grain
production is not expected to excees that of 1981 (12.3 million quintals).

Fishing: The year 1982 will see the startup of the Tunisian-Spanish Joint Venture
and the Tunisian-French Company. Estimates refer to production of 73,000 tons
(66,000 tons in 1981).

Energy: A slight drop in crude oil production is expected (5.3 million tons. com-
pared with 5.4 million in 1981). The same will be true of gas (300 million cubic
meters, compared with 330 million in 1981). Regarding electricity. projections

put consumption at 2.7 billion kilowatt-hours (up 11 percent). The sector's added

value is likely to drop 3.6 percent compared with 1981.

Mining: The mining sector should have growth of 6.9 percent (11.5 percent in
1981). This rate is based on phosphate production of 5.5 million tone, up some
500,000 tons compared with 1981. Production of nonferrous metals will decline.

Manufacturing industries: Growth of the sector will be about 9 percent. This
level is down from the average objective set by the Sixth Plan (11.5 percent).
This growth is based on recovery of the textile branch (9.6 percent compared with
4.9 percent under the Fifth Plan), a slight decline in mechanical, electrical and
chemical industries and stabilization of the production of agricultural industries.

Growth Rate of Added Value (I)

1981 1982 Percent Sixth

of Total Plan

Agricultural and food industries (1) 16.8 0.5 1 7.1
Building materials industries (2) 13.8 17.6 29 16.4
Mechanical and electrical industries (3) 15.2 11.6 17 17.6
Chemical industries (4) 8.3 8.1 8 8.5
Textile and shoe industries (5) 5.9 9.6 23 10.2
Misc. manufacturing industries (6) 14.2 9.0 100 12.0
Combined 12.4 9.0 100 11.5

1) The foreseeable drop in the growth of the agricultural and food industries
includes a drop in the production of olive oil and wine.

2) The increase in production of building materials, ceramics and glass (17.6
percent) essentially stems from development of projects using cement (40 percent)

and glass (27.7 percent), pottery (25 percent) and binding materials (12.5 percent).

3) The growth in the mechanical and electrical industries sector (11.6 percent)
takes into consideration a S-percent drop in the production of the Bl-Fouladh
iron and steel plants and growth in the rest of the branch's activity (14 percent)
as a result of favorable growth in machine construction (up 13.1 percent), the ‘
electrical industries (up 11.1 percent) and machine construction and shipbuilding
(up 19.8 percent).

FIHICHHNCIAI.IEIE(HULY
tlllUﬁ'ﬂJAL.UUI(ﬂVLY

4) The chuical industries will enjoy an increase on the order of 8.1 percent,
essentially stealing from the startup, in June 1982, of the new phosphoric acid

unit (Oi-3), which world raise production of phosphoric acid from 480,000 tons to
560,000 tons.

5) The sector of textiles, clothing and leather will evolve at a greater rate

than it did the preceding year (9.4 percent, capared with 5.4 percent). The growth
will essentially stem from cotton weaving, hatsaking, ready-tweet clothing,
leather and shoes.

Transport and telecomunications: In these sectors, it is expected that the 1981
rate will be maintained for the transport sector (8.5 percent). There will be a
major revival of transport by pipeline (19.8 percent), with the entry into service
of the trans-Tunisian gas pipeline, and a slight improvement in telecommunications
(10 percent). In this way, all sectors would achieve growth on the order of 9 per-
cent (compared with 7.1 percent in 1981).

Added Value in Real Terms (2)

19 1 1982
Rail transport 12.6 11.3
Road transport 6.5 6.6
Maritime transport 6.4 10.0
Air transport 9.8 8.5
Transport other than by pipeline 8.2 8.5
Transport by pipeline -26.7 19.8
Postal service and telecomunications 9.2 10.0
Transport and telecmunications average 7.1 9.0

Tourism: Estimates are based on an increase in accomodations on the order of
3,600 beds and an improved occupancy rate. The latter should go from 48.1 percent
in 1981 to 48.5 percent in 1982. The number of nights spent will go from 13.4
million in 1981 to 14.2 million in 1982. Sector receipts will be an estimated

370 million dinars, including 350 million in foreign exchange, asking up 16.6 per-
cent of export receipts Eros goods and services (15.7 percent in 1981).

Investments

The total investment in 1982 for all sectors combined is 1.4 billion diners

(1,225,000,000 in 1981), corresponding to 30 percent of the GNP. The preliminary
draft of the Sixth Plan projected a rate of 27.2 percent of the GNP, but a revalua-

tion of investments in hydrocarbons was made.

Investment Package, Distribution by Sector (in millions of dinara; percentages)

1981 1982
Agriculture and fishing 162 13.21 196 14.01
Nonmanufacturing industries 290 23.72 367 26.21
Manufacturing industries 194 15.81 245 17.51 .

“WWW!”
(cont.)

Services 491 40. 11 490 35. 0%

Including tourism 36 2. 9X 50 3.62
Collective equipment 88 7.2% 102 7.3%
Combined 1.225 100. 0% 1, 1000 100. 02

The orientation is to step up productive investments with a low and medium density
of capital and which create jobs (23 percent of the total).

In nonmsnufacturing industries, 233 million diners would go to the hydrocarbons
sector, related to the development of existing units (100 million diners) and be-
ginning construction of the new oil refinery for s capacity of 5 million tons.
Second, investments would benefit the electricity sector (40 million diners),
considering progress on construction of the new nades power plant. The mining
sector would make investments of 60 million dinars.

In the manufacturing industries, 86 million diners have to do with new projects.

Investments in Manufacturing Industries (in millions of diners)

1981 1982 Z of Total
Agricultural and food industries 55 50 3.6
Building materials industries 69 60 6.3
Mechanical and electrical industries 24 (015 3.1
Chemical industry 3!. 60 2.9
Textile industry 19 27 1.9
Misc. industries 13 26 1.7
Total 196 2105 17.5

The increase over 1981, or 51 million dinars, would greatly benefit the mechanical
and electrical industries (up 20 million diners), textile industries (up 8 million)
and miscellaneous industries (up 11 million).

Concerning services, predictions show more investments in tourism (50 million
dinars) and transport by means other than pipelines (175 million) and moderate
growth in housing construction (230 million diners).

Finally, 102 million will be spent on education. training, health and urban sani-
tation and waterworks.

COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux e't Cie Paris 1982

11,1064
CSO: 4519/130 END

1:5
mommiussouu