APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/00: ClA-RDP02-00080R000100030036-0
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100030036-8

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/8333

13 March 1979

TRANSLATIONS ON USSR POLITICAL
AND SOCIOLOGICAL AFFAIRS
(FOUO 4/79)

U. S. JOINT PUBLICATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/00: ClA-RDP02-00050R000100030036-8
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
nation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliternted are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.8. Government.

COPYRIGlT [ANS AND REGUMTIONS GOVERNING WNERSIlIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
0F TRIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
.ﬁnuoourmc o"; |- “Iron \‘u. 1. 1. In- wanna hum...“ \--.

our! JPRS L/B333

l”: ..'|'.' ...u .'.|'4‘..'I. "" " ’ ‘—"‘_ —'————- '

  
   
 
     
    
  
 
 
  

5. Din-run I'Jlr

'I‘RANSIA'I'IUNS on ussu - I'oI.I1'u:AI. AN!) mwlommw. AFFAIRS 13 March 1979

(F000 4/79)
). Til-’3':- . _. I. Kuhn-ml lint-nun..- It. I-
I‘.
{hum-mu.717......14...m Nun:- uul A-IJII-n l0. I'h-unl lnl Lick I'm: Nu.

 

ioint Puhlicationn Research Service

“’00 North Glcbc Rood ll. (‘uomn IGuu s...
Arlington. Virginia 22201

I). ‘r-IIIu-llllf IIerIMII-u Non: “III Mullen ”- Type oi liq-u" n "0|an
Coveted

A! above

'5. - -|-|':- no I‘m-n You“.

IO. —\l- .~| u- it

Tho rvport contains information on government and party structure. policy and

pruhlvms. luv and social regulation. education. and cultural and social aspects
oi Suvioi life. trade union and Konooool activities.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS 1
13 Ma:

TRANSLATIONS 0N USSR POLITICAL
AND SOCIOLOGICAL AFFAIRS
(Fouo 4/79)

CONTENTS
INTERNATIONAL

New Book Detalls Cnusea. Prospects of Near East Conflict
(Yevgeniy Naksinovlch Prilnkov, e: 31.; ANATOHIYA
BLIZHNEVOSTOCHNOGO KONFLIKTA, 1978) .... ...........
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

INTERNATIONAL

NEH BOOK DETAILS CAUSES. PROSPECTS OF NEAR EAST CONFLICT

Moscow ANATONIYA BLIZNNEVOSTOCNNOGO KONPLIKTA (Anatomy of the Near East Con-
flict) in Russian 1978 pp 1. 3-5, 191-355. 375, 376

[Annotation and excerpts from book by Yevgeniy Naksimovich Primakov: Editor-
ial Board chief T. A. Voskresenskaya, Editor L. c. Solov' yeva, Hap Editor

L. n. Chel' tsova. Junior Editor N. V. Halinovskaya. artistic layout by Ye.
V. Ratmirova. Artistic Editor T. V. Ivanshina. Technical Editor L. Ye.
Pukhova. Proofreader T. H. Shpilenko. Hysl']

[Text] The book by Ye. M. Primakov. corresponding member of the USSR Academy
of Sciences. analyzes the causes of the Near East conflict-~one of the most
dangerous contemporary international conflicts. The confrontation between
Israel. which is pursuing an expansionist policy. and the neighboring Arab
states and also the Palestine resistance movement is traced on the basis of
extensive historical material. 0.5. Near East policy is analyzed. How

the energy crisis is affecting the development of events in the Near East

and influencing the policy of the United States and its Hestern partners

in this region is examined, in particular.

This book is dedicated to vadim Petrovich Ruayantsev of blessed memory

The Near East has long remained a hotbed of dangerous tension. The absence
of a settlement of the Arab-Israeli conflict is reflected most negatively in
the position of the peoples and states of this region and the status and de-
velopment of peaceful economic relations. is threathening universal perce
and is creating serious negative features for the process of the relaxa-
tion of international tension. The absence of a political settlement or

the Arab-Israeli conflict has been the cause of or has created conditions
conducive to the development of a number of "satellite conflicts" such as.
for example. the bloody tragedy in Lebanon in 1975-1976.

"ha: is the cause of the Near ERSI conflict,* which is determining inter-
state relations in this region. engendering serious complications beyond its

*The term "Near East conflict" characterizes the main conflict in the Near East--
the Arab-Israeli conflict. Both terms are of equal weight in the ensuing ac-
count. The author is nware here that neither the first nor second designation
entirely reflects the nature of the conflict: the first represents merely a
geographic concept. while the second limits the conflict to an Arab-Israeli
framework, which is essentially wrong.

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

confines and disrupting the normal development of a number of processes in-

tended to improve the international organism. which was undermined by the
"cold war"?

One of the most protracted and serious conflicts of the 20th century--the
Near East conflict--has both internal and outside causes. The internal
causes are the contradictions between Zionism and, subsequently. also Israel,
which in pursuing an expansionist course. on the one hand. and the Arab peo-
ple of Palestine and the Arab states on the other. The outside causes are
the policies of the imperialist states since World Her 11. chiefly the United
States. which is directly supporting Israel's expansionist policy and utili-
zing the Near East conflict in the interests of the struggle against the
natural liberation forces in this region and world socialism.

The internal and outside causes of the conflict have proven interconnected.
ft is categorically wrong under these conditions to either confine the
causes of the Near East conflict to "internal“ Arab-Israeli contradictions
or to transfer them entirely to a "global 1evel"--as is frequently the case
with bourgeois researchers.

The Near East conflict has been developed in the current system of interna-
tional relations, whose main and determining contradiction is that between
socialism and capitalism. This has left its direct imprint on the nature

and course of the conflict. At the same time there is nothing more primitive
and incorrect than to depict the effect of international relations on the
Arab-Israeli confrontation in the form of the struggle of "superpowers" for
influence in the Near East. The concern of the two opposite social-political
systems for different results from this conflict is founded on a class basis.
It is precisely free class standpoints that the two leading countries of
these systems-~the Soviet Union and the United States-are assisting and
supporting the countries directly involved in the conflict: the USSR--the
Arab national liberation movement and the Arab peoples, who have become the
target of Israel's expansionist policy: the United States-the Israeli ruling
circles. which are pursuing a course in the Near East which is, generally,
coordinated with world imperialism.

This book reflects the intertwined nature of the causes of the Near East
conflict. At the same time theauthgr has considered it possible to succes-
sively examine them with the accent initially on the internal and, sub-
sequently. on the outside factors.

Diagnostics should be constructed on the basis of a comprehensive analysis
of the clearly highlighted and delimited causes of a phenomenon. It is im-
portant not to owerlook either of them. And--this. possibly. does not need
special emphasis--diagnostics has never been and cannot be an end in itself.
It is designed to signpost the paths of recuperation and elimination of the
illness both in the human organism and in relations between people. peoples
and states. It was for this very purpose that man acquired such a method
of cognition as anatomy.

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The author would like to express heartfelt gratitude to his comrades and
colleagues for their assistance in the preparation of this book.

Fall, 1977.

Chapter 5. Stages of the United States' Near East Policy

The United States‘ aims and interests in the Near East examined earlier
predetermined the high degree of ".5. involvement in the Near East conflict
and its aspiration to utilize this conflict to accomplish the task confront-
ing American foreign policy. The tactical line of the United States with
respect to the Near East conflict has never been hard-set and immovable but
has been modified from stage to stage of the implementation of the United
States' Near East policy as a whole.

And. moreover. in addition to the correlation of forces on global level, the
status. nature and immediate prospects of the United States' relations with
the most populous and most industrially developed country of the Arab world-
Egypt--which played under President al-Nasir. despite certain inter-Arab
contradictions and difficulties. the generally recognized leading role in

the Arab world. have exerted a principal influence on the evolution of
American tactics. There are serious grounds for directly linking U.S. at-
tempts to impart this impetus or the other to the development of the Near
East conflict with its different political approaches to the Arab world. which
has found concentrated expression in “.5. policy in respect of Egypt. It
may. in particular. be concluded that the United States began to make active
use of the Near East conflict in its own foreign policy interests after 1952.
which was marked by the revolution in Egypt which brought the “Free Offi-
cers" organization to power.

0.3. policy in the Near East since that time may provisionally be split into
a number of stages. The first, which began immediately after the 1952 Egyp-
tian revolution. lasted until mid-1955. In this period the U.S. Administra-
tion hoped and attempted to establish contacts with the new Egyptian regime
and control its domestic and foreign policy. "Positive" methods in respect
of Egypt. including the extension of credit to Egypt and 0.3. mediation
between the “Free Officers“ and Britain on the question of evacuation of

the British military base in the Suez Canal Zone. prevailed during this
stage. Throughout this stage Washington gambled on tying Egypt. as, equal-
ly. other Arab countries. to the United States either in the form of their
direct incorporation in s bloc structure or by the granting to them of
American military and economic "assistance." At that time the American lead-
ers counted on the "Free Officers" taking as the basis of their development
the model of the Latin American military-dictatorial regimes. which would
have predetermined their ultimate and strict dependence on the United States.
particularly under conditions where the traditional colonial powers in the
Arab world--Britain and Prance-had manifestly forfeited both their prestige
and their positions following Horld War II.

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

This U.S. line was adequately reflected in the American attitude toward the
Near East conflict. Throughoat this stage the United States did not gamble
directly on an intensificaton of Arab-Israeli confrontation. And, moreover,
attempts were made to bring Israel and Egypt closer together, which was
viewed as a means of the exertion of U.S. influence on both sides involved
in the conflict.

The sornnd stage of rho United States' Near East policy encompasses the
period from mid-I955 through 1957. Israel's military confronation with
Egypt began and Israel's armed clashes with Syria intensified in the spring
of 1955. Egypt reached agreement with the Soviet Union and Czechoslovakia
on arms supplies in the middle of 1955. This undermined the imperialist
Heat's monopoly on arms supplies to the Arab countries. In 1956 Egypt was
the victim of tripartite aggression. But. under pressure from the peace-
loving forces, Britain, France and Israel were forced in 1957 to withdraw
their troops from Egyptian territory. Under these conditions the United
States effected a clear turnabout in its Near East policy. The means and
methods of U.S. actions in relation to al-Nasir's Egypt and other Arab na-
tional liberation forces began to acquire a subversive nature at this time.
Together with this, the United States was unceasing in its attempts to also
adopt a "constructive approach" toward Egypt for the purpose of taking ad-
vantage of the collapse of the positions of Britain and France, which became
manifest particularly in the wake of the 1956 tripartiteaggression against

Egypt.

This line was expressed in the U.S. attitude toward the Arab-Israeli con-
flict: the United States began to strengthen Israel by degrees, not always
with its own hands. but preferring to operate through its allies; the United
States viewed Israel's confrontation with the Arab countries as a means of
weakening the al-Nasir regime; efforts were made simultaneovsly to "pull"
Egypt up to the Israeli terms of a settlement; and at the same time at this
stage the United States was still leaving the doors open to attempts to im-
prove relations with the Bgyptian regime--the "flirting" with this country
was not yet over, and this predetermined the absence of automation in strict,
unconditional support of any actions of Israel dictated by its confronta-
tion with the Arab countries.

The third stage, which began with the U.S. proclamation of the Eisenhower
doctrine, lasted until 1971. In this doctrine the United States formulated
an independent course of its Near East policy, which was aimedat filling the
"vacuum“ which had allegedly been created in this region as the result of
the collapse of the influence of the traditional colonial powers--Britain
and France. In the wake of the proclamation of the Eisenhower doctrine
there followed the armed intervention of the United States and Britain in
iebanon and Jordan in 1958, which was intended to create a "barrier" to the
development of the national liberation process in the Arab world. As a
whole, this stage of American policy was characterized by open U.S. hostil-
ity in respect of Egypt and attempts by any means to oust the al-Nasir
regime and liquidate the progressive trends in the Arab world. The United

I.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

States began to pay particular attention at this time to the use of inter-
Arab conflicts and, following its failure, embarked firmly, as of the end of
the 1950's. on the path of the direct use of Israeli expansionist circles

in the Near East conflict.

The fourth stage of the United States' Near East policy began with the death
of al-Nasin It is characterized by a transition to greater "balance" and to
attempts by the United States to make the maximum use in its own interests
of the economic and political shifts which were revealed in Egypt and cer-
taln other Arab c0untries at the start of the 1970's.

In the period 1970-1972 the United States kept an eye on the situation,
frequently engaged in "reconnaissance in force" and, following the 1973
October war, actively assumed the role of 'hediator" in the business of a
political settlement of the Near East conflict. It was prompted to this by
the change in the correlation of forces between the parties involved in

the conflict and also by the clearly unfavorable situation for the capitalist
world which had arisen as a result of the connection between the development
of the Near East conflict and the intensification of the energy crisis. Here
the u.s. mission for a political settlement was undertaken chiefly in such
directions and forms as would secure to the maximum U.S. interests in the
Near East, neutralize the elements which had emerged in the situation in

this region and internationally which were unfavorable to Israel's extremist
plans and weaken the positions and influence of the Soviet Union. These aims
being pursued by U.S. policy are not facilitating but, on the contrary, mak-
ing more difficult the achievement of a lasting and just peaceful settle-
ment of the Near East conflict.

let us examine the stages of the United States' Near East policy in more de-
tail.

1. The Task--Involvement in Blocs (l95z-l955)

After the overthrow of King Faruq in 1952, the United States far from im-
mediately began to pursue a policy hostile to the new Egyptian regime. At
the time of the coup the "Free 0fficers"--Jamal 'Abd al-Nssir wrote and

spoke about this repeatedly-—attempted to establish relations with the United
States. Ali Sabri, a former member of the leadership of the "Free Officers,"
was authorized by the Revolutionary Command Council to make contact with the
Americans ﬂmaediately after the overthrow of Faruq, and for this purpose he
visited the U.s. Embassy in Cairo. Following the coup. Ali Hahir was ap-
pointed prime minister (albeit not a controlling position since power was
actually in the hands of the Revolutionary Command Council, a very import-
ant position in the state, nevertheless) obviously not least in consideration
of his pro-American sentiments. And it was no accident that this appoint-
ment was interpreted so positively in the United States that Dean Acheson.
secretary of state at that time, even announced a “new era" in American-
Egyptian relations.

5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

General Nnjib, who headed the Revolutionary Command Council following the
coup. made a whole number of gestures which were evaluated as pro-American.
He said in an interview on 8 August 1952 that Egypt attached great signifi-
cance to the organization of a military poet in the Near East and intended

to turn to the United States for military assistance. On 19 September 1952
Najib personally took part in a solemn ceremony on the occasion of the inaug-
uration of the American Informntion Center in Alexandria and had compliment-
ary words to any there about American policy in relation to Egypt. ﬂajib
openly advocated attracting American capital ventures in Egypt.

There is a dual explanation for this position of the new Egyptian leadership
following June 1952: having concentrated on the struggle against Britain and
its landowner-palace secret service in Egypt. the country's leaders were in
need of outside support or. in any event, wished to neutralize as far as pos-
sible American support for London in the Egyptian-British confrontation
which had begun. taking advantage of American-British contradictions in

this region for this purpose. At the same time the forces representing

the right wing of the new Egyptian leadership wished, with the assistance

nf Egypt's rapprochement with the United States. to weaken the tendency of
the regime's leftward movement, which had been discerned immediately follow-
ing the coup. and to blunt the anti-imperialist nature of the Egyptian revo-
lution.

Hashington also began its game in Egypt following the ouster of King Faruq.
".5. Secretary of State John Foster Dulles arrived in Egypt in May 1953.
American diplomacy simultaneously undertook "mediation activity." attempting
to bring closer together under its "patronage" Britain's and Egypt's posi-
tions on the question of evacuation of the British base in the Suez Canal
Zone. A start was made on the implementation of a program of American
assistance to Egypt of the order of $50 million. There was an outright
pilgrimage of American officials. politicians and businessmen to Cairo.

Among all the aims of its Near East policy, the United States highlighted

at the start of the 1950's, giving it priority, the task of the creation of
a military bloc, with the unfailing involvement of Arab countries therein.
lmacribing the mission which Dulles attempted to accomplish during his

visit to Curio, the well-known Egyptian journalist H. Haykal, being also

the best informed as a result of his proximity to al-Nasir. wrote that the
0.5. secretary of state attempted "to advance his plan to surround the USSR
with military and political alliances, a plan which he implemented with
religious fervor and which was the main driving force of all his actions

in the Near East."

The first postwar idea of such an alliance was born 2 years prior to Dulles's
arrival in Cairo. This was a plan involving Egypt's unfailing incorporation
in a joint "Middle East Command." which the United States saw as a replace-
ment for the entirely compromised military imperialist presence in the Suez
Canal Zone. Formally the proposal for the creation of a "Middle East Com-
ment" was made on behalf of the United States, Britain. France and Turkey

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFPICIAL USE ONLY

in the fall of 1951, but Uhahington was the initiator of and inspiration
behind this idea. A 0.8. State Department bulletin formulated the basic
principles of Egypt's planned participation in this military alliance: in
exchange for consenting to act as a founding member Egypt was promised a
number of high posts in the command, special training for its army and arms
supplies from its partners. But in exchange for all this Egypt was to have
undertaken to afford the command "such strategic. defense and other facili-
ties on its territory as would be necessary for the organization of the
peacetime defense of the Near East." It also was to have afforded "every-
thing necessary and its assistance in the event of war. the impending threat
of war or in the event of a manifest international crisis." As the bulletin
pointed out, the British military base in the Suez Canal Zone would be formal-
ly handed over to Egypt. but in fact the “Middle East Command" would take
charge of it "with Egypt participating in the administration of the base."

The authors of the "Middle East Command" idea planned that Israel also would
be associated with it. This was dictated not only by an aspiration to uti-
lize Israel‘s military potential in the imperialist plans but also pursued
two other aims: bringing Israel closer to the Arab countries under the
conditions of the spread of American influence to both sides in the conflict
(considering the nature of the regimes which existed in all the Near East
countries involved in the conflict at that time, the United States could
have counted on being successful in strengthening its positions "on both
sides" and preventing the development of Israel's normal relations with

the USSR and other socialist countries.

The "Middle East Command" idea, which represented an attempt to impose on the
Near East a new form of colonial dependence. was rejected by the Arab coun-
tries. But this was not the end of American diplomacy's attempts to knock
together a military bloc in the Near East under the aegis of the United
States. Following u.s. Secretary of State Dulles' trip to the Near East in
1953, Hashington put forward a new plan for the creation of a military bloc
of Hoslem countries alone-the Arab states, Turkey and Pakistan.

During the visit to the United States at the end of 1953 of an Egyptian dele-
gation headed by Ali Sabri, which had been sent for the purpose of purchasing
American arms. General Olmsted. the leader of the Pentagon's overseas mili-
tary assistance program. took advantage of a meeting with the Egyptians to
propagandize the idea of an Islamic pact. Making no secret of the anti-
Soviet direction of this pact. the American general said that in addition

to its role "in defense of the Middle East." the pact could exert great in-
fluence on the Moslems of the Soviet Union and china. "Everyone was shocked.
H. Haykal writes. "when Olmsted began to talk about how it was necessary to
create a fifth column in these countries."

Incidentally. it transpired later that, irrespective of the Egyptian dele-
gation's reaction to the general's words, the United States had absolutely
no intention of arming the Egyptian Army with modern weapons on a suffi-

ciently large scale-this could only have occurred in the event of Egypt's

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

reconciliation with Israel, in other words. in the event of Egypt refusing
to support thePalestinian people's rights to self-determination and its
signing of a separate peace agreement with Israel. U.S. diplomacy strove
for this, but unsuccessfully. Consequently, on American diplomacy's

scale of values Israel retained an even higher place than realization of the
idea of Egypt's involvement in a military alliance without its simultaneous
withdrawal from the confrontation with Israel.

After the impracticability of the idea of the creation of an Islamic pact
became clear, Hashington changed its tactics, acting as the actual initiator
of a bilateral Turkish-Pakistan military alliance, counting on making it

the "axis" of a broad military bloc with the condition of its obligatory
expansion via the Arab states. A Turkish-Pakistan pact, arranged by Ameri-
can diplomacy. was concluded in 1954. On 26 February 1955 American diplomacy
succeeded in putting together a Turkish-Iraqi military alliance, which was
given the name of the Baghdad Pact (subsequently, CENTO). Great Britain
joined it officially on 6 April. as did Pakistan and Iran in September-
November 1955.

It is significant that the United States viewed Iraq's involvement in the
military alliance as a means designed to disrupt the Soviet Union's rela-
tions with this country. Under direct pressure from the Heat the government
of Nuri al-Sa'id broke off diplomatic relations with the Soviet Union in
the period of the creationof the Baghdad Pact.

Attempting to accomplish the main aim at the first stage--incorporation of
the Arab countries in a military bloc-the United States did much to prevent
complication of the realization of this idea because of its close relations
with Israel. while developing and strengthening relations with this state,
in a number of instances Washington aspired to conceal them and sometimes
even to refuse to acknowledge the one-sided orientation toward Israel which
had been "ascribed" to it.

Primarily. the United States abandoned its initial plans for Israel's in-
corporation in a military bloc in the Near East. Moreover, in connection
with the American aspiration to drag the Arab countries into a military
alliance at all costs a number of statements were made by 0.8. officials
condemning Israeli policy. Thus in his report on his 3-week visit to the
Near East Dulles recommended that Israel "become a part of Near East society
and cease considering itself a foreign element in this society." Advocating
the need for the creation of a Near East military bloc. Dulles concluded his
report with the recommendation of "an impartial attitude toward the Arabs
and lsraelis." In July 1953 the United States refused to transfer its
embassy to Jerusalem. which the Israeli leadership had declared the state's
capital, contrary to UN reso;utions. In the fall of 1953 the United States
vigorously protested Israeli raids on the territory of Egypt. Jordan and
Syria. After the Israeli attack on Qibya in Jordan on 18 October 1953.

the 0.5. State Department came out with a statement which said, in part:
“The killings and robberies during this incident persuade us that the persons

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

involved in this shouhllmve proceedings instituted against them and that
effective measures should be adopted to prevent shmilar actions in the future."

Certain representatives of official Washington circles went even further.
casting doubt in their public speeches on the policy of making Israel a
"homeland" for all Jews. U.S. Assistant Secretary of State Henry Diroade
twice came out with an undisguised condemnation of Israel's aspiration to
become "the nucleus of world Jewry." 0n the first occasion-on 9 April 1954
in Dayton. 0hio--and. in repetition. in a speech to the American Council for
Judaism (the neo-Zionist Jewish organization in the United States) N. Biroade
sharply opposed the Israeli leadership's aspiration to increase immigration
into the country and essentially developed the thesis from Dulles' report on
the need for Israelis "to regard themselves in the proper light as a Near
East state and to see their future in connection with this region and not

as the headquarters and nucleus. so to speak. of groups scattered around

the world defined by religious belief."

Such speeches and official statements of the State Department manifested an
aspiration "to play the Israel card" in an attempt to effect a rapprochement
with the Arab countries and utilize this rapprochement for drawing them into
a military alliance. At the same time metallic notes also sounded in the
United States' voice in relation to Israel because Hashington had begun to
display nervousness in connection with the unbridled extremism of the Is—
rneli ruling clique and its unwillingness to_sdapt and insert itself into s
hear hast context (failing which. in the opinion of Dulles and his entourage.
Israel could not perform in full the rule of outpostof American influence in
the Near East). which could disrupt the 0.8. maneuver. alienate the USSR

and other socialist countries.

"are Washington was. naturally. far from sacrificing its relations with Is-

rael for the sake of a policy of rapprochement with the Arab countries: it

was a question of tactics. more precisely. of priorities in the accomplish-

ment of this task or the other of American diplomacy. For this reason Hash-
ington did everything possible to "amortize" for Israel the results of this

game and. in any event. to pass nowhere beyond its limited confines.

It is well known. for example. that on 20 October 1953 Dulles announced a
suspension of aid to Israel insofar as the latter had refused to abide by

an injunction of the UN Trusteeship Council concerning a cessation of opera-
tions to drain swamp land and build a hydropower station in the demilitarized
zone between Israel and Syria. But as soon as 28 October the United States
announced the resumption of aid. satisfied by a statement of the Israeli UN
representative concerning an agreement not to cease but simply suspend the
work.

At the same time President Eisenhower appointed a mission headed by Eric
Johnston for carrying out a project to divertthe waters of the River Jordan
and create irrigation systems. The Arab states, which rejected this proj-
ect. not unreasonably termed it pro-Israeli since the United States had

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLX
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

linked with its implementation a solution of the refugee problem by means of
their new settlement predominantly on Jordanian territory, without their
return to the lands from which they had been expelled.

The aspiration to draw the Arab countries into a military bloc gave rise to the
need for the United States to propose military assistance to a number of

Arab regimes either as a means of pulling them toward a bloc or as a re-
ward for their consenting to Join it. Immediately following the conclusion

of the miiitary pact between Turkey and Pakistan in 1954. the United States
granted Iraq military assistance for the purpose of stimulating this Arab
country's entry into the planned broad bloc. The agreement provided for
supplies of American arms to Iraq. the establishment of a 0.5. military
mission in the country and the dispatch of Iraqi officers for training in

the United States.

Proceeding precisely from the task of reinforcing the West's aggregate mili-
tary positions in the Arab world. Washington. as already said, displayed
diplomatic activeness in the conclusion of the Anglo-Egyptian agreement on
the evacuation of the British base from the Suez Canal Zone. President
Eisenhower wrote on 15 July 1976 in his message to President al-Nasir that
"simultaneously with the conclusion of a Suez agreement with Great Britain
the United States will be able to enter into direct relations with Egypt in
the field of economic assistance and the strengthening of its armed forces."
"After it had facilitated through unusually effective diplomacy the conclu-
sion of an agreement between Egypt and Britain on the evacuation of the Suez
baae. the United States aspired more than ever before to draw al-Nssir into
a Western defense agreement and change his behavior in relation to Israel.
Arms were to be the main means of accomplishing this, is how Uilliam Quandt
comments on the aims of American participation in the Egyptian-British accord.

2. The Reasons for the Turnabout in Policy (1955-1957)

Desyite the flexibility it had shown. the United States did not succeed in
realizing its idea of the incorporation of leading Arab countries in a mili-
tary bloc. Iraq was the sole exception. Egypt, where by this time the ele-
ments which had formed a group around al-Naeir and which possessed far great-
er revolutionary potential than the supporters of General Najib had conclu-
sively gained the upper hand. not only sharply opposed the_3agdad Pact but
also directed its policy and its influence in the rest of the Arab world
against this bloc. As a counterweight to the Baghdad Pact. Egypt signed
military agreements with Syria and Saudi Arabia. A government headed by
Sabrl nl-'Asali, leader of the National Party. was in power in Syria at

this time. Saudi Arabia agreed to a military alliance with Egypt obviously
motivated by its traditional hostility toward and rivalry with the hashemite
dynasty in Iraq: King Sa'ud feared that Iraq's inclusion in the laghdad
Pact would make this state the "cat's principal protege among the Arab
monarchies. There was also, obviously. considerable significance in the
fact that in 1955 there had been a sharp deterioration of Saudi Arabia's

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

relations with another member of the Baghdad Pact--Britain--on account of
the al-Buraymi oasis. to which the British protege the sultan of Muscat
had advanced claims.

The United States attempted to prevent Egypt's conclusion of military
agreements with other Arab countries, particularly Syria. realizing that

this woulu put an end to the American plans for the creation of its "own"
military alliances in the Near East controlled or directly commanded by the
United States and could also strengthen the Arabs' positions in the confront-
ation with Israel. On 26 February the U.S. ambassador in Damascus handed the
Syrian Government a memorandum which proposed that Syria decline to subscribe
to the defense alliances. Syria interpreted this memorandum as interference
in its internal affairs and rejected it. In response Hashington began a
campaign of pressure on this country unprecedented in American-Syrian rela-
tions. Elements of this pressure were a sharp exacerbation of Turkey and
Iraq's relations with Syria. Israeli attacks and. finally, the murder of
'Adnan al-Haliki. the patriotically-minded assistant chief of the Syrian Army
General Staff. which was connected with plans for the restoration of al-
Shishakli's pro-American dictatorial regime. Despite this pressure. on

20 October 1955 Syria subscribed to a defensive alliance with Egypt and. a
week later. with Saudi Arabia.

The pressure on Syria was intended to put pressure on Egypt also. But this
did not stop nl-Nasir. who called the Baghdad Pact '% prison for the peoples”
and stepped up the struggle against it.

A whole number of researchers in the field of American-Egyptian relations be-
lieves that this very struggle. Egypt's turning to the socialist states for
weapons in mid-1955 and. finally. Egypt's nationalization of the Suez Canal
Company in July l956--sll this also predetermined the turnabout in American
policy in relation to al-Nasir's regime. It is said that al-Nssir himself.
with his own hands. forced the United States to alter its position. This
conclusion, which was assiduously disseminated even in post-al-Nasir Egypt.
particularly in the attempts to "argue" the policy of rapprochement with the
United States under the conditions of its continuation of rigid support for
israel. is seen as incorrect and not corresponding to historical reality.
These measures on the part of the Egyptian leadership undoubtedly hardened
the American course. but the policy of the United States itself predetermined
the development which led to Egypt’s implementation of all these measures.

It is obvious that we should dwell on this in more detail. and not so much
for polemical purposes as for the restoration of the true picture. which
testified that. first. the United States began to pursue its anti-Egypt
policy on its own initiative and not in response to al-Nasir's actions di-
rected against U.S. interests and. second, that this anti-Egypt course of

the United States was entirely linked with the strategic position which
Washington had occupied in relation to the parties directly involved in the
Near East conflict.

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Struggling against the anti-imperialist trends in the policy of Egypt and
certain other Arab countries. the American leadership began to utilize these
countries' confrontation with Israel in its own interests. It was gambled
that the military pressure of a "strong" Israel would compel these countries
to be more pliant in relations with the United States and prevent the de-
velopment of the process of their rapprochement. Israel's importance to the
United States in the protection of its interests in the Near East grew under

the conditions of the failure to enlist the Arab world in imperialist al-
liancea.

A result of this was the United States' removal of a number of restrictions
on the development of the Near East conflict which it had put up in the
foregoing period of its flirtation with the Egyptian "Free Officers." In
certain instances the United States even resorted to supporting the policy of
Israeli "reprisala." which. naturally. aggravated the Near East conflict.
Meanwhile this aggravation also acquired a logic of its own.

The United States made a strategic choice in favor of Israel. which was in
conflict with the Arabs. The development of the conflict required of the
United States a more clearly negative approach to the Arab side. particular-
ly in all questions connected with the possibility of the growth of its de-
fense capability. It was possible for this negativisn to be of a "selective
nature" in this period: essentially only three Arab countries were in active
confrontation with Israel-Bgypt. Syria and Jordan. The "oil factor" had

not at that time exerted a limiting influence on U.S. policy. which was anti-
Egyptian and. in relation to the conflict. anti-Arab. which had taken shape
under the conditions of the growth of anti-imperialism in the Near East.
American oil interests in Saudi Arabia. Kuwait and Iraq seemed reliably pro-
tected with the help of the local authorities. who maintained close rela-
tions with the United States. All the regimesin the Arab countries where
American oil companies operated were overtly or covertly anti-Naair.

The chronology of the Lnited States' anti-Egypt actions is significant in

the plane of what has been said. The United States began to put into ef-
fect its perfectly definite turnabout in its policy toward Egypt not follow-
lng the purchase of Czechoslovak arms and. even less. following the national-
ization of the Suez Canal Company but earlier than all this--back in the
spring of 1955. There was a gradual buildup of the United States‘ oblique
and direct anti-Egypt actions, which reached their culmination in July 1956
in the withdrawal of the original proposal to grant Egypt financial as-
sistance for the construction of the Aswan hydrocomplex, which was important
to it.

Certain Western authors assert that Dulles' "sudden" withdrawal of previous-
ly promised assistance was dictated by purely subjective considerations:
Ihnles--a complex personality who had an extremely big influence on the
course of American policy in the Near East--was considerably irritated by
the Egyptian propaganda campaign against the Baghdad Pact and its initiators
and participants. The majority ascribes the withdrawal of assistance in

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFVICIAL USE ONLY

the Aswan construction to Dulles' reaction to the agreement with Czechoslo-

vakia on arms supplies to Egypt which Jamal 'Abd al-Naair announced on
27 September 1955.

la speaking of the "fatal" nature of Dulles' refusal. which. indeed. played
an exceptionally big role in the further development of events (for it was
followed by Egypt's nationalization of the Suez Canal Company. which, in
turn. gave rise to the tripartite aggression against Egypt in October 1956)
a number of researchers in the Rest considers the motives and driving for-
ces of the American decision altogether "inexplicable" and "unexplained."

Yet this withdrawal by Dulles was the logical consequence of the changes in
American policy toward Egypt which lay chiefly in the plane of the Arab-
Israeli conflict.

True. as has been said. internal changes had occurred in Egypt by the time
of the turnabout in American policy: General Najib had resigned, al-Nasir
had finally gained the upper hand in the leadership and victory had gone to
the most dynamic forces advocating the country's independent course of de-
velopment. But this was not enough in itself to change the American atti-
tude toward Egypt. According to Haykal. Dulles was generally satisfied with
his meeting with al-Nasir which had taken place on 11 Hay 1953 in Cairo.
Al-Nasir did not take up Dullea' proposal concerning Egypt joining the M110
(Middle Best Defense Organization). but Dulles could still detect in a num-
ber of his arguaents the possibility of "constructive" discussions with the
Egyptian leader in the future (resolute anti-imperialism became al-Naeir's
policy after a certain time, but in 1953 he was chiefly guided by a purely
pragmatic approach to the choice of partners and allies). "Al-Nasir proved,"
H. haykal writes. "that if Egypt joined the pact prior to the departure of
the British from the Suez Canal Zone. this would appear that it had done
this under pressure from the 8.000 British soldiers on the Suez Canal base.
This was an argument which gave Dulles hope. He felt that after the depart-
ure of the British from the base. it would be possible to talk with al-Nasir
about joining the pact. Al-Nasir also acknowledged the need to protect the
country against communism."

Thus the United States did not lose hope that it would be successful in reach-
ing at least a modus vivendi in relations with the Nasirite leadership. It

Is known. for example. that Washington succeeded--this was its "service."
basically--in furnishing the agreement on the withdrawal of British troops
from the Suez Canal Zone, which was signed in 195‘. with clauses in accord-
ance with which the British armed forces could return to the Canal Zone in

the event of an attack on Egypt and on other members of the Arab League or
Turkey. These clauses were viewed as being directed against the Soviet

Union and their purpose was to compensate for Egypt's refusal to participate
in a military alliance under the aegis of the Western powers.

Nor was Cairo's sharply negative reaction to the creation of the Baghdad
Pact a surprise to Hashington. Jamal 'Abd al-Nasir had repeatedly warned

13
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the U.s. leadership that he would oppose any military alliance in the Near

East in which an Arab country participated. However. simultaneously with

these warnings he repeatedly emphasized, and in a number of his public speeches
also. his interest in relations with the Nest. if such relationswere not
conditioned by commitments to participate in military alliances.

Nor could the withdrawal of American assistance for the Aswan construction
.hnve been the U.S. reaction to sl-Nssir's agreement with the socialist coun-
tries on arms supplies. More than 2 months after the signing of the Egyptian-
Czechoslovak agreement on arms purchases. in November 1955, Dulles met in
Washington with Egyptian Finance Minister A. M. al-Qaysuni and'charged him
with conveying to al-Nasir that "the Soviet Union is helping Egypt with wes-
ponsv bututhe United States intends to help Egypt in the construction of the
high dam. '

Further. Dulles asked al-Nasir to ponder "the difference in the nature of

the assistance of the two countries and decide who Egypt's real friends are."
leaving on one side the Pharisaic methods of Dulles' diplomacy, let us turn
our attention here to the fact that during his meeting with al-Qaysuni the
U.S. secretary of state had not only not removed the question of American
assistance for the Aswan construction in connection with Egypt's obtaining
arms from the socialist countries but. on the contrary. opted for this U.S.
assistance in the form of a bridgehead for "competition" with the USSR for
influence in Egypt.

And. indeed. in December 1955 the United States declared its readiness to
grant Egypt assistance in the construction of the high dam in Aswan. The
United States and Britain assured Cairo that they would grant it $70 mil-
lion. while the Internstionsl Bank for Reconstruction and Development de-
clared its readiness to grant Egypt a loan of $200 million.

Nor. obviously. could withdrawal of the assistance on the part of the United
States have been predetermined by the policy of Egypt's neutralisu which had
been proclaimed and confirmed by al-Nasir's active participation in the
Bandung Conference of nonalined countries in April 1955. it is known that
In the middle of June Dulles sharply opposed the policy of neutralism, which
he termed amoral. however. all this was before the United States had agreed
to grant assistance for the Aswan construction and not in the time between
this agreement and the subsequent withdrawal.

Nor does the theory of Dulles' "impulsiv€'decision withstand criticism. U.S.
intentions were fully revealed at a secret meeting of Baghdad Pact foreign
ministers hack in March 1956. that is. 4 months prior to his announcement
of the withdrawal of assistance for the Aswan construction. The totally
secret protocol of this meeting was photographed by an Iraqi minister and
handed over in Beirut to Egyptian intelligence officials. Upon receipt

of the document. al-Nasir doubted its authenticity: events, however. con-
firmed its accuracy.

14
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

what. then. at that time were the main motives for such an extraordinary
measure as the United States' demonstrative retreat from its previously
promised assistance. a retreat which had been prepared in adV|nce. which
could not fail to have attested the complete reorganization of American po-
licy in relation to Egypt?

Since the start of 1955 there had been a sharp reduction in American im-
perialism's opportunities for maneuver, which had assisted previous attempts
to reconcile two mutually contradictory aims of its hear Bast policy: on
the one hand the strengthening of Israel as a strategic base of American
control over the Near East and. on the other. the reinforcement of 0.8.
positions and influence directly in Egypt and other Arab countries. This
occurred under the conditions of a sharp galvanization of Israel's anti-
Arnb policy which was formulated by Ben-Gurion. who had returned to power.
and which resulted in the attack on Gaza. Naturally. even under the new
conditions the United States did not rule out a policy of flirting with

Egypt. but the United States' opportunities for maneuver in this plane had
distinctly narrowed.

The problem of military reinforcement in the face of a real danger of Israel's
armed actions confronted Egypt in all its magnitude. Cairo realized that

not only the fate of the "Free Officers" regime in Cairo but also Egypt's
authority and positions throughout the Arab world would largely depend on

the extent of the opposition to these Israeli actions. Following Israel‘s
February attack on Gaza. Egypt immediately began to look for sources of arms
supplies. I: was in vital need of such. According to its military represent-
ative. at that time Egypt had six operational military aircraft and ammmni-
tion for tanks for one hour of battle.

Initially Egypt turned to its "traditional" arms sources--Britain and France.
However. this request for the sale of weapons had negative results for Egypt.
The government of Anthony Eden. which had come to power in Great Britain in
April 1955. sharply increased the anti-Egyptian element in this country's
policy. particularly under the conditions wherein Britain had joined the
Baghdad Fact. The January 1955 election in France had brought to power the
government of Guy Hollet. which also. from the very first. occupied an ex-
tremely negative position in relation to the Nasirite regime. This govern-
ment adopted a policy of resolute suppression of the national liberation
movement in Algeria. and the weakening or even removal of al-Nasir was con-
sidered an important condition for this. One month after Guy Hollet had
become premier. France declined to sell 300 mortars on the grounds that they
could be passed on to the Algerian insurgents. But simultaneously with

its refusal of Egypt France sold Israel a consignment of Hystere aircraft

and other arms. France obtained the direct consent of the United States in
accordance with the "Tripartite Declaration" for Hystere supplies to Israel.

Under these circumstances J. al-Nasir even requested the United States itself
that It sell Egypt arms to-the tune of $27 million. The State Department

15
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"justifiably assumed" that nl-Nasir had no money and proposed that he pay in
cash. Another demand was advanced simultaneously--that he take a group of
American military advisers which was to observe how the supplied weapons would
he used. Al-Nasir could not accept the Pentagon's demand, which threatened

to put the Egyptian armed forces under the control of the United States.

which had close relations with the other side of the conflict--Israel. Hash-
ington immediately declared that Egypt's position did not allow it to sell

it weapons. It was right after all this that al-Nasir turned to the Soviet
Union and Czechoslovakia with a request for arms sales. His request was
satisfied.

Two days after this became known in Hashington (it had learned officially of
Egypt's agreement with Czechoslovakia from al-Nasir's 27 September speech).
J. Allen. U.S. assistant secretary of state. flew to Cairo for talks with
the Egyptian president. A day later the British ambassador called on al-
Naulr and expressed. on behalf of his government, "profound anxiety." The
Hestern press carried a whole series of anti-Nasir articles. It was per-
fectly clear that the United States and the Rest European countries had
hastily coordinated their actions to put pressure on al-Nasir for him to
renounce the concluded agreement, which impinged on the West's possibilities
of controlling the Near East conflict in its own interests. This pressure

had no effect. The first consignments of the purchased weapons began to
arrive in Egypt.

A few months prior to al-Nasir's request for the sale of arms. the United
States itself had proposed military assistance to Egypt: American repre-
sentatives were constantly informing the Egyptian leaders that it could be
a question of a supply of various types of arms to the tune of $40 million
to $100 million. Now. a few months later, the United States was refusing
Egypt--why? The point was that at the end of 1956 the specific purpose of
proposed American military assistance was totally different. The United
States believed that assistance "would make al-Nasir sufficiently strong"
inside the country for him to be able to adopt decisions on the appropriate
form of military cooperation with the Heat (albeit in the form of the sta-
tioning of a permanent U.S. military mission in Egypt inpsecting the Egyp-
tian Army) and on a separate settlement with Israel with a solution of the
question of the Palestine refugees. As far as the request by al-Nasir him-
self for military assistance was concerned, it was made at a time when it
had become clear that Egypt needed the weapons to reinforce its positions
in the confrontation with Israel. It was precisely this which predeter~
mined Washington's negative response.

There are grounds for believing that Dullcs' subsequent refusal to grant
Egypt financial assistance for the Aswan construction was also chiefly con-
nected with the fact that Egypt had embarked on a period of active con-
frontation with Israel. which was initiated by the Israeli attack on Gaza.

The 0.5. Congress was perfectly distinct in its opposition to the idea of
assistance to Egypt. A number of congressmen initiated a campaign against

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

proposed U.S. assistance on the grounds that it was being granted to "Israel's
enemy." As a supplement to this, Knowland, leader of the Republican minor-
ity in the Senate. told Dulles that the Senate would not approve US. assist-
ance for the construction in Aswan. putting forward as a reason for this
negative attitude the fear of competition on the part of Egypt for American
cotton producers.

The very terms of the United States granting a loan for the Aswan construc-
tion were linked with the advancement of the idea of Egypt making a separate
peace with Israel. Prior to his departure from Washington for Cairo. at

the end of May 1956 Ahmad ﬂusayn, Egyptian ambassador to the United States,
was received by Undersecretary of State Herbert Hoover Jr, who was at that
time standing in for Dulles. to be given information to be conveyed to his
leaders. Hoover put forward the conditions whose adoption by Egypt was to
precede an American decision concerning the financing of the Aswan construc-
tion. The first part cf them contained purely financial and economic re-
quirements. The second part contained U.S. requirements of a political na-
ture. Egypt, according to Hoover, was to assume tow commitments: declare
that in the future it would not conclude agreements on arms supplies with
the Soviet Union and reach a peace agreement with Israel. The motive for
the renunciation of new agreements with the USSR was allegedly dictated by a
concern to insure that Egypt would be able to pay off its debts without
mortgaging its cotton for arms; the peace agreement with Israel. naturally.
on terms close to those dictated by Tel Aviv. was presented as a means of
eliminating tension essential for the Aswan construction. The American
position was perfectly clear: in exchange for assistance in the construc-
tion of the dam Egypt had to adopt a policy geared toward a separate peace
with Israel. Hhile a renunciation of the development of its relations with
the USSR was to contribute to Egypt's greater tractsbility in the face of
the diktat of Israel, where by this time the "hawks" were firmly at the
helm.

Judging by everything (this was mentioned earlier). Egypt had not occupied

a nihilistic position on the question of the possibility of a settlement with
Israel. but al-Nasir was thinking of a general and not a separate settle-
ment. with the obligatory solution of the Palestinian problem. and considered
the 1967 UN plan of the partition of Palestine the basis thereof. At the
same time, after Ben-Curion's return to the government, the Israelis adopted
a policy not of the search for compromise but for the overthrow of al-Nasir.
And under these conditions the American proposals resembled a diplomatic
cover designed to promote this aim.

When it became clear to the United States that al-Nasir would not agree to a
separate agreement on Israeli terms or terms close to them, the Hhite House
and. particularly at that time. the State Department began to seek more ef-
fective measures intended to break al-Nasir's resistance and bring his policy
under American control. A means was needed for this which was capable of
having an even greater impact on Egypt than the refusal of arms supplies.

The United States attempted to make its withdrawal of its previously

17
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFVICIAL USE ONLY

promised assistance for the Aswan construction just such a means. Dulles
obviously calculated that such a turnabout could have the maximum impact
since it directly called in question the feasibility of a project of vital
importance for Egypt.

The United States was not nor could it have been in any doubt as to the
strength of the painful method which it intended to adopt in respect of
Egypt. it deliberately decided on concentrated strategic pressure on al-
Nasir's regime. In his report to the Congress for the second half of 1955
U.S. President Eisenhower wrote that the construction of the Aswan high Dam
was "the key to Egypt's capability of providing for its growing population
in the future." Eisenhower explained the agreement of the United States.
Britain and the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development "to
join efforts" in the offer to finance the construction by the "extraordinary
importance of the project." And the United States also decided to play on
precisely the fact that the Aswan construction was of such importance for
the new regime in Egypt. The American politicians counted on the surefire
nature of their maneuver. Dulles believed that after he had received the
United States' refusal to approach him with outstretched hand. al-Nasir
would he forced to agree to all the American terms. Even if the Soviet
Union did supply Egypt with weapons. it would not be in a position to cre-
ate a source of economic assistance as an alternative to the Heat. Dulles
hoped.

The calculations that the U.S. maneuver would break al-Nasir were also based
on the fact that in December 1955 Hashington had not merely agreed to fi-
nance the start of the construction in Aswan but had also announced its
readiness to provide, in conjunction with Britain. assistance and financing
for "subsequent stages" of the project.

Following the withdrawal of the United States. there immediately followed
withdrawals from the financing of the Aswan construction by Britain and the
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development.

Thus by his withdrawal of his offer of assistance to Egypt Dulles was not
responding to al-Nasir but acting on his own initiative. The fact that the
import of these actions of Dulles amounted directly to blackmail of Egypt
is emphasized by many authors even in the West. One of them. Maxim Rodin-
son. wrote the following in this connection: "Having assumed that the USSR
was not in a position to finance the Aswan Dam, Dulles announced on 18 July
that the United States was canceling its offer of assistance, adding cer-
tain disparaging remarks by the way of explanation.... For the western
powers capitulation (of Egypt-~Ye. P.) seemed entirely certain."

Speaking in Alexandria on 26 July, in response to Dulles' maneuver al-Nasir
announced the nationalization of the Suez Canal Company. The United States
sharply condemned this decision of Egypt‘s. Immediately following al-Nasir's
declaration. Dulles met in London with the British and French foreign

18
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ministers. and. following this. it was officially announced that the United
Stutcs had "temporarily" frozen all the Suez Canal Company's bank deposits

abroad. The United States simultaneously cut back on supplied of a number

of most important commodities to Egypt which had been delivered in accord-

ance with the aid program which was in effect and refused it sales of food-
stuffs in the immediate future. The United States thus actively joined in

the economic blockade of Egypt.

The U.S. secretary of state was the initiator of the advancement of a plan
for the establishment of international control over the Suez Canal--a neo-
colonialist form of depriving Egypt of sovereignty over a seaway situated
in its territory. This plan of an international consortium to administer
the Suez Canal came to be called the "Dulles Plan." At a meeting with his
British and French colleagues Dulles proposed the convening in London of a
conference of Suez Canal user-countries intended to establish "international
control" "on a legal basis." In a joint statement of the three powers the
convening of a conference of user-countries was set for 16 August 1956.

The speeches of the 0.5. secretary of state at the London Conference, which
ended on 25 August sincetheHestern states' neocolonialist position had
brought it to the point of deadlock; the "Committee of Five" mission, in-
spired by the United States and headed by Australian Prime Minister Menzies.
which was intended to impose the "Dulles Plan" on al-Nasir; a new separate
iondon conference, which had adopted, in spite of the most widespread pro-
tests throughout the world. a decision on the setting up of the Suez Canal
Users Association--all this was aimed at taking away from Egypt it sovereign
rights to the canal. Western politicians did everything they could to doom
to failure the Egyptian initiative concerning nationalization of the company.
The West feared the success of this step not only because it had struck at
their positions in Egypt itself but also because it had created an extra-
ordinarily dangerous precedent for them: other countries might follow the
Egyptian example. It might lead to the end of the era of the "inevitable
failure" of such actions which had been proclaimed by imperialist politi-
cians following the failure of the nationalization of oil in Iran by
Hossadeq.

Behind all the measures designed at all costs and in any form to return the
Suez Canal to Hestern control stood the United States--a country which. in-
cidentally. was far less interested in navigation along the canal than many
other states. At the same time the United States did not take part and did
not support the armed triple aggression of Britain. France and Israel aimed
at restoring by force the Suez Canal to foreign domination.

Completely different and sometimes diametrically opposed assessments are
expressed concerning the American position in connectionwith the triple
aggression against Egypt. The British press has written of a "sobbing Prime
Minister Eden" during a telephone conversation with President Eisenhower.
who "refused" to support the allies at the decisive moment. Eden's memoirs
are bestrewn with reproaches leveled at the United States. A number of

19
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

western researchers even believes that the 0.5. position at the time of the
events was manifestly "pro-Arab": the United States failed to support its
allies which had made the attack on Egypt and voted in the UN General Assembly
for the resolution calling for a cease-fire and the withdrawal of Israeli
troops. There is also an opposite viewpoint-it was a matter of a "division
of roles": while Britain. France and Israel were the direct participants in
the attack. the United States undertook to secure the "international rear"

of the operation and for this purpose did not participate directly in the

Suez adventure.

What. then. were the motives for the American position in respect of the
triple aggression against Egypt? Where do we find the meaning of the Ameri-
can statements and actions?

The explanation of the American position by Prof John Badeau. former U.S.
ambassador to Egypt. who headed Columbia University's Middle East Institute
after his retirement from the diplomatic service, merits attention. J. Badeau
emphasizes that the 0.8. refusal to support the armed attack on Egypt was
caused not by fundamental contradictions in the aims pursued by the United
States on the one hand and the states which perpetrated the aggression on
the other and not by the fact that the United States rejected in principle
the methods of operation of its allies but by the fact that in the opinion
of American politicians the moment had already been lost and that the new
conditions did not allow them to act with military methods. "Hhat was pos-
sible a week after the nationalization." Badeau wrote. "was not possible

3 months after." In reaching this conclusion the United States at the same
time gave its approval for France to supply Israel with an additional three
squadrons of Hystere aircraft.

There is reason to believe that even after the attack of Israel and then of
Britain and France of Egypt the U.S. position was far from simple and straight-
forward. In his study, which was published by the Rand Corporation. H. Quandt
terms it. for example. an "open" question whether Dulles aspired "to post-
pone adoption of the UN resolution calling for a cease-fire. at least until
the British were through with al-Nasir." In any event the United States
did much behind the scenes to defer the adoption of this resolution in the
United Nations. and it was only onthe fifth day of the aggression. 2 Novem-
ber. that it was passed by an emergency session of the UN General Assembly
and. moreover. in the absence of Dulles. who reported sick. "Despite the
serious split in policy with the allies. the fundamental American assessment
of al-Nasir remained as before." the study "0.8. Interests in the Middle
East." which was published under the editorship of Prof G. Lenczowski. says.
"He (al-Nasir-Ye.P.) was an obstacle to the reinforcement of the United
States' system of allies and too friendly toward the Soviet Union." Haykal
is even more categorical on this score in his book "Cairo Documents": "It
should not be thought that Dulles' far-reaching aims differed from Eden's
aims. He also wished for al-Nasir's fall. but his brother (Allen Dulles--
director of the CIA--Ye.P.) had ssured him that this could be achieved
cautiously. by means of a coup in the country-itself and not by an attack
from outside. This would not have caused resentment either among the Arabs
or the Russians."

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

When. on 3 Rove-bet. Britain and, subsequently, Franco rejected the General
Assembly resolution and 2 days later dropped assault-landing units in the
Suez Canal Zone. the United States condemned these actions. but nothing sore.
The following complex of circumstances apparently predetermined the American
position at the time of an inediately after the Suez crisis.

First, the United States was forced to reckon with the policy of the Soviet
Union. which resolutely supported the vicim of the aggression—Egypt. After
the landing of the British and French troops in the region of Port Said. the
Soviet Goveth demanded the i-ediate convening of a UN Security Council
session to discuss the question "The Noncospliaace by Britain, France and
Israel of the General Assenbly Decision of 2 November and I-ediate Measures
To lialt the Aggression of the Said States Against Egypt." In s draft resolu-
tion the Soviet Union proposed that a time of 12 hours be given for the with-
drawal of all interventionist troops and. should Britain. France and Israel
not cease the aggression. that Egypt be granted military assistance by the
forces of the UN Security Council lesbers.

The global correlation of forces which had already cone about by the tine of
the tri [ie aggression had led to the-point where the export of counter-revolu-
tion had become very dangerous. The British and French leaders were ready to
shift responsibility to the United States in this case. leaving to it. as
leader of the capitalist world. the adoption of a decision on actions aimed
at protecting its allies. Eden and Guy Hollet put their trust in the auto-
satisa of the American reaction when the United States' closest and host
iaportsnt partners happened to be threatened. In pursuing by their action
against Egypt chiefly not all-imperialist (although there were these also)
but their own specific aims aad=thinking of the strengthening of their own
positions in Egypt after the liquidation of the al-Nasir regise (perhaps
even hatching plans for a kind of revanche for the withdrawal under the
conditions of the galvanization of Aaerican influence in Egypt following the
ouster of King Faruq Britain and France were at the sane tine counting: on
the fact that the United States would be absolutely autooatically forced to
protect them in the event of global complications.

The Aaerican leaders wished to reserve the right to s free choice of deci-
sion. The more so in that they were indignant that their allies, whose plans
they had, naturally. suspected and known in general outline. had not deeaed
it necessary to notify Washington of the details that had been worked out

and the date of and the procedure for the attack on al-Nasir's Egypt. The
day before Israel's attack on Egypt. the British foreign secretary had as-
sured the American albassador in London that he still did not have any data
on Israel's intention of striking at Egypt. At the same time. as became
perfectly obvious, and fro- Eden's memoirs also. the coordination of Israel's
actions with Britain and ﬁance had been elaborated and accomplished in
advance in all details.

Second. Hashington understood that the action of Britain and France against
Egypt. which was undertaken without consideration of the tine and circum-
stances. would lead to the ultimate weakening and. possibly. the liquidation

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of their positions intheArab world. IftheAmerican politicians had thought
that such a weakening or liquidation would have been identical to the loss
of "overall" Western influence, they would undoubtedly have acted far more
energetically in support of their partners. However, the viewpoint that

the firwest guarantee of the interests of the entire imperialist West lay

in the plane of the introduction and strengthening of purely American posi-
tions had gradually gained the upper hand in Washington by that time.

It was precisely at this time that the “vacuum theory" had become quite
widespread in the United States, and. moreover, the United States understood
the irreversibility of the process of the formation of this "vacuum" in
Western influence through the collapse of the positions of the traditional
colonial powers. Given their understanding of the inevitability of this
process. the American politicians gambled on filling in the developing
"vacuum." The actions of Britain and France, which were dangerous for the
entire West and for its aggregate positions in the Arab world, were carried
out in a form of which Washington did not approve at that time. The United
States saw in this not only its partners' irritating blunder and the pos-
sible danger in this connection of the growth of revolutionary forces in the
Arab world but also a good opportunity to strengthen its own positions and,
through this-—on a new, higher level--strengthen the influence of the whole
imperialist West in the Arab countries.

The new understanding of the situation and the United States' role in the
Arab countries, which were viewed as a part of the so-called third world,
was reflected in, for example. the following conclusion, at which J. Badeau
arrived in his analysis of American policy at the time of and after the Suez
crisis: "The United States has completely irreversibly become the custodian
of general Western positions. As a consequence of this, the American role
has simultaneously become both independent and limited. It has become in-
dependent in that it has ceased to be chiefly a supplement to the tradition-
al positions of the Eruopean powers, but is now based on an American deter-
mination of interests and political aims. No single Western power could
successfully pursue a policy in the Arab world which would conflict with
U.S. policy. European policy has become the supplement, while American policy
has become the foundation."

Third, following the failure of Dulles' trick of withdrawal of the original
consent to finance the Aswan construction and after American diplomacy at
the time of and after the nationalization of the Suez Canal Company had im-
paired even further the positions which the United States had won in Egypt
with great difficulty in the first 2 years following the overthrow of Faruq,
the Suez crisis had created a favorable opportunity for Washington to at-
tempt to restore its prestige in Cairo. 'ﬁhmy Arabs were grateful for
American opposition to the Suez aggression. Under such conditions it could
have been assumed that a new 0.8. initiative materialized in strengthening
of its positions in the Middle East would prevent subsequent Soviet penetra-
tion," W. Quandt wrote. Thus with the aid of its policy at the time of

22
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the Suez crisis the United States also gaabled on counteracting the growth
of the authority of the USSR and Soviet influence (all this was called
"penetrat ion") .

Fourth. Unshington expected that the United States would have sufficient
possibilities of securing Israel's interests. including even those that
were manifestly incoapatible with the interests of the neighboring Arab
states. by nethods which would not create a risk either of a global clash or
an undue weakening of iaperiaiist positions in the Arab world. liaving
occupied a definite position at the time of the Suez crisis. the United
States silultaneoualy proaised Israel that the 0.5. delegation in the United
Nations would address all its efforts in its favor. ”Confidence in this
fact." Dulles wrote in a nesorondum to A. Eben. Israeli ambassador in Wash-
ington. "is best capable of securing the future for Israel. and not occupa-
tion. with its challenge to the overwhelming part of the world public."

llaving defined its position. the United States even applied certain pressure
on Israel to compel it to lower the level of the crisis--inpleaent the
General Assembly resolution and withdraw its troops. But this pressure

was strictly limited--it did not go beyond the economic framework. The
United States froze a loan to Israel.

This in itself could not have played the detersining role in compelling
Israel to ultimately evacuate its occupation forces from Sinai. Even a day
before the attack on Egypt. Ben-Gurion declared at a session of the Israeli
Cabinet that the United States. which had opposed this military action. would
not send its troops to force Israel to withdraw froa Sinai. ‘i'he upptr linit
of Its pressure. according to ben-Gurion. was the threat to break off dip-
lomatic relations. a ban on private collections for Israel and the block-
ing of the American loan. Practice showed that the United States did not
even go so far as to threaten Israel with a break in diploaatic relations.

At the same time a clearly outlined and very decisive Soviet policy had
arisen on Israel's path. Israel was compelled to withdraw its troops from
Sinai. :‘he only thing the American politicians' managed to achieve was the
introduction of UN troops on Egyptian territory and in the region of Shsrm
nl-Shaykh. which controlled the entrance to the Strait of Tina. UN troops
were also stationed in the Gaza region.

3. Pros: Utilization of Inter-Arab Confcits to the Direct Gaable on Israel
(1957-1970)

A fundamentally new situation had cone about in the Arab world as a result
of the Suez crisis. The forced withdrawal of the Israeli Army from Sinai
served the development of the national liberation processes in many Arab
countries. Tremendous revolutionizing influence was exerted by the fact
that the Egyptian leadership had succeeded not only in nationalizing the
Suez Canal Company-mot only foreign property but a key facility which
largely secured the system of foreign domination and control over Egypt--

23
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

but also in defending its right to not ionalizationdespite all the effortn or
states ineomparnbly more powerful than Egypt militarily and economically. A
basic factor, which became an obstacle on the path of the export of counter-
rcvolntion--the alliance of the national liberation movement with world so-
cialism-wanifested itself clearly at the time of the Suez crisis.

A patriotic goverrnent came to power in Jordan in October 1956. it was
extremely important that this was preceded by elections which even American
authors consider "the most democratic in this country's history." At the
time of the Suez crisis the new Jordanian Government broke off diplomatic
relations with Britain and France. The situation in the Arab world had be-
come so cardinslly different from everything which it had been in preceding
years that even the states which were traditionally considered the Heat's
"reliable partners" were forced to engage in actions of an objectively anti -
Imperialist nature. In the wake of Egypt and Syria. at the start of Novz'aber
1956 Saudi Arabia also broke off diplomatic relations with Britain and
France. while Iraq broke off relations with France. Al-Nasir's political
popularity assumed tremendous proportions. The entire Arab world paid heed
to his speeches. addresses and actions.

It had become perfectly clear that the prestige of the old colonial powers--
Britain and Prancenin the Arab world and. even more important from the
American politiciana' viewmint. their capacity for successful actions were
close to zero. At the same time there was a rapid growth in the authority
and influence of the Soviet Union in the Arab countries. which realized
increasingly clearly the tremendous significance of friendship and coopera-
tion with the USSR for insuring their capacity for independent development.

Sor were Washington's hopes that the public disagre-ent with Britain. France
and lsrael at the time of the Suez crisis would automatically lead to a
sharp increase in U.S. possibilities in the Arab world justified. This
disagreement was not enough. especially since the American leadership and.

to an even greater extent. the American press continued to emphasize the
limited nature of the disagreements among the allies, reducing them to
purely tactical factors.

The Eisenhmr doctrine was born under these conditions. 0n 5 January 1957
the U.S. President submitted for congressional approval a document which
said that "the United States is prepared to use armed forces to assist any
nation or group of nations requesting assistance against armed aggression
perpetrated by any country controlled by international col-mist..." The
Congress approved this document and proposed that the President act on

the basis of its principles.

The Eisenhower doctrine signiied fundamental changes in the United States'
Near East policy both in form and in content. For the first time the United
States had appeared before the Arab world with an independent docmeat de-
finiag the main direction of its policy. Prior to this. the United States

2!.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

had been able to participate and did participate in the forsulstion of joint
docusents with its allies. Such. for exasple. was the 1950'Tripartite De-
clarat ion“ of the United States. britain and francs. according to which
these powers undertook to guarantee the 19‘9 Israeli borders and ”control"
the art-assent of the Near East countries.

Attempting to prove the need for the pursuit of the foreign policy course
reflected in the Eisenhower doctrine. Aserican politicians resorted. as
already sentioned. to the “vacuun theory." The first premise of this theory
was the inevitability of the formation of a "void" as a result of the weak-
ening or collapse of the positions of this imperialist power or the other in
the East. while the second prenise was the need for this “void" to be filled
in with the influence of another ilperialist power. This "need" was deduced
fro. the struggle of the two systems in the world arena.

The authors of the "vacuun theory" offered the following outline: a strug-
gle is underway between the so-called free world and the socialist countries.
Therefore everything which is outside the fraaework of this struggle. in-
cluding the nntionsl liberation love-ent of the peoples of the East. has

no right to independent existence. Proceeding frol this outline. the authors
of the "vacuus theory" asserted: either the influence of the ”free world"
(the imperialist Nest) or the influence of ”international co-uniso.” in
other words. if the influence of s ”free world" country cones to an end. it
is essential to activize the influence of another country. nasely. the United
States. This thought. for example. was emphasized by Dulles in his speech

at the opening of the UN General Assenbly 12th Session. in which he actually
denied the possibility of the existence of Arab nationalis- as an independ-
ent love-ent.

The ”vacuuo theory" served. first. as substantiation of the United States'
expansionist plans and. second. as a justification for its policy aised at the
liquidation of the independent countries of the test chaspioning the prin-
ciple of positive neutrality.

Although the U.S. President's sessage to the Congress contained no direct
references to the "vscuua theory." the Mericsn press nevertheless assid-
uously propagandizcd the Eisenhower doctrine, proceeding precisely fros

this theory. One of the doctrine's principal authors--John Poster Dulles--
also provided the appropriate clarifications. cm 15 January 1957. to a ques-
tion fro- Senator Mansfield as to whether the Eisenhower doctrine could be
considered the culsinating point of American foreign policy after which there
would rensin no single "vucuun" with the exception. perhaps. of the ”vacuuns"
in lndia and Burns. Dulles replied: "Possibly, yesl"

However. literally 2 nonths after the adoption of the doctrine. Aserican
politicians were forced to hush up the "vacuum theory." Horeover. phrases
to the effect that the United States was not attespting to fill any "vacuus"
because routine in joint coununiques signed by J. Richards. special repre-
sentative of the 0.8. President. and the goverments of certain Near East

25
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

countries. This Iberican political figure. whose sission was to persuade
the Near East states to adopt the Eisenhower doctrine. publicly rejected

the "vacuus theory" even in his interviews. Prank discussion of the "vacuue
theory" also becase extreaely unpopular in the Merican press.

in proclaiming the doctrine Aserican politicians had failed to take into
cansideration the strength and scale of negative reaction in the Arab
countries. The "vacuun theory.” which was an insult to the Arab people's
national dignity. elicited the strongest opposition. States-en and public
figures of the sajority of Arab states spoke out against it. "Re do not
agree with the Heat's idea of the existence of a 'vacuus' in the Near and
Middle East." Egyptian Presiden Janal 'Abd al-Nasir declared. "This idea
presupposes that such a ‘vacuua' should be filled by the western countries.
But we will fill it ourselves. Or. rather. we have filled it ourselves."

A characteristic peculiarity of the Eisenhower doctrine was its distinction
fro. the silitary cousitsents which the United States had assused or pro-
posed that its European allies assuse in connection with the various plans
of the creation of sllitury blocs in the Near East. It was then a question
of ”defending" the region against the threat allegedly esanating from the
Soviet Union. ﬂow. according to the Eisenhower doctrine. the United States
had announced its guarantees of the security of ”all nations" of this region
against attack by countries under "the control of international cos-union."
it was perfectly clear that there had been a tilt toward the direct use of
- Inter-Arab conflicts as grounds for American arsed intervention. In this
plane the Eisenhower doctrine was the first ties that the United States had
l’orsulated a scans of the exploitation in American interests not only of
the Arab-Israeli but also of all other local conflicts in the Near East.
This also bees-e apparent free the explanations sade by Asericsn official
bodies. particularly in the comtriea which by that tine had already been
incorporated in silitary blocs.

On 23 January 1957. for exasple. the Information Bureau of the Asorican
Fnbaasy in Tehran published in the local press replies to questions con-
cerning the Eisenhower doctrine. To a question as to why the 0.8. Main-
is‘uutiuu did not act directly the bureau declared that direct actions
"would possibly not be successful": "the seasures of the British and the
French directed against Egypt did not lead to the fall of al-llasir's

noverr-ent . "

The new Aserican tactics of struggle against sovereign states in the Arab
Fast asounted to the following: an independent Arab country is accused of
becoeing a "Soviet satellite"; a version is spread to the effect that this
country is threatening its neighbors. The next step was to be geared to
the organization of a request to the United States for arsed protection

of the neighbors of this "aggressive" state. “which has cote under the in-
fluence of international cosnuniso."

26
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A dlsiinriive feature of the American lino reflected in the Eisenhower dor-
trine was also the stress put on the utilization against revolutionary trends
in the Arab world not only and. possibly. at this stage not so such of Israel
as of the Arab and other Hoslen regimes dependent on the United States. Is-
rael. which had cosprasised itself with its unsuccessful attack on Egypt and
having been cospelled to release occupied Egyptian land. had to withdraw

for a time. albeit a brief one. free the role of main force in the struggle
against the al-Nasir regime andtheanti-inparialist elements in other Arab
countries which were gravitating toward it. A new anti-Arab activation of
Israel iamediately after the failure of the Suez adventure--and American
politicians could not have failed to have been aware of this--was fraught
with the danger of a strengthening and consolidation of all the anti-imperial-
ist forces in the Arab world as a whole.

It say be considered that in I957 Syria became the first "proving ground"

in which the United States put its new Rear East tactics to the test. Two
days after the Eisenhower doctrine was aada public. a UPI correspondent trans-
mitted from ﬂashington: "Syria is a fine example explaining why President
Eisenhower has put forward his new doctrine." and the observer H. Baldwin.

who was well known at that tine. tersed Syria a political. economic. military
and psychological "'vacuum' which should be filled" in an article published

in the NB" YORK TIMES magazine a month after the adoption of the doctrine.

Now. when many years have elapsed since that time. it is still interesting
to elirit which of the processes in Syria's internal life were evaluated by
American politicians as a threat to 0.8. interests.

At the time of the Suez aggression the Syrians blew up the oil pipeline from
Kirknk to the Nediterrancsn. along which flowed oil produced in Iraq by the
Anerican-Anglo-French Iraq Petroleum Company. But this occurred at a time
of an exacerbation of the Arab-Israeli conflict. when this had reached the
crisis stage. The United States attempted to change the regime in Syria some
time after this. It was thus not a question of "forced actions" dictated

by "a need to maintain the system of the supply of oil to the allies in West
Europe": the oil pipeline from Kirkuk had been restored by this time. and
only a comparatively small proportion of the oil exported from the Near East
countries flowed along it; there were no actions against the pipeline be-
longing to the American Tapline Company. along which oil from Saudia Arabia
was carried to the Mediterranean. The blowing up of the pipeline strained
American policy toward Syria, in our opinion. but was not the main reason
for its extreme aggravation.

The United States could not have been pleased by the decisiveness with which
the Syrian authorities reacted to the conspiratorial activity of the American
Embassy in Damascus. On 22 August 1957 the chief of the Syrian Army General
Staff called a press conference at which he accused U.S. Embassy officials

a. Stone. IA. Klouzl and P. Jettoa of having connections with circles of the
ousted dictator aI-Shishakli and of conspiring for the purpose of changing
the nature of the Syrian regise by force. an: all this was a reaction to
American policy and not the reason for it.

27
FOR OFFICIAL USE OﬂLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Hashington had publicly declared that "coamunist elements" had gained the
upper hand in the Syrian regime and. in order to appear more convincing
(this is still done at the present tine in sany American studies of that pe-
riod). claimed that the "co-nuniet" who occupied the post of chief of the
Syrian Army General Staff had actually brought it under "communist control."
The Syrian regioe in 1956-1957 was and remained bourgeois. A. Bizri, chief
of the General Staff of the Syrian Arsy. was never a aenber of the Cos-unist
Party. Moreover. in a number of its actions both the government and the
army command occupied a position opposed to the Syrian Cos-unist Party.
which. given its possibilities. was unahle to influence the country's policy
to any definite extent. Certain of the e in the Syrian Government at that
tine like Foreign Minister S. al-Bitsr, for exasple. then held openly anti-
conaunist positions.

Finally. the American press wrote that Hashington feared Syria's rapproche-
ment with the Soviet Union. Such a rapprochesent as the objective result
of Syria's nnti-ieperialist struggle undoubtedly occurred. But it did not
go beyond the traditional frasework of relations which the Soviet Union

had with many other nonsocinlist countries. in any event. nothing gave
grounds for the provocative report which appeared in the NE" YORK TIMES on
10 Deceaber 1956: ”The United States is worried by the move-eat of con-un-
ist troops through the straits and their landing in Syrian ports.

The real reason which forced the Aaerican politicians to sharpen their Near
East policy against Syria at the very end of 1957 was the considerable
apprehensions which had been aroused in Washington by the processes which
had begun in inter-Arab relations. Egypt. which had emerged in practice
iron the Suez trials as the victor and which, as a result of this. had won
enormous authority in the Arab people's sssses. even in itself represented
a great anti-iaperialist force in the Near East. The circles formulating
U.s. policy saw an even greater danger in the revolutionary dynamism of
al-Nasir and. naturally. in the fact that Egypt was becoming a center of
attraction for other Arab states. Arab unity in that period acquired a
clearly expressed anti-imperialist nature. Egypt's closest partner in
spirit. in the doaestic policy it was pursuing and in its attitude toward
outside forces was Syria. A bridge was built between Cairo and Daaascus.
This bridge. in the event of its builders relying sore on objective pro-
cesses and taking better account of local specifics in these two Arab coun-
tries. could also have been extended to certain other Arab capitals. This
threatened to change the appearance of the entire Arab world. The United
States resolved to underline the Damascus foundation of the bridge of Arab
unity that was being erected imaediately after events had shown the stabil-
ity of President el-Nasir's regiae.

It is significant that at the culminating point of the tension in American-
Syrinn relations the United States slackened its pressure on Egypt. Every-
thing was being done to slow down the trend toward unity between them on

the basis of cannon struggle against the Heat's iaperialist policy. The
United States resumed the payaent of a loan to Egypt on the basis of American

28
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
IOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

technical assistance which had been broken off in November 1956 and released
some of the Egyptian bank deposits which had been frozen at the time of
Egypt's nationalization of the Suez Canal Company. The president of the
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development traveled to Cairo.
where talks were resumed on the granting of a loan to Egypt for construction
of the Aswan Dam. however. as might have been expected. this trend of Aneri-
can policy in relation to Egypt proved temporary: it had purely tactical
functions and. moreover. failed to elicit "steps to meet the United States
half-way" on the part of al-Nasir.

Thus Syria became the first victim of the new American policy proclaimed in
the Eisenhower doctrine. The actions against Syria were carried out in
accordance with the "scenario" contained in the doctrine itself.

In the wake of a loud propaganda campaign. whose purpose was to convince
public opinion that an independent Syria was a threat to its neighbors. a
special cmissary--U.S. Assistant Secretary of State Loy headerson--left for
the Near East. Judging by American press reports. he was entrusted with
preparing the ground for application of the Eisenhower doctrine against in-
dependent Syria. L. Henderson visited Syria's neighboring countries and
had talks with the leaders of Lebanon. Jordan and Turkey and representatives
of Iraq. The gamble was that the neighboring countries would officially
attest to the danger threatening them on the part of Syria. which had al-
legedly become a "Soviet satellite." This would serve as grounds for ex-
tensive U.S. intervention on the oasis of the doctrine.

It is perfectly clear that the United States wished to obtain a request for
assistance primarily from the Arab countries bordering Syria. Appeals for
protection eeanating precisely from the Arab countries would have been more
convincing. At the same timetheorganization of such a declaration would be
a serious blow to the trend of rapprochement among the Arab states. which
would afford the United States an opportunity to directly weaken the anti-
imperialist forces throughout the Arab world. which had been utilizing the
objective process leading to Arab unity in the interests of the struggle

for liberation from foreign control.

The American politicians' assessments were manifestly unjustified. King
Sa'ud and Iraqi Premier al-Ayyubi visited Damascus. where the officially
dispelled the rumors concerning the danger allegedly eeanating from Syria
which had been exaggerated by the United States. Moreover. King Sa'ud and
the Iraqi premier declared that they were ready to assist "fraternal Syria'
in the event of aggression against it. Official figures in Lebanon and Jor-
dan essociated themselves with these declarations. Thus those who. accord-
ing to the plans of the American politicians. were to have helped in carry-
ing out the anti-Syrian plans came out against the United States at the most
decisive moment. This position of the state leaders of all these countries
was predetermined by the profound process of state leaders of all these
countries was predetermined by the profound process of the consolidation

29
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of the Arab peoples which had developed particularly following the successes
of the anti-imperialist forces in Egypt and which had not been properly taken
into consideration by the authors of the doctrine.

It was precisely as the result of the development of this process that the
United States failed to achieve even formal approval of the Eisenhower doc-
trine by any significant number of Arab states. Only three Arab countries--
Iraq. Lebanon and Libya--with a total population at that time of 7.3 mil-
lion. which was less than 10 percent of the population of the entire Arab
world. officially adopted the Eisenhower doctrine. It is significant that
the American politicians failed to impose the doctrine oven on those Arab
countries which were usually called the United States' friends. It is per-
fectly obvious. for example. that the transmitters of the doctrine were
counting on success in Saudi Arabia. Moreover. J. Richards. the 0.8. Presi-
dent's special representative. who was sent to the Arab states with the
assignment of signing joint statements on consent to the doctrine. regarded
(as. moreover. did the overwhelming part of the western press) the Saudi-
American communique signed in Riyadh as a document which legalized this
country's adoption of the Eisenhower doctrine. This viewpoint was official-
ly repudiated by a 5 October 1957 statement of the Saudi Arabian Government
categorically denying the fact of adoption of the Eisenhower doctrine.

in addition. the events surrounding Syria showed that even the Arab countries
which had officially agreed with the American doctrine could not. under the
conditions of the growth of Arab national self-awareness. be the local found-
ation whose presence was essential for a struggle against independent Arab
states in accordance with the Eisenhower doctrine. In Iraq. in lebanon.

in Libya the positions of the supporters of the doctrine were highly un-
stable. It was opposed by a strong opposition. which was winning increasing
support among the population. The Beirut correspondent of TNE TIMES wrote
that doubts were increasing in Lebanon with respect to the advisability of
government support for the Eisenhower doctrine. "The reference to inter-
national communism and the absence of any guarantees against Israel in the
Joint statement" (the American-Lebanese cos-unique signed at the time of
Richards' visit--Ye. P.). THE TIME emphasized. "have provided the opposi-
tion with an opportunity to persuade many people that the government has
involved than in an undesirable foreign pact."

"The Eisenhower doctrine is approachingits sunset." was the conclusion drawn
by the British DAILY TELEGRAPH AND MORNING POST. "King Sa‘ud. who gave it

a cordial reception when it was explained to him by the President in ﬂash-
ington. is now making it understood that he will never associate himself
with it. Lebanon. which did this openly. now wishes to alter the wording,
removing the reference to communism.... Iraq. although it has remained
solid with the Nest against communism. is attempting to teassure...$yris."
It is interesting to note that this statement came from a paper which had
written back on 26 July 1957 that ”the main success of the Eisenhower
doctrine lies in Egypt's isolation.“

30
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

At the time oftthyrian events the United States also sttespted to use non-
Arab countries in its own interests--Turkish aggressive circles were assigned
a big role here. however. yet another serious obstacle, which had been under-
estimated by the creators of the doctrine. had arisen on the path of iaple-
aentation of the plans connected with Turkey.

in proclaising the Eisenhower doctrine U.S. leading figures knew from the
experience of the Suez crisis that the Soviet Union and other socialist
countries would not remain on the sidelines in the event of the colonial
powers' direct aggression against independent Arab countries. however, the
authors of the doctrine evidently imagined that they would succeed in neutral-
izing the actions of the Soviet Union under the new conditions. when the gam-
ble in the struggle against the independent Arab countries had been made
chiefly on a strike on the part of their neighbors, which were also Near East
countries. These calculations were not justified. The Soviet warning to Tur-
key's aggressive circles left no doubt that they would not succeed in impart-
ing a local nature to an anti-Syrian action. while the commitment of Ameri-
can traops to Syria would threaten an escalation of the conflict.

The failure of the employment of the new American tactics in relation to Syria
in 1957 predetermined the shifting of certain accents in the policy of imple-
mentation of the Eisenhower doctrine. This became particularly clear in con-
nection with the U.S. reaction of the creation in February 1958 of the United
Arab Republic [UAR]. which incorporated Egypt and Syria. The United States
made its ain that of surrounding this new state. which had sharply increased

the centripetal tendencies in the Arab world, with a kind of "cordon sanitaire."

Attempts to change the nature of power in both regions of the new state and
liquidate the anti-imperialist direction in its foreign policy were. of course.
maintained here. But in connection with the Syrian failure the United States
still concentrated chiefly on strengthening those Arab regimes which at that
time were actual or potential allies for the Test. here the United States
considered the forces advocating various forms of alliance with the UAR

the most dangerous opponent of these regimes.

Back in April 1957 the patriotic government headed by al-Nabulsi had been re-
moved from power in Jordan with all-around U.S. support. including a show of
strength by the 6th Fleet. the direct participation of Mallory. the 0.5. an-
bassadnr in Asmnn. and Military Attache Sweeney in the plot and the granting
of big funds in the fort of "aid."

Even the reactionary regime in lraq becaae an object of American concern. The
dynastic disagreenents between lraqandSaudi Arabia were largely relaxed with
the participation of American diplomacy. A big role in the rapprochement of
the two nonarchies was played by the 0.8. State Department's organization of
simultaneous visit to the United States by King Sa'ud and the "strongman" in
lraq--'Abd al-llsh--the king's uncle. At the start of December 1957 Iraq's
King Payssl visited Saudi Arabia accompanied by 'Abd al-llah.

31
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The United States' official joining of the Baghdad Pact's Military Committee
served the purpose of strengthening the royal regime in Iraq. As has already
been said. the United States had declined to associate itself with this bloc.
which had actually emerged on its initiative. Hashington had turned down
numerous requests from both Baghdad and London for direct U.S. participation:
the Americans had no chance of "combining" lsrael with Arab countries in one
military bloc. but 0.5. entry into a unified military alliance with one of
the parties to the conflict would. as American politicians emphasized. have
tied their hands and diminished their opportunities for maneuver. However.
at the new stage. when the accent was being put on utilizing inter-Arab con-
tradictions in the interests of American policy. the United States. despite
Israel's negative position and. in consideration of this position. still
declining to formally join the pact. nevertheless officially joined the bloc's
military organization--the Baghdad Pact Military Committee.

In mid-1958 the United States closed the circle of utilization of the mechan-
ism of the Eisenhower doctrine for the first time--U.S. marines were loaded
in Lebanon. where at that time a civil war was underway between nationalist
forces and elements which gravitated toward an alliance with the Heat.

The situation in Lebanon become extremely exacerbated following the murder

on 7 May 1958 of the prominent Lebanese journalist-patriot Nasib al-Hetni.
who had edited the newspaper TELEGRAPU. which had carried strongly-worded
exposures of American policy in the Near East. The Nationalist forces. which
were attempting to bar the path to pro-imperialist reaction. which aspired.
operating with any means. to impose Sham'un's presidency on the country for

a second term. called for a general strike on 10 May. The strike grew into

a broad insurrection against the National Liberal Party. the Phalangists and
the Dashnaks. which had formed a group around Sham'un-Halik. A substantial
part of Lebanon was under the control of the rebels. The army observed
neutrality to all intents and purposes. The situation had developed to the
point where the Sham'un-Halik grouping. which had close ties to the West. was
on the verge of bankruptcy.

But the landing of American troops in Lebanon was not only connected with in-
ternal Lebanese events. It occurred simultaneously with a British airborne
assault landing in another Arab country--Jordan. The intervention was con-
nected with the victory of the anti-imperialist revolution in Iraq. which

had put an end to the pro-Heat monarchical regime in this country. The fall
of the "Near East Bastille" was a most powerful blow to the imperialist posi-
tions in the region. The prospect of the solidarity and rapprochement of
Iraq. Egypt and Syria could be clearly discerned; this did not come about not
because of the absence of an objective basis for rapprochement (this basis was
formed following the victory of the July revolution in Iraq) but because of
the subjective sentiments and mistakes of both Qasim. who led iron. and the
leadership of the UAR. But the disagreements. which were adroitly exag-
gerated by western politicians and local reaction and which grew into out-
right hostility between Iraq and Egypt. were manifested later. As far as the
fart of the accomplishment of the revolution in lraq was concerned. the United

32
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

States felt considerable apprehension about the possibility of the unifica-
tion of the anti-imperialist forces in the region. The more so in that such
a unification could now include Iraq. which possessed vast oil resources and
sufficient financial means, which had been obtained in the form of conces-
sionary withholdings for oil extraction. In addition, the nationalist for-
ces in Lebanon, which leaned toward the UAR. had manifestly gained the upper
hand. Under the conditions that had been created the United States applied
the provisions of the Eisenhower doctrine and landed marines from the ships
of the 6th Fleet in Beirut. The assault landing force of 17,000 was a very

considerable military force by Lebanese standards and was 2.5 times as big
as the Lebanese Army.

As also in respect of Syria in 1957. the first stage of American actions in
Lebanon was a propaganda campaign designed to show that Lebanon was threatened
by danger from outside on the part of a state "which had been exposed to the
influence of international communism." The UAR was named as this state. This
concept of a threat to lebanon from outside had nothing in common with reality.
Now. in restrospect. this fact is acknowledged by very many authors who are
coming out with studies in the sphere of American policy of that period.

"The conflict (in Lebanon--Ye. P.) basically concerned personal relations

and rivalry of an internal nature unrelated to international issues." Robert
hurphy. one of the most active 0.8. State Department figures connected with
the formulation of beer Bast policy in that period, wrote subsequently. "Com-
munism did not play a direct or appreciable role in the insurrection...."

A work on Merican policy in the Near East which appeared in the United States
in 1968 also stresses the internal nature of the Lebanese events: “There

was one basic cause of the crisis. and that was the differences in the cul-
tural and political orientation of different sections of Lebanese society."
The above work, like, incidentally. the majority of such studies. concludes
l*at the United States. unaware of the real situation, still "proceeded from
the assessment that Lebanon was threatened by international communism."

Yet American politicians were excellently informed about the nature of the
internal Lebanese events and about the fact that no external threat to Lebanon
existed in practice. The UN observation mission, which was stationed on the
Syrian-Lebanese border. and UN Secretary General Dag haammrskjold confirmed
that the charge that the UAR was interfering in Lebanon's internal affairs
did not correspond to reality. There was also something else which the per-
sons who formulated U.S. policy understood perfectly well: the insurrection-
ists in Lebanon had nothing in common with the international communist move-
ment either in the nature of the leadership of the movement or in its links.
The insurrectionists were headed bythebdg businessmen and landowners Sa'ib
Salam. 'Abdallah al-Yafi. Ahmad As'ad, Rsshid Karami and others. who be-
longed to the nationalist camp. against which the United States launched

active operations. taking cover behind slogans of protection against a com-
munist attack.

33
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The American operations in Lebanon in July 1958 bore a number of particular
features which showed the evolution of American policy not only following
the perpetration of the Suez tripartite aggression but also following the
unsuccessful attespt to deal with the patriotic regise in Syria.

After the Suez events, Washington again returned to Joint actions with its
allies. "sharing responsibility" with Britain and coming to an understanding
with it concerning simultaneous and coordinated operations in the landing of
troops in Lebanon and Jordan. of course, the priority of the United States
and its role as first fiddle in these joint operations were indisputable.

The action which was carried out contained one important feature which also
distinguished it from the planned actions against Syria in 1957. The 1957
anti-Syria operation envisaged the possibility of interventionist actions
against an Arab country in which a patriotic national regime had already been
established. Events showed that this could actually have led to a rising of
the level of the crisis and to its globalization. In respect of lebanon

In July 1958 v.5. actions were undertaken in accordance with a different
plan: a request was organized for the withdrawal of troops on the part of
the local government formally in power. Thus intervention was undertaken in
n country (the British, who carried out an airborne assault landing in Jar-
dun. acted the same) which already had a pro-Vest regime for the purpose of
strengthening this regiae and protecting it against internal nationalist for-
rcs. According to R. Murphy. President Eisenhower. who had entrusted his--
Iris former colleague of the tine of world "or II in North Africa-~with a spe-
cial diplomatic mission in lobanon. "wished to deaonstrate in good time and
in practical fashion that the United States was capable of supporting its
friends."

The assault landings in Lebanon and Jordan inflamed the atmosphere exceeding-
ly throughout the world. causing profound anger and calling forth a protest
iron the progressive public of nany countries. This was one of the main rea-
sons why. 3 sonths after the invasion. on 25 October 1958, the United States
cospleted the withdrawal of its troops from Lebanese territory. leaving.
moreover. a for free ideal situation for itself in Lebanon. Shihab became
president of this country. He entrusted R. Kareni. one of the leaders of

the insurrectionists. with foruing a cabinet. True. pro-"est leaders also
Jointed this cabinet. but the new government was able to implement a number
of seasures in Lebanon's national interests. Prise Minister R. Karani and
Foreign Minister H. al-‘Uwayni, another leader of the anti-imperialist op-
position. declared that the Eisenhower doctrine no longer existed for Lebanon.

The actions of the United States and Britain were unsuccessful. "By the end
or the year " (l958--Ye.P.), H. Howard and R. hunter write in the book "Israel
and the Arab World. The 1967 Crisis." "it had become perfectly clear both

in Hashington and in London that the security of those Arab governments

which relied on Western bayonets could not longer be insured.”

3’-
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Finally. the intervention in Lebanon and Jordan only changed for the worse

the situation for the Heat throughout the Arab and in the so-callsd third
world.

After the perfectly obvious failure of the tactics connected with the utili-
zation of inter-Arab conflicts for the strengthening of its positions and the
creation of obstacles on the path of the development of revolutionary proces-
ses in the Arab countries. washington again gradually returned to the idea of
reliance on Israel as the principal force capable. in its opinion. of crush-
ing "Nasirisl" and holding back anti-iaperialist novaents throughout the
Arab world.

But the return to this policy was not smooth and unilinear. Following the
withdrawal of Merican forces from “beam and the British forces from Jor-
dan in the fall of 1958. there was a brief period when a reamption of the
"flirtation" with Egypt and. through the latter. with the entire Arab world
seened possible to the United States. The disagreements between Egypt and

the Soviet Union which had unifested themselves predisposed it to this idea.
Syrian Conunist Party activity had been banned following the creation of

the UAR. There were arrests of conunists in both areas of the UAR. The
growth of contradictions between Cairo and Baghdad also led to the spread of
anticoununist sentinents in the UAR. Anticosaunist articles in the press,

in which. as always in such cases in Egypt, there inediately and readily
resounded the voices of certain journalists known not only for their reaction-
ary views but. at times. also for their links with western intelligence. be-
gan to develop into an snticonnunist caspaign. However, al-Nasir understood
the strategic significance for the Arab national liberation movement of friend-
ship and cooperation with the socialist countries. This was the main reason
why the period of strain in relations between the UAR and the USSR was over-
come and replaced by a period of relations characterised right up until sl—
Nasir's last days by autusl understanding, confidentiality and friendship.

Naturally. the period of the cooling in Egypt's relations with the socialist
countries was recorded by the American leadership. Under such conditions-
in the future this was to be repeated frequently both in relation to Egypt
and other Arab countries--the United States attempted to isolate Cairo to
the greatest extent fro. the Sov‘:t Union and the other socialist states.
The Uni ted States delivered wheat to Egypt in accordance with Federal Law 1480.
The A-erican Embassy in Cairo was highly active. J. Kennedy. who had taken
office as 0.5. President in January 1961. frequently sent al-Nasir lengthy
message which were friendly in fern and which consented on various 0.8. for-
eign policy actions and expressed the United States' wish to "turn the page"
in relations with Egypt.

hut all this referred to tactics. while American policy's strategic line re-
mained unchanged. The following were the nein parameters by which the United
States' Near East policy was measured at this stage: 1) the start of the
policy of the intensive area-en: of Israel-«dint. by West Germany. and. under
President Johnson. by the United States directly; 2) active opposition to

35
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

to the Egyptian mission in Yemen: and 3) coordination of policy with Saudi
Arabia for splitting the UAR and supporting the snti-Nasir forces in Syria.
All these measures may be viewed on two levels: utilization of inter-Arab
conflicts in 0.8. interests and attempts to "regulate" in its interests the
development of the Arab-Israeli conflict. And there is reason to believe,
moreover. that the utilization of inter-Arab contradictions. along with
having a certain independent significance for ".8. policy, came to play an
increasingly big role in the implementation of this "regulation."

"Regulation," "control" or 'hmnagement" of international conflict situations
in the latter half of the 1960's and the 1970's was not only an important

part of American "crisis-reaction" policy but was also corresponding reflected
in the theory of conflicts which was developing extremely rapidly in the United
States at that time. Together with the problem of their solution. western
concepts and theories of international conflicts examine an "intermediate"
stage-the "controlling" or "management" of conflict situations. Two spe-
cial purposes of U.s. policy are amalgamated at this stage: preventing the
escalation of the conflict to the point of a threatening global clash and
aspiring to insure a development of the conflict situation which is advant-
ageous to itself. In other words. this "control" is designed to secure the
realization of imperialist goals with the utilization of international con-
flicts, but in a time of the sharply changed correlation of forces in favor
of world socialism.

In its attempts to purposefully influence the development of a conflict situa-
tion between different countries the United States envisaged the employment
of a whole number of measures:

implementation of its policy directly through the leaders of a puppet regime
or allied country participating in the conflict;

the threat of its own intervention;
its own intervention;

utilization of the fact of the dependence of the countries party to the con-
flict on arms supplies from American sources; and

utilization of the United States' economic relations with the parties to the
conflict in order to influence their adoption of certain decisions.

All the enumerated measures constituting the arsenal of means of American
interference are not. naturally. of equal significance. The possibilities

of their employment are limited by the specific conditions of the develop-
ment of the international conflict or situation in the countries directly
participating in it. At the same time it should be emphasized that in both
theory and the practical activity of the United States the means of "managing"
conflict situations include intervention on the part of the United States

36
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

itself. The report "Controlling Conflicts in the 1970's." which was sub-
mitted by a study group of the American UN Assistance Association composed
of 26 prominent American figures (these included Yale University President

K. Brewster. l.. Bloomfield. professor of political sciences at lil'l’. C. Yost.
former U.. . representative in the United Nations. General Ridgway and others).
examines the war of American imperialism in Vietnam and 0.5. intervention in
the Dominican Republic as a means of control of the development of the cor-
responding crises. These aggressive interventionist actions are shown as
measures aimed at the "preservation of peace." "It is not at all surprising.
considering the weakness of the United Nations. that in many situations a
decision has been adopted in the form of unilateral operations." the report
says. if anything did actually trouble its compilers, it was the fact that
the United States undertook such "operations" in isolation. without the ap-

propriate camouflage of "multilateral actions" allegedly aimed at maintain-
ing peace.

Together with attempts to utilize the UN mechanism to "manage" conflict
situations. American theoreticlnns and politicians devoted and are now de-
voting increasingly grcst attention to the idea of the creation of "special
international bodies" for such "control." The U.S. aspiration to circum-
vent the UN Security Council. which the UN Charter invests with special
functions and powers. is connected with the idea of the creation of an
"international mechanism" for "controlling" crisis situations. More than
anything. the principle of the unanimity of the great powers in the Security
Council in the adoption of decisions is not to the lilting of American poli-
ticians. This position conceals the American politicians' aspiration to
clear their path of a serious obstacle which is to a certain extent prevent-
ing them from playing their game in conflict situations.

The theory and practice of "controlling" conflicts is completely unaccept-
able as it is conceived by American politicians. despite the interest of all
states of the world in preventing crisis situations growing into a world
thermonuclear war. The point being that the United States ties into one the
two ideas which it invests in the process of "controlling" conflicts—pre-

vention of its escalation into a global clash and defense of its imperialist
interests.

There is also another point: the United States and other imperialist states
understand by conflicts the revelation of contradictions which are completely
different in nature and assign revolutionary transformations within the
"third world" states to this category. Naturally. the Soviet Union and
other socialist countries cannot participate with the United States in
“controlling" such "situations."

However. let us return to American policy in relation to the Arab-Israeli
conflict and to the means and methods which the United States has employed
or attempted to employ to "regulate" it. The account to follow will show
that in this case American policy has uployed the sheaf of means envisaged
by the theory of "controlling" conflict situations. from the trade weapon

37
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

through the threat of its own armed intervention. As has been said, the
methods of the utilization of inter-Arab contradictions also had their place

among these means. The American position with respect to the Egyptian expedi-
tion in Yemen is an example of this.

On 9 September 1962 four shots killed Ahmed. the king (imam) of Yemen. and
Ahmed's son. Prince Muhammad al-Badr. who had ascended to the throne. was
overthrown on 26 September. Col Abdallah al-Sallal. chief of al-Badr's guard.
who led the coup. proclaimed a republic and became its first president. Yem-
en was a typical island of the Middle Ages in the modern world. Perhaps
nothing enables us to judge the appearance of this country under King Ahmed

in such concentrated form as the appointments of his palace in San'a' or.
more correctly. the contents of his private room. where the king had lived

shortly before his death. In 1965 your author was among the few who were
shown Ahmed's room in the state in which it was left by its owner.

Photographs had been pasted on the walls of the room. including such as those
where the imam was observing with interest how at the gates of San'a' the
latest convict was being beheaded--not simply. as the Yemenia accompanying

he explained. but by a certain number of blows of the sword. the number of
which was determined by the royal court. Alongside on a hook dangled "hala-
bushi"--irons in which Ahmed ordered to be clapped there and umm.during his
report. a minister who had committed an offense. incidentally, al-Ssllal.
Yemen's first president. spent 5 years in a dungeon in chains on the orders
of the imam. A regular starting pistol lay on Ahmed's writing table. The
imam liked to perform miracles: he would shoot himself in the chest with
this pistol so that the guard might believe that no "bullet" would take him.
Here on the well hung a portrait of the first cosmonaut-~Yuriy ngarin--which
had been neatly cut out of a magazine. The imam sincerely admired the ex-
ploit of the conquest of space. In a corner stood a movie camera. This

room was Yemen's sole movie theater. The imam delighted in watching films
(the first time he met sl-Naair. Ahmed squeezed the president's hand until

it hurt—«this was how he shook hands with tribal leaders to show them his
strength--and inquired whether Omar Sharif had married some actress or other).

while throughout the country the showing of any films was banned on pain of
imprisonment.

But eVen such a preserve of the Middle Ages as Yemen was exposed to the
spirit of the times. This country‘s isolation from the outside world which
had been built up over the centuries was gradually broken down. Foreign
specialists arrived in Yemen. and Soviet workers and engineers built the
port in al-ﬂudaydah. Several dozen Yemeni students received instruction in
Cairo and in Europe. The refreshing gusts of revolutionary winds which had
begun to blow in the Arab world had begun to reach Arabia.

After the coup in Yemen. Imam ai-Badr was arrested by al-Sallal. but when

the guard absented himself to eat supper. be. changing into a woman's

clothes. escaped from custody without anyone noticing. His uncle. Prince
Hanson. who was Yemen's chief representative in the United Nations. immediately

38
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

flew to Saudi Arabia and enlisted King Sa'ud's help. The tribes which he
succeeded in rousing to the struggle against the republic were armed and fi-
nanced by Saudi Arabia. Al-Badr emerged from the underground. Armed struggle
was launched against the republic. Under these conditions representati"es of
President al-Sallnl arrived in Egypt. and al-Nasir decided to send in support
of the Yemen Republic initially a battalion and. later. several additional
military subunits. Thus began the Egyptian expedition in Yemen. The stony
Yemeni desert sucked in more and more Egyptian soldiers. Al-Nasir once

joked bitterly: "i sent a battalion to lift the siege of San'a' and then

i sent a division to reinforce the battalion."

The United States immediately joined fully in the Yemen events on the side

of King Sa'ud. when. instead of ferrying weapons and money to royalist tribes
in Yemen. several Saudi pilots flew to Cairo and requested poltiical asylum.
crates bearing the emblem of the American "aid" program-~two hands clasped

in n handshake~-were nnloaded from their aircraft. These crates contained
weapons and ammunition. Ss'ud banned flights by his pilots to Yemen and

asked Jordanian aviation to make the flights to supply the rebel Yemeni
tribes. The following day three Jordanian Air force planes flew to Cairo.

and again they proved to have the same freight in the same packaging--crates
on which were depicted two hands clasped in a handshake.

President al-Nasir delivered a firm protest to the American ambassador in
Cairo. saying that the American practice was not bringing Arabia assistance
and friendship but death. The purpose oftheSaudi and American actions in
Yemen was perfectly clear. Both the Saudi rulers and the American oil cow-
panics feared that republican Yemen would be too "agitatory" a neighbor for
Saudi Arabia and feared the influence of the Yemen events on the structure
of Saudi society. which had remained untouched for centuries. Saudi Arabia
and the United States wished to nip the Yemen experiment in the bud. They
were particularly worried by the fact that the Egyptian troops which. at
the request of the government of the Yemen Arab Republic. had assisted it
in the struggle against the rebellious royalist tribes inspired and supported
by Saudi Arabia had drawn close to the Saudi Arabian border.

There is reason to believe that the United States was pursuing one further aim
in Yemen in addition to the aspiration to nip the Yemen revolution in the bud.
It wished to drag Egypt as deeply as possible into the Yemen events. believing.
not without reason. that Egypt's activeness in its resistance to israeli ex-
pansionist policy would thus be neutralized. Yemen sucked in thousands of
Egyptian soldiers and millions of Egyptian pounds. Yemen took away forces

and resources of which Egypt was acutely in need both to strengthen its de-
fense capability and for economic development. Naturally, "dragging al-Nasir
into Yemen" was only one side of the coin for the United States; the other
consisted of an aspiration to limit the Egyptian possibilities in Yemen and
prevent the development of a real force capable in time of exerting a re-
volutionizing influence on other parts of the Arabian peninsula. The United
States needed an Egypt which was up to its neck in the Yemen business, but
whicy was. however. incapable of getting a grip en the situation there.

39
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

winning a decisive victory over the royalist tribes and really strengthening
the republican system in what was only yesterday a country entirely out of the
Middle Ages.

Al-Nasir had adopted a clear position in relation to the events in Yemen. This
position was known to the Americans from the correspondence which nl-Nasir
conducted with 0.5. President Kennedy. Al-Nasir emphasized in his letters

that he was ready to give.the order for the hmaediste withdrawal of Egyptian
soldiers from Yemen if the Saudis ceased to assist the royalists. This in-
tenthnawns perfectly sincere since Egypt was really concerned to wind up its
Mission in Yemen on conditions of a half :0 outside support for the opponents
of the republican regime.

ﬂeanwhile the United States on the one hand insisted on the withdrawal of
Egyptian troops and even proposed certain compromises (as mentioned. for ex-
ample. in a letter from Kennedy to al-Nasir. where the 0.5. President dis-
played a readiness to link the withdrawal of Egyptian troops with the cessa-
tion of Saudi Arabian interference in Yemen's affairs), but, on the other,
Washington stepped up assistance to the Yemeni royalists through the same
Saudi Arabia. This assistance was not confined to the dispatch of American
weapons. A special committee was set up in the United States under the
leadership of Robert Komer. a former intelligence officer. which organized
the dispatch of mercenaries to Yemen. This committee's activity soon came
to be known in Yemen as "Komer’s war."

A few years later-~this was at the start of l967--at the time of a skirmish
in Snn'a' it was discovered that republican soldiers were being fired on from
the headquarters of the American ”four-point aid“ program. On the orders of
the Yemeni Government the house was taken. and the four men in it were ar-
rested. Safes were opened, and a large number of papers was found in them
testifying that the headquarters of the American aid program was a screen
covering ClA activity. At the demand of the Americans the papers were re-
turned. but their secrets became known to Egypt. All this was in 1967. but
a few years before this--in l963--President al-Naair realized, according to
Haykal. that the United States was playing a double game in Yemen and "that
a part of the American plan was to drag him deeper and deeper into the Yemen
campaign and tie down the Egyptian Army in the lifeless desert. Egypt's
participation in this campaign suited the Israelis very well for a large

and ever increasing number of Egyptian soldiers was fighting the Saudis and
not them."

The United States had also played a largely similar role in relation to the
Syrian-Egyptian disagrecments which led to the breakup of the UAR in 1961.
of course. the defeat of the first "unifying" experiment--the creation of
the UAR consisting of Egypt and Syria-~was a result of objective causes and
many subjective mistakes. chiefly on the part of the Egyptian leadership.
however. the interference of Saudi Arabia and direct CIA activity were im-
portant factors. Reports had spread throughout the Arab world to the effect
that King Sa'ud had allocated 7 million pounds sterling for a coup d'etat

50
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In the Syrian area of the UAR. According to Haykal, this figure proved to
have been understated. When Sa'ud. who had already abdicated in favor of his
brother Payaal. arrived in Cairo. al-Nasir reproached him. saying: "How
could you have paid these people 7 million pounds"? Sa'ud replied: "I am
ashamed to confess to you that 12 million were paid. not 7 million."

The trial of separatists from the first Syrian Government after the split of
the UAR showed that the U.S. CIA had operated hand in hand with King Sa'ud.

Pursuing a policy of splitting the UAR. the United States thereby wished to

weaken ai-Nasir and reduce his influence in the Arab world. Simultaneously

everything was being done to prevent the creation of a strong state capable

of offering serious resistance to Israeli expansion in the Near East.

The biggest watershed signifying the demarcation line between Egypt and the
United States was the question of the 0.3. attitude toward arms supplied to
Israel.

As has already been said. at the start of the l960’s the United States gam-
bled un utrengthenlng Israel In the Near East conflict. In 1961. during an
official visit to Hashington. Adenauer. under pressure from President Ken-
nedy. agreed to grant Israel credit for arms purchases. This moment marked
the United States' intention to give this state arms. however. under the con-
ditions of the continuing American flirtation with Egypt and the hopes that
there still entertained that it would be successful the United States aspired
to operate through the hands of others. A deal involving the supply of wea-
pons to Israel was possible with the formal nonparticipstion of the United
States therein. Israel obtained credit from Heat Germany with which it

could make purchases in any country. The arms acquired with this credit

from Britain. France. the United States and Italy were two submarines. six
motor torpedo boats. 200 tanks, 200 armored personnel carriers. jet fight-
ers. transport aircraft and helicopters. For its part. the PRC concluded a
contract for the purchase from the Israelis of submachineguns and uniforms
for the German Army. The details of this deal. which was not only approved
but also carried through under 0.8. pressure. were described to President
aI-Nasir by an emissary of Erhard who had traveled to Cairo specially at the
end of 1966.

At the start of the l960's the United States had begun to hold talks with
Israel on Independent arms supplies also. Naturally, these talks were held
in an atmosphere of total secrecy. but on 27 September the American author-
ltles officially announced that an agreement had been concluded for supplies
of Shyhawk fighters to Israel. It is significant that on the eve of this
announcement the 0.5. ambassador in Cairo called on al-Nasir and conveyed

to him a verbal message from Kennedy which notified him of the agreement.
Al-Nasir believed that American diplomacy needed this maneuver in order to
tie his hands and not to afford him an opportunity of actively opposing

the deal. his fears were confirmed when articles appeared in the U.$. papers
to the effect that President al-Nasir had been "consulted" in advance con-
cerning supplies of American fighters to Israel. By that time the United

hi
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

States' positions on arms supplies to the countries involved in the Near East
conflict had become completely clear. Formally the United States was supply-
ing weapons both to Israel and. in small quantitties. to certain Arab coun-
tries--Jordnn. Saudi Arabia. But the lion's share of the supplies was

going to lsrael.

It was officially declared that the United States was attempting through its
supplies to maintain a "balance" in the Near East and bring matters to the
point where no one side in the conflict could achieve military superiority.
in actual fact it was a question of the creation of the military superiority
of lsrael--a state pursuing an expansionist policy. By ”balance" the United
States understood the possibility of Israel withstanding militarily the ef-
forts of all the Arab states. In reality this created the considerable ad-
vantage of lsrael militarily over one. two or three Arab countries which
could realistically have formed a coalition against it. At the sane time.
considering Israel's scientific-technical superiority over the Arab countries
which had evolved. the American-style "equalization" of its armament with
the armament of the Arab countries naturally resulted in Israel having the
military advantage over the Arab world.

Simultaneously with supplies of weapons to Israel. the United States did every-
thing to prevent supplies of weapons to Egypt and the other Arab countries in-
volved in the confrontation with Israel from the socialist countries. Every
conceivable effort was made to frustrate Egypt's own defensive measures.

When Egypt (this was a year after the creation in Israel of its own "Gabriel"
missile on the basis of a French missile) successfully tested a locally de-
veloped missile. in Septemberl962 the American ambassador conveyed to Presi-
dent al-Nasir a further verbal message from Kennedy which expressed strongly-
worded displeasure in this connection and demanded that the American be given
the right to inspect the Egyptian nuclear reactor which had been built with
the help of the Soviet Union. The United States had never issued a similar
demand in respect of Israel. although Israel. as is known. had at that time
made progress in the field of research geared to the creation of nuclear wea-

pons.

The United States simultaneously proposed the establishment of agreed limits
for offensive armed forces both for Egypt and Israel. but under the inspec-
tion of the United States. naturally. such an inspection could have been
utilized in favor of Israel. Through its ambassador in Egypt the United
States repeatedly made representations apropos Soviet arms supplies to the
UAR.

The American position combined the widely publicized declaration of the United
States' aspiration to curb the arms race in the Near East with an active
policy aimed at Israel's armament under the conditions of its leadership's
pursuit of an expansionist policy. Typical of this position was a demarche
of Johnson. who had become 0.5. President following Kennedy's death. On

18 March 1965 the American ambassador requested a meeting with al-Nasir and
handed him two documents. The first was a personal message from President

62
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Johnson marked “secret." It said that the United States would avoid arms sales
to the principal parties to the Arab-Israel conflict and would under no cir-
cumstances sell weapons which would give one side a military advantage over
the other. "This is the policy we have followed and will continue to follow."
the letter declared. Simultaneously, however, al-Nasir was handed a note
which bluntly said that the United States was selling Skyhawk aircraft to
Israel to “lessen Israel's fears regarding UAR bombers." The note also pro-
claimed the United States' readiness to also sell Israel other types of wea-
Poasallegedly essential for its defense. It was downright blackmail of Egypt:
it was essentially stated that the United States would sharply increase mili-
tary assistance to Israel if the Arabs instituted a campaign against the pres-
ent supplies of American arms to this country. Al-Nasir termed this note

an "ultimatum."

It was clear that Hashington had come fully into the open as the principal
supplier of arms to Israel. having lost their monopoly in the sphere of arms
supplies to the countries involved in the Near East conflict. the Hestern
states. primarily the United States. were making efforts to acquire the right
to control arms supplies. And. moreover. they wished to use this right to
create an actual preponderance of armaments on Israel's side.

The United States was in parallel doing everything to neutralize the recipro-
cating anti-American reaction on the part of the Arab world. chiefly Egypt.
Together with various diplomatic actions. other means were also employed for
this-~such as pressure on the al-Nasir government on the question of American
wheat supplies. As has already been said. after the withdrawal of its troops
from labanon. on the basis of Law 680 the Americans resumed food aid to Egypt.
However. the implementation of this aid was constantly maintained in an un-
certain state in order to obtain the maximum concessions from Egypt in various
spheres. Threats were made periodically to cut off this aid. and it was ul-
timately limited to 1-month supplies and then ranceled altogether.

American policy on the threshold of and during the 1967 Near East crisis was
subordinated to the ideas of ”controlling" and “managing" the Near East con-
flict in the interests of Israel. The U.S. position in this period may with
complete justification be termed anti-Arab.

in March and April 1967 relations between Israel and Syria deteriorated sharp-
ly. Israeli troop movements. border skirmishes and air battles had their
effect. Not shy in their expressions, Israel's leaders threatened to take
Damascus. Official statements and inspired articles in the United States
contained unconcealed support for Israel. Horeovcr. in a burst of candor
during a conversation with a correspondent of the American magazine U.S.

NEHS AND HORLD REPORT Prime Minister of Israel L. Eshkol said that his gov-
ernment was proceeding from the guarantees promised by Hashington in the form
of ships of the 0.5. 6th Fleet. "We have obtained these promises." Eshkol
said. "When we appealed to the United States, they answered us: 'He are
here. The 6th Fleet is here'."

43
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OVFICIAL USE ONLY

The situation got hotter. and under these conditions Egypt moved its troops
up to the Sinai peninsula. 0n lb Hay Gen Hahsud Phwai. chief of staff of

the Egyptian Army. wrote the following to the Indian general. Rikhye. con-
nandcr of the UN forces: "I have given the order to the UAR arsed forces to
be ready to take action should Israel initiate aggression against any Arab
state. For the purpose of carrying out these instructions part of our troops
on the eastern front in Sinai have been fully sobilized. To insure the safe-
ty of the UN forces concentrated at the checkpoint: I request that you with-
draw these forces from these checkpoints. l have given instructions to the
commander of the eastern front in this regard. I hope to receive reciprocal
infornation."

This letter from Pawzi contained a request for .\e withdrawal of UN forces
from the checkpoints where Egypt opposed lsrael--on the border between Gaza
and Hilat--in order to avoid clashes between the UN forces and the Egyptian
Arsy. H. Fawzi had not requested the withdrawal of forces stationed at other
points. for example. at share al-Shaykh. Moreover. Charles Yost. forser 0.5.
UN representative. even wrote that the text of the appeal of the Egyptian
Coanand to U Thant had not been approved in advance by Cairo. Al-Nasir.
according to Yost. did not wish the UN EIergency Force to be withdrawn fros
Shnrn ash-Shaykh.

The Egyptian Arny heading for Sinai passed in front of the windows of the 0.5.
Embassy in Cairo. This was not done secretly but deliberately openly and
noisily. Al-Nssir wished by this military-political deuarche to change the
situation in his favor. having prevented an attack on Syria and again en-
phasized his leadership role in the Arab world. There is a couplets lack of
proof that. having begun sobilization of its forces and dispatched then to
Sinai. Egypt was pursuing actual offensive aisa against Israel. however.
there was an escalation of the conflict. and the single-minded policy of
Israel. which was supported by the United States and which had been, in the
main. coordinated with 0.8. policy. also led to this.

It is possible that the United States was not in this period directly con-
cerned to see the conflict pass to the stage of armed confrontation. However.
on the scale of its policy priorities an even higher place was occupied by
the goal of preventing a strengthening of Egypt's positions as leader of the
Arab world.

Events developed thus. Pawzi received a reply to his letter frol U Thsnt.
The UN Secretary General's letter proposed either the withdrawal of all UN
forces. including those or Share al-Shaykh, or no withdrawals at all. This
reply. which had perfectly obviously been coordinated with the United States.
drove Egypt into a corner. It either had to go back on its word and appear
before the Arab world as the side which had suffered a crushing defeat or

it had to agree to an exacerbation of the situation. demanding the withdrawal

of the UN forces from Shara al-Shaykh also. which in practice posed the
question of the possibility of a direct arsed confrontation with Israel.
The point was that Egypt. having desanded the withdrawal of UN forces from

46
FOR OFVICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Shara ai-Shaykh. that is. having said "A." could not help but say "B." that
is. not commit its own troops to this point in their place. It was not a
question of Egypt's legal right to this action-Sharn tel-Shaykh was Egyp-
tian territory. As is known. UN troops were stationed here after the 1956
tripartite aggression. and Egypt had been forced to agree to the unilateral
stationing of these troops on its territory. in this way paying for the
withdrawal of Israeli troops from Sinai. But this is one side of the coin.
The other is that the very coamital of Egyptian troops to Shara al-shaykh was
undertaken under indirect pressure from U Thsnt and also. possibly. the United
States. which was attempting to force al-Nasir to cspitulate by political
means or to do this by military methods with the help of Israel.

President al-Nasir agreed to the withdrawal of all UN troops. and EsYDtian
troops entered Sharm ol-Shnyhh. Cairo declared that it would close the
Strait of Tiran to Israeli navigation and ships carrying strategic cargo for
Israel. however. there is reason to believe that after this Egypt wished

to stop the conflict on the basis of compromise. There were real possibili-
ties for this. U Thant flew to Cairo with a plan which. it was said. had u.s.
support. This plan consisted of three parts: the first was a request to
Israel not to send any ships through the Gulf of Aqsba to "test" Egypt's de-
cision to close it; the second was a request to other states using the Strait
of Tiran to refrain from transporting strategic material for Israel on their
ships; and the third was a request to the UAR to refrain from inspecting
ships crossing the Strait of Tirsn.

U 1hnnt's plan. which provided an opportunity for the preparation of a set~
tlement on a coapromisc basis (al-Nasir particularly wanted such a settlement
after his actions had elevated him to an unprecedented height in the Arab
world). was accepted by Cairo. Egypt was doing everything at this time to
prevent war. President al-Nasir delivered speeches on 27 and 29 Hay in which
he repeated: "He do not intend to shoot first. we are not about to launch an
attack." It is known thatza hours before the Israeli attack. the Egyptian
nigh Command convened a meeting attended by the country‘s political and mili-
tary leaders. Certain generals believed that under conditions where Israel
was clearly prepared in the next few hours to launch an attack on Egypt it
was necessary to have recourse to a preventive strike. Al-hasir was absolute-
ly firm in his reply: ”I will not be the first to start the war because un—
der those conditions I would leave myself exposed before my allies and

before other countries of the world."

However. all this failed to halt the development of events. which inexorably
led to an armed confrontation. At the rudder of this development stood
Israel. and behind it--the United States.

Naturally. for the Israeli leadership. which by this time had been supplemented
with manifest "hawks” (General Dayan had become defense minister. and H. Begin.
leader of the Herut. had jointed the government). the position of the United
States was an extremely important factor when it came to making a decision.

The Israeli foreign minister and chief of Israeli intelligence flew to

45
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Hashington. Foreign Minister Abba Eben was immediately received by President

Johnson. What 0.5. position did he encounter? Let us turn to Lyndon John-
son's memoirs for this.

i. The 0.5. Administration assured the Israeli Government of its full sup-
port for the idea of the lifting of the blockade of the Gulf of Aqaba. in-
cluding the use of force against al-Nasir. "You can assure the Israeli Cabin-
et." U.s. President L. Johnson said to Israeli Foreign Minister Abba Bban on
26 Hay 1967 in the "bite House. "that we will energetically proceed along the
path of implementing [any] and [all] [words in slantlines in bold face] pos-
sible measures to keep the strait open.“ Choosing his words carefully. Eben
inquired at the end of the meeting: "I would not be m.staken if I were to
tell my prime minister that your position is that of making every possible
effort for the purpose of guaranteeing that the strait and the gulf remain

open for free and safe passage"? "I assured him." L. Johnson writes. "that
he would not be mistaken" (our emphases in all cases--Ye. P.).

2. while not ruling out the use of extreme measures against Egypt. the United
States initially aspired to insure the study of all political-diplomatic and
military-political means of putting pressure on aI-Nasir in order to force

him to retreat "with a loss of face." Nothing was actually done (with the
exception of U Thant's plan. which was mentioned earlier and which hung in

the air as only Egypt had agreed to it) to find for al-Nasir a "prestigious"
way out of the situation. Under these conditions the United States did not
stop short at a military demonstration--2 days prior to the Israelis' attack.
a 0.5. aircraft carrier with uncovered combat aircraft on board which were
ready for action sailed through the Suez Canal.

At the same time the United States--this can also be clearly seen from John-
son's memoirs--was attempting to create a coalition for the use of military
force against Egypt. It did not wish to act in isolation. Immediately after
the evacuation of the UN Emergency Force from Sinai. on the 0.3. President's
instructions Secretary of State D. Rusk got in touch with France and Great
Britain and proposed the preparation of joint actions on the basis of the
Tripartite Declaration of 1950. U.S. Ambassador c. Dohlen sent a cable from
Paris saying that the French authorities did not consider it opportune to
resurrect the Tripartite Declaration and that they were "altogether changing
their position." c. Bohlen came to the conclusions that the French authori-
ties "attach corresponding importance to the Soviet approach and have de-
cided to play a waiting. cautious game." As far as Britain was concerned.

0. Thompson. its minister of state for foreign affairs. conveyed to D. Rusk
during a meeting in ﬂashington a communication on its readiness to create

a special naval detachment "under a flag of many nations" to break through
Egypt's blockade of the Strait of Tiran by force. According to President
Johnson. the Uhlted States ”made a thorough and complete study of the British
proposal together with leading congressmen and interested governments.“
Israel was notified of this 0.5. position.

46
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

however. matters were not confined to theoretical developments. The navy's
special forces had embarked on the preparaton of four special-purpose detach-
ments. The first detaclsnent included two of the biggest aircraft carriers--
the "America" and the "Saratoga"--and the cruiser "Little Rock." The second
detachment was made up of landing craft. The third consisted of subunits of
marines ready to make an assault landing at any time. The fourth consisted
of auxiliary ships. including oil tenders which carriedhundreds of thousands
of tons of fuel in their tanks. Admiral Martin. the same who had led the
assault landing of 0.8. marines in Lebanon in 1950. received a secret order
according to which he was instructed to put on full alert in the Eastern
Mediterranean 50 warships. 200 jet bombers and fighters and 25.000 soldiers
and seamen of the Marine Corps.

The United States aspired to avoid a situation wherein it would have to open-
ly employ its armed forces in conjunction with Israel: recollections of the
colossal "losses" which a similar situation had created for Britain and France
in the Arab world in 1956 were still fresh in the American politicians' mem-
ory. At the same time the United States did not oppose independent Israeli
armed operations. It merely asked the Israelis to "wait a little" in order

to give other anti-Egypt measures a chance to work in the beginning.

"hat is more--and it is very important to emphasise this--the United States
had formulated its position under conditions where it additionally knew that
Egypt was not about to be the first to begin armed operations against Israel.
U.S. intelligence reports repudiated Egypt's intention to attack Israel. Dur-
lng the 26 Hay I967 meeting in the white House with A. Eban U.S. Defense
Secretary McNamara divulged the findings independently arrived at by each

of the three U.S. intelligence services. These findings may be summaried

in the following assessment: Egypt does not intend to be the first to begin
military operations. which did not prevent the American leadership from again

manipulating the traditional indictment of al-Nasir for aspiring to "throw
the Israelis into the sea."*

0.8. Defense Secretary McNamara also familiarizcd A. Eben with another con-
clusion of the American special services: "All the officers of our intel-
ligence organs are unanimous that if Egypt does launch an attack. the Israelis
will crush it." This information. which contained for this period an assess-
ment of the correlation of the information. which contained for this period

an assessment of the correlation of the forces of the two sides involved in
the Near East conflict. was conveyed to the Israeli leadership by the United
States at a time when the former was formulating a decision on which the fate

'Follnwing a talk with members of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee on
23 Hay 1967. Secretary of State D. Rusk reported to the President that "there
is general agreement in Congress that the Arabs cannot be allowed to throw
the lsraelis into the sea." It can be imagined how this talk wentl

67
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFPICIAL USE ONLY

of war and peace in the region directly depended. The American information
undoubtedly could have prompted and obviously did prompt the decision on
Israel‘s sn-called preventive strike against the neighboring Arab countries.
In any event. having settled on this decision. the Israeli leaders realized
tlmt it was not a question of protecting the Israelis against "impending ex-
termination." as they frequently attempted to portray it subsequently.

The thesis of U.S. "neutrality" in 1967. which is also propagandizcd by the
".8. State Depertment. does not bear comparison with the facts of real life.
At the time of the military operations the American representatiVe in the

UN Security Council stood in the way of the adoption of a resolution con-
demning Israel's aggression and conducted matters such as to delay a cease-
fire. aspiring to give the Israeli military the opportunity. after the defeat
of the Egyptian Army in Sinai. of solving the “task" on the eastern front.

in other words. occupying the Golan Heights--psrt of Syrian territory. The
aims of American policy were just the same: the use of Israel to oust or.

in any event. sharply weaken the Arab anti-imperialist regimes and strengthen
the position of the United States in the global confrontation with the Soviet
Union and the other socialist countries.

"The Americans realized that the results of the war were a victory not only
for Israel but also for they themselves. The new situation which had taken
shape in the Near East by mid-June was ideal for them." David Kimche and
non Hawiy wrote in the book "Samum." They adduce the following argument in
confirmation of this conclusion: when the United States' "failures" in
Vietnam had been revealed. "the Americans needed a counterbalance. and they
found this in the Near East." According to these two well-informed Israeli
authors. the United States supported all Israel's demands. proceeding from
the fact that. otherwise. "the other side would win. not only Egypt but also
the Soviet Union." Thus David Kimche and Dan Bawly conclude. "an almost
complete identity of interests had been created between the United States
and Israel. and this fact swept away all disagreements and created an op-
portunity for Israel to firmly insist on its demands." The Israeli authors
mean by these 'ﬁenands" basically the refusal to release the occupied Arab
territories.

To maintain this occupation and engage in its attempts to bottle up the "no
war. no peace" situation until the time when the Arab countries agreed to
submit to Tel Aviv's diktat after 1967 the Israeli leadership needed con-
stant inflows of American weapons and constant u.s. political and diplomatic
support. And the Israeli leadership obtained both in full. Even in 1968
President Johnson had made the decision to supply Israel with 50 Phantom
supersonic fighter-bombers. Supplies of American weapons to Israel. includ-
ing aircraft. missiles and various electronic equipment. increased from year
to year. Israel was frequently sent models of armaments which the 0.8. Army
had only just begun to receive.

As far as 0.8. political-diplomatic support for Israel was concerned. its
main direction in that period was actual assistance to the Israeli leader-
ship in frustrating the attempts to prepare the ground for implementation

68
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of UN Security Council Resolution 21.2, which was adopted on 22 November 1967
and which provided for the hithdrawal of Israeli troops iron all occupied
territories (the problem of rectification-minor changes in the borders of
4 June l967--waa left to be decided by the parties to the conflict in their
mutual interests and with consideration of the obligatory consent of each
side). cessation of the state of war in the Near East. generally recognized
borders of all the states in this region. guarantees of these borders. free-
dom of passage along the region's seawsya and solution of the Palestinian
refugee problen.

The compromise Resolution 262 was at this stage the sole possible basis of
a political eettlesent. All its provisions were accepted in full in Cairo
and human. In an interview on American television on 16 June 1970 Joel 'Abd
al-Nasir expressed a readiness to recognize as the definitive borders of
Israel those which had existed up to the 1967 war. He responded positively
to the question as to whether Egypt was ready to promise would not be used
for an attack on Israel after the Isrealis had quit the occupied lands.

Sinultnneously the mechaniss of preparation of the ground for the implementa-
tion of Resolution 242 had been formulated in detail. At the request of the
UN secretary general the Swedish diplomat Gunner Jarring began his mission
for this purpose.

Tel Aviv did not conceal its negative attitude toward either Gunner Jarring
or his mission. At the same time the Israeli leadership was making particu-
larly intensive use of the formula of "direct negotiations at which Israel's
position would be set out" and. moreover, even hinted at the possibility of
"steps toward the Arabs." However. the true value of these promises, hints
and half-hints was not very high--simltaneously with these the Israeli lead-
ership had outlined distinctly and publicly the parameters of a settleeent
to which it "could agree": continued occupation of the Golan Heights. the
Gaza region. a number of areas of Sinai and the Nest Bank and the annexation
of Jerusalen. Under these conditions 6. Jarring prevented ‘i'el Aviv's san-
euver aimed at completely burying for a given period of time the idea of a
political settlement and putting responsibility here on the Arab side. which.
you see. is opposed to "promising direct negotiations."

Israel did not accept UN Security Council Resolution 262. It is significant
that. presenting a "peace plan" at the UN General Assembly 22d Session. Is-
raeli Foreign Minister Abba Ebnn mentioned not one word about this resolu-
tion. which was the sole acceptable and sufficiently balanced basis in this
period for a political settlement. It is not fortuitous that under these
conditions Tel Aviv did not agree at all with the mission of 6. Jarring.
who. receiving the corresponding powers from the UN secretary general. ul-
timately began consultations in the capitals of the states party to the Near
East conflict to prepare the practical isplenentation of Resolution 2’02.
Even agreeing to seetings with the UN secretary general's representative
throagh forced assent. since any other decision would have confronted Israel
most seriously with world public opinion. this state's leaders emphasized

(.9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

that they did not interpret Jarring's mission as one of mediation but viewed
it merely as a channel along which Israel could remain informed about the
position of the Arab countries. Tel Aviv completely rejected any counter-
traffic--information for Egypt, Syria and Jordan via Jarring concerning spe-
cific details of the Israeli position. It did not need a neutral, mediating
mission. And here also Israel essentially obtained the tacit approval of the
United States.

As a result of this position of Israel. which it would not have been able to
maintain without U.S. support. the Jarring mission came to a standstill.

This was particularly dangerous under conditions where the curve of tension
in the Near East had again taken an upward turn. At the start of 1970 Israel
increased military pressure on the neighboring Arab countries for the purpose
of achieving their capitulation and consent to terms dictated by Tel Aviv.
The Israeli Air Force flew missions in depth over Egyptian territory. The
bombers' targets were not only and not so much military as civilian. These
raid were aimed at creating the right "psychological" atmosphere in which,

in the opinion of Israeli politicians. it would have been possible to acti-
vate Egyptian antigovernnent forces.

But this gamble failed. As the Heat German journal EUROPA ARCHIV (No 19.
1970) wrote. the attempt of the American-Israeli sioe "to bomb out” the al-
Naair government, which was to have brought a pro-American government to
power. failed. By mid-April 1970 the Soviet Union had assisted in the con-
siderable strengthening of Egypt's air defense forces, and the Israeli Air
Force could no longer make raids in depth with impunity. Egyptian air de-
fensc's missile installations demonstrated considerably increased efficiency.
The loss of several Phantoms had a sharply negative psychological impact in
the Israeli Army. The illusion of the preservation of ”open skies" over
Egypt for a long time to come was shattered. Under these conditions Tel
Aviv preferred to abandon the raids in depth.

Since the end of April the Israeli politicians had been laying the main
stress on the confrontation in the Suez Canal Zone. Every day the reports
carried information on artillery duels, the landing of patrols and air bat-
tles. It soon became clear that a force was fighting the Israeli troops in
the Suez Canal Zone which was quite different from the army of the time of
the "6-day war." On 24 March 1970 Drew Middleton, correspondent of the NEH
YORK TIMES. who had visited Israel and who had talked with military repre-
sentatives there. wrote: "Artillery is the most effective arm of the Egyp-
tian forces in the Suez front. The Israelis are speaking about the accuracy
of the artillery fire.“

The changing correlation of military forces between Israel and Egypt, in
which. although no cardinal shifts had yet occurred, a corresponding trend
had been discerned. the actions of the Palestinian guerrillas--all this
began to have its effect on the mood in various Israeli circles. Simultan-
oOusly changes in public opinion in the West in favor of the Arab countries

50
FOR 0F?ICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

became more noticeable. During the "6-day war" and in the months immediately
following it public opinion in the West was. in the main. with the help of
the pro-Zionist press. oriented toward support for Israel. however. after
lsracl's declared territorial claims. the situation gradually began to
change. The constructive policy of Egypt. Jordan. Lebanon and certain other
Arab countries aimed at the search for a compromise peace settlement con»
trihuted to these changes.

In this situation the United States could not appear to be completely linked
with lsrael's position. Some kind of initiative--albeit of an outward na-
ture--was needed on the part of the United States itself. “hat was needed
was some kind of step or action. as long as there was some apparent active-
ness in the political plane ultimately intended to secure American inter-
ests when the inflexible Israeli policy had ended up in deadlock. In addi-
tlon. even in the United States the dissatisfaction of certain circles.
chiefly connected with the oil business in the Arab countries, with the
country's one-sided orientation in the Arab-Israeli conflict had begun to
show. Commenting on this mood. the magazine BUSINESS "EEK wrote: "Not only
the investments of the oil companies but also the strategic interests of
the United States and its allies are at risk in the Near East and the Arab
countries of North Africa. The discontinuance of oil supplies from these
areas for a lengthy period would sharply reduce industrial production in
Japan and West Europe. Japan obtains 90 percent of its consumed oil from
the Near East. Britain 70 percent. France 80 percent. Heat Germany approxi-
mately 90 percent and italy amost 95 percent." Speaking of the galvanize-
tion of the supporters of a "more flexible" U.S. policy in the Near East.
the NEH YORK TIHES was even more to the point: "The Nixon Administration
has begun to fear that the United Statesiaill forfeit its influence on the
Arabs entirely and ultimately find itself in complete isolation in its sup-
port of lsrael."

it was precisely under these conditions that the United States undertook a
diplomatic demarche. On 25 June 1970 Secretary of State U. Rogers announced
a ao-cailed U.S. Near East peace initiative. He declined to reveal the
details of the "plan." but it became clear from further press reports that
this "plan" amounted to a proposal for the resumption of the G. Jarring mis-
sion. The second feature of the United States' ao-called peace initiative
was an appeal to the parties to agree to a temporary cease-fire on the forces'
boundaries.

The American proposal. which came to be called the "Rogers Plan," is viewed
by a number of researchers as the United States' transition to a "more even~
handed policy" in relation to the Near East conflict. Such evaluations ap-
pear prnundless. Subsequently the United States did indeed make a number

of gestures toward Egypt. attempting to win positions in this country to

the detriment of Soviet-Egyptian relations, but this occurred after the
death of President al-Nasir. As far as the "Rogers Plan" was concerned, it
was. to all appearances. subordinated to a single aim--putting American

51
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

policy in the Near East on an active footing under conditions where Israeli
policy was deadlocked. There was essentially nothing new in this plan. It
is known that the USSR repeatedly submitted proposals aimed at the practical
implementation of the UN Security Council Resolution of 22 November 1967,
insisting on resumption of the Jarring mission. At the same time a declara-
tion on the possibility of a temporary cease-fire for the resumption of the
Jarriug mission was made before Rogers' speech by none other than President
al-Nasir. Nevertheless. the plan was served up as a "new initiative" of the
United States. and the corresponding proposals were directed both at Israel
and also Egypt and other Arab countries.

Egypt agreed to the resumption of the darting mission and to a cease-fire.
Israel far from immediately made an analogous decision. A struggle had de-
veloped in tlw country between different political groupings. as a result

of which the Gahal bloc of extreme-right parties. which opposed resumption of
the Jarring mission and the very talks on the question of the return of oc-
rupied Arab territories. withdrew its representatives from the goverwment.
Under the influence of the concrete situation which had taken shape in the
Near East and also under pressure from world public opinion Israel was ultim-
ately forced to agree to a restmtption of talks via G. Jarring.

There was a cessation of fire in the Suez Canal Zone on 7 August 1970.* How-
ever. the Israeli representatives made no haste to make contract with Jarring.
It soon became clear that the declaration of readiness to participate in
these contacts had not been forced but was regarded by the Israeli leadership
as a tactical maneuver. Accusing Egypt of having brought missile installa-
tlons intotheSuez Canal Zone during the truce. at the start of September
lsrael officially turned down contacts with Jarring.

This position of Israel's was not condemned by the United States. On the
contrary. official American statements and, to a even greater extent. inspired
articles in the American press emphasized "understanding" of Israel's Wootives."
This "understanding" was expressed in spite of the fact that the 0.5. Admin-
lstrutlou could not in fact confirm Israel's accusation.

The lucessant supplies of American arms may with every justification be as-
sessed as encourage ment of Israel in its "firm" policy. in other words. one
hostile to a political settlement. In September 1970 Istaeli Prime Minister
Golda Meir went to the United States for talks with the U.S. Administration
on Increased military assistance to Israel. The American press observed that
on this occasion also the 0.5. leadership agreed to the maximum satisfaction
of lnrael'a requirements.

If the United States. forced to reckon with clearly changing public opinion.
sometimes permitted itself statements about "neutrality" and "objectiveness."
in the mainquestiommarms supplies to Israel-it pursued an invariable policy.

.. ._-_._......__._——.—.

*fiairo time-~from 0100 hours—o? 3 August.

 

52
FOR 0F?lClAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Statements about u.s. "neutrality" could not have exerted any serious restrain-
ing influence on the Israeli leadership while supplies of modern American
wcapons to Israel, which were not being interrupted or cut back under any
conditions. had given the Israeli extremists a completely free hand.

However. taking heed of the situation which had evolved. these extremist ele-
ments sometimes played up to the United States. attempting to "lighten the
load" of those who under all circumstances had remained loyal to the policy
of support for the Israeli military. Thus. addressing students of Israel's
higher educational institutions on 6 January 1971. Israeli Defense Minister
Hoshe Dayan revealed certain reasons why Israel. while in practice unwilling.
had. all the same. agreed in the susmcr of 1970 to a resumption of the Jar-
ring mission. he stated the following: "It was better to resume negotia-
tions than to refuse. It is easier for the Americans to supply us with wea-
pons now that we have returned to the talks than if we had refused.“ The
motives by which the United States itself was guided in insisting on Israel's
consent to the resumption of the Jarring mission. which was envisaged in the

so-called Rogers Plan, possibly also show through in this statement by M.
Dayan.

Mention should also be made of the fact that. having formally consented to
negotiations via Jarring. Israel took advantage of certain extremist actions
by individual detachments of the Palestinian movement which had diverted
public attention from Israel's provocative political maneuvering. At the
start of September the Palestinian group Popular Front for the Liberation

of Palestine hijacked several civilian aircraft belonging to various world
airline companies. One plane was blown up in Cairo, the others were put down
on a desert airfield in Jordan. One of the leaders of Fatah declared in an
interview with the Cairo newspaper aL-JUHHURIYAH that "the theft of civil
aircraft of three Western airline companies had seriously harmed the Arab
cause: this incident had diverted world attention from Israel's refusal to
continue contacts with c. Jarring. representative of the UN secretary general,
for a peaceful settlement of the Near East crisis and from a resumption of
supplies of American weapons and aircraft to Israel."

It was at this very time in Jordan that the dangerous events began to develop
which led to the frstricidal clash between the Jordanian Army and the Pales-
tinian organizations. The position occupied by the United States in connec-
tion with these events was also of fundamental significance for an apprecia-
tion of the United States' entire Near East policy in this period.

Let us begin with the fact that imperialist agents. who had been able to take
advantage of both the reactionary, pro-Nest sentiments of certain elements

of the Jordanian Army Command and also the extremism and irresponsibility of
individual guerrilla groups. had participated directly in provoking the
clashes in JOrdan. The "catern press described in detail the shelling of

the Palestinian camps on the outskirts of Amman. the Jordanian Army's storm-
ing of the PLO headquarters situated on one of the hills of the Jordanian

53
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
?0R 0F?ICIAL USE ONLY

capital. the firing from the windows of houses and battles. during which
thousands of people were killed and wounded. The inperialiatﬂest was per-
fectly content: two forces which had previously proclaimed as their aim
struggle against Israeli aggression had clashed between themselves.

Nawevcr.it was more than a matter of mere satisfaction. The United States
made skillful use of the events in Jordan to demonstrate its solidarity with
Israel and even readiness--"if ueccssary"--to fan the Near East conflict. It
is perfectly obvious that in this context the United States deliberately
exaggerated the danger "threatening" the Jordanian regime "from outside."
All this was done to put pressure on the Palestine resistance movement. Syria
and Egypt to force them into an awareness of the 0.8. resolve to act "most
effectively“ in the event of the conflict developing into the crisis stage.
even the direct participation therein or American armed forces.

American politicians displayed exceptional zeal at that tine to maintain the
status quo in the Near East. that is. the "no war. no peace“ situation. which
was advantageous to Israel. The outward motives of the American "reaction"
were presented as an aspiration to prevent the Near East "sliding" into a
new war and cven...stand in the way of tsrael's intervention in Jordan.

which would have been inevitable and allegedly justified in the event of

the success of the Palestine resistance movement in this country. In

actual fact it was a question of something else-the creation of the best
conditions for Israel's struggle against the Arab resistance forces. which
were preventing it from consolidating the results of its expansionist policy.
We are persuaded of this also by the fact that at the time of the Jordanian
Army's clashes with detachments of the Palestine resistance movement the
United States was acting in coordination with Israel. and in questions of the
formulation of a unified military policy. moreover. In the situation which
had been created "Nixon ordered Kissinger to be the key American figure for
coordinating American-Israeli actions with Rabin,"* the Kalb brothers write
in their book "Kissinger." which caused a sensation in the United States
thanks to the most interesting facts which it cited. "The eyes of the public
were. as before. trained on Rogers and Sisco. but the task of coming to an
agreement on an unprecedented and secret American-Israeli understanding of
joint military operations in the Jordanian crisis was entrusted quietly.
without the vivid glare of publicity and without full notification of the
State Department. to Kissingnrand Rabin." The same two journalists. who had
worked with Kissinger for many years and were familiar with the machinations
of the U.S. Administration. subsequently describe this "unprecedented"
coordination: "Kissinger immediately called Rabin. and they got to work
(Rabin subsequently proudly joked that he now knows more secret entrances to
and exits from the private residence of executive power than the secret
services). with Dayan's authorization Rabin familiaried Kissinger in full
with the israeli military plans and twice a day gave his a summary prepared
by Israeli intelligence." In accordance with these plans. according to the
Kalb brothers. an Israeli strike was planned against Syrian tanks on Jor-
danian territory in the Irbid region. Rabin informed Kissinger of Israel's

*Rahin was at that time Israeli ambassador in the United States.

. 56
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

intention of "sending" its arsed forces to Jordanian territory. Israeli
ground and air force operations directly against Syria also were coordinated.
"but not in detail."

For its part, the United States put its naval forces in the Nediterranean
on alert.

The situation in Jordan soon eased. This was not. naturally. a result of the
"crisis reaction" measures taken jointly by the United States and Israel but
thanks to the efforts of President al-Nasir and a nuaber of other Arab fi-
gures, who at a conference of heads of Arab states urgently convened in

Cairo were able to cone to an agree-eat on the terns of a cease-fire in Jor-
dan. The decisions of the Cairo suamit were accepted by Yasir 'Arafat. chair-
man of the PLO Executive Cosmittee. and Jordan's King Uusayn.

As far as the formulation of a joint Alerican-lsraeli position was concerned.
this was a typical example illustrating U.S. attempts to actively "manage"
the Near East conflict and to "control" its development in its own inter-
ests. At the same time the formulation of this position of the United States
and lsrael was a qualitative shift testifying that the relations of the
United States and Israel were becoming increasingly organic and close. "Kis-
singe. and Rabin shook hands," H. and B. Kalb write. "Together with the
Jordanian crisis their unpublicized mutual understanding had passed into
history. although they both understood that the precedent had been set."

6. The "Even-ﬂanded" Course-~Anti-Arab Policy by Other Means

The Cairo sun-it convened to discuss the events in Jordan was the last in
which President al-Naslr was to take part. During the conference al-Nasir
had no sleep for several days on end. Without sparing his health. which had
been undermined by the heavy workload, he did much to lead the Arab world out
of the dangerous Jordanian crisis. President al-Nasir's life cane to end on
28 September 1970. With his death Egypt and the entire Arab world had lost
an outstanding statesman who had won widespread fame and popularity. a fight-
er against inperialisn and for the happiness and progress of his people and

a sincere and great friend of the Soviet Union.

After the death of the Egyptian president. the United States gambled on ask-
ing the saximun use of certain trends and processes in Egypt which did not

at that time signify a departure fro. the al-Nasir line but which were. never-
theless. fraught with individual elements of such a departure or deviation.
There were also other factors preparing an sctivization of American policy in
the Near East. As has already been said, during the Jordanian crisis there
was a manifestation of the unity of the United States and lsrael. but this
occurred at s tine when the conflict was developing into the crisis stage.

As far as another stage-we "snoother" stage--which the conflict entered

after the cessation of the Jordanian crisis, was concerned, here Israel's
inflexible. uncospromising extremist line was beginning to hinder the United
States. The United States simultaneously realized that this line would lead
their ally up a blind alley.

55
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Under the pressure of the world public Israel was forced at the end of De-
cember 1970 to consent to a resumption of the mission of the UN secretary
generai's representative. The Israeli leaders obviously calculated here

that this mission would be of no practical significance and that consent to
its resumption would not occasion the need for Israel's position to be de-
fined in detail. However. on 8 February 1971 G. Jarring sent Egypt and lo-
rael. unexpectedly for the Israeli leadership, judging by Tel Aviv's reaction.
identical memoranda requesting certain prior commitments on the implementation
of the UN Security Council Resolution of 22 November 1967. As UN Secretary
General U Thant subsequently explained in his report on the Near East. "Am-
bassador Jarring's initiative was based on the fact that these commitments
were to have been given simultaneously and on a reciprocal basis.... Israel
was to have given an undertaking to withdraw its forces from the occupied
territory of the UAR.... The UAR was to have given the undertaking to enter
into a peace agreement with Israel."

no [5 February G. Jarring received a reply from Egypt which indicated that.
on condition of the withdrawal of Israeli troops from the occupied Arab ter-
ritories. Egypt agreed to implement all the measures listed in Jarrin's memor-
andum. including: cessation of the state of war with Israel: agreement to
the creation of demilitarized zones along both sides of the border; agreement
to the commitment of UN troops to a number of points: acceptance of guaran-
tees of the borders of all states in this region. including Israel. on the
part of the great powers: implementation of measures to insure that Egyptian
territory not be used for purposes hostile to other states; and freedom of
pasoge for ships of all countries along all scaways of the region. including
the Suez Canal.

As far as isrsel was concerned. it did not give an official reply to the
questions put by Jarring. A simple comparison of the positions of Egypt and
Israel showed in all clarity who was hindering a settlement in the Near East.
"I would like to note with satisfaction the positive reply given by the UAR
to Ambassador Jarring's initiative." UN Secretary General U Thant emphasized
in his report on the Near East. "But the Israeli Government has not yet re-
sponded to Ambassador Jarring's request for certain commitments regarding
the withdrawal of troops."

Almost simultaneously Israel demonstrated its unconditional negativism and
unwillingness to solve the questions by political methods by torpedoing
Egypt'sé February proposal that Israeli troops be withdrawn a certain distance
from the Suez Canal and that a start be made on clearing this important sea-
way within the framework of a general settlement of the Near East problem
on the basis of the 22 November 1967 Security Council Resolution. At this
time Egypt's policy of interim measures did not contradict the interests

of the Arab countries. It was not a question of partial but of interim
solutions within the framework of an overall coordinated plan of the with-
drawal of Israeli troops from all Arab territories. Egypt's 6 February

1971 proposal was cardinally different from the partial solutions to which
Egypt agreed in 1973-1976.

56
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Meir at first bluntly and categorically rejected Egypt’s proposal on opening
the Suez Canal. But after the mood of the world public had shown itself to
be manifestly in favor of the opening of the canal. the Israeli leaders at-
tempted to create the illusion of their positive approach to this idea. How-
ever. the "review of positions" was effected such as to liquidate Egypt's
peace initiative. The Israeli leaders declared that there could only be an
"interim settlement" in the event of it being regarded as an independent
agreement not connected with an overall agree-eat providing for the with-
drawal of Israeli troops from the territories occupied at the time of the
June I967 war. Simultaneously the Israeli leadership flatly refused to ex-
amine the question of the possibility of the Egyptian Army crossing the Suez
Canal. Thus in practice Israel blocked the possibility of an agreement with
Egypt on an interim settlement. Its implementation on Israeli terms-and
the Egyptian leadership understood this full well at that time-~wou1d have
contributed to the preservation of Israeli occupation of a considerable

part of Sinai and the West Bank of the River Jordan.

Thus Tel Aviv's obstructionist policy led on the one hand to the practical
cessation of the Jarring sission. who declared that. failing a positive re-
spouse from Israel to his memorandum. he could not continue his activity as
mediator for a peace settlement in the Near East. and. on the other. to the
frustration of Egypt's peace initiative for the opening of the Suez Canal.

It was precisely under these conditions that Washington announced at the end
of April 1971 that the 0.5. secretary of state would make a trip to the coun-
tries of this region and visit Egypt and Israel. The visits of 0.8. Secre-
tary of State R. Rogers and his assistant J. Sisco took place in May of the
same year. They held meetings and talks with the leaders of Egypt and Is-
rael. Simultaneously there was an exchange of messages between President
Nixon and Golda Heir and President Nixon and President Anwar al-Sadat. The
world began to talk about a new 0.5. "mediation mission." “hat was the
purpose of it?

First. the United States had stepped up its political activity in the Near
East when Israel's obstructionist policy had become the target of decisive
condemnation by various circles of the world public. including those which
at previous stages of the development of the Near East crisis had been di-
stinguished by their one-sidedly pro-Israeli sympathies. Following Israel's
refusal to respond positively to Jarring's memorandum, demands were put for-
ward. particularly by certain Asian and African states. for sanctions to be
applied against Israel. In this connection many unprejudiced observers be-
lieved that the United States had begun a "mediation mission" for the pur-
pose of averting the complete international isolation of its Israeli ally
and pulling it from the fire.

Second. the purpose of the American "good offices" mission was to put pres-
sure on Egypt in favor of a partial settlement.

57
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OVPICIAL USE ONLY

Third, the United States was obviously thinking of galvanizing its support-
ers in a number of Arab countries. One the eve of Rogers' trip to the Near
East articles appeared in certain Cairo newspapers whose authors wrote that
the "key" to a Near East settlement was in the hands of the United States.
These articles pursued the idea of the need for the Arab countries' "more
flexible" policy in relation to the United States. in proclaiming its
"mediation mission" Usahington attempted to create the illusion that it was
abandoning its pro-Israeli one-sidedness in an approach to the Near East con-
flict. It was obvious that the United States aspired by this path to help
the pro-western elements in a number of Arab countries gain the upper hand
and move matters toward a change in these countries' political course.

Fourth, American politicians aspired to weaken the relations between the
Arab countries and the Soviet Union. Big hopes in this connection were in-
vested in the development of events in Egypt after May 1971. As is known,

a whole number of figures accused of conspiring against President al-Ssdnt
was removed from leading positions in the state apparatus and leading organs
of the Arab Socialist Union at this time. A clear attempt was made to take
advantage of these internal events to sow dissension between Egypt and the
Soviet Union.

At the time these efforts were not crownedwith success. A government dele-
gation of the Soviet Union flew to Cairo. A friendship and cooperation treaty
between the Soviet Union and Cairo was signed on 27 Hay 1971 which not only
summed up the long and diverse relations between the two countries which had
been developing successfully for many years but also outlined wide-ranging
prospects of such cooperation in the future.

An attempt to isolate the Arab countries from the socialist states and the
international workers and communist movement was also made in connection with
the July 1971 events in Sudan, where a bloody anticommunist campaign had been
unleashed. This imperialist attempt was rebuffed by progressive Arab cir-
cles. A communique issued in connection with the stay in Egypt of a CPSU
delegation headed by CPSU Central Committee Secretary 8. N. Ponomarev (July
1971). which had been attending the National Congress of the Arab Socialist
Union. emphasized that any manifestations of anticommunism only serve the
accomplishment of imperialist aims in this region of the Near East. The
inclusion of this clause in the joint Soviet-Egyptian document at this time
was of great significance since it restructed the opportunities for maneu-
ver of intra-Bgyptian and foreign reactionary forces interested in weakening
Egyptian-Soviet relations.

Subsequently, as is known, the trend toward a deterioration in relations with
the USSR and their relegation to a considerably lower level than had been the
case under President al-Nasir was developed in Egypt's policy. The result

was President al-Sadat's unilateral denunciation of the Soviet-Egyptian co-
operation treaty. But the Arab rightists and their patrons only succeeded
in achieving this later. Immediately after the demise of al-Nasir, they
lacked sufficient possibilities of effecting such a turnabout.

58
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Nor could American policy. despite its manifest activizntion,in the immediate
aftermath of the death of the outstanding Egyptian leader straightaway

score successes in imposing a cepitulationist position on the Arab side.
This was expressed. in particular. in the Egyptian leadership's undisputed
desire to expand multifaceted cooperation with the USSR expressed after al-
Nasir's death. In the course of Soviet-Egyptain negotiationsin October 1970
al-Sadat declared: "As acting president of the republic. I wish to state the
following: we have persistently requested that Soviet military personnel
remain in the country. On the basis of the wish and will of our people. the
armed forces and the leadership of the Arab Socialist Union and the govern-
ment I will even request an increase in this personnel." Under these condi-
tions the leadership of the U.S. State Department was forced, in order to
create the appropriate "background" for political maneuvering in the Arab
world. to drop certain hints as to the possibility of a restriction on U.S.
ares supplies to Israel. However. in practice there was no halt to the flow
of Phantom and Shyhewk fighter-bombers. spares for them. air-to-ground mis-
siles and other arms to Israel. Moreover. it was precisely in 1971 that there
was intensive elbboration of plans of U.S. aid to Israel with the object of
"guaranteeing" it all essential arms. At the start of 1972 the United States

officially announced that Israel would be supplied with a new consignment of
Phantoms.

This reluctance and. probably. impossibility. considering its traditional ties
to Israeli expansionist circles and the considerable influence of the "Israel
lobby“ within the United States. of Washington stopping supplies of offensive
"weapons In Israel played a big role in exposing the essence of the United
States' Near East position and created a serious obstacle on the path of
implementation of "renewed“ American tactics in relation to the Near East
conflict. The more so in that American supplies of arms to Israel were being
unwrapped when disagreements on this questionhadcome to light in the Rest.
The policy of France. whose government once again confirmed the decisions
adopted by the deceased President de Gaulle on a halt to supplies of all
types of arms to Israel. primarily Hirage aircraft. differed appreciable

from American policy. The deal involving the supply of 50 such aircraft was
definitively canceled by Paris. and an agreement was signed on 15 February
1972 on the return of the advance payment to Israel.

Renouncing the ornament of Israel neither in principle nor in practice. the
United States at the same time continued to pursue its line aimed chiefly at
weakening the ties binding the Arab countries. primarily Egypt, to the Soviet
Union. Washington understood sufficiently well that only along this path would
the United States acquire the opportunity for maneuver for the purpose of
"controlling" the Near East conflict in a direction advantageous to itself

and Israel.

One of the tasks being accomplished here was the weakening of the anti-
imperialist. progressive and the strengthening of the pro-Nest, conservative
Arab regimes. Perhaps Henry Kissinger. assistant to the President for national

$9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

security. spoke with the greatest candor about these motives of the United
States' Near East policy on 26 July 1970 at a closed meeting with American
press representatives: ”We are attempting to achieve a settlement (of the Near
East conflict-Ye. P.) by such a path as would strengthen the moderate re-
gimes and not the radical ones. We are attempting to put an end to the Soviet
military preaence....“ It is significant that Kissinger made direct mention
of Soviet military advisers here, and this was, obviously, correspondingly
evaluated in rightwing circles in Carlo. which. while not at that time in
power. had nevertheless. by degrees. begun to increase their activeness.

This motive--and in approximately the same terms-uwns sounded in several of
Kissinger's statements in succession. H. and B. Kalb were to write later:
"The heart of the matter for Kissinger was that he saw in his mind's eye the
time when the Egyptians would read certain signals in the international at-
mosphere and would themselves decide to end the Russian presence." It is
difficult to agree with the portrayal of the "miraculous intuition" of a
Kissinger who back in al-Nasir's lifetime, several months before his un-
expected denth, could foresee the pcripeteia of the internal political strug-
gle and the shifts in Egyptian leadership and policy engendered by its re-
sults. At the same time Kissinger did indeed wish to send a "signal" to
those who in Egypt had by this time already begun to propagandize the thesis
that "the keys to a Near East settlement are exclusively in the hands of the
United States."

After al-Nasir'a death. such "signals" came to he sent directly to the new
Egyptian leadership.

There is reason to believe that a concrete discussion of the “price“ for al-
Sadat's unilateral decision to end the mission of Soviet military advisers
in Egypt had already begun by this time. In his book "The Road to Ramadan"
Haykal. who attaches great significance to this fact, writes of the arrival
in Cairo (in the first half of November 1970) shortly after al-Nasir's death
of one of Saudi Arabia's King Fayaal's "powerful" and most trusted people-
his son-in-law and counselor Kamal Adham, who exercised general supervision
of the activity of the Saudi secret services. In his talks with al-Ssdat
"he spoke of the presence of the Russians in Egypt," Haykal writes. "empha-
sizing how much this was worrying the Americans." President al-Sadat replied
to K. Adham that he "depended on the Soviet Union insofar as the Americans
were supplying Israel with everything it asked for," but added that "in the
event of the completion of the first stage of the withdrawal of Israeli
troops. he could promise to get rid of the Russians. Kamal Adham asked
President al-Sadat if he could pass this on to the Americans. and the presi-
dent said that he could."

This conversation was undoubtedly passed on as intended, and it is natural
to suppose thatsuhsequently talks on this question proceeded along two chan-
nels--via the Saudis and directly along the American-Egyptian channel.

60
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OEPICIAL USE OﬂhY

At the start of 1976 a sensational article was published in the United States
by Edward Sheehnn. professor at Harvard University. in Kissinger's Near East
ninslon. According to the NEW YORK TIMES. "State Department officials stated
that Sheehan had lwd a multitude of talks with Kissinger's chief assistants
who had participated in the diplomatic transactions in the Near East. They
reported that these contacts had taken place with Kissinger's approval. al-
though he denied that he approved Sheehan's access to secret material--
transcripts of conversations with Near East leaders." Those who did this.
Kissinger declared in a brief interview. "committed a flagrant violation of
secrecy and a serious aistake." adding that he was "staggered" to see this
material in the press. There is also another version: Sheehan's article

and. subsequently. book. which was developed from the article and entitled
"The Arabs. Israelis and Kissinger." were the result of "leaks" of inferen-
tion organized by the secretary of state with the intention of self-advertise-
ment. However. in any event. the accuracy of the information cited by Sheehan
was not called in question in the least either by the 0.8. State Department

or the secretary of state himself.

Rogers informed al-Sadat in Cairo. E. Sheehan writes. "that Nixon would pos-
sibly meet his half-way if al-Ssdat were to reduce the Soviet presence in
Egypt. while Kissinger. with a certain indiscretion. had already delcared
before this that the American aim was to 'expel' the Russians.... whatever
his immediate aotives might have been (al-Sadat--Ye.P.). he nest have known
that the expulsion ofthsSoviets would be evaluated as a further appeal for
granting of American aid."

The day before al-Sadat nade the decision to end the lission of the Soviet
military advisers. he had a further aeeting with a special emissary of the
King of Saudi Arabia--Defense Minister Prince Sultan. At a closed nesting
with editors of Cairo newspapers al-Sadat later related that Prince Sultan
had conveyed to his news free the Americans. recalling that "the key to the
situation is in their hands.“ Prince Sultan had gone to him directly from
Washington. Kamal Adham was also "by chance" in Cairo at the same time. Re-
porting these facts. ﬂsyksl supplied them with a more than definite comment:
"Whether there was a connection between these facts (the meeting with the
Saudis and al-Sadat's decision concerning a "pause" in relations with the
Soviet Union. which he had declared for all to hear--Ye.P.) and whether

King Physal was notified of the measures which the president intended to
iaplement I do not known. and perhaps. none of us will learn. until Presi-
dent al-Sadst decides to say so himself."

No open. official reaction followed on the part of the United States to this
"gesture" of al-Sadat's. which had manifestly been made with the intention
of going a considerable part of the route to meet Usahington half-way. But
Kissinger had prepared several secret message to be signed by Nixon which.
as E. Sheehan attests. were subsequently sent along intelligence channels
directly to al-Sadat via hafiz Is'mail--adviser to the Egyptian president
for national security affairs. The messages stated that the removal of the
advisers was an inportant act and contained the assurance that the U.S.

61
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0F?ICIAL USE ONLY

Administration would involve itself in the Near East as soon as the presiden-
tial elections were over and the talks on Vietnam completed."

The version was spread in the American press that Kissinger was "extremely
surprised" at al-Sadat's sudden decision. "Why has al-Sadat done me this kind-
ness"? he inquired of his colleagues. "Why did he not first demand any can-
cessions from me"?

This reaction to the allegedly "sudden" and "disinterested" decision to end
the mission of Soviet military advisers in Egypt appears absolutely artifi-
cial and improbable. In its entire policy. both indirectly and directly.
Hashinton was nudging the Egyptian leadership toward this direction.

A little more than a year after nl-Nasir's death the United States had estab-
lished two channels of communication with the top Egyptian leadership. "There
was a normal channel from one foreign ministry to the other and, together
with this. there were also secret communications-~through our own intelli-
gence service and the CIA (always particularly active in the Near East)."
Uaykal writes. Both these channels were in constant operation.

Together with these. there were one-time-only high-level meetings. Perhaps
the most important of these contacts (prior to al—Sadat's personal meeting
with Kissinger in November 1973) was during Nafiz ls'mail's visit to the
United States 23-25 February 1973. The brief protocol part of this visit--
N. tn'nnil'a visit tn the whire Nouse and his meeting with President Nixon--
was extensively illustrated on American television and in the press; N. ls'-
mall's long secret talks with a. Kissinger were naturally not publicized.

The two goals which American policy had set itself emerged during Kissinger's
talks with is'mail: a weakening of the 0883's positions in the Near East and
the preparation of conditions for an independent mediation mission. "The
United States was ready to hold a general discussion on Near East problems
with the Soviet Union. but when it was a question of specific problems, it
preferred to deal exclusively with the parties directly concerned." this
was the conclusion drawn by Haykal in evaluating ﬂ. Is'mail's dispatches to
Cairo.

These two goals. being unified. merged into a single U.S. aspiration to uti-
lize its mediation mission to impose on the Arabs the terms of a settlement
unacceptable to them and to strengthen Israel's positions.

During H. ls'mail'a trip to the United States it was decided that, together
with open contacts through the U.S. State Department. a completley privy,
top-secret line of communication of the Egyptian Government would be estab-
lished personally with H. Kissinger. to whom, as President Nixon told H.
ls'maii. he would entrust the process of a settlement of the Near East con-
flict. R. Nixon added. according to N. Naykal. that not even the State
Department would know of this line of communication.

62
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

At this time various efforts were made on the part of the Egyptian leader-
ship. which. in turn. had set a course toward increased relations with the
Best. aimed at under no circumstances aggravating relations with the United
States. Even in the event of 0.3. actions in Egypt being in contradiction
with its sovereignty or if it was necessary to sacrifice the interests of
friendship with the USSR on the altar of the process of an isproveaent in
Egypt ian-Anerican relations.

Thus it was. for example. in connection with the ao-called Randopolo affair
at the end of 1971. An Egyptian subject of Greek parentage naaed Randopolo.
the eanagar of a large estate situated near an airbase. was spying for the
United States. he was connected with a CIA operative called Miss Swain. who
was officially a junior secretary in the visa section of the American Con-
sulate in Cairo. The Egyptian security organs arrested Randopolo and Swain.
According to ll. llayltal. a certain Eugene Trone, leader of the CIA network

in Egypt. who had diplomatic cover as a aenber of the sission looking after
American interests in this country following Egypt's rupture of diplomatic
relations with the United States. wrote an "extraordinarily frank letter"
to the director of the Arab Republic of Egypt's [ARE] General Intelligence
Service. who at that tine was Gen Allied la'nail 'Ali. "I want you to under-
stand." the CIA resident wrote. "that Egypt is not the target of this intel-
ligence affair.... There are Russians on the base (military specialists--
Ye. In). and we were interested in what they were doing there. He were spy-
ing on then. not on you." The explanations were accepted. The American
spy was released at the start of 1972. and Randopolo died in prison of a
heart attack. The incident was closed: it was not to hinder the general
"flirtation" between the two countries-Egypt and the United States. The
United States. for its part, also did everything to "close" the "Raadopolo
nffair"-in Septeaber 1971 the American diplomatic representative Bargun.
together with E. Trone. called on the director of Egyptian intelligence and
offered him his apologies.

The "flirtation" with Egypt was only one side in the American game in the
Near East. Its other side. the determining one. loreover. remained close
confidential relations with Israel and a policy geared to the continuous
provision of its any with the most Iodern weapons. It is significant

that llafiz Is'nail. who had been treated with affection by Nixon and Kis-
singer and who had not had tine to return from Hashington to Cairo. read in
Paris in February 1973 a NEH YORK TIMI-18' report that the 0.3. President had
decided to supply Israel with 68 Phantons and 36 Skyhawks. "Kissinger hast-
ened to assure al-Sadat through his secret channels,"l-3. Sheehan writes.
"that the report was false and that the Israeli request (awaiting an answer)
was still in the process of being 'exanined.‘ Kissinger was angry at the
leaked information because it had undermined his talks with Is'nail. How-
ever. the report was not false. only preaature; Nixon confirmed it in the
spring."

The fourth Arab-Israeli war eruped in October 1973. The following account
shows the specific causes which led to the Near East conflict again growing

63
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in October into the crisis stage. The long-standing policy of the United
States in relation to the Near East conflict was not the least of them.

The position of the United States during the war could not under any cir-
cumstances be defined as a manifestation of "even-handedness" in the approach
to the two sides involved in the conflict. In spite of everything, including
the real threat of an oil embargo with very serious consequences for the
economies of the United States and its allies, the United States decided to
support Israel. Hashington instituted an "air bridge" for supplying Israel
with arms and aanmnition. The delay of several days in the opening of this
bridge gave rise to many arguments and various judgments. Certain people are
inclined to blame the Pentagon "technocrats" for this, others believe that
Kissinger was "playing his own game." attempting to create the most propitious
conditions possible for the start of the U.S. "mediation mission" and not
afraid that this delay would create difficulties for Israel. “Even if the
Israelis had not received the weapons we sent them, they would not have been
in a position of impotence. They had prepared their counterattack across the
Suez Canal before they received our assistance." Kissinger told Haykal. One
way or another, one thing is clear: the United States, as always in critical
situations. took Israel's side completely.

This was also manifested in all clearness in the United States' diplomatic
steps during and after the October war. It was also discernible in the mes-
sage concerning the appropriate of $2.2 billion for urgent military aid to
Israel which the U.S. President sent to Congress. Everyone understood that
the allocation of the huge sun which had been requested had no direct rela-
tion to the military operations (insofar as it could not have been realized
immediately) but was designed to support Israel psychologically. put psycho-
logical pressure on the Arabs and, what. probably, was even more important.
provide Tel Aviv with a guarantee of the reinforcement of its military po-
tential to be used by the Israeli leadership to hold on to the captured Arab
lands after a cease-fire in the October war has been put into effect. Si-
multaneously with this and. obviously. also "for psychological purposes" the
United States moved its 6th Fleet, reinforced with several aircraft carriers,
into the Eastern Mediterranean.

The American position on the question of a cease-fire during the war in Octo-
ber 1973 leaves no doubt as to the true direction of U.S. policy. The talks
which the U.S. secretary of state had in this connection with the Israeli
leaders are. naturally, of particular interest. Matti Golan, chief diplo-
matic correspondent of the Israeli newspaper HA'ARETZ, writes about the con-
tent of these talks in the book "Henry Kissinger's Secret Talks," which was
published in the United States in 1976. The first version of the book was
banned by the Israeli military censor. The chief censor gave as the reason
for the ban on the book in an official letter to the author the fact that
"that book is based almost entirely on secret and top-secret information

and quotes from sealed documents." M. Golan himself makes no secret of the
source of his Information. According to him, he obtained the material for

64
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

his book in the form of an "authentic text" from "a certain high-ranking
person." and he had the impression that "someone in the Israeli Government
was interested in the publication of the material.“ This obviously coin-
cided with the period when not everyone in the top Israeli leadership was
satisfied with the United States' flirting with President al-Sadat. An
Israeli Cabinet session subsequently studied the question of H. Golan'e book
and. "guided by considerations of state security." interpreted as “fear"
lest damage be done to Israel's relations with the United States. made the
decision not to publish the book. The second version of the book was writ-
ten in a considerably toned-down form for publication abroad. but even it
contains information. perfectly authentic. moreover. to judge by the entire
prehistory of the publication and the absence of a reaction from the u.s.
State Department. which throws light on the motives for and nature of many
American diplomatic actions during and after the 1973 October war.

So. how did the United States react to the need for a cease-fire in the Near
East in October 1973? As is known. the cease-fire proposal was first incorp-
orated in UN Security Council Resolution 338. the draft of which was drawn

up during Kissinger's visit to HOecow. The appeal for an immediate cease-
fire in this resolution. which was adopted by the Security Council on

22 October. was not immediately put into effect. The Israeli troo.s stepped
up military operations, attempting to complete the encirclement of and hit
the Egyptian Third Army on the east bank of the Suez Canal. in the Sinai
desert. The version appeared in the American press and. later. in literature
devoted to the October war according to which the American leaders "put pres-
sure on Israel" to force it to cease fire. This explanation of events has
proved for from accurate.

On 22 October. a few hours after the Security Council's adoption of Resolu-
tion 338, the aircraft of the U.S. secretary of state landed at Ind Airport
in Israel. He immediately had a meeting first with the group which was a
part of G. Heir's "kitchen cabinet" (several top leaders who usually gathered
in the kitchen of Heir's home to solvethonwst Important questions) and then
invited the chief of the Israeli Army General Staff and certain other gen-
erals to a meeting to brief the secretary of state on the military situation.
"Kissinger ultimately inquired.“ H. Golan writes. "how many days it would
take to complete the encirclement of the two Egyptian armies on the east
bank on the Suez Canal. Chief of the General Staff Blazer said 7 days.
Brigadier General Peled. commander of the air force, gave a different time:
2-3 days. Kissinger responded: '2 or 3 days? This is all? In Vietnam the
cease-fire did not take effect at the time that had been agreed on.'" "Kis-
singer's hosts." H. Golan writes. "did not request further explanations. His
words sounded to them like an indirect call to continue military operations."
This impression. M. Golan testifies. was strengthened when the question of
observance of the cease-fire was discussed. The Israelis had interpreted
Kissinger's remark "as an indication that he would not be dissatisfied if
combat operations had continued after the day of the cease-fire."

65
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

It is interesting to note that in his speeches President sl-Sadat frequently
mentioned that the 0.5. secretary of state had categorically warned him
against attempts to strike at the Israeli bridgehead on the west bank of

the Canal. The front was "puff-pastry." If one could speak of the encircle-
ment of the Egyptian Army on the east bank. it could be said with sufficient
Justification that the tanks of Israel's General Sharon were in a similar
position on the west bank of the Suez Canal--the bridgehead was in communica-
tion with the main disposition of Israel troops in Sinai via s pontoon
bridge across the canal and a narrow. 6 kilometer-wide. corridor. which a
number of Egyptian generals had proposed cutting off. President al-Sadat
would any later that he had considerabl- superiority of firepower-~2 :l-but
that he did not begin operations since H. hissinger had declared to him that
the United States would not tolerate an Israeli defeat.

As can be seen. the United States adopted an entirely different approach to
the situations that had taken shape on the east and on the west banks of the
canal. The pro-Israeli nature of 0.8. policy was more than obvious. And

this told most directly in the results of the military operations. particular-
iy at the final stage.

was there an advance arrangement between A. al-Sadat and ". Kissinger con-
cerning the limited nature of military operations from the Egyptian side de-
signed merely to "unfreeze" the conflict and provide an impetus for a set-
tlement effected with the mediation of the Americans or did such a formal
advance arrangement not exist and an accord manifest itself in the process of
the war? One way or another. President al-Sadat himself repeatedly acknow-
ledged in his speeches that military operations on Egypt's part could, were
it not for "the political risk he was running," have been of a more danger-
ous nature for Israel. The development of events in connection with the
Israeli tank breakthrough on the west bank of the Suez Canal is significant
from this viewpoint. Let us turn to a description of the events given by

M. H. haykal. "hen the Israelis were convinced that Egypt's strategic re-
serves had been committed to action. Sharon gave the final order to initiate
the attack across the canal, which was launched on 15 October. In the region
of nevcrsoir and Abu Sultan there was an unguarded gap of about 60 kilometers
between the Egyptian armies--lsraeli asphibious troops crossed the Great
Bitter lakes and quickly gained a footing on the west bank. Astonishingly.
there was still. at the ooint of Sharon's nain crossing. an Israeli strong
point on the Bar-Lev Line which had been neither liquidated by the Egyptians
unr abandoned by the Israelis and which was able to give great assistance

to the crossing Israeli troops.

"After the Israeli troops had set up their bridgeheads. they laid down a
pontoon bridge over which their armored forces crossed and which was pro-
tected by long-range and medium-range artillery and aircraft. A first tar-
get of the attackers was Ismailia. but stiff resistance was met and they
turned south and west. rapidly taking new territory." And it was here.

in ﬂaykal's opinion. that the unexpected occurred.... "On 17 October on

6"
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

extremely efficient Egyptian fornation--the 182d Parachute Brigade con-
sisting of volunteers and commandoes--was thrown against the Israelis. Units
of this brigade had alnost reached the Israeli crossing points and the frog-
nen in it were about t‘ blow up the bridge when the order was received to
draw back and maintain a line of defense with the division next to them to
avoid creating a salient. 1he colonel commanding the brigade could not be-
lieve that the order case from Egyptian headquarters and asked for confirma-
tion. The order was eonfirsed by an officer whose voice he recognized. how-
ever. attempting to gain tine and insure the success of his mission. he
appealed to Cairo General headquarters for confirmation. This was also
given. and with regret he withdrew his hand from the Israeli windpipe. to
which it had been so close.

'Whe artillery of the Second Army...and a unit of artillery of the Third
Army began shelling the enemy bridges, scoring numerous direct hits. before
they too received the order to withdraw to avoid creating a salient." Such.
according to Hayksl. was the "bad side" of the Israeli Army operation to
establish a foothold on the west bank of the canal. which had serious aili-
tary and political results, which were reflected in the terms of the cease-
fire.

At the some timetheoverall results of the October war influenced subse-
quent u.s. policy to a considerable extent. without an analysis of then
it is impossible to correctly picture the nature of the measures which
Washington adopted in the military-political and diplomatic spheres.

In the first days of the war the Egyptian Army scored a number of coneider-
able successes. having crossed the length of the Suez Canal and broken
through the "iapregnable bar-Lev Line"-an enormous bank of sand with an en-
tire network of fortifications installed by the Israelis on the east bank of
the Suez Canal. The Syrian Army had reached the Golan Heights. Subsequent-
ly Israel managed to even out the military situation: its tanks broke
through to the west bank of the canal and also drove a wedge through the
Syrian defense in a narrow sector in the directionof Damascus. advancing
approximately 20 kilo-etera from the boundary line which had existed prior
to 6 October.

Nevertheless. the main conclusion that can be drawn from 20 days of battles
(military operations actually ended only 3 days after the UN Security Coun-
cil had adopted the cease-fire resolution) amounts to the failure of Israel's
military doctrine. This doctrine proceeded from the fact that Israel had
the possibility and capability of striking the Arab countries without per-
ceptible losses for itself. chooaing at its discretion here the time and
place for armed operations and unilaterally determining the scale and de-
gree of intensiveness of the armed encounters. Israeli military doctrine.
of which the political conception of the Israeli leadership was also a
continuation. proceeded from the Arabs' "inveterate incapability" of offer-
ing appreciable resistance to the Israeli military machine and, even less.

67
FOR OFVICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

gaining any. even "local." success in a confrontation with Tel Aviv.
Israeli "strategists" essentially ruled out the possibility of the develop-
ment of active Arab resistance to their expansionist plans. Simultaneously
the properties of the types of arms which certain Arab armies possessed
were virtually ignored.

The military operations in October destroyed a number of strategic principles
of the Israeli General Staff. The Israeli Army's losses proved unexpected-
ly large for the Israeli leadership. The number of those killed was ap-
proximately 3.000.‘ If we put the ratio of killed to wounded at l : 5 (this
ratio is usually even higher in a modern war). a very considerable number
of soldiers and officers was rendered hors dc combat. According to Israeli
figures. approximately 500 soldiers and officers were taken prisoner. Of
course, the Arab countries also had big losses, b. the losses in the war
were particularly perceptible to Israel. considerin the colossal difference
in human resources between it and the Arab countries. Israel incurred big
losses of military equipment: 900 tanks and approximn ely 250 combat sir-
craft. which constituted approximately one-half of the isrseli Air Force.
"In the short period of time since 1967 the Arabs had considerably narrowed
the 'technological' and 'qualitative gap' between them and Israel and had
learned how to fight well in a modern war." was the conclusion of Nadav
Safran. an eminent researcher of the Near East conflict, a former Israeli
officer and now an American professor.

The October war demonstrated the indisputable fact that Israel had ceased to
rule the skies. Egyptian and Syrian air defense put up effective resistance
to the Israeli Air Force. The acknowledgements of the American military re-
searcher Y. classmsn are interesting on this score. He describes the events
of the 1973 war thus in a book devoted to the Near that conflict: ”Although
the Israelis had an idea of the types of anti-aircraft guns which the Arabs
had. they were taken unawares both by their effectiveness and intensiveness
of use." The author also writes about the extremely efficient use on the
port of the Egyptian infantry of portable antitank guns. "Despite the fact
that the Israeli armed forces knew about these guns," Y. Glassman writes,
"certain tank commanders were simply staggered by their effectiveness, which
had a big psychological impact on the crews of the combat vehicles. This is
how. for example. a tank commander described his position: 'You are rolling
along in a tank with a quiet confidence in its invulnersbility and suddenly
you see an individual with some kind of stick about 200 yeards ahead of
your. You cannot believe that one man could destroy a huge armored machine.
but a few seconds later the tank. is a wreck'."

It later became known that in response to sharp criticism Israeli Defense
Minister M. Dayan had submitted his resignation right at the start of the
war. In his notice of resignation he mentioned his "responsibility for the
failure" of the system of defense. Dayan's resignation was not accepted
since the Israeli leaders did not want at that time to exacerbate the in-
ternal political contradictions and attempted to consolidate the alliance
of different political forces represented in the government.

68
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The preliminary report of the official commission set up in Israel under

the chairmanship of Supreme Court Justice Agranet to investigate the rea-
sons for Israel's failures in the October war was published in April 1976.

In January 1975 the Agrenat Commission submitted the final report. which
attested the Israeli Command's serious underestimation of the Arab countries'
military potential. the "unpreparedness" of the Israeli Army and the lack of
discipline at the war's initial stages. The chief of the General Staff

and the leaders of the intellgienca service of the Israelis Army were dis-
missed even on the basis of the commission's preliminary findings.

Finally. during the October war for the first timetheArab countries made use
in their own interests of such a powerful weapon as oil. As a result of
coordinated measures the Arab countries announced and began to implement a
slowdown in oil production. The cutback in oil production amounted to
practically 30 percent compared with Sentember 1973. Simultaneously there
was a boycott of a number of Hestern states which supported Israel. It was
imposed against the United States and Holland. and. moreover. as a conse-
quence of the boycott of Nolland. the Rotterdam oil refinery, which supplied
products from Arab oil to a considerable number of BBC countries, ceased to
function. A third direction of the Arab world's "oil war” was a sharp in-
crease in oil prices. By the end of the year oil prices had quadrupled in

a number of cases since the start of October.

These measures directly affected the interests of all the developed capital-
ist countries. but primarily the Heat European states and Japan. which pro-
vide for almost 80 percent of their oil requirements through imports from
the Arab countries. The Arab countries' "oil measures" effected the United
States to a lesser extent, although here also they intensified and aggra-
vated the processes connected with the energy crisis.

So. as a result of the change in the correlation of forces in the Near East
conflict and the exacerbation of the "oil factor" and also of the ever in-
creasing dissatisfaction with the inflexible. shortsighted policy of the
Israeli leadership considerable changes began in the international atmo-
sphere in favor of the Arab states. For the first time the sac countries
came out with a joint political document on 6 November 1973 in connection
with the events in the Near East which contained an appeal for a political
settlement of the conflict in accordance with the UN Security Council Reso-
lution of 22 November 1967.

The Japanese Government also defined its position in relation to the Near
East crisis. Like the EEC countries, Japan demanded the implementation of
UN Security Council Resolution 262 of 22 November 1967.

The process of Israel's international isolation intensified as a result of
and after the 1973 October war. It should obviously be emphasized that
the explanation of this lies by no means only in the plane of influence
of the "oil factor" on the position of a whole number of Western countries
in relation to the Near East conflict. As Prof Charles Yost, an important

69
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

American etpert and former u.s. representative in the United Nations. wrote.
"the isolation (of Israel--Ye. P.) is only partially the result of the Arab
oil power. The isolation is also caused by the spreading conviction that
Israel has no moral right to occupy--as it has now done for 9 years-appre-
ciable Arab territories taking during the “6-day war" or to deny the Pales-
tinians the right to self-determination. a right which on legal grounds it
proclaims for itself. These feelings are so strong among the countries of
the third world that they support the Arabs in international forums despite

the fact that the sharp upsurge of oil prices has caused them considerable
harm."

Ever increasing dissatisfaction was displayed in West Europe and even in
Japan in connection with the support which the United States was lending
Israel. For the majority understood that the United States is ultimately
responsible for Israel's capacity to pursue an extremist policy. The ERG
refused the United States permission to use its territory for transporting
arms to Israel; Britain and France imposed a complete ban on arms exports to
the warring countries. including Israel. In practice the United States was
unable to use the territory of a single one of its Rest European allies with
the exception of the fascist regime in Portugal to transfer arms and ammuni-
tion to the Israeli Army. The American military bases on the territory of
the Heat European NATO states were also blockaded at this time. which. as
the American politicians' confessed. came as extremely unexpected for ﬂash-
ington. This elicited unprecedently sharp criticism of the West European
allies on the part of American statesmen. particularly the U.S. defense
secretary.

The disagreements of a number of West European countries with the United
States were aggravated particularly after the United States. which had
failed to consult its NATO allies in advance. put its armed forces on many
bases. including those in Europe. on alert.

It was far from only a question of the "hegemonist" manner in relation to
its allies in which Hashinglon had taken this action. The United States'
partners. like many others. incidentally. believed that there was no need
to put the 0.5. armed forces on alert worldwide and that there was no justi-
fication for this worthy of attention. The version. which failed to cor-
respond to reality, later appeared in the American press to the effect that
this U.S. measure had been caused by the reality of the USSR's unilateral
interference in the Near East. In actual, fact. as many observers noted.
the step taken by the Hhite House was of a demonstrative nature and had a
mainly domestic direction: at the time of the Hatergate scandal and at a
time of attacks on President Nixon he and his immediate entourage wished

to demonstrate their "firmness" and "capability" when the United States'
interests were at stake and divert the public away from the sensational

Watergate exposures of the Republican Administration. Meanwhile this
"diversionary maneuver" increased tension globally and gave rise to the

risk of the escalation in relations between the United States and the USSR,

70
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

which had elicited sharp opposition on the part of America's allies. The
Heat European press wrote that the American politicians were manipulating
their allies. bringing the affair, against their will, to a "critical thres-
hold" and being guided here by domestic political considerations.

All these shifts both in the balance of forces in the Near East and in the
United States' relations with its allies in connection with the Near East
crisis and the threat of a hardening of Arab oil policy put considerable ob-
stacles in the way of the implementation of U.S. policy in the Near East.

The anti-Israel reaction to the events of a large part of the so-called

third world operated in the same direction. By the end of October 1973 the
number of African countries which had broken diplomatic relations with Israel
had reached 25. -

Nor could the fact that during the October war the Arab countries' solidarity
had risen to a higher level have failed to have had an effect on American
policy. Western literature frequently divides the.Arab world into two groups
and "two circles" of countries in relation to the Near East conflict. The
first consists of the Arab states which participate directly in the armed
confrontation with Israel. The second consists of those which are not in-
volved in the conflict directly but which do not conceal their hostile
attitude toward Israeli expansionism. During the 1973 war there was a sharp
activization of the role of the "second circle," which may be seen as a new
shift in the Near East situation and one that is extremely unfavorable to the
Israeli leadership.

This shift was manifested in more than just the fact of coordination of oil
pressure on the imperialist states. Many Arab states which had hitherto not
participated directly in the confrontation with Israel sent their troops to
the Syrian and Egyptian fronts: some--1ike Iraq--sent appreciable forces,
which plaved a big role in frustrating the Israel attack on Damascus, while
others sent symbolic forces. Certain Arab oil-producing countries allocated
millions in funds to cover Egypt's and Syria's serious economic losses.
Conservative Arab regimes. even those which were regarded as sufficiently
strong bastions of U.S. influence. were involved in this solidarity. Saudi
Arabia. for example. played an important role in the use of tue "oil weapon"
against the United States in October. A month later King Paysal told the
U.S. secretary of state that he had been forced to act thus and he begged the
United States to alter its Near East policy in order not to compel him, "a
friend of the United States." to make decisions which were so difficult for
his.

A number of observers noted that a further appreciable result of the October
events in the Near East was the failure of the efforts of anti-Soviet ele-
ments attempting to alienate the Arab world and the Soviet Union and shun-
ning no insinuations concerning Soviet policy for this. Thus a number of
anti-Soviet myths which had been assiduously exaggerated by imperialist and
also Arab reactionary elements, from fabrications concerning the quality of

71
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the weapons which Egypt and Syria possessed through big talk about the So-
viet Union's "retreat" from its principled position of support for the Arab
pooples' just struggle to liquidate the consequences of Israeli aggression.
were completely dispelled during the October flareup.

A statement by al-Sadat himself is of undoubted interest in this connection.
0n 7 October 1973 he told the USSR ambassador in Cairo: "I cannot find words
to express my profound gratitude to the Soviet 1eaders--Egypt's true friends.
This will remain in my heart and the hearts of all Egyptians forever." Four
days later he again told the Soviet ambassador: 'Wburposition is the posi-
tion of true friends who have come to our assistance in the most crucial and
difficult days for us. The actions of the Soviet leadership are of historic
significance and will undoubtedly have great influence not only on the course
of military operations but on the future relations of friendship between our
countries."

The changing relations between the United States and!the Soviet Union also
began to exert their influence on the American position. The military opera-
tions in the Near East in October occurred under the conditions of the pro-
cess of normalization of relations between countries incorporated in the

two opposite world social systems which was underway and under the conditions
of the shift away from the "cold war" toward relaxation of tension. This
contributed both to the localization and cessation of military operations and
the progress of the subsequent measures adopted for the purpose of leading
the Near East conflict in the direction of a political settlement.

For the first time in the history of the Arab-Israeli conflict the UN Secur-
ity Council cease-fire decision was successfully linked, with the most active
role of the Soviet Union. directly with the problem of liquidation of the
general causes of the conflict. A big achievement of the principled and
active policy of the USSR was the formulation of a resolution. which was
adopted by the UN Security Council on 22 October, in which a call for a
cease-fire in the Near East was advanced simultaneously with the demand for
the practical implementation of UN Security Council Resolution 242 of 22 No-
vember 1967. The Soviet-American resolution. which was adopted by the UN
Security Council. also provided for immediate political negotiations between
the parties involved under the appropriate auspices.

The Soviet Union's energetic policy continued to pave the way toward a just
and lasting peace in the Middle East even after Israel's ruling circles,
having given their verbal consent to the Soviet-American resolution, immed-
lately violated it. For 2 days after the Security Council's approval of
this resolution Israel was extendingthebridgehead which it had taken on
the west bank of the Suez Canal. which enabled it to put Egypt's Third Army,
which was on the east bank of the Suez Canal, in a difficult position,
having cut its food. water and ammunition supply lines. On 23 October

the UN Security Council categorically repeated the demand for a cease-fire
in the Near East. The USSR's active position contributed to the adoption

72
FOR OFVICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

on 25 October of a further Security Council resolution providing for the
creation of a UN Emergency Force. At the request of the president of Egypt
the Soviet Union sent a group of its representatives to this country to ob-
serve thc implementation of the Security Council cease-fire resolution. In
the wake of this step by the Soviet Union the United States was also forced
to send its representatives to the Near East.

The combination of the Soviet Union's decisive measures in support of the
Arab countries' struggle to liquidate the consequences of Israeli aggres-
sion with the constructive policy aimed at the development of the process of
the relaxation of international tension also exerted a definite influence on
Hashington's position. Under the influence of Soviet policy and also taking
account of the changes which had been revealed in the military situation in
the Near East and in the political situation in other regions of the world,
the United States was forced to make a number of changes to its position.
These changes were also undoubtedly dictated by the Arab states' use of the
"oil weapon" against the countries supporting Israel. As a result of all
this certain positive. constructive features appeared in the U.S. position.
which also contributed to the movement toward a political settlement in the
Near East.

Of course, as has already been said, it was not a question of Hashington
denying Israel aid. However, under the influence of circumstances the United
States was compelled to change certain aspects of its policy, which was taken
into consideration during the Soviet Union's contacts with the United States
on questions of a Near East settlement which had taken place in Moscow and

in Washington.

how was all this reflected in the general process of a political settlement
of the Near East conflict?

The convening of a peace conference on the Near East in Geneva became pos-
sible at the end of December. After a series of preliminary negotiations.
including those between the Soviet Union and the United States. the con-
ference opened on 21 Decenberl973 in the Palace of Nations in Geneva. Tak-
ing part in the conference from the Soviet Union was Foreign Minister A. A.
Gromyko. from the United States Secretary of State h. Kissinger. from the ARE
Prime Minister and Foreign Minister I. Fahmi, from the Kingdom of Jordan
Foreign Minister 2. al-Rifa'i and from the state of Israel Foreign Minister
A. Eben. The session was opened by UN Secretary General K. Haldheim.

Thenext step was the signing on 18 January l97b at the lOl-kilometer post on
the Cairo-Suez road of an agreement between Egypt and Israel on the disengage-
ment of their troops. In accordance with this agreement, Israeli troops

were evacuated from the bridgehead on the west bank and withdrew deep into
Sinai on the east back of the Suez Canal. up to the Mitla and Gidi passes.

The numbers of the Israeli troops present up to the passes were limited.
Simultaneously there was a reduction in the numbers of Egyptain troops and

73
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

heavy military equipment on the east bank of the canal whither these troops
had crossed over during the combat operations in October 1973. An 11-
kilometer-wide buffer zone was formed between the Egyptian and Israeli troops
in which the UN Emergency Force was stationed. Egypt and Israel undertook

to refrain from all military and paramilitary actions from the time of

the signing of the agreement. The agreement observed that the parties did
not regard it as final and that it represented "only the first step along

the path toward a final, just and lasting peace."

The start of the Geneva Conference had inspired hopes of the possibility of
the establishment of a Just and lasting peace in the Near East. These hopes
were not without foundation and were underpinned by a number of factors
which actually existed or, rather, a number of new circumstances--we have
already spoken of these above-which had appeared as a result of an since
October 1973 and which began to be projected on the process of a political
settlement, objectively contributing to its development. These new circum-
stances and new possibilities may be termed the "potential of a political
settlement." Hhat did this "potential" include?

First. the failure of the Israeli military-political doctrine, which, pro-
ceeding from the "inveterate nature" of Israel's military supremacy over the
Arab countries and essentially denying the reality of the Arab countries'
unity of action. with respect to the oil question also, had for many years
blocked the path toward a lasting and just peace in the Near East. The
"summary acknowledgement" of N. Goldmann, chairman of the World Jewish Con-
gress, which he made on 2 January 1975 in an interview with the WASHINGTON
POST, is very interesting: "I had an endless quarrel with D. Ben-Gurion

(a father of Israel's military-political doctrine-—Ye. P.). All these years
I believed that time was working against Israel, while he claimed that it
was working precisely for Israel. The October war and the oil situation
prove. unfortunately, that I was right."

Second. the failure of the Israeli leaders' calculations that "external sur-
roundings" would facilitate their hard, expansionist line in relation to the
Arab states aimed at ultimately imposing on them peace terms which were one-
sidedly favorable to Israel. The calculation was founded on the "constancy"
of the support for Israeli policy on the part of the West European states
and on the possibility of neutralizing the effect of the process of the re-
laxation of international tension, which was unfavorable to Israel's ex-
pansionist course, and preventing a manifest change in international public
opinion, which was contradicting to an ever increasing extent the line being
proclaimed and pursued by Israel. The relaxation of international tension
lad created an opportunity for direct constructive contacts between the
USSR and the United States, and this had become a clear positive element

for a political settlement.

Finally. third. the complete failure of the Israeli leadership's attempts
to "neutralize" the Palestinian factor. erase the Palestinian problem and
remove it from the category of the most important components of a Near East

76
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

settlement had been revealed. Like its predecessors, the G. Meir government
usually portrayed matters such that the fate of the Palestinians was only
of concern to those Arab states in which they were currently living. This
formulation of the issue not only attested the Israeli leadership's
complete denial of the fact that the very Near East conflict was largely the
result of the Palestinian Arabs having become a people in exile deprived

of the possibility of enjoying the natural and inalienable right to self-
determination but was also an active neans of frustrating any realistic
approaches to a just political settlement of the Near East conflict.

And. moreover. denial of the Palestinian people's right to self-determina-
tion as far as the creation of their own national state passed as an in-
heritance from C. Heir's government to the Israeli Cabinet of I. Rabin, which
was created in May 1976. The "new faces" and the "new generation" on the
Israeli political horizon (this was how the American and Rest European
bourgeois press commented on the retirement of c. Heir and H. Dayan) took
over in the form of a baton and carefully carried further the completely
negative position in relation to the Palestinian problem.

Hesnwhile life had inflicted crushing blows on the Israeli leadership's
anti-Palestinian line. By an overwhelming majority the UN General Assembly
29th Session passed a resolution on 22 November 1976 which recognised the
Palestinian people's right to self-determination. national independence and
sovereignty. There was also confirmation of the Palestinians' right to
return to the places of their birth from which they had been expelled. By
a special resolution of the UN General Assembly the PLO was accorded perma-
nent observer status at the United Nations. The broad international recog-
nition of the Palestinian people's rights and their legitimate represents-
tives improved the prospects of a solution of the Palestinian problem.

And for its part. the PLO made an appreciable contribution to the quest for
a constructive solution of this problem. A session of the Palestine Na-
tional Council—the highest organ of the PLO-dues held in Cairo in June
1976. One of the main decisions of the session was the proclamation for the
first time of the task of the creation of a "Palestinian authority" on the
territory of the West Bank of the Jordan and the;Caza region following the
withdrawal of the Israeli occupation forces.

Another important decision of the National Council was the reconendation
that Y. 'Arafat, chairman of the PLO Executive Couittee. use for the de-
fense of the Palestinian people's national rights such forms of struggle as
the diplomatic and the political. This created important conditions for
the participation of the PLO, recognized as the sole representative of

the Palestinian people, in the Geneva Near East Peace Conference.

It should be noted that the political resolution of the Palestinian Nation-
al Council was adopted unanimously-«he representatives of all the organ-
izations. including those who even on the eve of the Cairo session were
adopting a negative position. voted in favor of it. True, later the Pm

75
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

headed by c. Hahash, in conjunction with two other comparatively small Pa-
lestinian organizations, created a "rejection front." however. the over-
whelming majority of the Palestinian movement--?atah. al-Sa'iqah and the
Democratic Front for the Liberation of Palestine--remained with Y. 'Arafat.
leader of the PLO Executive Committee.

As a result of all that has been said the possibilities of a political
settlement after October 1973 became considerably more favorable than.
perhaps. in the entire time of the existence of the Near East conflict.
However. possibilities are not reality. they have to be made reality. and
a definite policy may serve as a means of this. The United States loudly
declared that its "step-by-atep" settlement policy was such a policy. In
actual fact as a result of the implementation of this policy steps were
taken in a direction away from a settlement. and the positive potential of
peace which had been built up with such difficulty in the Near East since
October 1973 was considerably dissipated.

In an attempt is made to analyze the American measures since October 1973.
it may be concluded that they have pursued the achievement of a complex of
goals:

isolation of the Arabs from the USSR;

liquidation of the military situation which was created as a result of the
war in October 1973 and which was unfavorable to Israel; and

alienation of the Arab states and the frustration of efforts aimed at their
unification on an anti-imperialist platform. particularly with respect to
the oil question.

Perhaps the most authoritative source revealing the aims set by the American
"step-by-step" policy is the secretary of state himself. On 16 December 1973
u. Kissinger. in Jerusalem. described his "general strategy” to the Israeli
leadership (quoting H. Golan. who reproduces this conversation in the above-
mentioned book) thus: "Kissinger explained that the purpose of the troop-
discngagement negotiations was to obviate the necessary of conducting nego-
tiations on borders and a final settlement. The success of the negotiations
(in disengagement--Ye.P.) would also lead to another aehievement--the lift-
ing of the oil embargo. At the same time this would put an end to Israel's
isolation. easing the pressure on it mainly on the part of the Best European
states and Japan. No one in Israel should entertain even fleeting doubts,
Kissinger warned. that the failure of the disengagement negotiations would
destroy the dam holding back pressure on Israel. this time in favor not of

a partial withdrawal but of a full withdrawl to the borders of 6 June 1967."

Naturally. the Arab leaders did not hear these words from the secretary of
state. but in Israel he could and had to speak absolutely frankly on this
question.

76
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Simultaneously certain disagreements were manifested between Israel and the
United States. For from everyone in the Israeli leadership was happy with
the rapprochement between the United States misgypt which had begun or.
equally. with the fact that' to accelerate this rapprochement the U.S.
secretary of state had begun to resort to a certain pressure (very limited.
it is true, and always on secondary issues) on the Israeli side. Kissinger
himself said that foreign policy is the art of unification of as large a
ntmber of interests as possible. In this case the United States was doing
everything to unite the interests of a strengthening of Israel's positions
with the interests of its own maneuvering in relation to Egypt, the main aim
of which was to "squeeze out" the Soviet Union.

There is a significant example in this plane--the u.s. Administration's re-
action to Israel's protest at the U.S. decision. adopted during President
Nixon's visit to Cairo in the stunner of 1976, to supply Egypt (together with
Israel) with a nuclear reactor. In response to this the U.S. secretary of
state sent the Israeli leadership (the government was then headed by Rabin)

a telegram explaining that "Egypt needed the reactor for domestic purposes.
If it does not acquire it from the United States, it will, of course. turn to
Moscow. American interests. which perfectly clearly are also Israel's in—
terests." Kissinger emphasized. "dictate a situation where Egypt depends

in the question of a reactor on the United states...."

Let us examine in more detail the specific measures of American diplomacy
adopted following the end of the military operations in Sinai and the Golan
Heights.

Inediately after the end of the 1973 October war, the United States was in
practice confronted with the following choice: make the maximum use of the
sisuntion that has been created and the new opportunities that have emerged
in this connection for initiating movement toward a general compromise set-
tlement of the Near East conflict or first "smooth out" the situation, one-
sidedly neutralize the results of the war which are unfavorable to Israel and
only later move in the direction of a settlement in Israel's interests. That
the United States opted for the second path was immediately attested by the
sharply increased supplies of arms from the United States, unprecedented in
the history of American-Israeli relations. It was not even just a question
of making good Israel's losses. The United States had given Israel arms
worthSl billion during the war for this purpose. It was a question of a de-
cision. with the consent of Congress, to grant Israel an additional $2.2
billion for military purposes right on the eve of the convening of the Geneva
Near East Pace Conference.

The hearings on this question in the 0.8. Senate Foreign Relations Couittee
on 13 December 1973 were extremely interesting. They were conducted by its
chairman. Fulbright. who said, in part: "I absolutely do not understand the
urgency of this (the granting of a further $2.2 billion to Israel--Ye.P.)

at precisely this moment. If the peace efforts fail and we take a different
road, I will not be able to do anything on that account. This would be going

77
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

beyond my personal competence and that of this committee, becoming, in my
judgment. a purely military question. But today we are faced with a diplomatic
situation, and it is precisely this committee and the State Department which
bear the responsibility for it. I would wish to support them and would not
want to do anything capable of complicating or rendering impossible the
achievement of a settlement at the peace conference." Senator Fulbright
simultaneously expressed doubt as to the expediency of granting Israel arms

for such an essentially tremendous amount-~from the viewpoint of the cor-
relation of its forces with the Arab states.

It is significant that the administration's decision on unprecedented mili-
tary assistance to Israel right at the very moment when the contours of joint
Soviet-American efforts in the sphere of a settlement of the Near East con-
flict were being mapped out elicited criticism. and quite acute at that, on
the part of a number of senators and those invited to attend the Foreign
Relations Committee session. Senator McClure bluntly expressed concern that
the colossal new American infusion into Israel‘s military organism “will
show the Soviet Union that the United States is not averse to jeopardizing
the start of the relaxation process for the sake of one-sided support of
Israel." "And for what"? McClure asked. "To defend its right to occupy
captured Arab land"?

"As the last war clearly showed. "Sen J. Abourezk said, "our policy of kind-
ling the arms race in the Near East had the consequence of contributing more
to tie new explosion in this region than to averting it." "It seems that

we have no faith in the conference (Geneva-Ye.P.) and that we are arming
lsrael to a level where it will not have to do anything at the conference...ﬂ
the presiding Fulbright declared. responding to the statements of administra-
tion representatives--Deputy Secretary of Defense Clements. Admiral Hoorer,
chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Committee. Deputy Secretary of State
Rush and others who with one voice defended the administration's line. which
had nothing in common with real movement toward a settlement. Despite the
serious criticism both in Congress and from the United States' allies, this
line was pursued.

It may be considered that the granting of colossal American military assist-
ance to Israel was the point of departure from which H. Kissinger began his
diplomacy--sett1ement of the Near East conflict "step by step."* Taking the
granting of enormous military assistance to Israel as a basis. the U.S. sec-
retary of state began active preparations for the first disengagement of
Egyptian and Israeli troops in Sinai.

*“The secretary of state is certain that the Congress's approval of the bill
(on granting Israel $2.2 billion for arms—-Ye.P.) is a vital prior condition."
Deputy Secretary of State Rush declared at the U.S. Senate Foreign Rela-

tions Committee session.

 

78
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Initially the American politicianadid not try to present the disengagement

of Egypt's and Israel's troops in Sinai as an independent action. Fire had
only just ceased. The troops in Sinai and on the west bank of the Suez Canal
were really facing one another "with rifles stilt." as they say. Under

these conditions the task of the first troop disengagement. which was pre-
sented in the context of an overall settlement. made sense and was supported
by the Soviet Union. At the same timetheSoviet Union firmly emphasized dun
it was supporting not an individual. independent and isolated measure counter-
posed to an overall settlement but an action designed to facilitiate this
overall settlement and to get it moving. The Soviet side regarded the troop
disengagement in Sinai both in its nature and in its methods of implementa-
tion exclusively in the overall context of a political settlement in the

Near East.

It seems exceptionally important that the USSR also pursued this viewpoint
on the first troop disengagement in Sinai in its contacts with Egypt, where
certain signs of complicity in the American policy of partial measures in
relation to the Near East conflict had begun to be manifested at this time.‘
For example. the following provision was carried in the cal-unique on the
stay of ARE Foreign Minister 1. fahmi in the USSR (ll-2‘ January 1976): 'ﬁhe
troop-disengagement agreement is of positive significance, considering that

a radical settlement in the Near East on the basis of complete implementation
of the Security Council decisions will follow in its wake."

HoweVer, subsequent events showed that the course of an overall settlement
in the Hiddle East was blocked.

Upon a retrospective analysis of the American position it becomes clear that
evenin the first disengagement of Egyptian and Israeli troops the United States
had not set itself the aim of securing the continuous nature of the process

of a political settlement embracing an increasingly large number of problems
of importance for the establishment of peace. American diplomacy was con-
centrated fully on the solution of military questions intended to exclude

the verypoasibility of a repetition of the situation of October 1973. which
was extremely unfavorable and. what is more, contraindicative for Israel.

Certain of the U.S. secretary of state's statements testify completely un-
equivocably to this direction of American policy. E. Sheehan cites the
official record of R. Kissinger's talks with Syrian President R. sl-Aead on

*"The Soviet Union's position was difficult in the extreme during henry Kis-
singer's trips between Jerusalem and Aswan in 1976," H. H. Haykal wrote at the
start of May 1977 in the Jordanian newspaper AR-RA'Y. "The USSR was in ig—
norance of what had been said and did not conceal its irrit ion. Hhen we
attempted to dispel its misgivings, we did less than was necessary and more
slowly than was required. Others were ahead of us in briefing the USSR."

 

79
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

15 Deremher 197] in Damascus. ﬂ. al-Asad asked: "Does the United States
agree that. first. Syria cannot cede territory in a settlement, second. that
there cannot be a settlement without a solution of the Palestinian problem
and. third. that the purpose or a peace settlement is the solution of these
two questions, otherwise it would just be a waste or time without an agree-
ment being reached"?

ﬂ. Kissinger was more than definite in his reply to this: 'Ve are ready to
discuss with you a withdrawal of Israeli troops at the first stage and we
recognize that there will have to be further troop withdrawals at subsequent
stages." Troop withdrawals--nothing more. But no attention to the problems
raised by the Syrian president, without which an overall settlement of the
conflict is altogether impossible; no desire to seriously discuss questions
connected with the Geneva Conference.

As for the terms themselves of the troop disengagement and how they were
hatched and understood by the United States. 3. Sheehan has a very interest-
ing statement on this question. "It (the agreement--Ye.P.) contained" Shee—
han writes in the American journal FOREIGN POLICY, "all the principal pro-
posals of Dayan--in reality Dayan eculd be termed its secret father. It was
assumed that the lsraelis would pull back in Sinai beyond a line approximate-
ly [5 miles from the Suez Canal protected by a UN buffer force and would

leave the Egyptians a narrow strip of territory on the east bank, where they
would accordingly reduce their army from 60,000 to 7,000 men: the emplace-
ment of missiles in a 30-kilometer-wide zone symnetrically along each line

was prohibited. Al-Sadat did not promise to end the state of war. but nor

did he receive a timetable of further Israeli withdrawals and he secretly
promised the United States that he would allow Israeli nonmilitary cargoes

to pass through the canal as soon as it had been cleared. Kissinger addi-
tionally conveyed to the Israelis a secret document in which the United States
reported the Egyptian promise to clear the canal. restore the cities in the
zone and resume peaceful activity in this region. Egypt and Israel agreed

to American aerial reconnaissance in the disengagement zone: the document
ended with the words “the United States will make every effort to fully satis-
fy lsrael's requirements in arms supplies on a long-term, extended basis."

Naturally. without even knowing the origin of the package of all these mea-
sures, they could without particular difficulty be called a "Dayan creation."

Under the conditions that had been created the Soviet Union persistently waged
a struggle for the speediest resumption of the work of the Geneva Conference
for the immediate solution of the entire package of problems of a political
settlement of the hear East conflict.

Simultaneously a great deal of attention was paid to the preparation of an
agreement on the disengagement of Syrian and Israeli troops on the Golan
Heights. There were compelling reasons for persistent attention to this
question. Following the first troop disengagement in Sinai. there had emerged
the real threat of the concentration of Israel's forces on the front with

80
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Syria. considering that Egypt's participation in military operations in the
event of an new outbreak of war in the Near East would have been rendered
difficult. Under these circumstances the disengagement of troops on the
Golan Heights was an urgent necessity. At the same time Soviet diplomacy was
Implementing a number of active measures to exclude conditions unacceptable
to the Arab side in the troop disengagement on the Golan Heights.

After prolonged preparation. which included the USSR foreign minister's trips
to the Near East and his meetings with the U.S. secretary of state, final
docaments were signed in Geneva on 5 June 1974 determining the procedure for
and time of the disengagement of Syrian and Israeli troops and also of the
withdrawal of Israeli troops from part of Syrian territory which they had
occupied. These documents provided for the release of territory with a

total area of 663 square kilometers. including 112 square kilometers with the
city of al-Qunaytirah. which was captured by Israel in 1967. In a message

to the CPSU Central Committee general secretary the Syrian president em-

phasized that Syria "values highly the support of the Soviet Union and all
friendly countries."

The opposite nature of the approaches to a political settlement of the Near
East conflict on the part of the Soviet Union and the United States was shown
even more distinctly following the troop disengagement on the Golan Heights.
thle the USSR was constantly and tirelessly calling for a resumption of the
Geneva Conference with the participation of PLO representatives for a com-
prehennivc settlement through the eradication of all the reasons which gave
rise to and which maintain the conflict the United States was continuing to
proceed with the "partial-measures" policy. Concealing its reluctance to
agree to a resumption of the Geneva Conference. the State Department ad-
vanced the argument of the need for its careful preparation. The Soviet
Union declared that there should be careful preparation. but that the dis-
cussions thereon could not serve as justification for frustrating the idea
of a resumption of the conference.

At this time it became clear that the U.S. State Department was, together
with other aims (we have already mentioned these: "squeezing" the USSR out
of the Near East. splitting the Arab world. liquidation of the military re-
sults of the October 1973 war unfavorable to Israel and the freezing on a
new basis of the “no war. no peace" situation in the Near East), linking a
further task with the "step-by-step" tactic--blunting the keeness and,
possibly. altogether neutralizing for a prolonged period the Palestinian
problem and burying it in partial. separate agreements.

The diplomatic activeness developed around the question of the "troop dis-
engagement" ontheﬂest Bank of the River Jordan is of interest in this con-
nection.

Accompanying President Nixon on his trip to Israel in June 1976, the U.S.
secretary of state argued the American position on this question to the
Israeli leadership thus: "The choice facing Israel is not simply whether

81
FOR OFFICIAL USE OﬂLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

to negotiate or not negotiate with King ﬂusayn. The choice is whetherto nego-
tiate with ﬂusayn now or be forced to negotiate with PLO leader Yasir 'Arafat
later. Each day without an agreement with the king of Jordan strengthens

the positions of the Palestinian organizations in the Atab world."

For the reasons mentioned by the 0.5. secretary of state the United States set
as its priority goal the achievement of a partial settlement of relations be-
tween Israel and Jordan. Hashington'a contacts with Amman were developed in-
tensively on this question. As far as the Palestinian leaders were concerned.
they qualified the planned agreement on the "disengagement of Jordanian and
Israeli troops" as an attempt to put part of the West Bank under the control
of Jordanian administration, leaving the other part under the Israeli mili-
tary authorities and thereby in practice canceling out the Palestinian peo-
ple's right to self-determination.

A number of H. Kissinger's talks with the Israeli leadership was subordinated
to the task of reaching an agreement on the disengagement of Israel's and
Jordan's troops. This was one of the main themes during King Busayn's stay
in Hashington in March 1974. The American-Jordanian communique devoted to
his stay in the United States contained direct support for the disengagement
of Israeli and Jordanian troops.

Yet such an agreement could still not be reached. It was torpedoed at this
stage by Israel. which feared that an agreement would render more difficult
its struggle to annex the territories of the Heat Bank of the River Jordan
and Gaza in one form or another.

It is highly significant that an "argument" employed by American diplomacy
(claiming to "have a broader view of things than Israel" and, on this basis,
"defend its interests better than Israel itself") in its attempts to win over
Tel Aviv to a partial settlement with Jordan amounted to intimidating it
with the "alternative" in the form of the Geneva Conference. In conversa-
tion with Y. Allon, who arrived in Hashington at the end of July 1974. the
secretary of state said that. given a prolonged pause in his "step-by-step"
tactics, there would be no other possibility than to resume the work of the
Geneva Conference “in that the Soviets are putting pressure on in this di-
rectiunand that there are limits to how long they can be kept outside of the
process."

The possibility of the realization of the American plan of a partial Jordan-
ian-Israeli agreement in 1974 was finally undermined by a decision of a
conference of heads of Arab states in October 1976 in Rabat. According to
this decision. which was adopted unanimously (by Jordan also), the PLO was
recognized as the sole legitimate representative of the Palestinian people.
Under these conditions Jordan could no longer act as a party in the negotia-
tions on the fate of the West Bank, which is populated, as is known, by
Palestinians.

82
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Israel gave the decision of the Rabat conference a hostile reception and used
it for an even further hardening of its position in relation to s resump-
tion of the Geneva Conference, putting forward the unconditional demand

for the exclusion of PLO representatives from participation therein. This
demand. which actually blocked the convening of the forum for a political
settlement of the Near East conflict. was entirely and fully supported by

the United States.

When it became clear that the maneuver related to a partial Jordanian-Israeli
agreement had failed, the United States again concentrated its attention on
Egypt. "Kissinger's long-term strategy." the NE" YORK TIMES wrote on 2 June
1974, "according to the statements of his associates, consists of attempts

to neutralize Egypt as a factor in the Near East conflict."

In the light of all this it was obviously not fortuitous that at the end of
1976 and the start of 1975 voices intensified in a number of countries, in-
cluding Egypt. saying that the Soviet Union should be involved in a settle-
ment of the Near East conflict only at the "final" stage. This maneuver was
aimed at isolating the Arab states. weakening their ability to withstand
pressure on the part of imperialist circles, dragging out the process of a
political settlement in the Near East ad infinitua and essentially returning
to the state of "no war. no peace." which was fraught with an inevitable new
explosion. Under these conditions the USSR foreign minister made a number of
trips to the Near East. The Soviet-Egyptian and Soviet-Syrian communiques
issued during A. A. Gromyko's stay in Egypt and Syria in February 1975
recorded the need for the speediest convening of the Geneva Conference.

But because of the position of Israel. which was supported by the United
States. the Geneva Conference was not resumed. In its place U.S. diplomacy
began to strive in earnest for a second partial agreement between Israel and

Egypt.

The year of 1975 began with U.S. Secretary of State H. Kissinger's trips to
the Near East, during which he had intensive talks with Israel and Egypt on

a second troop disengagement in Sinai. However. it was announced on 22 March
that the Kissinger mission had failed. The secretary of state returned to
the United States without having signed an agreement. which. in the opinion
of the journalists accompanying him. was more than SO-percent ready.

After it became clear that an Egyptian-Israeli agreement would not be signed
at that time, U.S. Administration circles made it understood that the Geneva
Conference was to be the "next step." Thus U.S. President 6. Ford said in

an interview with representatives of Hearst newspapers on 28 March 1975:

"I do not believe we now have any other choice than a return to Geneva."
Simultaneously the American press was writing about the U.S. Administration's
displeasure with Israel's "inflexible" policy. It was reported that Presi—
dent Pord had ordered a review of U.S. Near East policy. There were also
hints of the possible abandonment of planned arms supplies to Israel. nut it
soon became clear that Washington was not thinking of changing course. It
was obvious that the American tactic of a "step-by-step" settlement in the
Near East could continue.

83
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFVICIAL USE ONLY

In addition. certain Near East experts advanced the supposition according to
which the "failure" of American efforts in March had been "programmed." In
their opinion. the demonstration of "inflexibility" was favorable at that

time for a strengthening of the position of the ruling groups both in Egypt
and in Israel. One way or another. immediately following the "failure“ of

the Kissinger mission American diplomacy continued efforts to prepare a second
troop disengagement in Sinai.

In August of the same year Kissinger again flew to the Near East and again
began his "shuttle diplomacy." On a September 1975 Egypt and Israel signed
a new agreement. which recorded a certain pull-back of Israeli troops. the
handover to the Egyptians of a substantial part of the two passes-~Hitla and
Gidi-thc expansion of the UN buffer zoneand the setting up in the passes of
an early-warning service with American personnel. In accordance with this
agreement. Egypt also acquired the Abu Budays oilfields. which, in the testi-
mony of many experts. had been predatorily worked by Israel during the occu-
pation and which were no longer of serious value as a result of their sharp-
ly diminished resources. At the same time Egypt undertook to allow nonmili-
tary cargo for Israel through the Suez Canal.

In accordance with the new agreement, Egypt secured the return of only a
small part of the territory of Sinai. more than 90 percent of it remaining
lsraeli-occupied. The second troop-disengagement agreement introduced a

new element into the Near East situation: the United States had unilaterally
stationed its personnel in Sinai. acquiring in practice the possibility of
viewing and listening to all Egyptian territory.

The Egyptian-Israeli Sinai agreement aroused serious opposition in the Arab
world. A Syrian Ba'ath Party statement. which says that the Egyptian-Israel
agreement omits all mention of the other Arab territories unde- Israeli oc-
cupation and completely bypasses the problems of the Palestinian Arab people.
is typical in this respect. The Ba'ath Party emphasized that this ignores

the integrity of the Arab problem and creates the danger of a slide toward

the methods of separate actions. The statement also observed that the Ameri-
can presence in the region and the United States' inclusion in the struggle
as a direct party at a time when Arab efforts have been aimed at excluding

the United States from the struggle ensue from the Egyptian-Israeli agreement.

The Egyptian-Israeli agreement on a second troop disengagement in Sinai also
elicited sharp criticism from the majority of other Arab countries and the
PLO.

It has already been mentioned that E. Sheehan called Sayan the "father" of
the first agreement on troop disengagement in Sinai. This observation cer-
tainly applies even more to the second Egyptian-Israeli agreement. And,
moreover. linking the idea of troop disengagement between Israel and Egypt
with the name of Dayan is not a rhetorical exercise. This link reflects

actual reality.

84
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Netti Golan writes in the book we have already cited that in 1970 disagree-
ments emerged in the Israeli leadership concerning the tactics with respect
to Egypt. After August 1970, when agreement had been reached on extending
the cease-fire in the Suez Canal Zone for the next 3 months. Dayan, fearing
a resumption of the "war of attrition." which had cost Israel dearly. pro-
posed a partial agreement: a pull-back of the Israeli troops to the line

of the Hitla and Gidi passes in Sinai with a negligible presence of Egyptian
troops on the east bank. In September 1970 these proposals appeared in the
press with a reference to "sources close to Dayan." The defense minister—
himself gave as the reason for his proposal the "optimal nature" of this
solution for Israel, considering the situation that had taken shape, mean-
ing. naturally. “optimal" from the viewpoint of the plans for holding on to
as much as possible of the territory captured by Israel. Dayan asserted
that "the Israeli presence on the canal is a far from ideal solution from
the military and political viewpoints.... His first argument was strategic:
the Hitla and Gidi passes are a far better line of defense than the canal.
The second argument was psychological and practical: Egypt would never agree
to Israel sitting on the bank of the canal." The events of October 1973
showed that these arguments were not without foundation.

In December 1973, during talks with Kissinger, Dayan faailiariaed the sec-
retary of state with his "personal" plan. which "was almost identical" to
the proposals which he had put forward back in 1970. According to H. Golan,
the secretary of state initiated "the process of converting Dayan's personal
position into the official position of preparing for negotiations." This
process, with certain modifications, culminated in the signing of the second
partial agreement between Egypt and Israel.

In addition to the negative results of the agreement mentioned in the Ba'ath
Party statement quoted above it would be possible to cite one further result
of the second Sinai troop-disengagement agreement which is extremely nega-
tive for the Arabs: considering the change in the correlation of forces
which was manifested in October 1973, Israel ob:ained more than favorable
terms from the military standpoint. The transfer of the passes to Egypt was
to a large extent nominal. In the Gidi pass the Israelis retained a stra-
tegically important height along the northern parameter and certain hills
which dominate the locality, only slightly bending their line westward be-
tween the passes. At the same time, with the continuing occupation of Arab,
including Egyptian. land, Israel secured itself with the help of the American
early-warning station againstall "surprises" in a confrontation with the
militarily strongest Arab country-Egypt--which in practice found itself
neutralized for an indefinite length of time.

"The second Sinai agreement," E. Sheehan wrote, "was Israel's principal
tactical triumph. It gave up the slight (in the admission of several Is-
raeli generals) strategic value of the passes (and, as the facts show, not
even that entirely--Ye.P.) and obtained from the United States moral, fi-
nancial and military support enjoyed by no other state."

85
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Hhereas Dayan's "authorship" had secured the purely military terms of the
second Sinai agreement favorable to Israel, there was obviously no less
significance in the pluses which this agreement guaranteed Israel in the
military-political sphere. 0n 3 December 1974 the Israeli prime minister
gave an interview to the newspaper hA'ARBTZ which struck many people by its
frankness. Rabin declared that "Israel's main aim is to gain tims"--only

7 years approximately, according to the prime minister, during which Europe
and the United States will have succeeded in freeing themselves from depend-
ence on Arab oil. Rabin said that during this "pause" Israel could deal
with partial agreements, but that it should "avoid" a total settlement until
the time when the United States, relieved of all oil commitments, would cease
to fight for terms which Israel considers "unsuitable."

In other words, Rabin was advocating a new round of "no war, no peace" in the
Near East. For a guarantee of such a period Tel Aviv put forward a demand
for Egypt's abandonment of the state of war with Israel. The Egyptian lead-
ership declared that it could not agree to this until a final settlement of
the Near East conflict. however. in practice the second Sinai agreement
implied a guarantee that Israel was entering a new period of "no war, no
peace" in relations with Egypt. “You have obtained all the military ele-
ments of a cessation of the state of war," the U.S. secretary of state said,
addressing the Israeli leaders. ”You have obtained 'a renunciation of the

use of force'."

The talks which the U.S. secretary of state held with the Israeli leadership
are of great cognitive value. The contents of the "irritable," "strained"
talks of 22 March 1974, during which Kissinger, who already knew of the im-
pending interruption of several months in his mission, presented his argu-
ments in a deliberately unbridled form, are particularly important for a
characterization of the second Sinai agreement. In response to Allon's
additional demands and complaints H. Kissinger said: "The agreement is in-
tended to afford the United States. as before, the opportunity of controlling
the diplomatic process. Compared with this. the position of a line 8 kilo-
meters nearer or farther does not, frankly, seem very important."

The secretary of state interpreted this proposition by the "rule of con-
traries" method. painting a hypothetical picture of what would emerge in
the event of there being no second agreement: "He have no illusion. The
Arab leaders who have counted on the United States would be discredited.
You put obstacles in the way of "step-by-step" diplomacy first for Jordan
and then for Egypt. We will lose control. He now see how the Arabs are
creating a united front. Great emphasis will be put on the Palestinians,
and there will he a link between movement (of a settlement--Ye.P.) in Sinai
and the Golan. The Soviets will again appear on the scene. The United
States will lose control over events, and we will have to adapt to this
reality. The Europeans will be forced to broaden their relations with the
Arnbs.... There will be attempts to drive a wedge between Israel and the
United States not because we wish this but because such will be the dynamics
of the situation. Let us not deceive ourselves."

86
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

It is difficult to resist quoting one further "explanation" of the secretary
of state to the Israeli leadership during these "difficult talks": "He
(that is. the United States—-Ye.P.) attempted to reconcile support for you
(that is. Israel-~Ye.P.) with our other interests'ln the Near East in such a
way that you did not have to make a decision right away. Our strategy was
aimed at saving you right off from all sources of pressure. If we had
wanted the 1967 borders, we could have achieved this with the support of
unldpublic opinion and an appreciable section of the American public. The
strategy was aimed at protecting you against this. we avoided the formula-
tion of an overall plan of global settlement. Compared with the pressure on
us. which is increasing, to compel a return to the 1967 borders. 10 kilometers
(it is a question here of the Israelis' demand that the second boundary in

Sinai then being planned be brought 8-10 kilometers closer to the Suez Canal
--Ye.P.) is nothing."

You could not, as they say. have it any clearer than that.

All these aims and interests of Israel were secured by the second agreement,
which was signed, as has been said. after a certain interruption in Kissin-
ger's Near East mission. But there is more than this. An analysis of the
second agreement on troop disengagement in Sinai is completed by an examina-
tion of a secret appendum thereto called. on the Israelis' insistence. a
"Memoranda of Agreements Between the Governments of Israel and the United
States." As a result of the internal political struggle in the United States
these Hemoranda were made public. Despite H. Kissinger's reluctance to
familiarize the broad public with them, the U.S. Senate Foreign Relations
Committee decided to make public the documents submitted by the State Depart-
ment in connection with the proposal on stationing troops in Sinai. In ac-
cordance with this decision. on 3 October 1976 the press was handed a num-
ber of materials constituting the Memoranda of Agreements Between the Govern-
ments of Israel and the United States: American-Israeli Assurances and the
Memorandum of Agreement on the Geneva Peace Conference (both these documents
were signed by Y. Allen and ﬂ. Kissinger) and also additional U.S. Admin-
istration Assurances to Egypt. of which Israel had been informed.

The following points may be highlighted in these documents:

1. The United States undertook “on a permanent and long-term basis to re—
spond to Israel's military equipment requirements." including those for "the
latest weapons." It was specified in an additional assurance that the United
States would supply Israel with "such latest types of military equipment as
the F-16 aircraft" and also "examine for its positive solution the question"
of supplies to Israel of ground-to-ground and Yershing missiles with non-
nucleur warheads.

2. The United States undertook to increase economic assistance to Israel in
consideration of "Israel's additional expenditure on oil imports to make up
for the oil which. under ordinary (I?) conditions, would have been obtained
from the Abu Rudeys and Ra's al-Sidr oilfields (4.5 million tons in 1975)."

87
FOR OFVICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

3. The United States also assumed considerable commitments in the political
sphere: "not to participate in any efforts by other countries which in its
opinion and the opinion of Israel (it thus acquired the right to "veto"
American actions not favoring its policy-~Ye.P.) harm Israel's interests; not
to recognize the P10; and to consult with Israel and coordinate with it 'its
position and strategy at the Geneva Conterence'." In a separate clause the
United States proclaimed Israel's "right" to prevent any state. group or
organization (read: PLO--Ye.P.) at any subsequent stage of the conference
participating therein.

4. The United States guaranteed Israel the implementation on time and in
full on the part of Egypt of all the measures not settled in the troop-
disengagement agreement. regardless of any actions, acts or circumstances
occurring between other Arab states and Israel. In other words. the United
States "guaranteed" Egypt's isolation and its exclusion as an active force
from the pan-Arab struggle for liquidation of the consequences of the Israeli
aggression.

The United States even made the start of implementation of the sgreeaent on
Israel's part directly conditional on Egypt's authorization for "the delivery
of [all] (my emphasis-Ye.P.) Israeli cargo via the Suez Canal."

Israel insisted on this. and the United States undertook this with the help

of President al-Sadat: Egypt agreed in advance with all the clauses recorded
in the secret memoranda. It was bluntly written: "The United States in-
formed the Government of Israel that it had obtained the Egyptian Government's

consent to all the above."

The Memoranda of Agreements Between the Governments of Israel and the United
States were, as B. Sheehan put it, "virtually the equivalent of a marriage
contract." Thus ended the extensively publicized "review" of American
policy in the Near East.

Assessing the advantages which the by no means disrupted but, on the contrary.
"flourishing" relations with the United States gave Israel, Prime Minister
Rabin declared on 18 Hay 1978 in an interview with the newspaper DIE "BLT:

"70 percent of our arms are supplied by the United States. A further touch-
stone is financial assistance for arus purchases and also economic aid. A
few figures: from 1968 through 1973 we received just under $2.5 billion
altogether. According to President Ford's preliminary estimates, from 1976
through 1977 we will have received $7 billion. In the two budget years of
1976 and 1977 we are to receive $6 billion, that is, more than half of that

which we received in all 29 years up to 1977."

“Should relations between states be judged on the basis of the reports of
a few correspondents or on the basis of the assistance granted Israel to
achieve its national goals"? Rabin answered thus the "doubts" of those who
believed in the reality of a review of U.S. policy to Israel's detriment
(not in words but in reality).

88
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Naturally. American policy would not have succeeded in achieving an anti-Arab
result had it not been able to count on taking advantage of anti-Soviet trends.
The axis of power in Egypt shifted to the right after al-Naair's death. The
so-cnllcd new comprador bourgeoisie, whose principal source of income is
commission and business profits obtained from cooperation with foreign capi-
tal. strengthened its positions. The small-trader circles have gained the
most from the "new economic policy" pursued in recent years. They have taken
advantages of the lifting of restrictions on imports and the virtual liquida-
tion of state control of foreign trade. Appnoximately 500 million Egyptian
pounds have been spent annually in recent years in Egypt on imports of luxury
items. And this has all occurred under conditions where the growth rates of
production and capital investment have been manifestly inadequate and con-
sumption has exceeded the total national product. This picture reflects the
process of the rapid enrichment of a negligible stratum of the population
with the intensifying process of the impoverishment of the bulk of the
Egyptian people. "One-tenth of the population consumes 65 percent of the
national product. Of this 10 percent, 2.5 percent consumes 23 percent of

the product. Al-Sadat administers in the interests of this minority. He
forgets about the remaining 90 percent." Lufti al-Khuli, former chief editor

of the journal AL-TALI'AH (VANGUARD). declared in an interview with HATIN DB
PARIS.

President al-Ssdat's decrees have given largely uncontrolled access to Egypt
to foreign capital. A ban on its activity in many spheres of the economy
has been lifted. From June 1976 through the start of 1977 more than 150
decrees and enactments were adopted defining the interests of foreign in-
vestors of capital. Foreign capital has been granted access to industry,
agriculture and finance. Some 25 foreign and mixed banks. that is, almost
as many as there were in 1956, on the eve of the nationalization of the credit
and banking system. were operating in Egypt at the start of 1977. Egypt's
economic policy in recent years. providing guarantees for foreign companies.
has actually led to the point where foreign capital is authorized to deal
directly with local firms without any controlling role on the part of the
state. A considerably lighter taxation practice has been introduced in re-
lation to foreign capital: it is not liable to nationalizatioa,and the un-
restricted export of profits abroad is permitted.

The private sector has acquired scope for its development. The state sector
has been cut down and, following the liquidation of the generalorgnnizations,
it has virtually lost those of its planning principles which were introduced
in its operation under al-Nasir. As a result the state enterprises act in
the market as private commercial entities. A revision of the provisions of
the 1962 National charter in the part which regulates the mutual relations
of the state and private sectors is essentially underway.

A number of decrees has been directed at strengthening the economic positions
of the landowner and rich peasant. They acquired the right to expel from the
land the peasant tenants who could not keep up with the increased rents.

. 89
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Liquidation of the system of peasant cooperatives has begun. They are being
replaced by so-cnlled village banks; according to the Cairo press. these
"banks" extend credit and sell seed and fertilizer to landowners on the same
terms as to the poor peasants.

Egypt's economy has run into the most serious problems. The course which
had found concentrated expression in the so-called open doors policy has led
to an intensification of the pro-Heat orientation of the country's entire
economic life. This has increased the pernicious influence on Egypt of the
inflationary processes developing in the capitalist world. According to of—
ficial figures. the level of inflation at the end of 1976 compared with 1973
constituted 35 percent. The London journal THE ECONOHIST believes this fi-
gure to be much higher--close to 50 percent.

The reorientation toward the Heat has contributed to the growth of the balance

of trade deficit. According to available estimates. with a gross national
product of $11 billion. the balance of trade deficit in 1976 constituted
52.5-3 billion. while the foreign debt (including current liabilities)
amounted to $18 billion. The country is consuming far more than it is pro-
ducing. Egypt's debts are growing constantly. In order to pay off the

interest on loans from the Arab oil-producing countries and. to an appreciably

lesser extent. from western sources Egypt has additionally been forced into
increasingly heavy borrowing.

A number of researchers believes that a departure from a socialist orienta-
tion toward a restoration of capitalism as the basic structure occurred in
Egypt in the mid-1970's. It is not fortuitous that this departure has been
accompanied by an increase in social conflicts. There has been an increase
in the number of strikes. Hid-January 1977 was marked by a real social up-
heaval which extended to all of Egypt. There were demonstrations involving
thousands in the streets of Cairo. Alexandria and other Egyptian cities;
strikes erupted at a number of major enterprises like the Helwan Metallurgi-
cal Combine; and workers. students and artisans took to the streets. The
protest demonstrations followed a government decision to raise the prices of
basic necessities. Police units and army subunits were sent in against the
demonstrators. In Al ABRAH's estimate. 65 people were killed and 800 in-
jured. The security organs arrested more than 2.000 people. But, despite
all these punitive actions. the Egyptian leadership was still forced to
retreat under the people's pressure and cancel the decision to raise the
prices of consumer goods.

It is significant that the Egyptian Government is attempting to attribute all
its internal difficulties. which are the inevitable result of the "open doors"
policy, to the "machinations" of Marxist groups inside the country or the
policy of the Soviet Union and other socialist countries.

The author does not consider it his job to illustrate in detail in the book
the considerable changes in Egypt in the social. economic and political

90
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

spherca. It is worth emphasizing. however. that these changes have been
largely supported. sometimes inspired and, in any event, always willingly
utilized by American policy.

The culmination of the anti-Soviet ar>ions was sl-Sadat's unilateral deci-
sion to end the USSR-ARE Friendship and Cooperation Treaty on 15 March 1976.
Many newspapers have written of the connection between his decision to de-
nounce the treaty and 0.5. policy. According to Algeria's AL-HOUDJAUID.

the ARE president was acting the role of persistent petitioner of the United
States and Saudi Arabia. which set his pursuit of an anti-Soviet policy as
their terms for extensive economic assistance to Bgypt.‘ The 0.8. secretary
of state, whether in an aspiration to influence the 0.5. Congress. stimula-
ting its approval of economic aid to Egypt. or in the interests of personal
prestige. particularly under the conditions where the failure in Indochina
had struck at his reputation. declared for all to hour that he had known for
6 days about al-Sadat's intention of denouncing the Soviet-Egyptian treaty.

The struggle concerning a political settlement of the Near East conflict by
the time of the appearance of this book is still far from over. But it is
already perfectly clear that the American "step-by-atep" tactic has absolute-
ly failed to promote the establishment of lasting and just peace in the Near
East.

As Comrade L. I. Brezhnev. general secretary of the CPSU Central Committee.
said, "there are those. apparently. who would like to propose to the Arab
peoples something in the nature of a soporific in the hope that they will
calm down and forget about their demands for the restoration of justice and
the complete liquidation of the consequences of aggression. But a soporific
deadens the senses for only a short time. after which the person wakes up

and finds that he is confronted with the same real life with its problems....
All this indicates that there is no substitute for a real. lasting peace set-
tlement. And to delay it is impermissible, if we do not wish to display a
complete disregard for the fate of the countries and peoples of the Near

East (including, it stands to reason, Israel. whose people can hardly be
interested in living endlessly under the condtiitns of a country which

has been converted into a military camp) and the fate of universal peace."

It is significant that a sober. realistic attitude toward the problems of a
settlement had begun to show through in the United States by the mid-1970's.
The paper "Toward Peace in the Near East," which was compiled at the end of
1975 by a Near East study group of the Brookings Institution, attracted
attention in this plane. The group included the following prominent repre-
sentatives of 0.8. political science: Horroe Berger (Princeton University).
Robert Bowie (Harvard University). Zbigniew Brzezinski (Columbia University).
John Campbell (Foreign Relations Council), Malcolm Kerr (University of Cali-
fornia. Los Angeles), William Quandt (University of Pennsylvania). Nadav
Safran (Harvard University), Charles Yost (Brookings Institution) and
others. ’Whis paper merits the attention of the American public and the
u.s. Administration." Kermit Cordon. president of the Brookings Institution.
writes in a foreword.

91
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The group of Americans. who. according to K. Gordon. "know the Near East and
want the United States to help this region achieve peace.“ concluded that the
"Sinai agreement, as before. essentially leaves untouched the basic elements
of the Arab-Israeli conflict. if attention is not paid to these elements
very soon. the acute tension in this region will load to the increased risk
of forcible actions. He believe that the best method of a solution of these
problems is theachievement of an all-embracing agreement."

Another of the study group's conclusions is also of a fundamental nature:
"The main basis for a settlement should be the conclusion with mutual con-
sent of an accord taking into consideration both the Israeli demand for

peace and security and the Arab demand for evacuation from the territories
occupied in 1967 and the granting of self-determinatic: to the Palestinians."

The group advocated the provisions of an all-embracing peace agreement pro-
viding for a whole number of commitments being implemented in stages, which
"should be firmly determined in the agreements." "International corrobora-
tion and guarantees are. undoubtedly. the next requirement." The group of

American researchers emphasized that here "the United States should act in

conjunction with the USSR.“

Certain recommendations or the wording of these proposals give rise to doubts
or appear simply unacceptable. However. together with this, the main point
catches the attention: many prominent representatives of American academic
circles are coming to the conclusion that the methods of "partial steps" are
unacceptable and that what is needed is an overall settlement. which cannot
be achieved without the withdrawal of Israeli troops to the line of 4 June
1967. without the Palestinian people being given the right to self-determina-
tion and. which is also of considerable importance. without the active parti-
cipation in a settlement of the Soviet Union.

However. there is still a gap between these conclusions and the practical
deeds of the U.S. Administration. It was not closed even after certain of
the Brookings Institution authors crossed over to the state apparatus:
Brzezinski became President Carter's assistant for national security. and
Quandt headed the Near East desk in the National Security Council.

Chapter Vi. Regularities of the Transitions to the Crisis Stage

We have examined the causes engendering and maintaining the permanent status
of the Near East conflict. These same causes, upon their sharp exacerbation-
either simultaneously, in a complex, or a part of them--have formed the basis
of the conflict's development into the stage of an international-political
crisis. Thus it was in 1948, 1956. 1967 and 1973. And, moreover, the hier-
archy of factors causing the ccnflict's growth into crisis stages has changed
depending on the correlation of forces of the parties to the conflict. the
situation in the Near East, the specific interests of the imperialist powers,
the degree of development of the national liberation process in the Arab

world and the international situation as a whole.

92
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/00: ClA-RDP82-00050R0001000300304
FOR OFFICIAL USE OﬂLY

Each transition to the stage of an international-political crisis has thus
presupposed its own hierarchy of "stimulating factors" characteristic of

it alone. However. their collection has not gone and does not go beyond

the framework of the general causes of the Near East conflict--israel's
policy in relation to the Arab Palestinian people. which has led to the
latter being deprived of the right to self-determination: the contradictions
between Israel and the neighboring Arab states caused by the Israeli lead-
ership's expansionist policy: and the use of the Near East conflict by a num-
ber of inperitliststates in the interests of their own policy.

Let us examine the concrete instances of the Arab-Israeli conflict's transi-
tion to the crisis stage.

The 1968 Palestine "or

In 1968. immediately following the creation of the state of israel, the
armiea o; a number of Arab countries entered the territory of Palestine.
and the first Palestine war began. what was the basis of this transition
to crisis?

I. The policy of the imperialist states. "There are few who now remember."
the Israeli researcher Uri Davis wrote. "that armies participated on the
Arab side in the war in 1948 which were arsed and trained by the british

and even partially led by British commanders. Great britain. having lost
its Palestine mandate in connection with the 1967 UN plan and Israel's sub-
sequent proclamation of independence. perfectly obviously aspired to estab-
lish its control in this region as a result of the victory of the Arab coun-
tries."

Simultaneously imperialist circles. in this case no longer Eritish but chief-
ly American, were gambling on the Zionist movement's victory over the Arabs
and the strengthening of Israel. thinking of the possibility of utilizing

it as a base for the implementation of their own policy in the region. 6.
Shocken, publisher and editor of the lsraeli newspaper HA'ARETZ has written
frankly about the motives for this gamble on lsrael's victory over the

Arabs: "The "cat was not delighted with its relations with the countries in
the Near East. The feudal regimes in the region were having to make con-
cessions to the nationalist movements. which sometimes adopted a socialist.
left-leaning slant. which was leading to these regimes supplying Britain and
the United States with their natural resources and making territory available
for military bases with ewer increasing reluctance.... Thus the strengthen-
ing of Israel would help the western states maintain equilibrium and stabi-
lity in the Near East. Israel was to hecooe the watchdog. There were no
fears that lsrsel would take any aggressive steps in relation to the Arab
countries if this were contrary to the wishes of the United States or Bri-
tain. However, if for some reason or another the Western states were to
sometimes prefer to close their eyes '0 this. Israel could link itself with
the administering of a punishment to one or several neighboring states whoae
disobedience to the ﬂeet was going beyond the permitad limits.”

93
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Thus during the first Palestine war the imperialist circles backed both
parties to the conflict and urged on both these parties to step up their
actions. Perhaps at that time Britain was to a large extent acting to strength-
en its own positions and had subordinated to this not only sympathies and
antipathies but also actual involvement in the process of the growth of the
Near East conflict into the crisis stage. As far as the United States was
concerned. "global questions" connected with the aspiration to strengthen
the positions of the entire capitalist world (under 0.5. hegemonism. natur-
ally) in the struggle against national liberation movements and the world
revolutionary process as a whole occupied an increasingly large place as the
basis of its policy in 1948.

2. Israel's expansionist policy. Re have said previously that the Zionist
and. subsequently. Israeli leadership set as a principal goal the prepara-
tion of conditions for the state's territorial expansion. It was shown how
this policy was even being implemented on the eve of the first Palestine

war and. moreover. how plans were being constructed for the further expan-
sion of the territory of Israel. The Arab countries knew of these plans. and
this also could not have failed to have played its role. creating the psycho-
logical climate right for orders for the armies of a number of Arab countries
to enter the territory of Palestine.

3. The policy of the Zionist circles aimed at squeezing out the Palestinian
population from the land on which it lived. This line, which was directly
implemented or underpinned by forcible measures. gave rise to armed resist-
ance on the part of the Palestinian population supported by the governments
of certain Arab countries. The Zionist movement's anti-Palestinian policy
played its,role in the creation of the political and psychological climate
right for the decision by a number of Arab countries. urged on by Britain,
to commit their troops to the territory of Palestine.

4. The extremism of certain Arab circles whose goal was liquidation of the
state of Israel. Negativism in relation to this state took the form of re-
jection of the UN General Assembly resolution on the partition of Palestine.

In aggregate all these causes. which intensified on the eve of the proclama-
tion of the state of Israel and became connected with one another. formed
the basis of the sharp exacerbation which led to the first Palestine war of
19‘8.

The I956 Tripartite Aggression Against Egypt

The 1956 crisis fell not only in appearance but also in essence even further
into the category of international—political crises. The following were the
cause of it:

1. The imperialist policy of Britain and France. Immediately after Egypt's
nationalization of the Suez Canal Company, these two Heat European countries,
with definite coordination with the dominating power in the capitalist world--

96
FOR OPPICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the United States*-began to prepared an armed action against the al-Nasir
regime. This preparation, as shown earlier, proceeded in parallel with
political-diplomatic measures aimed at depriving Egypt of the victory it
had won through nationalization of the Suez Canal Company.

2. The policy of Israel, which was aimed at coating the al-Nasir regime.
which had shown at this time its possibilities for uniting the anti-imperial-
ist forces in the Arab world and organizing resistance to Israel's expansion-
ist policy.

Each participants in the tripartite aggression was pursuing goals whose
amalgamation into a single complex insured the Near East conflict's trans-
formation into the crisis stage in 1956.

A realistic analysis of the causes of the Near East conflict's development
into the crisis stage of 1956 reveals the utter groundlessness of the two
pseudotheories that l) the conflicts of "Britain and France against Egypt"
and “Israel against Egypt” simply coincided in time and were "superimposed"
on one another and did not represent a unified whole-a direct conspiracy of
three of Egypt's enemies; and that 2) Israel was fighting for its security and
had made the goal of removing the threat to its existence on the part of

Egypt and the Palestinian fedayeen of paramount importance.

Both these pseudotheories became widespread both in Western, not to mention
lsraeli.literature and in the pronouncements of a number of statesmen, parti-
cularly of Britain and Israel. Thus the British foreign secretary declared
on 31 October 1956 in the House of Commons that "there was no prior agree-
ment" between his country and Israel, which had attacked Egypt. On 20 Decem-
ber 1956 A. Eden, prime minister of Great Britain. went further, emphasizing
that his country had altogether "no advance data to indicate that Israel
might attack Egypt."

These statements utterly falsified reality. Britain and France had begun

to work on the "military alternative" iamediately after Egypt's nationaliza-
tion of the Suez Canal Company. At the end of June both the British and
French governments instructed their war ministers to prepare detailed plans
of military operations against Egypt. At this time Eden sent v.5. President
Eisenhower a telegram which said, in part: "My colleagues and I are certain
that we must be prepared in the last resort to use force to make al-Nasir
listen to reason. For our part, we are ready to do this. This morning I
gave instructions to the chiefs of staff to prepare the corresponding mili-
tary plan."

0.5. Secretary of State Dulles arrived in London on 1 August. while not
supporting the immediate use of military force against al-Nasir Dulles

nevertheless uttered a sacramental sentence which immediately reassured
Eden: "He must find a means of forcing al-Nasir to choke on what he is

trying to swallow."

‘The 0.5. position on the eve of and during the 1956 crisis was discussed in
detail in the/previous section.

. 95
E03 OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

This day and the next the French advocated the speediest use of military
force against Egypt. The British General Staff objected that it would take
at least 6 weeks to prepare an operation for Anglo-French forces to restore
international control over thecanal zone. A group of Anglo-Preach experts
began to preparetheoperation on 5 August. The initial outline of the plan
was ready on 8 August. accepted by Eden on 10 August and later confirmed by
French Premier Guy Hollet. The question of the base for the attack was soon
solved. The British weekly THE ECONOHIST wrote on 26 November 1956: “At

a very early stage the idea of an attack on Suez from the base in Aden was
rejected as impracticable; the idea of an attack on Alexandria from Libya
was also rejected. although a rumor con: rning this plan had. it seems.
reached President al-Nasir insofar as on 30 October he sent his best tank
brigade to Alexandria. Cyrpus is the closest base to Egypt. and the chiefs
of staff claim it is essential." Halts was chosen as another base.

Following the choice of bases for the invasion. the extensive mobilization
of reservists of the recovery service. signallers and personnel of the
ordnance supplies and clothing service began. The transfer of military com-
bined units to the islands of Cyprus and Halta was accelerated. 0n the
second day after the London conference of 22 states on the question of the
Suez Canal. on 25 August. the DAILY HAIL testified that for the past 3 weeks
British troops. tanks and armaments had been setting off almost daily for
the Mediterranean. The French Command was officially authorised to billet
its armed forces at the British bases in the East Mediterranean. The ac- '
celerated transfer for French troops to the island of Cyprus began.

The slight delay in the start of operation "Husketeer"--this was the code-
name of the Anglo-French plan for the attack on Egypt--was also connected
with the position of the United States. For a whole number of reasons.
which we discussed earlier, it did not openly join the “club" which was
preparing an attack on Egypt. Prof H. Thomas believes that the United States
was trying "to postpone the military operations at least untiI the presiden-
tial election in November 1956. This delay was unacceptable to British and
France. which thus decided to use Israel's long-standing desire for a pre-
ventive war as the fuse for their own operations."

The chief of the Israeli Army General Staff later said that a "political
alliance" had been concluded between the three countries. In actual fact it
was not only a question of a political but also a military alliance and of
the complete military coordination of the three countries which carried out
the attack on Egypt. And this alliance did not come about spontaneously
and on the eve of the start of the war but considerably earlier.

Israel's contacts with France. which were established shortly after the ac-
cession to power of the Guy Mallet government (January 1955). were the pre-
lude to the alliance. One of the first persons he received as premier was

S. Peres. the representative of Israel's Defense Ministry. By this time

Peres already had good relations with the new French Defense Minister Bourges-
Maunoury. which had been established during the latter's time spent as

96
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

interior minister in the previous French Government. Relations between the
Israeli and French defense ministries became closer than they had ever been
formerly, and France promised to secretly supply Israel with all the eras

it needed. To cover up this secret Tel Aviv resorted to disinformation:
Israeli diplomats in a number of western capitals continued to demand arms
deliveries to their country. claiming that it had no sources of arms supply.

"There was an important meeting between Israeli (headed by Shimon Peres)

and French military and political figures on 28 July in the Bois de Bologne."
H. Thomas writes. "From the start of August the Israelis obtained from
France almost all the types of weapon they had requested. French sources
pay particular attention to one further Franco-Israeli meeting. which was
held on 7 August in Paris. The French familiarized Israel with the military
plans which had been drawn up in conjunction with Great Britain. Thus. as
General Dayan's published diaries make clear. the Israeli chief of staff
knew the details of operation "Husketeer" (and, presumably, the possible
date of its commencement) by 1 September. He also knew that the Anglo-
French threat had forced sl-Nasir to withdraw one-half of his army from
Sinai. including a tank brigade."

At this time Bourges-Haunoury and his entourage embarked on the direct co-
ordination of their military plans with Nishry. the Israeli military attache
in Paris. On 17 September Dayan gave his staff the job of examining variants
of an invasion of Sinai in connection with the Anglo-French plans for the

use of military force against Egypt. A. Thomas, head of the secretariat

of the French Defense Ministry, and [Hangin]. assistant French defense min-
ister. flew to Tel Aviv the following week. Shimon Peres flew to Paris on

20 September. Commenting on the coordination of military plans with France
which was underway. Ben-Curion declared at a session of his party's lead-
era: "He will soon have a true ally."

There were impressive grounds for these words. And it was not Just a ques-
tion of Israeli-French contacts. moreover. Secret meetings were already
being held at that time in Paris on a tripartite level-with the participa-
tion of British military representatives. It was decided to abandon the
initial intention of carrying out an Anglo-French assault landing in Alex-
andria. The choice of Port Said as the site for the landing was connected
with the fact that the Anglo-French intervention had already now been linked
operationally with the Israeli invasion of Sinai. ”The plan of the Anglo-
French Joint Command. according to which the attack would be launched via
Port Said in the canal zone. had been formulated by 26 September. The
French proposal for an airborne assault landing, which was expressed con—
trary to British opinion. was rejected. They settled for a massed am-
phibious assault landing combined with vigorous air support."

Peres again flew to Paris on 29 September. but this time with H. Dayan,
Foreign Minister 6. Heir and Transport Minister H. Karmel. The next day
Dayan and Peres net with Pineau. Bourges-Haunoury and his assistants.

97
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Meetings were continued with 81y. chief of the ?rench Army General Staff.
who sent generals challe and Martin and Colonel Simon to Israel to defini-
tively learn the Israeli Army's arms and ammunition requirements. After
his trip to Israel. General Challe flew to the United States and then
got down to working out the strategic plan of coordination of the opera-
tions of the Israeli Army and the armies of the allies. General Beaufre--
later commander of the French forces during the tripartite aggression--
was working with his staff not only on the "winter plan" which had been
submitted by the British but also on linking it with the problems posed by
the "hypothetical situation" of Israel initiating action.

Ben-Curion .as also extensively informed via Paris of the Anglo-French
contacts which had taken place without Israeli representatives participat-
ing. However. he needed direct confirmation from the British concerning
the joint operations. a direct link with London obliging Britain, as he
believed, to implement the coordinated plans, despite the "special" posi-
tion of the United States. Ismediately after the nationalization of the
Suez Canal Company. Julian Amery. secretary of the "Suez group" in the
British Parliament, "who had suddenly become persona grata in the British
Foreign Ministry," formed an association with Peres. The following words
of British Foreign Secretary Selwyn Lloyd to his Canadian colleague Lester
Pearson on 7 September also had a promising ring for Ben-Gurion: "If
everything continues as before, you know that Israel might take advantage
of the situation and move against Egypt. Frankly speaking. I would not
condemn them for this."

But all this was still not enough for Ben-Curion. He wanted greater cer-
tainty. London also apparently wanted greater certainty. An embittered
anti-Jordan campaign was kicked up in Israel at the start of October. Its
instigators emphasised that the danger for Israel was coming from the bases
of Palestinian fedayeen on Jordanian territory (it is known that the bound-
ary with Egypt was generally "quiet" at that time). Hatters were not con-
firmed to a campaign of words. On 10 October the Israeli military carried
out a piratical raid against the Jordanian village of Qalqiliyah. To the
surprise of many people, there was an angry reaction to this act by London.
which warned Israel against a repetition of such attacks. In addition to
attempts to play--this did not cost anythingl--on the feelings of the Arabs
and mollify the anti-British sentiments in the Arab world,* Britain aspired
to confirm Israel in its intention of concentrating entirely on preparing
the attack against Egypt. It has already been mentioned that the Egyptian-
iaraeli boundary was very quiet at that time and that the Israeli leadership
had absolutely no grounds for anxiety concerning Israel's security.

*"Britain had been given prior notice of the possibility of this raid (of
lsrael against Jordan--Ye.P.) by the French and used it as an opportunity
to demonstrate the pro-Arab trend of British foreign policy," the work
"Controlling Small "are" by Bloomfield and Lees says.

98
FOR OFVICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In his memoirs Eden describes the 16 October meeting in Paris, where he

and 5. Lloyd held talks with Guy Hollet and Pineau. After a brief dis-
cussion of the events in connection with Israel's incursion into Jordan on
10 October. it was decided. according to Eden. that "in the event of Is-
raeli intervention. it would be better. from our viewpoint. if this were to
be against Egypt." Ben-Gurion was. as they say, quick to grasp this sig-
nal. Rejecting all talk of "the threat of the fedayeen operating from
Jordanian territory.” in his Knesset speech on 17 October he declared. sur-
prisingly for many Western researchers even: “The most serious danger
confronting Israel is an attack (7!) by the Egyptian dictator."

On 22 October Ben-Gurion. Dayan and Peres flew to Paris. The final series
of secret meetings. in which Guy Hollet. Pineau and Bourges-Haunoury parti-
cipated on the French side and 8. Lloyd and Patrick Dean, who had arrived
in Paris secretly. on the British. prior to the invasion began in the
French capital. Ben-Gurion advocated that Britain and Prance undertake

to blockade the Egyptian airfielde and destroy the Egyptian Air Porce at
the time of the Israeli intervention. 5. Lloyd's stay in Prance was ex-
tremely short; he left behind Dean. who prepared in triplicate a document
for three signatures. Evidently, Ben-Curion was not happy with Dean sign-
ing on behalf of Great Britain. and the document was sent to London for "a
more reliable signature. which. evidently, was forthcoming."

Pineau also flew to London. while Ben-Curion and those who had traveled with
him from Israel awaited his return in Paris. According to A. Nutting.
minister of state of Great Britain. 8. Lloyd told him that Pineau would
leave London with assurances for Ben-Curios: "He has no need to fear that
he will be left in the lurch."

The two operations-"Husketeer" and "Kadesh" (the codename of the Israeli
plan for the invasion of Sinai)-which were locked together, were initiated
on 29 October. Israel was entrusted with the role of leading the operation.
Its paratroops were dropped into the Hitla Pass. Israel's mechanized units
rushed into Sinai and. overcoming Egyptian Army resistance, began to ad-
vance toward the Suez Canal. The offensive was carried out under an umbrella
formed by the French Air Force.

A few hours after the Israeli attack. in the morning of 30 October. British
Prime Minister Anthony Eden convened a session of the full cabinet. French
Premier Cuy Hollet and Foreign Minister Christian Pino: arrived froa Paris
on the same day. At 0600 hours GMT Egypt and Israel received an ultimatum
to immediately pull back their troops 10 miles from the Suez Canal. Bri-
tain and France demanded that Egypt also "authorize" the occupation of the
key positions of Port Sa'id, Ismailia and Suez. They were given 12 hours.
Israel. as was to have been expected. agreed instantly to the demand for
the withdrawal of troops 10 miles from the canal. Properly speaking.

its mission--that of leader of the operation--had been accomplished. Egypt,
however. for perfectly natural reasons. refused to accept the ultimatum of
Britain and France. which aortally jeopardized the country's sovereignty.

99
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The Anglo-French troops entered the war against Egypt on 31 October. The
next stage of the operation--Anglo-French armed operations against Egypt--
had begun .

They may be split into two stages. The first consisted of preparatory
operations by the air forces to gain air supremacy and blockade the
Egyptian airfield. It lasted from 31 October through 4 November. Day

and night the Anglo-French light and medium bombers carried out raids against
peaceful Egyptian cities. attempting to sow panic among the population. The
second stage was occupation of the canal zone. By b November a large num-
ber of ships with an amphibious assault-landing force had been concentrated
near the island of Cyprus. To secure the landing an airborne assault land-
ing was carried out at dawn on 5 November in the region of Port Sa'id. Be-
fore the drop and during it the Anglo-French aircraft carried out massed
raids against the city. The residential quarters of Port Sa'id were brut-
ally shelled by on-board artillery of the French battleship "Jean Bart." a
cruiser. a destroyer and several escort ships. The Anglo-French marines
landed in the Port Sa'id region on 6 November. Having fought their way
south. the interventionists occupied a number of points in the Suez Canal
Zone.

Ianediately following Israel's attack on Egypt, a UN Security Council ses-
sion was convened. A resolution was submitted for discussion demanding an
immediate cease-fire and the withdrawal of the Israeli interventionist
troops from Egyptian territory. The resolution contained a call for a
renunciation of the use of force or the threat of force. A vote was taken.
of the 11 Security Council members. seven voted “for." Britain and France
voted "against." Using the Security Council permanent member's right of
veto, they rejected the resolution preventing realization of the criminal
conspiracy against Egypt.

In response to this a number of delegates demanded the convening of an
emergency session of the General Assembly. Here again Britain and France
tried to prevent the United Nations examining the question of the attack on
Egypt. However, this was no longer within their powers. Insofar as one
UN body's proposal to transfer a question to another is a procedural mat-
ter. Security Council unanimity was not obligatory in this case. Despite
the fact that Britain and France voted against, the Security Council sub-
mitted the decision on the convening of an emergency session to the UN
General Assembly.

The emergency session opened on 1 November at 1730 hours New York Time.
After 10 hours of stormy debate. during which the representatives of many
countries angrily denounced the aggressors, a resolution calling for an
immediate cease-fire and the withdrawal of troops was put to the vote. Some
65 votes were cast in favor of the resolution, six delegations abstained

and five voted against (Britain. France. and Israel and also two British
dominions--Auatralia and New Zealand).

100
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Thus from the very start the actions of Britain. France and Italy were sharp-
ly and universally condemned in the broad international forum. This demon-
strated that striking moral-political isolation subsequently confirmed by

two further resolutions of the emergency session-of b and 7 November on an
imaediate cease-fire and the withdrawal of the interventionist troops from
Bgypt--adopted by an overwhelming majority of UN members. The open refusal
of Britain. France and Israel to submit to the UN decisions aroused the
profound anger of the entire international community. The United States

did its utmost to prevent the adoption by the General Assembly and Security
Council of resolutions which would not only have contained appeals for peace-
ableness but also envisaged concrete practical measures capable of putting

an end to the intervention. Under these conditions the Soviet Union demanded
sanctions against the aggressors. Simultaneously the Soviet‘Government sent
the British. French and Israeli governments messages containing the most
serious warning. The Soviet Government. one of them said. is fully resolved
to use force to crush the aggressors and restore peace in the Near East.

0n 7 November Britain. France and Israel were forced to cease fire in Egypt.

The 1967 "6-Day War"

In 1967 the following represented the hierarchy of causes*which engendered
the transition to an international-political crisis:

I. Israeli policy. which was aimed at ousting or sharply weakening the re-
gime of al-Nasir. who by this time had acquired the real features of a leader
cementing unity in the Arab world and gathering around him increasingly cap-
able anti-imperialist and anti-Zionist forces.

An "offshoot" of this Israeli policy was the course aimed at changing the
nature of the regime in Damascus. which. given the military alliance which
had been formed with Egypt. had become a most dynamic Arab force fighting
against the policy of the Israeli leadership.

On 13 Hay Prime Minister Eshkol publicly stated that Israel "itself would
choose the time. place and means" for military operations. Addressing a
military audience. Rabin. chief of the Israeli Army General Staff, directly
linked the struggle against "Fatahraids" with the struggle to overthrow the
Syrian Government. "Both these statements had a shock effect in the Arab
world." the book "Controlling Small Nara" says.

2. Israel's policy aimed at suppressing the Palestine resistance movement.
This motive was directly present in the plans of the Israeli leadership.
which was preparing for a war against its Arab neighbors.

*The events characterizing the transition of the conflict to the crisis stage
of 1967 are, like the position of the United States in this period. examined
in detail in the previous section.

101
FOR OVPICIAL USE ONLY
For orrrcm. use ONLY

Israel's policy was being pursued against a background of methods of mili-
tary-political pressure employed by Egypt to achieve the end of limiting
Israel's expansion and imposing on it a number of conditions favorable to

the Arab side. Israel made deft use of this Egyptian policy to unleash mili-
tary actions.

The Israeli leadership did not doubt that the steps being taken by Egypt would
not go beyond the framework of a military demonstration and that in practice
al-Nasir did not want war. On 22 December 1967 HA'ARBTZ carried an inter-
view with the then chief of staff of the Israeli Army, Y. Rabin, who ack-
nowledged: “There is a difference between a concentration of troops for

the purpose of starting a war and a movement which could end in war but

which is not geared to war and represents something different. I believe

the latter was at the root of sl-Nasir'a thinking."

The assertions of a number of Israeli leaders and the press that Israel

had begun "a defensive war against the threat of genocide" have nothing in
common with reality. Israel's Gen H. Peled, who took part in the 1967 war
and who later became a professor history. observed that in May 1967 there was
no danger of Israel's destruction: "The Egyptians had concentrated 80,000
soldiers. while the Israelis had mobilized hundreds of thousands of people
against them.“ General Peled later declared in an interview with HA'ARIV:
"1 am sure that our General Staff just never informed the government (of
Levi Eshkol) of the absence of anything serious in the way of a military
threat to Israel.... All these old wive's tales about the tremendous dan-
ger hanging over us in connection with our small territory and these argu-
ments which arose when the war was over were never part of our calculations
until the start of military operations. At the time when we ordered total
mobilization. no one in his right mind could have believed that all these
forces were necessary for our 'defense' against the Egyptian threat. These
forces were needed to smash the Egyptians on a military level once and for
all.... The idea that the Egyptian troops concentrated on our borders could
have threatened Israel's existence casts doubt on the mental capabilities of
anyone capable of analyzing the situation thus."

What, in the light of this. is the value of the big talk of the "hordes" of
Egyptians ready to "fall on tiny Israel"!

3. 0.5. policy. which supported Israel's expansionist leadership. This
support. examined earlier. was an obligatory element of the kindling of the
tension which predetermined the military eruption in June 1967 in the Near
East. Without American support the Israeli leadership would not have dared
attack Egypt. Syria and Jordan. Emphasizing the United States' total in-
terest in Israel's "lightning victory" in 1967, the American magazine NEWS-
HEEK wrote: "The combination of Israeli muscle and American sweet talk pro-
duced an extremely satisfactory result for Washington."

102
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The October 1973 Crisis

In 1973 the causes of the transition to the crisis stage proved more blurred.
The Arab countriea--Bgypt and Syria--initiated extensive armed operations in
October 1973. and these armed operatiOns caught the Israeli leadership un-
awarea. moreover. Proceeding from this. many western researchers, not to
mention the pro-Zionist press. have formulated the question such that the
transition of the conflict to the crisis stage was on this occasion the re-
sult of actions originating on the Arab aide. Such a definition of the
causes of the emergence of the 1973 crisis appears incorrect. It is essen-
tial to examine the situation prior to the start of the military operations,
paying attention to the qualitative changes therein which had occurred or
were imminent before October 1973. Only such an analysis makes it possible
to reveal the real. profound causes of the new transformation of the conflict
into the crisis stage.

It is known that by the start of the military operations in the Near East
Israel had stepped up its policy 1imed at consolidating the results of the
aggression against the Arab countries perpetrated in June 1967. The "planned"
implementation of measures to assimilate the Arab land taken during the "6-
day war" not only continued but there was a qualitative shift in this policy
at the start of September 1973. Under the conditions of the election strug-
gle which had developed in Israel the Moshe Dayan group. which included a
number of “hawks," strove for the official consent of the Labor Party,

which headed the government coalition. to the authorization of the sale and
purchase of land on the occupied Arab territories. The corresponding docu-
ment was adopted on 3 September. This document not only defined the prin-
ciples of the trade in Arab land on the territories occupied in 1967 but also
outlined a vast 4-year program for the creation of new Jewish settlements in
the Rafah region. on the southern approaches to the Gaza Strip, in the south-
ern part of the River Jordan valley, on the Golan Heights and in the region
south and east of Jerusalem. It was planned to accelerate the rate of pur-
chase of Arab land through government channels with the simultaneous fi-
nancing of the "settlement of refugees.” primarily in the Gaza region.

At this same time. that is. on the eve of the conflict's development into the
crisis stage. Israel stepped up its attempts to fully liquidate the capability
of the Arab countries and the Palestinian movement of resisting Tel Aviv'a
expansion. Attacks on the territory of Israel's neighboring Arab countries,
chiefly Syria and Lebanon. were made for this purpose. Not only the air

but also the ground forces of Israel took part in them. Together with this.
sabotage raids in depth were carried out aimed at liquidating Palestine
resistance movement bases and personnel. One such raid was carried out in
Beirut in the night of 9-10 April 1973. during which the Israeli sabcetura
killed a number of PLO leaders and blew up the information center of the
Democratic Front for the Liberation of Palestine. the Fatah office. the PLO
office and a number of other buildings in Beirut. The Israelis exerted
concentrated psychological pressure on the Arabs aimed at forcing the Arab
states to agree in advance with the idea of their military impotence and

103
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Incompetence and thereby fully exclude the possibility of decisive retalia-
tory actions from the Arab side. Israel. according to the American weekly
NEHSHEEK. made it "clearly understood that its air force would not stop short
at devastating Egyptian territory in the event of war."

It is significant that this psychological pressure included demonstrative
statements of the Israeli leadership to the effect that under no circumstances
did Israel intend to quit a whole number of territories taken in June 1967.
Thus on 26 Hay General Dayan declared on French television: "At all events,
Israel must retain Sharm al-Shsykh and the Golan Heights on occupied Syrian
territory. If agreement were to be reached with Egypt, the Israeli armed
forces could withdraw from the canal, but then the border would run between
the Suez Canal and the former cease-fire line between Israel and Egypt up to
the '6-day war' ."

The Israeli leadership made no secret of the policy which it had already
adopted in relation to the Palestinian problem. Asserting that in the event

of a political settlemert of the Near East conflict the Palestinian question
would automatically be transferred to the jurisdiction of Jordan, to which
"certain of the occupied territories" would be returned, on the eve of Octo-
ber 1973 the Israeli leadership had essentially removed the Palestinian
question from the agenda.

The conclusions reached by Nahum Goldmann with respect to the causes of the
1973 war are interesting. "The Yom Kippur war," he writes in his book
"Whither Israel?" was from the historical viewpoint the result of the nega-
tive consequences of the 1967 war. Israel had come to feel such confidence
in its superiority that it imagined that the status quo which it had created
would last for a long time and that the Arabs would not demonstrate total
insanity and would not commit suicide by venturing to embark on a new war;
the psychological, military and many other spheres of Israeli life were un-
der the influence of this victory, and the result was the war of 1973, which
in a few days radically changed the entire situation. In the years between
the two wars Israel's policy had been unrealistic. It had set as it goal
preservation of the status quo in the hope that the Arabs, like the great
powers. would reconcile themselves to this situation."

The expansionist line was pursued by the Israeli leadership-under the con-
ditions of continuing support on the part of the United States. which was
expressed in 1973. as before, chiefly in the form of arms supplies from the
United States to Israel. Israeli Prime Minister Golda Meir visited Washing-
ton at the end of February-start of March. Her visit was mainly connected
with negotiations on arms supplies. According to a NEH YORK TIMES reports.
the United States undertook to additionally supply Israel with 48 fighter-
bombers and light ground attack aircraft and to assist in the production

in Israel of a new fighter-bomber.

A qualitatively new feature was observed here also. The United States had
begun to pay particular attention to the development of the military in-
dustry in Israel. "American technical assistance in the production of

104
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OF?ICIAL USE ONLY

military aircraft in Israel is no less important than the promises relating
to additional supplies of aircraft by the United States," the Israeli news-
paper "A'ARETZ wrote on 15 March 1973. The world press also emphasized that
the measures to build up Israel's military potential were being implemented
by the United States under conditions where supplies in accordance with
deals concluded earlier had not even been completed.

Speaking of the 0.8. role in the growth of the conflict into a new crisis
stage in 1913.". Goldmann wrote: "The Israeli leaders concluded that the
United States would actually support their policy of rejecting any agreement
unless it satisfied all Israeli requirements and try to vindicate positions
of strength, guaranteeing observance of the status quo for many years. If
there is anyone responsible for the Yom Kippur war, it is primarily the
United States."

The situation created by Israel's policy, with the actual support of the
United States, had led to the point where there had been a marked increase
in the econmmic and political difficulties in the Arab countries on the eve
of the 1973 October war. Egypt had been forced to maintain a mass army and
spend approximately 1 billion Egyptian pounds annually on military needs;
60 percent of the Syrian state budget went for defense purposes. Many
observers noted that the deal in settling the Near East crisis threatened
these two Arab countries with an acute internal crisis. "The pain of de-
feat could cause an explosion within the country, and Israel would not even
have to fire a single shot insofar as it would then secure the status quo
in Sinai. in the Gaza Strip, on the Heat Bank of the Jordan, in Jerusalem-r

everywhere; and this would mean that the issue was closed," the Egyptian
president declared on 1 May 1973.

Summing up, it may be concluded that Israel's policy was aimed at preventing
a settlement of the Near East conflict on a just basis despite the appeals
and demands of the international public and UN Security Council and General
Assembly resolutions and insuring the preservation and stabilization of the
results of the 1967 aggression. Tel Aviv continued in practice to reject
all initiatives which could have "unfrozen" the conflict and solved it by
political means in the interests of all the peoples living in this region.
The Israeli leadership and American politicians, who supported it, gambled
on the fact that preservation of the "no war, no peace" situation would
contribute to a general shift to the right in the Arab world, the progres-
sive weakening of revolutionary-democratic regimes and the deepening of the
fissures between different Arab countries; facilitate the opportunities for
maneuver of the openly reactionary and rightwing nationalist Arab forces;
and intensify the chauvinist and ultra-Islamic trends, which in a number

of cases had manifestly acquired an anti-Soviet and anticommunist character.

For a whole number of reasons this policy of "freezing" the conflict in the
Near East had to be and was hopeless. Moreover, this Israeli policy also
acquired the nature of a detonator, which triggered the embittered military
actions in the Near East in October 1973.

105
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The Soviet Union had warned repeatedly of the dangerous nature of the develop-
ment of eventsin the Near East. The final occasion was literally on the eve

of the October war. when in the UN General Assembly the USSR foreign minister
again pointed out that events in the Near East were taking an extremely dan-
gerous turn. At this time. in September. there were numerous reports coming
from the Near East of a concentration of Israeli troops on the east bank

of the Suez Canal and in the Golan Heights region. At the start of October
Israel called up some of its reservists, thereby inflaming the situation to

the utmost.

Under these conditions military operations began in the Near East on 6 Octo-
ber 1973.

To judge by everything. the Israeli leadership proceeded from the fact that
the Arab side would not venture to "unfreeze" the conflict at that time.
Certain Israeli figures aspired to impress upon the world public the idea
that the situation in the Near East would in time acquire a certain stability
and that preservation of the situation characterized by continued Israeli
occupation of vast Arab territories allegedly did not only not represent a
serious threat to peace but. on the contrary, was creating some kind of new
"approaches to a settlement." In an interview that the London THE OBSERVER
the Israeli foreign minister. for example. claimed that the situation in the
Near East arena "is losing its intensity" as a result of the fact that "the
cease-fire has its own dynamism."

Arguments about a decline in "tension" in the Near East had nothing in com-
mon with reality. The causes which had brought the situation in the region
to crisis point and which had created a constant threat of the spread of

the conflict continued to operate. Israel had not retreated from its aggres-
sive. expansionist policy in relation to its Arab neighbors, increasing
pressure on the Arab states and attempting to impose capitulationist set-
telement terms on them. All this was the basis of the transition of the

Near East conflict to the crisis stage in 1973.

An investigation of the “stimulating factors" which predetermined in each
specific instance the development of the Near East conflict into the crisis
stage leads to the conclusion that only the liquidation of all the causes
forming the basis of the Near East conflict can frustrate the dangerous
development of the conflict situation threatening not only peace in the Near
East but also universal peace. This conclusion emphasizes once again the
extreme urgency of the neutralization of the whole complex of causes which
have engendered and are maintaining the Arab-Israeli conflict. And this

can only be done in the process of an overall settlement. '

The need for such an overall, all-embracing settlement has also become in-
creasingly urgent because the Arab-Israeli confrontation has brought to life
or. in any event. imparted an aCute nature to and impeded the settlement of
a whole number of other conflicts in the Near East. evidence of which were
the 1975-1976 events in Lebanon.

106
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in Place of a Conclusion
The Path to Peace: The Soviet Viewpoint

'l'hc Soviet Union and the other countries of the socialist conunity are
struggling consistently for a peaceful. political settlement of the Near
East conflict in the interests of all the peoples living in this region.
What fundamental features characterise the USSR'a position on the question
of the Arab-Israeli conflict?

It is obviously necessary to first of all say how the USSR evaluates the
nature of the Arab-israeli conflict. The Soviet Union regards this conflict
not in the. fare: of a "clash of two nationalisms" but as a manifestation of
the confrontation of imperialism on the one hand and the national liberation:
movement on the other. The essence of the conflict lies precisely in this
nntagonina. despite the fact that this does not always appear sufficiently
rectilinearly and straightforwardly on the surface.

This understanding of the nature of the Near East conflict has predetermined
the USSR'u political position. which is expressed in assistance to and sup-
port for the Arab states and the Palestinian people. who have fallen victim
to Israel‘s expansionism and aggressiveness. The decree of the CPSU Central
Co-aittee 2] June 1967 Plenum "The Soviet Union's Policy in Connection Uith
lsrael‘s Aggression in the Near East" esphasized: "lsrael's aggression is
the result of a conspiracy of the most reactionary forces of international
imperialim. primarily the United States. directed against a detachment of
the national liberation movement.... The Soviet Union, the other socialist
countries and all progressive anti-imperialist forces are on the side of the
Arab peoples in their just struggle against imperialism and neocolonialism
and for the inalienable right to decide all questions of their donestic life
and foreign policy themselves."

Thus the Soviet Union's position in relation to the Near East conflict was
and is now constructed on the basis of proletarian internationaliam and
support for the national liberation struggle of the peoples.

The Soviet Union's attitude toward the Near East conflict is at the same time
a consequence of its general approach to the problems of international rela-
tions and of its many years of struggle for tneir improvement and for the
reorganization of the system of interstate relations on the basis of the
principles of peace. mutual respect. strict observance of sovereignty and
noninterference in internal affairs.

ln this plane the Soviet Union's interest in a just and lasting peace in
the Near East has acquired particular import in the 1970's. The develop-
ment and materialization of the relaxation process and the imparting of an
irreversible character to this process have come to depend largely on the
liquidation of hotbeds of international tension. of which the Near East is
one of the most dangerous. Under the conditions of the transition from

107
toll OFFICIAL US! ONLY
VCR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the "cold war" to the relaxation of international tension which has begun the
pnllry of intolerance of aggression and a firm stand against any possibility
of the acquisition of territory through aggressive actions have becone parti-
cularly important and urgent. Herely the exclusion of a develop-ent of
events where the aggressor triunphs and receives dividends for his actions
would create an opportunity to reorganize the system of relations between
states on the basis of peace. justice. equality, mutual advantage and general
progress.

Addressing the plenary seating of the UN General Assembly 29th Session. USSR
Foreign Minister A. A. Gromyko declared: "Some people try to depict the
Soviet Union's position as one-sided and as corresponding nerelyto the
interests of the Arab states. Yes, we support and will continueto support
the Arabs' legitimate demands. But it is wrong to see just this aspect in
our position. when we strive to insure that territory acquired by force
should not be a bonus for the aggressor. in its content this demand goes be-
yonu the framework of the Near East. It reflects an intolerance of aggres-
sion in general. Thus this is a question of an important international prin-
riple. a question of the consistency of policy."

The USSR's aspiration to lead events in the Near East to a lasting and sure
peace is also connected with the fact that this region is directly adjacent
to the USSR's southern borders. Naturally. the lack of stability and the
danger preserved therein of a military eruption is directly contrary to the
USSR's interests.

Precisely by virtue of all that has been said. the proposition on the need
for the concentration of the efforts of the peace-loving states on the li-
quidation of the remaining military hotbeds, priaarily the accomplishment of
a just and lasting settle-ent in the Near East, is an organic part of the
system of the most urgent and important aeasures envisaged by the Peace Pro-
uran adopted by the 26th CPSU Congress and the Program of Further Struggle
for Peace and International Cooperation and the Freedom and independence

of the Peoples adopted by the 25th CPSU Congress.

The Soviet Union's position in relation to the Near East conflict thus shows
that its policy of the relaxation of international tension and of the exclu-
sion of wars as a neans of solving disputed questions between states not only
doesnotcontradict but. on the contrary. is organically linked with the
principled line of support for the national liberation forces subjected to
imperialist attacks.

ﬂow to achieve peace in the Near East? First of all. the Soviet Union has
proceeded ind continues to proceed from the fact that the oath toward it

lies only through the liquidation of the consequences of the lsrseli attack
on the Arab countries in l967-the so-called 6-day war. if the status quo
which took shape after 1967 is preserved, the situation in the Near East will
be constantly explosive. This conclusion is of fundamental significance
since certain Western politicians have proceeded and are continuing to

108
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
proceed from the fact that the situation may gradually "lose its acuteneas"
and that there will be a decline in the intensity of the threat of the Near
East crisis to world peace. The Soviet Union has always rejected such a
conclusion. The Soviet leaders declared this both prior to (including on
the eve) and after October 1973.

In its definition of the path toward peace in the Near East Soviet policy
proceeds iron the fact that there is a coaplex of causes at the basis of the
Arab-Israeli conflict: Israel's occupation of Arab territory. the deprivation
of the Palestinian Arab people's inalienable rights and the continuing state
of war. Soviet diplomacy has consistently and unswervingly pursued a policy
of liquidation and neutralization of all these causes in a complex. Only
such a solution will lead setters toward a just and stable peace in the re-
gion. This. for exaaple. is hovthekey aspects of this probles were revealed
in the Soviet Union's proposals on s Near East settlement and the Geneva

Peace Conference published on 2 October 1976:

l. The withdrawal of Israeli troops from all Arab territory occupied in
1967.

2. Realization of the inalienable rights of the Palestinian Arab people.

including their right to self-detereinstion and the creation of their own
state.

3. Guarantee of the right to independent existence and security of all the
states which are directly party to the conflict--the Arab states neighboring
Israel on the one hand and the state of Israel on the other-and the grant-
ing to then of the appropriate international guarantees.

6. Cessation of the state of war between the corresponding Arab countries
and Israel.

The Soviet Union put forward these aspects of s settle-eat for examination
as the agenda of the Geneva Peace Conference, emphasizing that this agenda
"tskesintoconsideration the legitiaate rights and interests of all the
parties directly involved inthe conflict-othe Arab states. the Palestinian
Arab people and the state of Israel."

The Soviet Union has struggled and is continuing to struggle unswervingly
and in keeping with principle against Israel's expansionist. aggressive
policy. At the same time in 1958 the Soviet Union recognized and supported
the right of the Jewish population of Palestine to self-determination. The
invariability of the Soviet line on this question is obvious. For example,
a statement adopted at the USSR Supreme Soviet July (1970) Session says:
"The USSR Supreme Soviet believes that each state of the Near East has a
right to independent national existence. independence and security."

There is something else that is obvious at the same tiae: one people can-
not have self-determination at the expense of deprivation of the right to

109
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

self-determination of another people-the Palestinian Arab people. For
this reason the Soviet Union not only recognizes Israel's rightto existence
as a state but is also waging a principled struggle for satisfaction of the
Palestinian people's legitimate rights. even their creation of their own
national state. Failing this. a peaceful settlement of the Near East con-
flict is impossible since the unsolved nature of the Palestinian problem

is blocking the path to a just and lasting peace in the region.

'Whe Near East needs a lastingandjust settlement which would not infringe
the vital rights of a single state and a single people. or course, Israel
has a right to state independence and a secure existence. But the Pales-
tinian Arab people have the same right." Comrade L. I. Brezhnev declared in
Tula on 18 January 1977.

So a comprehensive solution of the problems of the Near East conflict is the
sole realistic course of its settlement. Is this conclusion identical to

a denial of a stage-by-stage approach in the solution of problems? By no
means. The Soviet Union doea not in principle reject interim measures which
could affect individual questions. Thus. for example. in his speech at the
16th Trade Unions Congress Comrade L. I. Brezhnev emphasized that the with-
drawal of Israeli troops from all occupied territories could be accomplished
in stages over several months. for example, within a strictly determined
time frame. The main thing is that "stage-by-stage" measures be organic
components of a universal settlement and that they be regarded and imple-
mented in the context of this overall. comprehensive settlement of the Near
East conflict.

For a whole number of years the Soviet Union has consistently played an
active role in the attempts to achieve a peaceful. political settlement of
the Near East conflict. aspiring to formulate acceptable principles of the
implementatioaofUN Security Council resolutions. Hhether during meetings
and talks with the leaders of Arab countries and the PLO and consultations
with the great powers which are members of the UN Security Council or during
bilateral consultations with representatives of the U.S. Administration. the
Soviet Union has always actively pursued a policy of support for the strug-
gle of the Arab countries to liquidate the consequences of Israeli aggres-
sion and to establish a just and stable peace in the Near East in the in-
terests of all the peoples living in this region.

On the basis of a sober analysis of the situation in the Near East and in
consideration of the positions of the parties to the conflict and also the
bilateral and quadripartite consultations within the UN framework on ques-
tions of a Near East settlement. back in 1969 the Soviet Union put forward
realistic and constructive proposals for a political solution of the crisis.
The Soviet plan was correspondingly submitted to the interested countries
and was amplified and supplemented in 1970.

It should be emphasized that all the 0558's proposals on a peaceful settle-
ment of the Arab-Israeli conflict. including the Soviet peace plan for the

130
FOR OPPICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Near East proposed in 1969. have not been pious wishes for peace but a
developed system of measures to achieve and guarantee it. He have already
emphasized above the interlinking nature of the problems and. consequently.
the comprehensive nature of the Soviet approach corresponding to the inter-
esta--not imaginary and invented but genuine--of all peoples inhabiting the
Near East. Thus the 1969 Soviet settlement plan proposed concrete measures
with an indication of the times of the withdrawal of Israeli troops con-
nected with the establishment of new. peaceful relations between Israel and
its Arab neighbors. it was envisaged. for example. that this approach would
be implemented in two stages. According to the Soviet plan. the borders

of the Near East states could have been guaranteed through the two sides'
assumption of concrete commitments. These would have included consent to
the establishment of demilitarized zones along both sides of the border
which would afford neither side advantages. and. moreover, the modus Operandi
of these zones would contain restrictions of a purely military nature; to
the commitsent of UN troops to a number of points: and to direct guarantees
on the part of the four powers which are permanent menbers of the Security
Council or guarantees of the Security Council as a whole.

Now. glancing retrospectively at the events in the Near East which occurred
in the first half of the 1970's. it can be said with certainty that the adop-
tion of the Soviet plan could have spared the peoples of this region many
sacrifices and brought them to the point of peaceful coexistence. Unfor-
tunately. this was not the case. The Soviet plan encountered stubborn re-
sistance both on the part of Israel. which hoped that it would be successful
in preserving the "no war. no peace" situation. and the United States. which
supported the Israeli leadership.

Under the conditions which took shape in the Near East after the October 1973
war the Soviet Union put forward and firmly defended the idea of the con-
vening of the Geneva Peace Conference for the solution of the questions

of a comprehensive settlement. As is known. this conference began its work
in December 1973 and then recessed. The USSR has constantly insisted on

a resumption of its work. believing it to be the most suitable forum for
the solution of the problems of an overall settlement of the Arab-Israeli
conflict. This idea was emphasized once again with all justification in
the Soviet Union's proposals on a hear East settlement and the Geneva Peace
Conference presented to the governments of the United States. Egypt. Syria.
Jordan and Israel and the PLO leadership at the start of October 1976.

This document put forward for examination not only the proposal on the agenda
but also questions of the organization of the conference and the idea that
it be conducted in two stages. the first of which could definitively agree
on the agenda and determine the procedure for the examination of specific
aspects of a settlement. At the second stage it was proposed to concentrat'
on the formulation of an accord in essence. It was emphasized that the
conference should culminate in the adoption of a docuaent (or deer-ants) of
a treaty nature. The Soviet Union has never regarded the idea of the con-
vening of the Geneva Conference as an end in itself. believing that the

111
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPPICIAL USE ONLY

main thing lies in the fruitful and equitable results of its work. and in
this connection has emphasized the need for the thorough preparation of the
conference. At the some time the Soviet Union has opposed attempts to post-
pone thsconference and to drag out the preparationof it ad infinitum.
beliving that its convening is of vital significance for the normalization
of the situation in the Near East.

There is particular significance in the fact that the Soviet Union insisted
on the PLo's equal participation in the Geneva Peace Conference. This em-
phasis was particularly important because without the participation of the
real and generally recognized representatives of the Palestinian people it
is impossible to solve the Palestinian problem. and there can be no overall
settlement of the Near East conflict without its solution. The Soviet Union
has persistently pursued the line of PLO participation in the Geneva Con-
ference under conditions where Israel. with 0.8. support. has attempted to
circumvent the Palestinian problem. leave it on the sidelines of the settle-
ment process or replace the Palestinian people's representation. which is
capable of defending their legitimate rights, with a Quisling-type "repre-
sentntion."

As is clear from the statements of its leaders and from the concrete mea-
sures which have been adopted. the Soviet Union has not only always attached
tremendous significance to the problem of a settlement of the Near East con-
flict but has proceeded from the conviction of the real possibility of the
liquidation of its causes and of an all-embracing accord on the establish-
ment of a just and lasting peace in this long-suffering and uneasy region--
the Near East.

In his speech at the 16th Trade Unions Congress Comrade L. I. Brezhnev again
put forward realistic. clearly balanced proposals capable of bringing mat-
ters to a settlement in the Near East. The Soviet Union has emphasized the
need for the principle of the inadmissibility of the acquisition of terri-
tory by wars and'the right of all states of this region to independent
existence and security to be made the basis of a final document (or docu-
ments) on peace in the Near East. Of course. the inalienable rights of the
Palestinian people. including their right to self-determination and the cre-
ation of their own state. must be secured.

The peace documents must provide for the withdrawal of Israeli troops from
all Arab territory occupied in 1967. The corresponding lines of the borders
between Israel and its Arab neighbors who are party to the conflict must be
precisely determined. These borders must be declared definitively estab-
lished and indissoluble.

Following the completion of the withdrawal of Israeli troops. the state of
war between the Arab states which are party to the conflict and Israel will
cease and relations of peace will be established. here all parties will
assume mutual commitments to respect one another's sovereignty. territorial
integrity. inviolability and political independence and to settle their

112
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

international disputes by peaceful means. the conference's final documents
should evidently also contain a clause on freedom of passage for the ships
of all countries. including Israel (after the cessation of the state of war).
along the Strait of Tiran and the Gulf of Aqaba and also a declaration from
Egypt on the passage of ships along the Suez Canal. which is entirely under
Egyptian sovereignty.

The proposals on a Near East settlement presented by the CPSU Central Com-
mittee general secretary pay particular attention to questions of practic-
able guarantees of a just peace. whose terms will be recorded in the final
document. Demilitsrized zones-without one-sided advantages for anyone--

could be created. with the consent of the corresponding states. of course.
along both sides of the established borders. Either a UN emergency force

or UN observers would be stationed for some clearly defined period of time
within these zones.

"Implementation of the terms of a peace settlement could, in our opinion.

be guaranteed. if so desired by the contracting parties. by the UN Security
Council and. possibly. individual powers such as the Soviet Union. the United
States. France and Britain. for exawle. The guarantor states could have
their own observers in the UN contingents in the corresponding zones." Com-
rade L.I. Brezhnev declared.

The international community gave a highly favorable welcome to the joint
Soviet-American statement on the Near East issued on 2 October 1977. which
says: "The Soviet and American sides believe that all concrete questions
of a settlement. including such key questions as the withdrawal of Israeli
troops from the territories occupied at the time of the 1967 conflict. the
Palestinian question. including a guarantee of the Palestinian people's
legitimate rights. the cessation of the state of war and the establishment
of normal peaceful relations on the basis of mutual recognition of the prin-
ciples of sovereignty. territorial integrity and political independence.
should be solved within the framework of an all-embracing settlement of the
Near East problem."

At the some time the comments of the world press emphasized that not all

the provisions of this statement formthebasis of practical American policy--
the United States has continued to maneuver. aspiring chiefly to strength-
en Israel's positions.

This. generally. was the situation in the fall of 1977.

"hen this book was completed. events in the Near East were continuing to
disturb the world. For sany decades of its developnent the Near East con-
flict has been a textbook eiampie of acute and complex international situa-
tions threatening the peace and security of the peoples. Thousands of
people have fallen victim to them in (our wars and several hundred clashes.
And, moreover. life has still not put an end to the score--neither of wars

113
FOR OPPICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and need clashes nor the thousands of victims and the treaendous destruction.
1! this book has helped the reader even somewhat to detenine the real
causes of the long-standing Arab-Israeli conflict and has shown hie that these
causes. while as yet not extirpated. will contribute again and again to the
conflict'a developnent into the stage of dangerous international crises. if
the book has contributed to an understanding of the essence of the policy of
the capitalist countries. which are intensifying the conflict and impeding its
settlement and if it has provided illustrative eaterial explaining in even
greater depth the Soviet position and setting off the USSR's constructive
role in the establishent of a just peace in the Near East. the author con-
siders his task accomplished.

COPYRIGHT: Isdatel'stvo Hysl'. Hoseov. 1978

8850
C50: 1800
END

116
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY