APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00880R000200020043-0
Near Eas’r/ North Africa Report

No. 2048

_|r=e;fs_'] FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE?
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original infomtion was
processed. "here no processing indicator is given, die infor-
mation was susnarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.3. Government.

PROCUREMENT OF PUBLICATION

JPRS publications may be ordered fro- the National Technical
Information Service, Springfield, Virginia 22161. In order-
ing, it is recoil-ended that the ms amber, title, date and
author, if applicable, of publication be cited. ‘

Current JPRS publications are announced in Govermsant Remus
Announcements issued semi-monthly by the National Technical
Information Service, and are listed in the {anally catalog of .
U s. Covert-ant Publications issued by the Superintendent of
Documents, 11.8. covert-ant Printing Office, washington, D. c.
20402. ._.

Indexes to this report (by keyword, author, personal ‘names,
title and series) are available fro- Bell a am11,ola_ -
Mansfield Road, Wooster, cuts. “691 .

Correspondence pertaining to utters. other. than prochrelsnt
may be addressed to Joint? hblicatim maxim Seryicef.
.1000 North Glebe Rcad,'Ar1ington. Virginia “If-22201. ,
lt. Alma-rt (hour ”0 rue“

   

This serial report contains information on socioeconomic, government, political.
and technical developments in the countries of the Near East and North Africa.

    

_._..._._. ..___——_

17. Donn-um Mala-e a. Mun."

    
     
        
       
       
      
        
    
       
     
           
 

Polirical Science __Intcr-Areb Affairs ___l.ibya __Sultanatc
Sociology ._North African _Hauritania of Oman
Economics: Affairs _x_Horocco LSyria
Culture (Social __Afghanistnn _People's Demo- __'l’unisia
Sciences) _x_A1geria cratic Republic _United Arab

Ethnology _Bahrain of Yemen Emirates
Geography _x_Bgypt _Persian Gulf __Heatern Sahara
Techologlcai _x_ Iran Area _Yemen Arab
Military Sciences _lraq _Qatar Republic

L Israel _Sau'di Arabia

__Jordan __Spanish North

_X_Kuvait Africa

L Lebanon _Sudan

    
    
 

b. want-onion“ [nu-a 7mm

   

c.¢0$A!Iful¢l/Ooouu 5D. SC. 5K, 15

 

    
   
         
          

. VII l . n o .. '_ '_-'_ '-‘_—'- "' —--—-— :06--— 5|...';. {4-6;}; .
"1?..1' 53'." 333: "Availability wﬁng‘; 2;}; l 121
5‘” " "Y """ '3 .a Queeaxammm ""13. m.’ "
ﬁvrhmf i 1'] ll , Virginia 22161 UNCLASSIFIED I
ran ANN-nun Soc hummu- on loam onnml. roan an (4-7"

“mm "NS-”l

mu“...- .1 I new].
IA

NEAR EAST/NORTH AFRICA REPORT

No. 2048

CONTENTS

'AL-SHA'B': Khomcyni Greetings to BendJedid on Revolution
Day
(AL‘SHA'B, 3 Nov 79) scoot.soosooooooeouoooseooeo-e

Algeria Reports Bendjedid InterVicv With French Television
(Mitorial Report) one...IoOno's-.IOIOIOIOOOIIOOOOO

President's Tenure Criticized
(Muhanmad 'A‘bd-al-Quddus; AL-DA'HAH, Oct 79)

Government. Criticized for Not Applying Islamic Iaw
(Salih 'Ashnnwi; AL-M'HAH, Oct 79)

Critical Debate on New Student Ordinance Continues
(AL-M'HAH, Oct 79)

Harmful Consequences of Agreement With Israel Discussed
('Unar aL-Talmsani; AL-DA'HAH, Oct 79) ...........

Center for Islamic Research, Studies Described
(AL-M'HAH, at 79) assessessuccesses-eoeoecooaooae

Bani-Sadr Calls for Carter Initiative To Defuse Crisis
(Bani-Sadr Interview; LB mm, 10 Nov 79)

French Initiative Mooted in Hostage Crisis
(mnCOIS mlzct; MOE-30m, 13 Nov 79) scones...
Z-Onmm-yn i. Seen Uniting Islam, 011 for Holy War
(ANLUHIO Aercm} ABC, 21 mt 79) esoosseoooososssoe

Bani-Saab BeruLeu Bazurgsn Administration
(WM,15 SC? 79) 00.0.0000.seessooosoooeoesososoe

Buzargan' s Cab i not Redmfi'led
(my, 29 Sep 79)

'BAMDAD' Reports on Civil Disorders Around the Country
(Editorial Report) see-esee-esosoeooocosssoeosesosos

Tribal Leader Warns of 'Explosive' Situation in Furs
Provinm:
(Ali. Rnfi'i; W, 5 NOV 79) cusses-sesssoosssoooo

Mijor Rebel Radio Station Captured in Mahs‘nad
(W, 5 Scp 79) Ionscove...sesoosssosoosossnssses

Trial of Hasssn lbzih Labeled 'Puppet Show'
(m‘YE Rm, 28 sep 79) noseeases-assaoossoseesoos

Consequences of Nazih's Dismissal
(“AMER-YE Rm, 2 (kt 79) useooosososssoesoseooooooos

Oi.l Strikes, Second Blow Against Mallshs
(ma-YE Rm, 26 &p n) 0.00000IOOODOOIOOCOOOQOOOI

Bnbassy in London Bxpels Questionable Employees
(mm, 30 Get 'r9) oQIOIOI.OIOOOOOIOOOOOOOOOOO'OOIO

Military Leader Deplores Growing mblic Estrangement
(mm, 25 0‘21? 79) sooeooooeoeooeo0.900.900.0000..-

Commerce Minister Exposes SAVAK Graft in Ministry
(mm, 27 “t n) I0......OIOIOIOIIODOOOII...OI...

Government Spokesman Describes Visit to West Germny
(W, 29 Oct 79) assoc-socassess-sosocoososssoooo

Ahmdzsdeh Explains Conditions for Odnershi;
(W, 19 sep 79) as...5so.too-oooesoeooeosooossse

Elections for Local Councils Announced
(W, 19 Sep 79) Asoosooesoeesosessoeosoooosees-e

Sale, Purchase of Big Plots of Idle land To Be Banned
(mm, 1&p N) I...IO000C0.000IOOOQOOOIOIOOOOOIOI
wtsui-lic 'Gsmg Har' Escalates in Jerusalem
(Abraham Rablnovich; mmm POST, 29 Oct 79)

Ila-art Disease Rate Increasing
(mm POST, 25 Oct 79)

Joint. Hater PrnJcct Hith Egypt Raised as Possibility
(Mll'iln'i'l Gortl; llA'ARP-TZ, I" :‘l-‘p 79) vetoes-scoote-

Probe Shows Multiple Errors Caused Power Blackout
(Benny Morris; mum men, 29 Oct 79)

KUJAI'I'

ILS. Seen Attempting To mnipllate Mideast Ares
(Editorial; All-RA'! AL-‘AMM, 2“ Sop 79) 00.0.0000...

Government Acts Against Shi'ite Dissidents
(AL-“STAN, 29 50]) 79) sue-os-ossoesooeooseooaouo

LEBANON

Statement by the Sidon Political Council
(Ml-m, 2 mt w) .IIIOOOOOIOI.OIOCIOOOIOIIIIOIIO

limb Army of Lebanon Holds Graduation
(AL-m, 2 OCt n) on.notsoooooooososso-ssouoosss-

Duties of Gendarmes in Nabatiyah Described
(mun SYSdid; AL'MHAR’ 2 mt 79) oesto-sseosossous

”0000

naucetta Discusses 'Good' Relations with Spain
(M'Hsmed Boucetta Interview; EL PAIS, 7 Nov 79) ....

Boucetta Interviewed on Sahara Question
(M'Hamd Boucetts Interview; max-1d Domatic Service,

8 NOV 79)OOOOIIIIII'OOIOIOOI000....0..IO..IIIIOI.III

Morocco Algeria Mast 'Rediscover' Ii‘rsne Spirit
(Ahmd M30111; IE mm, 1‘ NOV 79) sou-aoeooosossoos
Hr -:'. (ct-nu. mm)

'LF: VATIN' Denies Morocco Is Anti-Soviet, Hits USSR Sahara
SLam‘c

(Ahmd Alnoui; LE m'rm, 26 Oct. 79)

USSR Mbassador on 'Vcry Good Results' of Cooperation
UiLh Morocco
(LE ”TI", 3 Nov 79) OOOIIIIIOOOOOIOOOOOOOOIIODI...

mrnr-mn :hmlulintt: Urnc Release of ﬂirty Mnnimrs Held
in Mal-H's
(LB mm, 31 Oct. 79)

Opponitionlst Remtes Claims of Arrest of 08?? Activists
(AL-SHA'B, 29 mt 79) OOOOIIOOIOIIIOIIOOUIOIIOIIOOI

Developmnt. of Free 20:23 Praised
(AL-TEAM, 15 Sep 79) Colon-000....coo-Ilcolooool

Cotton Prices Sch; Steps Taken To Emurc Delivery and
Payment.
(AL’TW, 23 Sep 79) non-coo.alooouooou-oooooann

Irrigation Hater Fran mphrates To Help Revive
Al-sumiyah's Agriculture
(Hanan al-mtrib; AL-THAHRAE, 27 Sep 79)
'AL-SHA'B': KHOMEYNI GREETINGS T0 BENDJEDID (XI REVOLUTIW DAY
Lnllllél Algiers AL-SHA'B in Arabic 3 Nov 79 p 3 LD

[Text] Chedli Bendjedid. president and party secretary general. has
received the followinq congratulatory cable from Iranian leader Ayatollah
Khomeyni on the 25th anniversary of the eruption of the armed revolution:

0n the occasion of the 25th anniversary of the liberation of your dear
country. Algeria, from the yoke of the tyrannical authority of the colo-
nialists, the pretenders of civilization, I send my greetings and the
greetings of the honorable Iranian people to the fraternal Algerian peo-
ple coupled with sincere congratulations on this glorious occasion.

(hnr people suffered bitterly from foreign domination and oil suckers.
particularly the United States. and sense very well the bitterness of
sadness and sorrow the heroic Algerian people had suffered. Because of
the fraternity and spiritual ideology which bind the two peoples, the
lranian people have shared the joys and sorrows of the fraternal Algerian
people and of all the fraternal Islamic peoples.

l have strong hopes that the Muslims in all parts of the world will study
their problems and the causes of their sufferings as they stand on the
threshold of the new century [the start of the new Hegira century] and.
therefore, seek to liberate themselves from the shackles of the imperial-
ists. The Muslims. who suffered bitter pains at the hands of the oppres-
sive big powers and were subjected by various ways and means to the
intrigues and conspiracies of these powers which also plundered their
wealth throughout this century, must unite, unify their stands and rally
together sincerely and faithfully and rely on almighty God and on Islam
in order to be able to rid themselves of their present situation.

In order to rid themselves of this situation, the Muslim peoples and
states, if they are patriotic, should seek to sever the bonds of ideo-
logical subservience to the Nest. The Muslim must adhere to their genuine
deep-rooted culture and learn the progressive Islamic culture which derives
its teachings from divine inspiration and the holy book and teach this
culture to the world.
The East and Africa. the continent which has risen from backwardness as
a result of the national Islamic renaissance and the bloody revolution
of the brave Algerian people and thus rescued one country after another
from the grip of the United States and other colonialist states, must
rely on themselves and on their intrinsic power and vigorously fight
imported cultures. The African and Asian countries and all countries
hound by shackling conditions must realize that the evils and corrup-
tion which the conspiratorial and aggressive Heat and East and the

United States-~the aggressor against oppressed states--export to them
are immeasurable.

The Muslim states must adopt a hostile stand toward usurper Israel which
has caused problems and tragedies for the Islamic countries. These coun-

tries must defend with all their might the aims of dear Palestine and
Lebanon.

The Muslim countries must defend the liberation organizations all over the
world. We strongly denounce the Egyptian-Israeli plot to jeopardize the
tremendous revolution of the struggling Palestinian people. ._

Heads and members of the delegations now meeting in dear Algeria. let us
join together to cut off the hands of the rightist and leftist criminals
headed by the United States and to uproot Israel and restore the rights

of the Palestinian people who have been deprived of everything.

I implore almighty God to grant the Muslim advancement. strength and

unity and the Muslim countries sublimity, dignity and power. Hay God's
peace and mercy be upon his righteous servants.

C80: 6402
ALGERIA REPORTS BENDJEDID INTERVIEH WITH FRENCH TELEVISION

LDlll638 [Editorial Report 1.0] Algiers Donestic Service in French at 2000
GMT on 9 November carries a 47-minute announcer-read "Interview in Full"
given by Algerian President Chadli Bendjedid to French television. The
date of the interview is not specified. The reception is poor. as is the
quality of the recording. Thus, the questions which are read in French.
cannot be heard at all. Sone parts of the answers are also unnonitorable
as the announcer-read answers in French are often superimposed over what
appears to be a recording of Bendjedid answering in Arabic.

At the beginning of the interview, Chadli Bendjedid reviews the heroism and
sacrifices of the Algerian people during the Algerian revolution, and ex-
presses thanks to those states which supported it. He stresses his plans
to continue with Algeria's socialist revolution, and expresses concern that
Algerians working abroad receive the full respect due then until such tine
as the Algerian government can bring the- all hone.

Asked a question on Algerian-French relations, Bendjedid replies:

"Despite the trials suffered by the Algerian people during the fight for
liberation, despite the problems that have arisen, our people harbor no re-
senteent. We are against French colonialism, we have never been against the
French people. This idea oust clearly be borne in aind. We have turned over

the page of a colonialism that lasted nearly a century and a half. We want
to open a new page.

"He. the people and the government, are inspired by a sincere will for co-
operation with France. We have, by the way, attained a noticeable evolution
of these relations. Unfortunately, during the past few years clouds have
gathered in the sky of French-Algerian relations. Today, let as say on be-
half of the political leadership of Algeria. the occasion is favorable (7for
tackling) negotiations on relations between the two countries. As far as
Algeria is concerned, it is ready to (7proceed). He went, in conformity

with the will of the Algerian people, to open a new page. allow the past to
belong to history and look towards the future.

"The visit to Algeria of the French Minister of Foreign Affairs has been.

in ny opinion, a happy initiative of the French govern-ant. As far as I
an concerned, I reaffirm our desire to open constructive dialog without
endangering our Interests, but a dialog based on respect for the joint promo-
tion of fruitful cooperation for the two countries."

In reply to another question, Bendjedid speaks about his intention to improve
the lot of the Algerian masses, strengthening the institutions, the economy
and the state's structure. He describes various stages in Algeria's develop-
ment, and notes that agriculture must be strengthened.

Answering another question, Bendjedid says that there is no opposition in
Algeria, only individual opponents. In Algeria the people is its own master,
and is the only leader of the revolution together with the FL“, the only party.
Nobody else can impose its will on Algeria. The M stads for full democracy
and respect of the constitution. Those who stand up as opponents are men of
the past. Today, it is the revolution that is alive and those who do not fol-
low it have no place in Algeria. The opponents are suspect, because foreign
interests appear to be involved in their activities. Different opinions are
allowed in Algeria, but not gauging up against the revolution.

In connection with the Hestern Sahara problem, Bendjedid says:

"The Saharan affair is clear to us just as it is to the international and
regional organizations. The matter is a consequence of the liquidation of
colonialism. we support the principle of the peoples' right to self-determi-
nation. He do not accept the language of force that wants to force upon
peoples solutions they reject.

"To us, the conflict is between a people fighting for its freedom and a regime
using force to impose its will on this people. the Saharan people. As we be-
lieve in the necessity of guaranteeing the right of peoples to self-determina-
tion, we support the Saharan people. By doing this, we are in perfect harmony
with the UN charter the OAU, and the principles of the nonalined movement.“

Replying to another question, Bendjedid confirms that in his opinion the
Saharan people exists, is living on its territory and is fighting for the
recognition of its sovereignty. lie then continues:

"There is talk of an Algerian-Moroccan conflict. This is wrong. The real
conflict exists between a people which is fighting for its freedom, its self-
determination against a regime that wants to force its will upon it. As far
as Algeria is concerned. it is defending a principle which it has not created,
but which it has always respected. It did so during its national liberation
war by demanding the recognition of the Algerian people's right to self-
determination. In this we are faithful to our principles. He have demanded
respect for ourselves."

He then continues:
"We have not been the ones to break relations with Morocco. It was Morocco

which took the initiative. (7It is necessary) that relations should be based
on UN charter and an objective study of the problems. (71 believe) that the
Saharan problem must be solved politically and peacefully. because am do
not settle political problems."

Later in the interview, Bendjedid says in connection with a question on the
Camp David agreement that the answer to the Middle East problem is clear.

It will never be solved if the interests of the main party, the Palestinians.
are disregarded. There cannot be peace if the Palestinians are ignored. The
occupation of the territories is the root of the problea, and solutions of
others aspects are nothing but palliatives.
PRESIDENT'S TENURE CRITICIZBD
Cairo AL-DA'UAH in Arabic Oct 79 p 49

[Article by huhanmad 'Abd-al-Quddus: "Limiting the Presidential Term of
Office Is a Necessity"]

[Text] I am reviewing this matter in total objectivity, removed from the
excitement of the situation, and I an letting God only guide my course.

This is an effort on my part to be of service to this Hoslem country, to
promote it and to raise the banner of Islam over its territories so that
what happened in the recent and the distant past would not recur.

Among the constitutional amendments that have been proposed is that which
pertains to amending Article 77 of the constitution which pertains to the
presidential term. The president's tenure in office would thus not be
confined to two terms only as is stipulated by the current article. It is
my opinion that we should establish ;, maximum number of years for the presi-
dent's tenure in office. I believe that in Egypt, in particular. this matter
is necessary and urgent. [I believe that it is necessary and urgent] that
the present article remain as it is without amendment. I am supported in
this opinion by reasons that are valid to me.

First, when it comes to legislation it is better that our perspective and
our thoughts not be confined to the present. Instead. the future must be
taken into consideration. Similarly, all impulses for flattery must be set
aside because the matter pertains to a homeland that has a past, a present
and a future.

Second, there is a huge difference between a ruler in an Islamic regime

and a ruler who governs under positive laws. The first governs according

to decreed and established rules. The advantages of these rules have been
confirmed to all those who applied then. and they became models of justice,
equality and equality of opportunity. The perpetuation of a presidential

term is therefore permissible because people may remove the ruler from office
if he violates the law of God in his administration. Positive laws, however.
are subject to all the shortcomings and inconstsncies of the husn mind and,
therefore. require that renewal of the presidential term be not without limits.
We have seen how much tyranny the executive authority has exercised over the
other authorities. There are controls in limiting the presidential term
that bring about [a sense of] balance between the authorities.

Third, Egypt is ruled today by a multiple party system. It is the nature
of multiple party systems in all the countries that have them not to allow

an unrestricted presidential term because of the dangers they have experi-
enced as a result of not limiting the presidential term. For this reason
they make the ruler a symbol of the state and of sovereignty. But government
and the execution [of business] are the prerogative of the cabinet. This is
the case in Italy. Hest Germany, Austria and India. We all know that in the
United States a president cannot renew his term of office but once. There
is no doubt that the length of the period would tempt a president to hang
on to his position. And this situation would entail measures that are not
in the interests of nations. The British people overthrew Churchill right
after the war even though he was the one who had brought them victory. I
offer the following examples to underscore this notion, the notion that the
length of the [presidential] term is a temptation for injustice (that is
perpetrated] in order for the president to hang on to the position.

A. In Western Europe, there was Salazar, the dictator of Portugal who con-

tinued to rule that country for 40 years. Franco also stayed in power for
38 years.

B. in Eastern Europe, there were Stalin, Tito and others.

C. In Asia, there was the Shah of Iran and what he did to his people; and
there was Mao Tse Tung and Sukarno.

D. in Africa, there was “tile Selassie, the former emperor of Ethiopia; and
there were many others.

E. in South America, there were men like Sonora.

F. in Egypt, we had Jamal ‘Abd-al-Nasir and the misfortunes he inflicted
upon Egypt.

Fourth, this rapid tour around the world and the comparison between demo-
cratic and oppressive regimes make me affirm with certainty and with assurance
that limiting the presidential term is a sound, reasonable and authentic
principle in our contemporary world. We urge that it be applied here because
the president of the republic in Egypt, according to the 1971 Constitution
has vast powers that are almost absolute. Furthermore, he is not accountable
to the People's Assembly. The fact that the presidential term is not limited
is consistent with a single party system, but it is most certainly not con-
sistent with the multiple party system.

Fifth, the stability of the constitution is an indication of the stability of
the government. In Egypt, however, constitutions have been changed in a manner
that attracts attention. In 23 years, from 1956 until today. there have
been four constitutions; the 1956 Constitution, the 1958 Unity Constitution.
the I966 Provisional Constitution. and the 1971 Constitution. There were
unly two presidents. however. during that time. This means that the number
ul rnnNLIlutlnnH was twice that the number of presidents. and this is an
quu1l|inn Mlluullnu as far as constitutions] stability is concerned.

Sixth. limiting the presidential term is in the interests of the president
of the republic because the president can be in one of two situations; if
he is a successful president, it is best for him to give up the presidency
at the height of his success so that his memory would live as a model for

those who will succeed him. If he is a failure. it is also best that he make
room for others.

Seventh. limiting the presidential term makes the president's advisers offer
him the truest and the soundest advice so that they can be well thought of
in their country. The fact that the presidential term is not limited would
tempt them to offer insincere advice because the presidency is permanent and
their personal interests become tied to this permanence.

Eighth. limiting the presidential term sets a high example for not becoming
attached to the presidency and turning away from it. It also renews the
vitality [in government, restoring to it] the vitality of youth that withers
because of the length of the presidential term.

Ninth, not limiting the presidential term constitutes what resembles monopoly.
and monopoly, especially when it is in government, hurts everything.

8592
C50: (0802
GOVERNMENT CRITICIZED FOR NOT APPLYING ISLAMIC LA"

Cairo AL-DA'HAH in Arabic Oct 79 p 25

[Article by Salih 'Ashmawi: "who Is Responsible for the Pact That Islamic
Law Is Not Being Enforced?"]

[Text] Discussion calling for the application of Islamic law must be
continued and renewed. The frequent repetition of such a call is not
boring; in fact, insistence. perseverance, diligence. persistence and
escalation of the campaign constitute the required course that would bear
fruit. The campaign would thus reach its goals and achieve its objective.
The rights of a claimant who persevers are never lost.

A magazine has recently published that Dr Sufi Abu Talib, the speaker of
the People's Assembly delivered, as was his custom, a lecture on Islamic
law. but he was unexpectedly confronted by a stormy encounter with young
Hosiems who were attending the lecture. They showered him with questions

about the reasons for the delay in ratifying the bills that would put
lslnmic law into practice.

Once again the speaker of the People's Assembly resorted to the excuse that
became outworn with usage: the Shari'ah Legislation Comittees were

lagging behind in their work and the Borders Connittee was the only committee
that had completed its work. The young people were not satisfied with this

excuse which would not longer satisfy a small child, an enthusiastic
young man, a judicious man or a venerable old man.

The truth is that parliamentary sessions after parliamentary sessions have
been adjourned and one assembly after another has been formed and the
position of the People's Assembly on ratifying the bills that would put

Islamic law into practice remained unchanged. It is the position of "main-
tain your position."

It seems that Dr Sufi wanted to reassure the young people who were agitated
so he told them about integrative bills that would put Islamic law into
practice. Dr Sufi told the young people that these bills would be presented
to the current [session of the] People's Assembly in November.
As we make a note of this promise that was made by the speaker of the
People's Assembly--and we don't know the number of that promise because so
many statements have been issued and so many promises have been made--we

sincerely hope that this promise will be realized. November is not a far
way off.

The Responsibility of the Ruler

After trying to defend the delay of the People's Assembly in ratifying the
hills that would put Islamic law into practice, the speaker of the People's
Assembly did make a clear and profound statement at the end of this meeting.
he said, "A discussion about putting Islamic law into practice is mere

talk. Such application is the responsibility of those who enforce such laws."
He gave an example [of this] and said, "Any judge can now refuse to render

a verdict that is based on any law that contradicts Islamic law because under
the existing constitution such a law would be considered unconstitutional."

This statement promptly raises the following question: “Hho is responsible
for the fact that Islamic law has so far not been put into practice in Egypt?"
The answer is clear and simple.

The primary responsibility falls on the president of the republic, Muhammad
Anwar al-Sadat. He is the symbol of the state and the head of the govern-
ment. He can-if he were to place his prestige, his influence and his power
behind the issue of putting Islamic law into practice--accomplish much and

accomplish it sooner than many people think. Precedenta affirm that he can
do so.

There is no doubt that the People's Assembly can ratify the bills that would
put islamic law into practice during its current session. Apologies about
the fact that the Shari'ah Legislation Committees did not complete their
work are no longer acceptable.

The government, as represented by the prime minister and the ministers, can
begin immediately enforcing Islamic law in a broad area and in many matters
without waiting for the new laws. The government can issue administrative
orders for holding prayers during business hours in ministries, government
agencies. public sector companies, in the courts, in educational institutions
and in the universities. The government can also close restaurants during

the days of the month of Ramadan, [the month during which Hoslema are required
to fast from sunrise to sunset], and during the Friday noon prayer. It can
close the nightclubs on al-Haram Street, and it can forbid the broadcasting
of wanton songs and the showing of sexual movies and such other actions.

The elders, the scholars, the students and the missionaries of al-Azhar
can do much to put Islamic law into practice. A legal opinion, a speech or
an article that is written or delivered in diffidence is not enough.

There is no doubt that the courts can begin applying Islamic law immediately
without waiting for the new laws. They can refuse rendering verdicts that
are based on any law whose provisions contradict the provisions and the
teachings of Islam. Yes, a judge can refuse to grant interest because
interest Is usury. and usury is prohibited in Islamic law. [A judge can
do so] in spite of the fact that the civil law stipulates that interest
he paid. This is because the law in this matter is unconstitutional.

There was a time when an Islamic judge would find himself in a fearful
struggle between his conscience and his faith and between the stipulations
of the positive law whenever he had to render a verdict on a matter that
contravened Islamic law. This difficulty has now been renoved, thank God,
and a judge can now refuse to render a verdict according to those laws.

The Responsibility of the Press

instead of publishing love stories, romances and news about male and female
artists as well as actors and actresses, the press, in all its diversity and
variety, with its power. its control and its influence, can mobilize people;
it can amass efforts, and it can attract the attention of officials force-
fully and with determination to the application of Islamic law.

The rest of the media--and this is what the educated person and the
illiterate person listen to-can play a positive role in the application
of islamic law, instead of broadcasting wanton songs and showing cheap.
sexy movies. Dr al-Dhahabi, may God have mercy on his soul, did say.
“Television does demolish what the mosque builds."

Finally. the people--and chief amongst them are the young believers who are
students at the universities-~are the ones who have the primary right and

the major interest in the application of Islamic law. It is not enough that
the people express their desire and proclaim their unanimity in their demand
for the application of Islamic law. They must rather proclaim their deter-
mination and their insistence on this demand. They can exert pressure on their
representatives in the People's Assembly. on their ministers and on the

different agencies of government until their wishes are met and their request
is granted.

One can thus see that the entire nation, from the top to the foundation, is
responsible for the fact that Islamic law is not being applied. Let each

one of us. regardless of his position. do his duty and work seriously and
sincerely for the purpose of achieving.this noble goal. There is enough room
for everyone in this field of work and effort. Let no one think that pro-
crastination and the passage of time will make the people forget this demand
or give it up. Their insistence upon it will grow regardless of the cost.
"Allah has power to grant them victory" [The Pilgrimage: 44].

8592
050: $802
CRITICAL DEBATE ON NEW STUDENT ORDINANCE CONTINUES
Cairo AL-DA'HAH in Arabic Oct 79 pp 56-57

lArticle: I'Youth and University News: Debate on New Student Ordinance
Continues; the Ban Against Organizations That Are Established on Ideological

Bases Does Not Apply to Islamic Groups; Abolishment of Association Is Obvious
Challenge to Students"]

[Text] A person who has been following student activities in our univer-
sities this year has seen that Islamic missionary activity has been noticeable.
This activity took place despite obstacles and hindrances. Islamic groups
have attracted a sector of students that is not inconsiderable; these groups
continue to attract attention on the local and international scenes with their
reactions to significant events within the Islamic homeland. 0n the inter-
national scene western newspapers have underscored and demonstrated their
apprehension from the increase in Islamic activity in the universities of Egypt.
0n the local scene a series of events did begin, and the matter was taker to
court in what was called the events of the universities of al-Hinya and Asyut.
The courts rendered their verdict and exonerated Moslem youth from all the
charges that had been made against them.

The new student ordinance that was issued behind the backs of students abolished
the General Association of Students. What are the consequences of this?

th have the college associations been restricted? Do these incidents mani-
fest democracy? What can possibly happen if Egypt's students were represented
by the National Association of Egyptian Students in Iraq, which is attacking
Egypt, instead of by their own General Association? Is the abolish-eat of
Islamic activity in the university based on legal principles? He will try to
answer all these questions in this investigation that ALPDA'UAE is undertaking
to resume its discussion of the new student ordinance.

The Courts Speak

Hustnfa Farghali al-Shuqayri, a judge in South Cairo says, "Hhen we discuss
this matter from a legal standpoint, the new ordinance for the Student's
Association which stipulated a ban against the establishment of organizations
or bodies on ideological bases for the purpose of abolishing the activities
of Islamic groups does not apply to Islamic groups. This is due to the
following matters:

12
"lslamic groups are not associations or organizations in the legal sense of
an association or an organization. Islamic groups consist of a group of
young people who have committed themselves to an Islamic code of conduct

and to missionary work among others. The matter does not go beyond the
practice of religious rites and the revival of Islamic teachings in one of
society's sectors. This is the duty of all Moalema in society. The bonding
we see among the members of Islamic groups and the affection they have for
each other make some people think that these groups are associations or
organizations. These groups rather demonstrate the practical application of
the statement of God Almighty that 'Believera are brothers.’

"The fact that we are seeing Islmaic groups carrying out the duty of
enjoining kind deeds and proscribing reprehensible actions-—and this is
what led some to describe them as extremists and narrow minded--is merely

a commitment that these groups made to a statement by the messenger of God.
may God bless him and grant him salvation. The purport of the statement is
this: 'Let anyone who sees an objectionable act, change it; if he cannot

do so, he may speak about it; if he cannot do so, he can make the change in
his heart for this is the weakest demonstration of faith.‘ The messenger of
God, may God bless him and grant him salvation [also] said. 'The best holy
war is a word spoken against a tyrant.’

"Islamic groups do not practice their activity as self-sufficient organizations,
but rather as groups that grew out of the Cultural Committee. which is one of
the association's official committees."

The harvest of Years of Defeat

The numerous internal social, political or foreign problems that the nation
is suffering from are the harvest of years of the defeat and repression of
Islamic activity. In addition. tightening the grip around Islamic groups
will create a gap between them and officials. Widening this gap between
this broad base of Hoslem youth and the leadership is not in the interests

of this homeland because the young people of today are the leaders of the
future.

The Danger of Abolishing the Association

Muhammad Mahmud 'Abdallah secretary of the Committee on Religion and Society
at the General Association for Students and president of the Petroleum
Engineering and Mining Association in Suez says. "There is no country in the
world that does not have a general association representing its students. The
danger of abolishing the general association becomes clear if we knew that
Iraq has a group of students who call themselves the National Association for
the Students of Egypt. The significance of abolishing the General Student
Association lies in the fact that the National Association for the Students

of Egypt may be considered by international organizations the representative
of the student body in Egypt. Hhat would officials do in that case?

13
Abolishing the Legal Channel

Khalid Fikri, president of the Association of Medical Students at Cairo
University says, "If we were to look at the danger in the country of
abolishing the general association. we would find that the General Student
Association had begun to support different projects [such as] the student
transportation project and the women's Islamic dress code project. The
association was also dealing with subjects that are of interest to students
as well as university directors. The activity of the General Association

had been extended to include assistance and guidance to student activities
in secondary schools.

"The General Association was the only organization that could contact govern-
ment agencies and official institutions to voice the problems of students.

"The new student ordinance also restricts the activities of the Association
of University Students, and this will have a harmfuleffect on students'
spirits because students may come to an agreement about activities in the
university. and they may pursue these activities in the spirit of youth.

"Restricting the association--the Association of University Students-—diminishes
student activities in the different colleges. [In fact], these activities

may die altogether. Similarly, having student activities come under the

control of the president of the university would be considered interference

in the freedom of students, and this is objectionable."

But what about the college associations?
Restricting Freedoms

Muhammad Mahmud 'Abdallah in petroleum engineering and mining in Suez says,
"The new ordinance abolished the position of association president and
replaced it with that of association secretary. There is a difference in
competencies between the two positions. The president of the association
and also the supervisor of student affairs at the college had the right

to sign checks. The secretary of the association does not have the right
to sign checks, and this restricts the freedom of the associations."

Muhammad Mahmud 'Abdallah says, "The activities of the student associations
in the recent period have won the admiration of our fathers, the members of
the faculty. who have encouraged more of them. These activities which have
also won the approval of some students, have made the students wonder about
who is qualified to replace the Islamic groups in leading the associations
after this? The best example of the students' approval is their unanimity
in the elections in almost all the colleges. Had the members of Islamic
groups not been worth [of leadership positions], the large numbers of aware
students would have rejected them. They would not have found for themselves
a place among the students. The fact that this ordinance absolished the
association is an obvious challenge to the wishes of student groups."
Muhammad Mahmud 'Ahdallnh adds, "The new student ordinance gives the students
no authority. Members of the faculty and the dean have the authority. This
authority which was usurped from students by the ordinance and given to
members of the faculty may create friction between the students and faculty
members that only God would know about. when a student feels that he is not

qualified to be charged with a certain function. he will lose confidence in
himself.

"Finally. we say to those who are drawing up ordinances and legislating laws
to fear God [in dealing with] this homeland and its youth. Let them keep in
mind that as young people at the universities rally around Islam, they do not
do so from avacunm,or because they have established an association or an
organization. They do so because they are committed to speak the truth of
Almighty God: 'The true believers, both men and women, are friends to each
other. They enjoin what is just and forbid what is evil; they attend to their
prayers and pay the alms-tax and obey Allah and His apostle. On these Allah
will have mercy. He is mighty and wise' (Repentance: 71]."

8592
C30: 4802
HARMFUL CONSEQUENCES OF AGREE!!!” HITH ISRAEL DISCUSSED
Cairo AL-DA'HMI in Arabic Oct 79 pp 10-6

[Editorial by 'Umer al-Talmassni: "Those Jews Keep No Promises and Have
No Conscience"]

[Text] This is the prominent feature of those people; they cannot escape it
even if they themselves tried to be like other human beings in so far as
human emotions and human feelings are concerned. Here they to try hard to
be like other human beings. they can only achieve part of what they want

in this regard--if they truly want to--because this is how they are created.

Humanity is the concept that was burned in the perceptions of Jews. It

turned into ashes that were blown away by the wind not only in all the corners
of the world, but also outside the earth's atmosphere to become lost in the
abyss of the unknown and in the bottomless pits of space. The Jaws know

this about themselves, and they try to hide this behind a curtain of democracy
that they draw on the citizens of Israel who are eastern as well as western
Jews. They try to make the world believe that freedom, complete freedom,
exists nowhere, works nowhere or delights [people] nowhere but in Israel.

But regardless of the media skills it can su-on, regardless of its cunning
in hiding facts, regardless of its ability to falsify and to mislead, Israel
will not have influence over the laws of the universe whose systems have
established that time will reveal whatever men hide.

They themselves reveal their intentions little by little, sometimes
deliberately and other times inadvertently. Their intentions clearly indicate
to us that they are determined to achieve their editions whether or not

there is a peace treaty. This is because to them a promise is of no value
unless it serves their interest. Otherwise, they are always willing to
revoke in the afternoon, and even before noon, the promise they sealed early
that morning. Have we not seen the newspapers that were published on

August 5, 1979 after Camp David and the peace agreement, stating that the
Israeli government had announced that it was refusing the participation of
the PLO in any negotiations now or in the future? The Israeli government

also decided not to cooperate in any form with the UN peace keeping forces
in Sinai.

16
Israel Is Taking Liberties

Those are the people with whom we have made an agreement and with whom we
want to normalize relations. Hhat we are always reading is that Egypt wants
the Palestinians to have a part in the negotiations, but that Israel refuses
this adamantly now and in the future [even though] there is an agreement
between us and them. How can anyone in his right mind conceive of this
situation? if lsrael is taking such liberties, what should the position of
the Egyptian government be? How can the Egyptian government make everything
easy for the Jews, while they make everything complicated for it? Then we
are asked to think well of Israel and to be realistic although those who
oppose this treaty are the ones who are truly realistic. He ask God from

the bottom of our hearts that He spare us the evils and consequences of
this treaty.

Dietance From Them Is an Advantage

It is the best of blessings for us not to enter into any contracts with those
people regardless of the justifications, the circumstances and the surrounding
conditions. It is an advantage to be away from them. In order to avoid
having the vindication, the discovery or the promotion of my point of view,
that making promises to these people is futile, interfere [in this argument].
I will not allow myself to make an introductory statement in this regard, but
I will let others make such a statement instead.

In the newspaper AL—AKHBAR of 31 July 1979 Lt Gen Kauai Hssan "ali the
minister of defense announced that the [question of the] settlements
constituted a provocative action that did not serve peace. This was a
statement from a man who is responsible for protecting the homeland. The
significance of the word, provocative, is clear and evident. That is, first
of all, it is not a legitimate act; second, it is equivalent to a challenge;
third. it is contemptuous of the other party; fourth, it demonstrates
excessive conceit, arrogance and haughtiness; fifth, it shows that the
challenger is confident in his position; sixth, it denies what is being said
about the good intentions of Israel; seventh, it reveals Egypt's weak
position if Egypt were to pass over this challenge; and eighth, it is a

test of how far Israel can go in perpetuating such provocative action and
taking subsequent steps if the second party were to pass over such provo-
cation. Did Israel turn away from such provocative action after this
serious military announcement? hot at all.

How Can He Be Reassured?

Yes, not at all. The Israeli government announced that it refused to have
the PLO as a partner in any negotiations now or in the future (ALPABRAH,
Monday, 6 August 1979). It also decided not to cooperate in any way with
the UN peace keeping force in Sinai. Egypt is quite eager about the partici-
pation of the liberation organisation in the ongoing negotiations, and it

believes that this is one of the most important factors that would bring
about the success of these negotiations.

l7
But the second party to the peace treaty is adamant. determined and un-
equivocal in its refusal of Pm participation in the negotiations now or

in th future. How can these two antithetical opinions be reconciled. and how
can we be reassured that Israel really wants peace? How can we concede

that Israeli intentions are good especially since Israel refuses to cooperate
with the UN peace keeping force in Sinai in a manner that violates all rules
of decorum? what is the meaning of this refusal? Is Israel preparing for
something? Does it intend to betray and to surprise us? Don't these positions
impart to us a certain implication about this Israeli arrogance? Don't they
tell us that Israel will proceed in carrying out its asbitions without con-
sideration for international promises and human fundamentals?

ls mel ' s U l t imate Hopes

The most that Israel used to hope for is that the Islamic countries. or at
least one of them recognize it, even if the price of such recognition were
its return to the was borders. Israel has now achieved its ultimate
wishes; [it has won the recognition] of the strongest Islamic country.

but why is it not showing any consideration? th does it think that time
has given it peace and that material power in this world is the means for
realizing illegitimate ambitions? Although it hurts us that Israel has
taken this position. we hope that this blatant challenge to the dignity of
Moslems throughout the world will be an incentive to awaken Islamic chauvin-
ism to take action that would force Israel to keep its place. We hope that
it will be an effective cordial that would revive the feelings of Hoslems

for their religion and for championing and defending it so that all those who
have ambitions. wherever they may be, would know that the Moslems are still
free and proud. Small numbers will not keep Hoslems away from a holy war
even if the required cost for such a war were the lives of millions. There
is no doubt that it is noble and more consistent with the faith that ten
million Moslems live in freedom and honor protecting their homes and their
sacrosanct objects than one billion Hoslems live in disgrace. in serfdom and
in servility, trampled underfoot by those who had been plotting against their
religion ever since it came into existence.

We Do Not Engage in Underhanded Activities

We do not engage in underhanded activities against Israel as it does against
the entire world. But it is Dr Butrus Ghali who points out these notions

in a statement he made to the French newspaper, LE HATIN. This statement

was published by AL-AKHBAR on 3 August 1979. It indicated that Egypt may
change its strategy if the negotiations on autonomy on the Heat Bank and

the Gaza Strip did not lead to satisfactory results. Although we are facing
opposition regarding negotiating and making agreements with Israel, we find
it absolutely unacceptable that Israel assume this position with those who
trusted its good intentions and concluded a peace treaty with it. We believe
that the israelis will not fulfill any one of the articles of the peace treaty.
this position, and there are many like it, may truly and actually force
Egypt to change its strategy with those who keep no promise or covenant with

any human being.

18
Let me refer you to a statement that was published by Dr Ibrahim al-Bahrawi
and AL-AKliBAR on Tuesday, 16 August 1799 [sic]. It contained a good analysis
of Israel's position. "There is a growing conviction among international
forces and western parties that the road to ensure stability in the Middle
East lies in finding a peaceful settlement that includes a just and satis-
factory solution to the Palestinian question. This growing conviction is

as large as the different forms of Israel's narrow political vision. These
manifest themselves in its hopeless attempt to swim against the sweeping
current of a comprehensive solution in the area. Begin seems to be telling
himself that as long as we were forced to make territorial concessions in
Sinai, such a concession ought to be the price that would force the Americans
and the Egyptians to keep quiet about our intentions on the Heat Bank and
Gaza. Begin sent Carter a message after the Camp David meeting in which he
stated that the government of Israel will interpret and construe the terms.
Palestinians or Palestinian people, occurring in each paragraph of the

document [that establishes] the agreed upon framework of settlement. to mean
the Arabs of Palestine."

Although we do not agree with some of the expressions and tendencies that

are mentioned in Dr al-Bahrawi's statement, we think that he agrees with us

in general. The Jews that we knew before the peace treaty are the same after
the peace treaty. If we were to give them all of Sinai, the Suez Canal and
the al-Sharqiyah Governorete. they would not be satisfied [and deterred] from
pursuing their secret, public objective of exhuming the body of the messenger
of God. may God bless him and grant him salvation. from his grave and returning
to Khaybar and to aI-Hadinah to extirpate the Islamic religion and all Hoslems
from the surface of the earth. Anyone who thinks otherwise will be asked.
first and foremost. to examine his thoughts and to change them before posterity
and God, and before it is too late. The Jews will not trust a Hosiem even if
he were to swear on water and make it freeze or swear on the flames and make
them subside. This is because this is their nature: they lie, and they think
the whole world lies; they deceive, and they think the whole world deceives;
they dissemble. and they think the whole world flatters and dissembles. They
cannot help this because as the Koran says, "whenever they make a covenant.
must some of them cast it aside?" [The Cow: 100]. The whole world in
general and the Hoselma in particular must be keenly aware of this fact.
Hoslems must evaluate thier policy and their conduct with those Jews on this
basis to ensure our safety from what those swindlers have in store for us.

They Bear Us No Good Hill

Those Jews have no good will for their own race or their own Judaism. iiestern
Jews treat eastern Jews with extreme cruelty and contempt. The Israeli
government may be the most cruel government in the world. An article by

Dr nl-Bahrawi published in the Tuesday. 14 August 1979 issue of Al-AIOiBAR
newspaper stated that the Israeli government was one of the cruelest. the
most offensive and the most repressive systems of government in modern

times. Eastern Jews make up about 70 percent of those employed in the
Israeli Defense Army, and they carry out their military service. However, they
assume the lowliest and the basest of position. An Eastern Jewish woman

19
pruvlth-d several examples of confessions that were made under hrutul
lul'lJIl’r. ‘l‘hcy rcvrnl the falsehood of the Israeli government. Some

rabbis sent protests to Kurt Haidheim, stating that it was evident that

the Zionist government intended to internationalize and desecrate the unique
character of the Holy City. The memorandum also mentioned that devout

Jews were subject to severe and relentless punishments that were dealt to

them hv the forces of the Zionist police under the direct instructions of
llegl n ' 5 move rnment .

llow can we put our hands into the hands of people who are not even true to
the Jews themselves? They do not want personal glory: they do not want

to spread the Jewish faith; and they do not want to expand their own

terrain, as people think the ambitions of those Jews are. Not at all. They
want something else for which they have been planning for a long time. Time
after time and slowly they have been trying to attain it. They hate
Christianity just as much as they hate Islam because of the humiliation and
degradation they suffered from Christiana, but not from Moslems. They did

not forget the centuries of humiliation they suffered at the hands of the
llritlsh and the French during the Middle Ages and early in the Renaissance.
They did not forget any of this, but they have been slowly nurturing this
ancient humiliation until they should have the opportunity [to avenge them-
selves]. Although today they are seeking the aid of Christians against
Moslems, this is a stage of their horrible revenge. When, as they claim,
they do away with Moslems and their allies--and they will never achieve this,
and Huslvma will never be extirpated—nnd they arrive at this’itsge for which
they have been planning, they will turn against Christians and they will
destroy them with their diabolical, malicious ways that are unknown even

to the devil himself. This is the reality of their goal and the object of
their desire. They want God's chosen people to prevail over the world. It
is eastern Judaism that is publicizing to the world the horrors and the
atrocities of the Jewish government. It is publicizing to the world the fact
that the Jewish government is founded on tyranny, on torture, on racism and on
racial discrimination. Although Jews pretend to show respect for their
sacrosanct objects, some of them acknowledge that other Jews are trying to
desecrate them. 'me ill intentions of Begin became evident to some Jewish
rabbis who felt compelled to file complaints to Kurt Waldheim, the permanent
secretary general of the United National Organization. Those are the Jews

to whom we make promises, to whom we open the gates of our country, and with
whom we want to nor-alize relations.

Intentions and the Normalization of Relations

Come with me and let me point out to you the true intentions of Israel and
its ruler, Begin, regarding the normalization of these relations. [I will
refer you to] a statement that was made by Dr Butrus Gahli himself in an
interview that AL—AllRAli published on Tuesday, 21 August 1979. Dr Butrus
Chali says, "The statements made by Hoshe Dayan create difficulties and
obstacles." This is a statement by an Egyptian government official. Why
would Moshe Dayan create difficulties? Is it because his intentions about
the peace treaty are good? th would he create obstacles? Is it because
he wants matters to proceed on the course that was drawn up for then when

20
the peace treaty was signed? Not at all. For Israel. the peace treaty was
uni the ultimate thertlve. but It was rather a stage in the process of
realizing [its] greedy, illegitimate and irrational ambitions.

Then look at how the process of normalizing relations between Egypt and
Israel is proceeding. One of the means by which relations are to be
normalized is to simplify the measures that would enable Israelis to ente.
Egypt. The entry of Egyptians into Israel would be the other side of the
equation [and such entry would be granted], without favor or niggardliness.
But when was the Jews' treatment of others or of Jews like themselves based
on justice. equality and consideration of both parties' interests? It is
impossible. A Jew will not accept any transaction, whether it be commercial,
economic. political, social or military. wherein he does not have the upper

hand. At the same time a Jew strives for having the other party to the
transaction lose.

Dr Butrus Ghali says in the same interview that 242 Jews came to Egypt after
the treaty. Do you know how many Egyptians went to Israel in return for

this number? One Egyptian. Don't be surprised. It is not Israel that made
a mistake here, but rather the Egyptian government which accepted this
situation in its concern for normalizing relations. Does the normalization
0f relations mean that Israel reap all the benefits and Egypt reap none?

This position requires that the government of Dr Hustafa Khalil be questioned

this huge difference [in number] between those who enter the other's country
from the two governments? Hr Butrus Ghali goes on to add in the same inter-
view, "What is even more serious is the fact that Israel has created
administrative obstacles to prevent Egyptian ideas-newspspers, books.
records--from entering Israel." Israel is not satisfied with preventing

the entry of Egyptians into Israel for the purpose of normalizing the so-
called relations between them, but it goes beyond that to the extreme of
preventing Egyptian newspapers, books and tapes from entering Israel.

Once more. why do we accept this unfair and unequal situation? The imminent
danger to Egypt from an agreement with Israel becomes evident when we read
what Dr Butrus Ghali says in the same interview: "In spite of the fact that
we agreed that Egyptian and Israeli airplanes were not to be permitted to
fly between the two countries before relations were normalized, we are
surprised every few days with Israeli requests to fly and to land private

Israeli and other airplanes. This contradicts what has been agreed to and
is an attempt to impose a de facto situation.

Indications

Tell me the truth, Dr Butrus. how did you permit the publication of such an
interview? It has special meanings which we need not touch upon.

First of all, why did you permit an attempt to impose a de facto situation
on Egypt that was to Israel's advantage? Does this permission represent

21
impotence or consent? Hhat will people say about such a situation? The
government has been entrusted with the public's interest. and such a situ-
ation is not in Egypt's interest, and this is acknowledged by Dr Butrns.

Docs such talk constitute praise for the Egyptinngpvernmeut or is it criticism
or ll? 1 don't know. However, in the interests of the existing cabinet,

I believe that a convincing explanation for such conduct should be offered

to the people. I myself appreciate the factors that would place the govern-

ment of Egypt in such a position, but I do believe that death in defending our
homes w0uld be better than living in those homes in this manner.

Ur Muelafa Khalil, call upon the 60 million Egyptians to fight a holy war to
regain our rights. Let 30 million heroic, brave fighters die for this cause
so that 10 million can live the life of proud, free men who do not consent

to humiliation regardless of the price that must be paid to remove it and

to remove its fearful dangers. The conduct of Israel provides adequate,
legitimate justifications for us to turn away from the course of proceeding
with them on the peace treaty. They want this peace treaty to he a passe
partout through which they can realize all their ambitions. Although the Rest,
chiefly the United States. did praise our interest in peace, westerners will
respect us when we take the position of regarding as inexpensive everything
that we pay for a free and noble life; and when we prove that the heroes of
al—Quadisiyah, Hattin and 'Ayn Jalut did bring forth men who achieved what
they themselves had achieved before them. "You shall be bereaved of your
possessions and dear ones, and be subjected to the insults of the pagans and
of those to whom the Scriptures were given before you. But if you endure with

fortitude and guard yourselves against evil, you shall surely triumph"
[The Imrsns: 186].
CENTER FOR ISLAMIC RESEARCH, STUDIES DESCRIBED
Cairo ALPDA."A“ in Arabic Oct 79 p 62
[Article: "The Center for Islamic Research and Studies"]

lTextl Almost 3 years ago while preparations were being made for the

new format of AL-DA'HAH, the idea of establishing a center for Islamic
Research and Studies was adopted. Noble and blessed efforts were joined
closely with valuable experiences and sincere enthusiasm to complete the
project. Unexpected circumstances, however, and among them was the travel

or transfer abroad or to other areas of a group of those who were implementing
the idea and were completing the project, forced postponement of the project.
The plans. the lofty purposes and the goals of the idea did. however.

continue to live on in people's minds.

After AL—DA'HAH moved to its new location, the idea began to press itself
again especially since the im;4rtance and the significance of the center

as well as the extent to which it can be useful to Islamic thought on all
levels had become evident. The utility of such a center had become evident
through our sense of the dangerous ideas that were being thrust on the
intellectual scene. These ideas glorified falsehoods, spoke highly of
shamelessness and committed crimes against truths. These ideas attacked
the trudnand advocates on their own turf. Accordingly, attempts were begun
anew to forge the idea, to bring it into the realm of execution and to over-
come all the obstacles so that the objective can be achieved and the target
attained.

The truth is that the primary role in this matter, as it is in every matter,
depends upon young Moslems. The new stimuli that the project attained

until it became an entity were the result of the efforts, the sacrifices,
the donations and the grants of young people. The truth also is that these
stimuli were and will continue to be for the sake of God. Those who were
behind them seek nothing but to please God and to struggle for his sake.

Is not the presentation of true Islamic thought and its coemmnication to
people's minds and understandings in pure and unadulterated form so that all
other alien thoughts, all other imported theories and all other covered
deceptions would crumble an effort for truth and action for its sake?

23
A huge Responsibility

The Center for Islamic Studies and Research carries out its duties and is
aware of the tremendous responsibility that rests on it. Understood
correctly Islam is a comprehensive mission and a complete system that cannot
be divided into parts: religion and politics, sociology and economics,
faith and conduct, rites of worship and transactions.

True islamic thought must play its role in firmly implanting in people's
minds the correct features and the correct dimensions of the religion.

It is for this purpose that officials of the Center for Islamic Research
and Studies who understand its mission have established the goals for the
Center's mission. The following are among the Center's goals.

I. The Center will present the Islamic point of view candidly and clearly
in the face of all the problems that are being raised.

2. The Center will carry out Islamic research and studies in all matters
that pertain to the Islamic world in our contemporary meaterial world.

3. The Center will provide information and news pertaining to the Islamic
world and to the entire world. It will rise above the local level to that

of the greater Islamic world, and it will becone profoundly and genuinely
familiar with what is happening all over the world.

4. The Center will oppose the deceptions that are encroaching upon Islam,
the imported ideas, the false theories that promote lies and the cheap
attempts to devise intrigues against Islam and its advocates.

5. The Center will provide advice and counsel to those who are in charge
in the Hoslem world.

The Center's System of Operations

The nature, the course and the methodology of the studies at the Islamic
Center are Islamic. Their purpose is to offer practical studies and
research with an Islamic point of view on all local and worldwide con-
temporary issues, problems, struggles and developments that are taking
place in the Islamic world and in the entire world. The Center has drawn
up a plan of action that is operated within a framework. The following are
among the features of this plan:

1. [There will be] an annual book about the Islamic world in all its
aspects. It will present the problems of the Islamic world, defend its
causes, tie its parts together, change the Hoslems' view of their world
as a single unit, and make an effort to destroy local and national con-
siderations.

2. [There will be] a study of hostile forces.
3. [There will be a study of] the superpowers, their policies and their
objectives.

4. [There will be a study of] contemporary notions and values and their
place in Islam.

5. [There will be a study of] the problems of the age.

6. [There will be a study of] the position of Islamic jurisprudence on
surrounding and impending phenomena.

7. [There will be a study of] theories and ideas.

8. [There will be a study of] Islamic revolutions and other such subjects
whose research and presentation the Center finds necessary.

The Center will present its studies briefly on the pages of AL-DA'HIB or
in detail in pamphlets, books, articles and reports in style that would,
God willing, be beneficial and meet the objective.

The Center for Islamic Studies and Research, which is temporarily located

at the offices of Al-DA'HAH Magazine announces that all areas and fields

of research and study are open to all Hoslels who are striving to serve
their religion and to demonstrate its correct features and its genuine
attributes. The Center is pleased that it be the agent that brings people's
efforts together and that people's efforts be brought together through

all the research centers and through all those who are researching the

field of Islam for the purpose of achieving the cannon objective and
attaining the single goal. God grants success.

8592
630: 4802
lsANl—SADR CALLS FOR CARTER lNH‘IATIVE T0 DEFUSE CRISIS
LD131607 Paris LB HONDB in French 10 Nov 79 p 3 LD

[Interview with Foreign Minister Bani—Sadr: "Hashington Must Take the
Initiative in Ending the Crisis"--Tehran, 8 November]

[Excerpt] Tehran. [Question] Meanwhile, what steps do you plan to take
in the present trial of strength with the United States? Do you envisage
breaking off diplomatic relations or imposing an oil embargo?

[Answer] At the moment such measures would be premature. Having sparked
off the crisis by admitting a criminal-~the former shah--into its terri-
tory. it is up to the United States to take the initiative in ending the
crisis. The United States does not want to hand over the shah to us
alive because if we were to put that tyrant on trial his revelations
would spark off the scandal of the century--the corrupt and bloody

regime which the Americans installed in order to better plunder our
country. Horeover, we decided yesterday to publish the documents from
the secret archives which have fallen into our hands.

[Question] Do you not think that your cause would be better served if
you saved the lives of the hostages and, better still, released them?

[Answer] Contrary to what some people have claimed, there is no ques-
tion of executing them. Their release depends on the United States. In
present circumstances, no Iranian Government whatsoever would be in a
position to take such a decision unilaterally. The students seized the
U.S. Embassy without consulting with any of the country's authorities--
whether the Imam. the Revolutionary Council or the government--who sup-
ported them subsequently. Furthermore, they rightly enjoy prodigious
popularity in the country. In the interests of all parties concerned
President Carter must immediately take an inithnive liable to satisfy
the Iranians.

680: 6900

26
FRENCH INITIATIVE HOOTED 1N HOSTAGB CRISIS

L0131409 Paris FRANCE-801R in French 13 Nov 79 p 7 LD

[Article by Francois Luizet: "Khomeyni Rejects Mediations of PLO, Pope"]

[Excerpts] Tehran-Barly Saturday afternoon the'Swedish and Syrian
ambassadors and the French and Algerian charges d'affaires went into the
0.5. Embassy to meet the hostages. In the absence of Ambassador Raoul

Deiaye. who is at present in Paris, it was Charge d'Affaires Andre-Louis
Amigues who represented France.

On Sunday it was rumored in Tehran that he had met with 0.5. Charge
d'Affaires Bruce Laingen who is still on the third floor of the Iranian
Foreign Ministry under the Islamic guards' "protection."

France Can Play A Role

The French Enbassy strongly denied the rumor; nonetheless, sale people
here think that a French initiative cannot be ruled out. I say initia—
tive and not mediation since mediation implies negotiation and Iran does
not intend to negotiate.

On Sunday morning I spoke to Mr Bani-Sadr in that connection: "France can
certainly play a role by asking the Americans to agree to hand over the
shah to us." he told me. '1ioreover, that is what I pointed out to the
European ambassadors I received Saturday."

C50: 4900
KIIOMEYNI SEEN UNITING ISLAM, OIL FOR HOLY WAR
Madrid ABC in Spanish 21 Oct 79 pp l5, l7, 18
[Article by Antonio Alferez]

[Text] They extract more than half of the world's oil and because
of the black gold, they have money and power. Their petrodollars
shore up--or could torpedo in 2b hours--the stock markets of London,
Paris and New York. They constitute an "unma" (world community) of
750,000 faithful who invoke God in Russian, Chinese, Persian, Turkish.
French...and, of course, Arabic. This community has found a new
prophet, Khomeyni, who proclaimed some weeks ago: "The Holy War is
underway and will not stop until the ultimate victory of our militias
and the establishment of universal Islamic power."

An almost 80-year old ascetic with a stern face and an inscrutable glance
was able to overthrow an imperial monarch with two millenia of history
behind him. Hohammed Reta Pahlevi was unseated by the "Ayatollah,"

Al Ozma Haj Seyyed Ruhollah al Husssvi a1 Khomeyni, which in English
would mean something akin to "prominent symbol of God," "descendant of
the prophet" and'tod'a representative on earth."

In I963, shortly after being named "great ayatollah" of Qom, Khomeyni
began his lengthy battle against the shah. Some months before, the
youthful new president, John Kennedy, his feet perched on the desk in
his office at the Hhite House, rudely gave the Iranian emperor this

piece of advice: "Your Majesty ought to do something to put an end to
feudalism in Iran."

The shah put Kennedy's advice into practice and in I963 began the so-
called "white revolution," which focused on modernizing industry, handing
over lands to peasant farmers and carrying out an intensive literacy
drive. The modernization was opposed by Khomeyni, but the shah was
implacable. Police agents disguised as Huslim theologians drugged
Khomeyni, wrapped him in a rug and sent him by plane to Turkey.

28
The Altar Beats the Throne

During Khomeyni's l5 years in exile, the shah successively personified

an irresistible rise and a clamorous fall. Rezs Pahlevi's ambitious plans
gained particular momentum when crude oil prices soared in December

I973. Iran, the world's second largest exporter of oil, began to fill

its coffers at breakneck speed. Owing to the quality of their equipment,
the Iranian Armed Forces were to become the world's fourth best fighting
unit. During the 2,000& anniversary of the Persian Empire the shah
staged the Persepolis Festival, blind with the "Cyrus complex."
Hashington hoped that Rezs Pahlevi would become the policeman of the
region, but he had even more ambitious plans.

The foundations of the new lrsnisn empire were, however, too weak.

A person would have to be quite short-sighted, like Carter, to assert,
as the American president did on New Year's Eve in i977 st Nievarsn
Palace in Tehran: "Your country is an island of stability in one of
the world's most unstable regions."

The country had not been able to assimilate so much disorderly progress
in such a short time. No one, except the speculators, was prepared
to make the "big leap." Then came the frustrations, discontents and
the first disturbances. The shah had been applying the two basic
formulas used by non—democratic rulers to shore up their governments:

-—Enrich your people, and they will thank you for it (s 20d century
principle);

--Encourage the emotional, nationalistic ritual (l9m century principle).

Neither of the formulas ultimately worked out in Iran. And while the
shah saw his throne crumbling, Khomeyni was setting in motion his fifth
column: the Muslim clergy. Paraphrasing a historic saying, someone
said this about Iran: "Religion is the power, not the opium, of the
people." The Muslim spiral succeeded in overthrowing a powerful
emperor. The extraordinary strength of the Iranian clergy is based on
180,000 "mullahs" (those who reveal the doctrine of the Koran). Above
them are the "rowskbus" (clergymen), "Halts“ (preachers), "pishnsmans"
(those who lead the prayers on Fridays), "hojstes-eslsm“ (theologians)
and the "ayatollahs" at the pinnacle of power. In Iran there are
80,000 mosques and 300 seminars with more than 70,000 students.

Someone has observed that whereas there is l doctor for each 13,000
inhabitants in Iran, there is 1 religious minister for each 183 faithful.

The Power of the Nosque

This extensive and well-organised clergy is even more effective because
of its traditional influence and economic power. Every Shiite believer

29
must hand over one-fifth of his earnings to the mosques, which thus
take in some 3 billion pesetas a year. The Shiite clergy are also
the country's largest landowners, even surpassing Reta Pshlevi when he
was on the throne.

The mosque had hoped to gain veto power but in the end it achieved
everything: absolute power. Many thought that after his return Khomeyni
would move back to the sacred city of Qom and devote himself exclusively
to theological tasks. This has not been the case, because although there
is a government in Tehran, it is, in reality, a crude pretense. The

real power lies with the Ayatollah and his circle at Qom. In a way,
Khomeyni is devoting himself to "theological" tasks: he is prepared to
make Iran the first Islamic republic in accordance with a tbeocratic
model. Alcohol, modern music, prostitution and drugs have been outlawed;
1.0 publications have been closed down, and movie theaters have almost

no audiences because of the films that they are forced to show.

Twenty percent of the work force is jobless; inflation this year will
hit 60 percent; labor costs have risen 105 percent, and every month the
country urgently needs 100,000 tons of 0.8. wheat.

When the shah fell, thousands of radical Iranian students (who had been
sent to various universities around the world on scholarships granted,
strangely enough, by Reza Pahlevi himself) returned and soon became
disconsolate over the country's scant freedoms and the total lack of
jobs. Thousands of women felt a similar disenchantment. They had
taken such an active part in the demonstrations against the shah, and
now instead of their status improving under Khomeyni. they were
relegated to second-class citizenry.

To all of these dissatisfied people Khomeyni issues the following
warning: "You will be wiped off the map." This is not rhetorical
exaggeration. Almost 500 persons have been brought before the firing
squads after very suIIIary proceedings headed up by Islamic committees.
In the wake of the overwhelming ni-ber of yes votes in the referendum
on the Islamic constitution, Khomeyni has been even tougher: "The
people have voted in favor of the Islamic Republic. Hhoever fails to
obey shall be annihilated."

Neurotic Interpretation of the Law

Khomeyni is not overly endowed with political imagination. Two books
that he wrote more than a decade ago and whose first appearance went
totally unnoticed have just been published in Paris. The two show a
violent, uncultured and xenophobic prophet, a narrow-minded and almost
neurotic interpreter of Muslim law. These books constitute evidence
that as long as l0 years ago Khomeyni had established the political
groundwork of what he is now putting into practice: "The Islamic
government is the government of divine law above the people; sovereignty
comes exclusively from God, and those who have a perfect knowledge of
the law officially exercise it. To obey the imams is merely to obey
God himself." Moving on to a different topic, Khomeyni's books show

a man obsessed with thr unclean. lle devotes more than 15 articles to
the "fundamental" questions of how to urinate, defecate and clean one's
sexual organ and anus. He sets forth an entire system of casuistry
(the description of which is half naive, half scatological) regarding
how to cleanse oneself of feces, blood, urine and sperm. The
casuistry regarding cases of bestiality, incest and other deviations

is also crazed.

All of this has to a large extent shattered Khomeyni's prestige, and
one expert observer of developments in Iran, former Prime Minister
Sapur Bakhtiar, has given the Ayatollah's regime 6 months. Re fear that
Bakhtiar, a Hestern-educated politician currently residing in Europe,
has been influenced by the ambiance of Paris and London, from where
Khomeyni can be regarded somewhat erroneously as a power-hungry "Islamic
Sovonarola" with a politically obsolete ideology. But this is not the
mood in the Muslim world, and when Khomeyni asserts that "we Muslims
area single family, even though we live under different governments

and in different regions," hundreds of millions of people are stirred,
from the coasts of the Sahara on the Atlantic to the Indonesian archi-
pelago in the Pacific.

The Failure of the Reforaists

The power of Islam has always had a political and military dimension.
When the Egyptian Army crossed the Suez Canal during the early hours
of the I973 Yom Kippur War, Sadat's soldiers shouted the legendary
"Allah u Akhbar" (God is great), and coanentators extolled it as the
greatest Arab victory since Saldino (the conqueror of the crusaders!).
Politicians have always intelligently used religious power in the
Islamic world. Thus, the father of Pakistan, Jinnah, manipulated the
hopes and fears and millions of Muslims to break up the British
viceroyship in India. Decades ago, a Turkish politician utilized
religion as an adversary that had to be cut away from the state;
Ataturk secularized Turkey in his yearning to modernize the country.
Islam, which in its age of splendor had been in the vanguard of
philosophy, the arts and economics, seemed to be an obsolete model
incapable of vying with the christian West or the Marxist East.

Modernization programs tempted many Muslim leaders, who were aware that
the Islamic religion "had given everything to God and nothing to
Caesar" (the state). Tunisia and Algeria are examples of this
modernization, to cite the cases of two countries with quite different
political bents. The ultimate results of these "modernisationa" have
not been too spectacular, and the most that the Islamic countries

have achieved is a poor copy of the Hestern model.

31
nightly or wrongly, it is obvious that this old, black-turbaned
ayatollah has put an end to the age of the Ataturks, Burguibas and
hnumctlicncs. It is a return to the source. Khomeyni's image as seen

on so many walls in Cairo, Algiers, Tunis or Tripoli is a reality that
ought to give us cause to reflect. "He are going to destroy the vestiges
ur the west, which have only ruined us, and build Mohamed's country,"
Khomeyni says. And 700 million Islamic believers seem to be following
the rallying cry: in Cairo, college youths have requested separate
classrooms for the sexes in their departments; in Tunis, gangs of devout
young Muslims are waging a public battle against pornography in movie
theaters and magazine stands; in Turkey, secular funeral processions

are attacked; in Malasia, aroused crowds force the government to
de-sanctify 30 Hindu temples; in Afghanistan, the regime, which is a loyal
ally of Moscow, is teetering because of nationwide opposition to a
secular, atheist government...1'he Kremlin is monitoring this Islamic
spiral with concern: 22 percent of the Soviet Union's population
practices the Muslim religion, and at the current demographic growth
rate. this conunity will make up one-third of the Soviet population

by the end of the century.

A Mosque in Regent's Park

The Christian West has dominated Islam for the last two centuries, both
economically and culturally. Today, the Islamic conmmnity is beginning
to awaken and reject the Western model, its hierarchy of values and its
culture. From now on, we will have to take into account the Islamic
community between the Heat and the East. But to what extent? Even
though it produces two-thirds of the petroleum exported to the West,

the Islamic world rests, for the moment, on flimsy foundations: the

CNP of the 29 countries that are officially Muslim accounts for only

5.“ percent 0‘ the "0f” GNP. some $400 billion, approximately equal

to France's GNP. Some 80 percent of the Islamic community, which is
now returning to its roots, is illiterate (better or worse for Khomeyni's
plans?).

In a corner of Regent's Park in London, the finishing touches are being
put on a splendid-looking mosque that almost all of the Muslim countries
cooperated in building and that cost 500 million pesetas. It is the
first major Islamic sanctuary erected on European soil since the

Alhambra in Granada during the 13% and lluh centuries. 'I'he SO-meter tower
that rises above the beautiful London park is a graphic symbol that

a new force has emerged in the complicated structure of world power.
Khomeyni is the new prophet. The scope of the Islamic awakening is

still a question mark.

8763
C50: [aloIO
MNl-SADR BERNIE BAZARGAN ADHINIS'I'RA'I‘IGI
Tehran KEYllAR in Persian 15 Sep 79 p ll

[Text] 'Abdolhassan Bani-Sadr, a member of the Revolutionary Council and
a member of the Council for Higher Study of Basic Lav, spoke at a meeting
held at Yazd in honor of the late Ayatollah Taleqhani. lie also praised

Taleqhsni before tens of thousands of people in the city's Friday Mosque.

At the meeting, Bani-Sadr strongly attacked the Bazargan government, which
he called disorganized.

"As far as the government, the Revolutionary Council and the Council of
Experts are concerned, until we have the firm support of the Iranian people
and are masters of our own fate, we shall face continuing problems. If we
continue to follow the present policy, our revolution will end up in a

quagmire, just like the previous regime. Therefore, put aside your doubts
and get down to work."

Responding to a question from the audience about the role of the Revolutionary
Council, Bani -Sadr replied that "the government and the Revolutionary Council
exchange members, with five members of each belonging to the other--I am
supposed to be one of them, but I do not go to government meetings. I think
that this relationship slows down the Revolutionary Council's work. Still,
the Council is an independent body. Do.not think that no work at all is
accomplished; yesterday the government sent 20 new bills to the Revolutionary
Council. Nevertheless, things should be better than they are. It is the
same disorganization that I am talking about; the goverment lacks a firm
foundation on which to base its work. I said the same thing to the prime
minister. I told him that first he had said that the banks face the
revolution with ruin, then later he said that the same banks should be
nationalized. It is because we are not now in the realm of ideology that

I say that the banks should be nationalized. Truly, our economy has less
than 20 years to live under the government's current policies, before the

oil revenues stop flowing in. However, we have an opportunity to build an
Iran that is capable of living on. When the government is disorganized and
lacks clear objectives, problems arise."
annl-Sndr said the following about the prime minister: "What is needed in
the nuvermnt is organization and a sense of purpose. I believe that the
government wants to preserve the foundations of the Pshlsvi government,
only refnrming them, and this is the source of the difficulties between it
and the Revolutionary Council, with the result that it has become blunted
and lust efficiency. Now, in any case, there is a third body, a temporary
body set up to codify the basic law, after which it will be changed."

Asked why he did not accept a position in the government, Bani-Sadr replied
that "if one belongs to a group, one is obliged to defend its collective
actions and, if one finds oneself in a ainority, accept it and try to
convince the others that one is right. I would probably find myself in

the minority 90 percent of the time. This is not to say that I should also
work outside the Revolutionary Council. Of necessity, I ought to defend the
letter, because I am part of it and because it and because its existence

is preferable to its nonexistence. My views are fundamentally different
from Bazargan's. His government, which is disorganized when it ought to

be organized, ought in my opinion to be replaced by another body. 'Reform'
is out of the question. I hope that a truly revolutionary governaent will
he set up in the near future."

892i
C80: 4906
[Tiextu7 Two new posts have been created in the cabinet. Roving Minister
assumes responsibility for supervising the internal affairs of the provinces.

Names of New Ministers

Engineer Hehdi Bazargan, Prime Minister of the Provisional Government of the
Islamic Republic of Iran, reshuffled his cabinet yesterday. The following
appointments were made in this cabinet reshuffle: Dr Hostsfa Chamran-Minister
of Defense; Engineer 'Ali Akbar Mo'infar-Hiniater of Oil; Engineer 'Ezntollnh
Sahabi-Minister of State and Supervisor of the Plan and Budget Organization;
Dr Hnsan Habibi-Acting Minister of Culture and Higher Training; Mohammad

'Ali Reja'i—Acting Minister of Education; 'Ali Bspahbodi-Acting Minister of
Labor; Dr Yadollah Sahabi-Hinister of State for Training and Research;

Dr Daryush Foruhatm Roving Minister; and Boseyn Bani Asadi-Hiniatar of State
for Executive Affairs. '

Engineer Hehdi Basargan, Prime Hinister of the Provisional Government of the
lslnmic Republic of Iran, sent a message following his cabinet reshuffle
yesterday. The text of the Prime Hinister's message is as follows:

"Hy Dear Pellow-Countrymen,

"Although it is Friday afternoon and a holiday, and admittedly administrative
matters should not be discussed, as you know, for this cabinet, and for many
of my colleagues, both those whom we have selected and have assembled from
far and wide, and those who had been in government service previously and
have assumed responsibilities and jobs, the issue of Friday being a holiday
and such things do not matter much. For many of us, not even night and day
matter. Therefore, according to the old proverb that says, 'whenever you take
a fish from the water, it is fresh.‘ so, too, I want to set forth for you

my information on this matter which is governmental and administrative in

35
nature and is of great interest to you. The matter concerns the cabinet
n-shurllo wlllcli. after the lengthy studies conducted for some time past and

the changes that have taken place. must be reported to my fellow-countrymen

and to the employees. These names and these individuals were submitted to the
[man two days ago and, tomorrow (today). too, in accordance with the invitation
that has been sent. they will be introduced to the cabinet and the Revolutionary
Council. A number of the changes result from several resignations of my
colleagues. necessitated by various reasons. either illness or exhaustion.

other jobs or other responsibilities, and also new needs and problems or the
solution of problems which subsequently we encountered in this form.

"ln total. 1 must present six ministerial posts and, tomorrow (today), they
will he submitted for approval to the Revolutionary Council. Changes in
ministerial posts and their duties will affect three posts." “.3. the Prime
Minister then identified the new ministers as follows: Minister of Defense-
Dt Mostafa Chamtan; Minister of Oil-Engineer 'Ali Akbar Mo'infar; and because
the Plan and Budget Organization post will be vacant, Minister of State and
Supervisor of the Plan and Budget Organization-Engineer Eratollah Sahabi;
Acting Minister of Culture and Higher Training-Dr Basan Habibi; Acting
Minister of Education-Mohhamad 'Ali Reja'i, who has been serving as supervisor
for the past two weeks; Acting Minister of Labor-Mr 'Ali Espahbodi; Minister
of State for Training and Research-Dr Yadollah Sahabi; Roving Minister-

Mr Daryush Foruhar; and Minister of State for Executive Affairs-Engineer
Hoseyn Bani Asadi. (Note: The Plan and Budget Organisation job had always
been without rank; now it has Minister of State rank.) Generally, as I have
said. the world is nothing but flux and change, and life and living is
nothing but motion. These cabinet changes are normal and natural, especially
for a country that has carried out the biggest revolution, at least in its
history, if not in the history of the world and that revolution. i.e., the
upheaval and upset. is accompanied by more changes. During the provisional
period and the transition. these fluctuations and changes not only do not arise
from chaos and weakness, rather. they are a sign of attending to problems

and overcoming difficulties. I will submit to my dear brothers and sisters

a brief explanation regarding two of the new ministerial posts. One is the
Ministry of 011. Up to now, we have not had a Ministry of Oil in Iran. He had
the iran National Oil Company. i.e., after the nationalization of oil; we had
the National Petrochemical Industries Company; and we had the Iran National
Gas Company. Of course, the latter two, gas and petrochemicals, came into
existence much later. After the Consortium Agreement (a consortium is many
similar and affiliated companies that receive nourishment from the same
source), and prior to the time of the deceased Mossadeq, was a treaty that
was devised by the English. According to this treaty. we do not have

many rights. After the natimslisation and the coup d'etat, the consortium
became this single, independent and separate entity and, actually, it was
under the supervision of the Shah, and the Chairman of the Board of Directors
and the Board, itself, were appointed by and tool: orders from the Shah alone.
_. r.uuullﬂs countries haVv a position in the world and play an essential
role. both with respect to producing energy and the effect that has on the

deserved importance to us, both in a positive, useful. and essential sense
and in a negative sense with the harm. damage, and difficulties it causes for
the country. The idea of an Oil Ministry is only natural and this idea was
first broached in the Council of Ministers five months ago. I. myself,

established and it will include these three conpanies for the present, and per-
haps later. it will also include mines and other companies. These three

that this will occur. a portion of their activities that have a technical
and management aspect will become. technically and economically, companies

As for the post of Minister of State, I can say that this, too, is a matter
that had been raised beginning in the third month of the government because
the provisional government did not in any way confine and restrict its interest
and attention to the capital, contrary to what some people thought and said.
From the very first day. the government's attention was on the more remote
provinces because they Here more deprived and fewer resources had been
affairs of the provinces, especially the most deprived provinces. Fortunately,
now In.- has been designated. Mr Daryush Foruhar has been appointed to this post.
of course. this is not a ministry that has for itself two floors of offices.
an army, and a school. No other ministries are mobile. The departments, too,
are mobile. and the responsibilities, too, are specified. The Department of
Education, for example, in Senandaj, is subordinate to the Ministry of
Education and the governor is subordinate to the Ministry of Interior. This
roving minister, however, as I proposed in Monday's session of the Council
of Ministers and as was approved, basically will designate from each ministry
nne deputy and one informed, experienced and empowered director-general. These
people will form a committee which will travel to the provinces en masse, or
in whatever number is deemed necessary, and there, on the spot, this committee
will study the problems and difficulties, both those submitted by the people
and those submitted by the subordinate departments, themselves, because, con-
trary i'o the accusations being leveled against them (and some people are very
unkind). it is not true that they do not want to work and that the atmosphere
of the departments, especially in the provinces, is an atmosphere of dis-
interested idleness. They, too, have financial, technical. and managerial
problems. etc., and this comittee will provide a link with several ministries.
We saw this problem during last Sunday's trip to Khuzistan. 1n liliuziatan, the
governor general had assembled all of the department heads and directors
general in the municipal hall and they discussed their problems and difficulties
and everyone demonstrated great interest and the utmost sense of responsibility.

How much better and sounder this is. because their requests and problems will
he comunicated to the ministries.

"These are the decisions that were pondered and, God willing, and of course.
after obtaining the permission of the Imam, our high-ranking leader of the
revolution. we will take action in the easiest way. May the grace and favor
of God, the cooperation and interest of the people and the backing of the
local people be such that we will be able to steer the prosperous and hopeful
ship of state through this rough and stormy sea of the world and Iran to safe,
happy. and prosperous shores."

Biographies of the New Ministers

Engineer 'Ezatollah Sahabi, Minister of_ State and Supervisor of the Plan and
Budget _Organization, was born in 1309 _/__ 21 March 1930-20 March 1931 _/ and, in
1331 / 21 March 1952— 20 March 1953 _I, he graduated from the Technical College
at Tehran University. Upon entering the university, he joined the Islamic
Students Society and he was considered one of the society's most active members.
in the year 1332 l- 21 March 1953-20 March 1954 _I, when the National Resistance
Movement was formed, Sahabi joined that organization and because of this he
was imprisoned twice. He was dismissed from his government job (he was an
employee of the National Bank) and he began working free-lance, but he re-
mained active in Islamic societies. In 1360 l— 21 March 1961-20 March 1962 _,7
when the Iran Freedom Movement Society was formed, Sahabi joined and. while
carrying on activities for this organization, in 13102 L— 21 March 1963-

20 March 196lo_l he was sentenced to prison. After his release from prison,

38
Sahnbl began to cogperate with and assist the active organizations of that
llmc. until I330 I 2| March 1971-20 March 1972_/ when he was imprisoned for
the [nurth timw and was sentenced to an 11-year term. The new Minister of
State and Supervisor of the Plan and Budget Organization was released from

prison along with_ other fellowaighters in the month of Aban 1357 I 23 October-
21 November 1978_/.

Dr Chamrau-Minister of Defense

Dr Mostafa Chamran. the new Minister of Defense. previously held the post of

Deputy Prime Minister for Revolutionary Affairs and he was among the active
members of the government involved in the Kurdistan events.

Dr Chamran was born in 1310 I 21 March 1931-20 March 1932 _/ and he spent his
Middle School and College years at Tehran University. He then left for
America to continue his studies. Chamran began his political activities with
the National Movement and, during the attack on the National Movement. he
was arrested along with 86 people. among them Dr Shari' ati and Taher Ahmadzadeh.
I'hen, along with Dr Yazdi and _Ghotbzadeh. he founded the Islamic Society of
America and Europe. in 1342 I_ 21 Marchl963-20 March 1964 _/, he went to Egypt
and Joined the guerrilla fighting. In 1970, he left America with his family
and went to Lebanon. He is one of the founders of the Anal Movement which.
in fact. had been the military branch of the Movement of the Deprived. He
returned to Iran after the revolution.

Daryush Foruhar-Roving Minister

Daryush Foruhar. the new Minister of Labor Ifsic_7, began big political
activities in earnest in 1327 I 21 March 1948-20 March 1949_ I. In that year.
he ,along with several other people, formed the Pan-Iranist Party; but, later.
in 1329 I 21 March 1950-20 March 1951 _/, Foruhsr separated from the Pan-
iranists —and established the Iran Peoples Party, which was based on Pan-
lranism, and he served as its leader.

During Dr Mohammad Mossadeq' a campaign, Poruhar supported Mossadeq' s Rational
Government. In 1332 I_ 21 March 1953—20 March 1956 _I, he was wounded and
hospitalized.

During the Iranian people's struggles of recent years. Foruhar was imprisoned
on several occasions.

Until a few months ago. Foruhar had served as the National Front spokesman;
but. after he was appointed Minister of Labor and Social Afgairs, he re-
signed as the National Front spokesman. On 28 Ordibehesht I 18 May_]. he
severed his cooperation with the National Front.

Mabibi-Acting Minister of Culture and Higher Training

"asan Habibi was born in Tehran and pursued his intermediate studies at the
Polytechnic Institute. Later,he was admitted to the university and he obtained

39
a doctorate in the field of law. He was actively involved with PEYAM-E
DANESH.IU which in those days reflected the views _of the National Front, and

he was a number of its editorial hoard. in 1363 L 21 March 1966—20 Mar«h i965_ /
hu- Ht'nl to France and «ontinued his education in the field of legal

aucinlnyy. In l’nris. the [nan Khoneini entrusted to hin the drafting of the
prellnlnnry text of the draft constitution.

In addition to political activities. Habihi is considered one of the
proninent intellectuals.A few of his works and translations are cited below:

I. DlALECTlC (translation)-written by George Govarich
2. LEGAL SOCIOLOGY (translation)-written by Georg Govarich
3. Social Reports (translation)~written by George Govarich

4. he has also written a gra-nargsnd the compilation of the collected works
of the martyred militant. Dr 'Ali Shari'atg took place under his supervision.

Ho'iufnr-Minister of Oil

Engineer 'Ali Akbar Mo' infar, Minister of the new Ministry of Oil, previously
was Minister of State and Supervisor of the Plan and Budget Organization.

Mo' iufnr was born in Tehran in 1307 l 21 March 1928-20 March 1929 _/ and he
completed his studies for a licentiate degree in the field of road and
construction engineering at Tehran University. Later, in Japan. he earned

his doctorate in the field of road and construction engineering and became

an expert in seismology.

The new Minister of Oil previously was a professor at the Technical College.
advisor to the Office of the Technical Assistant of the Plan Organization.
and Chief of the Office of Technical Research and Standards. Mo'infar is
also a senior expert in the Ministry of Justice.

Espahbodi-Minister of Labor and Social Affairs

'Abdul 'Ali Espshbodi, the new Minister of Labor and Social Affairs, was _born
in Mashhad in the lonth of Shahrivar 1318 L_ 23 August-22 September 1939 _l.

Me pursued his higher education at the Law College in the field of political
science. He later received a doctorate in econoaics from Tehran University.

Espnhbodi's first government job was in the Ministry of Housing and City
Planning, but he subsequently joined the private sector.

in addition to his work experience, the new Minister of Labor had been a
political prisoner for a while.
New Minister of Labor: "Unemployment Hill Be Eliminated; Labor Law Hill Be
Revised"

'Abdul 'Ali Espahbodi, the new Minister of Labor of the Provisional Government
of the islamic Republic. who was appointed to this post yesterday by

Engineer Mehdi Bazargan, in his first conversation with KEYHAN, said that the
Labor Law will be revised. He added that the law will be revised in such a
way that the rights of workers and employers alike will be preseved.

The new Minister of Labor and Social Affairs said with regard to increasing
the level of employment and solving the unemployment problem that a plan
would be prepared in coopreation with other organizations and would be sub-
mitted to the Economic Council and, if approved, it would be implementd.

In continuing the conversation with KEYHAN, Espahbodi said that establishing
an unemployment fund would be a depressant and that we must draft economic
programs to boost the level of employment instead.

He said. "He must give political training to the workers so that we can imr
prove the level of production."

The Minister of Labor continued, "Unfortunately, inefficiency exists in the
factories, and we are trying to improve the level of production by devising
new programs.“

Daryush Poruhar: "New Post Requires Planning"

Daryush Foruhar, Minister of State and Roving Minister, who had gone to the
Ministry of Labor today to say goodbye and to introduce the new Acting
Miniter of Labor and Social Affairs, told KEYEAN reporters regarding his
future plans, "The post turned over to me, Minister of State and Roving
Minister, is a new post and study and planning are needed to determine its
duties and suitable programs. As of today, I will be busy studying so that
I can get on with the job."

8514
C50: 4906
'BAHDAD' REPORTS ON CIVIL DISORDERS AROUND THE COUNTRY

LDO91309 [Editorial Report LD] Tehran BAHDAD in Persian 6 November
gives a roundup on page 2 of news received by telephone from the
provinces: From Hamadan it is reported that technical school students
are refusing to go to class for the next 4 days and threaten a hunger
strike thereafter. Their demands are chiefly concerned with syllabus
changes.

The governor-general's office in Bushehr is reported to have been
occupied by unemployed school-leavers since last Tuesday. and work there
is at a standstill. Their demands relate to certain administrative
reforms, including the retirement of staff who have been in their posts.
for over 20 years and their replacement with unemployed graduates.

It is reported by the Pars News Agency from Kernan that unemployed school-
ieavers have staged demonstrations in various parts of the city denanding
work,finally delivering a petition to the governor-ganeral's office.

Construction workers at Hahmudsbad employed by the 3.1.H. Construction
Company which employs one-third of the city's workforce, are reported to
have gone on strike.

The Bazar at Qom is said to have closed down in protest at the assassina-
tion of Ayatollah Tabstabi'i.

Unemployed workers in Gilan Province staged a sitdown in the governor-
general's office in Rasht, while unenployed school-leavers in Nurabad
Nanasani have locked the doors of the governor's office. the Education
Ministry. the district court and the city hall. bringing these organiza-
tions to a standstill.

C50: 6906

h2
TRIBAL LEADER WARNS 0F 'EXPIDSIVE'SITUATION IN PARS PROVINCE

LDO9lOﬂ9 Tehran KEYHAN in Persian 5 Nov 79 p 9 LD

[Article by Ali Rafi'i: "Khosrow Qasgqa'I: 'The Landlords and Peasant
Farmers Are Being Incited Against Each Other'"]

[Excerpts] In a discussion with KEYHAN correspondent Ali Rafi't, Pars
Province Qashqs'i Tribal Chief Khosrow Hashqa'i, now in Tehran to present
demands by the Pars tribes more effectively, gave a warning of the danger
of conflict in the province of Pars. He said: I have remained in Tehran
for some time now in the hope that the government night do something to
carry out development projects in the nomadic tribal areas of Pars, but
nothing has happened up to now. I am slowly coming to believe that for so

long as there is no actual clash and loss of life, the government will do
nothing.

However, I must warn that the Pars region is about to explode. Regret-
fully, certain government officials are acting in a provocative manner
and wish to incite landlords and peasant farmers against each other. A
week ago I met the Imam and reported to him on the situation in the Pars
Province, in Bashehr, Yasuj and Buyer Ahmad. The Imam asked me to safe-
guard the security of the region, and we will do this with all our night,
but the people have demands which must be considered.

I replied to the Imam that on the basis of promises given to us by the
government, we in turn made promises to the people, and now that the

government has not kept its promises the people regard us in an unfavour-
able light.

It is because of the affection that the people have had for us [presumably
the chief's family] that they have maintained security without expecting
anything, but if this affection should be lost and the people's demands
are not met, who will be able to guarantee the security of the Pars region?

In short, the people have become rebellious, and 1 do not believe that
the government has the courage to take revolutionary action.

[:3
Elsewhere. in a strong attack on Pars officials, he said: They have no
intention whatever of fulfilling the demands of the people. Bssicslly,
some of then are incapable and others were only exiled here because of
their foreign associations.

I fear the day when the people may rise up and demand exclusive sppor-
tionment for themselves of the revenues from oil and gas. or take matters
into their own hands and say "now that the government can do nothing. we
must act ourselves."

in short. considering the nooimplasentstion of decisions we [presumably
the tribal chief's family] made for the tribes. let us see what the people
thanselves decide: We are with the people.

On the Kordestsn issue, Khorsrow Gsshqs'i said: "I was ready from the

outset to go to Kordestsn and negotiste with them. since we share cannon
problems with the Kurds. He believe that the Kurdish people are in the
right, but neither we nor any of the people of Iran sccept sopsrstim."

(:80: 10906
[Text] Forty-eight hours me:- the mind or the Armed Forces or the
Islamic Republic and the Revolutionary Gnu-do, hhehed still has not re-
gained itenor-el appearance, andthie iaatetinevhenlllofthehille
overlooking the city, roads leading to the city and strategic pointe of the
city are being strictly controlled by the military forcee and the Revolu-
tionary Guards.

ibhen-adNax-imee'i andMehdi Res-van, the reporterandphotognpher eenthy
mel yesterday, have arrived inhhehad. Thereportthat Roi-nevi tiled
laet night stated that the businessmen or the city are mdmlly opening
thestoreeandtheheheviorof-wotthmehovedthettheyaeuedhcppy
abonttheandvaloftheimandom'depermel.rhe
storetold the reporter eentbyms 'Iounntthe

tired of the eitmtion that had developed for 13. They told us we not right.
Theydidnoteey, however, WMveebouldfightmdvhyveahonld
fight. The Dmatic Party said that the Kurds not get autonoqy, but it
didnoteuplainvhateutonowuo‘ndneanandvhetueeautonowwnldbeto

I
eetowhytheeegentlemendidnotepeakupdm'ingthereignortheutenie
regime. Some of then even collaborated wholeheartedly with
ortheregine.ldoknovthetthexm'diehpeopleh¢vebeentreated\metly.
Mmergiveathooghttoupaneionohddevelomthere if
Goverumntorthelelanicﬁewhliciespeokinghonesuy, itvilltekectepe
torepeirthedangeeinthieprovmoeineteadotjuettalhngndumg
promieeeandthreate. Vedonotmttosmmlvithemne. Ittheydevelop
our cityend region, uevnl bleee thou.

I:
past few days concerning the fact that all of the strategic points, hills,
and even the rooftops of the houses of inhabad had been fortified by the
Democrats and they had announced that they would stand against the W

and the Guards until the last man. Today, however, when I arrived in Hehabad,
I realized the mptiness of these rumrs. There was no resistance; nor did
the ordinary people of the city quarrel with the Ann. There is no sip: of
fortifications behind the houses or on the roofs. Finally, I did not wader-
stand the source of these minors. This is not an exaggeration. I have spoken
with many of the residents of lbhabad. They are very kind people and,li.ke
all Iranians, they love their country; but, because the govermaents of the
previous regime did not take any positive steps on their behalf, now that
the Islamic Revolution has been victorious, they expect the goverment to
help then and, more than anyone else, they expect the 1mm Khomeini, the
leader of the Islamic Revolution, with his characteristic decisiveness, to
issue emphatic orders to the government to develop this region. That is all
there is to it.

"Before stating my conclusions from w conversations with the people of
Ihhabed, I will describe how the Araw entered this city.

“Am units entered the city of Nahabad from two directions: one, from
the Naqdeh-Mahabad crossroads and, the other, by way of the Mil Garrison
from the Haragheh-Pahabadroad. Themitthatwes-ovingbywayofhcagheh-
Miandoab to occupy Mahabad reached the gate of the city at approximtely
1300 hours the day before yesterday, and it deployed at that same location.
Concurrent with the deployment of this unit, airborne, Green Beret, and
strike units mdertook the strike jobs and, while clearing the area, they
occupied all of the Democrats' trenches.

'Colonel Kazan ﬂilmam,comander of the forces sent to Mahahad via the llaqdeh
crossroads, told reporters, We were fully infomed about the situation and
location of the Deaocrsts' weapons. Our objective was to select a tactic
that would enable us to inflict the greatest blow, with the least casualties,
on the armed elements of the Demmtic Party in order that their ability to
fight would be lost and dissipated. Thus, with air support and with the
protection of helicopters, at 0900 More the day before yesterday, swift and
decisive attacks by the foms sent began. We encountered, however, boobs
and explosive traps that had been planted all along the axis. Along our way,
we encountered the modern weapons that had fallen into the hands of the
Democrats from the Pahebsd Brigade, modern weapons such as tanks, rocket
launchers, and 106.: guns.- The more we advanced, the less resistence the
Danocrats showed, and they Just put their weapons down and fled. Finally, at
1400 hours, the day before yesterday, we took the hills overlooking W,

and one hour later, a column of the forces out arrived at the lbhebad
Garrison.

'lhny weapons and inlements of war were left bdzind by the Demcrats in
HahabadGarrisonapdone couldnsmetsnks, lOG-gmsandalargemnberof
military vehicles.

116
"than the Canada:- of the Operations unit of the Green Beret.’ Mn 31:»
home force: said regarding the method or opmtion:
fired upon us with nortars, cannon, 106 millimeter guns, and tanks along the
route of our advance, fortunately, we continued our advance without suffering
any casualties and we occupied the strategic points east and south of W.
it 1730 hours, an armored personnel carrier company and the Gran Berets were
on their way to the hills overlooking the city which are strategic sites.
Although scattered firing was directed toward us along the way, we succeeded
in capturing one self-propelled cannon free Democratic Party slants. After
deployment in the hills, we searched the area and discovered a number of
radios, som mnitions, commist literature and nanii‘estcs.‘

"He added, 1?. 0800 home, yesterday, while our personnel were seaming the
interior of the city with field glasses from the hills above, they became
suspicious of one house. This house had belonged to the dissolved Rastakhis
Party and was the site of the clinched Democratic Party's operations staff.‘

Most Powerful Radio Discovered

“A group of Green Derets set out for the aforementioned house. Along the way,
they were fired upon with KalashnikoVs and machine guns, but they arrived at
the house without suffering any casualties, and the Green Berets occupied
the house. Inside the house, three long-range radios, which were capable of
reaching the nest farsflung areas of the world, even America, were con-
fiscated by the Green Berets.

"Other munitions round included a masher of Templar-81 mortar launchers, F0113
machine guns, 50 caliber rifle br'rels, a large masher of field radios, two
mine detectors, night-viewing binoculars, snail and large caliber Intuition,
several thousand anti-personnel mines that were made in Israel, hues and
detonators, a large quantity of pu-kaged provisions, including potatoes, beans,
rice, flour, various types and varieties of compote, sugar, alchoholic
beverages, a large mmber of tiles, several cartons of assenhled mlotov
cocktails, an Amy vehicle which had been parked in i‘nont of the Wilding,

a large number of airborne uniforms of the paratrooper unit, gas mks, tear
gas grenades, telephone headquarters equipaent, a teletype, various ups,
subversive docuaents, files on Dasomtic Party elanents and naabers of the
Feday-e Khalq guerrillas, backpacks, and berets that had been stolen fro.

personnel of the lbhabad Garrison. These itas will be tin-nod over to the
division.

" Today (yesterday), at 1000 hours, a group was despatched along the route
south-east of inhabad to search and they discovered a large quantity of
Colt cartridges, gas make, mine detectors, anti-personnel nines, mess,
detonators, individial tents, radios, field telephones, aerial comication

radios, and mortar launchers, and the owner of the house where these mitions
were found was arrested.

"One of the Great Berets sent the following message to the inhabitants of
Mahabad via the Pare News Agency:

'He are IranianGreenBereteandweareymu-hrothers. Nearesarvingtbis
country. You, the people of Mshebad, can continue yom‘ life with peace of hind

protected by the security that we, accowenied by brother Guards,have provided
101' you.

LR
"Captain Turkonan, Coriander of the special airborne forces from Tehran, spoke
with the correspondents and said, 'At 0900 hours yesterday (the day before
yesterday), we moved 20 kilometers from Miandoab in moored vehicles of the
Win Division sent from Hanjil to reinforce the any forces. We were fired
upon three tmos between Niandoah and l’ahabad. We searched all of the villages
along our route. The houses were empty of residents, and, in several homes,
we found large quantities of munitions, and batman 1.0 and 60 people were
arrested.‘

Conversation With Abusharif

"Abusharif, the operations cox-sander of the Islamic Revolution Guards Corps of
Iran, at 1900 hours yesterday, at the site of deployment of the Corps in
Mnhabad, said in a conversation with reporters concerning the actions takaa
in the area, especially Mshabad, 'Yesterday aftemon, after a series of
battles we had with anti-revolutionary elaaents along the way, mder fire of
the artillery of anti-revolutionary eluents, we arrived safely in the city
of i-‘ahabad and only one of our brothers was wounded at the entrance to the
city.’ He said, 'He understand from the contacts that we have had as ox" this
morning with the local authorities and representatives of the people that
everyone is happy and pleased about the arrival of the arsed forces of the
Islamic Republic and theGuards, andtbeyexpressedtheirpeacaofdndaiter
six months of anxiety and disturbance. Now, all of the roads entering and
leaving the city are open, and those inhabitants who had somht refuge in
the mountains because of the threats of the dissolved Democratic Parw are
gradually arriving in the city.

'Conditions in the city of Mahabad were conpletely normal today, and the people
welcomed the armed columns of the Army and the Guards in the streets and
distributed fruits and sweets aaong tha.‘ ibusharif added, "l'odq, at the
request of the governor of the city, we sent a mange to the people of
Mahabad in a radio-television interview, and we said that the propaganda that
anti-revolutionaries had spread against the Guards there is false and un-
founded and that the Guards had arrived in the city to preserve meadow and
order and to establish security and, as soon as the security organizations and

.the gendamerie could resume their noraal work, the duties of the Guards sent
would be turned over to the local responsible organisations and Guards.‘
Abusharif added, 'Hitb the actions that have been taken, it is expected that
the Guards sent will soon be able to return to their own loosis.’

"Abusharif expressed the hope that, with the efforts of all of the people of
Nahabad, subsequent to clearing the area, developent operations would begin.
Regarding the scarcity of public necessities and fuel, he umonnced that
several tankers of fuel needed will be brought to the city fron Hiandoab.

'Ahxsharif said, 'Just as we have done in Paveh, Saqqea, Harivan, and other
cities of central Kurdistan, in Mahabad, too, provisions and public necessities
wulbeprovidedandwillbet‘mdmfreeofchargetotluunderprivileged

and needy.‘
"Abus'nnril‘ added, 'Finally, w message to the people of Kurdistan, and
especially to the people of Mahabsd is that they should take an example from
their great Kurdish brother, Selsdin Lyubi, and, just as this brave, courageous
military leader fomht for years against the enemies of Islam to establish
the glorious flag of Islam in defense of dear Palestine and advanced up to the
heart of tin-ope, we, too, in union and solidarity with all of the Noelns of
Iran and the world, will strive for the holy goals of Islam. Saladin iyubi was
a region before he was a Kurd, and no distinction is nude in Isles: among “hark,
Kurd and Arab. (m1 no'nen mm) All of us are brothers and lbslene and we
mst not be deceived by the divisive propaganda of the enemies of Islan.’

Arrest of 15 Denocrats

"After the occupation of t-‘ahabad by personnel of the Amy of the Islanic Republic
of Iran, Guards sent from tree 13, Isfahan and Sanadaj, arrived in the city.

"This same report states that, concurrent with the search conducted by the
Green Berets in the hills overlooking the city, the Gmrds arrived and med
ammber ofpeoplewhowere fleeing, andtheyarrestedlS peoplewho arena-
bers of the Dawcratic Party.

"Dar-1mg searches of the residences of these people, two rinse, one colt, a
number of cartridges, hand grenades and a large number of various cos-niques
gran Sheikh 'Ezeddin Bound. and the Pedey-e Dale Guerrilla organisation were

om.

Despatch of Division Column to Oshnaviyeh

"A column from the 64th Division at camera (Reuiyoh) 1w: for Oshnawiyeh at
the request of that city's people. The Governor of Heat Azerbaijan, who
accompanied the Cosmnder of the 64th Division of Grundyeh and t‘ w colt-1 sent
to Oshnnviyeh, net in the municipal office of the town of Haqdah witt- His
Eminence Voharer, the Friday Insm of the Shias of this town, and he who with
him concerning regional prOblens.

"The Governor of West Azerbaijan then began to talk with anlah Seleh Rahini,
religious leader of the Kurds of Naqdah. Uhile condemning the actions of those
who incited the Gardaneh Doab incidalt, which resulted in the urtyrda of
15 of the fighters of the town of Naqdeh, Mullah Seleh asked the governor to
reinforce the responsible armed forces in the region in order to guarantee
the region's security as much as possible. \lhile referring to the cafes-Meta
incidalt in the village of urns in which a group of irresponsible aned people,
in retaliation for the blood shed by the martyrs of Gsrdaneh Doeb, killed 68
or the inhabitants of this village, mm Salah said, We are all convinced
that the dissolved Deucecratio Party of Kurdistan has betmed both the Kurdish
peeple and the people of Iran; but no one person can scene the guilt of
another person.’ In continuing his speech, he said, "rho innocent people who
were martyred in the village of and were all believers in the Islamic
Revolution. Their only crime was that they were Kurds.’

So
'l-h- llsqgu, while expressing deep regret about this incident, said, 'One cannot
attribute such acts to the government nor to Islam, and the people who
omitted this crime are neither revolutionaries nor true followers of the
Im.‘

Illsqgu added, 'I promise you that we will pursue the perpetrators of this in-
cident imediately and punish then.‘ General Tahirneahsd, comander of the
64th Division at Ormyeh, Vho also attended this meeting, said, 'we are not
protectors of killers; rather, we defend the law.‘ He promised the Kurdish
representatives of Naqdeh that he would guarantee the security of all Kurdish
brothers and sisters in Model: by stationing a special force in this city.'

Villagers iron armmd léahabad Take hinge in the City

W—Pu‘s News Agency—“me teen sent by the Pars News Agency to the west
or the country observed in the city of W that a matter of refuse“ the
have taken remge in the city m surrounding villages, and there are
approximately 1000 of that, lave chosen to live in one of the schools of this
city. These remgees, who have come to the city mm the villages

Qarah Dagh, Kuseh Karseh, Gordi Iaqnb, Dabeshqaneh, Iehneh Deh, Khor Khoreh,
and Qezel Qufi, said that they had cone to the city because of the attacks
that had taken place on their villages. It still is not clear where these
attacks originated.

According to the report of the correspondents sent by the Pars ﬂown Agency to
the west of the country, 'As of 1730 hours yesterday when the report was
filed, He still had not been able to learn what actions had been taken by
the responsible authorities to return these remgees to their villages. Us
did observe, howsvc, in the city that those residents who had "actuated
their hon“ are gradually returning to the city from the mountains. In a
conversation between the counittee sent and sons of the people of the city,

it became clearthat the cityisindireneedi‘ronthe standpoint ofmsl
item and some food items.‘

Request for Demonstrations

Yesterday afternoon, the public relations office of the 64th Division of
Orumiyoh announced that the comonder of the Pasveh Garrison announced in a
telephone contact with the 64th Division of Onndyeh that the inhabitants of
Villages and prominent peeple aroImd Pasveh had called on the garrison and
requested permission to hold dmmtions in support of the high ranking
leader of Iran's Islamic Revolution, the 1m Khomeini, and the W of the

Islamic Republic of Iran and condoning the actions of the dissolved
Demcratic Party of Kurdistan.

The public relations office of the 64th Division of Omani/eh said that these
demonstrations will be held if the sounder of the 64th Division of Oruniyeh
QWOGQ
Occupation of the Khan Pass

Yesterday afternoon, a spokesman for Dr Che-ran, Deputy Prime Minister for
Revolutionary Affairs, said in a telephone call to the Para News Agency,

"At 1300 ham-s today, the difficult and dangerous Dian Pass, several monsters
from Bunch, was opened by the armed forces and strike forces, and the whole
area i‘ronSaqqestoBanehandsouthofthatareahavecons under the control
of the Arum'lie announced in this telephone call, 'Ms, the biggest base or
the enemies of the Revolution has {(1an

Bodies of Martyr-ed Guards Transported

Yesterday afternoon, the bodies of three of the Gmrds sent from Tehran to
the western area of the country, who had hen nartyred in the clash with
anaed personnel of the dissolved Democratic Party of Kurdistan amend the
town of Baneh, were transported to Sanandaj.

The bodies or these three martyrs are in the morgue of the ZOO-bed hospital
for the present and they will be transported to Tehran at the first opportunity.

These three martyrs had been members of Deputy Prime Minister Chan-en's group.
Governor's Gommnique

This comunique was issued yesterday by the Governor of Vest Azerbaijan:
'Kurdish I'oslem Brothers and Sisters in Mahabad,

'Now that, by the grace of God, the Mahabad area has baa cleansed of in-
surgents and security prevails in the area, all brothers residing in Mahahad
mist give attention to the following points and act accordingly.

'1. People should return to their Jobs and earnestly do their work.

'2. They should provide full and sincere cooperation in advancing the goals
or the Islanic Revolution.

'3. The area's needs will be contained and provided for swiftly by the directors
of the province.

'4. The government, too, inits turn, willtahethenecessarystepsatonoe
to provide for the area's urgent needs.

'5. Villagers uho left their villages and bones should return to their villages
which will enjoy security and all assistance necessary.

'6. The government will make every effort to lunch as swiftly as possihle

economic and development programs in order to provide for the cutout of all
of the people and units or the area.

'7. The intrigues of anti-revolutionaries should be strictly avoided.

52
'8. Respected inhabitants and all of the leaders will be asked to report
their most urgent needs to the governor's office and other authorities so
that steps might be taken at once to provide for these needs.“

Message of Dr Chairman

Dr l~'ostafa Chem-an warned in a message issued last night that those who are
conspiring against Iran's Islamic Revolution will be brutally crushed.

The text of the message is as follows:
“Dear Kurdish Countrynen,

"For some time now, conspirators, incited by foreim Imperialists, have made
your area the site for infiltrating subversive political-military activities.
They were killing the innocent; they were scattering families; they were is-
posing on the area their political ideas by force of arm; they were eliminating
their opponents; they disrupted the «unity of the area; and, generally, they
conspired against Iran's Islamic Revolution and for the sake of foreign
interests.

'The government tried to bring round peacemlly those who had been led astray
and to prevent bloodshed; but the seditious took advantage of this good will
and freedom, set aflame a portion of our dear comtry, shamelessly raised
the standard of opposition against the central government, and openly .-
barked on extreme activities against Iran's Islamic Revolution. Finally, the
high ranking leader of the Revolution, Imam Khomeini, domed that the
seditionists and conspirators were to be brutally crushed, and as you saw,
the conspiritors were swiftly eradicated and they chose to flee and now
nothing remains of all that uproar and foolishness.

"By the will of the great God, blessed by revolutionary leadership, and as a
result of the people's desire for Iran's past life, security has returned to
your-area, andmost of thepeoplehave retumadwithgreat Joytotheirhcmes

"A number of simple, deluded people, however, still are mgitives in the
mountains and are afraid to return to their homes. By order of Imam Mini,
however, a general amesty has been declared and all of those deluded people,

provided that they turn over their weapons to the government and are sorry
for their pasts, will be forgiven and included under the general meaty.
Those people who have committed serious crimes, imam, will be summed to
court; onlythecmn'tcanissueaverdictintheircasesandnoonehasa
right to molest the life and property of another.

“How, the time has come for all fugitives and even those people who have been

deluded to return to their homes, confess their mistakes, repent their un-
worthy actions, and return to the bosom of the nation. The government will
guarantee their safety and security, too.

53
I"l'hoee people, however, who, God forbid, conspire against the Islamic
Revolution of Iran and its peat lender and drew weapons walnut the
torcee, will be brutally cruehed. The govern-eat and the arm will not show
then any mercy Vhltooever, and they will suffer defeat and disgrace in We
world and in the hered‘tor.‘

8511.
080: 1.906

5h
TRIAL OF HASSAN NAZI“ WELD 'PUPPEI‘ SHW'
Paris “AMER-YE RUZ in Persian 28 Sep 79 p 1

[Text] The Imam said to hundreds of oil workers, unaccountably gathered
in the sidestreets of Qom, that "God willing, Nazih will he tried." he
asked them to replace themselves as oil workers and become instead secret
police to collect documents for the trial of the managing director of the
oil company and give them to Mr Bahraqi, his son-in-law and the man who
has become the Vishinskiy of Iran. Some of these oil workers were taken
from Qom to Abadan to pave the way for the trial of Nazih.

Two things emerge from this action of the leader of the religious regime:
one is that Khomeyni does not have enough power to unilaterally suspend
Nazih and try him for drawing breath and showing courage. The other is
that he wants Bazargan to understand, together with other freedom lovers
like Engineer Sanjabi, Admiral Hadani and Hoqadan Harsghei, that this
cnmel could also sleep in their house and that they had better follow the
straight road of condoning the actions of the reactionary holy men.

After the fall of Idi Amin in Uganda and Bokassa in southern Africa the
leaders of Iran are the only news source that is at the same time laughable
and savage. They have brought Iran, which was tending toward Europe, to
the heart of the dark continent. Idi Amin threw his own foreign minister
into the river. Bokasaa killed students in prison. Our leaders who have
killed hundreds without trial now promise a puppet show trial.

9A68
C50: 4906

55
CONSEQUENCES OF NAZIH'S DISMISSAL
Paris NAHBH-YB RUZ in Persian 2 Oct 79 p 1

[Text] The casting aside of Hassan Nazih was the event that awakened
patriotic freedom-loving Iranians who a few months ago considered the
Islam oi Khomeyni as freedom and justice, a movement of the people and
progress. They considered the victory of the revolution as starting a
society that would be a model in the human community.

Today when the sacrificial blood of the revolution has not dried, blood

which all thought would bring Islam, religion, freedom, justice and equality,
has brought an Islam that only uses the name republic and is not a popular
democratic movement, only a movement that is upheld by reactionary leaders.
The sweat of the freedom fighters was to secure lost rights, not to lose

even what rights remain. They wanted to produce a model society and of
course it has become such, a model in reverse.

Nazih was one of the last persons struggling within the regime. For months
he tried to bring to a conclusion his 25-year struggle in the destruction
on which the previous regime was built. In this destruction, every place
that wanted freedom saw only servitude, every corner that wanted justice
witnessed repression, and every side that wanted equality felt the
preference of reactionary, job-loving preachers. They suddenly woke up
from a nightmare and saw that they were only temporary tools in the hands
of the reactionary leaders. Because they did not know, knowledge itself

is forbidden. Because they were generous, generosity is annulled.

The Sanjabis, Riehis, Nazihs, and soon the Basargsns, have been used as
soporifics for the enlightened, and they were used to strengthen the position
of the leaders, based on ignorance, and help them complete the job of
building a wall of darkness around Iran.

Nazih was an honored advocate of the court who knew nothing outside the court
rooms. His latest struggle makes him look like a hero. Maybe he will be a
model for others who love Iran and will fight for the liberation of the land
from the jungle of ignorance and hopeless darkness. The patient people of
Iran praise the Nazihs and will remember their names and struggles among
those many examples from past times.

9M8
cso: 6906 56
OIL STRIKES, SECWD 3L0! AGAINST HULLAHS

Paris NAHEH-YB RUZ in Persian 26 Sep 79 p 1

[Text] The differences between Hassan Nazih, advocate of the court and
managing director of the National Iranian Oil Company and Ayatollah
Khomeyni and members of his family have reached a head. For 2 days he

has not shown up at the oil company. Ihis has been the cause of a strike
by the workers at the main office of the company. Dr Nazih, who is one

of the greatest fighters for liberty in-lrsn, has for some months put
himself at a distance from the extremist spiritual leaders and is the only
leading person to bring his troubles with them to light.

The decision of Ayatollah Khomeyni to proceed with purging the oil company
is directed at not only the appointees of the previous regime but all
"chirping women" who oppose the ancient learning and want skill and literate
people. The replacement of Rassan Nazih with Ayatollah Rafsanjani, who
has received one of the number one jobs and will soon join the ranks of

the holy men with the government's blessing, was the cause of the strike

in the country's basic industry. These workers, whose long strike during
the last weeks of the shah's regime was a principal reason for his over-
throw, deserve the leadership among all classes of workers for their
service in fighting union and political struggles. These struggles were
important to the cause of freedom lovers because, as it became clear that
the new regime, instead of improvement, wanted to move back to ancient ways
of thinking, this was the first social group to oppose these actions.

After the continuation of unrest in the university which caused the closing
of higher educational societies in Iran, the oil workers strike is the second
blow to strike the mullahs' regime. Ihe strike has also spread to the
southern oil workers. Therefore, it can be said with certainty that the

regime is sliding to its fall because after this strike the regime will
have difficulty stopping the flood.

9448
C30: 4906

S7
EMBASSY 1N mason mats (203811me WWIBS
Tehran KBYIIAN in Persian 30 Oct 79 p 12

l-A'rticle: "22 Employees of the Iranian Embassy in England Are Expelled
for Political and Moral Reasonsﬂ/

[Tears] In a conversation today, the charge d'effaires of the Iranian 8m-
bsssy in England announced that a trial would be set to investigate the
crines of the Iranians who have been arrested. The charge d'affaires of
the Iranian embassy also expressed the view that most people who had as-
sembled under the umbrella of Belthtiar's protection are corrupt people,
Bahais, Zionists and people who had been harmed by the Islamic Republic.

in his conversation regarding today's trial of Iranians in London, the
charge d'affaires of the Iranian embassy in England stated "A trial is
being held today to investigate the crimes of Iranians arrested in the
London demonstrations. This trial was held on the recsnnendatlon of the
arrested persons, who are proponents of the Islamic Republic of Iran, and
one must investigate their objection to the London police."

Dr Afruz, the embassy charge, than stated, with regard to the 22 people
expelled from the Iranian embassy. "Mnty-two embassy enployees have been
expelled for reasons of redundancy or for political or moral causes. Some
of then, who had been receiving low salaries, eisused embassy telephones

or engaged in other activities to augment their income; in any event, they
have been released." The Iranian charge d'affaires added that the group

of expelled persons have also joined groups opposed to the Islamic Republic.

Concerning the studies of Iranian students in England, the charge d'af-
{sires of the Iranian embassy said,

"About 70 percent of the people who come to England to study for the bach-
elor's degree cannot study in the fields they are interested in and have
no choice but to engage in studies in peripheral fields."

Referring to the problems which are arising for Iranians at London
Airport, he said:
uhe right to issue or refrain from issuing permits to foreign subjects

tn enter the territory of England is the absolute business of the govern-
nn‘ni and we cannot interfere in these matters, especially since the number
nl irnnious who New [0 London Is very larue. In summer the number of
Iranian visitors even reaches l,000 people per day; now, however, this
ligure is about 700 persons per day. Nonetheless, we have constantly tried
to manage to provide facilities for Iranians who want to come to London.
Amour), these visitors there are sometimes people who have official business
and it is for this reason that we ourselves have proposed that the embassy
he informed of these people's arrival in advance so that no difficulties
will he created for them at the airport. In addition, it is my recomnda-
tion concerning the travel of Iranians to England that visa abrogation pro-
cedures be eliminated and that those who want to travel to England be com-
pelled to obtain a visa from the British Embassy in Tehran, in which event
no difficulties will arise at the airport concerning their entry into
England. A group of travelers come to England for medical purposes and

are sick; the major portion of this group can also be treated in the country
and we recommend that a medical comission be formed and express an opinion
on the need of sick persons to be treated outside the country before they
leave."

Regard ing the closing of the London mosque, Dr Afruz stated "0n the oc-
casion of the seventh night following the death of His 8minence Ayatollah
Tnleqani, ceremonies were held at that mosque and were attended by many
people. In these ceremonies, a large number of Iranians living abroad,
greater than the capacity of the location, took part and this created an
excuse for those opposed to say that the doors of the mosque did not con-
form to safety regulations; for this reason, the police requested that the
mosque be repaired and that the outer doors be rebuilt in accordance with
safety regulations. This mosque is now closed down and repairs on it are
being carried out quickly."

Regarding Bakhtiar's supporters in Europe, Dr Afruz said "These groups are
perforce not supporters of Bakhtiar but opponents of the Islamic Republic
of Iran who have gathered together under Bakhtisr's ushrella. Host of
them are corrupt people who have escaped, Bahais. Zionists, people who
have been harmed by the Islamic revolution of Iran, and close friends of
the family of the deposed Shah."

The charge d'affaires of the Iranian embassy did not categorically confirm
that opponents of the Islamic Republic and some groups belonging to the
international Confederation of Students sympathising with the People's
Guerrilla Forces participated in the demonstrations by Bakhtiar's supporters.

However, he did say "It is probable that they also took part in these
demonstrations, but no absolute proof is available in this regard."

[1337
050: 1.906

59
MILITARY LEADER DEPLORES GROHING PUBLIC BS‘I‘RAMEHENT
Tehran KBYHAN in Persian 25 Oct 79 p 2

lérticle: _"Adm Madaui: The Curve of Popular Participation in Affairs ls
Declininggl

lTexsl Adm Ahmad Hadani, the governor general of Khusestan and conssander
of the navy of the Islamic Republic of Iran, made inportant statements to
KEYHAN in a special interview concerning the presence of several American
ships in the Indian Ocean and the Saudi Arabian coast, the role of the navy
in the Bandsr Anzali episodes, the detonation of three oil pipelines and

the general acts of sabotage taking place in Khusestan, and the reasons

for the failure of the town council elections. In this interview, referring
to people's participation in the town council elections, the governor gen-

eral of Khuzesten warned that the curve of popular participation in activ--
ities is declining.

At the outset of his statemnt Adm Hadani said,

"As I have pointed out in the past, the presence of several American ships
in the Indian Ocean and the Saudi Arabian coast is the sort of threat which
imperialism has used in the Persian Gulf for a long time. whenever it
wanted to make a display of strength it would dispatch its ships to this
region and thus create threats and terror." Hedani added,

"A change has occurred among imperialists. They are present and they have
bases. Of course at the same time these superpowers have intense coweri-
tion with one another which is of course far from a friendly international
relationship, and they interfere in countries which have no relationship
with them. It would be better if Persian Gulf protection were assigned to
people who have this responsibility, that is, to those who border on the
Persian Gulf." Hedani added, "If they do not wish to observe this inter-

national etiquette, it will be painful but will not directly cause a dis-
turbance among us."

In response to a question from mum's correspondent concerning the role
of the navy in the recent events in Bender Ansali, Hadani said, "It did
uni act as if it was an oppressive force which acts harsuly as soon as
there is a discussion. Rather, i have always said lhst we will not open
u knot which we can up!!!) by hand with our teeth. in areas which are cou
uected with the navy, sometimes severe crises occur which place the area
in danger. Our effort is to take steps through arrangements which have
been very carefully thought out and are for the people's sake, and not,
God forbid, allow a severe act to occur which is out of place. It is
natural that we should not be viewing disorder in the country; rather,
order sh0uld govern in every part of the country." Regarding the latest
acts of sabotage in Khuzestan, Madani said "Of course if we think that we
can protect absolutely 100 percent of all our pipelines, oil installations
and economic installations, the mobilization of such a force is not in our
power nor indeed is it in the power of other countries which have such in-
stallations either, because it is not just us who have such facilities--
our neighbors also are in the same situation. however, there are patrol-
meu. Sometimes criminals take advantage of this opportunity and find an
opportunity to connit sabotage, and sometimes, too, we identify and arrest
them and punish them so they will not engage in this activity any more."

lulu: Hadani then added, "of course the effort is being made for us to be
able to mobilize our forces so that these acts of sabotage can be reduced.
Naturally. if an act of sabotage does take place in some corner on occasion
we must not lose our heads, because whether we like it or not a country
which is fighting against imperialism must be able to tolerate such prob-
lems." Regarding the town council elections, he said:

"in this matter, we must look at the curve of popular participation in
group activities. Since the beginning of the triusph of the revolution,

i have unfortunately been noticing that the people's receptivity to such
matters is declining and that the curve is dropping. An indifference is
to he observed today in the course of group activities and matters which
constitute public duties. Part of this of course lies within ourselves--
that is, is the doing of agents--and one must see from the overall perspec-
tive what expectations we have had of ourselves and one another and to
what point these have been met. If we see that expectations have not been
met somewhere, we should try to meet the expectations which the society
has with an about face and carry them out. If this condition is realized

the society's receptivity to group activity will increase; if it does not,
this curve will head down."

lid-17
(250: (4906

61
COMMERCE MINISTER EXPOSBS SAVAK CRAFT Ih‘ MINISTRY
'i‘chren KEYNAN in Persian 27 Oct 79 p 3

Mrticlc: "Minister of Commerce Has Revealed Techniques of Graft and
Savak Agent Conspiracy in Conrnerce Hinistryflf/

/1‘cx_t/ Reza Sadr, the minister of comerce, lifted the veil over a great
case of graft and domestic conspiracy on the part of Savak agents in the
(:rain, Hard and Granulated Sugar and Tea Organization and the relationship
between this conspiracy and foreign countries, at a press, radio and tele-
vision conference.

At the start Reta Sadr said, "when I began my job in the Ministry of Com-
mercc, one of the most important mattersl faced was that of appointing
and changing managing directors of organizations related to the ministry.
in this regard, we had big headaches in two organizations: first was the
Grain, Hard and Granulated Sugar and Tea Organization and the other was
the Government Trade Organization. Fortunately, we have not yet faced any
problems in the latter conpany, but in the Grain, Hard and Granulated
Sugar and Tea Organization, 6 months after his appointment, we learned
that Ahtlolhoseyn Nikkhalq was an agent of the disbanded Savak and engaged
in a series of illegal measures, with the help of his friends, who were
also Savak agents, according to existing documents and evidence; one of
these measures was the two-stage embezzlement of 70 million rials." The
minister of coumerce, describing this setter, said, "Sonatina after he
was chosen to be managing director of the Grain, Hard and Granulated Sugar
and Tea Organization, Nikkhalq asked me directly to transfer one Ministry
of Consnerce telephone line to his home. The administrative and financial
undersecretary opposed this, labelling it meaningless action which was
against the law. Finally, as later becaas known, without my knowledge or
that of the administrative and financial undersecretary, he transferred
one Grain Organization telephone line to his home and thereupon insisted
that his brother be chosen to be a member of the board of directors of the
Government Trade Organisation. At the use time the Finagrain Germany
claimed losses of $6 million; when we requested a reduction, Nildthalq un-
dertook the performance of that job and after a while declared, 'I have

62
managed to bring about a reduction of one-third. Of course the amount of
the reduction should have been nuch greater and 2 days later he drew out
n check for $1. million."

The ainiater of commerce added that Nikkhalq carried out all these activ-
ities with the collusion of a person named Behnam Nojumi, who presented
himself as a conmercial agent but was nob-rather. according to datumenta
and evidence which have been acquired he was an agent in the dissolved
Savak. nehnam Nojuni, who cooperated with Nikkhalq and ﬂaaheui Quchani,
foreiun trade chief of the Grain Organization, closely and sincerely, pre-
sented himself as the agent of the Intoraeia Company and obtained the sun
of no million rials through four Iranahahr Bank checks without paying a
penny to this conpany. In addition, he obtained IO million rials from the
Grain Organization with the cooperation of Nikkhaiq and Haahemi Quchani.
The lnterseia Conpany repreaentative in Tehran, named Captain Hahmudi, has
totally denied that Behnam Nojuni was an agent and has declared that he
has no knowledge whatever of such a person. Nikkhaiq, for whose arrest a
warrant has now been issued by the Office of the Revolutionary Public
Prosecutor. was chosen to be an advisor to the minister of agriculture and
rural development some tire ago. Haahemi Quchani has been arreated and
taken to Evin Prison but Nikkhaiq and Behnam Nojumi have escaped and are
fugitives.
COVERNMQNT SPOKESMAN DBSCRIBBS VISIT T0 "381' GERMANY
Tehran KBYHAN in Persian 29 Oct 79 p ll

fM’thle: "Dr Tabstaba'i, Deputy Prime Minister, in a Visit with German
Authorities: 'we Have Hade No Connitment To Supply Fuel to the Hest'ﬂ/

llﬁxcerpg Dr Sadeq Tabataba'i, deputy prime minister for polit-
ical affairs and government spokesman, travelled to Germany 13 days ago in
order to investigate the contracts the deposed shah had made with that
country and hold conversations and exchanges with German authorities. He
returned to iran yesterday at dawn.

In a special interview with KBYHAN at Hehrabad airport, Sadeq Tabataba'i
described the results of his conversations with the chancellor of west
Ger-any and other officials of that country.

Sadeq ‘l‘ebataba'i said "In the discussions I held with Gemn authorities,
the actual situation in Iran following the revolution was first described
free the political and economic standpoints; in the meeting held with the
Ger-an chancellor, I described Iran's foreign policy principles concom-
in: various matters including issues of neighboring countries, conditions
in the Middle East, Iran's categoric stand vis-a-vis Israel, and Iran's
foreign policy regarding the African countries and the European Coomon
Market."

The deputy prime minister for political affairs and government spokesman
then added "The west German chancellor then asked about conditions in
Kordeetan and whether the Kordestan problem could be solved by political
means. In response I told him that the issue of Kordestan was complex,
that is, that the forces fighting in Kordestan against the Kurdish people--
who are our compatriots--and against the government of the Islamic Republic
are forces composed of various elements, including personnel of the former
Shah connected to the Imperial Guards, which were dissolved following the
revolution. A group of people devoted to the Shah who are in England and
France conpose part of these forces, and there are personnel from the dis-
solved Savak, personnel connected with the government of Iraq, Israeli
spies. and also some Kurdish eimnts. It is natural that we are
conducting no kind of political discussions with the deposed Shah‘s nun.
Faced with their hostile operatinns--hostile operations which mostly have
a military character and wholly in order to disrupt the security and calm
in the region and consequently prevent construction and developuwnt oper-
ations--the means of confrontation are military; it is possible to solve
the problem with a number of Kurdish elements who want independence and a
kind of autonomy through political negotiations.”

Essential Ground for Relations with Foreign Countries

Sadeq Tabatab'i then added "The road which must be chosen in Kordestan to
avoid this crisis. which is foreign in its origin, is one of military and
even political operations. Regarding the Council of Experts, the explana-
tions i gave the German chancellor and in particular the point which was
interesting to them were that under conditions in which the iranian revo-
lution and the Islamic Republic of Iran have about 98 percent of the
nation's vote behind them, this democracy, after a revolution which had no
precedent anywhere in the world, has nonetheless made it mandatory that
Jewish, Christian and Zoroastrian experts also be invited to draw up the
constitution and take part in the Council of Experts, in spite of this al-
most unanimous majority, in order that they may be participants in Iran's
future constitution. This point was the object of everyone's attention.“

Continuing the discussion with KBYMAN, Sadeq Tabatab'i pointed out, "De-
tailed discussion was held with the German chancellor and his minister
without portfolio regarding economic relations between the two countries.
in this, 1 stated "If the essential ground for our relations with foreign
countries is accepted by you, then discussions regarding contracts and
other economic and commercial relations will be much easier. Therefore,
if agreement is reached over the fact that Iran wants independence in all
areas, Iran's commercial relations, before we say what we want and what
we do not want, must be based on Iran's economic policy, and Iran‘s
economic policy nust be devoted to meeting the general needs of the Iran-
ian nation. The general needs of the Iranian nation are to meet material
and spiritual needs and provide the resources for growth for all and as a
reSult benefit the cultural growth of Iran, so that it can enjoy a condi-
tion of effectiveness and creativity in all fields and secure the ground-
work for its own independence by making use of technology and science.
Moreover, the things we want and the things we do not want--that is, the
limits of our economic activities--must be based on the fact that Iran
will preserve its territorial integrity, national sovereignty and inde-
pendence and that resources will be provided for all. If these outlines
are accepted we will then determine what we want and what we do not want
and then how much of what we want is inside the country and how much of it

we must import from abroad. Therefore our commercial relations are based
on our economic needs.

"'Concerning technology and progress, it is natural that we are not only
interested in using the advanced technology of the Rest--we also need it.

65
it is clear to everyone that West German's technology and industry are
amour, the most advanced technologies and industries.

"'Therel'ore, we are in need of West Germany in this field, but this need
on the one hand is in order to make our independence prevail and preserve
our independence while at the same time meeting our requirements for pro-
ntess.‘ This principle was accepted and well received by the German
chancellor and his minister without portfolio."

we Hill Set the Price of Oil Ourselves

lie added, "it is true that we have reduced our oil production to about
half the pre-revolution level . This may not be pleasing to the ”eat but
on the other hand we have made no comitment to being responsible for pro-
viding the energy the world requires. We are taking into account the
volume of domestic consunption and the volume of requirements at the time
and on this basis are seeing how much oil we must produce [or our own
domestic system and how much oil we met sell in order to organize and
meet the country's budget. He will also set the price of oil ourselves
and not allow anyone to dictate to us how mch oil to produce, whom to
sell it to and what price to sell it at. ’

"we hope to substitute another source of energy for oil in the domestic
field in the near future." Sadeq Tabataba'i, who described the details

of his talks with the west German chancellor exclusively for KBYHAN, said
"Regarding substitution of another source for oil, the West German chancel-
lor asked 'whst, for example,‘ and I said, 'for example, the natural gas
resource. He can use natural gas as an energy source for another 300
years. By constructing solar collectors, we can use solar energy in the
stir Desert and by using solar collectors in the stir-e Lut provide
all the warm water throughout Iran. For of course a very cheap price,
since each square meter of solar collectors costs $15--one-tenth the costs
at which they had intended to construct the nuclear power plants at Bushehr-
one could fill the entire Kavir-e Lut with solar collectors and thereby
provide the necessary warm water and heat for Iran. It is exactly for
this reason that we need the atomic agreement which was made between the
former regime and the German company; we have no need for this agreement,
which, with all its features and the accessories it needed--the fuel, the
refined or enriched uranium materials-- was to cost a sum equal to 15
billion marks, that is, something close to 75 billion toeans, would have
devoured our budget and moreover was extremely dangerous from the stand-
point of security and safety. We hope that you can realize that we do

not need this and that for this reason we will not go through with this
contract. We believe that the German company committed violations in im-
plementing its contracts and did not conduct its operations in the proper
manner; for this reason the claim it is making for cospensation is un-
founded and if we cannot resolve it by negotiation we will take it to
court. But of course going to court is not in Germany's interest and it
will also entail damage for us in terms of money and time. Therefore it
would be better for you, as the hced of the government, to intervene in
the matter and, although the coupeny on our side is not a government com-

pany, [or you to try to get our dispute with the KHO Company resolved.”
Sadcq Tnhetebe'i said. "The chancellor's minister without portfolio is to

tend the file we hsve on this matter end to hsve us couplete what he needs

and send it to him and so that we can resolve our problem with the German
firm KHO through the intervention of the German government."
AHMADZADEH EXPLAINS CMITIONS FOR (measure

Tehran KBYHAN in Persian [9 Sep 79 p 5

[Text] In the fourth Council for the Study of National Economic Questions,

which was to study the industrial situation, Hahnud-Ahmadzadeh, the
Minister of industries and Mines, said that "the problems facing our

industries are beyond imagining. I must explain about the legal conditions

for ownership which have been approved by the Revolutionary Council. They
are:

"1. Things cannot be owned which are forbidden by Islam.

"2. Only those things may be owned which are intrinsically capable of
being privately owned, i.e., not things like the sea.

"3. Ownership must be acquired through legal means.

"Other considerations include:

"1. Health must be equally distributed among the people.

"2. "carding is not allowed.

"3. Ownership must not be harmful to the public, e.g., opium.

"a. Goods which are urgently needed by the people must be turned over to
them."

In another part of his speech, Ahmadsadeh spoke of the problems facing
industry:

"1. Host factories are experiencing financial problems.

"2. The banks are not cooperating in providing sufficient credits.

"3. There are difficulties in obtaining needed inputs.
"a. Managerial problems are compounded by the intrigues of former owners
and managers.

"5. Existing markets are inadequate.
"6. leur unrest is causing problems."

Elsewhere in his speech, Ahmadzadeh proposed the creation of a center for

industrial planning, studies and statistics, as well as centers for research
and expanding rural industries in various parts of Iran.

Vocational training centers are also needed in order to strengthen the
country's labor force.

Ahmadzadeh added that the activities of large and medium industries have
been evaluated and suitable means found to transfer the nonbasic ones from
the government sector to the private and mixed sectors. The pillars of

industrial expansion have been determined and steps taken to lay the
foundations in these areas.

The documents establishing industrial workers councils have been drafted.
Industries are also being encouraged to enter and compete in international
markets. Building materials and equipment industries have been established
to provide supporting services. Insofar as possible, this equipment is
being built in factories which now exist in Iran. Industries are being
mobilized to build needed agricultural machinery, tools and equipment.

Studies and systematic investigations into all basic industrial activities
have also been undertaken.

Factories are being established to fill the gaps, and will form a complete
network of productive units throughout the country.

Intermediate industries whose products are exported in semifinished form
for use in other countries should be encouraged and industries which are
linked to agriculture should enjoy special priority. Basic and strategic

industries should be expanded. A market strategy answering the needs of
industry has been drawn up.

Ahmadzadeh also said that more industrial planning and research units,
more on-the-job training programs and, finally, more international
competition are needed.

892i
650: 6906
ELECTIONS FOR LOCAL COUNCILS AHMED
Tehran KEYHAN in Persian [9 Sep 79 p 12

[Text] Interior Minister Hashem Sabaghian announced yesterday morning in
a press conference that a bill establishing local councils had been drawn
up and submitted to the Committee of State and the Revolutionary Council.

The interior minister said that action on the bill had been delayed after
it had been approved by the Revolutionary Council and sent to the Ministry
of the interior, because the latter was preoccupied with preparations for
the elections to the Council of Experts. Also, after numerous studies by
a committee headed by Deputy Minister Haj Hamzeh, the bill sent by the
Revolutionary Council still was not ready for enactment. For example, the
bill states that the election of municipal councils comes first, even
though the formation of municipal councils must be preceeded by the
formation of village and district councils. The Revolutionary Council's
response to the committee's comments, which were sent in a lZ-page
memorandum, has not yet been received.

The interior minister said that he hoped the elections to the municipal
councils could begin in the first half of October.

This phase will be dedicated to the memory of Ayatollah Talegqani, who died
recently.

Asked whether the elections would be free, Sabaghian said that the candidates
should come from different social strata. He added that this recommendation
certainly has not been observed, even in the village councils. The minister

said that a similar bill for councils in the factories, offices and other
establishments is in preparation.

in explaining the government's financial policy in Kurdeistan, the minister
said that, on the Eham's order, one day's oil revenues had been earmarked
for use in Kordestan. A special office in the Ministry of the Interior

has been established to handle this matter, in collaboration with the Enam's
financial office in Ssnadaj. the latter is composed of a representative of

70
the Emam and two representatives of the Ministry of the Interior. Also,
the municipal government of Sanandaj is functioning with the help of cadres
provided by the Tehran city government. The minister said that to date
1,000 tons of rice, oil, flour, sugar and detergent have been sent to the
region and, according to the local authorities, there is no food shortage
at present .

The necessary steps are being taken to improve the water situation at
Saghez, Bijsr and Karivan. Also, two 2,000-liter tanker trucks are
distributing free drinking water to households. Another thing which is
being done is a road survey in preparation for expanding the local road
network. with regard to the shortage of seed and fertilizer, Sabaghian

said that the necessary amounts will be sent to the region. In the health
field, medical teams are being sent in, and construction work on the 250-bed
Mnhabad Hospital will be resumed in the near future.

After Sabaghian had finished his remarks, his deputy, Haj Hamzeh spoke about
the problems and contradictions in the version of the election law approved
by the Revolutionary Council. He said, "As the minister of the interior

has said, after we received the law establishing the councils, a group of
the most intelligent and experienced individuals in this ministry started
studying it. Through long and detailed study, the problems and contradictions
in the bill were discovered and pointed out to the Revolutionary Council in
a detailed report. One such problem which was discovered was the bill's
lack of attention to geographical divisions. For example, there are
municipalities like Ahvaz, which have only one subdivision, while there

are numerous other municipalities which include many villages and hamlets
within their boundaries. For example, the municipality of Rudsar, in Cilan
Province, contains nearly 1,000 villages. If we were to deal with this
municipality according to the provisions of the approved version of the
bill, we would be ignoring the rights of those villages, by giving them
minority representation.

"According to the formula in the bill, all the districts together have one
representative and the major town has three representatives. Such problems
have led to delays in implementing the new law. After we became aware of
these defects, we set up an experienced group to draw up new standards and
guidelines to be used in such matters. We have worked hard on our own to
prepare the law on municipal councils, and similar laws for other types of
councils are also now under preparation."

Citizen Participation Called Essential

Hni ﬂamzeh continued, saying: "Recognizing the importance of the people
and taking into account their thoughts and beliefs are among the most basic
principles of Islam; even the Koran stresses the importance of consulting
the people on a variety of subjects. The best way to realize this aim is
to form a council in which the people participate in dealing with various
social matters. He are particularly aware of this, and therefore we are
trying to finish plans for the councils as soon as possible. Bowaver, if
there have been delays, it is for the reasons discussed above."

892i
(so: 4906
71
SALE, PURCHASE 0? BIG PLUS 0? IDLE LAND 1'0 33 BANNED
‘i‘ehran BAHDAD in Persian 1 Sep 79 p 10

[Text] The buying and selling of big plots of idle land is to be banned.
Mostafa Katirani, the Minister of Housing and Urban Development, told a
PARS reporter that tracts of land over 1,000 square meters in Tehran and
1,500 square meters in other areas are affected by the measure.

The minister also said that a special organization will be set up in
association with the Ministry of Housing and Urban Development to work
closely with the municipal governments in implementing the new law. Its
responsibilities will include defining criteria to be used in determining
whether or not a piece of land is idle, taking possession of and surveying

idle land, and taking the necessary steps to prepare the land for transfer
to applicants.

The minister added that according to the law, within 3 months both large
and sail property owners who claim that their land is in use must report
to the authorities concerned. The sedond group, as soon as they show that
they are able to meet the necessary conditions, such as that they own no
more than one piece of land, and do not have a house, will receive a
permit from the authorities.

According to the law, those who receive land under the law's provisions
may only sell it once. Owners of tracts which exceed the size limit do
not have the right to sell these lands, which belong to the goverment,

unless they can prove that they are in use according to the officially
established definition.

892]
080: 6906

72
BRIBFS

commits MINISTRY PLOTS--‘l'he Office of the Prime Minister hes declared in
an announcement that a network of corruption and conspiracy against the
Islamic revolution and the government of the Islmaic Republic of Iran has
been discovered sfter several months of investigation and inquiry. The
text of the announcement is as follows: "In the name of God, the all.
ucrciful, all-compassionate: After several months of investigation and
inquiry, one of the networks of corruption and conspiracy against the ad-
vancelnent of the Islamic revolution and the government of the Iranian re-
public has been unearthed by the government. According to official docu-
ments, this network was engaged in activities by seans of sgents and per-
sonnel of the disbanded Sevak snd individuals connected with Western im-
perialism and counterrevolutionary groups in the Ministry of Comerce.

The objective of this network was to acquire control of setters related

to the purchase, transportation, unloading and distribution of public goods
and coanodities from foreign countries and to strike out at the revolution-
ary society of Iran during sensitive moments. The technique of this group
was the disruption of activities in progress. the paralysis of Ministry of
Connerce officials, positive sttespts to spread rumors and poison the minds
of employees, introduction of false accusations against honest revolution-
sry elements and, in parallel with that, exaggereted msnifestetions of
islam, revolution, fervent concern for the treasury and recourse to religi-
ous end nationalist personalities. They even carried iqudence and shame—
lessness to the point where in order to give themselves an aura of legit-
imacy they requested admission before the presence of the leader of the
revolution and a meeting with the prime minister. Because the government
is of the people, is responsible before the people end considers it neces-
sary that the people be informed of the particulars of this plot. the prime
minister has ordered that the Ministry of Commerce convey the details of
the affair to our beloved cowgtrigtgthrough a radio and television inter-
view and press conference." I1ex_t_/ llehran IBM in Persian 27 Oct 29

p _3_/ 11887

CSO: 10906

73
llASSlDlC 'cmc HAR' ascsuras IN JERUSALEM
Jerusalem JERUSALEM P081: in English 29 Oct '79 p 1
[Article by Abraham Rabinovich]

[Text] The gangland-style warfare between hassidic groups in Jerusalem's
ultra-orthodox quarters entered a new phase of violence over the weekend
when kaftan-garbed attackers savagely beat a rabbi in the Keren Avrahan
quarter after breaking in the door to his house about midnight Saturday.

The rabbi, Aharon Moshe Schwarz, was reported to have required 60 stitches
in his head and to have lost three teeth. Part of his beard and one of his
sidelocks were reportedly ripped off by the assailants, who wielded crow-
hars and sticks. Rabbi Schwarz, an administrator at the Satmar Yeshiva.

is affiliated with the anti-Zionist Eda Haredit and was instrmental in its
campaign against yeshivot accepting educational funds from the government.

Hea She‘arim sources last night claimed that the raiders were Belzer bassi—
dim disguised in striped kaftans such as those worn by Reb Arele'a hassidim,
who are stalwarts of the Eda Haredit camp. The attackers somehow eluded
Eda guards posted in front of the rabbi's house on Rehov Ezra. They
reportedly nanhandled his wife when she reached for the phone to call
police.

Rabbi Schwarz was taken to Shaare Zedek hospital and released after treat-
ment.

The incident follows a beating last week of another rabbi affiliated with
the Eda Haredit and a programme of harassment against the Eda leader. Rabbi
Yitzhak Ya'acov veins.

"This is the first time there's ever been violence like this in the
orthodox coununity." an Eda supporter said last night. "Everyone here
is shocked."

It was reported yesterday that the Belzer rebbe has left the country for
Switzerland. Be hiaaelf had been the target of an ambush set by Bda

7h
supporters last week in retaliation for the first heating. but the rabbi
failed to show up at the house of mourning where he was expected.

Eda supporters accused the Belzer hassidia of initiating the violence as
a reply to the campaign against ultra-orthodox schools accepting funds
from the government.

"This has become a problem now, because Agudat Yisrael has managed to get
so much for this purpose from Premier Begin that many yeahivas find their
offers difficult to resist."

The Be]: group is affiliated with Agudat Yisrael and accepts government
funds.

Hen She'arim sources asserted emphatically that an action of the scope of
Saturday night's attack could not be carried out except by direct order
from the hassidic hierarchy to which the attackers are affiliated.

The belzer rebbe has some 5,000 followers. Some of them, who have friends
in the Eda camp. warned them late last week that some action was isminent.

Rabbi Schwarz is a Vizhnitzer hassid, some of his followers lean towards
the Eda, as he does. and some are pro-Lguda.

The polarization in the ultra-orthodox cos-unity appears to be growing.
with no rabbi having sufficient moral authority and sufficient neutral
colouring to effect a compromise. It is unclear how this inter-couunal
dispute will affect ultra-orthodox militancy on the Raaot Road and other
issues.

It was reported last night fro: the Eda cup that countermeasures are
being planned against elements in the Belt camp allegedly involved in the
recent violence.

(250; 10820

75
HEART DISEASE RNIE INCREASING
Jerusalem JERUSALDt POST in English 25 Oct 79 p 2

[Text] Tel Aviv--1:he incidence of deaths among the Jewish population in
Israel from heart disease is growing faster than any other cause. accord-
ing to data from the Central Bureau of Statistics.

The death rate per 100,000 from heart disease was 102.2 in the 1950-1954
period. but it more than doubled to 210.7 in the 1975-1977 period. During
the same comparative period, the death rate per 100,000 fron all types of
cancer grew from 86 to 138.8.

The third ranking killer was cerebrovascular disease (strokes), which rose
from 63.5 per 100,000 in the 1950—1954 period to 96.7 in the 1975-1977
period.

Although deaths from these diseases are increasing among the non-Jewish
population, they still remain much lower than among the Jewish population.

In 1977 the death rate for heart disease among the non-Jewish population
was 89.6 per 100,000, 66.1 for cancers, and 42.9 for strokes.

However. the non-Jewish population had much higher death rates per 100.000
in several other fields. such as dysentery—six times as high as among
Jews; congenital birth defects—almost three times as high; and deaths
from a variety of causes soon after birth-~almost three times as high.

Deaths among men from heart disease is much higher than for men in the
early years, but the women gradually catch up and then even pass the men--
in the 85-year-old and over bracket.

C50: 1.820

76
JOINT HATER PROJECT WITH EGYPT RAISED AS POSSIBILITY
Tel Aviv HA'ARETZ in Hebrew 21 Sep 79 p 25
[Article by Hicha'el Gerti: "Project 'Yeor' or the Nile in Blue and Uhite"]

[Text] The idea is not new. The dates printed on many documents—~under
the classification "classified," and small-print letters titling the pro-
ject "Ye'or"--evidence the optimistic approach of those who deal with water
in Israel. The files concerned with examining the economic value, the
engineering details, and the political implications of transporting water
from the Nile to the Negev were opened years before the Egyptian president's
visit to Israel. The files, which gathered dust between entries. since
that visit have become much requested reading material and have become
well-known in the 2 weeks since President Anwar al-Sadat's declaration in
his meeting with Israeli reporters in Haifa--a declaration which was
broadcast in the newspaper headlines: "From the Nile to the Sinai-and
Perhaps to the Negev," and "Sadat Is Hilling To Supply Water to the Negev."

The idea of bringing water from the Nile to the Negev, like the ideas which
resulted in the execution of other gigantic engineering feats (and it will
immediately be said, with different levels of success or failure), is not
connected with a brilliant spark of genius or prophetic vision. Every

year about 55 billion cubic meters of water pass through the Nile. while
Israel's entire water supply provides a bit more than 1.25 billion cubic
meters. The conditions of the area between the Nile--and, in fact, between
the sweet water canal, which has carried the waters of the Nile for the
past 100 years, located Rest of the Suez Canal (which enables the
existence of the "agricultural arrow" remembered from the days of the You
Kipper War)--are favorable and there are no natural barriers or difficult
topographical conditions to overcome. If we were to connect the plentiful
water from this with the deficiency of that and compare this with the
simplicity of planning and execution, the idea of transporting water fro-
the Nile to irrigate the fields of the Negev appears to be a unique answer
to the problem.

Just as the advantages of bringing water from the Nile to the Negev appear
simple and clear, also the principal danger inherent in the program is
nhvluus after a first glance at the mission--the utilization of large
quantities of water whose source is in a neighboring country and invest-
mrnlﬂ In regional development programs based on a water source dependent
upnn Ihv good will of an outside agent--which carries with it dangenius
dvpcndvury. The problem of dependency is principally a political problem.
In every future contact with Egypt, after the completion of the project
the Israeli representatives would be unable to forget the location of

the water faucet which feeds the Negev settlements. "All Sadat would have
to do to remind us of this when he comes to demand concessions from Israel
is to hang a picture of the faucet in the negotiating room," says a water
planner. "He would not even have to mention the faucet and certainly
would not have to make any threats. He will know that the subject is deep
in the Israeli subconscious and overshadows their considerations."

Alternatives to the Project

Apart from the seductive aspect of receiving water to fertilize the desert,
even though there is the fear of creating dependency, it appears that an
examination of the project from other aspects is like examining a mushroom
under a microscope which reveals the spores, while in fact its surface is
smooth. The issue of carrying the waters of the Nile to the Negev has
three principal interconnecting layers. Above all the other considerations
is the political aspect, of which the problem of dependency is not the only
one. On the second level. far below the political level are the economic.
financial and social problems which would affect the work. On the bottom
level are the engineering aspects which, despite their simplicity, go
beyond the economic and even the political levels.

Many planning alternatives to "Project Ye'or“ exist, some of which deal
solely with the Israeli-Egyptian possibility--with relation to the problem
of water for the Arab population in Judea and Samaria and Gaza--snd some
are connected to the possibility of transporting additional water and elec-
tricity between lsrael and Lebanon (the Litani) and Jordan (the Yarmuk).
However, the combination of the Jordan and the Yarmuk is not a necessary
condition for carrying out the project; and apparently it does not greatly
change the understanding of the principal inherent problem--plsnning,
political and economic.

The former assistant water commissioner, Mr Sha'ul Arlozorov. emphasized
three alternatives to transporting the Nile waters only, all of which are
based on the same engineering system. According to this plan, three wells
would be dug under the Suez canal; their source would be the sweet water
canal. These canals would send water to central sites in the Sinai not far
from Baloza. At these stations the water would rise to a height of

several tens of meters (with much less energy invested than in the primary
drawing station of the national water carrier at the Sea of Galilee, which
raises water to 400 meters). The water would move by the force of gravity
along the Sinai shore in an open canal; the digging of this canal, as stated

78
previously. does not depend on overcoming topographical difficulties.
From that canal, secondary canals would extend to the watering networks
that will feed the settlements in which the Egyptians plan to settle more
than 1 million people. At the corner, the canal would cross the border
and bring water to the existing water network in the northwestern Negev.

The engineering planning is related to the political problem in several
aspects, the first of which is planning the division of the water that
will come from the Nile, and whether to incorporate it into the national
network or to create two networks. If it were included in the national
network, it could be combined with the supply of water from lsrael to
.hxhea and Samaria, which show signs of a future water shortage, and to
the Gaza strip where the water shortage is already an acute problem. The
drawing of too much water from the wells in the strip has already caused
seepage of sea water in wells in the populated areas.

Transporting water to Arabs in the territories in exchange for a portion of
the Nilc'a water would create a double dependency--larael would be depen-
dent upon Egypt, but Egypt in turn would know that the citizens of Gaza

and Judaea and Samaria were also dependent upon Israel and their economic
well being. which to a great extent is dependent upon the availability of
future water sources, would therefore be more dependent upon Egypt's

policy than Israel's.

A central political problem dependent upon economic planning is that of
quantity. Theoretically, it is possible to transfer large quantities of
water to the Negev, and one plan refers to moving 2 billion cubic meters
of water from the Nile, of which 1.5 cubic meters would water the Sinai and
500 million cubic meters would water the broad settlement areas in the
Negev. The political danger arises from the dependence on such a large
water supply (this amount would be enough for hundreds of settlements),
and it is reasonable to assume that about 100 million cubic meters would
be most reasonable. Also, it is estimated that an additional 50 million
cubic meters of water would be enough to fill the country's water needs
[or a long time.

The outline of the program drawn up by Sha'ul Arlozorov also includes a
reverse flow--of electricity and not water. In his proposal, Arlosorov
calls for paying for the waters of the Nile by supplying electricity to
the 'El 'Arish area. Aside from the economic benefit of eliminating the
need to supply electricity from the Nile valley, which involves great
losses along the route. it would also have a moderating effect by lessen-
ing the dependency which would again become mutual. Another engineering
possibility which would moderate the dependency is to create a reservoir
(or reservoirs) in the region of the green line in which large quantities
of water could be stored. These reservoirs, however, would not cancel the
dependence on an external water source, but would change it to a dependence
which would have an effect only after some time.

79
Despite the simpllcity of the needed reservoirs and the low cost-~becnuse
lhv Nllc's waters carry a large quantity of fine silt which would quickly
seal the bottom of the reservoir-~the building of these reservoirs would
increase the cost of the water that they would hold. both because of the
additional cost in building them and because of the large loss of water
due to evaporation. A more simple way would be to force the water to
rrsrrvnlrs underground and preserve a higher level of the Sea of Galilee.
and it is not necessary to use the Nile waters for this. It is possible
to force the same amount of water which would be saved and to create one
time reserves underground that would have the same influence as the above-
ground reservoirs from the aspect of moderating the dependence.

The Problem of Finance

The increase in the price for a cubic meter of water due to building the
reservoir is about A cents. (All prices are figured in cents because the
portion of the estimates made in Israeli pounds lost significance within
a few months due to the high rate of inflation.) The price of the Nile's
wuter next to the lsrseli—Egyptian border apparently would be competitive
with the cost of the water in the national water carrier. In various
surveys. the prices were set at between 13 and 18 cents per cubic meter
(in fact, the ability of the Nile water to compete in the Negev will
increase in proportion to the increases in the cost of oil on the world
market. since a large portion of the price of the Galilee waters carried
south is the cost of the electricity to draw it and carry it up the moun-
tnin--about 2 kw hours per cubic meter--while the cost for energy is a
much smaller portion of the cost for the waters of the Nile for the Negev).

A price of 15 cents for water, similar to the real price of water supplied
the south in the national water network. from the point of economic feasi-
bility inhibits the possibility of raising wheat over wide areas. Cotton
cultivation is also not worthwhile with complete irrigation (without men-
tioning the competitive Egyptian cotton which will grow as the irrigation
networks are developed by our neighbors to the south). But this price
makes the feasibility of producing export items, such as flowers and
vegetables most certain. However. a massive increase in the areas devoted
to raising export products would create a difficult social problem, which
anyone interested in the execution of the project should discuss in the
early planning stages.

This export production demands many working hands, and if we do not want
to create a region of large estates in which Arab children from the Case
strip are employed (and this is not the fruit of the writer's imagination)
it is necessary to act with care when planning the set up in the south.

On the economic level, there is also the problem of financing the project,
which apparently will cost millions of dollars (here we must differentiate
between the high cost due to the length of the required carrier and the
simplicity of engineering, despite the fact that the engineering of the
:wthmai carrierls much more complex than "Project Ye'or." it is not
reflected in thobuilding cost). The problem of financing is apparently
what caused President Sadat to suggest Israeli cooperation. 0n the side
of the politicaL economic, and engineering aspects of transporting the
Nile waters to the Negev. it is worth considering the possible reasons
why the Egyptianpresident made his suggestion at the Haifa press con-
ference. It is worthwhile to do this before fast-moving lsraeli companies
(including goven-ent companies) suggest their services for digging the
canal and changhg the Nile to a "blue and white" Nile. Aside from
creating Israelidependence on an Egyptian water source. which possibly
was a considerauon of the planners in Cairo President Sadat knows the
expected difference in Hashington's attitude if he were to request aid
for n nortlxern Sinai waterwork--ss a joint project that would contribute
to the advancamnt of peace. Sadat already chose the second possibility;
but, in this case. if Israel excitedly joined the project, 0.8. financial
support would «me not only from the foreign aid meant for Egypt but also

from the money hMgeted for Israel, since it would be a cooperative ven-
turc.

Although tiiis project is very seductive (strengthened in the wake of the
psychological eﬂect of the drought of '79). it is necessary to be con-

trolled and to weigh properly the pros and cons before taking a formal
stand.

9182
C50: 6805

81
SHOUS HULTII’LF. ERRORS CAUSED POWER BLACKOUT

nlvm JERUSALEM POST In English 29 Oct 79 p 2

rlc by Bunny Morris]

A live-man committee appointed
by Energy Mlnioter Hoda'i to in-
vcatlgetc the nationwide power
blackout ol October 0 ha deter-
mined the reason [or the iatlure. but
”in not fully convinced that they had
to load to A total nanonal blackout."

Thin was one 0! the "preliminary
conclulone" ot the committee nub-
milled to the mloiotry loot Wednee.
dny nnd made public by the mintetry
yrnlcrdny. A llnel report lo expected
in about three weeho. the mlnlotry
hold. '

The tnveetlutore said that the

breakdown occurred becauee of
three ioctore. none at which clone
would hove led to the tollm.

At lault were muntenence at the
Yukon switching atatlon. whloh dld
not contorm to eteodln; octet,
reuulatlona: molntenaoee at the
oome lecillty. whlch did not conform
to o epeclilc work order; and the tur-

ning oi! oi a wron
Electric Oorporatit

The committee. I
Haviv. deputy lit:
the mlnlotry ln che
aid that the wort:
ceeelve end the ey:
{allure were In rel

Once the (allure c
cornmlttee'o report
the centre o! the co
of northern lereel
"But the commute
eioced that the em
a total nattonal bla

he mechanism-
equipment at the
(auctioned proper!
ment woo deetroyel
blechout. etetee th

The committee in
oion electrodes p
Britten. It inch:
lbavit. tbe miniotr:
another mini-try e
Electric Corporal]:
U.S. SLEN ATTEMPTING T0 MANIPULATB HIDEAST AREA
Kuwait AL-RA'Y AL-‘AHH in Arabic 24 Sep 79 pp 1. 19
[Editorial: "To Explode the Myth That All Roads Lead to Washington")

[Text] when one examines the map of the Arab world, one sees clearly that
every Arab country is in a defensive position. The assault on the region
includes all the Arab states, the rejectionists as well as the moderates.
Initially, there was a belief that the 0.5. attempt to make the Arabs toe

the American line was aimed at the rejectionist states. but judging by the
gathering storm over the Gulf region and the Arabian Peninsula, to say
nothing of the Haghrib [North Africa], it has become evident that the
Americans intend to spare no one. rejectionist or moderate. Their aim is

to coerce everyone into submission--to smother every sign of life. The

truth is that. for vainglorious reasons, and egged on by the Zionists who
control it. the United States, in dealing with the problems and states of

the region, is behaving with an arrogance and defiance that surpass all
description. Not even the moderate states are exempt from this treatment.

As usual. the pretext for this behavior is the Americans' psychological
complex over the danger of communism. They fancy that as long as they
delineate the limits beyond which we may not venture. we will remain securely
on the end of their leash, and, as in the days of ancient Rome, all our roads
will continue to lead to Washington.

It is now evident that the danger of communism. whose roots have never pros-
perod in the Arab world, is not the only one that faces us. There are

other danger signals. and some of these have already flashed under our

eyes and in the name of our religion. our shield against communism. There
are those who seek to destroy this shield from within and thus open the way
to an unlikely and remote Communist threat.

Despite these unmistakable signs. there are those who still believe that
our security rests with Hashington and that our destiny, like it or not.
will be determined there in collusion with Israel and the Camp [David]

group.
We do not deny our weaknesses. We do believe, however, that we can with-
stand the onslaught and emerge from our defensive position to return to
normality. This is the only path toward genuine regional and national
security, as well as security of the civilized world.

There are those who. most likely due to habit. feel insecure about using a
fresh approach to deal with the situation. They are uncomfortable about
using unfamiliar words and abandoning familiar ones. They feel uneasy about
adopting a new line. They must remember. however, that the problem is
related to our destiny. The United States, in its go—for-broke assault.

has gone beyond all established standards. It is determined to cut Arab
veins and connecting tissue from within. How else can we interpret the
events enveloping the area from the Mediterranean to the Gulf? Our mistake
was to make the first concession. The moment we permitted the United States.
through Israel. to strike, pressure, and move at will, while we capitulated
and retreated, we in fact not only surrendered our destiny to it, but
intensified its desire to bring us to our knees. He must remember that he
who kneels once continues to kneel. In the words of al—Mutanabbi, the great
Arab poet. "He who permits himself to be degraded finds further degradation
easier to accept." The poet could have added that he who accepts an insult
encourages further insults. This is what is happening to the Arabs in their
dealings with the United States, with Israel. and the world community. For
years now. we have incessantly begged the United States to pressure Israel
to stop its destructive war against south Lebanon. Re have used every
possible means to plead with Hashington. Our supplications went in vain,
much like blowing into a punctured goatskin. Perhaps that is the way things
ought to be. He who begs is weak or unwilling to use his strength. To

hell with us, then, and with our destiny. Had we stopped begging while

we were strong. the outcome would have been quite different. Now that no
inviolable borders remain in the region. except Israel's "secure borders,"
what are we waiting for? Rather. is there anything left for us to wait for?

9063
C50: 4802

814
GOVERNMENT ACTS AGAINST SllI'ITE DISSIDENTS
Paris AL-MUSTAQBAL in Arabic 29 Sep 79 p 18
IArtlcle: "Government withdraws Citizenship of Religious Provocateurs"]

[Text] The Kuwaiti Government is determined to take severe and decisive
measures against religious provocateurs. A Kuwaiti official told AL-HUSTAQBAL
that the Kuwaiti people view the announcements made on the subject by Prime
Minister Shavkh Ss'd al-Abdallah al-Sabah and Foreign Minister Nawaf al-
Ahmad al-Sabah as an appropriate response to anyone who attempts to tamper
with the country's security or flaunt its laws. The Kuwaiti people, accord-
ing to the official, are in fact demanding that punitive measures against
suspect movements measure up to the threats implicit in the announcements.
"Failing that." he added. "people opposed to religious bigotry and division
will lose faith in their government."

Governmental measures went into effect immediately. Last Saturday. the
government cancelled a planned Shi'ite gathering at the Ha’li Sha'aban
Mosque in the nearly all Shi'ite Darb area. All roads leading to the mosque
were closed. A stiff warning threatening severe penalties was issued and
directed at would-be preachers who might use the occasion for other than
purely religious purposes. The governmental action, however, exempted
people who went to the nosque to pray. provided they left inediately

after the prayer service. Police patrol cars, ambulances. and tow trucks
were stationed around the mosque and in the immediate vicinity. A large
number of police and security men were standing by. The planned assembly
was subsequently cancelled. Some people prayed and went home. There were
no incidents. The government action did not end here. Aware for some time
that the Shi'ite stirring was not a spur of the moment affair. the govern-
ment is planning further neasures against its organizers. It is expected
that the government will soon act to deprive 'Abbes al-Kshri and his son
Ahmad. who are currently under investigation. of their Kuwaiti citizenship.
The government is convinced that the two are directed by elements outside
the country. Mr Abbas' entire family, who acquired citizenship after a long
residena: in Kuwait. will also lose their citizenship. It is possible that
the family will be expelled from the country.

85
In another action, the government confiscated the passports of several
Kuwaitis, including lawyer Khalid Khalaf (a former member of Parliament),
who has participated in Shi'ite activities, Dr ﬂamed Rusayr, a former

deputy oil minister, and 'Adnan al-Sayyid 'Abd sl-Samad, in view of the fact
that these activities contravene the laws of the country. Several persons
were detained a day or two for questioning. They were subsequently released
with a warning to desist from illegal activities.

A senior Kuwaiti official told AL—MUSTAQBAL that the government's actions
will be decisive and may increase in severity if the troublesome elements
persist in their activities. he added that, to date, the government has
been patient and tolerant. According to this official, the government
permitted the activists to move freely in order to gather detailed informa-
tion about their sources of support.

It appears that the quick visit to Kuwait and a few other Gulf states by
Iraq's deputy prime minister and defense minister, Lt Gen 'Adnan Khayrallah.
ls related to recent events in Bahrain and Kuwait. ALPHUSTAQBAL has learned
that General Khayrallah has given documents to and exchansed intelligence
information with officials of the countries he visited and pledged his
country's cooperation in the future. AL-MUSTAQBAL has further learned that
Baghdad and the Gulf states visited by the general have formally agreed to
exchange information on the activities of religious sects that have blos-
nomad in the wake of the Iranian revolution.

9063
(350: 5802

86
STATEMENT BY THE SIDON POLITICAL COUNCIL
Beirut AL-SAFIR in Arabic 2 Oct 79 p to

[Articlm "Sidon Council Reveals Role of the 'Organizations' in Acts of
Sabotage in Sidon, Set, and the Villages; 'No’ to Army Which Sous Discord.
'Yes' to Army which Liberates the South"]

[Text] The regional political council of the city of Sidon issued a state-
ment yesterday concerning the arrested members of the "Second Office"
organization. The statement contained the following:

"Since the Israeli subduing of our beloved South and the subsequent partial
withdrawal of the Zionist assault forces. and since the summoning of the
international emergency forces to implement the consecutive resolutions of
the international Security Council. the first and most fundamental of these
being Resolution 425 which calls for the achieve-ent of complete Israeli
withdrawal. the entry of the emergency forces and their deployment on the
recognized international border, and the subsequent entry of the official
authorities along with their administration and organizations for the pur-
pose of reclaiming national sovereignty over all the territory of South
Lehanon--since these developments, the Lebanese National Movement has
affirmed on every occasion. with every occurrence, and in daily and con-
tinuous practice its firm fundamental position in support of the return of
the authorities to their positions and their role. We continue to urge
these authorities to renounce their policy of hesitation. collusion, and
partiality, whether intentional or not. in order to take matters firmly in
hand by exposing the forces which have impeded and continue to impede imple-
mentation of the Security Council resolutions and substantiation of the
Zionist occupation of a portion of the national territory. however. the
authorities have remained incapable of making such a decision. We have
realized that the authorities are carrying out the instructions of the
American ambassador, bowing before Israeli extortion. shoving favor toward
partitioning schemes. and putting their resources at the service of the
Zionized sectarian isolationist faction. He have realized that such
authorities will not fight--even politically-«to regain their occupied land.
but will invent pretexts and excuses to cover up their unpatriotie and
effete position."
The statement continued: "Within this framework. the official authorities
had the audacity to fabricate the barrage of information concerning the
Issue of the army‘s entry into the Set and Nabatiyah areas and no others.
while they stood watching the disgusting butcheries perpetrated against

the Armenian sect by the bands of Bashir al—Jumayyil and Camille Sham'un.
They refused to send in their army to stop these butcheries. which were
slated to continue with the aim of aubduing the nationalist Armenian sect
and other pockets of resistance to the isolationist ghetto. partition schemes.
and Zionization. This information barrage by the authorities assumed a
physical dimension in our nationalist areas in the form of the base actions
and crimes which have been and continue to be perpetrated against the masses
of the South who are suffering the agoniea of bloodshed in their magnificent
steadfastness and resistance in the face of the vicious attack of the
Israeli-isolationist alliance.

"These actions manifested themselves in 'services' of the Second Office in
the cities and villages. Herewith some samples:

"1. In Nahatiyah: Firing on civilian vehicles on the al-Duwayr road in
al-Numayriyah; distribution of slips of paper bearing slogans hostile to

the National Movement and shamelessly supportive of Israel; sniping opera-
tions against a military vehicle belonging to one of the National Movement
parties in an attempt to sow discord either among groups within the National
Movement or between National Movement groups and groups belonging to the
Palestinian revolution.

"2. In Sur: Placing of explosives and explosive charges in some shops and
houses. as if the Israeli bombing were not enough for the heroic city of
Sur.

"J. In the villages: Mobilization of old agents and buying of new agents
for the purpose of sowing discord, generating propaganda for suspicious
(peace) schemes. and arousing sectarian chauvinism.

“A. On the barricades where Lebanese Army elements are present with the
international emergency forces: Agitation of nationalist youth to draw us
into a clash with the nominal army force, so as to make us appear to be
opposing and rejecting the presence of the authorities and their 'huge'
army.

"5. Last but not least. the Second Office. headed by Officer Qasim (Sabalini).
dared in the city of Sidon to commit the crime of harming the security of

the citizens. sowing discord and inciting people to demonstrate and strike

in order to bring public life to a halt and impair stability and tranquil-

lity in this nationalist city which today embraces all of the South.

“officer (Sabalini) deceived certain persons and bought their consciences
with money and promises of government posts. compelling them to print

and distribute an undated statement under an assumed name calling for
strikes and demonstrations. Naturally. Sidon rejected these suspicious

88
uttwpts. The city remains faithful to its nationalist steadfastness and
its I‘lghtinr. heritage which its martyrs. foremost among them the chief
martyr uf the South. .‘ln'ruf Sa'd, supported and bequeathed by their blood.
Our National Piovement and joint forces were lying in weit for all intrigues
of the agents. watching their movements and counting their every breath.
Thus they were able to expose, arrest. and interrogate these agents. where-

upon they confessed the crime they had comitted under compulsion of threat
or enticement."

The statement continued: "The mistaken and even treasonous practices on
the part of the authorities and some of their organizations with respect

to our masses will not force us to relinquish our firm and definite position
on the issue of the deployment of the army, which we now reaffirm.

"Our position on the army's entry into the South is governed by the role

of this army in the South and the mission which it is sent to accomplish.

We are the first to say 'yes' to a. army—any army—which will advance to
close the gates of shame. annihilate Sa'd Haddad'a bands which are the agents
of Israel. and liberate the occuoied national territory. For such an army
with such a role. we will not only permit entry but will rally around its
banner and fight within its ranks and under its coIIand.

"He say 'no' to an army which sows discord, sanctions the occupation. and
suppresses and subjugates the masses. He not only say 'no' to such an army.
but will prevent it from entering or being sent in."

Also pertaining to the entry of the army into the South. the joint conand
or the National Movement in the South issued the following statment:

"The joint comand of the Lebanese National Movement in the South has dis-
cussed the latest developments in the political and security situation.
and dwelled particularly on the matter of the 'entry of the army’ into

the South. It became clear after the discussion that forces belonging to
the Lebanese Army entered the operations area of the emergency forces while

refusing to enter or make any attempt to enter the area of the agent militias
in the border strip.

"Thus it is confined once again before everyone that the state strives
for the entry of the army into the nationalist areas. while there has been
no indication that it intends to extend its authority over all Lebanese
territory. This is shown by its failure to this point to effectively con-
trol. for example, the Tripoli-Beirut road. the area of al-Ashrafiyah, and
lastly an area of 1,000 [square] kilometers still maintained under the
aegis of the forces led by the traitor Sa'd Haddad."

The statement added: "In this regard. the Joint cot-land is anxious to
reaffirm that any entry by the army into the South which fails to include
all Lebanese areas. fails to close the 'gatea of shame' on the border,
and fails to put a final end to the activities of Sa'd Haddad's bands is

a move which conceals many dangers and designs against the Lebanese national
existence and threatens the national fate of the South with numerous perils.

89
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/00: ClA-RDP02-00050R000200020043-0
"(L is also important for the joint cmmmnd to point out the positive role
of Its forces in the village of Bar‘ashit. where they have done everything
possihiv for the international emergency forces in the way of facilitation
and cooperation so that these forces can perform their role, while the
(Hot Ynhon) barricade remains within sight and hearing of the emergency
favors, a continuing source of intimidation and transgrcsoions."

8591
USO: 6802
ARAB ARMY 0P LEBANON HOLDS GRADUATION
Beirut AL-NAHM in Arabic 2 Oct 79 p ’0
[Art lcle: "Arab Army of Lebanon Completes 'Janal 'Abd-al-Nasir Course'"]

[Text] The Arab Army of Lebanon announced that 2 days ago it graduated
.1 group of new troops in a course which bore the name of "Janal 'Abd—al-

Nasir." The ceremony was attended by Representative Zahir al-Khatib, Hr
Mahmud 'Abd—al-Khaliq, chief of defense in the Syrian Social Nationalist

Party, Mr Hunir al-Jayyad, representative of the Arab Socialist Union-
Nasiri to Organization and consul of the Libyan Jamahiriya in Lebanon, and
representatives of the National Front. the Palestinian revolution, the
Followers of the Revolution Movement, the Revolutionary Comittees, the
Popular Comittees and Confederations, the Union of Scholars. the Confedera-
tion of Unionist Egyptian Students in Lebanon, the Egyptian Nasirite Popular
Organization, and the Lebanon branch of the Unionist Nasirites in Sudan.
Also attending were representatives of the Beirut Municipality Labor Union.
Shaykh 'Adil al—‘Urvan. and delegations from the regions.

Al-Sayyad delivered the address of the Central Political Council of the
Nationalist Parties and Forces, in which he affirmed "that the any does
not absolutely reject legality, but we want it to be an any which is
nationalist in its composition and ethnic orientation, and we want it to
he an arty which will fight against the Israeli enemy and liberate the
border strip."

Representative al-Khatib gave a speech in which he attacked the authorities
and warned "the agents in the al-Shuf area against iaplenenting the designs
of the Lebanese Front." He also demanded that the army oppose the Israeli
enemy.

The next speaker was Shaykh 'Adil al-‘Uryan, who saluted the Arab Any of
Lebanon and regarded it as the "starting point free which to build the army
of Lebanon."

The comander of the Arab Army of Lebanon, First Lieutenant Ahead al-Khatib.

nade a speech in which he enumerated the outstanding traits of 'Abd-al-Nasir
and opposed President Sarkis, charging him with incompetence and accusing

91
him of preparing an army which "lacks the trust of the masses and has a
sectarian command as its foundation." and of drafting a "law for the defense
of the agents of Israel which is devoid of any combat doctrine, but has
mnklng a living as its constitution and surrender and dependency as its
statues." He believed that building the army "can be accomplished only by
firmly establishing Lebanon's identity. sanctioning justice and equality.
and completely eliminating dealings with the Israeli enemy."

He felt that the army is being sent into the South "for the sake of extor-
tion." He said: "Sending in the army on the pretext of extending the influ-
ence of the authorities so that the excuse for the occupation of the South
can be eliminated is extortion in order to impose what the Lebanese Front

was unable to impose with weapons."

8591
CSO: 4802

92
DUTIES OF GENDARNES IN NABATIYAH DESCRIBED
Beirut AL-NAHAR in Arabic 2 Oct 79 p 6

[Article by Admun Shadid: "Gendarme Platoon in Nabatiyah Performs Multi-
faceted Role:]

[Text] The commander of the gendarme platoon in Nabatiyah. First Lieutenant
Anwar Yahya, held a security meeting yesterday which brought together the
chiefs of the gendarme stations in the area. The chiefs submitted their
reports on the general situation to the commander, and he gave them the

new instructions he had received from the company coIInander. Haj As'ad
Dahir. and asked that they implement these instructions precisely and
rapidly.

In addition, First Lieutenant Yahya received a number of citizens who were
consulting him concerning reparations. He promised them that he would sub-
mit their claims to the competent authorities.

The gendarme station in Nabatiyah confirms the statement of damages, pre-
pares the official reports on the dead and wounded, and submits the paper-
work to the council of South Lebanon, resulting eventually in payment of
reparations. The men of the station also deal with incidents involving
conduct and infractions of the law, and prepare reports which are submitted
to the public prosecutor's office in Sidon. In another area, the gendarmerie
maintains coordination with the governor of South Lebanon and concerns
itself with general conditions. First Lieutenant Yahya submitted a detailed
report on road conditions and demanded that the Habbush-‘Arab Salim road

be paved and a bridge constructed on it, because the old road between

Kafr Raman and 'Arab Salim was exposed to sniping, thus hindering travel.

It has been learned that the governor of South Lebanon, Balia Payyad, gave
his orders to the Social Reconstruction Agency in Nabatiyah to carry out the
distribution of food under the supervision of the gendarme platoon. First
Lieutenant Yahya had requested that the governor keep the schools open to
receive students in the villages of Kafr Tabnit. Yahmar, and Arnun and make
the teachers confirm attendance during official working hours, which will
help keep residents in their villages and limit emigration.

8591
cso: 4802

93
BOUCETTA DISCUSSES 'GOOD' RELATIONS WITH SPAIN
L0131442 Madrid EL PAIS in Spanish 7 Nov 79 p 14 L0

[interview with H'Hamed Boucetta, Moroccan foreign minister, by Domingo

del Pino: "He Expect Spain To Maintain Its Neutrality in Sahara Dispute"
--Rnbat, date not given]

[Excerpt] Rabat--[Question] What is the state of relations between Spain
and Morocco following King Juan Carlos' visit in June?

[Answer] That visit is precisely the framework within which our relations
should develop. It was decided during King Juan Carlos' visit to first

set up certain committees--in particular, the committee of which [Spanish
foreign minister] Oreja and I myself are cochairmen. concerning the tunnel

under the Straits of Gibraltar. My visit is a consequence of these
decisions.

Of course. there are other problems in Spanish-Moroccan relations, such as
cultural agreements, certain still unresolved disputes, the issue of pen-
sions and that of the colonized territories, and, of course, problems on
the political level.

[Question] Is there not also a social security agreement under negotiation?

[Answer] Yes, we will sign the agreements which are ready for signing
and the others will be examined to expedite then. This will be an inter-
esting contact in all fields.

[Question] But how would you describe relations between Madrid and Rabat
at present?

[Answer] They are good but we must make them better. This cannot be
achieved through inactivity or lack of contact. 0n the contrary. we must
increase contacts. He must sincerely and clearly explain to each other
the matters which need explanation and explain our viewpoints to our
Spanish interlocutors, because our relations should become more active
than at present.

9h
[Question] I have heard that Prime Minister Maati Bouabid is also to
visit Madrid soon. "but truth is there in this?

[Answer] It was In fact envisaged that his visit to Madrid should imme-
dlatviy follow King Juan Carlos' visit. but a prime minister's visit
rcrtainly requires greater preparation; this will be discussed during
my stay In Madrid. and perhaps we will be able to set the date and the
conditions under which it will take place--that is. the problems which

will be discussed.

[Question] You have mentioned unresolved disputes between Morocco and
Spain. Can you specify them?

[Answer] Yes. I am referring to the colonized territories, agriculture,
social security. pensions, and so forth. It is to this that I am

referring.
Spain. Historical Hitness

[Question] Morocco has requested several countries to abstain in the
debate of the fourth committee of the current UN General Assembly. "hat
docs Morocco expect in this connection from the Spanish Government?

[Answer] what we expect from Spain--as we have always explained--is that
it maintain its neutrality, since its responsibilities in the Sahara have
ceased. That is all. Although we could ask it, as a historical witness,
to say that that territory always belonged to Morocco.

We are aware of the balance of forces currently existing in Spain, and

we do not wish to create difficulties for our friends. As far as we are
concerned, the matter is clear. We resolved it with Spain in accordance
with the principles of international law and as a result of the appeal by
international bodies. That is why our problems with Spain, as far as the

Sahara is concerned, are over.

[Question] The Spanish-Moroccan fisheries agreement, which has not yet been
ratified by Morocco, has been taken by Spanish public opinon as a symbol
of the state of relations between Madrid and Rabat. "hat is the current

state of its ratification by Morocco?

[Answer] All the problems with Spain will be analyzed during my visit

in order to make progress in them in the two countries' interest. As

far as fisheries are concerned, I am not in a position to tell you at pres-
ent the exact state of the study which has been conducted in this connec-
tion. but I know that this is one of the matters capable of analysis to

expedite it at the most favorable rate.

[Question] Is it envisaged that it will be discussed during your visit
to Spain?

95
[Answer] Not especially. But if this topic is raised, there is no
objection to discussing it.

Iqustlnnl Relations between Spain and Morocco have undergone a period

nl strain, even very recently. What is happening between the two
countries?

[Answer] I believe that it is necessary to eliminate passion fron
situations which, in my opinion, h:ve been artificially and superficially
created. Morocco's relations with Spain should be privileged. and this is
what we have always reiterated. we know Spain's difficulties in estab-
lishing its institutions and its policy in all fields after several decades
under a certain regime. We also know what prospects we have in Morocco

for being able to develop these relations in all fields.

For my part--and in this I believe that I an expressing the Moroccan
people's opinion--we desire to make the Spanish people a friendly people
and to cooperate with than. I an aware that we may have difficulties of

understanding on certain matters. but I believe that it is necessary to
avoid extreme stances with Spain.

C50: 4410
BUUCETTA INTERVIEHED 0N SAHARA QUESTION
LDO90702 Madrid Domestic Service in Spanish 2300 GMT 8 Nov 79 L0

[Interview with M'Hamed Boucetta, Moroccan foreign minister. by Pedro
Fernandez Ccspcdcs--date and place not given]

[Excerpts] International policy has been the subject of the visit and
talks of the Moroccan foreign minister in Spain, and his meeting with
the prime minister. At the end of the afternoon there was s press con-
ference with the Moroccan foreign minister. Pedro Fernandez Cespedes was
also there and he reports:

At the press conference. which also brought the visit of the Moroccan
delegation to an end, Foreign Minister Boucetta insisted that the reason

for his coming to Spain this time was to find solutions for every problem.

we repeat, every problem. Nevertheless, 90 percent of the questions centered
on one subject--the situation in the former Spanish Sahara. Although, as

we said. this was the subject that took precedence over all others, Mr
Boucetta, in his introductory remarks. said that the activities of the
Moroccan delegation in Spain during the last few days had been productive.
useful and efficacious, and that his contacts with Prime Minister Suarez

and his colleague, Oreja Aquirre. had been important and positive.

Apart from the subject of the Sahara, the results of the Moroccan delega-
tion's visit to Spain are essentially a series of agreements which the
foreign minister of Morocco released to us at this press conference:

[Begin Boucetta recording in French fading to Spanish translation] Agree-
ments have been signed. among which one might mention one on scientific and
technical cooperation. A cultural agreement and an agreement on social
security have also been signed. Part of the matter in dispute on recu-
perated territory has also been solved. Other agreements are being
prepared, including a plan to link Africa with Europe at the Straits of
Gibraltar. He also spoke of common problems with reference to Africa,

the Middle East and the world in general. Our talks have been positive.
|end recording]
After this general resume was made, as we said, the primary subject was
that of the Sahara. Speaking on this subject, on the stands of Spain
and Morocco. these were the first words of Foreign Minister Boucetta:

[1"!ng Boucetta recording] I believe there has always been a cannon
ground between us. The problem of the Sahara was not the main subject--
it is a subject that has already been dealt with.

You already know Spain's stand and it's not my job to lay it out. Morocco
is reporting to its friends of the development of the situation in the
region. [end recording]

He said specifically and emphatically on several occasions during the
press conference that the problem for Morocco was that of defending its
territorial integrity, which has been on various occasions attacked by
armed groups who carry out increasingly effective actions.

We shall find out, Mr Boucetta said, how events develop from the news
agencies. He was asked about the 1m resolution, the last one, which
contradicts Morocco's policy; about Spain's abstention on the resolution--
that is to say it did not vote--and about the declarations of the
Algerian Government to the effect that the presmce of Moroccan troops

on the border jeopardizes peace in the zone:

[Begin Boucetta recording] 0n the first point, every country is free and
sovereign to choose what position it likes on problems that have been
being debated for some time in the United Nations. There is a lack of
understanding on this point. Explanations are necessary. We shall make
the countries that belong to the United Nations aware of just what is

at stake. During the Spanish occupation it was a problem of decolonisa-
tion. Consequently, the problem was put forward in the United Nations.
Decolonization has ended, and now Morocco wants to express its viewpoint
in a more precise and clear way. The explanations we shall give will lake
certain countries understand this. It is a question of territory under
Moroccan sovereignty. according to UN Resolution 1515, and we have to
explain this viewpoint. So, it is really a question of international law.
insofar as the situation in the territory is concerned, Morocco is the
victim of aggression. It has to adapt itself to counter this aggression
by armed force and by incorporating the land that belongs to it into its
national territory. You said that there are Moroccan troops near Algerian
troops. I assert that these Moroccan troops are on Moroccan territory.
[end recording]

This was a constant the-e Mr Boucetta stressed throughout the press con-
ference. Morocco will defend its territory even, if necessary, to the

last Moroccan. He then recalled that King Hassan II has proposed a zone
of cooperation around the Sahara. The proposal is an attupt to achieve
peace based on respect for the right of sovereignty. The Organization of
Alrlvnn Unlly, In the opinion of the Moroccan minister of foreign affairs,
should try to harmonize the viewpoints of the interested countries without
taking sides on the matter. And, since throughout the entire press con-
ference he spoke of peace. stability and cooperation, he was reminded that
when he is asked about the POLISARIO Front he says that he does not know
or it. He was then asked who. in the event of reaching negotiations,

would the negotiators be. who would be speaking to each other. he gave
u short answer to a long question:

[Begin Boucetta recording] Morocco and Algeria. [end recording]

in conclusion, Boucetta spoke of the plan to link Morocco and Spain by
land, which means that Europe and Africa would be joined by road. The
Moroccan minister confirmed that the governments of both countries have
already decided to study a plan, although it could not yet be said whether
it was a question of a tunnel or a bridge. The financing of the plan
would he no problem since the tunnel or the bridge would serve as a link
between the economies of the two continents. A possible road, Hr Boucetta

said, between Leningrad and Kinshasa will attract certain countries to
participate in the plan.

C50: 6410
WROCCO. ALGERIA MUST 'REDISCOVBR' 1MB SPIRIT
L0091015 Casablanca LB MA'I‘IN in French 4 Nov 79 pp 1, 3 LD

[Ahmed Alaoui article: "Peace in the Haghbreb"]

[Excerpt] His Majesty King Hansen II hinself stated in an interview recently
given to [French television] Channel M:

"Any war can be concluded by applying a political solution to it, we are
pledged to achieve such a solution."

This means that all concerned are prepared to discuss peace, negotiations,
dialog and a political solution.

However, it is necessary to determine how these wishes can be fulfilled in
practice.

But first let us observe that a political solution has been mentioned in
Algiers only since Ibroceo started building up its defense potential and
armaments. In fact. Morocco has been forced to wage war and has been re-
pulsing acts of aggression for the past I. years using improvised if not
limited means, a fact which has not prevented it fron driving the mercenaries
out every time they tried to seize parts of our territory. However. ever
since it became known that Morocco will have the arms it needs to deal with
the arms possessed by the other side and thus reduce a flagrant inbalance,
the tone has changed. The peevish, even hatred-filled reaction which narked
the announcement that the United States will supply arms to Morocco is sig-
nificant in this respect. Hopes were entertained that as a result of various
pressures Horocco would be prevented fro- acquiring the meana it needs to de
fend itself and would be forced to accept an inossd peace.

We believe that our ability to negotiate from strength is a precondition for
any peace initiative.

Having said this, our determination to defend ourselves is only equalled by
our willingness to negotiate. However. first and format, we-nust gain con-

trol over the territory and, especially, remain vigilant. not to say nia-
trustful. He oust not reduce our war effort under the pretext that peace

is being mentioned by everybody and, as a result, fall into a trap to be

100
expected in the prevailing situation. We have repeatedly fallen victim to
our good faith and desire for peace. Therefore, it is more than ever neces-
sary to remain vigilant.

However. in accordance with everybody's wishes, we are willing to enter into
negotiations with Algeria. True, Algiers has rejected the idea of such ne-
gotiations, but international opinion is perfectly aware that, in fact. that
present dispute involves the two countries and that nothing can be settled
without direct contact.

Algiers will be the more willing to engage in negotiations because the pres-
ence on its soil of an international brigade armed to the teeth entails some
problems for it, since there have been many examples in history of troops of
this kind--centurions in Rome and Janissariss in the Ottoman Empire. for in-
stance-being finally used for a purpose conpletely different from that for
which they were created.

In fact. a disagreement had existed between Morocco and Algeria long before
the Sahara conflict arose. This conflict is a consequence of the original
disagreement, its by-product, as it were, and a means for exerting pressure
on Morocco which will become a problem of only secondary importance for
Algeria once dialog at last begins.

The original dispute was partly settled as a result of the 1969 Ifrane agree—
ment and the conventions signed and statement issued during the 1976 ninth OAU
stunnit in Rabat.

Therefore. it is necessary to rediscover the Ifrane spirit and go back to

the Rabat agreements and this can only be achieved through direct negotiations.
A settlement of disputes between the two countries is a political prerequisite
for any settlement which will at last open wide the doors to peace in the
Maghreb.

C80: “00

101
'LE NATIN' DENIES MOROCCO IS ANTI-SOVIET, HITS USSR SAHARA STANCE
[.0071053 Casablanca LB MATIN in French 26 Oct 79 pp 1, 1. LI)

[Ahmed Alaoui Article: "About Principles and Deeds"

[Excerpt] In a series of articles in which we analyzed and criticized objec—
tively the Soviet Union's policy with respect to the Sahara conflict we de-
nounced the comunist bloc's support for our adversaries both in the political
and in the nilitary spheres and referred, anon; other things, to the supply
of ultrasophisticated arms to mercenaries through Algeria and Libya.

This behavior constitutes a hostile act toward Morocco since Moscow is fully
aware that these arms will be used to support acts of aggression against our
territory and army.

Therefore, it seems clear that the conunist bloc is an objective ally of our
adversaries.

We also recalled that Morocco has always looked upon the USSR as a friendly
country. We have always sought to insure that our relations with the Soviet
Union are of an exemplary nature. Neither Morocco nor its politicians nor
its press have ever indulged in either systentic anti-Sovietisa or visceral
anticomunism. Is there any need to recall in connection with this that
Morocco is the only Third World country in which a comist party is allowed
to exist legally and where it can freely express its ideas? Purthemre. the
Moroccan Consunist Party is what is called an orthodox party—it is pro-
Soviet.

All that we ask for in return is reciprocity.

Further-ore, we have concluded important cooperation agree-ants with the
USSR and Ibracco is the Soviet Union's most inportant trade partner in Africa.
This should also deserve some consideration.

As we mentioned before. the Soviet Union and its allies have instead adopted
a profoundly hostile attitude toward us, at least as far as the Sahara prob-
len is concerned.

Uith respect to this, Comrade Ali 'Yats's reactions have been significant.

In a long article entitled "Let Us Have the Courage To Revise Our Policy"
published in his newspaper AL-MYANB he attacks our views and does his utmst
to justify the Soviet policy with respect to the Sahara conflict.

680: 111100 102
USSR AMBASSADOR 0N 'VERY GOOD RESULTS' OF COOPERATION WITH MOROCCO
1.0091533 Casablanca LE MATH! in French 3 Nov 79 p 4 LD
[Unattributed report: "Soviet-Moroccan Relations Are Excellent"]

[Text] Celebrating the 63d anniversary of the Russian revolution, the
Morocco-USSR Friendship Association organized at the Soviet Cultural Center

in Rabat various events in which diplomats, writers and some other personali-
ties participated.

Speaking on this occasion, Soviet Ambassador to Morocco Yevgeniy Nersesov
first mentioned the level of development achieved by the Soviet socialist
republics and the actions which have made it possible. lie then discussed
Moroccan-Soviet relations.

The ambassador stated with reference to these relations: "I an very pleased
to be able to observe that relations between the USSR and Ibrocco based on
friendship and cooperation are now developing at an even sore rapid rate on
the basis of strict respect for the principle of equality of rights and

mutual advantage, providing a good example of relations between states with
different social systas."

Discussing at some length the nature of these relations, Nersesov emphasized
the fact that the USSR contributes toward development in Morocco. The two
countries cooperate in all spheres, including the cultural sphere, to which,
the diplomat continued. special attention is paid by the Soviet govern-ant,
as is shown by the fact that not less than 300 young Moroccans are studying
in the Soviet Union and at least 250 have been trained there.

Calling for increased cooperation between the two countries, which has already
produced very good results, the ambassador expressed the view that friendship
associations shOuld be created both in Morocco and in the USSR to acquaint
people with the two countries' cultural achievements and contribute to the
development of mutual relations.

Thanking the morocco-USSR Friendship Association for its initiative,
Nersesov stated that it contributed greatly to the strengthening of the bonds
existing between the two countries.

C80: 6400
103
MOROCCAN SOCIALISTS URGE RELEASE OF PARTY WES HELD IN ALGIERS
LD080951 Casablanca LE MATIN in French 31 Oct 79 p 3 LD
[Hap report: "USP? Letter to Bight Progressive Arab Partiea"]

[Text] Rabat, 31 October-The [Moroccan] Socialist Union of People's l’orces
(USP?) has sent a letter to eight progressive Arab political parties asking
them to call on the Algerian authorities to release sole of its more ar-

rested in Algiers recently for refusing to support Algiers' ideas on Algerian
policy in Northwest Africa.

in its letter. published on Tuesday by AL-MDIIARRIR, the USP? laintains that
the Algerian authorities have launched a wave of arrests along 08?? militants
in Algeria vho. despite "administrative pressures. mental coercion and at-
tempts to bribe then," reject Algeria's proposals which are ailed at asking

then adopt a hostile attitude to our people's struggle for their territorial
integrity.

"For instance." the letter adds. "Hr Ibrahim Kalal and Mr Mustapha el-A-ari.
who have been living in Algeria since 1963, were arrested last week and held
at military police headquarters without any specific charge being brought or
legal proof provided aside fron the fact that they refused and still refuse

to support the separatist and tribal ideas upheld by the Algerian authorities

under the cloak of self—determination for our Sequiet s1 Basra and Oued deahab
Saharan zones.

"Therefore," the letter adds, "the USP? politburo asks you to do all you
can to approach the Algerian National Liberation Front urgently to obtain
the release of all those detained and permission for than to leave Algeria."

This letter has been sent to the Destourian Socialist Party (Tunisia), the
national sound of the Ba'ath Arab Socialist Party (Syria and Iraq). the
Progressive Socialist Party (Lebanon), the PLO, the National Progressive
Unionist Party (Egypt), the Yemen Socialist Party (South Yuan) and the
Socialist Revolutionary Party (Sonalia).

C80: “00

10h
OPPOSITIONIST REPUTES CLAIMS OF ARREST 0P USP? ACTIVISTS
Algiers AL-SHA'B in Arabic 29 Oct 79 p 5

[Text] In a press conference held in Algiers on 28 October, Mr Mohamed

Lntifi El Annmri, a former activist in the Moroccan National Union of People‘s
Forces, categorically denied that he had been arrested during his stay in
Algeria or that he had been subjected to any kind of pressure.

In a text which he delivered to the press, Mr Latifi castigated the biased
attitudes of the western news agencies which have reported news without
verifying its source and authenticity.

In its latest issue, the Moroccan Socialist [Text incorrectly uaes 'National.‘]
Union of People's Forces (USP?) weekly LIBERATION reported that USP? activists
residing in Algeria were being arrested. Mr Latifi El Almari who is also
known by his non de guerre, Moustapha Bl Annari, is presently working as a

professor of economics at the Technological Institute for Connerce in Ben-
Aknoun.

After residing in Algeria since independence. he went to Yugoslavia in 1966
to continue his education.

In 1965, he was residing in Syria where he received training in the Palestinian
camps. Mr Latifi returned to Algeria in 1970 to work as a teacher.

After the failure of the 23 Mars opposition novenent, it appears that he
ceased all political activities in the opposition to the Moroccan regine. He
has called for the unification of movements in opposition to Masean II for
the sake of note effective political action.

C50: 4602
DEVELOPMENT OF FREE ZONES PRAISED

Damascus AL-TBAHRAH in Arabic 15 Sep 79 p 5

(Article: "Syrian Free Zones: a Forward-Looking Experiment in the Area of
Free Zones Throughout the Horld"]

[Text] Syrian free zones, a fruit of the rectification movement led by
struggling comrade Hafiz al-Asad, President of the Syrian Arab Republic,
are rapidly and continuously expanding their full national, Arab, and inter-
national dimensiona in promoting economic and social development in the
Syrian Arab Region and in helping, both directly and indirectly, to revive
the national economy and provide it with financial and technological re-
sources. expertise and potential and, consequently, helping to increase
natlonai and per capita income, to provide large numbers of new jobs, and
to improve the standard of living of the Syrian Arab citizen. From another
angle, with their flexibility, facilities, incentives, and exemptions [from
certain financial regulations], they play a major role in promoting Arab,
foreign, and joint projects, investments, and activities, particularly in
attracting back emigrant national expertise and capital. Although the
Syrian free zones are still in the final stage of establishment, they have
had excellent results and augur an optimistic future.

Establishment and Development of Free Zones in Syria

with the dawning of the rectification movement, the General Organization

for Free Zones was created as a public institution of an economic character
in the public sector, with financial and administrative independence and

the capability of conducting commercial dealings with others in accordance
with the provisions of the trade law. It is directly linked to the minister
of economy and foreign trade, and its primary missions were defined by
Decree No 18, dated 18 February 1971.

The Free Zones Concept
Free Zones are part of the national territory but are defined, closed off.

and isolated from the territory of the homeland and are regarded as outside
the customs area. To put it another way, they are considered a neutral

106
rquums area where it is permitted to engage in commercial storage, estab-
lishnwnt of industries, and financial operations designed for reexport for
llu- punt-mu ul Inll‘l’natlcmnl lrndc.

Thry are not lluhlv for customs duties on goods entering from abroad. and
Lhry do not lull under the economic restrictions and regulations or currency
laws in effect within the region. Industrial operations can be performed
on goods and materials coming in, and the entry and exit of foreign goods
into and out of them are exempt from taxes and duties, except for currency
exchanges required for the organization and in accordance with existing laws
and regulations. Customs exercises no supervision within the free zones,
but only carries out supervision outside them, as if they were foreign
areas. to prevent any smuggling of goods inside. People dealing with the
{rev zones can use them in one oi the following ways:

vaupying empty sites in the free zone, sites supplied with all facilities,
roads, sidewalks, foundations, extensions, etc., for building their plants
or warehouses in return for annual occupancy commissions for a period up

to 15 years for commercial use and up to 20 years for industrial use, with
the understanding that ownership of the buildings will revert to the organi-
zation after expiration of the contract, whereupon they can be reoccupied
under a new contract and new commissions in which the commission for the
occupancy of the building itself is taken into consideration.

Occupying already constructed warehouses and buildings at encouraging rates
and suitable returns.

Storing their goods in the public warehouses, open spaces, and covered sheds
which the organization is building in the free zones, in return for fixed
storage rates.

Carrying out conversion, packing. and processing operations on these goods
at additional charges.

Available Advantages and Incentives in the Syrian Free Zones

Dr Taha Bali. director general of the free zones, says that the investment
structure in these zones gives Syrian, Arab, expatriate, and foreign in-
vestors many and varied incentives and facilities. mainly:

Permission to bring foreign goods of any type from any source into the free
zones and markets and to take them out of the customs zone without being

subject to any foreign trade regulations, customs duties, or taxes or fees
whatsoever.

Permission to bring goods in the free zones and markets into the customs

area to be made available for local consumption in accordance with existing
laws and regulations.

107
Authorization to bring a percentage of products of existing industries into

the free zones exempt from certain restrictions on importation in the free
zones.

Granting of import l.censes for importing the products of the industries
nwntioned earlier without converting the value abroad.

Exemption of the above industrial products from customs duties by the pro-
portion or local materials involved in the manufacture. They also benefit
from the reduction if they involve 40 percent local materials and labor.

Permits to set up banking establishments within the territory of the free
zones In order to carry out the financing of various commercial and in-
dustrial activities and functions and provide all banking services required
by the operations of investors in these zones. The Syrian Commercial Bank
has opened two branches. one in the free zone in Damascus and the other in
the free zone in Aleppo. and they are actively and successfully operating
in accordance with tne regulations that have been adopted. They have a
high rate of return and have engaged in extensive banking operations, to
the advantage of the Syrian Commercial Bank and the investment activities
in the free zones and of the national economy in general.

Licenses to supply national and foreign ships with maritime equipment from
the free zones. in accordance with pertinent regulations as contained in the
Investment regulations in the agreement with customs.

Use of the buildings that the General Organization for Free Zones puts at
the disposal of investors there and which are supplied with all facilities,
roads. sidewalks, electrical and telephone connections, and the necessary
equipment such as loading and unloading apparatus, etc.. in return for
annual rentals equitable to all parties.

All materials, goods, equipment, and machinery placed in the free zones in
Syria which originally arrived directly from the country of origin through
Syrian ports, airports or post or by land into Syria will be exempt from
the provisions governing direct import from the country of origin, and

from any violation of prior permit regulations in the event importation

is made to Syrian markets. They will be considered not subject to the
approval of the cabinet if they are imported into the Syrian market. with
the approval of the Ministry of Economy and Foreign Trade, and in accordance
with the proposal of the General Organization for Free Zones, the owners of
industrial projects in Syrian free zones may be permitted to introduce pro-
ducts in quantities up to a maximum of 20 percent of the value of their ex-
ports of these goods to foreign markets into the Syrian market exempt from
import restrictions. except as regards restrictions on controlling or
limiting imports or Arab boycott provisions. This would be in accordance
with import permits issued without need for conversion of the value abroad

and based on customs certificates issued through the appropriate customs
departments.

108
Bringing and taking foreign assets and currencies into and out of the free

zones and moving profits abroad without being subject to foreign currency
cont rol regul st ions .

Ne«---s:..ury Provisions and Steps for Investment in the Free Zones

The director general of the organization says that the system for investment
in these zones permits persons. either individuals or legal entities, to
m‘t‘upy sites in these zones, and to build the required buildings on the

land and use them either [or storing goods (comaercial investment) or for
setting up industries (industrial use) in return for an annual rental per

square meter set in light of the cost plus a profit margin in accordance
with a use of rental contract not subject to rental laws, as follows:

1 year for uncovered sites to be used for storage without erecting buildings
or industrial equipment on them.

[5 years for uncovered sites to be used for erecting buildings for storage.

20 years for uncovered sites to be used for erecting buildings for industries
and processing operations.

Upon termination of these contracts, they would be renewed on a yearly

basis unless the party concerned, 3 months before expiration of the contract.
expresses a wish not to renew. The organization can permit occupants of
special sites to sublet occupancy rights to others on condition that the
term of the new contract not exceed the term of the first contract. Action
to conclude contracts with the free zones are to be initiated by submitting
an occupancy request in writing to the management of the free zone where

the party wishes to invest, setting forth the purpose, the types of goods

to be stored or manufacted, the area needed, and the buildings. industrial
facilities, and equipment erected.

Development of Syrian Free Zones, Stages Completed, and Results Achieved
Following are the existing free zones in the Syrian Arab Region:

The free zone in Damascus. It covers a total area of 88,500 square meters.
Existing industries can be broken down to nine plants (toothpaste, medicine,-
readymade clothing, perfume essences, candies, olive oil packing, foodstuffs

industry, tricot garments) in addition to nine warehouses. It has empty space
ready for private investment.

The free zone in Aleppo. This zone is 15 kilo-stern north of Aleppo and

has a railroad running through it connecting it with the port of al-Ladhiqiyah
inside Syria and with Iraq and Turkey abroad. It has a total area of 1.5
million square meters, of which 150,000 square meters have been earmarked

for the first stage and work is underway to expand to a siailar size. It

was opened for investment in late 1975, and there are now 21 industrial
establishments and 32 couercial establishments.

109
The free zone in al-Ladhiqiyah. This area is located near the plywood plant
at the entrance to the city of al—Ladbiqiyah and covers a total or 765 [as
published] square meters, of which 2,300 square meters have been earmarked
for the first stage, this area having been provided with all necessary
utilillvs. 1hla area has been open for investment since 1976 and contains
three industrial establishments: a fruit juice plant, an agricultural
rhumlrnls plant, and a goathair yarn and textile plant. Approval was granted
in late 1978 for licensing the construction of a tire retreading plant and a

new facility for constructing a cold storage plant to cover a total area of
3,400 square meters.

The free zone at Damascus International Airport. It covers an area of
30,000 Square meters, plus an area of 200,000 square meters that has been
readied for future expansion. This area was set up to store air freight

and light technical industries. It now handles goods arriving in the region
via airline companies. A section of the previously erected buildings has
been used to set up five commercial establishments and one industrial
establishment for producing medicines and cosmetics.

The iree zone in Tartus. The old free zone in the port had a total area of
36,000 square meters and was opened in 1976. It cost a total of 750,000
Syrian pounds. while its income amounted to more than 2.5 million pounds--
that is, more than three times its cost. Early this year it was turned over

to the port company after the new free zone was completed and opened for
investment in early 1979.

The new free zone in Tartus is located parallel to the port and has a total
or 500,000 square meters making it a fine site. It has been provided with
all necessary utilities—~water. electricity, and telephones. This zone was
opened for investment in late 1978. Approval was given to license a foreign
company to erect metal buildings over an area of 20,000 square meters. All
construction work is expected to be complete in 1980.

The free zone in 'Adra. The public area of this zone totals 4 million square
meters, all of which is owned by the state. and is the largest of the zones.
or this area, 600,000 square meters have been earmarked for the first stage,
in addition to 100.000 square meters set aside for a vehicle sales park. as
there has been a great deal of activity in this business, and 'Adra now
supplies all neighboring countries, as well as the countries of the Gulf

and iron. with foreign vehicles. All administrative and necessary public
utilities (buildings for repair shops and fire departments) have been con-
structed. Two large warehouses covering an area of 8,000 square meters have
been built and are now ready for use. Although construction of this zone
and its buildings and facilities is not yet complete, the organization

began accepting investment applications from investors in 1978, as the board
of directors approved licensing the construction of the following industrial
establishments: a sensitized paper plant, a pipe plant, a keyblank plant.

a plant for the drug and cosmetics industry, a curtain rod assembly plant,

a plant to manufacture refrigerators and air conditioners, and a motor
assembly plant. These plants are now under construction, as are the

110
facilities of the zone itself. Construction of each is going on side by
side, and they will be completed and put to use.

Activities of Syrian Free Zones in the Arab and International Areas

The Syrian free zones have been active in Arab and international arenas

and have been able to obtain decisions and recommendations about the free
zones and their role in Syrian economic develop-eat and integration, as

well as the international dimensions which they have assumed and which are
growing year after year. whether in the framework of organization, coopera-
tion or coordination. The United Nations Industrial Development Organization
[UNinol has advocated more than one Arab and international conference for
free zones to mutually study their affairs and the possibility of developing
and moving forward. The most important result of these conferences and
meetings is the establishment of an international federation of free zones,
which has selected Manila, capital of the Philippines, as its headquarters.
The Syrian Arab Republic was elected as a member of the federation's execu-
tive bureau because of its tangible Arab and international activity. the
progress of its experiment. and the fact that it is considered a pioneer in
the field or free zones throughout the world. A number of ether Arab organi-

zations. such as the Organization of Economic Unity and the Arab Organization
of Administrative Sciences. have convened such meetings and conferences at

the Arab level. The most important result of them has been approval of the

principle of establishing an Arab federation of free zones on the pattern
or the international one.

8389
C50: 4802
(Zi)'l“l‘(lN PMCES SET; STEPS TAKEN TO ENSURE DELIVERY AND PAYMENT
Damascus AL-THAURAH in Arabic 23 Sep 79 p 4
lArtlcle: "Prices Set for Purchase and Transport of Prime Cotton"]

[Text] Steps to set prices on agricultural products for this 1979 season
havu been moving forward steadily in order to regularize agricultural
marketing operations and for all agricultural products in the region, in
addition to the decisions setting prices for a number of these products.
Muhammad 'Ali al-Halabi, Prine Minister. has issued Decree No 15 which
includes setting prices for buying prime cotton from producers at 188 Syrian
plasters per kilogram for the 1979 season. It will be Iarketed through the
cooperative societies, with the provision that l Syrian piaster will be
earmarked for the producer and l for the General Federation of Farmers.

So that this increase would not affect the sale price of ginned cotton and
cotton seeds to the worker and companies, the decree also dealt with fixing
the difference in prices for transporting the cotton produced from the
provinces in al-Hasakah. Dayr al-Zawr, al-Raqqah, and 'Ayn al-‘Arab in
Aleppo Province. as follows:

15 Syrian pounds, rather than 25, for cotton produced in al-Hasakah and
delivered to the Aleppo gins.

25 Syrian pounds, rather than 20. for cotton produced from Dayr al-Zawr
and delivered to the Aleppo gins; and 30 pounds, rather than 15. for cotton
produced in al-Raqqah and 'Ayn al-‘Arab and delivered to the Aleppo gins.

The decree of the Prise Minister also ensured fiscal liquidity for the
General Organization for Gina and Cotton Marketing. on the pattern of the
practice followed with the Organization for the Trade and Export of Seeds.
with the provision that the necessary funds will be deposited in each
commercial bank based on last year's average receipts. and in each branch
agricultural bank where payment is made for cotton a special account will
be opened to finance the purchase of cotton so that the funds deposited
under Paragraph 3 will be used solely for cotton.

112
The Prime Minister's report stressed the necessity of paying for the cotton
within 10 days after date of delivery, and the General Organization for Gina
and Cotton Marketing was instructed to open technical centers to receive the
cotton in primary production areas where there are no gins, with the under-

standing that these centers would be prepared to start taking deliveries in
1980.

The General Organization for Gins and Cotton Marketing will use the railroads
to move cotton and will employ modern machinery for loading and unloading“
According to an official source in the General Organization for Gina and
Cotton Marketing yesterday. the organization's gins in Aleppo have begun to

recvive the first early output of cotton for the new season. Receipts so
far having totaled 2.000 tons.

He stated that early cotton production output from Aleppo and the northern

and eastern provinces is expected to reach the Aleppo gins during the
coming week.

it should be noted that the organization has 19 gins.

8389
C80: 4802

113
IRRIGATION HATER FROM EUPHRATES TO HELP RBVIVB AL-SALHIYAH' S AGRICULTURE
Damascus AL-THAHRAH in Arabic 27 Sep 79 p 5

[Article by llasan al-Qatrib: "Project To Bring Euphrates Hater To lrrigate
thc al-Salmiyah Area"]

[Text] The Prime Minister issued instructions. within the framework of

field monitoring of the agriculture developnent plans which are overseen

by the appropriate official agencies, that is was necessary to dedicate a
comrehensive scientific study to the possibility of using surplus water

from the Euphrates Dan and bringing this water to the al-Salliyah area through
special pipelines with the goal of restoring its role as a vital. fertile area.
a role it used to have a few years ago in the forefront of agricultural areas
from the standpoint of production.

Given this serious attention. one can examine the agricultural situation
in the nl-Salniyah area through the following basic facts:

The al-Salmiyah Oasis in Time and Location

Since the earliest days, the al-Salmiyah area has occupied a notable position
at the edge of the Syrian Desert as a green oasis whose springtine lasted
nest of the seasons of the year. and which had natural springs with sources
in the foothills of the narrow nountains perched in the al-Bs'lbas area in
the middle of the desert.

The Rosana took advantage of these qualities and covered the area with a
conprehensive irrigation network which enbraced the cultivable land; traces
of this network can still be seen today.

Over the years, the inhabitants of the al-Salniyah area were noted for their
superior agricultural expertise and varied abilities that proved their
ability to work the land in such a way as to renew it and preserve its
constantly high productivity.

Up to the present tine. despite harsh natural factors. the al-Salaiyah area
occupies first place in Ilenah Province free the standpoint of soil quality,
varied production. and improvement of agricultural methods through the use
of modern machinery, notwithstanding the overpowering natural conditions that
weigh heavily on the people and force them to give up in disgust.

Natural Obstacles

The paucity of water and the decline in the groundwater level to its lowest

level constitute for all practical purposes the prime causes of many agri-
cultural problems in the al-Salmiyah area.

Two decades ago. dozens of natural springs were still flowing actively,
providing the area fully with its irrigation needs.

Practices followed up to that time involved the law under which the farmers

interacted to divide up the water in accordance with the needs of the culti-
vated land.

This distribution was made with great skill and precision with no impedi-
ments. This was conducive to giving a firm foundation to the spirit of
brotherhood among the people of the area and to the bases for cooperation
that were reflected in their social behavior, making them one family.

in addition, the mutual division by the population of the highest quality
locations provided an appropriate solution by covering a broad area with

population clusters that were turned into village sites through controlled
coordination and skilled engineering planning.- This helped to reduce the

pressure on the city and prevent it from being subjected to a high population
density.

From this viewpoint. the citizen in the al-Salmiyah area is regarded as the
last in a series of sites [as published] which were impelled by overwhelming
natural pressures to migrate and break their ties with the land. Despite
increasing pressures, the percentage of hardship emigration is lower than

in any other area, even though contemporary demands and the consequent new
obligations have been behind the upswing in the waves of emigration.

Nonetheless, and one can discover the true situation from the fact that the
land in al-Salmiyah still enjoys skilled labor and the strong right arms
needed to overcome natural obstacles in anticipation of future plans that

will bring a happy ending and restore to the area the vitality that had been
taken from it.

As with other areas, this area has suffered from the sneroachnent of the
arid desert, overrunning its trees and fruits and also its fertile plains,
turning it into a wasteland. That, however, is attributable primarily to
the sparsity of water. This is the justification for the elphasis on the
possible diversion of surplus water from the Euphrates to this generously
endowed area.
Reasonable Justi first ions

The main justifications that make discussion of such a vital project
absolutely essential are:

l. The quality of the soil. since the soil in the al-Salmiyah area is
suitable for growing most agricultural crops through crop rotation in the
winter and summer seasons. There are some crops which the al-Salmiyah area
has specialized in and which have played such a unique role that its name
is appended to thew-the best known being the al-Sallliyah onions, which
are the primary reason for an onion-drying plant to be established there.

2. Agricultural expertise. The farmer in the al-Salsiyah area is considered
superior in skill and know-how, in addition to patience. ateadfaatneas.
self-confidence, and. optimisa in the future. His innate spirit and generosity,
which he derived from his environment, helped give a firm foundation to a
spirit of cooperation before the establishment of the cooperative organiza-
tions that were brought about by the glorious 8 March revolution and were
supplied with modern agricultural equipment.

3. Population distribution. This is a characteristic whose likes we rarely
see in other parts of the country, since there is not a piece of ground where
there is not a population cluster such as an integrated model village—this
is an area covering 60.000 square hectares, beginning from the red desert
line in the east at the village of al-Ba'lbawi and ending with the al-‘Asi
al-lnhidami line to the west. The villages of al-Salmiyah are located in
accordance with a closely coordinated engineering plan. asking the whole
area a model agricultural unit where the quality and fertility of the soil
depend on the skill and know-how of the individual.

Outlines of the Plan To Utilize the Euphrates Canal

A look at a map of the country. keeping in mind its topography, will confirm
that a canal can be run from the Euphrates toward the al-Salmiyah area quite
easily, in conformity with the laws of nature, since the natural slope of
the ground will help the water flow freely by itself with no need to use
pumps, except for a small hill no more than 7 kilometers long.

Surveys done at the nstruction of the Prise Minister have shown that this
project, which is of vital importance for production, can be accolplished at
a very low cost and in conforlity with scientific practices.

Even at the present stage. when the project is still under serious study,
the optimism felt by the people of the area arises from the seriousness
with which the departments concerned are treating this project.

Other Benefits
The project will certainly have ancillary benefits just as important from

the standpoint of economic return as the primary goal of an agricultural
revival of the area:

116