APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDPOZ-00860R000200020041-2
Near East/North Africa Report

No. 2047

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[I are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. "here no processing indicator is given, the infor-
nation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.8. Government.

PROCUREMENT OF PUBLICATIONS

JPRS publications may be ordered from the National Technical
Information Service, Springfield, Virginia 22161. In order-
ing, it is recon-ended that the JPRS number, title, date and
author, if applicable, of publication be cited.

Current JPRS publications are announced in Government Repgrts
Announcements issued semi-monthly by the National Technical
Information Service, and are listed in the Monthly Catalog of
0.8. Government Publications issued by the Superintendent of
Documents, U.s. Government Printing Office, Washington, n.c.
20402.

Indexes to this report (by keyword, author, personal names,
title and series) are available from Bell 5 Howell, Old
Mansfield Road, Booster, Ohio 44691.

Correspondence pertaining to matters other than procurement
may be addressed to Joint Publications Research Service,
1000 North Clebe Road, Arlington, Virginia 22201.
)0 MI“! (inn! 1-!“ oat-'0

This serial report contains information on socioeconomic. government. political.
and technical developments in the countries of the Near East and North Africa.

)1. Doe-mm Mum a. Man

  

Political Science LInter-Arab Affairs ___l.ibya _ Sultanate
Sociology __North African _Mauritania of Oman
Economic: Affairs Lﬂorocco x_Syria
Culture (Social _Afghanistan ___People's Deno- _Tunisia
Sciences) ___Algeria cratic Republic __United Arab

Ethnology _Lnahrain of Yemen Buirates
Geography Lﬁgypt _Persian Gulf _He5tern Sahara
Techologieal Llran Area ___Yemen Arab
Military Sciences _lraq LQatar Republic

ilarael __Saudi Arabia

L Jordan _Spanish North

_Kuuait Africa

Lebanon LSudan

   

a. mmIM-M hum

c. count-cums... _5_D’ SC. SK. 15

" ..._ _ _. a m ..T;‘:"""
"ﬁni'l'ﬁ'fh ﬁ‘ﬂhiiabmcy “mg'hfb _| 152 ""
Sold by leS i;::::«» can. aha—P;;ﬂ _.|72 :3‘ __..___
Spring! ﬁeld, Virginia 22161 UNCLASSIFI ED
M‘M'J’N'I a.- mu... an luau. mama. row m «M’-

ﬂail-any any)»
mm II rma
NEAR EAST/NORTH AFRICA REPORT

No. 2047

CONTENTS

ARAB AFFAIRS

Kreisky Interviewed on Arab, Mideast Problems
(bruno Kreisky Interview; AL-QABAS, 1 Sep 79) ..........

FLO Leader 1r. Kuwait Cor-rents on Young Resignation
(AIFQABAS, 17 Aug i9) co.00.!o-noon-oooooloocoooocooocuu

Greece, Arabs ‘Z‘ry To Right, l-‘elbering Relationship
(Muhannad Mustefe Mahmud; AL-QAEAS, 25 Aug 79) .........

Student Lender Explains Opposition to Government
(Mu'tazz Maydani; AL-SAFIR, 11 Scp 79) .................

National Forces Discuss Democracy, Press Freedom, Parties
(AIPSAFIR’ I“ wt! 79) OOOOOIIOOICI'OIOO.DOOOOODOOOOOOO'OO

Al-Sadat Addresses Muslim Scholars
(All-A23“, sep 79) COODOOC....0.0...0.0.0.0....OOOCOOOO'

Legal Relationship of Islam and Constitutional Authority

Discussed
(mm, 111 Aug 79) OIOOOIIOIII'D-00.IOOOOOOCCIOIIIOQOOO

Elou the Moslem Proletariat Surprised toe Bourgeoisie
(mﬂu;, 12 sep 79) 00......-U.OOIOOOOIOOOOIIIIIOIIOICOI

Defense Minister Explains Details of Future Any Plans
(ETTEL‘IAT, 6 wt 79) I0.0...0.0..OOIIOOODOOOOOOOOICUOOO
CONTENTS (Continued)

ISRAEL

Reader Castigates Rebelllous Kurds
(Ahmad AllBaba'133-1'TELR'AT, 9 Wt! 79) oeveooeo'eeooe

National h‘ont Gives Views on Theocracy
(BAMDAD, 25 Oct 79) .09...0....OOOOOOC'ICO'IIOOOOOOODI

University Students Take Over Some Hotels in Tehran
(awn, 25 (kt! 79) .9...00.00.000.100...OIOO'IOIOOUOI

New Groups Denied Exit From Iran
(EW'AT, 13 Aug 79) CODOOOIOIIOIIOOOI'...0.0.0.0...

Experts Discuss Solving Economic Problems
(mm, 18 Sep 79) CIOOOOCOOIIOIIOOOIODUOOOI.00.01...

Economic Problem: 'E‘o Be Discussed at Seminar
(AYANDmAN, 31 Jul 79) 00......ODDOIOOODOODDIUDIOOOOOO

Train Stoppage by Azerbaijani Tribes Explained
(AIANDmAN, 31 Jul 79) 0.0‘COIOOOIIIOOOOCCIOOOI..00...

Fatalities Reported After Clash in Bender Anzali
(8m, 18 wt 79) OIOOOOICOIOOOOOOCIOIIOIOOOOOOIOOI.

New Land Reform Plan Discussed
(Em'AT’ 13 Aug 79) COOIOIOC0.0.0....IOOCIOOOIOIOI.

Briefs
Candidate Withdraws
Anvari Hithdraus
Political Groups Sum Election
Iraqi Islamic Group
Condemnation of Iraqi Claim

Poll Indicates Heizman's Leadership Preferred to Peres
(HA'ARHZ' 4 NOV 79) oo.oooeoeeeeeeooeooeoeooeoooooooo

llerut Chairman's Election Analyzed
(“A'AREIZ, 4 at 79) .0O0....QOOOIODOIIIOOCOOOOOOOI0..

Air Battles with Syrians Expected To Continue
(23,” slit; HA'ARETZ, 11 0C: 79) oooooeoeeoooeoeeoooo

Earnest Approach to Autonomy Talks Urged
(m'mz, S at 79) IIOOOOOOOOOOIIQOOOOOIOOIIIOUCIOOO

ub-
CONTI-Zﬁ'l‘S (Cor. t inued)

Stricter Controls Over IDF Personnel Files Needed
(M'ARBTZ, Smt 79) II...OOQOCOOOCOOOOIOOOOCII0.0...

Briefs
Settlement. Policy Hams Israel
Nabulus Mayor Justifies Terrorist Act

J ORDAN

Jordan Said Still Towing U.S. ttlement Policy Line
(8355831 Haddadin; AL‘HURRIYAH, 17 58p 79) coco-0.0.0.

Regina's Position on PLO Detainees Criticized
(hL-HURRIYAH, 17 Sep 79) sous...oeeooeeeoooooooooocco

FRI] To Supply Country With Security, Riot Control Equipment
(1“. 'Abbas; AL-HURRJYAH, 17 Sep 79)

Country's Energy Sources Said To Be Limited
(Ah-"lad al’mbbas; AIPRA'Y, 18 Sep 79) coco-eooeeoo-oe

Benefits of New Labor Bill Discussed
(Hmd ﬂ'sa'ayidah; Alt-mm, 8 5813 79) 0000-00000.

"(ROCCO

23 Mars Leader Bensaid Discusses Sahara Problem
(Mohamed Bensaid Interview; AL-IIJSTUR, 15-21 Oct 79).

QATAR
Shaykh Said To Have Opted for Bahraini Method To Settle
Succession Issue
('Ali Hashim; AL-NAHAR AL-‘ARABI HA AL-IIMLI,
16 Sep 79) 00.0.0000.I.I.IIIOIOIOOCCIOOOCOOOOOICOO...
SUDAN

Opposition Leader Rejects Compromise Hith Numayri
(Sharif al-Hindi Interview; AL—SAFIR, 25 Sep 79) ....

Briefs
Detainee List
CONTENTS (Continued) Page
SYRIA

Savings Encouraged, Loan Services Expanded
(nsm, 1‘ sep 79) IDIOOOIOU0.0.0.0...OOOOIOOOIIIIOUOOU 1L2

Report. Given on New Dam Project
(TIsm, 7 sep 79) OOODOOOOCIIIOOOOOOOOOIOOCIOOOOOODOOI 1m

Briers
New Canal 1118
KRElSKY INTERVIEWED 0N ARAB, MIDEAST PROBLEMS
Kuwait AL-QABAS in Arabic 1 Sep 79 p 15

[Interview with Dr Bruno Kreisky, Austria's Chancellor. by Ibrahim Abu-Nab;
"Kreisky: It Is Possible to Solve Palestinian Issue in 3 Years; Entire
World Now Acknowledges That PLO Represents Palestinians; Lebanese Problem
15 Not Separate and we Must Discuss Problems of Four Political Entities:
Jordan, Lebanon, Palestinain Entity and Israel"]

[Text] Austrian Chancellor Dr Bruno Kreisky told me when I went to inter-
view him at his office in the Chancellery. which is tantamount to the
council of ministers, that he could sit with me for a very short time be-
cause of his being very busy on that day, Friday, the 24th of last month.

Almost the entire state was busy with the U.N. conference for the employ-
ment of science and technology to serve development which was attended

by 5,000 participants from all countries. One day before our meeting,
Kreisky inaugurated the new buildings of the United Nations in Vienna
which cost the city one billion dollars and which were leased to the
United Nations at a symbolic rent of one Austrian shilling annually.
Kreisky was under the international spotlights and three television teams
from Europe and America were waiting to interview him.

I talked to Dr Kreisky and when the interview ended under the urgent de-
mands of his other engagements. I discovered that the interview had lasted
twice the time set for it at the beginning.

[Question] I began the interview with Kreisky with the following story,
saying: We in our Arab countries recount this story about a cat which

used to kill a mouse every day. So the mice held a conference to discuss
the problem and one of them said: There is no solution better than hanging
a bell around the cat's neck so that every time the cat approaches to attack
the nice, they can hear it and run away. The mice thought that this solu-
tion was excellent but the problem was...

[Answer] Kreisky interrupted me to say: “ho would hang the bell?
[Question] I said: Exactly. This is the problem. From what we have
read about you in our country. you seem to us to have enough courage to
try to hang the bell in Europe.

Story of Meeting With 'Abd-ai-Nasir

Naturally, we were talking about the Palestinian issue and the Mideast
crisis without direct reference to either. Kreisky understood what was
meant and said:

[Answer] It is a good story. As far as I am concerned, it is true because
I have created a big uproar in Europe and I have always created uproar
since I went to meet Jamal 'Abd-al-Nasir, the late Egyptian president,

10 years ago. I provoked many people here in Europe with that action of
mine.

Insofar as I am concerned, I must say that this issue is not connected
mainly with the oil problem because I started my efforts long ago and when
the oil price was of no significance other than to those engaged in the

oil industry. The price was important to the companies and to the refineries
but not to us as consumers.

I met 'Abd-al-Nasir, as I have already said. when going to Cairo was not
at all encouraged in Europe, contrary to the present time when going to

it is popular and comon among the European politicans. I was perhaps

the first European foreign minister to go there. This is why the oil issue
does not constitute a factor in my case. I am an old socialist democrat,

I learned a lot in Karl Marx's school and I know that the economic facts
are not usually tied to ethics and moral principles. Therefore, I believe
that if the Middle East problem is solved suddenly tomorrow in some way,
this solution will not affect the oil price equation.

There are two important aspects for me in this issue, namely that there

is an existing problem in this regard and I, as a human being and a soci-
alist, wish to overcome human suffering wherever it exists in the world.
The second aspect is that this problem constitutes a danger to world peace,
to European peace and to detente because the major powers are inVolved

in it. As a political human being engaged in politics, I support finding
a solution for this problem.

As for the oil issue, there is one aspect, namely that this issue has
made the politicians and others and the public opinion more sensitive

to the problem. To return to the story of the bell, I have tried as hard
as I can to ring the bell. For 20 years, I have been talking about the
need to find a peaceful solution to the Mideast problem.

[Question] Do you think that you have achieved success, Mr Chancellor?

[Answer] I believe that after nearly a quarter century of active work
in politics, I have developed the ability to judge whether success has
been achieved or not. I am deeply conv1nced that enormous and important
success has been achieved. I can give you three proofs of the soundness
of this statement.

Palestinians and Right to Self-Determination
[Question] let us hear then.

[Answer] First, the Palestinians were present, but not to the world public
opinion. I remember a conversation with Golda Heir, it was more of a sharp
argument than a conversation, which took place when I presented my view-
point and she posed the question to the leaders of the socialist parties.
Their answer was that there were no Palestinians. There are Arabs but
there are no Palestinians.

Today, nobody doubts that the Palestinians are present and that their
presence is recognized.

Second, the presence of the Palestinians as a people with their private
entity, and who must therefore have their rights, is recognized. In the
equation that says that all the aspects of the Palestinian prohlem must
be solved, it is meant that the solution must include the Palestinian
rights.

[Question] Do you mean by rights their right to establish their own
state also?

[Answer] I said a week ago when President Carter stated that he does not
favor the establishment of a Palestinian state--I said with utter cordi-
ality that we the politicians abroad are not here to create states as
states because we have enough states. I understood from this [President
Carter's statement] that he does not wish to be the founder of [another]
state. Therefore, I prefer the formula that says that what we should
struggle for is the right of the Palestinians to self-determination. They
are then free as to what to do with their future. This is my answer.

As to whether they get their own state. be with another Arab state or
establish a confederation with Israel, all this is something that should

be negotiable and it will be negotiable if the fundamental principle, namely
the principle of the right to self-determination, is recognized.

[Question] when you say the Palestinians, do you mean by this all the
Palestinians who were Palestinians before 19‘8?

[Answer] I seen by the Palestinians those Palestinians who view themselves
as Palestinians. If there is anybody who insists that he is a Palestinian,
then he should have that right. I am not called upon to put borders
[demarcation lines] between then.
[Question] Sorry for interrupting you. You said that there are three
proofs of the progress in the Palestinian issue. What is the third
proof?

[Answer] The third proof is that the world is more aware. and its aware-
ness is still rising. that the PLO is the Palestinian people's representa-
tive. There is an escalating conviction in this regard. Anything else

is impossible at present. Here is another way of talking about the method
of Shimon Perez who says that the Palestinians are subjected to the pres-
sure and threats of the PLO: Let the Palestinians say what they want and
choose what they want.

The Israelis have no right whatsoever to decide who is the representative
of the Palestinian people. This choice is not their right. This is the
right of the Palestinians and it must belong to them. Isn't it so?

[Question] Yes.

[Answer] This is why i am more optimistic, as you see. This in itself
is a good result for the present. Add to this that the United States
cannot disregard the problem as it used to in the past.

Andrew Young and U.S. Jews

[Question] "hat is your opinion of the recent uproar created with Andrew
Young's resignation?

[Answer] It has awakened a sleeping sedition. it will do no more than
make matters worse. The strugglers of the civil rights movement are

now mobilized and all this indicates nothing but more problems for Israel.
I truly believe that involvement in the internal affairs of the United
States was far from being sound. The relationship between a ministry of
foreign affairs and its ambassador is the concern of the ministry alone.
This is what the Israelis should have been told, in my opinion. Our
ambassadors are our ambassadors and if they commit some mistake. then we
must deal with it.

i, also. was minister of foreign affairs and prime sinister. He must
defend an ambassador like Andrew Young and in a position like his position.

[Question] Don't you think that the Israelis have interfered in the 0.8.
domestic affairs?

[Answer] I do not know. 1 do not want to say this because I am also being
accused by the lsraelia of interfering in their domestic affairs. No,

but we are all 0.“. members and we are always called upon to participate

in making decisions. This is why we must say what we believe.
[Question] Don't you believe that Israel's rebellion and its permanent
insistence on wetting what it wants without any consideration for the
interests of others pose a danger to the Jews in the United States and
other places and may create a reaction against them?

[Answer] i don't know exactly or i am not familiar with what is going

on inside the U.S. Jewish community. But I feel ever more strongly that
there is a split in their [U.S. Jews] loyalty. Many prominent Americans
of the Jewish faith are in the center of this split because they want to
give their loyalty to the 0.5. a 'ministration, to the U.S. president and
to his policies but Begin always demands their loyalty to him. This is
not the way to keep the comunity united. The community itself will split.

[Question] This is becoming clearer now.

[Answer] Yes. this is becotring more and more obvious and will continue

to do so. The Jewish community in the entire world may be split. Look

at Nahum Goldman who is now expressing his willingness to meet with Fatah.
He has congratulated me because 1 have met with Fatah. lie was one of the
most prominent [Jews] and if anybody is to be the king. in a certain sense.
of the Jews, then this is the man that was [should be]. He has been one
of the great leaders and I don't believe that anybody has attained his
status.

'Arafat Facing Problem Realistically

[Question] Hr Chancellor. as a result of your meeting with Yasir 'Arafat
and Willy Brandt here in Vienna, do you truly believe that there is a
possibility for settling what is between the Palestinians and lsrael?

[Answer] [is for the meeting, I had the impression, and so did Mr Brandt,
that Mr .‘Arafat is facing the problem realistically. This in itself is
very important. As for the Israelis, l have nothing but hope for internal
developments among them. However, I sincerely believe that there has been
vast internal change among the Israelis, especially among the new genera-
tion. This generation which waged the war consists of good soldiers with
courage. But they do not want to fight unless fighting is essential for
Israel's survival. But if they can get peace now on acceptable tem,
they prefer peace.

Thus, the issue is extremely significant because the new generation con-
trols the "Peace Now Movement" which is an effective movement for peace
and which has engaged in numerous serious actions.

I have heard that one of the chief rabbis in Israel has stated that the
land said by the Bible to belong to the Jews is less important than pre-
serving life and that if it is necessary to give up this land to preserve
our people's life, then let it be. i have personally read this.
Yesterday. an Israeli committee of experts dealing with the Jerusalem
ls‘mi‘ proposed partitioning Jerusalem into two sections, one Jewish and
the other Arab, with each having an independent administration and with
the presence of a general council for coordination and integration.

This is a very forward development compared to what I have heard from the
radicals.

[Question] Do you think that we have time (or such developments that take
a long time?

[Answer] Actually, we do not have time. What 1 mean by this is that we
have to continue and not wait to see because the age of the policy of
"wait and see" which was always a favorite of the his powers has ended.
In this case, we have to continue to exert pressure on the world public
opinion. in the United Nations and everywhere for a solution and we have
to let the parties concerned know that the side that does not favor a
just solution will be isolated sooner or later.

Solution Within 3-1: Years

[Question] Can you see a just solution in the horizon within one year.
for example?

[Answer] No. not within one year. One year is out of the picture in such
problems. He had to wait 10 years to conclude the treaty on the Austrian
state but you can see the results today. Austria is free and unbelievably
astonishing in the level of pros1erity that it has achieved.

1 am an optimist. If the Middle East problem is solved within the next

3 or lo years--and I believe that this is possible if a new war does not
erupt--you will see that this area--Jordan. Israel and Palestine (whether
it is the state of Palestine, the Palestinian entity or whatevet)--will
realize an enornous degree of prosperity in 10 years because the lack of
oil is a basic reason for real progress. In such a case. the people have
to work hard and to -xert their mind more strenuously than the others
because the dollars will not come running to them freely. I am convinced
that these three peoples have such a degree of capability and such an
intellectual standard that will enable them to achieve surprising progress.

Lebanese Problea Hithin Framework

Naturally, we lust also mention peace in Lebanon. It seems to me that we
have to discuss the problems of four political entities: Jordan. Lebanon,
the Palestinian entity and Israel. I will not be happy if coexistence

is established between the West Bank inhabitants and Israel only while

the civil war in Lebanon continues. Thus, I believe that we have to put
the Lebanese problem within this framework of interlocked problems because
all these problems are entwined internally with one another.
[Question] Do you think that there is a need in these 3 or lo years to
hold intellectual meetings for dialogue among the intellectuals of these
entities?

[Answer] I always want dialogue among the intellectuals. But the intellec-
tuals have one capability. They are intelligent to the degree that usually
makes them quarrel. The problem is how to make the politicians agree be-
cause they must have a dialogue among them.

It would be very nice to gather university professors in an intellectual
meeting. This will be a great event. But in tense atmospheres. the
politicians pay no attention to scientists and intellectuals and even use
thus for their ends everywhere. The Peace Now Movement in Israel is not
only a movement of soldiers but also a movement of univeristy professors.
The politicians must [ind the way.

[Question] But isn't there the danger that the apple cart may turn over
and its load 113C through another war before a solution is reached?

[Answer] Yes. He must prevent the eruption of such a war. This is some-
thing that the United States and the major powers should do.

[Question] Do you think that the major powers are doing enough to prevent
the eruption of such a war?

[Answer] No. they have not done this so far. However, I believe that they
must do so.

[Question] It seems to me from the science and technology conference
that i have seen held in Vienna that a new role is emerging for Vienna
in international affairs?

[Answer] This is not a new role but a wide-scale reaffirlation of what
is actually happening in our country. He must be fully aware and must
acknowledge that it is a role with a limited scope. We are not natural
middlemen. I am not a natural middleman because I do not enjoy the same
confidence on the Israeli side as I. do in some Arab countries. A middle-
man must have the confidence of both sides.

I will do my share because I am deeply bound to the problem. I will con-
tinue this work even though it is very tiring and unpleasant at times.
However. I am not here solely for the purpose of seeking a pleasant life.
ﬂoral Cmitment or Economic Interest?

[Question] Hhat lakes you engage in this work? Is it moral conitment,
economic interest or geo~political considerations?
[Answer] 1 want to he Irank with you and tell you that the motives are

a combination of several things. 1 am fundamentally a socialist and,
therefore, I work as a socialist. All my life has been guided by these
principles. Secondly. i believe in firm cooperation between Europe and
the Arab world and this cooperation is the most natural thing I can think
of. Thirdly. 1 am thinking of the political necessity of establishing
peace because if there is no peace, there will be a confrontation between
the najor powers. You cannot have detente and relaxation in Europe when
you have a confrontation in the Hiddle East.

[Question] What is the significance of your recent meeting with Yasir
'Arafat and what has this meeting produced?

[Answer] This is very interesting. You are asking me this question in
the city where Sigmund Freud was born and started his work. The Austrian
scientists did not understand him and he was given greater credit outside
his country than he was given in his own country.

But Sigmund Freud used the word "embodiment" which means making corporeal
that which does exist but is invisible. What I have done is to contribute
toward the attempt to embody the problem more clearly. Do you understand
me?

[Question] Yes, I understand you.

[Answer] This also happened at the (Socialist International). There was
only one speaker at that meeting of the leaders of the socialist parties
who opposed negotiation with the Palestinians. But they ultimately agreed
[with this one speaker].

Shinon Perez was the one who oppoaed and the one who made all those
present, including myself, agree that terrorism is bad, fearful and must
be ended. He made them all understand that Israel must survive. But at
the same time, he had to understand that we all approve negotiation with
the Palestinians and with their true representatives and that these
representatives cannot be chosen by the Israeli Government.

Palestinians Must Show Their Willingness to Deal

[Question] Are there certain signals that the Palestinians must give to
indicate their desire for a certain solution?

[Answer] I will tell you frankly that Mr 'Arafat, if he wants to speed

up this process, must, along with his colleagues, have the strong nerve

to display their desire for a solution and must not turn back to the rigid
and violent means because they will then destroy the process. Yes, they
will destroy the process. Now, and while the Israeli Government's position
is getting more rigid, the Palestinians must demonstrate their willingness
to deal. This will be the policy of true statesmen because they will

then win the entire world over to their side.
[Question] But reducing the Palestinian pressure will not encourage the
world to take quick action.

[Answer] No, no. no. You cannot pressure the world with force. How can
you force us? Terrorism consists of operations that are not very effec-

tive but that will destroy the public opinion that has reached the point
of supporting the Palestinians.
PLO LEADER IN KUWAIT COMMENTS ON YOUNG RESIGNATION
Kuwait AL-QABAS in Arabic 17 Aug 79 p 3

lArticlc: "Battash: Young Issue Has Confirmed Failure of Policy of
Wagering on United States; Carter Administration lncapable of Taking Posi-
tion That Serves Its People; Arabs Required to Utilize This Opportunity
Politically and Informationally; Palestinian—European Contacts to Find
Formula for Joint Dialogue"]

[Text] 'Awni Battash, director of the PLO Office in Kuwait, has stated
that the resignation of Andrew Young. the U.S. delegate to the United
Nations. is the biggest proof of the potency of the Zionist movement's
influence in the United States and of the impact of this movement's plans
on the U.S. administration. The resignation also proves Washington's
inability to find a just and lasting solution to the Middle East issue.
thus confirming that the policy of wagering on the United States followed
by President Anwar al-Sadat on the grounds that 99 percent of the cards
of the issue are in the hands of the United States is a false and faulty

policy.

Battash added that the PLO has been aware of this position and cognizant
of its dimensions. The events have proven decisively that the U.S. ad-
ministration is incapable of taking a position that serves the interests
of the U.S. people who pay the price of the Zionist domination of their
fates.

Battash further said: We expect wide-scale popular reaction of oyﬂplthy
with Andrew Young and with the Palestinian cause inside the United States.

we also ask President Carter: Has racial disczimination started anew and
where are the human rights program and President Lincoln's principlel7

Battash urged the Arab countries to utilise this position politically and

informationally inside and outside ti' United States and to use this
opportunity to bolster the Arab causes.

10
Concluding his statement. the PLO office director lauded the courage of
Andrew Young, the U.S. delegate to the United Nations, who has confronted
the Zionist tyranny to tell his people the truth.

0n the other hand. Arab diplomatic sources have revealed that contacts
are currently underway between the Common European Market group and the
PLO through the embassy of one of the members of this group in one of the
Gulf capitals. These diplomatic sources have said that the French ambas-
sador to one of the Gulf countries met more than four times with the
director of the PLO office in this country in the past 2 weeks to discuss
the possibility of finding a base or formula for joint dialogue and to
prepare for the visit of Yasir 'Arafat, the PLO chairman, to a nuaber of
capitals of the European group.

The sources added that the European group's goal behind this calm dialogue
is to bolster the mutual confidence, especially since Europe has advised
the PLO to escalate its diplomatic activity and to curtail its military
operations because the war of attrition launched by lsrael against the
resistance in southern Lebanon has affected the resistance'a military
strength. These sources have pointed out that this European position

has been conveyed officially to the resistance.

8494
C80: 4802

11
GREECE, ARABS TRY TO RIGHT FALTERING REIAIIONS"IP
Kuwait AL-QABAS in Arabic 25 Aug 79 p 15

[Article by Muhammad Hustafa Mahmud: "Signs of Danger in Arab-Greek
Relations; Why Doesn't Greece Recognize PLO. Facilitate Construction of
Islamic Center in Athens and Give Go-Ahead Signal to Joint Economic Estab-
lishments")

[Text] For a considerable time now, the Arab-Greek relations have occupied
the front pages of the major Greek papers in an attempt on the part of
these papers to familiarize the Greek public opinion with its government's
policy toward the Arab countries and to acquaint this opinion with the
facts concerning what facilities the Arab countries are offering the

Greek Government and what the Greek Government is offering in return.
AL—QABAS has taken this opportunity and participated with the Greek pipers
with this report to place the Arab-Greek relations in the balance of dis-
cussion.

Observers of the Greek Government's policy toward the Arab countries do
not know whether this policy is proceeding along the right or the wrong
path. It is well-known that Greece is undergoing a difficult economic
phase as a result of the rise of oil prices and of the shortage of oil.
This crisis started in 1973 and the Greek Government has not been able
to utilize it in its favor, considering that openness to the policy of
the Arab countries did not require at the time more than a Greek state-
ment supporting the policy of these countries. This would have been
enough to lay down firm foundations for the Arab-Greek relations and for
securing the Greek requirements of Arab oil in the long range with bis
facilities.

The essential shortcoming in that period emanated from the failure of the
Greek Government to open a new era for its relations with the Arab countries‘
Greek openness to relations with the Arab countries has been late. has
lacked a clear program and has been dominated by responsibility [81C]-
Instead of personally visiting the important Arab oil exporting countries

in 1976 and of endeavoring to establish complete openness toward these
countries, Greek Prime Minister Constantine Karamanlia delayed such action
until 1978.

12
But what is important in the Arab-Greek relations is that Greece is not
exerting efforts to enhance these relations and to raise them to a good
level by fulfilling a part of the just and legitimate demands of the Arab
countries, and this is acknowledged by the Greek popular circles and by
the opposition parties. This failure to exert efforts includes the issue
of recognizing the PLO as the sole legitimate representative of the
Palestinian people. All the Arab endeavors to make Greece recognize the
PLO officially have failed so far. This is due to the Greek Government's
foreign policy that took a generally negative course toward the friendly
Arab countries between 1974 and 1977.

It is true that Greece does not exchange diplomatic representation with
Israel and this is something that the Arab countries have appreciated and
continue to appreciate. However, this position continues to fall short
of putting the Arab—Greek relations on a firm and sound course. This
position is most like middle-of—the-way policy. “hat is required now is
more than this policy, considering the new changes.

Sign of Danger

The red light or the sign of danger, according to the phrase used by some
Athenian papers, turned on last May when more than an Arab ambassador
complained of the lukewarm or negative official positions toward what
concerns the Arab countries.

Arab diplomats say: We are dealing with people who are in their entirety
friendly to the Arabs but who are led by a government that is neutral to-
ward our problems.

The fact is that the existing relations between the Arab countries and
Greece demonstrate the slow pace of the Greek Govarnment in bolstering
these relations at a time when the Arab countries constitute the sole
source of Greek oil and when they let no opportunity pass without proving
their feeling of friendship toward Greece.

Arab Initiatives

A short time ago, the Greek Gove;ament was reassured regarding the energy
problem for the next 3 years when Saudi Arabia agreed to supply Greece
with 8 million tons of oil during these 3 years. Libya has also agreed
to supply Greece with 3 million tons.

It has been pointed out that the Greek Government has received assurances
that Arab oil supplies to Greece will not be cut off even if a new oil
embargo is imposed.

A sign of the Arab goodwill is the fact that when the OPEC started raising

its oil prices in 1977, beginning with a five percent increase, Saudi -
Arabia sent Athens a memorandum through the Arab-Greek Friendship Society

13
to the effect that the agreed upon 3 million tons would be delivered at
the old price without any increase and with payment facilities allowing
for the payment to start 6 months after delivery.

Until now, the Greek Government has not recognized the PLO. Moreover,

the Greek relations with numerous Arab countries are still limited. A
proof of this is the fact that these countries have no ambassadors and are
still represented by charges d'affaires in Athens.

The Arab diplomatic circles believe that for the relations to be bolstered
seriously. the Greek Government must go beyond the sphere of stressing its
friendship for the Arab countries with statements and similar utterances
to the sphere of adopting practical measures and initiatives.

Negative Stances

These sources censure the Greek Government for numerous negative stances,
including:

The issuance of a law ratified by the Greek Parliament imposing difficult
conditions on the Arab students studying in Greek universities. "hen the
Arab embassies protested. the Greek Government reconsidered the law with
the aim of abolishing many of its provisions. This law has caused numerous
Arab students to withdraw from these universities.

when the Kuwaiti consul in Athens visited the Greek Ministry of Foreign
Affairs in 1978 to ask the Greek Government to spell out its stance toward
the lsraeli attacks against southern Lebanon and against the Palestinian
camps, the consul was not pleased with the stance he met--a lukewarm stance
--even though he represented all.the Arab diplomats in Athens on that visit.

When Hr (Papaoglu), the chairman of the Greek-Arab Friendship Society

who was also governor of Athens, invited a PLO delegation to visit Athena,
he was sunmwned to the Ministry of Interior to cancel the invitation and
to stop holding discussions in this regard or give up his position as
governor.

Bargaining Over Organization!

The stance toward the Palestinian issue continues to top the negative
aspects in the relations with the Arab countries.

It has become known that the Greek Government makes it a condition to
recognize the PLO that it establish with Israel at the same time, rela-
tions at the anbassadorial level instead of the current consular relations.

It is worth noting that the Israeli consular outfit in Athens in very
active and works in an atmosphere of full freedom.
(bstruction of Islamic Center

There is another very expressive indicator embodied in the fact that the
Greek Government had promised a long time ago several Arab countries that
it would permit the construction of an Islamic center and a mosque in
Athens. A sum of 22 million drachmas were allocated by these countries
for this purpose and the site for the center was choaen. But nothing has
been done yet because there are obstacles.

Economic Aspect
Economically. there is more than one problem:

Three years have passed and the Greek side has not yet made a decision

on the issue of opening an Arab-Greek bank in Athens, keeping in mind that
the basic provisions have already been agreed upon and that a place has
been leased. But the issue ends at this point (30 percent of the bank
capital is to come from Kuwait, 30 percent from Libya and (.0 percent

from Greece). Iraq has also shown interest in the issue.

Concluding, an agreement to establish an Arab-Greek chamber of conerce

in Athens: Even though 90 percent of the benefits of this chamber will
be in favor of Greece, the Arab side wants the chamber to avoid problems
between Arab and Greek businessmen and to help in the delivery of good
Greek products to the Arab countries and, what is more important, to pre-
vent the infiltration of Israeli production to the Arab countries under
the guise of being Greek production now that it has become obvious that
quantities of Israeli con-odities enter the Arab countries under the guise
of being Greek connodities.

Now the issue of the Arab-Greek relations is raised in all its aspects
and is highlighted by the Greek press and political circles. There is
full conviction among most sectors that the Greek interest lies primarily
in putting these relations on the right course and in bolstering them.
The question is: Hill Karamanlis's government respond and move in this
direction seriously.

8696
(ISO: 10802

H
\n
STUDENT LEADER EXPLAINS OPPOSITION I0 GOVERNMENT
Beirut AL-SAFIR in Arabic 1] Sep 79 p 5

[Article by Mu'tazz Maydani: "Bahrain Student Federation: We Are Seeking
Right of Travel Like Other Citizens; He Resorted to Demonstration After
Failure of Dialogue and Hemorandums"]

[Text] Bahrain has witnessed recently a series of popular movements generally,
and student movements in particular, that have accompanied the developments
experienced by the Arab Gulf area since the Iranian revolution's triumph.

AL-SAFIR has interviewed Ahmad 'Ali Bu Shulaybi, member of the Executive
Committee of the National Federation of Bahrain Students and the official in

charge of culture and information, who has talked about the conditions of the
student movement in Bahrain, saying:

The Bahrain student movement is struggling against four decisions and measures
adopted by the government against the students, namely:

1. Banning a large number of students, amounting to 212 students since 1977,
from traveling abroad. A small number of these students did travel later.
However, there are still more than 100 male and female students (not 40
students, as the minister of interior has stated) who are denied travel.

2. Forcing students to renew their passports annually in Bahrain, keeping

in mind that the passports of the other citizens are renewed every 5 years.
This constitutes discrimination among the citizens violating the international
charters and conventions, especially the human rights charter, and conflicting
with the constitution in force in the country.

3. The innovation of the travel permits is imposed on the students alone
whereas the other citizens can travel without acquiring these permits. He.
as a federation, believe that the citizens should be given equal rights as
long as they have equal duties.

16
a. The measures to seize public liberties which started with dissolving the
Bahraini National Council in 1975 and banning open activities by the National
Federation of Bahraini Students. This is something that has forced the
federation to engage in activities at branch level but no: at the central
level.

Regarding the student movements witnessed by Bahrain last August, Bu Shulayhi
said: The federation's Executive Committee met during the summer and found
that there are changes capable of enabling the federation to make more
concerted and open moves. These changes are represented in the triumph of
the lranian revolution and the maturity of the student movement in Bahrain.
This is why the Executive Committee drew up an advanced program, including:

First, carrying out Open social, athletic and unionist student activities.
Second. a number of organizational steps.

Third, confronting and failing the four decisions under the slogan of "let

us escalate our struggle to foil all the decisions that are unfair to the
students."

He added: The federation started to carry out its program. holding acquaintance
parties and organizing cultural trips which were an occasion for large-scale
meetings to discuss the issues of which the student movement is complaining.

He further said: As for confronting the unjust decisions, the federation
presented to Shaykh 'Isa ibn Salmsn A1 Khalifah, Crown Prince ﬂamed ibn 'lsa
Al Khalifah, the prime minister and the ministers of education and of the
interior memorandums demanding cancellation of the decision banning travel.

In addition to the memorandums, the federation started to hold dialogue meetings
with the official authorities. But those meetings. which lasted from the
middle of July to the end of August, produced no positive results. For

example, Salman al-Hshamid, chairman of the student delegation that visited

the country's ruler to discuss with him the issue of the students banned from
travel. was arrested and later released as a result of the student and popular
movements. Moreover. the ministers described the students as troublemakers

because they demanded rights stipulated in the human rights charter and in
the country's constitution.

Bu Shulsybi said that the official authorities asked the students to sign
pledges not to "engage in any activity harmful to the state's security and
interests" as a condition to permit them to travel. The federation rejected
this and made other moves which proceeded hand in hand with the meetings

held with the officials, including the staging of a big student demonstration

that marched through the streets of al-Huharraq at the beginning of the
current month of September.

17
He also said that the authorities permitted nearly 30 students to travel
without signing these pledges as a result of the federation's struggle.

He also pointed out that the Bahraini students at home have other demands
concerned with giving them the opportunity to higher education. For example,
the Education College students are demanding that the fees imposed on them and
amounting to 160 dinara (nearly 1,360 Lebanese pounds) annually be reduced.

He said that the special section, namely the intelligence agency, is headed
by a Briton named Henderson who interferes in the country's various affairs.

He pointed out that the Bahrain authorities subsidize three clubs which they
have established in Kuwait, Cairo and Alexandria to divert the student
attention from politics and focus it on recreation. However. these clubs have
not been able to polarize the students and the number of those participating
in them has remained very small.

8694
650: 4802

18
NATIONAL FORCES DISCUSS DEMOCRACY, PRESS FREEDOM. PARTIES
Beirut AL-SAI-‘IR in Arabic lo Oct 79 p 11

[Article: "Dialogue Between National, Progressive and Democratic Forces in
Egypt; Khalid Huhyi-al-Din: National Concessions Are Linked to Attack Against
Democracy; 'Abd-al-‘Aziz al-Shurbaji: Boycotting sl-Sadat Is Solution; Dr
'Abd-al—Salam al-Zayyat: Socialism Is Inevitable Solution; Kamil Zuhsyri:
Freedom of Press Is Sacred; Dr 'Ismst Sayf-al-Dawlah: Al-Sadat Is Symbol of
Capitalism"]

[Text] The first dialogue has started in Cairo between the representatives of
the Egyptian national. progressive and democratic forces on the national and
democratic issue. on the freedom of the press, on the formation of parties, on
the economic crisis and on the new alliance in the Arab area between Israel
and al-Sadat's regime.

The "future of democracy, public liberties and of economic and national issues"
symposium was held on the night of Tuesday. 18 September. at the headquarters

of NPUG [The National Progressive Unionist Grouping]. Participating in the
symposium were representatives of the Grouping, the New al-Hafd and National
Front parties and independents from the various natioml political currents.

The symposium was also attended by more than 1,000 guests. including Islamic
writer Dr Muhammad Ahmad Khalafallsh, Nasirist thinker Muhammad 'Awdah,
university professor and lady writer Dr Latifah al-Zayyat, journalist Abu-Sayf
Yusuf, history professor Dr 'Abd-al-‘Azim Ramadan. former People's Assembly
members Aimed Taha, Ahmad Mujahid, Ahmad Qabbari 'Abdallsh and 'Abd-al-Khaliq
a1—Shinnawi, a former minister of irrigation and member of al-Hafd Party's
Higher Council. The symposium was also attended by Dr 'Awatif 'Abd-ai—Ralunan.
a professor at the College of Sciences; Bilmi Shs'rswi. an expert on African
affairs; Dr Lutfi 'Abd-a1-'Azim, the former chief editor of AL-AHRAH AL-IQTISADI:
artist Jamil Ratib, impressionist artist Anji Aflatun, poetess Halak 'Abd-al-
'Aziz. university professor Dr Amirah Hater and other writers, authors, artists,
journalists, university professors and students.

The meeting started with an address from Dr Yahya al-Jamal, a lawyer. the deputy
rapporteur of the Grouping Party and a former minister of state, in which he
explained that in its invitation to this dialogue, the party proceeds on the

19
basis of the fact that Egypt's problems and issues belong to all of Egypt's
sons and not to anybody else. Even though the Grouping has a program in which
its members believe. it does Mr claim that it. possesses the entire truth or
denies the rights of o:hers to express their opinions. This is where the idea
came for the open dialogue in which the numerous national currents meet to
discuss and debate latters. Through this dialogue, we can reach intellectual
Convictions which we then transform into actions for the future of Egypt and
of the Arab homeland in this decisive phase or” our nation's history.

Democracy Is Key to Situation

Khalid Muhyi—al-Din, the Grouping Party rapporteur, then spoke. He said that
the issue projected is no longer the peace treaty but national sovereignty and
rights over which we are witnessing constant concessions. Many supported

Camp David but were apprehensive of the many concessions made daily for the
so-called peace--the latest being the announcement about the sale of Nile River
water to irrigate the Negev desert and the Israeli Government's decisions per-
mitting its citizens to purchase land in the Host Bank and Gaza.

The concessions of the national issue are always tied with the onslaught against
democracy. Since the Jerusalem visit and until now. there have been numerous
retreats in democracy. Law No 33 of 1978 was issued under the name of 'the

law to protect the national front' whereas its real goal is to keep the national
and democratic forces out of the sphere of legal political action. Then the
so-callcd political interrogation was devised and, consequently, it has become
the right of the socialist prosecutor to isolate politically any citizen he
wants and to abolish any parties he wants! We are then surprised by an attempt
to impose the democratic socialism ideology even though there is no such thing
as a democratic socialism ideology in the world. There are democratic socialist
parties but nobody has claimed that there is a democratic socialist ideology.
This was followed by the first violation of the constitution through the dia-
solution of the People's Assembly. It is not permissible in accordance with

the constitution to dissolve the People's Assembly except for an urgent necessity.
such as a constitutional crisis or an objection to a number of important laws.
Such a thing did not happen. Rather. the last action taken by the previous
People's Assembly was its approval of the Camp David accords. Still, the people
were asked to participate in a referendum which ended with dissolving the
assembly and with the promulgation of a number of new laws. such as the new
parties law which bans the creation of parties opposed to the Egyptian—Israeli
treaty. They thus gave the treaty a power stronger than that of the constitution
itself. Nothing of the sort has ever happened in our history. The 1923 con-
stitution does not stipulate that whoever opposes the 1936 [sic] treaty has no
right to political action! Moreover, another law has been issued giving the
Supreme Press Council the right to own 51 percent of the shares of new papers.

This means that the ruling party will appoint the chief editor of any partisan
paper that disagrees with it in opinion! All these are just angles of the
attacks launched against democracy.
This has been coupled with a policy that undermines the area's future. The
Israeli press has been :alking abOnt s new political pact between Egypt and
lsrael in the wake of Begin's visit to Alexandria and al—Sadat's visit to
HaiEn--a visit during which the President of the Republic acknowledged the
principle of the United Jerusalem and announced his approval of the principle

of selling Egyptian Oil to Israel and supplying the Nile water t- the Negev.
This is an issue on which the President 0! the Republic is not entitled to

make a decision by himsell. Even the ruling party was not consulted on this
issue or on the issue of sending troops to the King of Morocco. Egypt accepted
the Camp David treaty [sic] under the pretext of putting an end to the attrition
caused by military spending. Now. we are required to fight in Morocco and to
interfere in an inter-Arab dispute. in this climate. the other voice can offer
no opinion. The national and democratic lorCes must have an opposed opinion

to prevent any further concessions. In a few weeks, discussions will take
place on the so-called constitutional amendment. The Eirsr issue that we must
raise is the issue of amending the institution 0! the president of the republic.
Egypt must become a parliamentary republic and its president must be elected

by the parliament and have limited powers. The prime minister must be the real
power.

The other issue is the issue of the formation of parties, as long as a party's
principles are not in conflict with the constitution. and the issue of the right
of press publication to natural and legal status persons.

The third issue is the issue of the Egyptian labor union's movement and its
independence. The socialist prosecutor must stop interfering in membership
nominations. The final point is the independence of the universities and
recognition of the student's right to political action and the issue of censor-
ship on books and on printing presses. The security agencies are currently

in full control of the printing presses and no book is permitted to be printed
without their approval. Only with this can we speak about the freedom of
expression in Egypt.

No Cooperation Hith al—Sadat

Khalid Huhyi-al-Din was followed by 'Abd-al-‘Aziz al—Shurabji, a former lawyers
doyen and member of the New al-Hafd Party's Higher Council. Al-Shurabji said:
To al-Sadat, we are all parties, catastrophes and tribulations. Democracy, in
al-Sadat's view. is for him to rule. Any talk about the freedom to form parties,
the freedom of the press or the freedom of assembly is meaningless to al-Sadat.
The solution I propose is baycott. There should be no cooperation with whoever
does not cooperate with the masses. If al-Sadat's motorcade passes through a
street. we should turn our backs to him and if he asks to conduct a dialogue,
we should reject. No ruler can withstand his people's boycott. The other
proposal calls for us to be more positive. If he declares that he will permit
the Nile water to be used to irrigate the Negev desert. then we should go and
stop this water physically.

Of course al-Sadat will declare that we have formed an alliance with the con-
munists. well, we have formed an alliance with people who have thought an
opinion whereas he--al-Sadat--has formed an alliance with the Zionists and the
Americans who have ambitions. We all agree on one point, namely Egypt. Hill
he join us or will he prefer his agreement on Tel Aviv and Hashington.

What They Want and What We Want

Dr Muhammad 'Abd-al-Salam al-Zayyat. a former deputy prime minister and chair-
man of the Socialist Union's General Congress. then asked: What is intended
for us and what do we want for ourselves? what is intended for us in the absence
of democracy is to remain silent and to forget the words 'imperialism and
colonialism.‘ There may come a day shortly when a law is issued levying pen-
alties for the use of these words. What is intended for us is to forget our
struggle of 25 years againsc the expansionist Zionism and to consider it a
Jewish national liberation movement. We are hostile to colonialism and hostile
to Zionism and we stress the need for the establishment of socialism in Egypt
as an inevitable solution to all our problems. We want to set up a real
economic base that absorbs the thousands of unemployed people who need work and
not to transform Egypt into a consumer market for the sake of commissions and
graft. We want a society over which the banner of democracy flies. We want
the unity of all the national, democratic and progressive forces. and let them
then accuse us of whatever they wish.

Rigging Up Elections and Referendums

Abu-al-Fadl al-Jizawi, a lawyer and one of the founders of the National Front
Party. criticized the new parties law. saying that this law stipulates that
the approval of 20 People's Assembly members be obtained before the formation
of a party. If a party manages to get the approval of some parliament members.
the state expels them from the parliament, as it has done with Abu—al-‘Izs
sl-Bsriri. Kamal-al-Din Husayn, Shaykh 'Ashur and 'Abd—al-Fattsh Essen. If
such a party awaits the elections for the People's Assembly, the elections are
rigged up the same way the referendums are rigged up and the party gains no
seats. The right to the formation of parties is a fictitious right. The
president reflects this fact when he says in one of his speeches: "Thank God
for the Hafdists who have dissolved themselves, thus giving themselves and us
rest. before we had to dissolve them. There remains the Grouping and I am
telling them to freeze their activities or to dissolve themselves before we
dissolve them." Do these words reflect democracy?

Egypt Will not Abandon Its Liberties

"hen the addresses from the rostrum ended. the dialogue was opened to the guests
of the symposium. Kamil Zuhayri. journalist and doyen of the Arab Journalists
Federation. spoke about the old attempts to divert the Nile water. He said

that those who have agreed to diverting the Nile water have read nothing about
the history of nationalism in Egypt and know nothing about our history until

the days of (Cromer). In 1905, a Zionist-British mission came to discuss
settlement of the Jews in the Sinai. Cromer was aware of the strong Zionist

pressure from London so he referred the decision to (Honcrief). the British
irrigation adviser, who rejected the plan.
Considering that Croner had repelled the Zionist ambition concerning the future
of Egypt. isn't today's promise a cause of ridicule and pain? Rather. it is a
national catastrophe. ﬁnd there born a national press. it w0uid have surrounded
such news wlth black.

Those who find it too much for the national elements to demand the freedom of
the press so that this press may take a firm stand toward this issue and others
are ignorant of Egypt's history and haVe only read pocketbook novels and shreds
of Hitler's or Ataturk's thoughts Ireference to al-Sadat].

Those who are distorting the culture and distorting the national movement do not
know that 100 years ago, a booklet appeared in Egypt to defend the freedom of

the press and that the National Party--the party of 'Arabi and al-Nadim--demanded
the freedom of the press. It is surprising that the issue of the freedom of the
press emerges only when Egypt is at a crossroad and when the struggle intensifies
between internal oppression and foreign ambitions [on the one hand] and the
rising national forces [on the other]. In 1909, Butrus Chali imposed the policy
of reconciliation with colonialism. decided to extend the Suez Canal concession
and wanted to impose a law with which to muzzle the press.

Today they want to repeat the tragedy under the pretext that some of our
colleagues the journalists are criticizing the regime outside Egypt. Don't
they know that Shaykh Muhammad 'Abduh, Huhammad Farid, Adib Ishaq and Abu-
Nazzarah were writing abroad? Egypt will not abandon the Sinai, the same way
it will not abandon 1:5 water and will not abandon its liberties. The freedom
of the press is as sacred as the Nile River waters.

Open-Door Economy Beginning of Retrogression

Dr 'Ismat Sayf-ai-Dawlah, a lawyer, then proceeded to touch off the issue of
the concept of democracy saying: Some of what I will say will not please some
people. We have come here to hold a dialogue. if we were in agreement, there
would be no need for this dialogue. There is nothing more sham than the word
'democracy' when it is not attributed to a certain society and to certain
economic and social conditions. We are talking as if we hold the same concept
of democracy as ai-Saaat's regime does. He are talking about retreats in
democracy. This is a trap. In my opinion. the retrogression from democracy
started with the promulgation of the open-door economy law which handed power
over to capitalism. The retrogreasion happened on the day when the peasants
were denied their right to stay and to settle on the land and when the workers
were denied the right to stability in work and to participating in the manage-
ment. All those who have gotten angry at President al-Sadat and his regime have
no right to be angry. The issue is not al-Sadat. The issue is one of a
capitalist retrogression. A capitalist system must be accompanied by liber-
alism or else it turns into fascism.

This is a political law. He can either be reformists and believe in the capi-
talist system. demanding some changes, or we can reject this system and there
will be struggle. They are the ones who have created the objective causes for
this struggle and they are trying to suppress this struggle with the ao-called

23
'natlonnl unity lsw.’ They have not stated for what purpose is this national
unity so that they may allow themselves to interpret it as they wish. But
they are the ones who have violated this law by enabling the capitalist class
to predominate the other classes. Al-Sadat is the ruling symbol of the

capitalist class that rules Egypt. 80. why are we talking about democracy as
if we have all agreed on its meaning?

8694
650: 6802
AL-SADAT ADDRESSES MUSLIM SCHOLARS
Cairo AL-AZHAR in Arabic Sep 79 pp 1981-2006
[Article: "Dialogue Between President of Republic and Muslim Ulema and Thinkers"!

[Text] President al-Sadat met in Ismailia with the Muslim ulema. The meeting
was attended by the vice president, Dr 'Abd-al-Rshmsn Bisar, the Shaykh of
al-Azhar; Hasan al-Tuhami, the deputy prime minister for the presidency, Dr
Sufi Abu-Talib, the People's Assembly speaker; Mansur Hasan, the minister of
state for the presidency, and a large number of al-Azhar ulema and Muslim
writers and thinkers. Following is the full text of the president's address,
of the words delivered by the religious leaderships and of the discussions
that followed the president's address:

In the name of God,

His eminence the grand imam and the venerable and esteemed brother ulema: I
have invited you tonight so that we may discuss the question of rebuilding
Egypt now that God, may He be praised, has opened our country to us. This
country has become ours and there is no decision other than our decision and

no will other than our will in it. You have heard your brothers and sisters
from the various fields of specialization who spoke previously about the
solutions and the problems that we are facing and for which we are all exerting
efforts to reach solutions.

Our problems are complex because a long time passed during which numerous
issues were neglected. He-were then surprised by a population increasing by
one million persons every year. We were surprised by all these problems
facing us all at once. You have heard your brothers and sisters describe
these problems and the solutions for them. Perhaps this is the first time in
which we sit together like a single family, without distinction between ruler
and ruled and as dictated by our tolerant religion, to discuss matters and to
apply the words of God, may He be praised: "They consult on their affairs."

In this phase, our matters will not be set aright except in the manner in which
our struggling forefathers and predecessors set their matters aright, i.e. by
having all our opinions agree on what is right and by our participation in
describing the ptnhlom and in finding the means and the cure to deal with all
these problems. You remember that at the beginning of these meetings, I
talked to the youth and that my first meeting was with the youth. Why?

Preparing Youth for Future

Because the youth are the generation that will have to take over the responsi-
bility from us. we must prepare the youth and arm them with all the weapons
and the means we can so that they may face life, may build Egypt, our immortal
Egypt. and so that we may help them avoid the mistakes we committed throughout
2,000 years before the 23 July revolution. You also heard me tell the youth
that the rulers of Egypt were foreigners and that Egypt was not ruled by its
own sons until after the inception of the 23 July revolution.

You also heard me say that the source of our suffering was not only the British
colonialism that oppressed the country, not only the intransigent king who was
alien to this people and who only wanted to give free reign to his desires and
not only the political leaders who existed from 1922 and until the inception of
the 23 July 1952 revolution and who turned Egypt into a farm for their interests
and monopolized the rule as if they were sent by divine providence to rule

Egypt and as if we--the peasants, the workers and the toilers--had only to
listen to and obey them.

Betrayal of 'Arabi Epitome of Tragedy

This was not all that we suffered. In the period that followed 'Arabi's
revolution and the 1919 revolution, we started to deviate from the path which
alone could have set us aright. After 'Arabi's revolution. a number of
Egyptians betrayed, as you know, 'Arabi and the British colonialism was able,
after being defeated in Kafr al-Dawwar and Alexandria, to march from this place
and to reach the canal where it found some Egyptian traitors willing to march
ahead of the British army on the orders of Khedive.

The tragedy reached its peak when the Khedive reviewed in 'Abdin Square the
forces that entered to strike and parade [sic] Egypt. In the 1919 revolution,
the situation was worse. The people detonated the 1919 revolution to state
clearly and unambiguously: We want democracy, a constitution and the people's
rights. All the people were united in this revolution to the degree that the
ruler had to call himself sultan instead of Khedive at the time. He triad to
find somebody to form the government but all those rulers [leaders] refused

to do so for fear of the people's wrath. So, Britan resorted to the trick of
issuing the 28 February declaration which gave Egypt a lame independence.

Mistakes of Old Politicians

It would have behooved those who proceeded to lead the political action at that
time to dictate this matter [sic], as the people had rejected all forms of
trickery in their revolution. But those leaders accepted this declaration

and the British advised the ruler at the time to transfer the khedivaship into
a kingdom so as to issue the so-called 23 July constitution and to introduce

26
it as a gift from the king. Those who led the political action at the time
also committed a grave mistake when they ucoepted the lame independence and
then the king's gift. Thus, the struggle was transformed. Instead of being

a battle for our people to achieve their full rights and to rid themselves of
foreign colonialism and of the foreign ruling family, our leaders, may God
forgive them, transformed the issue into a domestic political struggle with
which they preoccupied the people. They preoccupied the people with their
persons and their interests and they established the worst traditions instead
of establishing partisan or democratic political traditions, as they claimed.
Instead of stating that the goal of any political action is to build civiliza-
tions and states--as it is in the world that has built such civilizations and
states-—and instead of realizing the Egyptian people's prosperity, freedom,
dignity and sovereignty over their decision and their land, those leaders
instated their persons as the goal and pushed the people to align themselves
with persons. This regrettable slogan reached the point where those leaders
exploited the tolerance and goodness of this people when they said that occupa-
tion on the hands of Sa'd was better than independence on the hands of 'Adll.

leadership Battle

The issue was no longer Egypt's freedom or building Egypt and the dignity of
the Egyptian man so that he may live like any honorable man lives on his land.
The battle and the problem turned into the persons of Sa'd. 'Adli al-Nahhss
and the other leaders.

In the 1919 revolution and in the earlier revolution that Cairo staged against
the French colonialism, al-Azhar was the place from which the sound call was
issued--the call for struggle and strife, the call for freedom, the call for
death for the sake of Egypt and the call for freedom so that the people may
attain their rights. The two elements of the nation were formed at that time.

inside al-Azhar Mosque. the turbaned shaykh stood at the time side by side
with the priest and they called together for Egypt's right and Egypt's freedom.
They all demanded that Egypt be for the Egyptians and for their will and
decision. All those battles were waged against colonialism, be it French or

British. We thank God that faith runs in the blood of our people in this area.
This is a blessing from God to us.

This is what God has willed for us, namely that faith constitute the primary

and the firmest component of the personality of man on this land. And before
that?

Al-Azhar and Islam

He must point out that al-Azhar remained the defender of Islam for a full 1,000
years. Had it not been for al-Azhar and for al-Azhar's battles--not only in
Egypt but in all parts of the Islamic world--Islam would not have been able

to triumph against the ferocious onslaught of the European colonialism which
infiltrated Asia, Africa and our Arab area and attempted to strike Islam.

This is because Islam has been and will continue to be a revolution--a revolu-

tion in every sense of the word. We are proud of this and we must be proud of
it.
Story of Morocco Conference

When the conferees met in Morocco a few months ago in an Islamic conference

to which I had called [sentence incomplete]. Perhaps you don't know this but
the call to the Islamic conference which was held in Morocco 3 month or two
ago came originally from me to the king of Morocco, asking him to call for the
convocation of an Islamic conference in Morocco on the issue of Jerusalem.

The king of Morocco cannot deny this and the Saudis cannot deny it. The call
came originally from Egypt. I asked theking of Morocco in an official message,
which I demand that he publish innediately to all, to call for the Islamic con-
ference on Jerusalem. what has happened? What happened is that the ministers
of foreign affairs met in Morocco and that while we were preparing to send the
Egyptian delegation, the King of Morocco plotted with his minister of foreign
affairs, the Saudis and the rejectionists to ban Egypt from attending that
conference.

They feared the presence of the Egyptian delegation and feared that the Egyptian
delegation would answer them and tell them that we were the originators and the
ones who called for this conference and not Morocco, Saudi Arabia or any other
country. They plotted and the matter ended with the suspension of Egypt's
membership in the Islamic conference in the absence of Egypt--a suspension that
came about as a result of Saudi bribes to some Arab countries at times and as

a result of pressure exerted out of courtesy for Saudi Arabia at other times.
But the Islamic African countries were eager to denounce this attitude and they
recorded their denunciation and disapproval in the minutes of the conference.

Does suspending Egypt's membership eliminate Egypt's Islamic responsibility?
Not at all. Does suspending Egypt's membership cancel what al-Axhar has done
to preserve Islam for a 1,000 years against the ferocious colonialist attacks
from one end of the world to the other? Does suspending Egypt's membership
cancel this role? Not at all. Does suspending Egypt's membership abolish the
fact that Egypt, after Mecca, is the point to which every Muslim in the world
turns his eyes? It does not abolish this fact at all.

Responsibility

I wanted to mention this to you so that we may know what responsibility we face
these days with you. I am not talking about food security, not about the housing
problem, not about the infrastructures and not about what we are suffering
because plans are being made for these issues by specialized people. These
plans will be presented to you, and to the entire people, in your capacity as
being responsible not only for Islam but also for whatever concerns your home-
land. your people and your future generations. I am talking about your primary
responsibility toward Islam and toward the call for Islam. I begin by saying
this and by telling the entire world that we know our Islamic responsibilities
and we are aware of them, and so are numerous Islamic peoples in Africa and
Asia and many Arab peoples who have not been pleased with the actions of their
rulers. What has happened has been due to no reason other than malice against
Egypt. against Egypt's status and against what Egypt has attained.

28
True Islam Is Here

We need to remember this and i mention it at the UULSe! of my address to you
because as a result I wi.i ask you re state your opinion on this and on what
has caused Egypt's Islamic role to be involved in these trivialities to which
Saudi Arabia and those who follow its course and run behind it, namely Morocco,
[have led]. I want you to state your opinion on this. They say that Islam
in Egypt is in danger. All of you hete are men of the Islamic call.

within earshOt of the entire world, I say that we are proud that the true Islam
is here in Egypt. Egypt is the island of freedom, democracy and man's dignity
as desired by Islam. There isn't in Egypt a ruler who gets a salary of 8 million
pounds of the money of Muslims. There isn't in Egypt 2 ruler who spends money

on gambling tables whllo Muslims in many parts of the world are suffering. There
isn't in Egypt a ruler who spends the money of Muslims on plotting, bribery and
baseness just to build an imaginary leadership. Not at all. We in Egypt are
fully aware of the limits. What have all these wnc spoke before me today de-
manded? Further application of the Islamic Shari'a and further adherence to

the faith. But I ask: What is the situation of the peoples of those rulers?

Not only the Islamic peoples in the remotest parts of the world are in need of
help but so are the peoples of these rulers. Do these peoples truly enjoy the
dignity of the Muslim citizen in his country? Without excluding a single one

of these countries. the Muslim there does not enjoy the full dignity of the
Muslim, the full dignity of the human being and the full democracy and tolerance,
that are advocated by Islam, as they are enjoyed by the Muslim here.

Battle of Challenge

we have many problems, as I have told you. We have material problems--food,
housing, infrastructures and a proper standard of living for every citizen.

Re are working for this. He are working to achieve this. But primarily and
before everything else, we will not be able to triumph in the battle of the
challenge we are facing today without building anew the male and female citizen
of Egypt.

No, this is not a new building. But because we passed during a previous period
through conditions under which man's dignity and the Egyptian man were unjustly
subjected to things that they should not have been subjected to and which have
ended, God be thanked, since I launched the 15 May revolution and redesigned
and rearranged all the conditions—-I say that we are now in the battle of the
challenge that will turn Egypt into an honorable and impregnable homeland as

it has been throughout the ages. The one who will make this event is the
Egyptian man, and I do not say the new Egyptian man but the Egyptian man who
possesses the components that we neglected for a time and to which we have now
returned.

When the young Egyptian man and woman are full of confidence and have the strength
of faith-keeping in mind the limits drawn up for us by our Shari'a--we will

build the edifice that we want because we have tried ourselves before and we
achieved maximum success. The most eloquent example we can cite--"and your

God's blessings do recount“--is the Ramadan battle of 1973.

29
Faith

In the Ramadan battle of 1973, our weapons were 20 steps behind the Israeli
weapon. What made up for those 20 steps and made our weapon more advanced
[potent] than our enemies' weapons at that time? One word--faith. On these
shores that extend 180 kilometers from Port Said to Suez and on the canal bank
and when the Egyptian air force flew over [to the Israeli side] at 1600 on 10
Ramadan. our sons did not await the orders to cross but their multitudes rushed

God is great. This is true and not a tale that we tell with embellishments or
claims of something that never happened. This did happen. We were 20 steps
behind [srael in peace but with faith we got 20 steps ahead.

Youth First

It is on the basis of this that I talked to the youth. Before meeting with the
youth sectors in Ramadan, I had met with them earlier and told them that before
everything. before university education, before the doctorate and before
technology, let us arm ourselves frist and arm our youths from within with faith.
After this. education is easy. Everything will enter [go smoothly]. After this.
they will be able to face life. The most dangerous battle we are facing today
is the battle of building Egypt with the most advanced instruments of the age.
We will not at all start where the others started. He will start where the
others have ended because this is the Egypt with its 7,000 years during which
it gave the world its first civilization when the world lived in caves and sub-
sistcd on tree leaves. He had here then a civilization. astronomy and state
and governmental structures. This is your message. We should start building
the Egyptian youth from within. This is why I have asked that religion con-
stitute a fundamental discipline--a discipline that determines success and
failure--as of the beginning of the next academic year. I have also asked

that religion be taught from the elementary stage to the university stage.
There will be no :ruce [wavering] in this. All I demand is that our methods

be developed. I heard my daughters study Koren phrases and I asked them to
memorize them. I tell you that I thank God today. I am celebrating not only
meeting with you so that we may apply the principle of concultstion and so that
we may begin a new phase with a totally new state, but I also thank God that I
concluded [memorizing] the Koran today. We the peasants are accustomed to
celebrating the day on which the Koran [memorization] is concluded the way we

celebrate any holiday or religious occasion. Rather. this day is a bigger
celebration.

Conclusion of Koran

I thank God that I have concluded today. I thank God, may He be praised. that
He has enabled me to read the Koran. to conclude the Koran and to begin my
education and my life with memorizing the Koran. This is why i tell you that

I remember 1927; I will never forget it. It was 1927 and I was at the begin-
ning of my elementary school. Teaching us the Koran started with the easy and

30
understandable SIOrir: of the p:o;he:s. These stories open up--by their
quality--the horizons nf iragznatiun biforv ihv thiid. A child is full of
imagination in this stag». So. let us provice him with what nourishes his
imagination and gives him the first joys of the future religious education.

We have not forgotten until this moment the day :n which our teacher told us
the story of the angels ehn opened -ne Chwsl of :he prophet. may God's peace
and prayers be upon him. one day af:er he had taken his sheep to pasture, got
the devil out of it and Lheu uewhel the :hest. some wesrernized people or
those who call themselves rationalists, philnsﬁphurn or atheists may cast doubt
on this story. But the fact remains that since the day i was told this story
when l was a child in the first years of my life. i Learned that there is good
and there is evil. that there is a devil that dwells in man's heart. that man
should rid himself of this devil or should make sure that this devil does not
control his actions. This is why i demand that religion teaching start at

the elementary stage with the stories of the prophets. We have among our
esteemed education professors those who can do better in this direction than
what I am saying or do more to achieve this goal. 1 may (not be very well
versed) on this issue and i just wanted to give you an example.

Religion Fundamental ?r-uciple

As of the beginning of the next academic year, our young men and women will
study religion as a fundamental discipline. As I haVe said, this discipline
should start in the elementary stage and continue to the last university stage.
I will also ask that the fundamental components of the national history be
taught. also beginning with the elementary stage. What I mean by the funda-
mental components are those landmarks that we teach to these tender souls so
that they may be able to face life afterwards—-such as teaching them that man
is made of mind. body and soul and that the mind has its food. the body its
food and the soul its food. They should also know that any imbalance in the
nourishment of any of these components will cause an imbalance in the human
structure--sll in a simple and easy method. Among the components that we
should teach our children is what strength is. Is strength in muscles, in
loud voice or in the disavowai of values? No. strength is something else.
Strength comes from man's feeling before God and from his inner feeling that
he is right. This is the strength that makes man the strongest of the strong
and that makes him face all that life brings. I have tried this strength in
my life and I thank God that it has never failed me.

True Islam

in the fundamental components, we should also teach our children that God, may
He be praised. is right, that good is right. that justice and whatever makes
life honorable is right and that venerating parents is right. You cannot
imagine how annoyed l was after 18 and 19 January when I invited the Federation
of University Students. The federation [delegation] included a youth who had
grown a beard as if to tell us that he had reached the epitome of piety. You
remember that he was uncouth and loathsome. Does [slam consist of uncouthness
and foulness? Does not Islam teach love, gentle words and faith which make a
human being balanced in all his life and which open his heart and his soul to
people and to everything? This, net ioulness, is Islam. Regrettably, this
student comes from among those who have grown their beards and who have led
the religious societies sheet which they talk in the universities.

Is This Islam?

Venerating father. mother and values [sentence incomplete]. Values, God, may
He be praised [sentence incomplete]. You are all my teachers and better than
me. Our grand imam is next to me. "if they [your parents] try to make you
share with Me an associate that ycu do not know, do not obey then and deal

with them gently in the world." It [the Koran] says this. At the same time
God says He does not forgive setting up associates with Him. This is a definite
restriction. "0 my worshippers that have over-indulged, do not despair." Do
not despair even when you over-indulge. But there is a definite restriction,
namely not to set up associates with Him. Regarding the parents, He tells us
not to obey then [if they try to make us worship other gods along with Him] but
orders us to talk to then gently.

'Umar al-Talmasani Censured

This is the edifice that we want and not the edifice that some in the religious
groups want. Here, I will proceed to censure. 'Umar al-Talmasani had a censure
[for me] and 1 have something to censure him for.

'Umar al-Talmasani: Perhaps the consequences of your censure will be praise-
worthy. [Laughter and applause from audience].

President al-Sadat: The Muslim Brotherhood sent through its lawyer a warning
or a notification to Mamduh Salim, the former prime minister, that it does not
recognize the Revolution Command Council's decree dissolving the society and
that this decree is not extant. I did not learn of this [notification] until
after Hamduh Selim's resignation. Had I known of it, I would have said: No,
sorry. The decree is real and extant. I am stating this before all of you.
The society [Brotherhood] has issued its paper, with its editorial which is
written by Mr 'Umar, on the grounds that the society is registered in the
[Ministry of] Social Affairs. Yes, the society is registered but the decree
abolishing it is extant. Despite this, have I sent for you and put you under
arrest for this? Hhat makes the matter more bitter for me is to have [editorials]
written for our youth—-about whose development I as talking so that they may
face the challenge surrounding us and face the challenge of those who think
that money is everything, the Saudis and others, and who are trying to suspend
Egypt's membership in the Islamic world with utter insolence and ilpudence.

In whose interest is this?

'Umar al-Tal-asani issues the [Islamic Brotherhood magazine--AL~DA'HAH] with a
frontpage article saying that Mamduh Salim received a message from the U.S.
administration or the U.S. intelligence telling his: Beware and watch the
Islamic groups. They are very dangerous. Strike them and get rid of them.
Is this true? This method made me so sad and it must end. After all that
happened in the past. 'Umar—~ts \)u v utseft exnrtEy sald--and after I opened

all the jails and detenttor L ops. “:haeiliratrc you. established the supremacy
of the law and gave full freecon .you still write rh-nl. You mention a magazine
and nobody objects. even though the publication of this magazine is illegal and

\

should be stopped immediately. 3;: a: all. But in rhvié interest? The youth?

What I say is that we should accept :he challenge and haild for Egypt the great
Islamic edifice which Sldrth wth can over whom there Is no power other than

the power of God. may He up wraised. How can . lyuu! :ny that the United States
sent a message of score? hot :uh ! |.uu; dvjifi rhe Egyptian government which

has given all this .irovdun] 15 3 government that reru§res {instructions} from
the united States or from JLherﬁ telling .t LU round up the lslamic groups?
This is sabotage. It snantages our youth who will Lua,ine, regrettably. that
these statements ccn:w'r the truth. bon't you rumenbtr the time when there was
semi-Soviet interven:!~: heforr I prepared for av nat‘!» and when l was in the
direst need of the Soviet Union to Suppl} he with armn Tu wage my battle, when
my relations with the “xi“ed itntes were severed Ind who" I was atIGCking the
United States violently? At rhct time, there was suspicion that they [Soviets]
wanted to interfere and i ordered 17,000 Soviet experts to leave Egypt within
a week. I set the deadline and 15 hcurs refore that deadline, the Soviets
carried out the order. 1 won: as to build an: youths on right, strength and
genuiness and not on rmwrs I also want the coursr ml the Muslim Brotherhood
to be different from its past course before 23 July ll“52f.

Why hasn't anybody harassed you?

I attest--and you know, everybody knows and Shnykh 'Ahd-aI-Rahman knows--that

my hand was in the hand of Shaykh ai-Banna, may God have mercy upon his soul.
The secret organization witn its personalities is before me [known to me].

There were weapons in it. But what have we done? Despite all this, nobody has
harassed you and I have not shut down your paper. But I have asked the minister
of interior to tell you: This is disgraceful. He did actually tell yOs this.
All I want is for us to froternize inatn'akha] and to build our sons with the
provisions that top educathn and too everything-«with faith. [Hith faith]

the Egyptian citizen, man or woman, can enter the fire and emerge unharmed.

I want us to build this religion on the truth and on goodness. I have absolutely
no power to impose authority [sic]. to open detention camps. to take revenge or
to harbor malice. as 'Umar himself has said. The Muslim soul harbors no malice
and no malice lives in it. I thank God that malice never lives in my chest.
especially since I know my limits before my God, may He be praised. and since

I know that I am responsible for the remotest sand of grain in Egypt. from the

east to the west and from the north to the south. and that I will be brought
to account for it.

This Should not Be Repeated:

This is why I want this to be the conduct of every one of us who desis with
religion and who teaches religion to our future generations. As a result of
this--of the old course--I demand that this course not be followed again be-
cause I will biock it before the people. I do not do things behind closed
doors. I do everything in the open. As a result of this [old course], young
kids attacked the Technical Military [College]. as you know, and slaughtered
its guards like sheep in the name of religion--in the name of religion. They
were Muslim Brothers. They were one of the branches that emerged from the
Muslim Brotherhood. Shurkri .‘iustafa assassinated Dr al-Dahabi. “he of us did
not condemn what happened to Dr al-Dahabi. This ir shameful. Shukri hustafa
was originally a Muslim Brother. I am taking this opportunity to speak frankly
before you as the man in charge. I am not the president of the republic now.
The president of the republic should abolish the Muslim Brotherhood and abolish
its paper until it registers itself anew because it has no legal presence. I
am not the president of the :epublic itself anew because it has no legal
preSence. I so not the president of the republic to do this. No. I am the
head of the family and God. say He be praised, has put me in charge of you.

I do not ask what i should do with each of you [sic].

Islamic Group

This is why I am speaking frankly. Now some so—calIed Islamic groups have
emerged with calls that mislead our sons. In whose interest is their deception?
If we want to give our children lessons from history. then let us give then
complete and undininished lessons and not have some people who focus on the
tender youth to incite them. and they are by their nature easy to incite and
instigate. against this or that. Herrera have reached with the Islamic groups
the point where one of their members went to tell his father: The money you
take from the state is illicit and I don't want your money. Their acts then
turned into crimes. You heard me say in al-Hinya and Asyut that these groups
burn [newspaper] kiosks and that some of then enter the aoditoriums and kick
out the professors to stop teaching. Is this Islam? They saw a man walking
with his daughter in al-Minya and said to him: How can you walk with a girl.

he answered: This is my daughter. 50. they asked him for a birth certificate
[to prove that she was his daughter]. God. may he be praised, said to Iiuhatnad:
"You will not control them. Call to your God's path with wisdom and exhortation."

I am taking this opportunity to tell you all that is in my heart because after
this I will not, by God. have mercy [for crimes comitted in the name of] Islam
and religion. I can never put the interest of the group and of Egypt in a
balance with which the likes of such people tamper. They push matters too far.
A young kid from al-Hinya belonging to these groups was printing pamphlets in
Cairo. Hhen he was seized. he had in his possession 800 pounds and pamphlets
full of attacks on the regime and the state. I am saying this after having told
you about the challenge we are facing. both domestically or externally. At
home, we have to solve the difficult problems and externally. we have to face.
regrettably, our brothers, put them in their place and teach them what Egypt
is. But first we must set ourselves aright from within.

No Religion in Politics
This is why I have declared and said that there is no religion in politics and
no politics in religion. Some tried to exploit these words. I will now repeat

them: No religion in politics and no politics in religion. For anybody who
wants to engage in political action, the parties are present and so let him

31;
PI'OCL‘L'O ant! t'XL‘l’ClSL’ 5121‘ [UL]. I-l’ﬁll DUL l\=; IL'IIEIUII LV v; nay -------- r---'--
on the state or to attack the stare. no. This is shameful. This is why there
is a number oi imums--some of whom. nrotuer 'Umar. ate Huslim Brothers and

some supporters of rre huslim ﬁrstborhuod--who use the mosques to attack the
state.

State Will not Be Tolerant:

Let them all know that rnv state will not be roierant with anybody from now on.
I owe you advice and l have given it to you and t owe you a chance and I have
given it to you. The responsibilities ‘acing us at home and abroad require us.
as I have told you. to strike this devia:lon--to strike it. I ask you to strike
it. You must strike it wirh your conduct first and by teaching our children.
secondly. the sound facts about our history, our religion. our efforts and our
work.

Nine years ago. the detention camps were closed finally and have never been re-
opened. I promise vou that they will not be reopened in my time. You must tell
those who follow me this fact. But in my time, the detention camps will never
be opened, God willing. in my time, i have not resorted to the martial law
until this moment. even though it is present.

In my tune. there has been security. safety and full freedom. But [we say] no
to the attempt to exploit freedom. The state is hospitable to itself and dear
to itself and it is now time for all to know that the state is above all these
trivialities and above those who accept them under any slogan—-and the biggest
catastrophe is for religion to ae this slogan. So.

Brotherhood and Communists

What was the reason for my saying no religion in politics and no politics in
religion? I also sent to you. 'Umar [sentence incomplete]. In the [election]
battle for the chairmanship of one of the professional unions. a very strange
thing happened. I was surprised to find the Brotherhood, the communists. the
old Hafdists and all the opportunists rallying behind a certain candidate be-
cause he insults the state.

I sent to 'Umar telling him: 'Umar. this is shameful. Does religion call for
electing whoever insults the state or elect somebody whose sole qualification
is foulness? All the qualifications of that man were his foul attacks on the
regime and on me. Insofar as I am concerned, you know that I am tolerant
because God has wanted me to be in this place and to suppress my wrath. I
have completely memorized the Koran and God has ordered me to suppress wrath.

At this point, 'Umar al-Talmasani said: Isn't it my right to answer?
The president said: Let me finish. 'Umar.

The president then went on to say: Is it possible to have in the same boat a
Muslim Brother. a communist and a new Hafdiat who destroyed all the old corrup-
tion of the opportunists before 23 July [1952]? 1 am placing these facts

before you for the first time. i have never disclosed them before and I am
divulging them now because we are approaching the new phase and we must all
stand like a single family and one man to face the challenge. to solve the
problems at home and to face the midgets and the dwarfs abroad and teach them
what their true dimension is. I only ask for one thing of our religious groups.
namely not to accept money from those dwarfs because we have the (report). if
the money is intended for the service of Islam. then it is welcome, provided
that it is given openly. But if given in other ways, then no.

'Umar wants to defend himself and he has the right to because I may have con-
centrated on him a little bit. He had asked to see me and I refused to meet

him until today so that he may speak before the people because this is my

method. I will only speak before the people so that they may learn the full
truth. I harbor malice toward no one, otherwise i would have taken the necessary
measures at the time and given myself rest.

President al—Sadat addressing 'Umar ai-Talmasani: Please go ahead. 'Umar.
Re are not With Communists

'Unar nl-Taimasani: The communist party leaders invited me more than once to
attend their symposiums and I turned down the invitation every time because I
know what enmity exists between Islam and the communists and 1 know that the
two cannot meet in the same bandwagon or match in the same procession. I am
fully aware that they invited me to attend the symposiums not because they
cooperate and want to participate in the same direction but because they want
to publish to the people the picture of 'Umar al-Talmasani sitting with the
comnunist leaders so that it may be said that the Brothers and the communists
are united. The Brothers and the communists will never be united.

Some of the parties about which your excellency has spoken also invited me to
visit them and I said: If it is a visit for greetings and for inquiring about
ordinary matters, then the invitations are welcome. But if they are for the
purpose of political discussions about fronts, then the Muslim Brotherhood
will not match in a front with anybody because its history is a well-known
Islamic history.

British Embassy:

Mr President, the British Embassy sent me a letter informing me that an official
of the Foreign Office was to visit Egypt and visit me at 1200 on 22 June. I
sent the letter to the minister of the interior. attaching to it a letter of my
own in which I said that I would not allow the visit unless given the permission
to do so [by the government]. Only if the visit is for press landmarks. then it
is welcome. If it is political. I will not talk to a foreigner on Egypt's
policy. Had somebody other than you [president] accused me. I would have
appealed to you. But now to when can I appeal. I appeal to God. I am innocent
of all that you have said. I am free of all you have said. I am clean. I am
a Muslim and I am extremely loyal. Many hear me. I have implored God to make

36
al-Sadat's rule last as long as possible. He are enjoying our freedom under it.
If this is my reward from Anwar al-Sadat, then I thank God and God's peace
and mercy be upon you.

Epitome of Democratic Dialogue:

President al-Sadat: I am afraid tnat you want to show me as having exploited my
position to address these words to you, 'Umar. No. How many times did the
minister of the interior summon you, 'Umar?

'Umar al-Talmasani: You know, your excellency, that I was in Saudi Arabia during
the elections. One of the brothers informed one of the prominent ministers of
this fact. I was making my pilgrimage.

President: No, during the union elections?

'Umar al-Talmasani: The elections concerning Ahmad al-Khawajah and al-Shurbaji?
The papers published the names of lawyers belonging to the Muslim Brotherhood

and I was astounded and inquired of one of these lawyers. If you want me, I

will bring him to your excellency to visit you and tell you [what happened].

This lawyer told me that both sides used our names without our permission. These
are election matters and we have nothing to do with either side. if anyone says
that I ordered or instructed so and so to support so and so, then I deserve all
you have said about me.

President al—Sadat: 'Umar. to make matters clear and so that I may not be unfair,
did not the minister of interior inform you of this and notify you on the issue
of the article? So, I have not mentioned incidents in which I have been unfair
and which did not take place. I have taken no measures and I will take no
measures [against you]. Otherwise. the approach would not have been this
approach that we are following today. So, you have no right to complain about
me to God because I fear Him. I truly fear Him. 'Umar, had there been a pre—
meditated intention or opinion. I would not have let your paper go on publishing
without a legal basis and I would not have let the Muslim Brotherhood continue
to exist on an illegal basis, and it is still existing illegally until this
moment. If there had been premeditated intentions, I would have taken the
necessary measures. and the law is on my side. No, I am talking today as the
head of the family whom God has willed to fill this seat.

God knows that I want to have rest from all this. This is, by God, true. But
I have preferred to postpone. This thing has been going on for months and here
we are meeting today. Perhaps you don't remember or you don't know that I
asked Hansur [minister of state for presidency], telling him that I want 'Umar
to be present [at this meeting] because it had not been originally planned for
you to attend. I told him: I want 'Umar to come in the sense that I have made
clear, namely that we are one family and should sit together and discuss matters
with utter frankness. Then, whoever is wrong must shoulder the consequences of
his mistake. Had I formed a premeditated opinion or condemnation, I would have
taken the measure [necessary] and there would be no reason for you to be here
today.
So, withdraw your complaint to God. [Laughter and applause]

'Umar al—Talmasani: The socialist prosecutor summoned and interrogated me.
May, June. July and August have passed since the interrogation and I don't
know what has been done. However. I believe that if there had been any wrong-
doing or violation, the socialist prosecutor would not have hesitated to sue me
and to adopt a legam measure. This has not happened. I am fully prepared to
state in the presence of Muhammad Anwar al-Sadat, the President of the Arab
Republic of Egypt and the Muslim. that the ethics, religion and upbringing

of 'Umar al-Talmasani cannot permit him to plot, lie or utter insults. No, by
God, never. The first words my tongue uttered when l was in the detention
camp and was awakened to be told that so and so [Jamal 'Abd-al-Nasir] had died
were--after having spent 17 years in jail: May God have mercy upon him. Not
a single word of abuse came out of my mouth. not even after 17 years in jail.
The first words were: May God have mercy upon him. I am not the one to plot.
lie or vituperate. I have reached an age that does not permit me to follow
such a course.

I beg your pardon, Mr President, but you are going to cause me to be bedridden
for months now because of what has been addressed to my ears psychologically
and morally. I implore God to be kind to me at this age, not to let me be
bedridden and to let me depart this world immediately rather than be bedridden
with illness.

If I complain to God, I complain to the Just and if I have made unfair accusations.
then God will know. I do not appeal to the unjust. I appeal to the Just "ho

has the power and with whom all fates end. Instead of my withdrawing my com—
plaint. your excellency should follow a path to deal with all the trouble I have
suffered.

We Start Anew:

President al-Sadat: The best way to deal with all this is [to realize that] all
we have talked about has taken place and is past history. He should all now
start with unity to build the edifice.

'Umar al-Talmasani: I want a private meeting with your excellency. I have a lot
to tell you and I cannot say it now.

President al-Sadat: I am sorry I havo kept you so long and the session has
gone on for such a long time. My concern is to give you a picture [of the
situation]. Despite the exchange with 'Umar, is my purpose to hurt 'Umar?

No, I do not harm the Brothers or the Muslim Brotherhood. They know that one
day I had my hand in Shaykh al-Banna's hand when we were struggling against a
common enemy--the British, the king and the parties.
Supreme-Islamic Council:

I believe that we should save you time and I propose that we, his eminence the
grand imam and you, brothers. should take this opportunity to form a supreme
Islamic council in which all the Islamic societies and Islamic activities are
represented. It will he a family council. Should anything develop, we will
hold the council to discuss everything with utter frankness, fraternity and
friendship and with all the tolerance, truthfulness and trust that Islam has
taught. I ask God to give them all success in overcoming this tribulation.
Thank you.

President al-Sadat had begun his dialogue with the Muslim clergymen at 2130 and
the meeting was attended by Husni Mubarak. the vice president of the republic;
by 'Abd-al-Rahman Bisar, the grand imam and the shaykh of al-Azhar; Hasan
al-Tuhami, the deputy prime minister; Dr 'Abd-al-Mun'im al-Nimr, the minister
of Awqaf; Shaykh Jad al-Haqq, the mufti of Egypt; Sufi Abu-Talib. the People's
Assembly speaker; Mansur Hasan, the minister of state for the presidency; the
heads of the Islamic sects and the Koran Memorization Society.

Text of Addresses.

The session started with an address from Dr Ahmad al-Hufi, chairman of the
National Party's Religious Affairs Committee, who said:

In the name of God, the merciful and the compassionate:

Mr President Anwar al-Sadat, the head of the Egyptian family: He are here to
exchange views on what the family should do with its future. If we try to
enumerate your numerous virtues and feats, we would need a long time. He have
known you since your youth writing articles and leading peOple in prayer. He
have known you as a most pious president who fears God in word and in deed.

we, the custodians of religious education, want to implant that simple piety

in the souls of our children because Islam is a faith founded on simplicity

and accessibility. As for those who turn radical and fanatic and who proscribe
what God has permitted, they have nothing to do with religion. We want to build
a religious education on a sound basis. He also want to tell you, Mr President,
about the impact of your religion on Egypt's victory in 1973. It was a victory
that was not due to heroism alone or to weapons alone but to the fear of God
primarily. We all know your heart, your justice, your peacefulness and your
compassion for the entire people. This is where Islam is. War in Islam is a
necessity and peace is the rule: "If they tend toward peace, then you too turn
to peace and trust in God." We tell you that the people are behind you and
that they support and back you up in your position toward those who oppose
peace. He, the clergymen and the custodians of religion, are with you and
around you. We support and back you and beseech God, may He be praised, to
keep you for Egypt so that you may achieve for us every aspiration. God's
peace. mercy and blessings be upon you.

Shaykh Muhammad al-Sutuhi, the grand shaykh of the Sufi ways of life [brother-
hoods], then delivered an address in which he said:
in the name of God, the merciful and the compassionate;

Faithful president and head of the family. the meeting with your excellency is
an affirmation of the principle of consultation. God willing. Egypt‘s human
and civilizationai edifice will be built on your hands. A country whose slogan
is science and faith and which contains al-Azhar will continue to be a vanguard
of the Islamic world. We, the Sufists everywhere. are immune to the radical
atheism and cmmmunism. We ask for greater cooperation from al-Azhar in support-
ing our message and religion basically. Religion is love and a Huslim is a
person who does the Muslims no harm with his hand or his mouth. The edifice
requires efforts. If one of you does his work, God loves to see him do it well.
Hr President. we request support for our group because it incurs expenses of
nearly 6,000 pounds in publishing its magazine. God give you success and His
peace and mercy be upon you.

Muhammad 'Awadayn then delivered an address in which he said: He, the youth,
have no demands other than for Egypt solely while the head of the family is
sitting with the sons of the people. There is a starting point that is most
important to the issue of amending the constitution, and even our life and our
continued survival. This point is to rule in accordance with what God has
revealed [the Koran]. Many have spoken on this point and it can be said that
there is nothing on which all the parties have agreed other than rule in
accordance with God's revelation.

The last [sic] address was by Muhammad 'Abdual-Haqsud, the chairman of the
General Society for the Preservation of the Venerable Koran. who said:

In the name of God, the merciful and the compassionate: Mr President, we thank
God, the wisest of all rulers, Who has gathered us here for the good. Re are

in dire need of spiritual security, in addition to the food, intellectual and
social security. In the name of the venerable Koran and the name of the General
Society for the Preservation of the Venerable Koran, it pleases me to present

to you some of the recommendations reached by the society:

It proposes the formation of a specialized higher committee to purge the
sources of Islamic thought of all lies infused into Islam. to translate the
Koran into all languages and to disseminate these translations to Muslims in
all parts of the world.

Gradual efforts to unify the sources of education and to direct it toward a
Koran-oriented course.

The state must devote attention to the Koran memorization societies and to
seeing that the Koran and religious studies proceed hand-in-hand with scientific

studies.

Set up a modern printing press to print the venerable Koran in its various
scripts to rest assured that the Korea is beyond any distortion that takes
place in the process of printing or of binding.

ho
'Ahd-al-ansud then presrnted :u lhv prcsldvnt a gift runslsting of the peace
and vlrturv thvld. anothvr cunslstlng of tho Venerable Knrnn shield for the
first lady of Egypt and 15 more copies of the Koran for the president and his
iamiiy.

'Umar al-Tnlmasani. the chief editor of AL-DA'HAH, delivered an address in which
he said:

In the name of God. the merciful and the compassionate, and prayers and peace
be upon the noblest of the messengers:

Mr President. the citizens follow up these meetings with interest, imploring

God that the meetings may produce good and big benefits for the homeland. They
are right in this. However. the citizens censure a little some of those who
attended the previous such meetings and made special requests. These meetings
are not meant to serve the interest of a special group. They are for the entire
nation and this is why your excellency will not hear a special request from the
Islamic call campaign. Mr President, when you came to power. jails and detention
camps were abounding with chains. But you opened their doors [releasing their
residents), allowed the holding of celebrations and symposiums where people can
speak with utter freedom and permitted the press to be bold and to criticize.

Those who emerged from the prisons proceeded to this nation with the message
of peace. spreading love and harmony which are more important than any law.

As long as the hearts are bound together, they will provide the protection.
guard and support. It is out of God's favors on us that people have proceeded
to speak of this.

It remains for us to say that whoever attends [these meetings] demands reforming
the broadcasting stations, the street and everything in this country. He can
all do without these details and apply God's law. People can proceed everywhere.
restricted by God's book and his prophet's sunna. This is sufficient security
and safety. When our hearts are tied to God and when you call for the jihad,
you will find everybody behind you--you who call for the jihad. he will all
thus be one heart abounds with faith and who turns his face sincerely toward

God never harbors malice for anybody. A Muslim wants good for people. so how
can an advocate calling for God bear malice for people? He all want what is
good for you. May God preserve you for this country to set God's shari'a in

it aright. A single word will see the people's hearts devoted to Huhasmmd
Anwar sl-Sadst. Lead us by God's book and you will find from us what pleases
you. He love and do not hate and we wish you all the good from God, may He

be praised. March with God's blessing and peace and God's mercy be upon you.

'Abd-ai-Rahman al—Banna, the brother of Shaykh Hasan al-Banna [the late founder
and leader of the Muslim Brotherhood]. delivered a word in which he said:

In the name of God, the merciful and the compassionate:

Mr President, you invited us to Islam and we owed it to you to respond. He owe
it to the people to explain Islam as the law, the justice and the final judge.

hl
The venerable ﬂadith says: "The dearest among you to Me are those with the
highest ethics. those who are humble and those who are sociable." [loose
translation]. Our teacher Shaykh Hasan al-Banna. may God's mercy be upon his
soul. used to advocate God's path with wisdom and gentle exhortation. The
youth must know this and anybody who has such a character will have a simple
and guntlc call that harbors no fear and no terror. "Good deeds and bad dovds
cannot be equated. Try with good deeds and you will find that he with whom
you have enmity shall turn into a dear friend."

We demand, Mr President, that we abide by God's book in all our legislation
and our law-making. I have this invocation of God for you: God open his heart
to the guidance of your book, open for him the gates of your mercy and protect
him. God's peace. mercy and blessings be upon you.

8494
C50: 4802

hz
MMMPGIFMMWMWDW
ManICEYI-IANinPersianMAugnplO

[Mt] Finally Iran's represattatives have been selected. Now, according
tomunlcuueyni, ournajortaskistoreviewthemtimtim. Butreviewing
mly the actual law without deliberating the theoretical principles an! philo-
sophical foundations of Islanic jurismidenoe does not represent the review
omterplated by Bun mum. After the eetablishrmt of the Cami]. of
meillmmrauyh-ingmisweeinlinewithﬂneeuﬁerdiscussim
inthatOouncil. sinoetlnthmcilhasmtyetbeetestablished,wearegoing
toanalyzebasicsinthisarticle, eoastoprovideanintrodmtimforfuture
deliberations in that Council.

A-WMveweentitledomarticle"IegalRelatimmipofIslmand
Omstimtionalhuthorityr Manswertothiequestimmstbesmghtinthe
cmnectim with the bloom-lemma Islamic Revolution and the glorims reform
of 10 Phrvazdin [30 hutch] Mmtheheroiclranianpeoplehscast its decisive

dmeesits politicalsystmthrmgharefatmm, theOmstiumts’Asesnhly
ammnofapertsnaymlmgerdrawupabraftconstimtimuuohnﬁght

cmtravme the political systen already chosen. For example, if the Iranian
nation had chosen a people's democratic republic as'its political systan, the

spirituudetailedlslamicrules. Preciselybemseofthismareoenyimmt
our review of the anatituticn in oaxfomanoa with Islan.

B - mat is the Oustitutim?

mm.imtobedisoissedmreistoseewlntisﬂnmtimtim,mt
areesdoesitoover, and, geranilmedoesitdifferfmotheere?

h}
1112 subject matter of the Conscitutim fin-mentally differs fran that of
othu laws. 135m covered by the Constituticn, and more generally by
oonstitutimal authority, deal with "public power" and the ways and mans
governing ﬂeestablishnent of tieswiththegavenmmt. Imscweredby

Usually, in order to forestall the "mum; of pm,” public power is
divided into three or so brands. Hereafter, in this article, we are going
to discuss the separatim of political powers, the jurisdictim of the
country's three tranche of government, and their respmsibilities via-His

In 18th and 19th cmturies' classical and liberal laws, lawmakers W
that by merely separating political panels and defining the rights and
respmsibilities of the individual in relation to the govenwlt'and vice
versa, they could establish justice in society. may soon realized, W,
that insides the official ruling body, there were other caters of power
many of which sin—passed in impnrtanoe the gmremlent, Parliarmt, etc..
nanely amnic tycoons and centers of "awning wealth."

in the textsofMoslanjurispmienoe andothersouroeS. Itmstbapointed
undattheimportanceof tycomswithsmvballimuealth isnotailynot
inferia: to that of the official ruling body, but in capitalist contries,
especially the mited States, the control of the county's political life is
practically directly influemed by wars with amballim wealth and unmpoliea.
Articlesdealingwiththeestablishmtof theeootunicsystmandthe
camtry's financial regimetmbemaddedtometactof ﬂienraftmtim-
tinn. Herebelm we are going to outline Islan's emetimtimal themiaa

while reviewing the Draft Constitutim.

in politics.
In reply to this issue we trust say that, in principle, God's rule nanifats
itself in two ways:

l-meatian: bodmthepl'lysitalandnm-physicalvmldsofexistamceare
influencedandgovenedbyeod'slawsarﬂoanmrﬂnents. 'memlemiverse
isnmbyaseriesofpreciseaﬁsystetaticlawsamistotallydepement
mtheoalpletedaninionofcod.whidlisasomoeofmﬂermtboany
thinker.

Z—quntsarﬂmeistages: thesecmdtypeofcod'smnifestatim,
ﬂemnifestatimofGod'sdmﬁnim, istl'ueenacmmtoflawsardtheir
mummicatimtrmmghprophetstopeople,pupartingtmtallpeopleare
cbligatedtoobservemthtwtneverviolatesuanisSaunorblm
ous.

Islam's Shariat mleshavebem Wtedarﬂmtplaixed indetail in
malan jurismxience.

mblic power, as one of the inpartant issues of social and political life
Msbeaarevievad. Wenwnustseemcod's capletedaninimnanifests
itself in the area of public power.

Weeaidthatdaewtnlemiversedeperdsaniisgavemeibyaseriesof
mierlylawsandis subjugatedtocod‘s will. Consequaitlyallheimsare
amnifestatimofdivine mardeachbeingispartandparcelofthe
mifestatimoftheabsolutedminimotcod. Likewise,intheareaot
constimtimal authority and public purer, such an absolute daninim is
waifestedinm. M,asevidmcedbythel<oran.themdmm
Manmearthfoutﬂiscaliptnte. Am,asevidemedbymstxoranicm1tamrs,
whcalipluteshavebemmﬂedmallmbeings,animtjmttoa

few of then. (”standards,“ pages 115 and 116, volune I). We this realize
autumlicorpolitiealpaaerhasbeenmtmstadbythemdtom. llama,
inthenraftognstimtim,thesanoeofpwerhasbemtracedtowblic

vote, that is, national electims,andplebiscite. My? BecausealtInIgh
mlesmfrancodandthisnneismxestianbleandabeolute,”
evidencedbythekorm,sicharu1ernsbemaztmstedtom. 11:13.11:
Kxan'sVerse73,intheonpterm'Parties,"tluIadspeaksabwtthe
Caliphateastmst. Nabecauseeverymteeisobligatadto
pesezvemdsafegmrdthemist,mislikediseobligatedbo
thatmst precious jewel of society, mly political potter, and
ﬂehaMOfsmartreblasptmfmreadumit. Slmldmn k
frauthiszeepmsibility,hewinbeaccamtable,justasanytmsteeis.
nemibilityfarprotectimwblicmﬂunmemmisaﬂy
afeaun'e of Islam: otherphilostphies outsider participatiminpablic
weraspartotlmwcfum,mtmtpartofm's . Pu:
ample,mis£reetoparticipateintheelectimofthenepublic.Ifhe

BE

:3

1:5
abstains fran mh a particigntion, he would not ounnit a crime. However,
in Islam, being involved in public peer is considered both a Man's right
and his obligation. It is hoped that the Maslen nation of Iran may be able
to act upon this divine message. Here we feel it is inperative to point out
that, as mentimed above, in Karen's civil laws and the Prophet W's
'Iraditims, rule has been interpreted as trust which great prophets, in
turn, entrust to their oannitted and responsible Islamic jm-ismidents.
Great Islanic jurismidents. such as sheykh Mari, Ashtiani, and man
Klueyni, have interpreted goverment and public power as the trusteeship of
Islanic jm'ismidenoe.

Consequently all public figures and stateana) are cms'idered "anin" [trustees]
in an Islamic mt. Thus, it would be fitting if the Draft Outstimtim
usesthenoble Islamicterm”anin'. Havever, itisastmethat, likesccres
of other noble legal Koranic terms, the mud "min“ has beam forgotten.

In any event, for present and future statesmm and public figures of the
Islamic Republic, we fervently may that they might mam-take to safeguard
thisrespmsibility inposedbytheSluiat, michhasbeenentzustedtothan.

In closing I propose that the text of Article 3 of the Draft Constitution be
mended as follows:

"me moeofpbhcpamisdivimnﬂewhichtasbemmmtedtomnmd
manifests itself through a plebiscite."

8291
(so: 4906
_/__Tcxt_7 The feeble mind of the superficial intellectuals could not even fore-
see the revolution, much less lead it!

Revolutionary decisiveness is a pressing need of our time under the present
conditions.

The movement of the Hoslem People of Iran, which has been set on the ideologic
course under the guidance and leadership of man Khomeyni, has frightened the
forces of alignment.

The Imam frequently has urged revolutionary decisiveness and, finally, as a
result of the recent anti-revolutionary plots in every part of the country,

he has assumed full command of the Armed Forces with his characteristic

bravery and c0urage. The reason for writing these lines is that. under the
present conditions, the recent events in the country require a special analysis.

John F. Kennedy, the deceased American President, who, from the very beginning,
was one of the smugglers of narcotics and wine in the United States of America
and, ultimately, was killed by those very same people and on behalf of rival
coapanies. stated the facts regarding subjugated and aligned countries in

the book "S rstegy for Peace." Since America is one of the practitioners of
imperialist policy, it might be a good idea to point out to the American
population his view, which had been a warning. He said, "in subjugated
countries aligned with us, when suddenly we realize that the aid we are
giving them is only filling the pockets of the c0r.:upt and vile leaders that
are subjugating the people and this aid. which amounts to checks for several
billion dollars, is cut off or we claim financial weakness vis-a-vis these
governments, inediately, huge leftist demonstrations are staged in their
streets, and the corrupt leaders, who again want tribute from us, inediately
threaten us with these leftist forces and their power and say that, if the
honey does not arrive within the next few days, a comnist revolution will
take place there” For the most part, however, our experience in oppressed

h?
.ouutries has been that, ii a revolution has taken place, initially it took
its inspiration from the nationalist forces; then it was corrupted by these
same street leftists; and. ultimately. the military assumed power." At first.
rt".- t:nlmn Revolution was not .\ communist revolution but Fidel Castro. as a
result oi the pressure of American Imperialism. was forced to rely on the
Social-imperialism of Russia; even 30. Cuba, a small country in the heart of
America, still has not actively and against its will become a tool of Russian
Imperialism. They say that, once. one of the American statesmen claimed that
Cuba was like a club in the Soviet Union's hand and that. whenever the Soviet
Union so desired. it could hit the h'est on the head. The Russians sent him

a message saying. "You have it wrong. Now. it is the Soviet Union that is
Cuba's club and is in Castro's hand and. whenever he so desires, he will hit
America on the head." In our own country. however, if we look at the history
of the struggles of leftist and communist groups, we realize that. basically.
the comunist forces were members of the bourgeoisie from the start and, for
the most part. their financial position was secure and they did not need a
revolution. Therefore, whenever the Moslem people of Iran started an uprising
or movement. the first force that always started thinking of ways to exploit
the freedom gained was this same bourgeoisie. which was aligned with the
dictatorial regime. they would emerge from their shell and vilely disgrace
the leaders of the people and. pretending to be leftists. they portrayed the
leaders of the people as rightists and agents of Imperialism. and they paved
the way for the reactionary Right to seize power. Then. they would withdraw
into their shells and not say a word for years.

St rect Demonstrations

During the term of Dr Hosaddeq, ‘he deceased leader of the anti-imperialist strug-
gles of eastern nations. when we were attacking the world-wide Imperialism
of that time, i.e.. the English, each time that Dr Hosaddeq. in the World
Court. the Security Council, or the U.N., needed to have the complete
solidarity of the lranian people behind him, these people staged street
demonstrations and. when we looked into these demonstrations. we found the
dirty finger of the Pahlavi Caurt involved in them, because the Court wanted
to demonstrate that the people of Iran did not solidly back Hoaaddeq and his
ideas. At the start of the nationalization of oil. the Nationalists' slogan
was, "Nationalization of Oil ThroughOut the Country" and then the National
Front of that time. when it announced a rally in Baharestan Square and when
all of the groups had proclaimed their solidarity and participation. these
people made public a society upon whose placards was written, "The Society

to Combat the Imperialist Oil Companies of the South." It might be a good
idea to go back a little way in order that we might understand the reason
that the above slogan appeared. Let us discuss our situation after the

Second World War. when a small measure of freedom had slipped into the
subjugated countries because the superpowers were preoccupied The allies

had brazenly expelled Reza Khan Mir PanJ from Iran, the 'l'udeh Party had become
active. and the democrats in Azerbaijan had formed their own government
through Pishevari and Chain: Yahya. Although the government was a good govern-
ment and was made up of the proletarian class. nevertheless, when Qavamol—
saltaneh. that agent of international Reactioniam. visited the Soviet Union.
Social-imperialism persuaded the Russians to abandon Azerbaijan and with-
draw support from the so-called ruling proletariat in exchange for the oil
of the North. in view of the agreement concluded by the U.N. that the
Superpowers would divide the world's resources among themselves, with only
a little pressure. the Russians evacuated Azerbaijan. Later, Qavamol-
Snltaneh invited Kaftaradzeh to Iran and the communists of that era line"
ihu streets cheering him. In the end. Qavam, by order of the Heat, r..-gned
and the commitment he had made regarding the oil of the North was not ful-
filled, but the Government of Iran has never received permission to produce.
drill ior and extract the oil of Semnan because the Caucasus oil fields were
damaged. This was the Soviet Government' 5 first step when it abandonned its
clients. During the time of Dr Hosaddeq, we saw that the leftists were the
agents of the vile and conspiritorial Royal Court of that time and that
numerous street marches and demonstrations were staged at a time when the
country needed complete harmony. The leftists undermined the nationalist
movement and, today, after 25 years. they consider that a mistake.

The Nationalist. Anti-imperialist Movement

it might be a good idea to tell you who owns the social and decision-making
clubs of these so-called democrats and leftist elements:

I. The House of Peace was in Ferdowsl Avenue, opposite the cooperative and
distribution store called Kucheh Sirk, and the house belonged to Major
General Zahedi, who later staged the coup d' etat of 28 Mordad I_ 19 August_ /
with CIA' s backing. Host of their meetings were held here and. _frequently,
prominent Freemasons assembled in this house and spoke most eloquently with
the comrades against the fascist government of Hosaddeql!

2. The Democratic Youth House was on the former Qavamolsaltaneh Street in an
old house which belonged to the Queen Mother, and once. when Hosaddeq was
busy defending [ran in the Security Council,these people staged a riot around
the house which resulted in intervention by the Army and the killing of a
number of people. At that same time, the West was portraying Hoalddeq to the
world as a fascist and an assassin by means of its mass media. (One should
not ignore the fact that,at that time, the Shah was Commander-in-Chief of the
Armed Forces.)

Although we converaed with these comrades in the old days, under the present
conditions where we have driven Imperialism back a step. we must preserve our
unity so that we can give permanence to our nationalist. anti-imperialist
movement. These people are still trying to generate strife among Iran's
classes, ant it was not clear with which class they identified. It is
sufficient to say that, at that time. these people were called atarched-collar
communists because, basically, the forces of these people. who considered
themselves against the superficial manner of thinking of the intellectuals,
were very modern and more advanced than everyone else from the standpoint of
thinking and dress.

1:9
in early May, these people staged a huge demonstration of brick factory
workers nhich proceeded up to Mokhberoldowleh Square. England, not only
terrified the national bourgeoisie which probably still existed at that time,
but it announced to the world that iran was on the verge of falling into the
lap of Communism. Then, too. from 25-27 Hordad L 16—18 August»/ and until the
shameful coup d'etat of 28 Mordad was carried out, these people staged such
disturbances and riots in every avenue, street and quarter that the over—
whelming majority of the iranian people (this majority exists in every

country and will blindly go along with any incident as long as it does not
damage its manner of thinking or life style) became fearful of the consequences
of Mosaddeq's democratic government and it was persuaded to remain silent vis-
a-vis the shameful coup d'etat. He saw that, with a few bankrupt military men.
even though a strong, pro-Tudeh Party organization existed in the Army, they
embarked on that disgraceful coup d'etat which, today, after 25 years and the

sacrifice of approximately 60.000 martyrs. we still have not been able to
eradicate.

Revolutionary Movement of the Moslem People

it should not be left unsaid that, on numerous occasions during Hosaddeq's
term. these people unloaded trucks full of rocks, bricks and clubs along the
route of the marches and used them against Hosaddeq's security police. Once,
156 policemen nere wounded. After the coup d'etat. however, all at once there
was no news about those marches and demonstrations, assuming they had taken
place. Members of the Central Committee preferred fleeing to remaining behind,
and they abandonned this place to the power of world-engulfing Imperialism
and departed. Only Khosrow Ruzbeh remained, and even he, according to a
member of this same bourgeoisie, was betrayed and arrested by the comrades
because he opposed the policy of the Central Committee. He said, "Why flee?
If our military forces are stronger, why not fight"? Today, we see that, on
the one hand, Pereydun Keshavarz and, on the other hand, the com.udes are
accusing one another from every direction; whereas, the people of ltan aiready

have condemned these people in their court and have acknowledged their
accusations.

Today, the revolutionary movement of the Moslem people of Iran has succeeded
under the guidance and leadership of Khan Khomeyni and it has been set on
ideologic course. This has terrified the pro-alignment forces, because, from
one direction, it promises to sever the interests of the imperialists and.
from the other direction, it is seriously threatening the market of imported
ideologies. Basically, the socialist economy does not have anything to offer
compared to the monolithic economy that Islam sets forth. Therefore, we see
that the forces of the Left are sitting shamefully along side the reactionary
Right, like so many Matin Daftaria, and they are inciting street riots on
one hand and border clashes on the other, and they are introducing all of
these things in the name of democracy and the rights of laborers. Finally,
they are giving America credit for the Moslem people of Iran's Islamic and
ideologic revolution, even though it is 100 percent anti-American.
Thr Peehle, Exhausted Brain of the Superficial intellectuals

They may not know it but, if we try to study our revolution with their formulas
and consider the weak masses which rose up from the lowliest quarter of the
city and carried to fruition the revolution by relying on the true ideology

of Islam, we realize that the Moslen proletariat and pious laborers. by relying
on the philosophy of martyrdom which considers death for God eternal life,
uprooted the aligned and vile regime of Pahlavi Capitalism and that the feeble.
worn out brains of the superficial intellectuals could not even predict that
revolution with their imported formulas, much less lead it. This is where the

aligned bourgeoisie and its intellectual cohorts and friends were taken by
surprise and were beating a dead horse in vain.

Revolutionary decisiveness is an urgent need of our time under the present
conditions and, certainly, it should have come about six months ago. It was
and is perhaps the lack of attention of all of the popular forces from the
standpoint of consultation with the Emam that created today's difficulties.

It is necessary to admit that this decisiveness must be exercised by a council
of recognized, Moslem men. endorsed by the committee, under the leadership of
the Emam, lest. along the way. some special group establish a dictatorship or,
later. opportunists, who are everywhere, exploit the revolution.
DEFENSE MINISTER EXPLAINS DETAILS OF FUTJRE ARMY PLANS
Tehran susu'ar in Persian 6 Oct 79 p 15
IZirticle: "Defense Minister Explains Details of Future Army Plansf'7

/:l_‘ex_t/ In a special interview with PARS NEWS AGENCY'. correspondent,

Dr Mostafa Chamran, minister of national defense, reiterated his views
regarding reconstruction, purges, and the establishment of councils in the
army and the creation of a unificationist society in the army.

At the beginning of this interview, regarding purges in the army. the min-
ister of national defense stated "In general this army is the offspring of
the government of satan, and the relations and regulations which dominated
it in past years are not acceptable from the point of view of the Islamic
Republic of Iran.

Therefore, qualitative changes will occur in the structure of the army and
purges will also be made in terms of individuals and their ways of think-
ing and conduct. Of course purges will not be in the sense of executions
or, God forbid, prison or the like--our criterion in this process, going
by Emam Khomeyni's statement, will be founded on three fundamental prin-
ciples: first, persons who have killed or tortured people or taken them
to trial and executed some; fortunately, the period for this group has come
to an end. The second purge group is people who stole from the public
treasury. This group is being brought to trial and will have to return
the money to the treasury. The third group, by 81mm Khomeyni's categor-
ization, are perpetrators of small crimes; he has forgiven them all and
our view is that they will not bother anyone any more. In facing the prob-
lem of former officers and men of rank, a philosophical, humanitarian view
is being taken. In other words, we will not take a person who acted under
conpulsion to court or convict him; rather, we will consider people respon-
sible in proportion to the free choice and will they had. He are well
aware that people were subjected to a uniform intellectual and political
platform under the conditions of the previous satanic regime and in the
context of the atmosphere and environment which dominated the society, and
they were so brainwashed that they comnitted acts without possessing the
will or the power of decision to do so. Therefore such individuals' acts

S2
are considered acts oi compulsion and for this reason one must not consid-
er this type of person, especially those personnel from lower classes, re-
sponsible, and trying or punishing them seems unjust. Likewise there are
large numbers who for some reason are terrified of purges and think that
that such a purge will revolve around traditional behavior and customs or
even personal and family relations, although this is not the case and un-
der no circumstances do we want to engage in peripheral matters instead of
this important one, nor will we enphasize it. The essential criterion in
purges is self-sacrifice and loyalty to the Islamic revolution and the
present government of Iran; that is, we will consider the extent to which
an individual is loyal and committed to this regime and thi: system. If,
God forbid, he does not believe in and have faith in this regime and this
system, he will be removed. Aside from this, three basic principles will
govern and control the purge process in the new criteria. First is reli-
ance on Iran's independence and territorial integrity and self-sacrifice
to the last drop of blood in guarding the Iranian revolution from north to
south and from east to west; that is, persons who are not committed to
Iran's independence and territorial integrity will clearly be part of the
purge. He expect an officer, a soldier, to consider these his first
national duty and his goal. Second is reliance on the Islamic revolution
of [ten and its leader, Emam Khomeyni. Therefore we will not put pressure
on people who at times do not believe and have faith in this revolution
from the intellectual and ideological point of view, in accordance with
the criterion "there is no compulsion in religion," in order that these
people will positively obey our beliefs and ideas, but we do believe that
this government is an Islamic government and that anyone who wants to co-
operate with it must believe in its ideologies in his heart, and we give
ourselves the right respectfully to request a person, if he does not be-
lieve in this ideology, to work elsewhere in enother job and leave this
organization. Our third basic criterion is the government's sovereignty
over its institutions, one of which is the army. That is, people serving
in the army must be committed to the army command, the army laws and the
sovereignty of the government. If someone wants to destroy the army's com-
mand and organization and the basis of the government's sovereignty by tur-
moil and acts of sabotage, he is in our opinion a counterravolutionsry and
will therefore be included in the purge by virtue of these criteria. At
the present time, however, people who believe in these three criteria and
work in accordance with them are to be honored by us, since we need them,
and their past, their conduct, their personal morals and family conduct
are not that great an object of attention as far as we are concerned."

In answer to the question whether the Army of Guards would be part of the
army, the minister of national defense stated "The Army of Guards will not
be included in the army. The philosophy behind the existence of the Army
of Guards has always been that it must preserve its independence from the
army and at the present time it is being administered under the supervision
of the Council of the Revolution. Therefore it will also have an independ-
ent platform in the future."
The Army's Tactical Policy

Regarding the army's tactical policy, he said "He believe that in the
future the entire Iranian nation must consist of revolutionary soldiers,
must bear arms in case of need and must fight foreign enemies and domestic
conspirators, and the army will also emerge as a more technical special-
ized, modernized institution, in the sense that ordinary people who acquire
military training over a period of a few months will in no way be able to
use heavy weapons, airplanes, heavy artillery, large machine guns, rockets
and so forth but that specialists are required to employ this new tech-
nology. Therefore our army will attract personnel who as a group will per-
form the role of such specialists and will put this system and this tech-
nology into operation, although ultimately the entire nation will consti-
tute its troops. we are trying to set out plans where as in the Army of
Guards, and similar to it, all the people will receive military training,
will be armed in times of necessity, and, as soldiers joined together in
the army, will fight against domestic and foreign conspiracies."

Modernisation of the Army

Regarding modernization of the army, the minister of national defense said
"He will strive to raise the level of our army above that of others in the
international or regional context from the scientific and technological
standpoint, or at least keep our army at the average level of the others,
and the units of the nation will constitute the ordinary soldiers of such

an army."

The question was raised that since, from the standpoint of armaments, our
army is dependent on the west and there is no possibility of changing this
system, what, therefore, our relations with the west, from the armament
standpoint and the matter of Western military advisers, will be? Dr Chamran
said, "In the past, the west tried to make Iran dependent on it and, where-
as we are certainly of the belief that we must preserve our political,
economic and military independence from the east and the west, we there-
fore will enter discussions with the west concerning arms and advisers
when they impose no condition or conditions upon us. He buy arms from
them on a commercial basis and as long as they are ready to give us arms
from the commercial standpoint we will accept them, but, if they want to
impose conditions on us from the political standpoint, we will not accept
them. At the present time the American government, from which a large
amount of our arms has been purchased, is not prepared to give us large
quantities of electronic accessories, nor will Iran be able to receive

them under these conditions.

"Concerning the advisors, in the past their policy was always to have imp
portant, basic activities carried out by foreign advisers so that the
Iranian would need the foreigners. Fortunately, however, Iran's noble,
intelligent and perspicacious engineers, officers and noncoamdssionad of-
ficers have to a very large extent learned military tactics and technology

and our specialists are able to perform them easily. It is also our

5h
effort to keep Iran from needing any foreign advisor in the future and,

if we ecll upon an advisor at the present time or if we have need for an
advisor in a temporary capacity, it will be just for the business of giv-
inu some lranisn technicians instructions so that we may cease to need
foreigners as soon as possible. He unanimously believe that it would be
better for us not to accept extremely heavy, complex technologies which
would cause us to develop a need for foreign advisors but to function with

simpler technologies with which Iranian specialists would be able to
operate.“

Construction of the Army Infrastructure

Regarding the infrastructure of the army of the Islamic Republic of Iran,
the minister of national defense said "As I have stated, our army was a
satanic one in the past, and it took decades to create this personnel and
system. Here we are obliged to make changes in it so that it may be justi-
fied in terne of the Islamic revolution of Iran. In examining this matter,
we are emphasizing four subjects: first will be an intellectual and phil-
osophical infrastructure for the army; second, a goal for the army; third,
method; and fourth, results. The comparison we will make will be between
the army which existed in the past and the army which we wish to create.

"Concerning the army's intellectual and philosophical infrastructure of

the past, one can say that it was built on the basis of worship of the
devil. Everything revolved around the axis of the Shah and all spokes
ended at this hub. In the new system, we want to create an army which is
founded on a philosophical basis of the worship of one God and differs
totally from the infrastructure of the worship of an individual or a person.

"The second objeCLive: In the previous satanic regime, the goal of the
army was to preserve the privileges and advantages of a special class, in
particular the 'person of the satan,’ in the face of all other phenomena.
In reality, this was protection of this satan's tyrannical government, de-
fense of the imperialistic interests of foreign governments, defense of
pacts like the CENTO treaty which was linked with isperialism and, in short,
the promulgation of the Heat's doctrine in our country and conversion of
this country into a base for Western imperialism in the Middle East. The
goal of the new army, however, is to guard the future regime, defend the
unificationist doctrine of Islam, guard the Islamic revolution of Iran,
defend the country's independence and territorial integrity, combat all
domestic and foreign conspiracies against this country's independence, re-
ject commitments to western or eastern policies, and, in brief, continue
to perfect the revolution in order to perfect man.

"Third, method. In the new system, we believe that one must obey the law
and that connutment must be made to Islamic and humane criteria, to an ex-
pension of awareness and growth to the maximum possible level, to study,

to investigation, to education and to purification of the spirit along the
correct road toward the Islamic revolution.

55
"Fourth, which is the practical result of these objectives and methods,

one must say that the army was a club in the hands of the dictator and the
devil against the people in the previous regime, whereas we want the army
to bring about the creation of a popular system in the new regime--not to
have the country make sacrifices on its behlaf but to consider that it ex-
ists for the whole people. is at the disposal of 35 million Iranians, and
stands with strength, will and determination against enemies and conspira-
cies, guarding the country's independence and acting as the people's great-
est support in advancing the goals of the revolution and preserving the
country's territorial security.

“This is our intellectual infrastructure for the new army system, and we
will create qualitative changes in the army which we will cause to emerge,
God willing, with education and purification."

The Councils

Concerning the re-establishment of councils in the army of the Islamic
Republic of Iran, the minister of national defense said "we accept the
notion of the council and iuplement it.

"Three months ago a number of noncommissioned army officers met with the
prime minister and talked with him about the councils. The prime minister
promised them this and the limits of the councils were even determined;
these were acceptable to the officers. The councils. as an absolute prin-
ciple, will peoform a consultative role, giving ideas, requests and recom-
mendations to the command. The conmmnd will also pay attention to the
councils and make use of them in accordance with requirements and needs
but of course will not be compelled to inplement these recommendations 100
percent. Another matter which has been raised for the councils is that
people admitted to the councils must possess specific conditions and char-
acteristics. No one must enter a council and speak for it. People must
be selected who accept the relations, regulations and criteria of the
Islamic government of Iran and they must believe in these three criteria
which I previously described and present their requests to the command
within the context of these criteria. For us. one of the important issues
being raised is the technical one of democracy and centralism. In every
organization democracy and centralism must advance shoulder to shoulder in
parallel fashion. Generally, in the technical manner, a proper organiza-
tion in modern organizational structuring takes pyramidal form; at the

apex of the pyramid is the central power, and the people and personnel de-
scend in pyramidal fashion until they reach the base.

"Centralism means the issuance of commands from above; when a command is
issued from above, all people underneath must perforce carry out the orders
of the conmumder; democracy assumes the meaning that even at the base
people are able to convey requests and views to the top (to the command).
The issue of centralism in the religion of Islam appears in the form of
the nature of authority; in the army it takes the form of the command,
and the issue of democracy manifests itself in the form of the councils.

”He are dealing with the issue of councils in accordance with this scien-
tific law, considering here that the question of council is under no cir-
cumstances one of turmoil or sabotage but is, rather, a scientific and
logical matter for the advancement of the common goals of all military
people and the whole Iranian nation. Obedience to the commander and to

superiors is also to be considered a necessary, obligatory matter, just
as councils are."

The Unificationlst System in the Army

Concerning the form in which the unificationist system will be applied in
the army of the Islamic Republic. he said "Our philosophy of existence is
based on the unity of God. we believe that one God created the creatures
on earth and that there is powerful coordination among all the laws exist-
ing in the world, that there is one unity, that this unity and oneness
manifests itself in the life of humans, human society and all our life as
well, and that class differences are essentially the consequence of idol
atry, a philosOphy which we reject, as we believe in unity. Therefore,
class differences and privileges must be eliminated. we hear that the type
of food for commanders in the army is different from that for noncommis-
sioned officers. There is a difference between commmnders and officers in
'reliance' in obtaining hard and granulated sugar. we realise that when
a sick person in the army goes to the military hopsital, people ask him
what class he belongs to in order to give him lesser or greater privileges.
This discrimination is unacceptable and we are trying to create an army
which will attain the form of unity. At the present time we know that at-
taining a unificationist system is not an easy job because it requires
conditions and principles which our people and our army are not in a posi-
tion to provide, just as implementing an Islamic regime is not 100 percent
practical at the present time and a large amount of work will have to be
done in the form of education, resources and conditions to reach this
stage. Nor can one implement the unificationist system l00 percent from
the standpoint of the army. Our objective is to attain a unificationist
system, and since the unificationist system is our overall objective. we
are trying at the present time-~in the first stage of belief, faith, reli-
ance on morality, proper education in the army and purification of the
spirit--to prepare tne ground for acceptance of the unificationist system,
second, to establish councils and consultation between the various classes
of officers and noncommissioned officers as soon as possible so that they
may come closer to one another. and third, in regard to the preparation
and codification of laws and review of the armed forces laws and decrees
which have been set forth, we will try gradually to orient all these laws
toward a unificationist system and we hope to proceed step by step toward
the unificationist system in the proper manner."

57
He 1 fare Services

Regarding future welfare services for military people, Dr Chamran said

"we know that injustice has been done to a large number in the army and

we will strive to have revolutionary decisions made in this area of wel-
fare problems such as annual bonuses, housing, and medical and supply ser-
vices. He will strive to have differences and discriminations which have
resulted from various group classifications eliminated, to have officers
and nonconlnissioned officers be equal before the law and be considered
equal from the humanitarian standpoint, and have the discomforts which
plagued a large number of pilots and noncomissioned officers totally elim-
inated. Our criterion of judgment in the army is not rank. Just as we do
not want to consider s higher rank to be proof of virtue and superiority,
we must not consider it to be proof of evil and corruption either. Our
criterion is belief, faith and loyalty to the Islamic revolution of Iran
and if sometimes a commander is discovered who is valuable in terms of
these criteria, we will accept him; we have no fanaticisms."

The minister of national defense added, "At the conclusion of my statement
I would like to make the point that we want an army which is popular, works
for 35 million people and exists to serve the people in the holy war of
construction and other activities which the army is pursuing, with all its
resources. Secondly, it should protect the borders, defend the independence
and territorial integrity of our country and in the case of attack by a
foreign enemy stand against them with all its force and defend it to its
last drop of blood. Third, the army must be the guardian of the Islamic
revolution of Iran and neutralize all conspiracies which foreign agents
are carrying out against our revolution inside the country. In a word, it
must support and aid our nation in our movement toward perfection in this
miraculous Islamic revolution."

1 1587
C50: (0906

58
READER CASTIGATBS RBBBLLIOUS KURDS

Tehran ETTBLA'AT in Persian 9 Oct 79 pp 1, 2
/:A_rtic1e by Ahmed Ali Baba'i: "there Are the 'Supermen' of Kordestan'Q']

lgxcerp£7 Mr Ali Baba'i submitted this
article to the newspaper BTI'BM'AT 3 days ago; in view
of an orderly turnover of backlog, it was to have been
published in tomorrow's paper on an ordinary basis.
However, the bloody episode in Kordestan prowtsd the
editorial board to present this article today as the
paper's lead editorial. Hey the publication of this
article persuade patriotic, realistic people to take
constructive action in the heat of the shock result-
ing from this episode.

To the Board of Editors of BTTELA'AT Newspaper:

There is no room for doubt that the country's supervisorial and executive
system has emitted mistakes in the issue of Kordestan, not only as a
consequence of a lack of awareness of the problems of Kordestan. People
who carried a little of the weight of the revolution on their shoulders in
the days of the revolution and were far removed from opportuniem, or the
desire to gain status, have been upset at the thoughts which have been
given to this vast country and its various problems:

He served in the house of our father 'i‘aleqsni. During the last 2 months
of disturbance of blood and fire we have been in contact with Kordestan
every day; there was not a day when we were not in touch and conversation
with Mr Moftizsdeh and some other experts from Sanandaj, with the Sheykh
or Seyyed Bseoddin and Mr Safdar (the Shiite spiritual man representing
the gentleman from Qom), and local officials in these and other areas of
Kordestan. I remember that Buoddin gave an ear to Brig Gen Peseshkpur,
commander of the Hahabad brigade, and said:

"May I suggest to your excellence that your mind should be at rest concern-
ing Hahabad and its outlying area. There are no confrontations or

59
misunderstandings between the people and the army; we have succeeded in
keeping the army totally removed from the problems; thanks be to God. no
important incident has yet occurred," and so on and so forth.

Cod knows that I have not been storing up excessive glee in my hide. In
tcknowledaing nnd pra sinn Brg Gen Pezeshkpur, Bzzoddin said that he was
managing the area well and that he should not be concerned about any con-
frontation between the stay and the people or between the people and the
army. ”hat is interesting is that I have insisted, in brief, that all
these conversations, or certain correspondences and reports, should have
been previously recorded and kept and are now certainly in the gentleman's
office, and l do not believe that this conversation to which i referred
especiallv trnk place more than 2 or 3 days before the victory.

Please note that an area like Kordestan, with a thousand problems, has
brought the burden of the revolution to this point and that we are now on
the threshold of s thsnre in regine. If the new administrators had had

the slightest information on the area of Kordestan and the various problems
there, we certainly would not have been afflicted with these calamities,
this cnrnnge and this fratricide today.

i went to Mshabad in the conpsny of Foruhar's delegation at av own request
(since i wanted to become acquainted with Kordestan and learn a little

from it. as i am concerned about its future). Subsequently a telegram was
sent fro: the late ralcqani to Ezzoddin. Safdsri and Moftizadeh to the ef-
fect that so-and-so would be accompanying the delegation. Let us leave
nsiJe he 'aC' that thos“ who claim to head up and administer the country
rccozniz d nobody except themselves--3 or a days later, burning with a
fever ol l0u dearess, ' came back from there, hetook myself to the home of
thv minis er nf the interior at dawn and wrote down on a piece of notepaper:

i. No one, except ior a single person or staff, shOuld intervene in the
kn'dt to. al'alts.

2. You SLJUI. in-edtsteiy put a secure. permanent means of communication
with the co nitree into operation.

3. You should at once put into operation an aid project or plan through
a team of Plan Organization engineers and experts in the area; while the
Kurds have not yet turned to violence, they will not do so if they obtain
l00 tomans between one sunrise and the next.

4. Send no Shiite religious figures there.

5. If you wish, also hear descriptions and reports on the sensitive

moments of turmoil and siege of the Hahabad Garrison under the aegis of a
couniss ion.
It is no concern of mine what happened to my immediate, terporary report.

i know that a number of people whose sole role was to neutralize and in-
validate the decisions, recouunendations and reports of the capital's com-
mittees and dele,-,ates sat down in the capital. The craft of a person who
has no craft is to find fault with the work of bold, decisive people. Al-
though this committee was exceptionally weak and its information, intellec-
tual capability and decisionmaking was limited, it ultimately did acquire
information from this standpoint. So how did it happen that people quietly
and gradually gave this comittee the scope to become informed and aware
of the problems of the area and it unquestionably functioned better in sub-
sequent decisionmaking? It would be ungrateful for us to belittle the
bravery, valor, poise and diligence of the honorable old man Bsma'il
Aradalan, a member of the conmittee, who went back and forth in the middle
of the 24-hour crossfire between the town's garrison and the guest house,
and the same goes with Foruhar, who did not rest for a moment. So how did
it happen that they kept this activity up regardless of whether or not
pwople were wondering what news there was of Kordestan‘.’ The government
and the managers of the revolution were thinking about everything and every
place except Kordestan, where fire has been on the verge of flaring up un-
der the ashes at every moment. It is also very natural that when all pow-
era are restricted to a small number of familiar, highly regarded faces
they can only refrain from thinking seriously, acting thoroughly, cogitst-
ing soundly and systematically foreseeing events and actions.

After we set out from Mahabad, a car stopped in front of us between Naqadeh
and Piranshahr, in the presence of Mr Sheykh Hoseyn Nuri and in the conpany
of Capt Jajj Rasuli and a group of guards. A young man who was also wear-
ing religious garb, on whose face a few hairs had started to sprout, and
who had a very distraught, bitter expression was seen; he was the head of
the committee or smoothing like that. A number of officers and guards and
some Kurds were escorting him. It was enough for a person to see this
sight to begin shaking over the destiny this area was facing. In the
presence of Mr Nuri, in the central mosque of Mahabsd, the consultation
and feelings we wanted to create in the name of the leaders of the revolu-
tion did not come about, although, I swear to God, both Izzoddin and the
others had the respect of the delegation, the committee and the emam's
emissary up to that moment. when we got to Mahabad in the evening, and
were taken to a meeting in the house of Mr Kharrazl, it was enough, in that
very first stretch of time. for us to understand where we had arrived and
what mental and practical ail the area needed. But wherefrom! Let us just
try to pick fights with one another in the capital and Qosl! Since this
sarcastic exchange took place in Kurdistan, let it be; otherwise, the
events and occurrences and terrible mistakes there will merit hours of con-
ference and discussion.

lld 57
080: 6906

61
NATIONAL FRONT GIVES VIEWS ON THSOCRACY
Tehran BANDAD in Persian 25 Oct 79 pp 1, 2

latticle: "0n the Occasion of the 30th Anniversary of Its Establishment,
the National Front of Iran Publishes Its View; and Reconnendationa on
Councils and Governance of Religious Jurists'_'/

Iiext] 0n the eve of the 30th anniversary of its establishment, the
National Front of Iran is publishing its recoamendations and opinions on
the councils and the Council of 8xperts.

Regarding the councils, the National Front of Iran remarked that:

"The issue of fanning councils, which is considered to be one of the foun-
dations of democracy and national government and has become part of the
people's fundamental demands following the triumph of the revolution, has
met with a sorrowful state.

"Before the law establishing the councils, which contains the powers.
limits on powers and nature of the councils' duties, was ratified without
provision for the conditions necessary for the holding of free elections,
procedures were taken to conduct elections in some towns of the country
with the mere ratification of the bill on the council elections law. The
government postponed the elections in Tehran and some inportant oatan cap-
itals until later, and, in the course of its activities, suspended elec-
tions in a numbe. of towns. It has now become known that the heads of the
Islamic Republican Party could not perfora the necessary surveillance over
the elections because of their preoccupation with the Council of Experts
and other ieportant national affairs, and, as had been rumored, people in
some areas were elected who were outside the organisations and outside
their expectation; the Islamic Republican Party declared the elections

to the city councils to be invalid and the government also voided elections
in a number of towns.

"We must with utmst sorrow declare that action regarding the elections
to the town councils, like other plans and projects, have been carried out

62
with a great uproar and insufficient investigation and study, and the re-
sult of such conduct will without a doubt he the spread of despair and
pessimism and a state of indifference among many of the classes of society."
In referring to the plan for an immediate transfer of power which was pre-
sented on [7 February 1979, exactly 5 days after the fall of the Pahlevi
regime and the triumph of the revolution, by the National Front, through
the recommendation on the comnittees and local councils and, despite the
government's inattentiveness to this recotranendationmas published else-
where in the draft proposed by Ayatollah Taleqani for local councils on

10 May 1979, the National Front of Iran then concluded that the govern-
ment's reconrnendation is opposed to that of the National Front presented
on 17 February 1979, and does not give attention to the draft which was
drawn up by s group of learned men, accepted by His Eminence Ayatollah
Taleqani and published on 10 Hay 1979, and is even contrary to statements
by Eng Bazargan which were published on the same date. The formation of
the councils is acceptable for the purpose of supervising progress but not
for managing the running of local and regional affairs. Finally the
National Front of Iran presented its plan for implanting sovereignty and
forming councils as follows:

The National Front Plan for implanting National Sovereignty and Forming
Councils

"In the opinion of the National Front of Iran, the council system must
constitute the foundation of the new structure of the country. This system
must be established in such a way that it will inspire the people's prec-
ticsl involvement in various affairs so that the country's activities will
be handed over to them. The formation of councils must not have a propa-
gandiatic aspect or embellish the country's laws and decrees as a phenome-
non devoid of content.

"In the opinion of the National Front of Iran, the council system, in the
event it is codified and implemented, can meet the needs of this period of
our country's history with attention to the following objectives:

"1. The implanting of national sovereignty and the establishment of gov-
ernment of the people over the people is not feasible through the mere
formation of a national consultative council and election of a government
which is the object of society's confidence. The national consultative
council and the national government can scrutinise only general matters
and the inportant general affairs of society; in view of the diversity and
conplexity of the matters placed before them, they cannot in practice
ascertain all the problems and inadequacies of various regions and areas
and adopt appropriate decisions.

"Fomtion of local councils with the necessary powers will enable the
people to take over the affairs bearing on their lives in a direct fashion
and find and carry out relevant solutions in terms of regional conditions,
requirements, traditions and customs.
"2. Since the people will be electing the persons fundamentally in charge
in each area, they will perforce put their work under surveillance, coop-
erate and share in efforts with them and be constantly informed and aware
of all resources and capabilities as well as problems and difficulties.

0n the one hand, this will result in the improved progress of plans and
projects and on the other hand it will avert the creation of contradictions
and complications between the masses of the people and the government ap-
paratus and in the course of time will create unity and solidarity between
the nation and the governing body and increase the country's defensive
ability.

”3. The participation by people of various areas in elections to the
national consultative council and the selection of representatives to be
sent to the country's capital once every 4 years cannot be considered com-
prehensive and sound without the formation of local councils, even in the
event all conditions of freedom exist in the selections. The various
classes of people who live in remote or even nearby areas cannot be in-
formed of all the measures their representative in the council takes or
know his personality and evaluate his activities cospletely. It is only
through the formation of councils, the participation by the people in num-
erous elections, the election of local representatives, officials and re-
sponsible persons, and surveillance over their activities that full knowl-
edge of persons in each area can be acquired through time and social per-
sonalities in large numbers can come into being throughout the country.

At the time of national consultative council elections, during the appoint-
ment of governors and subdistrict heads, or in all other general eleCtions,
the people, with the awareness they have previously obtained concerning in-
dividuals in the area and previous familiarity with the manner of elections
basic objections [line missing/ is relevant. The period of registration
for candidates and the gap between the announcement of candidacy and com"
mencement of elections have for the performance of election programs abso-
lutely do not exist." The National Front then declared, in describing

the atmosphere dominating society: "The National Front of Iran believes
that the holding of any kind of election before the establishment of an
appropriate environment and free climate in the country cannot be consid-
ered sound or free and cannot solve the problems of our society of today.
Until provisions on the councils which respond in some way to the needs

and expectations of society are prepared and ratified, and until the condi-
tions of the country are ripe for free electoral activities, the holding

of elections will yield no other results than increasing the instability
of conditions.

"For the sake of free elections, the National Front supports total freedom
of the press."

Codification of the Constitution

The National Front then referred to the system of studying the constitu-
tion within the Council of Experts and pointed out, "However, the council

6h
which has engaged in the basic codification, whose real name has not been
detennined, unfortunately has not pursued these or other matters which
might result in the establishment of national sovereignty. The government
has officially given this council the name of the Council for the Final
investigation of the Constitution and has announced that this council will
investigate the proposed draft in final form and carry out elections to
the council for this purpose in light of the draft constitution and the
recommendations which have been received. However, this council has not
devoted practical attention to these declarations.

The National Front's Opinion Regarding the Governance of Jurists

"Here, we wish to devote attention to two basic points apart from religi-
ous justifications and reasons, and express our opinion clearly in this
regard.

"First, if the goal in the governance of the jurists is to follow a lofty,
devout and virtuous person who is accepted by society by virtue of his
knowledge, piety, justice, bravery and leadership ability, this is undoubt-
edly acceptable and supported by every person concerned for his country
and interested in the prosperity and progress of society.

"It has been repeatedly observed not only in Iranian society but in others
as well that religious and even non-religious leaders who possess some of
these characteristics have been able to lead people under extremely sensi-
tive conditions and circumstances and impose great influence on the future
of human societies. Mahatma Gandhi, who led the 500 million people of
India against the powerful imperialist nation of that time and gained
India's independence, was without contest a leader who acquired the status
of leadership above all forms of laws and decrees. Dr Mohamed Mosaddeq,
the great leader of the nation, is also to be considered a valuable exaaple
of the leadership of society. He in our own country have had many religi-
ous leaders who by a mere statement or writing put society in motion and
destroyed many conspiracies.

"At the present time the influence of Imam Khomeyni's leadership on the
revolutionary movement and the triumph of the revolution and the people's
general support for him, which have been rare phenomena anywhere in the

world, are not things which will ever be forgotten in the history of the
world.

"However, this leadership and this following were not phenomena which re-
sulted from legal decrees, came into being because of the organizations of
lawgiving councils or were the result of ordinary action.

"in the event such emamhood, governance or leadership is created as cos:-

pulsory from the legal standpoint in any period, a spiritual and natural
matter which is related to the characteristics and qualities of an exalted

65
person and manager who is pious, scholarly and accepted by the general
public or majority of the people will take the form of a national organ-
ization possessing legal compulsion and will in reality lose its lofty
wotll status and be transformed into a governmental arrangement.”

The National Front of Iran then presented its recommendations on the re-
storatlon of revolutionary unity: "This draft, which was published on the

occasion of the anniversary of 21 July, was published in BAHDAD in its
original form on the same date.“

In another portion of its pamphlet, the National Front published Ayatollah
Taleqani’s proposed draft on local councils as follows:

Ayatollah Taleqani's Proposed Draft

Article 1. Pursuant to the principle of councils and in order to guarantee
the participation of people from all areas in the administration of public
affairs, to observe the historic, geographical and religious requirements
of the country's cities and ostens, and to adopt measures to preserve and
spread national culture, language and customs, village. subdistrict, town,
shahrestan and eaten councils will be formed throughout the country in ac-
cordance with the geographic and political subdivisions determined by law.

Article 2. Local councils will be elected for a period of 2 years as fol-
lows. and there will be no prohibition against the re-election of the
members of these councils:

l. The council of each village will be directly elected by the inhabitants
and will have five members.

2. The council of each subdistrict will consist of the elected representa-
tives of the village councils situated in the area of that subdistrict,
and each council will have a representative in the council.

3. The town council will be elected directly by persons who live in that
town. The minimum number of council members will be seven; one represent-
ative per every l00,000 persons will be added for towns which have a pepu-
lation greater than 200,000. but in no case will the nuaber of representa-
tives exceed 20.

4. The shahﬁestan council will be composed of the elected representatives
of the town council and the subdistrict councils in that area by having
the council of each subdistrict elect one of its members to take part in
the shahreatan council; the town council will select one town council mem-
ber for every 100,000 inhabitants of the town. However, the number of
elected town council members must in no case be greater than seven.
Article 3. Elections will be held without concern for religious, ethnic
or linguistic particulars and every resident in the area will have the
right to take part in them. A person who has resided in an area for at
least 6 months prior to the beginning of the elections will be considered
a resident of that area.

Article A. The minimum age of voters will be 18 full years and council
members must not be less than 25 years of age.

Article 5. The village council will elect the head man and will also aid
the head man in performing his duties, in its capacity of advisor and over-
seer. Removal of the head man will also be at the discretion of the vil-
lage council.

Article 6. The subdistrict council will present three candidates for
lieutenant governor to the governor. The governor will appoint one of
these to the post of lieutenant governor and present him to the Ministry

of the Interior. The subdistrict council will have the right to promulgate
the necessary regulations for the protection and development of farms,
orchards, pastures, public places and rural hranch roads and the equitable
manner for apportioning water in the public domain within the limits of
laws and shahrestan council decisions, and will oversee the activities of
the village councils.

Note: The removal of a lieutenant governor will take place by recommenda-
tion of the subdistrict council and ratification of the governor.

Article 7. The mayor of any area will be elected through the town council.
The ahahrestan council will propose three candidates for the governorship
from inside or outside the council and the Ministry of the Interior will
appoint one of these candidates to the position of governor. The governor
general will be appointed by recommendation of the ostan council and ap-
proval of the Ministry of the Interior.

Article 3. Changes of mayor will be contingent on decisions by the town
council, and removal of the governor and governor general will also take
place by recommendation of the ahahrestan and eaten councils and approval
of the Ministry of the Interior, except when the governor or governor gen-
eral is removed in necessary and unusual cases in accordance with the
national interest by recommendation of the minister of the interior and ap-
proval of the Council of Ministers.

Article 9. Surveillance of the activities of the mayor and local societies
and apportionment of work between them will be the responsibility of the
town council. The council will have the right to promulgate regulations
concerning all matters related to the municipality within the limits of

the laws and the decisions of the ahahrestan council.
Article 10. The shahrestan council has the right to pronulgete regulations
regarding the following matters in addition to conducting surveillance ov-
er the activity of the subdistrict councils in its area:

1. Cultural affairs, BuCh as the use of historic and religious buildings
and preservation and dissemination of national and local culture and the
national language and tustOms.

2. Educational affairs, such as the extent and quality of local language
teaching, the method of religious instruction and the teaching of national
arts and industries in primary and secondary schools and the establishment
of educational institutions within the limits of the nation's general edu-
cational policy and the shahrestan's budget.

3. Public health and medical affairs, such as public health regulations
related to public places, food merchants and restaurants, the establishment
and administration of hospitals, and surveillance over the work of doctors
and pharmacists.

4. Labor, industry and agriculture, within the limits of the country's de-
velopment policies and labor laws and regulations.

5. Promulgation of local duties in the context of towns, rural areas, and
roads and expressways within towns.

6. Promulgation of penal regulations to guarantee the decisions approved
by the council, determination of punishment for violations related to driv-
ing, and campaigns against profiteering.

Article ii. In addition to overseeing the activities of councils through-
out the ostan and establishing coordination among them, the oetan council
will have the right to promlgate regulations concerning general principles
governing the administration of the councils and determining common rules
in all fields subject to shahrestan council authority throughout the ostan.

Article 12. Subdistrict and town council regulations must no’ conflict
with the general regulations of the shahrestan council nor will shahrestan
council regulations conflict with the principles and rules of the oetan
council. The highest court in the area can make decisions regarding con-
flicts in regulations, and, if necessary, void regulations which have been
promulgated in conflict with the provisions of a higher council.

Article 13. Promulgation of rules related to general government policy
concerning the powers of the councils and the principles which must be
observed to preserve national integrity, public order and national inter-
ests by the local councils will be the prerogative of the national con-

sultative council, and the council regulations will be valid in the event
they do not conflict with these laws.
Article 11.. Governors general, governor. and lieutenant governors elected
by local council; will be considered euployees of the Ministry of the In-
terior during their period of tenure end will be eubject to epeciel govern-
ment etetutee. Following the conclusion of the councile' tenure and the
establishment of new councils, their positions will be eliminated.

11357
CSO: 10906
UNIVERSITY STUDENTS TAKB OVER SM HOTELS IN TBHIIAN
Tehran BAHDAD in Persian 25 Oct 79 pp 1, 3
lirticle: "University Students “take over Some Hotels in Tehranﬂ

IIextl After the takeover of the Tehran International Hotel office by
Science and Industry University Students during the past 2 days, three
other big hotels in Tehran were occupied by students of the National Uni-
versities of Iran, the Revolutionary Educational League and the Higher
Computer School. In discussions with MAD on the reasons for this ac-
tion, the students in these higher centers announced that the first concern
use to eliminate capitalists and the second was to possess a couplinentsry
dormitory.

In this regard, the representative of the Science and Industry University
students told BAHDAD "In the course of some months of discussion with uni-
versity and other officials on the fact that a dormitory should be provided
for the students, we finally reached the conclusion that the officials'
goal was to promise threats and that the continuation of these talks would
have no result other than to distress the students." He added, "Up to a
few days ago the municipality was to place a building at our disposal for
this purpose in Seyyed-e Rhendsn, but unfortunately this organization de-
clared that it would place these buildings at the disposal of groups of
squatters. This caused the students to take a decisive decision from two
standpoints." He pointed out, "At the beginning. the goal of the science
and industry students was to deprive the capitalists who have links with
American inparislists of their capital. Of course the effort also was to
coordinate this action with the government's views in some manner so the:
a legal route could also be followed." In connection with this, he
pointed out "The Industrial University has about 7,000 students and about
60 percent of them are from the provinces; all the money they receive as
sid for educational and housing expenses is around 650 tonsns. One cannot
even rent a room 3 by lo meters with this money." He pointed out, "Students
of the University of Science and Industry became concerned in connection
with the abovementioned points when they failed to obtain satisfaction
through officials. Realizing the status of the International Hotel, they
went to the hotel and took over about 600 rooms in the hotel and settled
themselves in them without any confrontation or opposition from hotel em-
ployees or persons in charge of the matter." The students' representative
pointed out that 1,500 students from the 'Jniversity of Science and industry,
300 of the nation's athletes and 120 students from the Higher Conmunications
School have taken up residence in this hotel right now.

Asked whether they were making use of the services offered by hotel of-
ficials, he said "Basically the students are doing their jobs by themselves,
the hotel employees are also being handled with mutual respect and absolute-
ly no problems are being raised for then."

In consideration he added "The university students still need dormitories,
and we will help other universities with the aid of other students until
we find other places where they can sleep."

He pointed out, "All dormitories we will select for the students will be
related to the issue of severing the capitalists from the nation's economy;
it is for this that our nation rose up." According to a report by BAHDAD
reporters, while this hotel has now been operated in a very organized
fashion for a days by the students, the Royal Garden Hotel, which is lo-
cated on Ayatollah 'l‘aleqani (Takht-e Jmhid) Avenue and was also allocated
as a dormitory yesterday morning by National Iranian University students,
was evacuated by hotel enployees and guards yesterday afternoon.

The representative of this group of students, who numbered more than 1,000,
told BAHDAD "This April we talked with government officials and university
employees, through correspondence and negot iation, about procuring dormi-
tories; after a while they placed one building at the other end of
Za'faranieh, which has about 85 rooms, at the disposal of the university
as a dormitory. Not only did this site not respond to the students' needs
for a place to sleep, it was also very far from town and the university and
therefore since we realized that the correspondence and the negotiations
were not progressing, we decided at 0900 hours yesterday morning, (Saturday)
to get going and take over and settle in the Royal Garden Hotel, which we
had previously earmarked." lie pointed out, "For this reason we also
brought both the conmittee of the area and some responsible officials into
events." He stressed, "we moved with cala and order, reached the hotel
and, to preserve order and to keep the people staying in the hotel from ba~
ing uncomfortable, sat down in the hotel without fuss. When the morning
prayer was held some guards came and said 'He have orders to get you to
evacuate the hotel,‘ but since we did not listen to what they said some of
our representatives went to the Office of the Prime Minister. The result
of this discussion and meeting was also a prauisa for some vague future."
This student added "Since the owner of the hotel is also a very influential
man, he put pressure on the hotel employees and workers and, being nobil-
ised as the students were awaiting the results of the talks this afternoon,
they get the students to rush out of the hotel by breaking some windows

and creating panic. At this point the officials also helped them so that
they would be successful in carrying out their plan." In conclusion, this

71
student said "In evacuating this hotel, the students created absolutely
no resistance. Their efforts were centered on having no outbursts break
out, and they left Lite: hotel peacefully. About 10 students sustained a
few injuries in this evacuation; they went to hospitals around the hotel
and were released after first aid treatments."

In his report, BAMDAD's correspondent writes that at about 1700 hours in
the afternoon 1,000 students once again opened the door into the hotel and
entered the hotel with the slogan "Dormitories, dormitories are our abso-

lute right."

According to the report by BAMDAD's correspondent, a group of Computer
Sciences Faculty students also occupied the Sine Hotel, which is located
alongside the Royal Garden Hotel, and settled down inside it. For this
reason the students of the National University became aggravated over the
problem of having to admit that there was a difference between the two
groups of students.

Another BAMDAD reporter engaged in a conversation in the Hotel Haldorf

with the representative of the Revolution Higher Technology Complex stu-
dents who had gathered yesterday at dawn in the foyer of the hotel. In
this interview, he pointed out, "For a long time there were arrangements
for villa-sized houses for us; we announced that we could not live in such
houses. The Housing Foundation placed a three-storey house at the disposal
of three groups; not only did the house not have room for them, no under-
standing existed among the groups presented either." One student, asked
why they had chosen the hotel for this purpose, said "me, because it is

a cowlex and another, because the hotel is inside the city. Moreover,

its owners are in contact with the capitalists who are devastating the
world and with Zionists." This student pointed out, "The hotel officials
are trying to drive a wedge between us and the workers and make us confront
one another, but the aware workers in this hotel cooperated with us at a
time when the hotel managers did not even give us permission to melts phone
calls from the hotel."

The representative of the students settled in the Waldorf Hotel mentioned,
"Many times throughout the day we announced that if those in charge of the
matter did not enter into discussions with us by 1700 hours in the evening,
we would occupy the rooms."

According to the report by BAMDAD's correspondents, the guests who were
staying in these hotels insnediately evacuated them, during their occupation.
There were 40 guests in the Waldorf Hotel, which was occupied by students
without dormitories this morning, and they left the hotel.

According to a report by BAMDAD correspondents, the officials in these
hotels were not willing to talk to newsmen. According to the latest re-
port obtained from the Hotel Waldorf, the students have taken over the
bottom eight floors of the hotel, have provided rooms for girl students
by opening up some rooms, and are in the hotel corridors themselves. In
the Royal Garden Hotel, about 500 students entered the mezzanine chambers
of the hotel from the hotel gardens and took up lodgings there.

Abolfazi Shshshani. the Tehran public prosecutor. also declared, in s state-
ment with BAHDAD yesterday on the takeover of the Tehran hotels,

"Reports concerning this matter have reached the Office of the Public
Prosecutor. Some other buildings belonging to individuals have also been
taken over, in addition to the abovementioned hotels, and since this action
is trespassing, from the legal standpoint, it is therefore punishable and
orders have been given for the evacuation of these locations. The matter
will be settled in the course of the next day or two."

The day before yesterday evening PARS News Agency reported from Kermanshah
that the director general of housing and urban development in the 0stan of
Kermanshahan told PARS News Agency's reporter that work on the Kernanshah
Foster Family Building alongside the town's boarding school for the care
of children without guardians has been completed, and that it was occupied
by students before children without guardians could be transferred to it.
Mohaunud Sepehripur, the governor general of Kermanshahan, stated in this
regard "The young people will be absolutely unwilling to have a place be-
longing to orphan children without guardians occupied by then."

11387
C50: 6906

73
WMWEDDCITFWIRAN
Mmm'lﬂ'inpersian 13Aug7991

[Text] 'me listof permdmied exit fzun Iran isbeingrevisedmdwin
incorporate an additianl group.

the office of the Deputy Prime Minister for revoluticnary Affairs has
Wall Iranianbankstopmvidemenmesoftheixbouﬂdirecmrs,
waging aired-ms, and managers haves: 1350 [21 lurch 1971-20 March 1972]
and Barman 1357 [21 January-19 Pei-nary 1979].

Sudzbankofficialsmesaxtﬂenewgrmptobedaﬁedadtalrmdpading
clearamebyrevolutimarymts.

Inearly Esfand [20 FWZO mar], duringthezmﬁmof kan'saix
anisurfaoebordersafbertmmlutim,u1ePrineWMdmm
Ministriesudstateorganiutimstofumishhimwithﬂemofninim,
Assistant-Secretaries, General Managers, mdotlm: officialsmtotha level
osmomsmmummmmtmwmu
immtigatedaxdﬂntﬂuybedmiedadtahmdpaﬂingcleanmebymhr
' ecu-ts. mviavofunermmtmrycnmte,ﬂ§tlistmaapilad

915°“?
(um-political) cawictims during the form: regime, are prdiibibed ﬁrm
leavingIranpuuingclearametrwghpublictrials. Italaoaontaimamﬂm'
motmmmmmwmmmmmm.

mmmm,mmmw.m«:ua
Wmtﬂmedmiedadtmightfwmtaboutuairmbym
appropriateofficialsatﬂieairpa‘t. mmrndalsomeedﬂntmnct
inquestimmﬂdrever beofficiany published.

7h
EI'I‘EIA‘AT‘S political correspmdent points out that the total umber of those
denied exit pending clearance through public trials ranges between 6,000 and
10,000. Of that nurber 750 consist of permanent deputies; 1,200 consist of
ministers, assistant-secretaries, general managers; and 600 consist of state
agency officials and acting directors.

8291
C80: 4906

75
_/_ Text_7 Engineer Mehdi Bazargan, Prime Minister of the provisional govern-
ment of the Islamic Republic of Iran, said at the opening of the seminar on
economics, "Now, we are living in a strange era, in a revolutionary era which,
without doubt, is unprecedented in our history and which has been welcomed
and applauded by all of the African and Asian countries in the world and, to
some extent by America and Europe. Moreover, it becomes clearer to us every
day that this revolution is deeper and broader than we had imgined.

"When I say 'us,’ I mean the people, the government, and even the leader of
the revolution, Ayatollah Khomeini. At first, it appeared to everyone that
the revolution's program was to overthrow the satanic and despotic imperial
regime, and it was thought that, with the overthrow of that regime, the old
saying, When the devil leaves, the angel arrives,‘ would apply and every-
thing would be rectified because. at that time, it was thought that that
regime was the source of all misfortunes, hardships and difficulties and
that, with its departure. freedom, democracy and justice would arrive in its
place. Likewise, at first, the government's plan was a constitution minus the
element of the monarchy, i.e., once the power of oppression and its aides and
cohorts in the country had been curtailed, the situation would proceed along
its normal course. This is the kind of thinking that dominated the thoughts
of everyone after the victory of the revolution.

"In practice, however, we saw that conditions and developments did not allow
this sleepy and rusty apparatus, this anesthetized patient, to function. 0n

the one hand, counter-revolutionary elements began their troublemking from
the very beginnirg. 0n the other hand, we encountered problems in getting the
wheels to turn. He thought that we would just start-up the government machinery;
the banks would begin to operate, the bazaars would open for business. and.

in general, the wheels of the country's economy would begin to turn. In
practice, however, we saw that a revolution was taking place within these
institutions. too. The workers would not accept the type of administration

in the factories, and the people tere applying pressure to have the banks

nationalized and the departments purged. Consequently, we saw that it was
necessary to bring about substantive change.

76
"Everything must be uprooted and overturned. Ownership must change; tenancy

must change; and the management of the workshops and even the clerics must
change.

In another portion of his speech, Engineer Bazargan said, "The provisional
government is in the position where everything is being demanded of it and
it must be the solution to all problems; meanwhile, it has been deprived of
all resources and does not have any power. We are. as the saying goes,'like
a knife without a blade.’ but we are being asked to be decisive.

"It is necessary to keep in mind that the private sector is very impo ant
to the cOunLry's economy and one must give it attention when consider 5
the country's economic system."

In conclusion. the Prime Minister thanked the participants and sponsors of

this seminar and expressed the hope that, in the mind of God, this seminar
would be successful.

Principle of Ownership

Then, 'Ali Mohamed lzndi, the Minister of Agriculture and Rural Develop-
ment, said, "Some positive steps were taken following the revolution, but
what we have been hearing since the revolution are slogans about a unified

economy and a unified society. without these slogans ever having been ex-
plained."

lzadi then addressed the problem of ownership and said, "First of all, it
was necessary to see whether or not Iran's revolution was an Islamic revo-
lution. In discussing ownership, the basic regulations must be Islamic
regulations. In Islam, legitimate and conditional ownership is respected.
Ownership in Islam is not irresponsible and achieving ownership is not per-
mitted by other than lawful means; in other words, it is necessary to state
that ownership in Islam is not restricted, but it does entail conditions."

lzadi added, "All of those who are active in the economic sector, first of
all, want to know whether or not their activities will be guaranteed. If
the security of order and discipline is not present in production and in-
dustrial units, or any other area of economic affairs, how can a healthy
flow of production continue? In my opinion, the government must play a
guiding role in such affairs and be the efficient overseer and supervisor
in implementing economic programs."

Hassan Nazih, Chairman of the Board of Directors and managing director of
the National Iranian Oil Company, said, "Before determining the basic economi
strategy, power must be centralized within the government. Planning, decision
making, and enforcement must be concentrated within the government. Order

and discipline must be established in all affairs and in all things. Re are
encouraging sound industrial and commercial experts and competent employers
in industry, trade, and construction so that they can cooperate shoulder to
shoulder with the government in reviving industry and trade, until the time
when a suitable economic regime has been created and established for the

77
country by a legitimate National Consultative Assembly composed of repre-
sentatives of all classes. The goal of the revolution was not, and is not,
unplanned and aimless destruction and disruption. we must create public hope
and confidence in the future, in fact.and by strengthening the government and
by establishing order and certainty.

"The display being made by some people of adherence to Islamic ideas in
governmental organizations which, in most instances, unfortunately, is not
based on true conviction and faith. is disrupting the work of the government
and is not solving anything. Each person must heed the limit and boundary of
his competence, knowledge, and expertise in public affairs and problems. The
clergy and a simple laborer should not think that they can be authorities in
all affairs and in all problems; otherwise, interference in power and re-
sponsibilities will continue and planning will not be fruitful. The death of
Taleqani and the sadness of the whole nation showed that the judgement of
public opinion is never wrong. One should not forget this point."

Plunder of the Oil income

Abunlhassan Bani Sadr, first of all, said that the real cause of the re-
volution and its victory was the fact that the former regime had reached a
complete impasse both from the political standpoint and from the economic,
social, ideological. and cultural standpoint. The economic impasse of past
governments was caused by the fact that their training apparatuses were
expanded quantitatively and they churned out as many graduates as they could.
when these graduates were drawn to administrative jobs. all of the oil in-
come had to be used for administrative expenses, without giving any attention
to production programs. In this discussion, we must make clear that we may
or may not continue the present ties that pertain to past policies. He must
leave room for the private sector in the economic system; we must determine
the policy of consumption and production; but. the shape and composition of
the budget shows that we are not able to solve the problems and determine

the economic system. We have a budget deficit. An important portion of the
budget is being used for administrative costs, and we are depending on oil
income alone. We must generate production along with employment. He must not
continue the present situation until the oil wells run dry."

Bani Sadr added, "Contrary to what was stated here concerning the fact that
we do not have much of an economic problem, we do have enormous problems. If
the present economic policy continues, certainly good results will not ensue.
It is necessary to see what our economy is at the present time and where it
is going. Ownership is a minor problem. The main point in the economic system
is who is making the decisions--the government or someone else--and toward
what goal are the decisions being made.1n Islam, ownership is not limited
either quantitatively nor qualitatively; rather, it is the result of labor.
For example, you do not grant the right of ownership for our work; then you
want to determine ownership for an object. This is a fraud."
)ne Must Think of the People's Peace of Hind

Hohammed 'Ali Molavi. President of the Central Bank of lran, said, "On

16 Khordad 1358 / 6 June 1979_ _/, we prepared and gave to the government a
program so that a special economic system, consonant with the situation of
the revolution, might be instituted in the couttry."

In another part of his speech, he said, "Social welfare must be proportionate
to our oil income, i.e.. first of all, everyone's attention should be on work,
because the essence of the economy is work. If the people do not return to
work, not only will we not be victorious; rather,we will be defeated. Ue must
have a comprehensive economic program that is consonant with the country' s
independence and the situation of its natural resources. Escape from any
relationship is impossible as long as foreign technology is needed.

"We should have made progress in industries and shown that we can produce the
raw materials for the industries within the country. Had attention been
given to this matter, we would not have all these ties and this backwardness
that we see today.

"in the economic system, the government must guide the industries. The govern-
ment should not invest in those fields in which the private sector can invest.

“Pianning must be total and national, i.e., it must consider questions in
such a way that our ties will be reduced day by day. Another problem is
coordination, and such an important problem still has not been given con-
sideration. In the past, it was because of lack of coordination in the field
of agriculture and industry that we became a consumer. Right now, we should
be thinking of a short-term program for economic movement instead of a long-
term program. The long-term program should be planned and followed up in the
caurse of time."
ECONOMIC PROBLEMS TO BE DISCUSSED AT SEMINAR
Tehran AYANDECAN in Persian 31 Jul 79 pp 1,2

[Text] Upon the invitation of the Central Bank. next week an economic seminar
will be held with the participation of the economic officials of the country.

In an interview with the press, Dr Hohanmad All Holavi, director general of
Iran's Central Bank pointed out: "I will resign if the seminar does not reach

favorable results and its resolution is not acceptable."

In the beginning of the interview, Molavi pointed out: "The list of names
which was published during the rcvolution—-those who had transferred money
abroad--was not a true list. It had been forged. Now, who published such a
phoney list, I do not know. Now, either it was a phoney list or not, and
whether someone had given the list or not, it is the responsibility of the
Central Bank to prepare a correct list. For this reason, since we have come
here, we have started to prepare an alphabetical list of those who have
transferred money abroad in the last 5 or 6 months. However, we can only
announce the names when we become certain of its accuracy, because most of
the names are similar to one another and it is difficult to distinguish them.
Another problem is that a great portion of the foreign exchange which had
beed transferred abroad belonged to Bank-e Sepah and Bank-e Helli and it

is said that the documents were destroyed in fire."

About 30 rials which is received as a deposit for every dollar from the
passangers [going abroad]. Holavi said "People are upset and they have the
right to be. At the time the decision was made, Hr Ardalan and I were among
the minority. He did not want to impose the 3 tomans of deposit on the
people."

The director general of Central Bank added: "Yesterday we found out that most
of the educational certificates issued in San Francisco are bogus and that
there is a center which issues those certificates and forges the embassy

and college seals.

"0n the other hand, here by paying 100 to 150 tomans you can get a medical
certificate stating that y0u require treatment abroad. With this certificate,
you get at least $10,000 of foreign exchange. The next day the foreign

80
exchange is sold in the market. Despite all these abuses, there is criticism
over 30 rials being received as deposit."

He added: "it was suppOSed to cover the costs of giving checks and money
orders to the passengers together with their passports in the airport, but no
one accepted the responsibility."

in response to a question as to whether these problems were caused because

of having several decisionmaking sources, or whether, with its independence,
the Central Bank could make such decisions by itself, he replied: "At present
we make decisions independently as much as possible. of course, our decisions
are in conformance with the government's policy. But, for example, a few days
ago it was announced by the minister of housing that construction (housing)
banks have been combined and that interest should no longer be received.

"0n the one hand, it is said that the interest is eliminated and, on the
other hand. we have to bargain with Bank-e Helli to reduce housing loans by
a half percent.

"For this reason, the ministers of economy, industry and trade and the head

of The Plan and Budget Organization, the authorities of the Chamber of Commerce,
owners of industry and all directors general of banks have been invited to
attend a seminar next week. if the decisions on the country's economy are not

coordinated or if I do not accept the resolution of this seminar, I will
resign."

Regarding a brain drain, Molsvi said: "He should make fundamental decisions,
putting feelings aside, and a capable person should be used and they should
not let the educated leave the country. At present the important issue for
us is not the escape of capital but of the educated. Host university person-

nel/teachers have taken long-term leaves and it is not known if they will
return."

At the end of this interview, regarding the total amount of foreign exchange
that the banks sell, Holavi said: "Each year 600,000 persons leave the
country to travel abroad. If each of them receives an average of $3,000. the
banks would be paying a total of $1.8 billion and in addition $2.2 billion

in foreign exchange is also paid to students, the retired, and for medical
treatment expenses, bringing the total up to $4 billion.

9044
C50: 4906

81
TRAIN STOPPAGE BY AZARBAIJANI TRIBES EXPLAINED
Tehran AYANDEGAN in Persian 31 Jul 79 p 1

[Text] Tabriz--AYANDEGAN correspondent--The Tabriz-Qatur railway which had
been closed for the last couple of days was opened and the first train passed
through Qatur railway station without any incident.

Engineer Shamlu, district manager of Azerbaijan railway, told AYANDEGAN:
"Following negotiations held by the delegation dispatched by the provincial
govarnor of East Azarbaijan and reaching agreement, the first train from Tabri:
went to Qatur after several days. The representative of the tribes was seen

on the train.

About the Qatur event, Shamlu said: "Holding hostages did not have the de-
finition of war. Because the Kurds had been in Khoy, they had announced that
the employees were not allowed to leave the station in Qatur and that no train
should go to that station." He added: "The employees of the railway were not
arrested. Because the roads were closed and only dirt roads were at the dis-
pOsal of the tribes, the employees were faced with shortages of food and lack
of hygiene.

He pointed out: "At present the railroad is at our disposal and employees
have started to work from today (yesterday). Today and tomorrow "the train"
will come to Qatur from Tabriz.

According to our correspondent. the Tehran-Tabriz train which had been stopped
with 500 passengers in Atashbayk and Hashtrud area went to Tabriz after the
rails were cleared. All passengers reached their destination safely.

Shaniu. the director general of East Azarbaijan railway, who put the in-
formation at the disposal of AYANDEGAN, added: "The stoppage of the train
in the Atashbayk area was due to technical problems with one of the cargo
trains and this caused the closing of the Tehran-Tabriz railway.

9044
C80: 4906

82
FATALITIES RBPCRFHD AFTER CLASH IN BANDAR ANZALl

Tehran BAHDAD in Persian 18 Oct 79 pp 1, 2

lérticle: “Owing to a Refusal To Face Problems and Facts, which Resulted
in the Latest Episodes, Bender Anzali Govegnor Accuses Agriculture Minister,
Fisheries Director of Perpetreting Crimesﬂ/

IIext/ The town of Bender Anzali, which was transformed into a scene of
intense struggle between revolutionary guards and various groups of people,
in the course of the past 2 days, was quiet yesterday and is being strict-
ly patrolled by police and Islamic Republic gendarme officials.

All shops, schools and government offices in this town were closed down
yesterday. Tens of thousands of people participated yesterday morning and
evening in burial rites for some of the people killed in the Bender Anssli
occurrences. At the present time vehicular traffic in the town is moving
sluggishly. uabib Davaran, the governor general of Gilan, declared yester-
day afternoon In an intervieu with BAMDAD that the casualties were 1a
killed and 47 wounded.

Yesterday Hoseynjani, the governor of Bandar Ansell, also accused the min-
ister of agriculture and the managing director of the fisheries of per-
petrating crimes in a cable he sent to the General Revolutionary Public
Prosecutor of Iran. This cable-~copies of which were also sent to the of—
fice of the emam, the office of the prime minister and the governor gen-
eral's office- stated “1, as governor of Bender Ansell, hereby accuse the
managing director of Iranian Fisheries and the minister of agriculture of
perpetrating a crime, because I conveyed all occurrences accurately to all
official personages in the course of organizing a seminar to investigate
the problems of fishermen in Bender Anzali and to the Fisheries Commis-
sion and the Governorste General of Gilan and in meetings with the minister
of agriculture and the managing director of the fisheries in Tehran, but
the managing director of the fisheries did not pay attention to these prob-
lems and facts. He only proclaimed ratified decrees and circular letters
without paying attention to the sensitivities of the region and the isr
portance of the problem. The minister of agriculture also supported the
managing director of the fisheries before me, in a manner remote from
existing realities, in the presence of representatives of independent fish-
ermcn, and was not even prepared to listen fully to what we said or to con-
sider the nutter a serious one. in any event the tactlesenese and the un-
revnlutionary, inhuumn action of fishery officials in making the facts ep-
peer the opposite of what they really were caused the recent events in
Bender Anzali to erupt and the blood of many people to flow." In conclu-
sion, the cable stated "I implore you to look into this matter as soon as
possible and l as prepared to present a testimony and statement on the
episode."

Yesterday Adm Medani, conuunder of the navy. also entered the Osten of
Gilan to investigate the recent events in Bender Anzali and proceeded to
examine the reasons for the recent events in Anzali in the presence of the
governor general of Gilan and military and national figures. Before the
session, Adm Hadani took part in a radio and press conference and stated,
"At the first moment the town's security forces were in charge of respon-
sible authorities, including the security and military forces and judiciary
officers; the army of course supports the nation everywhere, exists for

the sake of protecting the nation and preserving peace, and is at the dis-
posal of the people here, in addition to the assistance from the navel
forces.” He said, "Of course the 0stan Security Council decided in its
previous sessions and today that there should be no guards in Bender Ansell,
since it is likely that an explosion will occur." He added, "The security
forces will carry out the duties they have and the naval forces will also
perform their duties. I think, God willing, that the expected order will
come into being, that there will be no further room for anxiety and,
through the awareness of responsible officials, the problems will be
eliminated."

Regarding the latest conflagretions in Bender Anzali, he said "Not every-
thing can be dealt with under the title of counterrevolution. hany times

a conflsgration occurs when a situation is confronted crudely or when con-
frontations are not permissible and one must seek a cure. Many issues and
problems are so small that they may easily be solved but then unfortunately
people who have no responsibility get involved and interfere and the reso-
lution of a job which was difficult for those who had the responsibility
becomes much harder. I personally believe that if the responsible officials
themselves had solved this problem intelligently and those who had no re-
sponsibility had not interfered yesterday and the day before, we would not
have had so many killed or so many people wounded and the eruptions would
easily have ended in a very smooth manner. However, again, everywhere we
prevent losses is a gain. In any case one must engage in confrontations

in the context of order and deal with trespaseers strictly. He must also
be aware that these people belong to another category and they want their
problems to be eliminated. Do not address them as counterrevolutionaries.
He must seek remedies for problems of people of this sort in a very deli-
cate manner and then we will observe that the problems are being eliminated
smoothly. Of course there are a limited number of people throughout Iran

8h
who are lying in wait, muddying the waters and fishing, and as soon as
they enter the arena :hey must be categorically recognized, because they
are the keystone of those who are committing the wrongful acts."

Ilashem Sabhaghian, minister of the interior, announced in an interview
yesterday that the Guards of the islamic Revolution have conpletely de-
serted Bender Anzali as a conseQuence of agreements. Bender Anzali was
calm today but the holcing of funerals was acconpenied by demonstrating
end all the shops in this town were closed.

In describing the events of the past few days in Bender Anzali, the min-
ister of the interior said, "Essentially the matter took the form of a
clash between the fishermen and the fisheries at the outset. 0n the day
of the episode, the governor general of Gilan went to Bender Anzeli to an-
nouncc that the fishermen were free to fish; unfortunately, the blowup oc-
curred before his arrival. Because of the large number of protestora, the
fishery guards rcques:cd help from the Army of Guards of the Revolution
and three people were killed in the course of shooting." He added "Follow-
ing this episode, a renewed outburst occurred in the holding of the funeral
for one of these three people; according to the reports which have been
received, leftist forces had a hand in creating that." The minister of
the interior added that the continued presence of members of the Army of
Guards in Bender Anzali caused provoked people and resulted in a renewed
clesh, end as a consequence an attack was made on the site of the Army of
Guards.

Hashem Sebbaghien stated, "in the wake of the departure of the Army of
Guards from Bandar Anzali, security arrangements for the town were assigned
to the police and, in case of need, the naval force." The minister of the
interior declared that ll people were killed in the latest episodes in
Bender Anzali end that about 40 were wounded. he asserted that a coauittee
will be sent to this area by the Ministry of Interior to investigate the
Bender Anzali events in the early part of next week.

Regarding the news of Tuesday l5 Oct 1979 Lt Conan Khalil Ahmadi, contender
of the Naval Cruiser Training Center, cited two fatalities and 12 casual-
ties in the context of the demonstrations in Bender Anzali. On page three
of the newspaper it was stated that the navy's cruisers and security forces
undertook extensive operations to remove the Army of the Guards from the
circle of the blockade and placed a statement at BAHDAD's disposal in
Resht stating that notice was being given that the Navy's cruisers had no
mission to interfere in carrying out these operations and that no orders
to this end had been given to the cruisers.

The disturbed atmosphere of the town, following the latest events, has
been dissipated but all shops, offices and schools were closed down yester-
day. Yesterday a group of close to 1,000 persons carried the bodies of
the dead Quietly to the town cemetery at dawn and buried them in the course
of ceremonies. At the same time yesterday Adm Madani, comander of the

85
uevy, went to dander Anzali and headed directly for the naval base. In
another area, 200 guards established themselves near Khomam, 20 kiloueters
frmn Ansell, and refrained from going into the town. Severe wind and rain
yesterday added to the total calm of Bender Anzali to some extent. Mean-
while an atmosphere of wariness and uncertainty about the future is to be
observed Clilonﬁ the people, and the reaction of the government and the ex-
ecutive agencies in solving the problems of Bender Anzeli will be the sole
determining factor.

Yesterday an announcement was issued by the friends and family of the de-
ceased Nader Safa'i, who was killed in the recent outburst in Bender Anzali.

In this announcement, signed by the Islamic Students' Association, the
Hosiem workers' and Students' Club of Gilan University, the Holy War on
Construction of Gilan Ostan, and the Army of the Guards of the Islamic
Revolution of Iran, Rasht Headquarters, detailed matters concerning eertp-
dom for the sake of Islam were written.

In the conclusion, this announcement stated that the funeral ceremonies
for the martyred brother guard Nader Safa'i would begin at 1000 hours this
morning at the Halifnezhad High School in Rasht, on the Breq Bridge.

The Office of the General Public Prosecutor of the Revolution of the Islamic
Republic of Iran, issuing a proclamation addressed to the revolutionary
public prosecutor of Sander Anzali, did not accept the letter's resignation
and requested that he perform his humanitarian and legal duties as before.

The text of the proclamation is as follows:

"In the name of the almighty:

"Mr Parazpur, Islamic revolutionary public prosecutor of Bender Ansell:

In light of your valuable, unflagging services in the period of service,
agreement is hereby not given to your resignation dated 16 October 1979.

I therefore hope for your success in continuing your humanitarian and legal

duties in a good, decisive manner.

"lgigneﬂ General Public Prosecutor of the Revolution of the Islamic Ra-
public of Iran, Ali Qoddusi."

11337
680: 6906
NEW IAN) REIGN PLAN DISCUSSED
Tehran mm? in Persian 13 Mg 79 p 10

[Text] After the Wt of a new land reform plan which according
to Mr Abolhassan Bani-Sadr, nether of the Boomnic Camcil of the Isla'nic
Revolutim, was gablishai in EI'I‘ELA'AT, the Ministry of Agrimlture and
anal Developlmt mote mm'm' as follcws:

”l‘he camelmsive plan which was devised by the Iranian Islamic Republic
in accordance with Islamic principles and standards omcemim farming
methods am! systans of land cessimand land reclamtimardvdﬁchwas
submitted to the Cabinet, does not represent a new land refom plan.

In it issues dated 10 Mozdad 1358 [1 August 1979] and 15 nmdad 1358

[6 August 1979] under the title 'New land Reform Plan,“ mam publishai
articles much have created suspicions and illusions and have

people to flood our Ministry with letters rewestim details and clarificatims.
'me printing of such material is particularly regrettable in view of the
mfavorable huessim of this cancept evoked both amom petty lardlotds

and numbers of agrimltural councils.

Itnustbestressedunttheninistryofngriculmreamnralnevelopmt
hasnotmrked out anynevland reformami naturallyhasmtmhnittedme
toanyfonn,suchasthe0abinetorthemlutiomryootmil. mtwrnln
line with Islamic principles and stardards, we have formulated a Wive
p1anmwysandneansofhndamership,la:ﬂcessim,uﬂhn3rsclamtlmin
the Iranian Islamic Republic. And whm admitting our plan to theCabinet,
malsomadeitavailabletocertainanalysts.o.rplanmkesspecialpm-
visim fer beneficial atploylmt, its inplicatims, training rights of
famsofharmnlands, cmtimed mic activitiesinagriailm,anl,
at the sum time, asserting farmers' rights, the rights of famsm have
boomethoomersoftheirallcttedlmds. W,mde:ourplan,tm
mmnmidefacilitiesinadertomnltmwperﬂcmam
of farmlams, the reclamticn of barranltivatad lads, and code gave-mam:-
MalardtoapplicantsdnarereadytoemageinfamingaMaMul
mishandry. In addition, canbersare regulatims of the past will be radi-
cally ovuhauled, decisicn making will take place through the participatiai
of farming councils representatives, and decentralization will be stressed.

It is Raped that El'rELA'AT would publish these clarifications in order to
aisure the civil and religious rights of individuals, the establishmt

of relations between irrlividuals on the basis of nutml “sent/agreements,
the creaticn of a safe ani secure environment in villages, a greater use

of water and soil resources. Also, in order to eliminate people's anxiety
and misunderstaniing, help people respect the rights of one another, avoid
irregularities a: violations in villages, and steadily expand Iranian agri-
culture."

After receiving this letter, we telephoned Mr Rmtabataba'i, Assistant
Secretary of Agriculture, (by man the letter was signed), and asked him
the following questions:

E'I'l‘EIA'AT: Will the inplenentation of this plan ouwert all lardless
farmers into landowners?

Mr: Purtabataba'i: Eatery active and efficient individual engaged in agri-
culture will be provided with gwerment-amed resources, especially
gwerrment-amed barren land, arable but fallow lani for reclanaticn.

In p'widing that assistance, priority will be given to farmers residing

in the localities involved. We are aiming at initiating a developlmt and
omstmctive progran in villages in aocordame with Islamic standards by
mmsizing atploynent, a note liberal use of existing resumes, and
greata' activity, by eliminating major roadblocks and scrapping whereas
regulatims. Under that plan, the rights gained by far-um, both petty
lardomers and famere, will be preserved.

EI'I‘EIA'AT: Is the air-rent plan consistent with the important Islanic wecept
thatmcever worksona land shalld alsoom it?

n: Purtabataba'i: Yes, in principle the major issue is tl'at we shall
mapper-t landmsmoactuallywrkmthei: landsamiarebeneficialto
thanselves and their society. Otherwise, we shall not snort than.

EI'I'ELA'AT: Ifapettylardamerhireeacertainmmerofpeaeantsmwork
onhis land, inaooordancewithaomtract, .mdptofits therefran mile he,
himself,doesmterqageinanymkmit,willthelmdbecmsideredas
belagingtotlepeasantsﬂnworkonitoruiepettylamdnpmfits

franit? Willmtspportofaiditypeoflardmshipbeocnsmiedas
etploitaticnofnanbynan?

86
Mr Purtabataba'i: shariat's primiples and standards contain adequate
[rovisims governing contracts. Naturally when such Islamic principles
aredasewedandtheoontracthasbeensignedmthebasisofhm
relatims and with the satisfaction of the parties convened, no exploitatim
shalltakeplace. mtthisfqmeiscmplexaxﬂmmntbeadmtely
discussed over the template.

8291
$0: 4536
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDPOZ-00860R000200020041-2
BRIEFS

CANDIDATE Hl'l'HDRAHS-dn an interview with AYANDBGAN last night, Hanan Nazih
announced that he had changed his mind about becoming a candidate for the
Assembly of Experts. he said: "I heartly thank the parties, conunity groups.
honorable national and religious authorities and those fellow citizens who
have found me suitable for membership in the Experts Assembly. For the
reasons that I mentioned in yesterday's press interview (the day before yes-
terday), including the refusal of the reasonable request made by the hoslen
People's Republic Party and myself regarding postponement of elections (which
would definitely have been in the interest of the people and the country in
approaching unity and national understanding and would have resulted in avoiding
serious and unfavorable conadquences. especially preventing nonopolisn and
disunion). I hereby announce that I have changed my mind about becoming can-
didate for membership to the Assembly of Constitutional Expert. I wish that
Iran and Iranianness endure under the protection of God, the Koran and Isles.
[Text] [Tehran AYANDBGAN in Persian 2 Aug 79 p 2] 9064

ANVARI WITHDRAHSnDr Abdolkarin Anvari, deputy chairman of the lawyers' in-
stitute and secretary to the Council of the National Front contacted AYAIDBGAN
last night and announced that he had changed his Iind about his candidacy

for the Assembly of Experts. Anvsri explained: "I greatly appreciate the
feelings the people expressing various viewpoints of Iran's Rational front for
the election of the Assembly of Experts. Unfortunately as there is no possi-
bility for free election activities and the responsible authorities do not show
any interest in alleviating the atmosphere of intimidation. I, therefore,
announce that I as no longer a candidate and I am definitely hopeful that the
righth efforts of the true Moslens and antireactionary people of our country
would soon give an opportunity for the true servants of the holy principle of
freedon." As of last night the following announced that they had changed their
minds about renaining candidates for the assesbly. llasnn Sadr, Naser lnqeta',
Hojjstoleslan Fahim Kermani (Ker-an). Mohamed Bbrahin Shapuri (Ker-an).

Dr Salavati (Isfahan), Hasan Taqafi, Taher Ah-sdzadeh (Governor general of
ﬂuoresan), Ostad Hohansnadtaqi Shari'ati, Gholsnsli Afruz, Ayatollah Mahdi
ﬂa'eri Yazdi. Bojjatoleslanl Seyyed Ali Asq'ar Dastaib, Hobs-ad Parahpur. Ali
Asqar hadras. Dr Hohsen Jurabi. macaroni Qashqa'i, Adib Born-and. [Text]
[Tehran AYANDRGAN in Persian 2 Aug 79 p 21 9066
POLITICAL GROUPS SHUN ELECTION--The following political groups and parties
have officially announced that they are not participating in the elections
to the Assembly of Constitutional Experts: the Communist Party of Iran's
Workers and Farmers; the Women's Enlightened Society; Ashraf Dehqani Group
(Fedayee Khalq Guerrillas); Unity for Freedom, Iran's Liberation Party; the
Party of Future Pathway; Iran's Frecmen (Azadegsn); Azadegan (Freemen); the
political group of Rah-e nou (new direction); the Republican Party of Iran's
Federative People; lran's National Democratic Front; Struggling women's
Society; Revolutionary Unity for Salvation of Labor; the Liberation Society
[Text] [Tehran AYENDEGAN in Persian 2 Aug 79 p 2] 9046

IRAQI ISIAMIC GUM-[e Iraqi Islamic Harolutimary (atomization issued a
oanmmiquewiereinitanmmoeditsreadinesstojointiewormmaed
partyWiiohhasbempmposedbyalmlcueyni. 'ii'ieoammiqueresds:
"Your children in the Iraqi Islmnic Revolutionary crganiutim who have
mmtedymrkvolutimmtsidelranamhavemnmoooasims
declaredtheirsolidarityandoooperatimwithymrideas.onoeagain
resparistotheosﬂofyominvitatimatﬁdeclaretheirresdimsto
join thehbcld Messed party under ywrwise leada’ship. [Text] ['l‘ehran
minPersian20Aug79p21829l

CONDEHNATION OP IRAQI CLAIH--In a statement titled "The Progressive Hove- *
ment of the Iranian Peoples Does not Need a Guardian." the National Demo-
cratic Front strongly condemned the Iraqi Government's lateat claims. The
text of the pronouncement follows: The National Democratic Front published
a pronouncement regarding the latest claims of the Iraqi Government which
stated the following: "In a propagandistic fanfare, the Iraqi Government
recently called for restitution of the islands of Greater Tunb, Leaser Tunb.
and Abu Muss. It also called for the Irganian Government to grant self-
determination to the Iranian peoples [of these islands]. Such is the col-
lusion that the despotic Governaent of Iraq always uses to bring pressure

to settle its special scores by advancing territorial claims and then turn-
ing to peaceful means to gain a satisfactory solution. The case is that
there are many and various witnesses of this. and there is [therefore] no
need to bring up this matter for the hundredth time. However, it should
call for self-determination for peoples on its own country. not of its
neighbor. The Government of Iraq has persistently followed a policy of years
of crushing [minority] peoples and has not refrained from any crime in this
matter, which shows the brazen extreme a despotic and inhuman government can
to. [Text] [Tehran ETTELA'AT in Persian 6 Nov 79 p 12]

080: 6906

91
POLL INDICATES Harm's LEADERSHIP PREFERRED 1'0 PERES
TA 041142 Tel Aviv HA'ARETZ in Hebrew 6 Nov 79 p 3 TA

[Text] The leadership of 'Ezer Heisman as head of the Likud is preferred
over that of Shim'on Peres as head of the alinenent. This is the conclu-
sion of a nationwide public opinion poll conducted by the Pori Institute at
the request of HA'ARBTZ.

The question posed was: "Who wouldynu prefer to see in power: Shin'on
Peres as head of the alinenent of 'Bzer Veisnn as head of the Likud"?
Thirty-six percent favored 'Bzer Heisman as opposed to 27.2 percent who pre-
ferred Shin'on Peres.

Sane 22.2 percent do not wish to see either 'Bzer Weiuan as head of the
Lilmd or Shin'on Peres as head of the alinenent in power. The renainder
16.6 percent do not have any opinion on the issue.

The analysis of the replies' according to their votes for the various par-
ties in the last Knesset elections indicates that ex-wc voters rennin
hesiteant: 28.4 percent would like to see 'Eser Weimn as leader of the
Lihud while a similar percentage of 26.2 would like to have Shin'on Peres
in power as head of the alinenent. Sone 36.9 percent of ear-M voters do
not favor either of the non and 8.5 percent do not have an opinion on the
matter.

It is very interesting to see how the Liluud and alinenent voters are di-
vided: 55.8 percent of the Likud voters want to see 'Bser Heir-an in power
as head of the Likud and a ainilar percent (58.9) of the alinenent voters
want to see Shin'on Peres in power as leader of the alinenent. However.

14 percent of the Liked voters prefer the elinenent-Perea forntion and a
sinilar percentage (15.6 percent) of the alinensnt voters favor the Liked
under Heimn's leadership.

Sosa 19.3 percent of the mm voters and 15.6 percent of the alinenant

voters do not favor either of the sen and 10.9 percent of the Lilnad voters
and 9.9 percent of the alinenent voters do not have a definite opinion.

92
The largest group of the "RP voters. 60.3 percent, do not want to see either
Heiznnn or Peres in power. However, 25 percent of the NR? voters prefer

the Likud'e choice and 20.8 percent prefer the clineaent'o choice. Some
13.9 percent of the NR? voters do not have an opinion either way.

CSO: 5805

93
HERUT CHAIRMAN'S ELECTION ANALYZED

Tel Aviv HA'ARETZ in Hebrew lo Oct 79 p 2
[Article: "Yorsn Aridor Elected Herut Chairnsn"]

[Text] Deputy Minister Yorsn Aridor was elected Merut chairman by the
party's board which met in Metzudat-Ze'ev, Tel-Aviv on 3 October. Meier
of Knesset Aridor received 63 of the votes, and the other candidate,
Member of Knesset Michael Dekel, was supported by 67 heaters. There were
three abstentions, and eight newbers were absent.

Aridor‘s victory was assumed after Member of Knesset titan Livni announced
his withdrawal and told the board neﬂaers that he end Aridor had agreed to
cooperate. Aridor'a election is also seen as a substantial victory for
ministers Ezer Heitzsan and David Levy in the struggle beneath the surface
for leadership of ﬂerut. Knesset Chairman Yitshaq Shasir supported Moder
of Knesset Dekel and even insisted on nominating hil. Minister Ari'el
Sharon was absent. but other “at. of the defunct Shlonrion novenent
did participate.

Livni 's Support

Menber of Knesset Aridor said on 3 October that within 3 weeks he would
propose a new makeup for the secretariat, which is to be the organisational
are of the party. Following his election he said that his Iain goal would
be to ensure that. following the elections. there will be a new goverment
centered around ﬂerut and headed by Prime Minister Begin. Sons sources

in ﬂerut said that in all probability Mesber of Knesset Livni will be
asked to head the organization branch (which up to now was headed by Men-
ber of Knesset betel). and it is also possible that he will be deputy
chairman as a reward for his support of Aridor.

A Victory for Moderates

Although the struggle was anong Meters 015 Knesset Aridor. Dskel. and

Livni. it has ideological overtones. because Aridor was backed by Minis-
ters Heirs-an and Levy, who are known for their noderste stands on political
and defense issues. and who supported the peace treaty with Egypt

91:
(Minister Levy nominated Hr Aridor). 0n the other hand. Member of Imesset
Dekel use supported by s msjority of those in Berut who opposed the peece
treaty, emong them Newer of Knesset Shellir. chsirmsn of the Knesset
foreign end defense comittee, Moshe Ernss, Professor Joseph Rom. Hester
of Knesset Yig'sl Cohen-crud, end Member of Knesset Devid Shtern Met
of Knesset Rani Milo also supported hotel). The other Knesset seabers
supported Aridu'. Among them were chsirun of the coslition Chsil Dorfu,
cheirmsn of the Knesset party delegstion Chsim Ksufmsn, end Deputy Defense
ﬂinister Mordechsi Tzipori, ell moderstes on foreign sud defense issues.

8646
CSO: 4805
AIR BATTLES HIT“ SYRIANS EXPECTED TO CONTINUE

Tel Aviv HA'AREI‘Z in Hebrew 11 Oct 79 p 9

[Article by Ze'ev Shif: "More Air Battles Are Expected Over Lebanon, Fol-
lowing much Damascus Hay Introduce Surface-to-Air Hissiles Into Lebanon")

[Text] Israel and Syria are like two fighters after the third round, who
now face and suspiciously survey each other prior to the next round.

Both sides have valid reasons to suspect the good intentions of the oppos-
ing side, but it seeas that the Syrians are showing more nervousness. Is-
rael suspects that Damscus will not remain quiet in the face of the downing
of nine of its planes within 3 months. and therefore it will plan sou ra-
taliatory action: a nissile attack or sonething along this line. Israel
also expects that Syrian Air Force planes will continue to intercept our
planes over Lebanon. In general, there is good cause for alertness and
constant watch over the recent Syrian fortifications (especially in the
air—with the addition of the new Hig-25's and the antiaircraft aissile
batteriesu-but also on land. with the addition of the T-72 tanks).

Syria has good cause to suspect that Israel intends to continue flights
which nay bring about more dogfights; that its planes will continue intel-
ligence flights over Syria and actions in Lebanon against terrorist targets.
The Syrians feel that they are alone in the confrontation with Israel, af-
ter Egypt signed a peace agreement and after the pact with Iraq did not
turn out too well. They suspect that Israel would like to take advantage
of the situation. Syrian nervousness is felt in nany areas.

It is clear that. under the circuatances, this is not the last round.

The present struggle is over Lebanon's airspace, or that is how both

sides are defining it. Israel naintains it has a right to intelligence
efforts over Lebanon. because there are concentrations of terrorists there,
especially in the southern part of the country—terrorists who pose a
threat to Israel and its citizens. It naintains the right to use its air
force‘in order to foil their attenpts.

A Syrian Operational Conclusion

Israel can also claim that Syria has in effect conquered sections of Lebe-
non and has large concentrations of forces there. Israel has to keep an

96
eye on these forces. which are those of a hostile country. Syria, on the
other hand, claims that it will not let Israel do what it pleases in Leba-
non's airspace. and that it will prevent the Israeli Air Force from hit-

ting Palestinian targets in Lebanon. As long as there are such diametri-

cally opposed positions, the region can expect further rounds. unless
one side changes its declared position.

It would be wrong to think Syria feels that it has been totally defeated
and that it has no chance in such a confrontation. It seems to this
author that on the other side, things look different than what most Is-
raeli Air Force, the Syrians probably think that up to now, judging by ‘
what happened in the past, they got out of it not too badly. In the third

round, the last, where an unmanned Israeli plane was shot down, Damascus
counted it as a victory.

Before the previous round, when Hig-Zl's were dispatched against Israeli
Phantoms over Lebanon, the Israeli planes left the scene and the Syrians
used air-to-sir missiles against them. The Syrians could conclude that the
Israelis ran away, or that they turned around because they did not want to
engage in dogfights with the new Syrian planes. The downing of their
planes is attributed to a trick and not to a real dogfight. we also have
to take into account that they believe the debriefings of their pilots,
that they indeed shot down two Israeli planes, as opposed to seven surpri-

sed Syrian planes, which is not too bad considering the superior Israeli
Air Force.

The inevitable conclusion: the Syrians will continue with their declared
policy. If Israel shirks from a confrontation with Hig-23's, they will
probably conclude that it is just as well to engage more of these planes.

In addition, they may decide to try to avoid Israeli planes or even lay
traps for then. This operational conclusion fits in with the Syrian politi-
cal line. according to which Syria has to demonstrate both to the Arab
world and to the USSR that it is in the front line of the confrontation
with Israel. Their estimate is that Syria will gain pan-Arab prestige,

and that even Washington may end up pressuring Israel to discontinue, or

at least minimise, intelligence flights over Lebanon.

Things should also be examined from a non-Syrian point of view. No far-
reaching conclusion regarding the ability of both sides can be drawn from
the downing of the unmanned Israeli plane. At most it points to a high
degree of alertness of the Syrian defense system and to the fact that the
radar system protecting the country is good and sufficiently sensitive.

The downing of the unmanned plane does not say anything about the ability

of the pilots that hit it. There was no air battle, and we do not know
whether those guiding the plane did all they could to get it away. Certainly

one cannot conclude that Israel can no longer conduct intelligence flights
over Lebanon.

Israel has conducted intelligence flights over Arab countries for many
years, witth the lisitations of the range of its planes. Utilising

97
unmanned planes is but one method. and it does not prove that manned
flights are not conducted in addition to the unmanned flights. It is silly
to expect that Israel will not conduct intelligence flights over Syria.

and certainly the same applies to terrorist concentrations. Anyone coming
up with such a proposition can expect another Yom Kippur war or maybe even
worse. As long as Israel cannot obtain satellite photographs. it will con-
tinue surveillance and intelligence flights over areas of confrontation
countries. The downing of an unmanned plane will not deter it.

A Formula for Division

It can be assumed that. as time goes on. our planes may find it more and
more difficult to conduct such flights, and that the risk will grow as

the equipment possessed by the Arabs becomes more sophisticated. The
Hig-ZS is designed for dogfights at high altitudes and speeds. But even
it may find it difficult to confront a fast Israeli plane that infiltrates
quickly to take pictures. If a dogfight ensues. the heavy Hig-ZS

may find it difficult to face the F-15 or even the Phantom.

The Hig-ZS has its limitations. In other words, Israel can and will con-

tinue its intelligence activities although the Syrians have been equipped
with His-25's.

If the estimate that we are indeed facing a new round over Lebanon is va-
lid. chances sre that the battle will be held with the new Hig-23's.

Even so. the Israeli Air Force will prevail. and it makes no difference
whether the Syrians introduce more radar systems into Lebanon. When we
talk about a confrontation with F-lS planes. experienced Israeli pilots,
and the methods and tactics that the Israeli Air Force employs, the chances
of victory, or even of a relatively "good" outcome, for the Syrian Air
Force are very slim. The prestige of the Syrian regime will be badly
hurt in such a confrontation. Therefore, if Damascus insists on getting
in the way of the Israeli Air Force over Lebanon, it will and up conclud-
ing that it has to introduce antiaircraft missile batteries into Lebanon.

Israel will consider this a serious escalation. and it may serve as a casus
belli that will force it to enlarge the scope of its a'tivities. He then
may slide into a kind of war of attrition which was hinted at by Syrian
Defense Minister Hustafa Tales-which is not what either side wants. for
different reasons. Therefore. one can only conclude that if both sides
want to avoid a war of attrition and a total deterioration, they had better
find some kind of an unwritten formula for "division" over Lebanon's air-
space. Aa far as Israel is concerned, the author thinks this is possible.

8666
050: 6805
EARNEST APPROACH TO AUTONOHY TALKS URGED
Tel Aviv HA'ARETZ in Hebrew 5 Oct 79 p 13
[Article: "There Is No Escape From Substantive Talks on Autonoly"]

[Text] The settlers of Ofra tried to explain the break-in through the
fence by saying that tine is of the essence: pretty soon there will be
autonony in the territories, and they will not be able to achieve then
what they can do now. These settlers have no doubt that autonony is around
the corner, and it seems that they are convinced it will be "for citizens"
only. Otherwise they would not be worried about Jews taking over land—a
prohibition that the local Arab sdainistrative council will not be able to
enact, since it will not have the legal authority to do so. or so said

Mr Begin.

This approach by the settlers of Ofra and Gush E-unin followers, with their
nuances, is in total contrast to 'he estinate which goverrnent sources are
trying to talk the public into via intonation to the nedia. If we were

to believe the official of senioificial version, then it would see. that
everything is all right. The Egyptian President is not pushing for the
Palestinians to join the negotiations, and he even said so publicly, twice.
The til-stable for the joint sessions of the ninisters and of the working
coI-ittces of experts gives the iwresaion that everything will continue
in a relaxed nanner, and no one seen to be concerned with the fact that
the "target date" is only 6 months away.

But the nervousness of Gush Emmi- does not seen totally mfounded, and i:
any even be sore justified than the relaxed attitude of govern-ant sources.

Sone in Israel now differentiate between Dr Boutrus Ghali, the "bad guy."
and Presisent Sadat, the "good guy." If we are to deduce fron what happened
in the United States when the "bad guy" was Secretary of State Rogers.
whereas President Nixon was the savior who stepped in just in tins and
corrected what the secretary had el-ost done. then we ought to avoid this
for-at.

True. Anwar Sadat rejected the American diplonatic onslaught which tried
to rush the negotiations and have the Palestinians join then. We can only

99
guess at the Egyptian President's reasons: He may have estimated that a
Security Council resolution based on Resolution 262 would anger Israel and
could interfere with Israeli withdrawal from the Sinai--a process whose
continued progress is necessary in order to justify his political initiative
to the Egyptian people and the Arab world.

Sadat is not an ardent supporter of the PLO, the exaggerated support of
which by American diplomats may be frowned upon by Amman. Anyone who wants
the PLO to stop opposing autonomy had better stop courting it and wait for
Yassir Arafat and his advisers to realize that in the long run they stand
to gain by calling off the Arab boycott and by letting the Arabs in the
territories participate in elections to the administrative council.

This is the reason why Sadat said in Haifa that Palestinian presence is
only necessary after 3 years, that is, if the con-ittee that will decide
the final status of the Heat Bank and the Gaza Strip does convene. Then,
and only then, according to the Camp David accords, should "elected
representatives" of the Rest Bank and the Gaza Strip take part in the
negotiations--and not in the phase when autonomy and what it should be are
discussed. Participation by Palestinians in the Egyptian or Jordanian
delegation is conceivable but nct mandatory.

The Egyptian President did not try to say anything that would contradict

the accords when he said recently that it is possible, maybe even desirable,
to conclude the autonomy talks without the Palestinians. Suffice it that
they vote and get elected to the administrative council, whenever such
elections are held. It is well known that the "joint letter" did not set
forth a "target date" for this. it was only promised that elections would
be held "as soon as possible" after the conclusion of the talks.

Why shOuld we then not just sit back? Can we ever expect a more convenient
situation, with Dr Ghali claiming that without representation of the Arbas
from the Heat Bank and the Gaza Strip "there is no sense in negotiating,"
whereas the Egyptian President maintains that the job can definitely be
accomplished without them?

Actually President Sadat put the Palestinian issue away. but those who
maintain this ignore the fact that Dr chali said a few other things at the
last meeting in Alexandria. For the first time he stressed "substantial“
issues, as opposed to procedural matters, and even went further and said
that autonomy for "people only," rather than for people and land. is absurd.

If Anwar Sadat really wanted to refute what Dr Ghali had said, he would
have said that the claim of absurdity is pointless and that the idea of
autonomy for people only, the version of the Israeli Prise Minister and the
Israeli delegation, is a healthy one, logical and practical. But the
Egyptian President refrained froa saying just that, and while he lets his
foreign secretary (who has yet to be appointed foreign minister) call for
the joining of Palestinian representatives. and creates the impression in
Israel that he has rebuked and Egyptian official who is not even a minister,
he is quiet on the real issue.

100
Those who fight for giving the administrative council wide authority-and
this is the Egyptian and American line in the autonomy telks—-act so as to
enable the leaders of the West Bank and the Gaza Strip to obtain PLO
permission to implement autonomy while taking an active part in putting

it together. They will come of their own accord. with no need for pleading
at this stage of the game, because autonomy, as Dr Ghali and Mr James
Leonard, the American representative, see it, will certainly tempt them to
turn it into a springboard for a Palestinian "entity." The latter can join,
under a federation or a confederation. the Jordanian Hashimite Kingdom. or
it could form a "united Jordanian kingdom"--or evendeclereitself an
independent state. when the time comes.

what now seems to many as a definite contradiction between Dr Ghali and
Sadat is possibly only partly a game. There is reason to expect that in
future meetings the Egyptian delegation will push for adoption of their
position as regards the authority of the administrative council. We should
not be surprised if after January 1980, the date when the 10? is supposed
to end the withdrawal to the El-‘Ariah Rae-Muhammad line, the pressure

will increase, while pointing to the target date of 26 April.

Up to now our delegation has managed to postpone any serious discussion on
the shape of autonomy, with the exception of how to set up the administra-
tive council. will it succeed in doing it in the future as well?

It is interesting to note what Brigadier General (Reserve) Arye Shalev
had to say in this context. He recently published a paper on

"autonomy, its problems and possible solutions," as part of the
publications of the Center for Strategic Research. "when the continuation
of negotiations depends on the participation of the leaders of the West
Bank and the Gaza Strip, the question becomes what the contribution of the
United States can be. It can be estimated that because of some broad
considerations (oil, influence in the Arab world) and recognition of the
dominance of the PLO in Judea. Samaria, and the Gaza Strip. the United
States may change its policy in the future and demand the participation of
the PLO, if it becomes somewhat more moderate. and then the United States
could recognize the PLO and the Palestinians' right to self-determination."

Shalev continues: "It is less likely that this will happen during the next
year. a presidential election year (with primaries in February and March 1980
and the elections in November), when the President is fighting to stay in
office. It can be seemed that he will not risk taking a pro-Palestinian
and anti-Israeli stand. If this assertion is correct. it means that the
administration's freedom of maneuver will be rather limited in the coming
year, and thus its ability to substantially change policies on the
Palestinian issue" (pp 60-61).

The Center for Strategic Research is not a government agency, and Brigadier
General Shalev does not presume to claim that the government will try to
stall the negotiations until after the American elections. not we should
not take it for granted that what the hypothetical analysis of an outside
observer comes up with stems from a vacuum. In another place (pp 172-113)

101
he even proposes that stalling may continue until the beginning of 1981.
and since elections to the 10th Knesset are scheduled for November 1981,
perhaps until then.

Brigadier General Shalev suggests taking into account that the next Ameri-
can president will recognize the PLO. If he does that. "the risk is that
negotiations will not be based only on Camp David but also on an altered
American position regarding Israel" (p 173). Again, it should not be
assumed that the quoted paper reflects a thorough investigation of a strong
stand in the government in favor of stalling the negotiations, but anyone
following the actual policy of the government could conclude that it is
indeed looking for ways to stall the subsLantive discussion on autonomy
until after the target date of 6 sonths from now.

The government should be warned against these atteqts. We cannot expect
any political gains fron them. On the contrary, it stands to reason that
stalling can only strengthen the PLO and the Rejection Front. It would
he better not to interpret what Sada: said about the Palestinians' not
being necessary for the negotiations now as meaning that he really feels
strongly in agreement with the Israeli Prime Minister. The satisfaction
that many voice here any time the Egyptian President sounds appeasing is
not justified. Since the Camp David accords on a framework for peace in
the Middle East are for 5 years only. let us work for its realization-while
struggling with Egyptian and American attempts to lay the foundation now
for independence of the Arabs of the West Bank. But let us do it with
sincerity.

8666
C50: 6805

102
STRICTBR CONTROLS OVER IDF PERSONNEL FILES NEEDED
Tt'lAviv HA'ARETZ in Hebrew 5 Oct 7k p 15

[Article: "Classified Military Intonation Reaching Private Individuals
"ho Use It for Their Own Benefit"]

{Text} The altercation began as a very minor issue. A navy lieutenant
returned from a short vacation abroad and brought a small electrical
appliance, worth about $30. for his cos-ending officer. The co-anding
officer, a couander in rank, thought that this was meant as a present.
The lieutenant was angry with the commander, who did not even offer to
pay for the item just to be polite. Because of this misrmderstanding,
relations between the two became strained. Hithin a few months the two
officers stopped talking to each other. and the murky atmosphere that
resulted had repercussions on the functioning of the whole unit.

The con-tender, who did not know what caused the whole thing in the first
place, decided that the lieutenant had emotional problems. he instructed
the unit‘s physician to send him for observation in a closed mental
institution. The physician obliged. The infirmary's chief petty officer
was told: “True, I should refer the lieutenant to a mental health officer,
and he will decide whether the man needs treatment at all, but I do not
want to start an arguaent with the comaander. lie demands that the man he
sent for observation, and this is what I am doing. If it turns out that he
is indeed crazy, I will have acted properly. Otherwise he will be released
and even then nothing happened."

The lieutenant spent 2 weeks in a mental institution and was released as
mentally healthy (he is probably one of the few citizens in Israel to
carry a certificate attesting to the fact that he is not crasy...).
I-ediately after that the lieutenant demanded to be transferred. his
request was granted. But the anger about the whole matter was still such
that he decided to get out of the ID? altogether. The decision was made
easy by the fact that he has a technical skill which is very much sought
after in the civilian market. before he started formal proceedings for '
release he started looking for a job. he met with the personnel managers
of two of the largest concerns in the country. Each of then, separately,
was only too delighted to have him, expressed their enthusiastic willing-
ness to hire him, and even prodded him as to when he could start. A few

103
days after each respective interview, the lieutenant received an announce-
ment, very politely worded. the gist of which was to rescind any intention
of hiring him. No real explanation was given.

Friends of the lieutenant who worked in those two concerns found out the
reason for the strange rejections. They discovered that secret personal
details about him had reached the personnel managers. Anon; them was the
fact that he had been hospitalized for 2 weeks for observation. This made

him a mental case in their eyes, although the results of the observation
were totally different.

The lieutenant talked about it to a senior IDF officer. This author knows
for a fact that the senior officer sent a personal letter to the chief of
staff, Lieutenant General Refa'el Eitan, detailing the case and recommending
stricter supervision of military personnel, regular and in permanent service,

who work with the mr computer, in order that classified information not
be leaked.

For the Fun of It

It all started as gossip information, via friends. women soldiers made
contacts with computer personnel, and as a personal favor asked to find out
if those officers whom they had met were indeed single as they purported to
be. what their medical profile was, their IQ, and whether they had really
passed all those difficult military courses they claimed they had.

Both the requesters and the leakers did not see anythingwrong with what
they did, because "what don't you do for friends?"

In recent years, when many military officers were hired as managers of
plants, or mostly as personnel manager, leaks became worse. The managers.
before hiring any military officers who either had resigned or were
released, were not content with just the discharge papers, but wanted to
known more about the candidates‘ military past. This did not always stem

from sincere interest in the candidate's skills. Sometimes they wanted to
find out details that were irrelevant to the job.

Some of those managers managed to obtain classified information by using
contacts they had kept up since their days in the military. Some did not
hesitate to approach private investigators, as is done with graphologists,
in order that the latter obtain, among other things, cmuter printouts
containing classified information pertaining to the candidate. In order

to be able to satisfy their clients, some inver.tigatora started cultivating
relations with computer personnel. It should be pointed out that as far

as is known there were no bribes involvednjust personal friendships that
the sophisticated investigators manage to form. No one wants information
for money. They do not create the inresaion that their request is illegal.
They present it as a favor based on close friendship, and obviously it is
difficult to turn a friend down, especially when the request seems innocent.

10h
A conversation with private investigators reveals that quite often it is
possible to find out all kinds of information about a potential employee
without resorting to the computer. Thus. for example. an officer left the
IDF a number of years ago and has since been employed for a long time in
one or two plants. It is possible to collect data and estimate, based on
his past performance. how he may function in his new position. But it is
precisely those personnel managers who are former officers who urge the
investigators nor to be content with previous jobs but also to obtain data
relating to military service. At the same time the managers know. and the
investigators repeatedly stress, that for the specific need of hiring an
individual. the military data are meaningless. But when a client insists
and demands certain information related to military service, the investigator
has to comply. '

h‘ot for Money

Rumors that not only friends of computer personnel but also investigators
have access to classified military information have encouraged other con-
cerns to turn to investigators. The most recent known case is tied in with
the testimony of a bystander in a criminal case. One night the man acciden-
tally came upon a burglar as the latter was escaping from an apartment where
he had been spotted by neighbors. The suspect was caught by police a few
hundred meters from the scene. No one knows how, but the suspect's family
learned that the main prosecution witness was released from the ID? for
mental health reasons. The suspect's lawyer could have delved into this
matter during testimony, but he preferred to clarify the point prior to

the trial in order that he might find out for sure whether there was any
truth to the rumor. Thus he could avoid questioning the witness on this
point during the trial so that he would not lose the case if it turned out
there was nothing to the rumor.

An investigator was retained in order to obtain classified information
from the computer. Within a week he reported to the lawyer that following
the Yom Kippur war and within the past 2 years, the military profile of the
witness had been changed to 2/: following a nervous breakdown he had had
while in the service. Now the lawyer could prepare in advance a series of
questions which might cast a doubt on the reliability of the witness, while
presenting his as a mental case.

There is no doubt that the military authorities should increase supervision
over computer personnel. 0n the one hand the ID? is careful not to hand
out data to the Interior or the Treasury Ministry, claiming that many
citizens who divulge such personal information, which is important for the
military, will refrain from doing so if they know that the information may
be passed on. On the other hand, there are continuous leaks of classified
information to friends of computer personnel, to private investigators. and
actually to anyone who is willing to pay for the right contacts for the
purpose of obtaining such information, which is sometimes classified for
security reasons.

105
The basic problem is to find the right way to handle it. As mentioned
already, all or most of the leaks to date were not made for money. I!
supervision is tightened, bribes may replace "personal. good friendships."
Thus the problem will not be solved but computer personnel will be corrupted
by bribes. The problem can be eliminated. or at least alleviated. only

by strict rules and education in proper procedures, with an understanding
of their importance. Also, changes of some procedures which have not been
reevaluated for years uill have to be made.

8666
CSO: 4805

106
BRIEFS

3mm POLICY “ARMS ISRAEL—The majority of the public thinks that set-
tlement policy harms Israel's position in the world. This is the finding

of the Pori Institute's nationwide public opinion poll held at the request
of HA'ARBI’Z. Of those polled, 63.5 percent hold this opinion in contrast
with a mere 8.1 percent who believe that the settlement policy benefits
Israel's position in the world. Of those questioned 15.7 percent think that
the goverment's settlement policy has no effect, that it neither benefits
nor harms Israel's position in the world. That the government has no settle-
ment policy at all was the opinion of 0.9 percent, while 11.8 percent have
no opinion on the matter. Outstanding among those who believe that Israeli
settlement policy is harmful are members of the aocioeconomically advanced
population strata. Mons people with higher education. professionals. ad-
ministrators, high-income workers and veteran residents who were in the
country before the establishment of the state, over 70 percent believe that
the government's settlement policy is harmful to Israel's position in the
world. The poll encompassed a representative sample of 1,200 men and women
who were personally interviewed in their homes throughout the country. [Text]
(TA051037 Tel Aviv HA'ARETZ in Hebrew 5 lav 79 p 8 TA]

mums MYOR JUSTIFIES TERRORIST ACT—ﬂabulus Mayor Baesam aI-Shak's justi-
fies the terroriat act on the coastal road [which took place in spring of
1978]. In a meeting he had today with the coordinator of activities in

the territories, Maj Gen Dani Hat, nassan al-Shak'e said that until the
Palestinian problem is solved such acts are justified, effective and natur-
ally called for. Our correspondent Pinhas 'Inbari learned this from senior
officers in the military authorities. The labulus mayor refused to react.
[Text] [“061131 Jerusalms Domestic Service in Hebrew 1100 on 6 Nov 79 IA]

cso: 6805

107
JORDAN SAID STILL TWINS 11.5. SETTLEMENT POLICY LINE
Beirut AL-HURRIYAH in Arabic 1? Sep 79 p 29

[Article by Bassan Haddadin: "'Ahd-al-Hsnid Sharsf: Hagering on 0.3.
Settlement and Keeping Step With Its Tempo"]

[Text] Whoever follows the statements and press interviews given every
now and then by sl-Sharif 'Abd-al-Hanid Sharaf. the chief of the Bashi-
mite Royal Court, can read clearly the course and political inclinations
of the Jordanian regime vis-a—vis the issues of the Arab-Israeli conflict
and their developments. In his interview with the Jordanian AL-DUSTUR
correspondent in Havana on 7 September, Sharaf reaffirmed the mainstays
and directions of the Jordanian policy in the coming phase, thus eliminating
the doubt in the heart of those who still wager on the Jordanian "intran—
sigence" and on the seriousness of the Jordanian refusal to take part in
the ongoing negotiations for solving the Middle East crisis on the basis
of the Camp David accords.

Disagreement Over Means and Not Bases

Summing up the Jordanian-v.8. relations and the official Jordanian position
toward the 0.8. policy in the area, Sharaf said: ”Our relations with
Hashington are normal. The disagreement is over the means to achieve

peace. The dialogue with the United States continues and has not been
interrupted." A political reading of this interview given by one of the
most prominent pillars of the Jordanian political leadership and by its
unnamed spokesman neans clearly that the starting point of the Jordanian
regime's policy and directions in this phase is still based on wagering

on the u.s. policy in the area and that the dialogue goes on between

Jordan and the United states so that Jordan may find its right place in

the 0.5. policy and in the settlement supported by this policy-a settle-
ment which in the final analysis means nothing but capitulation to the
Israeli terms and expansionist ambitions and bowing to Israel's determina-
tion to cling to the occupied Arab territories and to reject the Palestinian
people's national rights. This is confirmed when Sharaf confines the
disagree-cut between Jordan and the United States to the means for achieving

108
the U.S. "peace" in the area and not to the foundations on which this
alleged peace is built--foundstions that have been defined by the Camp
David accords as the base from which the U.S. policy in the area will pm)-
cecd to achieve its comprehensive solution for the Middle East issue.

Relationship With Organization Normal

As for the relationship with the PLO. Sharaf expressed his satisfaction
with the development of this relationship that "has entered the phase of
normal relations and of ﬁc'nt coordination." It seems that Sharaf is talking
about another PLO in another planet and not the PLO recognized by the

Arabs and the world as a sole legitimate representative of the Palestinian
people or, and this seems more likely. it seems that al-Sharif 'Abd-al-
hamid Sharaf considers the abnormal relationship with the PLO as the
natural condition for Jordan's relationship with the organization and that
he wants the organization to provide him with a cover to pass the Jordanian
regime's policy and with a pressuring card to realize better terms in the
deal to join the settlement plans directed by the United States on the
basis of the Camp David accords and of the Israeli-Egyptian treaty. Al-
Sharif Sharaf and others know well that the relationship between the
organization and Jordan is proceeding from bad to worse and that the
Jordanian—Palestinian dialogue is threatened with interruption because

of the Jordanian official determination to reject the organization's
minimal demands. The Jordanian regime is still pursuing and arresting

the organization's members and supporters and still refuses to release

tens of political detainees, the most prominent of whom are Taysir al-
Ziri and Usamah Shannar, the members of the Palestinian National Council.

Jordan's Participation in Negotiations Required

It is significant that the statement of al-Sharif 'Ahd-al-Hamid Sharaf.
one of the most prominent pillars of the Jordanian political leadership,

on the continuation of the policy of wagering on the U.S. settlement and
on keeping step with this settlement's tempo comes at a time when the
negotiations for the implementation of self-rule on the basis of the

Camp David accords and the basis of the Israeli-Egyptian treaty continue
and at a tine when al-Sadat and Begin emerge after a meeting in Haifa

to invite the United States to exert its efforts and escalate its endeavors
to make Jordan join the ongoing self-rule negotiations.

The efforts of the Camp David parties are focused in this phase on attracting
Jordan to the arena of the ongoing negotiations concerning the self-rule.
considering that this [Jordanian participation] is the only way out of

the deadend reached by the phrties concerned in the self-rule negotiations
that continue in the absence of any Palestinian side willing to participate
in them. These U.S. efforts are received with strong reverberations and
with an open heart by the Jordanian regime which is responding to these
efforts through its continued wagering on the 0.8. policy in the area.
through its refusal to correct the relationship with the PLO and through

its refusal to abide practically by the Baghdad summit resolutions.

8496

cso: 4802
109
REGIHE'S POSITION 0N PLO DETAINEES CRITICIZED
Beirut AL-BURRIYAH in Arabic 17 Sep 79 p 30

[Article by B. H. [Bassan haddsdin]: “Detainees and Jordanian-Palestinian
Dislogue"]

[Text] The way in which the Jordanian regime is dealing with the issue

of the political detainees in Jordan who are nenbers of the Pm and of the
Jordanian National Hove-ent and who exceed 2,000 detainees in nud>er evokes
wrath and ridicule. The PM) delegation which visited Jordan recently and
net with the regime's leaders in al-Hafraq was told that the PLO has
nothing to do with the Jordanian detainees and that the security authorities
concerned will study the possibility of releasing the PLO detainees who
have not consitted acts in violation of security. The Pm delegation did
not argue and was content with these promises only to discover that they
are false proaises. Of all the detainees with which the goverment's
cells and prisons abound, the Jordanian Government has released eight
persons and has kept in its cells tens of sons of the Palestinian revolu-
tion. led by etrugglers Taysir al-Ziri and Usanlh Shanna: who are nesbers
of the Palestinian National Council.

The Jordanian Government knows perfectly well that Shannar, al-Ziri and tens
of other detainees in its cells have not conitted the slightest act in
violation of security and that their sole guilt is that they are nenbers of
the PLO and owe their loyalty to their people.

The PLO leadership has not consented with a single word on this new slap

by the Jordanian regine, as if the dialogue with Jordan has becone an end

in itself, regardless of the foundations on which the dialogue is established.
of the Jordanian regile's seriousness in dealing with the mo and of the
issue of the regine's continued arrest and persecution of the Pw'a Isa-bars
and leaders in Jordan.

If the Jordanian regine is determined not to offer any serious facilities

to the organization and if it persists in its policy of oppressing and bearing
down on its eel-hers and supporters. isn't it the right of all the Palestinian

110
and Jordanian patriots to wonder about the scriouaneas of continuing the
dialogue with the Jordanian regime? The prevailing feeling along both the
Jordanian and Paleatinian patriots ia that the organization must take a
serious pause during which it sets matters aright. Otherwise. it ia futile
to continue the dialogue because the Jordanian regile is the only winner
and the organization is the biggest loser.

8496
C80: #802
FRO TO SUPPLY COUNTRY “11“ SECURITY. RIOT CONTROL EQUIPMENT

Beirut AL-HURRIYAH in Arabic 17 Sep 79 p 30

[Article by F. 'Abbas: "Federal German Experts and Equipment for Jordanian
Oppression Agencies")

[Text] It has been announced in Amman that a bilateral agreement was signed
by the Jordanian Government and the ERG [Federal Republic of Germany]

in accordance with which the Bonn Government will advance to Jordan a finan-
cial aid of 6 million Deutsche marks to finance the purchase of some equip-
uent for the Jordanian security and police agencies and will send special-
ized Gernan experts to Jordan to provide training on this equipment.

The PRC, which has become famous for its technology in the advanced "instru-
ments and equipment for torture and for riot control“ that are used at a
wide scale by the black regimes of oppression and dictatorship and which

is famous for its broad experience in the spheres and means of "interroga-
tion and torture" that are inherited from the days of the Nasis-this

PRC is very interested these days in expanding its activities and services
in our area!

After its "abundant" services in bolstering and protecting nany lackey
fascist and dictatorial regimes in the area. including Israel. Egypt,
Morocco and Sudan, the PRG'a new "dirty American” activity is extending
to Jordan under the guise of aid and of the various bilateral agreements
signed by the two countries' governments.

The visit of hane-Dietrich Genscher. the Bonn Government's minister of
foreign affairs, and his delegation to Jordan-a visit which has cone in

the wake of the large-scale propaganda on a new European initiative in

the area and of the talk about a distinctive role by the PIG in this ini-
tiative-has produced several bilateral agreements between the two countries.
including a cultural agreement providing for German aid to Jordan and an
agreement for a German loan to finance some Jordanian projects. But the
most important of these agree-eats was the one signed by the Jordanian
director of public security on behalf of the Jordanian side and by the

new German ambassador for the German side.

112
In accordance with this agreement, the Bonn Government will supply Jordan
with various quantities of the products of the famous German technology
used by the intelligence and security men and for "riot control"-—riots
such as those that took place in the streets of the Jordanian cities during
the large-scale popular uprising at the end of last March and the beginning
of April. The Bonn Government will also send its specialized experts to
train those working in the Jordanian oppression agencies on the use of

this equipment and these new means.

The Bonn Government is not the only dirty American in Jordan. In the early
1950's, there were the British Intelligence Service men and they were followed
by the American CIA men who are still very active at a large scale and in
various forms and ways. In addition to the specialised men of the 0.5.
Elbassy and the broad services their administration offers Jordan. there

are tens of "experts" and CIA men who work in Jordan under the guise of

the special u.s. agencies. [words dropped]. They are active in drawing

up and directing the country's economdc. internal and other policies and

in recruiting the high-ranking officials to serve the 0.3. Intelligence

Agency.

8‘94
CSO: £802

113
COUNTRY'S ENERGY SOURCES SAID TO BE LIMITED
Amman AL-RA'Y in Arabic 18 Sep 79 p 6

[Article by Ahmad al-Dabbas: "Energy in Jordan: Its Present and Future;
Confirmed Sources Are Limited and Confined to shale Oil; Boosting Oil Prospecting
Programs and Streamlining Local Coneumption"]

[Text] Nunan--JNS--The energy problem has emerged at present as one of the
most prominent international problems. At a time when we in Jordan are
achieving high growth rates and marching forward with the development plans,
the coat of energy is almost consuming most of our revenues from our national
production.

This is why the call to adopt the means capable of reducing energy consumption
has become urgent and constitutes a national demand with which both the citizen
and the state are concerned.

In this report, we will shed light on the energy situation, on how energy is
consumed in Jordan and on the means capable of reducing this consumption.

Energy Sources

In an interview on the energy sources in Jordan, 'Ali al-Nusur, the general
director of the Electricity Authority, has said:

The confirmed sources of energy in Jordan are limited so far and are almost
confined to shale oil [al—sukhur al-aaytiyah] which require considerable human
and technological efforts, in addition to vast financial investments, to be
exploited. Insofar as oil is concerned, the prospecting has not produced

so far quantities fit to constitute a basis for a long-range energy plan.

Moreover, the waterfalls cannot supply more than 50 megawatts or five percent
of the capacity required in"the year 2000. As for geothermal energy, it is
still in the phase of exploration.
It is evident from the aforementioned that the sourcer of energy existing
in the country are limited and meager whereas demand -' energy. whether in
the form of electricity or other forms, is rising year after year. It is
expected that the individual's share will amount in the year 2000 to 1,200
kilowatt-hour annually compared to 300 kilowatt-hour in 1978.

Fuel Consumption

Regarding the fuel volume consumed by the Electricity Authority and the coat
of this consumption. al-Nusur said:

Jordan relies totally on imported oil as a fundamental energy source. It

is expected that the value of Jordan's annual oil imports will rise in 1979
to 76 million diners. This is equal to the value of all of Jordan's exports
of phosphate, industrial products and agricultural products.

Moreover. oil is the main source for generating electricity. The Electricity
Authority's consumption amounted in 1978 to 68,962 tons of diesel fuel, in
addition to 100,315 tons of heavy fuel, that have coat the state nearly 2
nillion dinars. If we take into consideration the constant rise in oil
prices, the cost of what the Electricity Authority will need will amount to
35 million diners in the year 2000.

The Electricity Authority is trying to make use of any new source to generate
electricity and to diversify the sources of electric energy so that it may
not remain the hostage of reliance on oil as the sole source of electricity
production.

Production Cost

Al-Nusur said that the cost of production per kilowatt-hour from gas turbine
No l in al-Husayn Thermal Plant is 16 fils whereas this cost is 6 fils from
steam unit No l, 5.9 fils from steam unit No 2 and 5.8 fils from steam unit
No 3. He thus find that the average coat of production per kilowatt-hour
from both the steam and gas units is 6.5 [sic] fils whereas the coat in the
Marks gas-operated plant is 14 file. If we calculate the average cost of
production in both al-Husayn and Marta plant we find that it is 9 fils
whereas it amounts to 18 fils in the diesel plant in al-‘Aqabah, lS fils in
the new al-‘Aqabah plant and 27 fils in al-Ka-ak. he pointed out that these
rates are reasonable and compatible with the international rates. he further
said:

These figures cover the production costs repA-sented in fuel. lubricants,
water. spareparts, operational wages and sparepart consumption.
State Subsidy

Regarding the state subsidy for electricity production. Engineer al-Nusur
said:

The state provides the Electricity Authority with an annual subsidy to meet
the fuel costs. The sum allocated by the government to subsidize the Electricity

Authority with the aim of covering the fuel costs for this year has amounted
to 600.000 dinsrs so as to supply electricity to the citizen at the set price.

Regarding the alternative sources of energy, the general director of the
Electricity Authority said that these sources are:

Shale Oil

Shale oil is present in various parts of Jordan. The quantities proven to
exist in al-Qatranah area in southern Jordan are estimated at 800 million
tons. The studies and analyses conducted by the Natural Resources Authority
have proven that the quality of the [shale] rocks present in the area is a
good quality in terns of thermal value. sulfur content and content of other

minerals if compared to the quality of the shale rocks present in the Soviet
Union and actually utilized to generate electricity.

The Jordanian government, represented in the National Planning Council. the
Electricity Authority and the Natural Resources Authority, is exerting serious
efforts to exploit the shale oil in cooperation with the Soviet Union. A
team of Soviet experts were invited this April and were familiarised with the
rock sites in al-Laj jun area and with the studies, reports and analyses
conducted by the Natural Resources Authority. It was the estimate of the
experts that the rock quantity available is enough to supply a thermal plant
with a production capacity of 300 megawatts for a period of 200 years. A
Soviet delegation including geological and lining experts also visited Jordan
this Septenber, inspected the site of the [shale] rocks and examined the said
reports and studies. These experts affirmed that the quantities of shale
rock in al-Lajjun area amounts to sore than 800 million tons and that the
rock is of a good quality. It has also been decided to send specimens to the
Soviet Union for shale rock utilization [tests].

Al-Nuaur further said that if we succeed in the shale oil experinent within 8
years. the authority will build an experimental power station in al-Qatranah
relying on shale rock.

Waterfalls

The waterfalls existing in Jordan are represented in sl-Haqarin Dam and King
Talal Dam where 50 negawatts can be generated

116
Geothermal heat: The presence of some hot springs in the area of Zarqa' Ma'in
indicates that there is a possibility that enough watc. exists to generate
electricity, especially since the temperature of some springs reaches 200
degrees centigrade whereas the temperature needed to generate electricity
economically is 150 degrees centigrade. The Ratural Resources Authority.

in cooperation with the (LN. Development Program. is implementing a program
aimed at prospecting for hot wells that can be utilized in generating
electricity.

Solar energy: The state is devoting special attention to the solar energy

in its capacity as a permanent and relatively cheap source. The Royal

Scientific Society's studies, research and applications concerning solar

energy are receiving the government's encouragement. As for the utilization

of solar energy to generate electricity, there is a joint project between

the Jordanian government and the United States of America to build an experimental

plant with a capacity of 100 kilowatts.

The authority is currently holding contacts to build an experimental electricity
plant powered by solar energy and with a capacity of 100 kilowatts in a remote
village.

Hind energy: There is a possibility for utilizing wind energy in the remote
villages.

Garbage: The Electricity Authority invited a Swiss expert to study the
possibility of using the garbage produced by the greater Amen area to
generate electric power. As a result of the initial studies conducted by

the said expert, it has become evident that there is a possibility for
utilizing the garbage of the greater Alan area to generate 20 to 25 megawatts
of electric power.

Energy conservation: In its technical sense, energy conservation means a
more efficient use and less waste of energy without affecting economic growth.
In other words, it means the use of a smaller amount of energy to produce

the [same] unit of goods or services. Because developing alternatives and
increasing resources requires a long time br‘ore the phase of counercial
production is reached, energy conservation becomes one of the best options

to deal with the energy crisis in the short ad medium ranges.

Electric Power Situation

Insofar as the electric power situation in true of production, consumption
and the individual's share are concerned, Engineer al-Nusur said:

The power consumed in 1978 amounted to 615 megawatt-hour compared to 513
megawatt-hour in 1977, i.e., with an increase of 19.88 percent.

117
Amman and al-Balqa' governorates consumed 81.16 percent, lrbid governorate
9.76 percent. al-Karak governorate 4.55 percent and Ma'an governorate 4.55
percent.

Residential consumption constitutes 36.32 percent of the total consumption
whereas industrial consumption amounts to 27.73 percent, consumption for
commercial purposes amounts to 11.96 percent, consumption for pumping water

amounts to 3.26 percent and consumption for street lighting amounts to 2.26
percent.

The per capita share of the electric energy consumed in 1978 amounted to 293
kilowatt-hour whereas it was 182 kilowatt-hour in 1975.

The number of subscribers in 1978 amounted to 179,983 compared to 162,421.
subscribers in 1977, i.e., with an increase of 10.81 percent.

Generating Capacity

Al-Husay'n Thermal Plant: Three steam units with a capacity of 33 megawatts
each, one gas unit with a capacity of 19 megawatts and another gas unit with
a capacity of 110 megawatts.

Marks Plant: Twelve diesel units with various capacities totaling altogether
1.5 megawatts, two gas units with a capacity of 20 megawatts each, thus bringing
the plant's total capacity to 85 megawatts. This is in addition to a number
of small plants owned by the Jordanian Electricity Company and having a
capacity of 5 megawatts.

Al-Karak: Three diesel units with a capacity of 1.5 megawatts each. thus
bringing the total capacity to 10.5 megawatts.

Al-‘Aqabah: The capacity of the old plant amounts to 6 megawatts. The two
diesel units in the new plant have a capacity of: 3.5 megawatts each.

0n the question of economizing in production and consumption, Engineer al-Nusur
said:

Since the beginning of the energy crisis and since the consumer has developed
the conviction on the need to save electricity efficiently. we have been
thinking of economising in the production of electricity to the degree
whereby the efficient units are operating while the reserves are saved for

hot situations and of producing at the minim cost possible without affecting
the electricity supply.

To save in the costs of production and consumption, we must use the efficient
equipment. In the long range, the solution lies, according to our plans, in
boosting the oil prospecting programs and in utilizing shale oil [a1-sukhur
al-zaytiyah] for the production of power. Al-Nusur urged the citizens to
streamline their electricity constasption and to use lighting when needed and not
in a wasteful manner noticed in many houses.

869k
cso: 6802 1.18
BENEFITS OF NEW LABOR BILL DISCUSSED
AInan AL-DUSTUR in Arabic 8 Sep 79 p 8

[Article by Hamid al-Sa'ayidah: "New and Advanced Labor Law in Kingdom; What
Are Justifications for Promulgating This Law and Hhat Are Benefits It Offers
Horkers; Dr ‘l‘aysir 'Abd-al-Jabir: Implementation of This Law will Begin
After 6 Months: Bright, rositive and Hodern Aspects in Law"]

[Text] Ntnnerous amend-ants have been introduced on the Jordanian labor law
which is currently in force and which went into effect in 1960.

During the long period in which this law has been in force, important
developments have occurred in the Jordanian society requiring re-examination
of this law and its amendments.

The authorities concerned have drawn a new bill that seeks to regulate the
relationship between the business owners and the workers, to enhance production.
to block the gaps in the currently implemented law and to catch up with the
social developments that have occurred in the Jordanian society.

This is why AL-DUSTUR has conducted this interview with Dr Taysir 'Abd-al-Jebir,
the undersecretary of the Ministry of Labor, on the new labor bill which will
replace the current law and on the benefits of the new law.

Jnstifications For New Law

Dr Taysir says: The‘ establishments, companit : and projects operating in Jordan,
especially in the industry, comerce, transport, banking and other sectors,

have expanded. The percentage of citizens 9' “king in the cities has risen
whereas the percentage of these working in t. . agricultural sector has dropped.
Ihe employ-eat picture in Jordan has been re\ ‘rsed. Hheress we had uneqloyment
in the 1960's and the early 1970's, we now have full eaployment. Moreover,

a need has been generated in the Jordanian «011on to inert a foreign work-

force including nearly 60,000 workers who are employed Iainly in the services,
comerce, agriculture and construction.

119
Employment of Manpower in Development Projects

The undersecretary of the Ministry of Labor says that under the canopy of

the development plan, Jordan has begun to set up a number of big projects
that will employ large numbers of workers, such as the potash, fertilizers
and refinery projects which require the creation of new labor-industry
relations on a new basis. This means that the Jordanian society has actually
undergone social and economic developments in the past 20 years. The labor
law must take these developments into consideration because this law is
connected-—by virtue of the labor relationships, especially from the angle
of their impact on production. on the labor-industry relations, on the worker's
welfare, on the labor organizations and on other aspects—with society as a
whole. particularly with society's production activity which is linked
directly with its ability to achieve development and progress.

Dr 'Abd-al-Jabir adds: In this period, Jordan's relations with the outside
world, especially with the International Labor Organization and with the Arab
Labor Organization. expanded.

The Jordanian government also ratified numerous labor agreements containing
advanced principles and bases acceptable to the international commity and
regulating the various aspects of labor conditions. It is essential that
the impact of these agreements appear in the Jordanian labor law.

Dr Taysir further says: Through experience, the relationship between the
three sides of the work triangle. namely the government, the business owners
and the workers. matured and they [workers] have gained the right to express
their views on various matters concerning their conditions and to participate
in drawing up the main frameworks organizing these conditions.

The business owners' and workers' organizations have displayed through their
actions a high degree of responsibility and affiliation by their eagerness
for the stable continuity of the labor-industry relations—a stability that
leads to higher. better and more efficient production and to improving the
work conditions and the conditions of the workers.

Vocational Training Establishment, Social Security Establishment

During this period. two major establishments closely connected with workers
and with industrial relations were founded, namely the Vocational Training
Establishment which was founded in 1976 and the Public Social Security
Establishment which was founded in 1978. The training establishment is
concerned with a main aspect of the labor market which is the aspect of
training Jordanian workers, providing them with the necessary skills and
raising their vocational capabilities to meet the increasing dunand for
skilled labor in Jordan and in the fraternal neighboring Arab countries.

The undersecretary of the Ministry of Labor adds that under the conditions of
full employment, the task of training has become a major responsibility that

120
has to be organized in cooperation with the other g0\=rnment agencies, the
businessmen and the workers through drawing up a training work plan and opening
specialized centers to provide this training.

This is followed by the adoption of an important and new step in the
Jordanian labor market, namely the step of categorizing the worker's skills
and giving each worker a certificate stating his skill and the level of his
mastery of this skill. This will be reflected positive-y in the performance
of work and in the industrial relations.

As for the Public Social Security Establishment, it will be in charge of
providing the worker with security in old age, death [sic], work-related
injuries and other cases, some of which the 1960 law dea‘s with.

The establishment's role emerges in creating a comprehensive social security
vessel that covers Jordanian workers in the various establishments in Jordan
and the Jordanian workers abroad. Dr Taysir points out that the role of the
Jordanian workers employed abroad has emerged clearly in their bonds to
their country and in the investments they employ in the various spheres

[through their remittances], especially in the spheres of housing, industry
and trade.

The undersecretary of the Ministry of Labor further points out that His Highness
Crown Prince Hasan presented, in the speech he addressed to the international
labor conference in Geneva in 1977, new ideas at the international level on -
organizing the exchange of manpower, particularly the idea of establishing an
international fund for the compensation of workers.

The Ministry of Labor has also appointed labor advisers in Kuwait and the DAB
and it is expected that other advisers will be appointed in other countries
in the future. These advisers act as liaison officers between the Jordanian
workers and the Jordanian governmert agencies.

International Expert to Draw Up New Labor 3111

Dr Taysir 'Abd-al-Jabir adds that under the canopy of all these developments,
the Ministry of Labor brought in an internat.onal expert from the International
Labor Organization to draw up the bill for t?! Jordanian labor law. Dr

(Man) [possibly 'Uthman] al-Jukhdar came to Jordan for this purpose in 1977,
prepared the bill and referred it in its sent-final form to the Council of
Ministers.

Out of its commitment to the principle of consultation with the other work
parties-~the workers and the businessmen-the Ministry of Labor also supplied
these parties with copies of this labor bill and invited them to study the bill
and to express whatever amendments and proposals they think reflect their
interests, opinions and conditions.

121
These parties have actually begun to prepare their replies. The Ministry of
Labor has already received a memorandum from the Federation of Jordanian
Chambers of Commerce. Moreover, the General Federation of Jordanian Workers
and the Amman Chamber of Industry are in the process of preparing their reply
on the bill. The Ministry of Labor is currently studying this bill in detail
through concerted and successive meetings.

After receiving all the replies, a meeting will be held to discuss and
crystallize these replies. Dr al-Jukhdar. who drew up the said bill. will

visit Jordan at the end of this month to participate in drawing up the final
bill of the labor law.

New and Innovative Aspects in New Bill

Dr Taysir says that the most important aspects of the new bill are the new

and innovated aspects which constitute with their contents a positive develop-
ment in the current labor law.

In its definition of workers, the bill covers all workers. regardless of
whether they work in an establishment with five workers or less. It also
covers farm workers, considering that agricultural work generally has gained
an organizational structure with characteristics that are not very remote
from the other labor relationships. The bill includes financial benefits
and improvements in the working conditions that surpass those contained in
the current labor law. The most important of these benefits are:

Application of the social security law to the workers decreed to be covered

by the new law. This will provide the workers with much better guarantees
than those contained in the currently applied law.

The payment of end-of-service compensations.

Increasing the worker's annual vacation to 3 weeks instead of the 2 weeks
stipulated by the current law.

Increasing the pregnancy and maternity leave for female workers to 12 weeks
instead of the 6 weeks stipulated in the current law.

Protecting the worker insofar as the end-of-service notification is concerned.
The current law provides for one month's notice whereas this notice will be
extended by the new law to 2 months for any worker serving 5 or more years.

Protecting the worker against dismissal just for the purpose of organising
or re-organizing an establishment and placing restrictions on the use of
this justification.

122
w

Giving the female worker the same benefits given to t.- male worker if she
is equal to hia in capability and carries out the sen. dork that he does.

Increasing the worker's dues in overtime wages.

The labor bill also contains new inclinations concerning vocational training
for the disabled and the possibility of committing establishments employing

50 or more workers to employ a certain percentage of vocationally trained
disabled people.

There are also provisions concerning regulation of the employment of foreign
workers, including those in the agricultural sector, and the regulation of
the emigration of Jordanian workers to the outside world.

The bill also covers and deals in detail with the labor contracts. especially
with the probation contract. vocational training and agricultural work.

The bill also provides guarantees for unionist liberties concerning the right
of a worker enrolled in a union to carry out unionist action without being
subjected to threats of expulsion or termination of services because of this
action and the right to devote his full time to unionist action if the union's
needs require it. The bill further gives a broad role to the unionist
organizations to participate and express their opinion on various matters
concerning the work situation and conditions.

Perhaps interest in this aspect will lead to enhancing the worker's interest
in responsible unionist action on the one hand and having the businessman
re-sxaaine their organization on the other hand so that sectoral organizations
lay be established for the various industries and activities in Jordan.

New Definitions

The undersecretary of the Ministry of Labor has also said that the bill is
characterized by precise and comprehensive formulation of the various aspects
with which it deals and the various sections it covers. such as employment,

labor contracts--including individual contracts, probation contracts, agricultural
probation contracts and collective work cont \cts-—wages, period of work,
vacations, employment of children and minors and the restrictions ispossd on

such employment, work organization, the vocat-onal organizations of business
owners and workers, the settlement of labor disputes and penalties.

Collective Interest in Bill

Answering a question. Dr Taysir said that he expects both sides-businessmen
and workers-will devote great attention to the bill because it affects their
life, their situation an their conditions. It is expected that each side
will present its view on the detailed points in the bill and to defend this
view in the joint meetings that will be held later.

123
Lav To Go Into Effect in Six Months

Concluding the interview, Dr Taysir said that enough time must be given to
the parties concerned to study the bill profoundly because it will govern
the labor relations and regulate labor for long years to come.

Therefore, I expect the law to go into force after 6 months at the least
and after it is put in its final form and approved by the official authorities
concerned.

8696
C80: 4802

121;
23 MARS LEADER BENSAID DISCUSSES SAHARA PROBLEM
London AL-DUSTUR in Arabic 15-21 Oct 79 pp 22, 23

[Interview with Mohamed Bensaid, a leader of 23 Mrs Organization in Morocco:
"To Be for the Horoccanisn of the Sahara Is Not To Be for the King"; date of
interview not given]

[Text] Beirut—A delegation of the "23 Mars" organi-
zation in Morocco, led by Mohamed Bensaid. one of the
organization's leaders. has recently visited Beirut to
hold talks with leaders of the Palestinian resistance
novenent, the various organizations of the Lebanese
national aovenent and representatives of the Arab liber-
ation groups in Beirut. Heathers of the delegation ex-
plained the situation in the Western Sahara following
recent develop-ants. The 23 Bars organisation's posi-
tion on the Sahara problell is a distinctive one. The
organization is the only "leftist" group in Morocco
which does not recognize "the Saharan people's right

to self-deterainstion" without Joining the denocratic
gene and process which the other opposition organiza-
tions have joined after the eruption of the Saharan
issue. AL-DUSTUI has interviewed Hohaned Bensaid. The
interview follows:

[Question] In your capacity as the representative of a leftist Moroccan
organization. how do you justify your concurrence with the official Moroc-
can position on the question of the Western Sahara?

[Amer] Re cane here, to the Arab east, to hold a series of contacts with
our brethren in the Arab liberation sovenent in order to acquaint then with
the seriousness of the situation in the Arab west. He specifically cane to
explain the Moroccan people's viewpoint on the question of the Western
Sahara and the inplications of that question for the entire situation in
the Arab Maghreb as well so its impact on the Arab cause in general. As to
our position on the problem of the Western Sahara, perait us to say in reply

to your question: our ears and nerves have becoae ateeled by the frequency
and repetitiveness of the accusations levelled at us in this connection.

125
To impugn our stand is sinful, indeed a criminal ac'. Some people see the
Sahara problem as one involving a struggle between 'He regime in Morocco and
a people in the Sahara who want independence. The conflict in the Arab west
is not at all as simple as that. The problem is complex and thorny and we
should therefore deal with it in a manner which measures up to its complex-
ities and tangible, not presumed, implications. For 20 years, the Moroccan
popular masses have been struggling with various military and political
means to liberate the Moroccan territory occupied by the colonialists and

to reincorporate them into the homeland as an integral. io‘ivisible part.
This being the case, how can we then withdraw from this struggle simply
because the Moroccan regime moved in 1975--because of its interests and
position. of course--to regain those [Saharan] parts of the Moroccan soil?
we have not been subjected to just one foreign colonization. Therefore,

the independence battle has become closely intertwined with the battle of
territorial integrity and unity in our modern national history.

A Polisario Victory?

[Question] The Polisario has scored two important victories recently. One
was the resolution adopted by the African conference held in Monrovia, the
other was the Algiers agreement between the Polisario and Mauritania. How
do you view those two events and their impact on the situation in Morocco
and on your position?

[Answer] Viewed from the perspective of the balances of struggle in the
region. we consider the Monrovia resolution to have been a relative victory
for the Polisario and Algeria. The resolution is not only an expression of a
diplomatic position which favors self-determdnination. More significantly,
it is the byproduct of a change in the general balance of political and mili-
tary power. we believe that this partial victory is due to three isportant
reasons:

0ne--The failure of the Moroccan regime's bet on winning the support of the
west by presenting the struggle for the completion of Morocco's territorial
integrity as one concurrently waged to stem the so-called "co-unist tide"
in the region. This has deepened the isolation of Morocco and helped the
front of adversaries present the issue to world public opinion as one of
liberation from imperialist hegemony in the region. We believe that this
bet has failed for obvious and simple rest as: the French and the Americans
do not view the problem in this simplistic manner.

Two--The failure of the military passiv: . Sense plan. Because of fear
generated by the experience of previous ctros, the Moroccan regime restricted
initiatives by the Sahara-based military com-ands and confined their major
task to one of guarding cities and important economic sites. Otherwise. it
has given license to the Polissrio forces to roam and attack at will in the
area. This has made it possible [for the Polisario forces] to utilize the
gaps and loopholes in the Moroccan defens plan and make deep military
thrusts into Morocco which have had widescale interantional impact and ef-
fect.

126
Threeo-The Moroccan regime's failure to strengthen and consolidate the in-
ternal front. There is no doubt that the deterioration of the economic sit-
uation and the attempt to restrict democratic freedoms have affected the
battle of national steadfastness.

These, we believe, are the deep-seated reasons which explain the partial
victory achieved by the Polisario at the Monrovia conference. Ve should
not, however, conclude fran that that we are on the road to defeat. lbrocco
still has the capabilities which can assure it of victory in its battle.

The Saharan question is a national one. It is the cause of the popular
masses more than it is the regime's cause. Added to this that Morocco com-
mands human, material and military resources which would enable it to estab-
lish Moroccan sovereignty over the entire Western Sahara, provided that the
national steadfastness program under which the Moroccan national and revolu-
tionary movement is fighting is honored [by the regime].

As to the Algiers agreement under which Mauritania renounced its claim to
the area of Tiris el-Gharbia in favor of the Polisario, it is our view that
this agreement has not changed the substance of the conflict in the region
inasmuch as it provided Mauritania with an outlet which could enable it to
preserve its entity:

l-The substance of the conflict has not changed because the njor party in
the conflict has been and continues to be lbrocco._ Morocco is the political
and military target in the Saharan conflict, but it is at the same time the
real focus of political and military weight. Therefore. Mauritania's re-
nunciation of its claims does not change the essence of the situation.
lbroccan forces have been stationed in Mauritania itself. Without Moroccan
military and administrative support it would have been impossible for
Mauritania anyway to have retained control over Tiris el-G‘harbia.

Z—True enough. Mauritania's withdrawal from the conflict and its decision
to sign the Algiers agremnt were a definite loss for Morocco. There is
absolutely no doubt in that. There is, however, a vast difference between
Mauritania's abdication and Polisario's ability to like the Tiris area the
birthplace of a Saharan state. Morocco was not facing several options but
has also been facing one option: to forestall and thwart the birth of such
a state which would not constitute a cowromise solution. In fact, Morocco
has decided the problem by retrieving the Tiris region (Rio de Oro).

3--The Algiers agreement provides Mauritania with an outlet designed to pre-
serve the Mauritanian entity. The struggle over the Sahara has turned into
a struggle within Mauritania itself which threatened its entity and unity.
The Moroccan-Algerian struggle in the region is in one aspect a struggle
over influence in muritania which has been eventually reflected in strife
among the Mauritanian tribes vying for power, thus splitting them into
pro-Moroccan and pro-Algerian stances. Added to this that Mauritania orig-
inally is afflicted by a conflict between its Arab citizens and its Senegal-
bscked negroid citizens. The Mauritanian state was originally established

12?
on the principle that it was rich in iron ore. Th-~refore, any security
threat which would jeopardize the ore mining cente‘ ' or paralyze the trans-
port of iron ore exports along a 1,500 Inn-long railroad would paralyze Mauri-
tania economically and push it to the brink of collapse.

He can thus see that the Algiers agreement, in its essence. was more or less
an only outlet for the preservation of the safety, integrity and continuity
of the Mauritanian entity. The Mauritanian leaders who signed the Algiers
agreement were fully aware that they are actually incapﬂ" of maintaining
control of the Tiris el-Gharbia area to insure its delivery to the Polisario.
He, therefore, say quite accurately that Mauritania has bought peace with
the Polisario and Algeria in return for a political victory only--a victory
which extricates Mauritania from what it considers to be an embroilment in
the Saharan problem and the predicament of alliance wit; Morocco. We believe
that this change in attitude does not mean that Mauritania will throw it-
self into the laps of the other side or support it in practice. Mauritania's
main concern is to save its skin in the Saharan war. Having learned a les-
son from previous bitter experiences, Mauritania will at all times use what-
ever maneuverability it can con-land to remain neutral and to maintain stabil-
ity at home within its own borders.

[Question] Judging frcm this analysis, you seen to be optimistic. But surely
Morocco will face a difficult situation and may find it necessary, in the
face of such a predicament, to strike a bargain which would bring to an end
the tail-end effects of that serious conflict on its own situation.

[Answer] If we are to use the lexicon of optimism versus pessimism. then

we are decidedly optimistic, for Morocco has fulfilled its complete solid-
arity over its Western Sahara. That does not mean, haveven, that we have
thrown caution to the wind or that the road of cementing this sovereignty
and forestalling the triumph of the secessionist scheme has become smooth
and easy. He realize that lbrocco faces a delicate situation internationally.
The nonalined conference will soon nest and the enemies of our,territorial
integrity will do the impossible to wrest a resolution similar to the Mon—
rovia resolution. Should they manage to do so they will try the same thing
at the forthcoming session of the United Nations General Assembly. In other
words, we will face a difficult situation in the international arena at the
same time in which military pressure will increase to many times its pre-
vious level. He will definitely face a de'icate situation on that [military]
level too. This is why we, as a revolutionary segment of the Moroccan na-
tional movement, emphasize that national ‘teadfastneas can only be achieved
through the strengthening of the intern .1 out by fulfilling the minimum
demands contained in the present program ;‘ the national movement. This
program can be sued up as follows:

Onenﬁxpansion of democratic freedoms by releasing all political detainees,
allowing all exiles to return and recognizing the right of all citizens to

self-expression, demonstration and organi .tion.

128
Noumlfilling the urgent demands of the popular nasses by increasing wages
proportionally with the increase in prices and nounting a camign of economic
measures designed to ameliorate the worsening conditions of the people by neans
of asking the affluent classes carry their share of the battle of liberation
and territorial integrity.

The implementation of this prograa will clear the way for s trenendous evo-
lution in the mass popular novelsent and the denocrstic and revolutionary for-
ces of the people while simultaneously strengthening the donestic front and
bolstering brocco's ability to rennin steadfast in its battle. With regard
to possible bargains and deals. we actually do not exclude such an eventual-
ity at all, but we do not believe that it is likely in the short range. To
strike a deal requires that there be a ainiaal degree of co-son grounds on
which all the parties concerned agree. Re do not believe that such a situa-
tion is possible or likely in the present circulstances. ‘rhe eneaies of our
territorial integrity find themselves in a good position. They are getting
growing international support at the ease time that they were able to break
up the Mauritanian-Moroccan alliance. Moreover, they are exerting growing
military pressure. Given all those advantages. it is unreasonable to expect
them to accept a cmronise when they believe that they can fully conau-ate
their goals of setting up an entity in the entire Western Sahara. The Horac-
can regiae, therefore, finds itself conpelled, in the context of the present
conflict. to retrieve the entire Saharan area and to cling to all its cards
lest it find itself in a situation of unavoidable defeat whose repercussions
it cannot fully control.

[Inset containing biographical data about the interviewee. p 22]:

Hohaned Bensaid, SS. is a onetime leader of the "Horoccan Liberation Arty"
which, between 1956 and 1960, waged a people's liberation war against Spen-
ish and French colonialisn throughout the entire territory of lbrocco,
including the Western Sahara. Be is a founder. with Kehdi Ben Barks and
other Moroccan patriots, of the "National Federation of Popular Forces"
party in 1956. He was expelled fro it, however, in 1970 for political and
ideological reasons. In 1970 the ”23 Mars" organisation broke away fro-
the National Iederetion of Popular Forces. Hohs-ed Benssid found hiaaelf
sympathetic with and supportive to the trend established by the "23 Mars"
organisation and is presently one of its leaders.

9256
080: 4602

129
SHAYKII SAID TO HAVE OFTED FOR BAHRAINI METHOD TO SETTLE SUCCESSION ISSUE
Paris AL-NAHAR AL-‘ARABI WA AL-DUHALI in Arabic 16 Sep 79 p 6

[Article by 'Ali Hashim: "Qatar Solves 'Its Problem' in Bahraini Manner;

Shsykh Suhaye ibn ﬂamed Al Thani Becomes Prime Minister and Shsykh ﬁnned ibn
Khalifah Remains Crown Prince"]

[Text] Doha—Qatar has found a solution to its "fasily" probleas but the main
Gulf problea. i.e., the problem of oil end of protecting oil, is still the
main preoccupation and concern.

After a period of what may be called a "coup" at the political level, Qatsr
now finds that the main concern preoccupying the mind of the ruler, Shaykh
Khalifah ibn umd Al Thenius concern which. in addition to the ruler,
preoccupied the mind of the young Qataris--has ended.

AL-lWlAR AL-‘ARABI HA AL-DUHALI has learned fron infoned sources that the
misunderstanding which existed between Shsykh Khalifah, the ruler, and his
brother Shaykh Suhsym ibn Based Al ‘l'hsni, the sinister of foreign affairs,
has vanished. Dissgreaeent has erupted over the crown princeship because
Shaykh Suhayn considered hiiself sore entitled to it that the other shsyhhs
of Al Titania The issue of selecting a crown prince persisted for nearly 6
years until Shaykh Khalifsh settled it by appointing his eldest son, Shaykh
Hand, the sinister of defense and the armed forces counsnder. crown prince
last sun-er.

At that use, the "misunderstanding" reached a far point between Shaykh
Khalifah, the ruler. and his brother Shsykh Suhayn who blessed his brother's
step but took a negative position toward the regime.

Shsykh Subsy- no longer reported to his office in the Ministry of Foreign
Affairs.

130
He spent his time in his private "council" at his hea.quarters [presumably
meaning residence] which is close to the amir's palace where he received his
friends and visitors from among the Qatari ambassadors returning for vacation.
businessmen and people with requests. But he did not engage in any official
function and the state was forced to appoint Almad ibn Sayf Al Ihani. the
former Qatari ambassador in London. minister of state for foreign affairs

to dispose of affairs concerning the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and to receive
foreign ambassadors.

Shaykh Suhaym did not say a word and showed no objection. but deep in his

heart. he felt that he, who supported his brother the ruler in his corrective
movement against the late Shaykh Almad ibn 'Ali Al Thani, was more entitled

to he the number two man in the state. in government and in running the country's
affairs.

The Gulf area became aware of this "misunderstanding," especially the Kingdom
of Saudi Arabia which is closer to Qatar than others because of the tribal
relationship between the two ruling families and of the Hahhabi creed that
unites the peoples in both countries.

Saudi Arabia played a major role in the issue but it was not able to settle
it. It was not able to impose the Saudi, Kuwaiti. Bahraini or the Abu Dhabi
"solution" on the State of Qatar.

Neither Shath Khalifah, the ruler, nor Shaykh Suhaym agreed.
Kuwaiti Mediation
Then came the Kuwaiti mediation.

The concern of Shaykh Sa'd al-‘Abdallsh al-Salim al-Sabah, the Kuwaiti crown
prince and prime minister, in the Gulf visit which he made 6 months ago was
to solve the Qatari "regime‘s complex."

It was said at the time that he was successful. But he did not achieve 100
percent success. Boa-raver. he Opened the path of dialogue between the ruler
of Qatar and his brother, even if only on th- diplomatic luncheon and dinner
tables.

But the issue remained "in a freeze."
Shaykh Suhaym continued to attend to his "council" and receive his visitors
or spent his time in his farm in the north, n official visits to 30m.

Geneva and London or in "hunting" trips in the Syrian, Jordanian and Iraqi
deserts.

131
Gulf Sensitivity

He did not want to hear a word on the "issue," neither did his brother the
ruler nor did any Qatari "with power."

Why?
The Gulf people are sensitive, they consider private issues and disagreements

their "own" affairs and they want nobody to talk about these affairs "by
virtue of their being" a family matter.

Insofar as they are concerned, anybody who is not from the Gulf is considered
a stranger and a foreigner, even if he has lived all his life with them.

Finally
Finally, matters stirred in Qatar.
The Gulf solutions for rule are numerous.

In Saudi Arabia, the eldest brother rules and the second eldest is the crown
prince. '

In Kuwait, the story is different.

The family branches take turns , from hubarak to Salim to Jabir and so forth.
In Bahrain, the rule has been based on having the eldest son as the crown
prince, the eldest brother [after the ruler] as the prime ninister, i.e., the
man with the power.

In Abu Dhabi and the other emirates, the eldest son is the crown prince.

In Abu Dhabi, Shaylth Khalifah ibn Zayid is Shaykh Zeyid's crown prince.

In Dubai, Shaykh Maktun ibn Rashid is Shaykh Reshid's crown prince.

In Ajman, Shaykh Hamid ibn Rashid sl-Nu'aymi is Shaykh Rsshid al-Nu'symi's
crown prince.

In Ras al-Khaimah, Shaykh Khalid ibn Saqr al-stini is Shaykh Ssqr's crown
prince.

In Um al-Qaiwayn, the story is the some.

132
There remains Sharjah where the balance has been upse because its former
ruler, Shaykh Khalid ibn Huhauad al-Qasimi. was assa inated when he did
not have sons of age to rule. So his brother Shaykh Sultan al-Qasimi, a
graduate of the School of Agriculture of 'Ayn Shams University. was selected
ruler.

In the Sultanate of Oman, Sultan Qabus. who was a student at the British
Sandhurst Military College, led a coup against his father Sultan Sa'id because

the Sultanate could no longer accept a rule like his and its people could
no longer accept systems of government dating back to the stone age.

Bahraini Solution
What is the solution to the misunderstanding in Qatar?

Shaykh Khalifah did not select the Saudi method whereby one brother succeeds
another, and neither did he choose the Kuwaiti method.

So the solution cane in the Bahraini way whereby the oldest son is the crown
prince and the oldest brother the prime minister.

In a while, amir decrees will-be issued in Doha appointing Shaykh Suhaye
ibn Hamad A1 Thani prime minister.

The cabinet will remain as it is, with a slight change in membership.

I opened the subject with Shaykh Suhayn, whom I met at his council, but he
smiled and disclosed nothing. He said: Ask the intonation people.

I also opened the issue with his brother Shaykh Nasir ibn Bamad A1 Thani and
he smiled and said: This is a matter that concerns the shsykhs.

The time of Shaylth Khalifah ibn ﬂamed A1 Thani, the ruler, is filled with

official visits and the director of his office, the minister of information.
is absent and there is no answer for any question.

86910
050: 4802

133
OPPOSITION LEADER REJECTS COMPROMISE WITH NUHAYRI

Beirut AL-SAFIR in Arabic 25 Sep 79 p 10

[Interview with Sharif al-Hindi, leader of Sudanese Democratic Federation
opposition party. by Mustafa Karkuti; in London, date not given: "Sharif
al-Hindi Tells AL-SAFIR: 'No Reconciliation Hith Numeyri; We Are Working
To Build a National Opposition Front; Sadat Realises Israel's Dream by
Transporting the Nile Water to the Negev"']

[Text] Sudanese opposition leader Sharif Husayn el-ﬂindi, head of the Su-
danese Democratic Federation Party. has declared War" on the regime of
President Ja'far Nunayri. His party and other Sudanese opposition parties
have attempted a reconciliation with Numayri twice during the past 10
years. However, Al-llindi declares that "the doors to discussion with the
regime are now closed."

AL-SAFIR met with Sharif al-liindi and covered various questions with hie.

In reference to his party's declaration that the Sudanese regime must be
overthrown, Sharif al-Bindi says: "This is not a new position but it has
been a constant one since 1969. since the first hour. the first day, the
first month of this regime." he adds that the Democratic Federation Farty
feels that this regime "in its origins differs from the aspirations of the
Sudanese people. We have opposed this regime by various methods from the
very beginning. and our opposition has continued, taking various political,
informational and popular forms (demonstration, strikes. etc.) in addition
to armed opposition (armed clashes)."

[Question] Hhat about the attempts at compromise during this period?
Didn't they lessen the intensity of the disputes?

[Answer] At the end of 1978, the opposition was represented by the Na-
tional Front in its old form, which included the Democratic Federation and
III-nah parties, the Hoslem Brotheer and other independent groups from
southern and western Sudan. An initiative by the regime was called na-
tional cospronise and national unity. and those concerned felt that it
was inappropriate to reject a cell for peace. on the basis that we have a
cause and do not want to overthrow the regime just to remove it.

13b
The regiae itself is dictatorial. fascist and closed It does not allow
public freedoms. does not represent the independent = '11 of the masses.
and its foreign policy does not represent national aspirations. In addi-
tion. in economic policy does not represent the movement of expansion
and econoaic and social reconstruction which the Sudanese people hope to
achieve. Because of all of this. we oppose the regime.

However, in spite of that. the National Front went along with the com-
promise, which was based on a conversation between Al-Sadiq til-Mahdi and
President Ja'far Nmyri. and it seemed to be based on the personal desires
and awitions of both. The compromise began. but it did not address the
Sudanese people and their national aspirations. Therefore. we got out of
that reconciliation, which lasted no more than 2 months. It actually
crashed before everyone. however, the other forces which had formed the
National Front with us joined the regime, except for those from the Hoslem .
Brotherhood, who had taken cabinet posts and high positions in various '
organizations, as did Al-Sadiq al-Hahdi and we too. We remained in oppo-
sition. and the compromise crunbled because of the absence of the basic
popular and sass element.

As for the second compromise attewt. which took place in May 1978 in lon-
don. the regime sent a delegation to negotiations which led to the sign-
ing of a pact between us and the regime. The pact did not contain all of
our desands, but it did contain the basic essence of our desires, such as
the demcrstic freedom: the freedom of publication. expression and
thought; freedom of assunbly; and the independence of the law and defining
the law; in addition to foreign policy defined as national and originating
from an unsubmissive policy concentrating on the basic question, that of
Palestine. This compromise pact also included economic program to fight
inflation, corruption. and manifestations of luxury in order to create a
balance and to develop the Sudanese economy.

Only a few months passed until we noticed that Numayri was changing his
mind about what he had signed and had agreed to. He realized that the re-
gime believed that by agreeing to the treaty it had ended and gotten rid
of the opposition. Thus, the reconciliation did not last long, because
the regise insisted on eliminating opposit an in all forms both at home
and abroad. After these two experiments at peace with the regime failed
and the regime's trick was exposed. the opp ‘sition intensified and stations
reached the boiling point. When we say that this regime will fall. we
mean that; but we are not wagering on any 'me, since it will be brought
by popular struggle. which decides when an. how the regime will fall. We
follow this path which has its ups and dow- 3. We believe that we will
triuph.

[Question] We asked Sharif al-hindi for more details.
[Answer] Re believe that the regime in Se an has already fallen. If we

View regimes not on the strength of their existence but on the basis of
the eleaents of their survival. we see that this regime has lost all of

135
the necessities for survival. 'whether they be economic, political, social
or even administrative. Consequently. it is a regime which has fallen.

and the people are waiting and counting the days and hours until this re-
gime takes its last breath. We neasure the regime's ability to survive and
continue by observing its performance in various sectors.

Doors to Dialog

[Question] If we assumed that circumstances existed similar to or better
than those in which the two previous reconciliation attempts took place.
could we see the possibility of reopening the doors to a dialog between
you and Numayri, or are these doors completely closed now?

[Answer] For our part. I do not believe that we could accept or partici-
pate in a dialog. The circumstances of the two previous attempts are dif-
ferent from the circumstances which now prevail in the political arena

in Sudan. In addition, we are fully aware that this regime has no inten-
tion of participating in any negotiation which would produce real or radi-
cal improvement in the situation on the national or nationalist level.

By studying views and sending envoys, which happens constantly. the re-
gime intends to buy time and dissolve the Sudanese popular movement.

The regime has absolutely no desire to alter its form or its structure,
which have now become reprehensible-not only are its practices reprehen-
sible but also its structure and makeup. The regime has become unaccepta-
ble to the masses; therefore, if we now accept any talk without a comprom-
ise, then this acceptance would be individually and personally one of its
specific desires. Thus, we accept no negotiations with the regime.

We oppose this regime in principle and fundamentally, and we can accept
only its complete removal.

Military Overthrow

[Question] mat prevents the occurrence of change or the regime's removal;
and is military coup—as a method of change—still a possibility for
bringing about change in Sudan?

[Answer] Many regimes exist in the world in spite of their people. tor
example. a revolution occured in Iran in 1953 mder the leadership of
Hossadegh, but it was wiped out after a brief period. however, this revo-
lution renained closeted in the souls of the Iranians and the Iranian op-
position for more than 20 years. Later. this revolution emerged on the
streets in various forms. It began with individuals and snall groups and
spread to hundreds and thousands, rising and falling until it was victori-
ous. Throughout this period the regime ruled in Iran. Note that it was
more powerful than the Sudanese regime in its arny, its money, its reputa-
tion, its foreign connections, etc. People believed that this regime
would not fall, but it did.
As for a military coup, anything is possible. I canr t rule out anything,
frol- military coup. to riots, civil war, secession, «-- the overthrow of

the regiae by popular or by other methods; all of these possibilities now
exist every day.

[Question] But don‘t you believe that these possibilities or others night

expose the Sudanese nationalist movement and Sudan itself to a very serious
situation?

[Answer] The organized opposition can prevent all of these dangers and
end up with a regime which averts and stops all of these dangers. but the
possibility of nilitary overthrow is present and obvious.

[Question] If the situation in Sudan has deteriorated Luis far, and if
the dangers to which the country could be exposed are of this ngnitude.
what prevents the existence of an organized and planned opposition, includ-
ing the Democratic Federation Party, the Unah Party and the Communist
Party, in addition to the Hoslen Brotherhood?

[Answer] This front essentially does exist, but perhaps it does not have
written and publicized programs. The popular opposition now within Sudan
is carried on by the masses in all of their groups. organising in the Deso-
cratic Federation Party, the Com-mist Party and the Ba'th Party and the
Iajority of the Ansar and the {lush Party, in addition to a large part of

the "salsa Brotherhood and the southerners and a large nt-ber of the sons
of western Sudan. This front has no written or publicised program. but
the administration and coordination in two arenas against the ragine in
the for: of deaonstrations or strikes are carried out by Sudanese popular
consensus under the leadership of the political organizations to which I
referred. There is a true front directing this battle, and. although it
is not openly reported, there is agreesent about it and coordination in
its work at hone and abroad.

[Question] have there been any attaspta since the recent uprising in Su-

dan to begin talks among the opposition groups to organise theaelves and
drew up a prograa of action?

[Answer] These attempts are continuous. and there are continuing meetings
at hose and abroad to give practical expression to the progressive front.
In spite of that, we are all agreed on the rewval of this regime, and
everyone is working to achieve this goal, \» tever their political inclina-
tions nay be. I must mention that there is a tireless effort to draw up
detailed plans with tine schedules for the period preceding the and of

the regime and the period following it.

Interdependence-and Axis

[Question] He shifted the conversation to agyptisn-Sudanese relation and
asked Sharif al-llindi whether he believes there is any "strategic dimension"

137
or whether the question is limited to one regime supporting the other and
vice verse.

[Answer] [I see] a basis for interdependence in the context of an Arab
economic interdependence, which can include Egypt. Sudan and the rest of the
Arab states. There cannot be interdependence between two countries only.
hhat exists between Egypt and Sudan is another facet of their joint de-
fense agreement, which in itself is an agreement to protect their regimes.
Sadat and Numayri drew up this agreement to protect their regimes from the
people of Egypt and Sudan. As for the so-celled "economic interdependence"
program, it is only a slogan since no development project has yet been im-
plemented in accordance with this agreement. All of the projects which
have been attempted in the south failed and encountered opposition from the
citizens, especially the (Junaqli) Canal, which the people rejected be-
cause they had no confidence in this project. These feelings were con-
firmed after Sadat announced during his recent visit to Haifa that the we-
ters of the h'ile would be carried by this canal to the Israeli Negev Desert.

The dream of the Israelis is to reach the Nile and the Euphrates; and,
while Sadat is not realizing this wish for them, he is taking the Nile to
th-. It appears that this was the hidden secret behind the (Junsqli)
Canal agreement to increase the water levels, which we do not believe
would be used to irrigate Sudanese, Egyptian or any other Arab land.

[Question] After Camp David, Egyptian President Anwar el-Sadat withdrew
Egypt from the front of the Arab east and trasnferred it to the Arab west,
this time not to support the liberation movements there but to support
and protect the regime of Horocco's King hassan. Do you believe that in
the near future we may see a Nunayri-Sadat-Bsssan axis elined in one front
against the liberation movements and nationalist governments in North
Africa?

[Answer] The Camp David agreement expelled Egypt, with its economic, mili-
tary. population, and cultural strength, froa the Arab cause. It is most
important that we oppose the Numayri regime because it was the only Arab
regime which supported, and still supports, the agreement, in spite of st-
tempts by some to dissuade it. Since the last sunit conference in Bagh-
dad. Sadat wants to strengthen his influence in the region. Thus, it is
not surprising that this man should turn from the east to the Arab Maghreb
because he has become an ally of Israel, and whoever is an ally of Israel
is willing to invent any discord in the Arab region. There is no doubt
that he is sending arms to Morocco and Sudan, and he is also willing to
create an axis in the Hsghreb.

Sadat is now attempting to break the vehemence of the Arab resistance,
which is represented in the resolutions of the rejection and steadfastness
front and the wait conference. Sadat is working to damage internal unity
in every Arab country and prevent any coordination between any Arab coun—
tries.

138
Democratic Freedoms

[Question] The president of the Sudanese Democratic ruderation says that
Sudan, like most of the Arab governments, is practicing repression and
abolishing democratic freedoms, whether they are political or intellec-
tual. Us asked him for his opinion about this widespread phenomenon in
the Arab nation where hundreds have been arrested and thrown into prison
without trial.

[Answer] Our position is clear. Re have declared it on many occasions,
the most recent of which was the General Conference of the Arab People.

we demand the application of all democratic freedoms: the freedom of
publication, expression, thought and political parties. We demand the
independence and sanctity of the law and respect for the Arab citizen.

by removing occasions of \danger from the Arab nation. Also. we demand

the application of the freedoms of the Arab individual. we believe that
the subjegated and imprisoned individual who listens only to what is broad—
cast to him and reads only what is written for him cannot achieve any vic-
tory. health and well-being are represented in the complete and intellec-
tually liberated individual. As long as democratic freedoas are not ap-
plied in all parts of the Arab nation, we cannot win in our cause against
Israel, which we are fighting as a civilization and a nation. If the Arab
citizen is not free, he cannot defend the nation or society. What can I
defend if I am subjugated and imprisoned in my nation. my home and my
country. and so are my father and my brother, for whom I am fighting?

The first and most basic thing which the individual is fighting for is to
be free, before he wages any other war.

The issue of democratic freedoms is our basic cause against the Sudanese
regime and any other similar regime. We are fighting to restore our free-
dom and the freedom of any other oppressed people in the Arab region.

[Question] We discuss Sudan again and ask what led Numsyri to dismiss
his former deputy, Abu al-Qasim Ibrahim, who was one of the supporters of
the regime.

[Answer] It is true that Abu al-Qasim was one of llumayri's colleagues.
he participated in the Hay uprising, and he remained a colleague for 10
years. It could not be said that Abu al-anim co-itted any mistake with-
out Nuaayri knowing it. There was no political reason to discard Abu al-
Qasim, nor can we say that the regime was nod because of Abu al-Qasim's
presence or that it is deteriorating or in, vving since his departure.
"hat happened is that Abu al-Qasim was offered as a sacrifice, since no
one was aware of the existence of basic dii .-erences between the two man.
All of the dirty tricks of which Abu al-Qasim is now accused are tricks

in which Numayri himself participated.

Numsyri has offered sacrifices over the yer 's to prolong the life of his
regime. and now the Nuayri Hay group has come to an end and he has no

139
more colleagues left. Whenever he sees strong opposition aoving in his
direction, Nanayri offers its sacrifices in order to say that the one re-
sponsible for failure was this or that man, this or that organization. etc.
Nunayri threw Abu al-Qasim's body because he saw lass upheavals marching
toward him. he bought some time by diverting than.

[Question] bhat led you to. manage or participate in the management of the
weekly magazine AL-DUSTUR. and vhat goals do you believe AL-DUSTUR will
achieve? -

[Answer] I do not own AL-DUS‘I'UR. I an not its chairman of the board. nor
am 1 its supervisor in any way. The magazine AL-DUSTUR is a part of the
Arab revolutionary media and the media of the Sudanese opposition move-
ment to this reactionary fascist regime or to any other fascist regime in
Sudan. It is an independent magazine serving the goals of the progres-
sive Arab revolution and the Sudanese popular opposition. If anything
controls its ownership, it is all of these goals. AL-DUSTUR is an addition
to the progressive free press in the Arab region. for it does not belong
to a party not is it muthpiece for any other, in Sudan or elsewhere.

[Question] "111 we see the pages of AL-DUS‘IUR open to all democratic na-
tionalist views. then?

[Answer] I assure you of that. I personally am not in charge of editing
it, but I want to say that if 1 had any say in AL-DUSTUR, it would be to
say. "State your opinion;" and I insist on it. It is an addition to pro-
gressive democratic Arab thought in the Arab region. and it is open to
these views. We. as the popular Sudanese opposition. talus fro. it only
what we took froa it voluntarily before.

7587
C80: 6802
BRIEFS

DETAINEE LlS‘I—AL-SAPIR has obtained the first list of :he nanes of 33 po-
litical prisoners in Sudanese prisons and has learned that there are ”hun-
dreds of detainees tron the progressive deancratic forces," lost of then
in the notorious "(tuber)" Prison. It is estinated that there are about
400 detainees. It is vell known that the arrest canpaign began more than
2 months ago and reached its peak last August. Sources say that the can—
paign is concentrated basically on the progressive union elsnsnts because
"the unions oppose the lava restricting freedom and the so-called leaders
supported by the authority. through the recent worker and student deton-
strstions. The folloving is a list of prodnent unionists vho have been
detained: llasan Qesan al-Sayyid. for-er secretary of the Civil Servants
Union. arrested upon his arrival at Khartoum Airport on 11 Aug 79; Ahaed
ﬂabih, secretary of the Union of hployees of Khartoua University; Sal-
nan llanid. unionist and nsdaer of the Sudanese Comnist Party Central
Co-ittee; Khalil llyas. for-er secretary of the Sudanese Youth Federa-
tion; Sahri Jusur. senber of the secretariat of the Youth Iederation; Dr
Ila-ad Sulayuan, for-er secretary of the Union of the Hidwr Teachers In-
stitute; mutter 'Abdellah. unionist; Yusui' Ilusayn, “or of the cen-
tral connittee; Oasi- Anin. well known labor leader; huha-ad Sa‘id sl-
Qedhal. nsnber of the Teachers Union; Hahbub Sharif. poet; Hahbub Sayyid
Ahmad, unionist; 'Abd al-Qadir el-llifa'i, iron the Int-era Union; 'Ahd
al-Qadir Sayyid Ahead, secretary of the Printers Onion; Sayyid ‘l'sha, fro-
the Teachers Union; Al-Sirr al-Najib. unionist; Sa'udi Dara). unionist;
'Ali al-Hilhi, chair-Ian of the board of tho Foundry "orkers Union; Sali-
Abu Shuhsh, neder of the board of the Teatils Workers Union; Mahjda
'Uthlan Nadi. unionist; Huhauad Sulaylan Yndur, mionist; 'Ahbas 'Ali.
Teachers Union; 'Avd 'Ahd sl-Hajid. secretary of the board of the Plastics
Rorkers Union; 'Uthaan al-lhadr; Easel al- lazuli; Ila-ssh streq; hadr al-
Din 'Abd al-‘l'an; al-Pstih sl-Iashid; Sat'iq ahlu; Bashir Ilyas; lithe-ad
Muted; 'Abd el-Pattah Zaydan; As'ad al-Zab'r. [Text] [heirut Alp-sans

in Arabic lo Sep 79 p l) 7587

680: 6802

1111
SAVINGS ENCOURAGED, LOAN SERVICE EXPANDE)
Damascus TISHRIN in Arabic I. Sep 79 p 2

(Article: "People's Savings And Loans: New "assures Hill Soon Be Taken To
Encourage Savings By the People; Loan Services Hill Be Expanded and the
Ceilings 0n Loans Will Be Raised"]

[Text] New measures are to be taken to encourage the people to save.

TISHRIN has learned fron reliable sources that the cabinet heads have agreed
to raise the interest on investmnt certificates and to abolish tine require-
ments for deposits.

Banking circles have interpreted these neasures as being deeply rooted in
respect for the financial status of the People's Loan Bank, and as strength-
ening the confidence of its depositors.

The new measures will raise the interest rate on investmt certificates
fron 8 percent to 9 percent, and decrease the period of deposit fro. 10
years to 5 years.

The People‘s Loan Bank is currently finalizing studies on isplenenting the
new measures and reorganizing their accounts in accordance with the new
advantages and facilitations so as to coordinate than with the old provi-
sions.

In a state-eat to 11’.sz, Hr huh-Ind sl-Kasss, director general of the
People's Loan Bank, noted the eight-fold increase in the bank's deposits
during the last 6 years, as well as the sirfold increase in slants
invested during the sane period.

He added: "Sales of invest-ant certificates amounted to 600 million Syrian
pounds (LS) last year, while they did not exceed 18 300 million in 1977."

He esphasised that all types of deposits at the People's Loan Bank are
tax exespt.

He pointed out that the bank has opened a under of branches in the provinces
to facilitate the acceptance of the nssses' savings and to increase its loan-
related services.

1112
Concerning the expansion of the bank's services in the area of lending to
the people. Mr al-Kassm noted an increase in the fi.:ures for credit
extended to persons with limited income from LS 12 million to 1.5 80
million. He stated that the bank had invested IS 150 million in persons

of limited income in the form of loans. He added that the bank had
recently participated in the construction of numerous hospitals and tourist
facilities in the provinces and that it had participated specifically in
financing the Damar Housing Project.

It should be noted that the system of popular saving and loan has been
modified so as to be characterized by flexibility and comprehensiveness.
The ceilings on loans uere nulbered and special facilitations have been
given to specialists and regular doctors, engineers. pharmacists. dentists.
and medical researchers inasmuch as they have been exerpted from filing
the financial sheet.

The personal surety for granting them loans has been set at a ainimum of
25,000 Syrian pounds for regular doctors and 50,000 pounds for specialists.
This is to encourage the opening and equipping of clinics and research
facilities. and to stem the brain-drain. These modifications have facili-
tated the establish-eat of hospitals and tourist facilities.

Small manufacturers and professionals also have a share in the facilita-
tions and the increased loans inasmuch as the ceiling on loans has risen
from 100,000 to 150,000 pounds.

The branches have been given broad powers to help them quickly reach a
decision on applications, to save time and effort and to simplify measures.

9123
(ISO: #802

1113
REPORT GIVEN ON NEW DAM PROJECT
Damascus TISHRIN in Arabic 7 Sep 79 p 2

[Article: "The Nahr al-Kabir Northern Dam Is Progressing on the Road to
Implementation; The Project Is a Huge Economic Installation Equivalent to
the Euphrates Installation"]

[Text] The Nahr al-Kahir northern da- project which is underway in Latakia
has progressed on the road to implesentation. The investigative work, the
field and laboratory experiments and the preparation’of preliminary designs
for thls vital project began in April 1975 and were cospleted in June 1978.
The project is expected to be completed at the end of next year. It will
irrigate the surrounding plains for an expense of 16,000 hectares.

To find out about the horizons and features of this work nsms visited
the territory of the project accoqanied by Engineer 'Als'-a1-Din Sulaynsn.
director of the project. From close up he informed us about the current
progress of the dam project. In the field in their natural surroundings
we witnessed the various stages that have been completed in this area.

Engineer 'Als'-a1-Din Sulayman defined the completed stages as follows:

At the beginning of 1979 research work on all of the designs was concluded
and the necessary modifications to the project were ads. The plans for
implenentation were completed. as well as the specifications and technical
requiresents for implementing most parts of it.

During the first half of this year the land needed for the dam's installa-
tions-land which will he subaerged by the lake created the dam, which covers

ll square lull—was appropriated.

Engineer Sulaynen emphasized that the authority's administration would make
every effort to pay the owners of the land appropriated for the projects
its [full] value during the next few weeks. When these appropriations are
concluded various sections and stages of the project will begin.

Concerning the other stages of work that have been coqleted. kg Sulaymen
said that the stage of preparing the contracts for implementation with

1M;
the Soviets to provide technical assistance for the project has been
completed. The contract to perforn concrete work in the canal to divert
the course of the river has been ratified with the sure Irrigation Coepany
(SARICO) for 56,000 square meters of reinforced concrete. This is one of
the most inportant fundamental jobs in the project and implementation of
the rest of the project depends on completion of this job.

A contract has also been concluded with a specialist foreign company to
construct the leak-preventing walls in the dan's foundations, the depth of
which is 60 asters below the riverbed. It is the second funds-ental job
which must be completed before covering the body of the den can be begun.

With regard to the jobs which will be undertaken by the project administra-
tion, Eng Sulaynan said that it is the responsibility 4f the adlinistration
to construct both the front and rear of the diversion dam and the support
earth mounds between these two sides so as to close off the course of the
river and divert it into the diversion canal. This will be accomplished by
the end of next year after cleetion of the leak-preventing wall in the
fmmdations of the dan as well as the concrete of the diversion canal. Then
the first basic stage in the den construction project will be completed.

It will be directly followed by the stage comprised of construction of
earth sounds supporting the body of the den. Construction of these nounda
will take a year and several nonths. Then the difficult and coaplicated
technical work in the project will have been caspleted. lhe State Organi-
zation for Major Projects has finished the excavations on the right and
left banks of the river which are necessary to support the body of the den.
It has also nearly conpleted the excavations of the irrigation source. In
the second half of this year excavations on the canal for discharging

flood water will follow.

All of this work has been done by equip-ent inorted in accordance with
the Soviet contract and the fruitful technical cooperation between the
Syrian engineers working in the organization and the Soviet engineers and

experts.

In addition to that the organisation's workshops have prepared areas
required for workshops for den construction, the tenporary roads necessary
for work. centers for the construction of awnings and warehouses. and the
centers to supply the den with electric p0 er and potable water.

The State Irrigation Conany. (SARICO) . hrs also cospleted excavation of the
canal to divert the course of the river, . I has nade preparations to
begin work on pouring the concrete in this canal this Septe‘er. The
State Road Conpany (ROADOO) has finished construction of the land-fill
for Road No the which connects the den and the Aleppo-Latskia Highway.

The total cost of the project has been estimated to be [.8 230 nillisn,
based on 1976 prices. However, the unfor' -een increase during recent
years in the price of raw uterials. fuel, tools, aschinery. equipmnt
and labor costs will certainly cause the estilated cost of this project
to rise.

11:5
In this connection it should be pointed out that the large gains which

the national economy will reap through the training of human cadres and

the development of technical experts will be rude through agreements on
scientific, technical and economic cooperation concluded with the Soviet
Union. This unforeseen increase in the cost of materials is not equal to
the co.-;l:5 and wages in the rest of the specializations and the engineering,
technical and mechanical jobs which are included in the project. Concerning
the obstacles and difficulties facing the course of work on the project

Eng Sulaynan said: "During the first half of this year it has been possi-
ble to overcome all of the technical, contractual and legal difficulties,
including the appropriation, which stood in the way of implementing certain
parts of the project. This past July, the beginning of the second half of
this year, is considered the starting point in the implementation of this
project to construct the dam in accordance with the plans' and prograas'
predetermined schedules.

Eng Sulaynan added, "The number of workers in the project in the various
areas of specialization is about 550 laborers and technicians. This figure
will rise with the progress and the effect of the work in the sections

of the project. A large nuaber of them gained their experience working
during the study and investigation stage. Some of them gained this tech-
nical experience from their work on the Euphrates dam project and the

other irrigation projects in the country. There is no lack of technical
competence.

it should be noted that the project consists of the construction of an
earthern dam on the northern Nahr al-Kabir approximately 20 km northeut
of Latakia. It is close to the Khan 'Atallah Bridge, and 1.0 a 7 km long
tunnel which brings water iron the dam's reservoir to the plain north of
the city. It is the clay type. Its greatest height is 52 meters, its
length at the sumit is 856 asters, and its greatest depth for preventing
leaks is 38 meters.

'lhis dam will form a lake behind it 11 km long with an area of 11 square
km. Its storage capacity will be 207 million cubic raters of water.

The goal of the project is to store water from the northern Bohr sl-Kabir
instead of having it flow uselessly to the river mouth at the sea. Another
object is to regulate the flow of the river and to irrigate a plains area
of 14,000 hectares situated among the coastal plain north of Latakia,

the riverbed plain, the hill and the 'Ayn al-‘Arus plain in the north.

Along the extent of the irrigation network in the dam region 38 villages
will spring up. They will he linked by communications routes, and

electricity and telephone networks. “their land is fertile and suitable
in nest districts for the cultivation of citrus fruits, which makes this

project economically very important.

In addition, there is the potential for utilizing the lake water formed
by the dam to ensure a reserve source of water for industrial purposes
and for drinking water for the city of Lstakia.

lhé
The main dimensions of the installations are as follow:
Various landfill: 3 aillion cubic meters.

Various excavations: 2.5 million cubic meters.
Reinforced concrete: 150,000 cubic meters.

Rock coverings for the front and rear surfaces of the dam: 130.00’ cubic
”IBIS.

11118 is in addition to the mining equipment and facilities for the irriga-
tion and discharge gates weighing approximately 700 tons.

The Higher Planning Couittee has decided to construct the den directly
through the Syrian Implementation Board with the help of experts and
equipment from the Soviets and in accordance with procedures followed in
the Euphrates (in.

A public sector coepany has been co-issioned to construct the irrigation
network because that is a familiar job in our country, while taking advan-
tage of the Soviet offer to purchase some of the materials needed for imple-
mentation. and to assist by providing some experts to supervise. Inle-
Ientation of this network has begun. It is expected to be capleted in
1982.

9123
C30: 10802

11:7
BRIEFS

NEH CARMr-Aleppr-SANA--1he Military Housing Authority recently began
digging the third canal within the project to irrigate Aleppo and convey
Euphrates water there. The length of this new canal from the river to the
city of Aleppo is approxinately 80 km. This was announced by the engineer
who is the director of branch No three of the Military Housing Authority.
He said that the canal excavations would be followed by the installation
of large concrete water Iains within the canal. This authority has reached
an agreement with a German company to import a special plant to manufacture
these water mains locally to expedite the completion of this irrigation
project. He said that the value of the contract for this plant is approxi-
mately 18 million Syrian pounds. It is expected to arrive in Aleppo at

the beginning of next year. Its equipment and installations will be
installed over a 2-month period. He added, ”the preliminary work towards
obtaining this plant is now underway. The installations subordinate to it
will be equipped by the tractor factory. me tractors will install the
plant's machinery in these facilities. which are in a la..e area of land
purchased by the Military Housing Authority for these installatic a." he
said that the entire [cost of the] third project's canal amounted to 110
million Syrian pounds. It will have the capacity to convey 220,000 cwic
asters of water daily, which is greater than the total capacity of the
first and second stages of the project to deliver Euphrates water to
Aleppo, which anounts to 180,000 cubic meters per day. [Text] [Danscus
AL-TEAHRAH in Arabic 5 Sep 79 p lo] 9123

C50: 4802 ED