APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/00: ClA-RDPB2-00050R000200040013-1
Near Eas’r/ North Africa Report

No.2064

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE
um

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and nterial enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. mere no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was su-arized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Hords or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.3. Government.

PROCURMNT 0F PUBLICATION

ms publications may be ordered from the National Technical
Intonation Service, Springfield, Virginia 22161. In order-
ing, it is recouended that the ms amber, title, date and
author, if applicable, of publication be cited.

Current JPRS publications are announced in Governaent Re orts
Announcements issued semi-monthly by the National Technical

Infomtion Service, and are listed in the Monthly Catalog of
U.S. Government Publications issued by the Superintendent of

Documents, u.s. Government Printing Office, Washington, 0.0.
20402.

Indexes to this report (by keyword, author, personal names,
title and series) are available from Bell a Howell, Old
Mansfield Road, Wooster, (trio 1.4691.

Correspondence pertaining to matters other than procurement
may be addressed to Joint Publications Research Service,
1000 North Glebe Road, Arlington, Virginia 22201.
It. mum (no-m m «can

This serial report contains information on socioeconomic, government, political.
and technical developments in the countries of the Near East and North Africa.

 

 

n. Datum Ann-=71“ 0. Demon

Political Science _X_Inter-Arab Affairs X __Libya iSultanato
Sociology __North African X ~Hauritanin of Oman
Economics: Affaira :Horocco iSyria
Culture (Social Afghanistan __Peoplc's Dcmo- ___'l'unisi.1
Sciences) TAlgeria cretic Republic ____Uniced Arab

Ethnology __ Bahrain of Yemen Emirates
Geography _Egypt _Persian Gulf _Heetern Sahara
'l'echological llran Area ____Yemen Arab
Military Sciences _X_Iraq ___Qatar Republic

_X_ Israel ___Saudi Arabia

LJordan ____Spanish North

__Kuwait Africa

X ___Lebanon ___Sudan

b lumlnn- ulOocn- (nae hum

1.. manta-41mm ‘50,. SC, 5K. 15

n. nv-I'nwuv’ . "' _ _.. - “nus-{mm a“. Ohm-KJH;- .. —} 2|. "no u rm- I
UnlinnLJm I\v.-ni1ability UNCLASSIFIFI) i 113
$01" by; IT'S K'szuufy ﬂan" "DP. I'm.) I ‘22. run
Springﬁeld, Virginia 22161 I UNCLASSIFIED . __ __‘_

 

 

m. nun-1m» 5.. "mm... .. "m... ‘ omen»; la. n m u I
NEAR EAST/NORTH AFRICA REPORT
No. 2064

CONTENTS PA
INTER-ARAB AFFAIRS

PRC Chairman Hopes for Dialog With United States
(Khalid al-Pahum Interview; AL-SHARQ AL-AUSAT AL-USBU'IYAH,

16 Dec 79)....0'.0.....0’3000000000300000OOOIOIIIOOOC.0O

Briefs
Joint Ventures With Arabs

A1521!“

Oil OfficiaLAit Laoussine Discusses Oil Pricing Problem
(AL-WAR AIr'ARABI HA AL-DWALI, 10 Nov 79)........... . .

IRAN

Hoslen People' s Republic Party Arouses Hostility
(Various sources. 11 Dec 79)........................... .

Statement by Qua Salinary
Khalkhali Favors Banning, by Sadeq Khalkhali
Reaction of Various Groups

Background Impressions of New Leaders Discussed
(Bobo Scheutz; SVENSKA DAGBLADBT, 29 Nov 79). ... .. . . . . . .

Means To Counter U.S. Sanctions Aired
(KEYHAN, 11 Dec 79).....................................

Strategy of Possible U.s.-Iran Clash Discussed
(Jesus Pavlo Tenorio; JUEVES DE EXCELSIOR, 6 Dec 79).. . .

Plan To End Unemployment Announced
(KEHYAN, 18 Dec 79).
CONTENTS (Continued)
IRAQ

Iraqi Position on Iranian Situation Analyzed
(AL-HAHADITH, 23 Nov 79)................................

New Oil Projects Inaugurated in Basrah, Hasit
(Yahya Kamia al-Najjar; ALPTHAHRAH. 18 Oct 79)..........

Briefs
Industrial Investments
IDCAS to Baghdad
Petrochemical Complex Completion
Naval Improvements Sought

ISRAEL

Poll Indicates Begin's Popularity at Unprecedented Lou
(HA'ARETZ, 2h Dec 79)...................................

Arab Regimes Should Learn From Iran How To Fight America
(Editorial; AL-SHA'B, 6 Nov 79).........................

Arabs Must Take Care That Oil Weapon Is Not Turned Against
Them
(Editorial; ALPQUDS, 14 Nov 79).........................

Arabs Must Take Hard Stand Against Reaction
(Editorial; AL-SHA'B. 15 Nov 79)........................

Defense Agency Plan for Settlements Viewed
(Zeev Shiff; HA'ARETZ. 19 Oct 79).......................

Major Development Activity Underway in Galilee
(Judah Ariel; HA'ARETZ, 19 Oct 79)......................

West Bank Students Seen Shortchanged in University Admission

Exams
(Editorial; AL-HISAD, Oct 79)...........................

Solution to Teachers' Salary Problems Proposed
(Yitzhak Shneerson; HAZOFBH. 22 Oct 79).................
CONTENTS (Continued)
LEBANON

Raymond Iddih Gives Views of Lebanese Situation
(AL-DUSTUR, 12-18 Nov 79)...............................

Phalangist Party Reportedly Training Hoslen Brothers
(AL-HURRIYAH, 12 Nov 79)................................

Fathi Yakan, Shaykh Hajdhub Released by Syria. Interviewed
(AL-ANHAR, 13. 21 Nov 79)...............................

Interview With Fathi Yakan
Interview With Shaykh Hajdhub

Kurdish Party Official Released by Syrians
(AL-NAHAR, 25 Nov 79)

Members of Smuggling. Counterfeiting Ring Apprehended
(AL-NAHAR, 28. 29 Nov 79)...............................

Results of Investigation
Further Details

Ihdin Massacre Suspect Sprung From Juniyah Prison
(AL-NAHAR. 26, 28 Nov 79)...............................

Armed Attack on Prison
'Al-Haradnh' Statement

Briefs
Phalangist Airport

LIBYA

Analysis of the Libyan Revolution, Qadhdhafi's 'Green Book'
(Charles Zorbigbe; LE HONDB DIPLOMATIQUE, Nov 79).......

MAURITANIA

Country Said To Be Threatened with Famine
(Houlaye Hachem; CNAAB, 6 Nov 79).......................

Minister Assigns Priority to Hater, Roads, Housing
(CHAAB, 28-29 Nov 79)...................................

Briefs
French Loan Agreements Signed
French Cooperation Agreement
National Educational System
CONTENTS (Continued)
SULTANATB 0P OMAN

Commercial and Economic Actions in 1979 Reviewed
('UNAN. 18 Nov 79)......................................

Oil and Nineral Development and Prospecting Reported
('UHAN. 18 Nov 79)......................................

Improvements Made in Hater and Electricity Services
('UNAN, 18 Nov 79)......................................

Briefs
Police Force

SYRIA

Evaluation of Efforts To Stimulate Exports Urged
(Salah 'Alvash Interview; AL-TNAURAH, 11 Nov 79)........

New Economic Vistas Projected
(Nusayn Ibrahim Interview; AL-BA'TN, 12 Nov 79).........
PNC CHAIRMAN HOPES FOR DIAIDG WITH UNITED STATES

LDl8lSO7 London AL-SHARQ AL-AUSAT AL-USBU'IYAH in Arabic 16 Dec 79
Pp1.2w

[Interview with Palestine National Council chairman Khalid al-Pahum by
AL-SHARQ AL-AHSAT correspondent in 1amascus-odate not given]

[Text] Palestine National Council [PRC] Chairman Khalid al-Fahum has ex-
pressed the hope of initiating an objective and constructive dialog between
the PLO and the 0.8. administration without prior conditions. He said that
the continued Israeli occupation of Palestinian and Arab territories is a
matter of life and death for the Palestinian people and that the Palestin-
ians now have no choice but, through understanding with their Arab brothers,

to use all the weapons, including the oil and economic weapon, to secure
Israeli withdrawal.

In an exclusive statement to AL-SHARQ AL-AHSAT, al-Fahun said: It is no
secret that the PLO is seeking to obtain the support and backing of all

the world countries for its just and legitimate demands, which are repre-
sented in the UN General Assembly resolutions confirming our people's right

to return to their homeland and to establish their independent state on
their national soil.

He added: Host unfortunately that official U.S. attitude toward the Middle
East crisis was never even-handed. The u.s. political, economic and mili~
tary support as well as the total U.S. bias in favor of the Israeli side
has been clear since 1948.

He said: He are making efforts and seeking to establish a constructive
dialog with the 0.5. administration, but that administration has so far

set conditions that we cannot accept. The first of these conditions for
initiating a dialog is that the P10 accept Resolution 2&2. The PLO has
already stressed that it is impossible to accept this condition because it
would mean the end of the PLO as the legitimate and sole representative of
the Palestinian people. The resolution in question refers to the Palestinian
people and the PLO only from a humanitarian aspect, which means that it

does not recognize any political rights for our people in their own coun-
try and on their own soil.

The second condition that the United States lays down for initiating a
dialog with the PLO is that it recognise Israel when Israel, through the
Knesset and the government, declares that it will not recognize the PLO
or the Palestinian people's rights as provided for by the UN resolutions
even if the PLO does recognize Isr;el.

Therefore, al-Fahum said: "We hope to establish an objective and construc-
tive dialog with the U.S. administration without prior conditions, particu-
larly since it is clearer than ever that the U.S. administration committed
a major mistake by adopting the self-rule agreement and signing such an
agreement with al-Sadat in the absence of the Palestinian people and the
PLO, their legitimate representative."

He added: "Europe has more and more begun to realize the danger stemming
from the continued conflict in the Middle East and the fact that this danger
cannot and without a just solution to the crucial element in the conflict,
namely the Palestinian problem. Considerable sectors of the U.S. public
opinion have also begun to be aware of this fact.“

Al-Janrm expressed the hope that European and world opinion, which is in-
creasingly understanding the Palestinian people's rights, would influence
the U.S. administration to adopt a better-balanced and more objective
attitude to the Middle East.

Asked if he could foresee a better future with the United States sooner

or later, al-Fahum said: "The road to the United States is still blocked.
But the continued Palestinian struggle, the bolstering of Arab solidarity,
the isolation of al-Sadat, the thwarting of the Camp David agreements and
the greater understanding of the justice of our cause in Europe and among
various circles in the United States itself as well as U.S. concern for
its own interests could all be factors which contribute to initiating an
earnest and objective dialog between the PLO and the U.S. administration."

He added: "I do not think that the dialog will begin soon, because it will
take the United States some time to realise, in the light of its own inter-
ests, that there is a need for dialog with the PLO and for recognizing our
people's right to establish a state of their own, and to stop offering un-
limited and unconditional aid to Israel so that it curbs its expansionist
ambitions which the Camp David agreements escalated further. He hear and
feel daily the Israeli leaders' insistence on building settlements on our
land and persecuting our people. The arrest of the most senior elected
mayor and the attempts to expel him from the country are but part of the
clear picture of Israeli ambitions in our occupied territories.“

He added: "Unfortunately, the U.S. administration and al-Sadat signed the

Camp David agreements and, as a result, the enemy thought that the West Bank
and Gaza had been sold to him in return for his withdrawal from Sinai."

2
“31815091 Replying to a question on the possibility of using the oil
weapon again if necessary, al-l-‘ahum said: "Our people's struggle, which
is supported by the Arab nation and the socialist and friendly states,
will continue and will redouble. He will certainly seek with our Arab
brothers to utilize all the weapons available to us in order to speed the
achievement of what we aspire to and what are known as the national and
unalienable rights of the Palestinian people. Therefore it is natural
that, through understanding with our Arab brothers, we should seek to use
all the weapons available to us to achieve this. I an referring here to
an inportant weapon in the battle, namely the oil and economic weapon."

He added: "He hope that the world and the United States will realise that
we only want peace based on justice, that we refuse to surrender as pro-
vided for in the Camp David agreements and that, in resorting to all weapons,
we do not intend to inflict damage or harm on anybody. He believe that the
continued Israeli occupation of our Palestinian territories is a natter of
life and death for us. Whoever sees Israeli expansionism. Zionist arrogance
and the insistence on liquidating the Palestinian problem can only justify

our stand on the need to resort to all weapons, first among them the oil
and economic weapon."
BRIEFS

JOINT VENTURES WITH ARABS--The Undersecretary of the Iraqi Ministry of In-
dustry and Minerals for Planning Affairs and Development Mr. Subhi Yassin.
who also chairs the Arab Coapany for Industrial Investments recently signed
an agreement with an unnamed French coapany for feasibility and econonic via-
bility of 11 industrial projects to be carried out as joint ventures between
Iraq and other Arab countries. The agreement was in the form of two contracts.
The first covers 8 projects while the latter three are covered by the second
contract. Iraq holds 16 per cent of the Arab Company for Industrial Invest-
ments shares. The company is capitalised at In 150 aillion. Saudi Arabia
holds 15 per cent of the capital; Libya holds 8 per cent and Kuwait 8 per
cent. Syria and Jordan each holds 1 per cent. Contracts are underway for
wider Arab participation in the company and other countries are expected to
join soon. The Arab Company for Industrial Investment is an agency of the
Council for Arab Economic Unity and its specialises in joint Arab ventures.
[Text] [Beirut THE ARAB WORLD WEEKLY in English 31 Nov 79 p 13]

CSO: 10820
OIL OFFICIAL AIT MOUSSINB DISCUSSES OIL PRICING PROM.“
Paris AL-NAHAR AL-‘ARABI HA AL-DUHALI in Arabic 1. Nov 79 pp 52, 53

[Article: "Algeria Proposes 'i'hree Solutions to the Energy Crisis; Ait
Laoussine: Oil Prices Should Be Raised Gradually in Proportion to the Price
of Alternative Energy"]

[Text] Iran and Libya have raised their prices, despite OPEC's agreement on
a unified price. Is this the answer to inflation and the fluctuations in

the currencies of the industrialized nations? The reply to this question has
recently been provided by Nordine Ait Laoussina, former vice president of
Algeria's oil and gas conpany, SONATRACH, who is presently an oil consultant
in Algeria.

"Saudi Arabia can do nothing to prevent an oil price increase." So stated
Shaykh Ahmad Zaki Yamani. the Saudi oil sinister, on a recent occasion.

"The world is heading for a war in the Gulf region between the Soviet Union
and the United States," said Mani' Sa'id al-‘Utaybah, the UAE oil minister.
who also added in a warning to the OAPBC member states: "As current head
of OAPEC, I believe that member states cannot raise their prices beyond the
ceiling without a unanimous decision."

Neither Saudi Arabia nor the chairman of OAPEC is in a position of strength
after Iran and Libya decided to raise the price of their oil beyond the
ceiling OPEC has been observing for 6 nonths now to establish a unified posi-
tion and a streamlined policy among its nembers.

As has been the custom before an impending meeting to determine prices,
prices have begun to rise indiscriminately and wildly. and competitive bid-
ding has reemerge: Libya demands a 50-percent increase in prices; Iran be—
gins to sell at spot market prices, i.e.. $40 per barrel: Iraq finds itself
at a crossroads: whether to increase its prices or to continue the policy
of rapprochement with Saudi Arabia and opt for freezing the present level of
prices by reducing production.
According to OPEC circles, this latter course [to decrease production and
freeze prices] is unacceptable because it would depress oil markets at a

time when the fate of production in Iran is unknown. The freezing of prices
would in turn cause an erosion in oil revenues. This year the purchase value--
that is, the real cost-- of a barrel of oil decreased by 5 percent. Freezing
the prices would bring the decrease in real value to 10 percent. At any

rate, it would be difficult to maintain the freeze for long, because the
increased demand for cheap oil will inevitably jack prices up.

Who Can Provide the Answer?

The expected solution at the forthcoming OPEC meeting in Caracas, Venezuela,
is for prices to be increased to $30 per barrel. It is rumored, however,
that the OPEC Iinisters will be called to an emergency meeting to deal with
the disintegration of OPEC as a result of the indiscriminate price hikes.

The long-term solution, however, was provided by Nordine Ait Laoussine, the
former vice president of Algeria's SONATRACH who is presently an oil consul-
tant in Algeria, at the third annual seminar of OPEC experts, which met in
Vienna from 3 to 5 October under the theme "OPEC and the Future of Energy
:iarkets." The following is a smsry of Ait Lsoussine's paper:

Thc :m-st important task facing the world today is the need to be exposed

to us; ideas and views relating to the changes in the oil markets, so as to
avoid recurring oil supply crises. Two years ago, I came to the conclusion
that prices should be raised ovrr the long run to keep up with the cost of
producing alternate sources of energy. This involved a dileana, for while

it is important to accept the fact that prices will have to increase, it is
more important to know to what extent, with what speed, and in which direction
these increases should occur.

I noted on an earlier occasion that prices can develop in one of two forms:
we can have then follow the market forces--i.e. supply and demand--but then
we will have no choice but to face a crisis; or, conversely, we can draw

up a plan to increase prices through an agreement between producers and con-
sumers to decrease oil supplies in the market. I believe it is not too late
to do that.

1 am in favor of the second option. I previously proposed a series of plans
for a gradual increase in prices linked not only to inflation rates and
currency fluctuations but also to a new factor-“namely, the production cost

of alternate sources of energy, effective the second half of 1980. This is
why I proposed an annual rate of increase amounting to 5 percent. I argued
that if we were to continue freezing prices at the level of $12.70 per barrel
(the so-called minimum price set before June 1978), this kind of shortsighted-
ness would speed up the increase in demand and would eventually push prices up,
with all the well-known implications and consequences.
This is exactly what happened. looking back, we see that those who wanted to
depend on the narket as a means of determining demand and price carried the
day at the OPEC aeeting in Geneva in June 1978 and froze prices on the basis
of the $12.70 per barrel price level, despite high inflation rates and the de-
preciation of the dollar.

The upshot was that the profits earned by OPEC after the 1973-76 price hikes
evaporated and the price of oil per barrel dwindled to only $7, based on the
1975 value of the dollar; this is lower than the price demanded by the (world
Energy Agency)-lower even than the price unsuccessfully demanded by the a-
gency to encourage the development of additional sources of energy outside
OPEC. Even the prices which have been based on the minimum price level to
raise sales and prices have not been affected.

Popular Talk

The problu: is that no one has talked about that issue at all. Naturally.
talk about lowering prices is less popular than talk about increasing them.

With regard to the consumer nations, the situation was comfortable. With
production of oil from the North Sea, Mexico, and Alaska, there was adequate
supply at low prices—so much so, in fact, that oil tankers wasted a lot of
time sitting in ports waiting for buyers. The balance of supply and demand
tipped in favor of the consumer and determined the price of oil.

This situation gave rise to the predominance of the theory of allowing the
law of supply and demand to determine prices, but the theory in question con-
tributed little to the development of new sources of energy capable of neeting
the needs of those nations in the long run. th7

It has become customary to speak of market saturation but not of a crisis.
Indeed, everyone dismissed the likelihood of a crisis before 1990. But when
demand began to rise in the second half of 1978 as a result of the Iranian
crisis and the decrease in the industrial states' oil reserves, and it became
impossible as a result of the Iranian crisis to make up for the drop in the
level of reserves, an oil crisis set in and prices began to spiral upward.
And so within a year's tine, the world was noving toward a severe crunch—

a situation which could be endless.

Any disruption in the oil flow jacks prices up. Added to this, scale OPEC
nations began to show a preference for selling their oil on the spot market

to get a higher return. In less than 6 months, prices shot up by some 60
percent, until the minimum price reached $20. Official prices rose from

$13 in 1978 to $20.50 in mid-1979. The increase was reminiscent of, and equal
to, the 1973 and 1971. increase.
The Simple Law and the Game

The situation I have just recounted was the result of a simple law called the
law of supply and demand, or what is also called market forces. Do we want
this situation to continue? Do we want in the future to repeat this circular
process of an apparent surplus leading to a demand crisis. which in turn
leads to rising prices, and so forth and so on? If the answer is yes, then
the real price (that is, the purchase value of a barrel of oil) will continue
to go up and down indiscriminately and uocontrollably.

i believe that "the market" is no more than an expression of the balance of
power between the producers and the consumers at any point in time. If it
were up to the consumers, they would want to have large quantities of oil
at low prices. If that is not enough, they will manipulate each other by
means of the price system, exactly as if they were playing tug of war. In
that game, were one of the players to slacken his efforts or lose his atten-
tion, he would lose ground.

This is the basic dilemma. A crunch is coming, and we can even begin to de-
tect it. Official sources have been saying that the crunch is coming next
year. This is not difficult to predict.

As I have said, prices rose by 60 percent in a very short period of time.
The rise affected first the demand and then the reduced level of production
in the industrial [as published] nations. This will lead to further compli-
cations which will develop later. It is well known that the complications
created by the oil price increase in 1973 and 1974 and their effect on the
western and world economies did not begin to appear until 1975.

Outside OPEC

What will happen is that the increase in demand will be slow, contrary to
expectations. Following the 1975 decrease, demand returned to its previous
level and then began to rise annually at the rate of 6 percent. This year

the increase will be 2 percent. Some observers expect demand to decrease next
year by 65 million barrels a day. That is to say that world production.
outside OPEC, of oil and liquefied gas would amount to 35 million barrels

per day this year and 36 million next year. OPEC would produce 29.5 million
barrels per day instead of 31.5 million.

Actually, despite the decrease in Iranian oil production, OPEC output in-
creased by 7 percent this year. The oil produced by OPEC was not fully con-
sumed, because part of it was used to build up reserves in the industrialized
nations. Those nations have published statistics showing that their stockpiles
allow them to enter 1980 with reserves far higher than last year's. The new
reserves are placed at 4.5 billion barrels. If this level of reserves

should decrease early, as usual, because of the industrialists' failure to
reduce their levels of consumption, then resupplying the reserves will be
sore difficult, because it is hard to tell what will happen in Iran and be-
cause OPEC can reduce its production to 27 million barrels per day in the
first half of 1980.

Hhat do we have to do to avoid a state of instability in the world 011 mar-
kets? 0n the 12th or 18th of next month [December], the result of what the
consumer and producing states have learned from past experience will appear.
If we allow the market forces to operate and be the determining factor, then
we know what the result will be: a decrease in demand will not case quickly
because there are different prices; that is to say. consumers would be able
to obtain oil. Horld prices will be affected until production decreases

and forces a change in prices, this time in a different direction. The
situation will go on and on.

He have not reached paradise yet. The progress we have made to link oil
prices to the cost of producing alternate sources of energy is still far
short of its goal. Freezing of prices will lead to a decrease in real prices.
which will widen the gap between the price of oil and the cost of alternate
energy, whose price will increase like any other commodity because of in-
flation.

Therefore I propose that we not seek a high increase in prices as a way of
compensating for the decrease in surplus revenue. and that we should instead
maintain the real prices of oil by raising then gradually, in addition to
controlling production as a supportive factor.

There is a great desire among the producers to reduce production because they
have earned high revenues after the increase in prices, but this desire will
gradually abate once the prices are frozen and their revenues are eroded

by inflation. Therefore I emphasize that a severe crunch in the oil market
would become possible if OPEC maintained its present level of production in
the present inflationary conditions, and that prices will affect the producing
countries' desire to cut production. But if the producing countries were

to maintain the level of real prices, there would be little likelihood that

a crunch would occur. Everyone knows that if prices are frozen while the
present level of production is maintained, revenues will dwindle quickly in
the second quarter of 1980.

There are many who believe that the world is heading for an oil crisis.
Most economists agree that the rise in oil prices is not responsible for the

present crisis. but that the responsibility lies in the speed with which prices
have risen.
I believe that the most important thing we can do to secure the world's long-
term energy needs to have the consumer nations publicly accept the need for
oil prices to increase and to draw up a phased program to increase prices
gradually in proportion to the cost of producing alternate sources of energy
for years to come. I therefore propose the following:

1) Put an end to sharp fluctuations in oil prices and production levels.
and determine levels of production by agreement between producers and con-
sumers on the basis of need.

2) Draw up a real reference detailing the cost of alternate sources of
energy, in order to use it as a basis for setting down pricing levels for
oil. The oil-rich countries should also link their production to their
expenses.

3) Increase prices annually by 5 percent of the real price, which I think
would be suitable for both producers and consumers.

Finally, the oil countries should not merely react to inflation, currency

fluctuations, and a deterioration in the conditions of marketing 011. They
should take the initiative.

9254
C80: 4602

10
MOSLEH PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC PARTY AROUSES ROSTILITY
Statement by 00- Salinary

Tehran BAMDAD in Persian 11 Dec 79 p 2

[Text] Greetings to you, the brave, hero and struggling people of Azerbaijan.
Regards to you, the decisive and awake brothers and sisters who with firm
determination, following your positive vote to the Constitution of the Islamic
Republic, you hit a heavy blow to the mouth of the criminal America and threw
the anti-revolutionary trash who wanted to stain your reputation, out of the
Islamic Republic Radio and Television center. You prevented bloodshed and
thOusands from suffering martyrdom. Everyday, America arranges new con-
spiracies in every part of the country. This time it has thought of making
disturbances in Azerbaijan, unaware of the fact that our dear nation is far
more awake and aware than being misled from its Islamic revolutionary di-
rection with such conspiracies and scenes. The 00- Seminary greatly appre-
ciates the awareness and assistance of you heroes under the leadership of the
struggling clergyand wishes more success for the Islamic revolutionary goals
and its protection. The seminary condemns the inperialist conspiracies in
Qom and Tabriz and confirms the following points:

1. The brave people of Azerbaijan are expected to tighten their lines and
maintain their unity of words, so that the anti-revolutionaries would not
ever think of making conspiracies and plots in that dear territory.

2. The great Ayatollah Shari'atmadari has requested to properly interpret
the issues and to banish those who change the realities, censor the news and
put it at his disposal.

3. The Ayatollah has also requested to banish those who under the name of
Hosien People's Republic Party relate themselves to him as well as to announce
the party as an anti-Islamic revolutionary party, so that the stain would be
cleaned from the clergy and beloved Islam.

Signed by 'Ali Heshgini, Maser Hakarem Shirazi, Mohamed Hehdi nabani,
Mohamed Pazel. Hosseyn Rasti Kashani. Ahmad Janati, Seyyed Abbas Khstam
Yazdi, Ahmad Azari Qomi, Hoha-ad Yazdi, Ali Almadi, Seyyed Hasan Taheri,
Ja'far Bosseyni Karimi, Hahn-ed Ali Shar'i, Mahdi Rosseyni Iohani and Ho-
hen-rad Ho'men, The Qom s-inary

11
Khalkhali Favors Banning
Tehran BAHDAD in Persian 11 Dec 79 p 2
[Statement by Ssdeq Khalkhali]

[Text] In connection with the daily events. Ayatollah Khalkhali issued the
following statement:

In issue 515836 of ETTBLA'AT issued on Sunday 2 Ordibehesht 1358 [22 April
1979] I wrote an article against the Moslem People's Republic Party indica-
ting that the religious authorities and sources do not have any differences
but that there are some of the supporters of the banned Rastakhiz Party [the
Resurgence Party of the People of Iran] and the shouters of "Javid Shah" [long
live the shah] or the identified SAVAK agents who want to oppose the prin-
ciple of the Islanic Republic by inclining towards Iran's Hoslen People's
Republic Party.

It is worthy of being nentioned that they want to achieve their "Satanic"
goals even at the cost of ruining the reputation and destroying the clergy.
Therefore, it should be reminded that the Ayatollahs should take the initia-
tive as they did in the referendum and announced that they would vote for
nothing but an Islamic Republic. They should announce that the goal is the
same. That is. it is the Islanic Republic that everyone wants, so that those
who seek excuses would find their treacherous plans futile and the differ-
ences would be solved and the nation would move forward with total unity to
establish a new Islamic society in the Middle East. This was the most
sensitive part of my article which inflamed the adventurers. We all saw

that as soon as the article and various docunents were published, sourceless
news, possibly fabricated, were spread in Tabriz and everyone was shouting
that Khalkhali should be executed. “hat were they saying and what was
Khalkhali saying? Eight months ago Khalkhali was saying the same thing that
today all religious authorities throughout Iran from the dear Azerbaijan and
Tabriz to Rasht, Kernan, Jahrom, Mashed, Qom religious center, the high rank-
ing teachers and the great religious authorities of Bsfahan and Shiraz and
the grand Ayatollahs and the top religious authorities in all areas ask for
the banning of the adventurous party, the so-called Moslso People's Repub-
lic Party.

th have the Sepahlanis, Saberis, and Rahmatollah Harghe'i Moqaddam, then
the provincial governor of Eastern Azerbaijan, fled the great nation of Iran?
The supporters of the Moslen People's Republic Party wanted to make denon-
strations in the Azerbaijan mosque and close the bazaar in Tehran. Did not
we see that the group had been set up by the neabers of SAVAK, Rastakhiz,
the mace beaerers and shouters of Javid Shah [long live the shah]? why
were some of our contemporaries in fear at that tine and went aside and
wrote articles against ne? They should now cone and see what schism that
the Moslen People's Republic Party is causing and what unholy ties it has
with the Porqan group and what an inseparable tie it has with the People's
Pedayin. Now their faces have been identified and the brave and heroic

12
of Iran under the great leadership of the honorable religious source and
powerful Bmam has identified all those who have sold themselves and they
will all be given a stiff answer as soon as possible.

"Wish the touchstone of experience were used so that the deceitful would
lose their reputation."

Thank God that those who wanted to hide their ugly face under deceitful masks
by using the names of the great religious sources such as the grand Ayatollah
Shari'atmadari in order to do a great service to International Imperialism
and Zionism engaged in a futile task, now they can no longer continue their
deceitful plan. We should appreciate all the Islamic religious sources. the
grand Ayatollahs and the great nation of Iran in condemning Iran's Hoslem
People's Republic Party.

We should call their name with respect so that those who have sold the--
selves could not act as supporters of Islam. I have a statement in this
respect which will be published in the future.

Reaction of Various Groups
Tehran KBYHAN in Persian 11 Dec 79 p 11

[Text] Yesterday the religious authorities and clergy of Kermanshah sent a
telegram to the gran Ayatollah Shari'atmadari in Qom expressing their anxiety
of the news regarding plots against Islam, the Hoslems and the Islamic coun-
try and asked him to make a prompt and serious decision for preventing such
conspiracies.

A part of the telegram indicates: Now the people expect you to issue an order
disbandingtheabslem People's Republic Party in which, unfortunately, the
opposers of Islam and the agents of foreign reactioneries have penetrated

and to evacuate government buildings which should be taken over by the

Islamic government. Because of the existing conspiracies which are about to
take place by foreigners it is necessary that the government exclusively
handles the deposals and appointments in the province of Azerbaijan. Of
course, the government will use your guidances and advice.

The struggling clergy of Abadan, Dezful and Shushtar also sent telegrams to
the office of the grand Ayatollah Shari'atmadari. A part of the telegram
sent from Abadan indicates: Host of the agents involved in the tragic event
of Tabriz are from the Hoslea People's Republic Party who unfortunately af-
filiate themselves to you. By taking this matter into consideration, the
clergy of Abadan request that you issue an order for disbanding the party

in order to maintain unity and fulfill the great Islamic revolution and
neutralize the satanic plans of the deviated and corrupt persons and also
banish the deviated elements free your presence.

13
Be referring to the recent events in Tabriz and emphasizing the point that
the elements causing the event were from the Moslem People's Republic Party,
the clergy of Shushtar and Desful have asked for disbanding the party.

The following telegram was sent from the clergy community of the province of
Ilam to the grand Ayatollah Shari'atmadari:

The honorable grand Ayatollah Shari'atmaderi: Greetings. All of the inhabit-
ants of the province of Ilam and Poshtkuh express their condolences for the
death of the guard and condemn the treacherous plot of attackiqyour residence.
They all demand that you issue an order as to the evacuation of Tabriz Radio
and Television, this Islamic propaganda base by the occupiers. And if this
has been done by the Hoslem People's Party, to issue an order for disbanding
the party.

The Religion and Knowledge Society end the Islamic Society of students in
Hiyaneh have each sent a telegram to the grand Ayatollah shari'atmsdari of-
fering their condolences on the occasion of the martyrdom of 'Ali Reza'i, the
guard, and expressed their hatred from the occupation of Tabriz radio and

television station and asked for the disbanding of the Hoslem People's Repub-
lic Party.

Tens of thousands of people in Azar Shahr and suburbs marched in support of
Ayatollah Shari'atmadari condeming the attack on the Ayatollah's house and
the martyrdom of one of the guards. The stores in the bazaar and streets
were closed for 2 days for the same reason. The people issued a resolution
asking for the punishment of those who had attacked to Ayatollah's house.

The clergy of Kangavar have also sent a telegram to the grand Ayatollah
Shari'atmadsri stating: The events of Azerbaijan, that is the glorious ter-
ritory, have caused uneasiness for the people of this territory. It is ex-
pected that the disturbances which have surely been planned by conspirators
be ended by your actions and orders. Now that it is heard that individuals
affiliated with imperialism have penetrated Hoslem People's Republic Party,
we would be glad if you renounce the party or issue orders for disbanding it.

Clergy of Arsanjan Send a Telegram

Saqarol Islam Seyyed All Saqatol Islam sent a telegram from the clergy and
the struggling people of Arsanjsn to Ayatollah Shari'atmadari. A part of
the telegram indicates: We request your honorable position, Ayatollah, that
you issue orders that the honorable people of that territory pay full atten-
tion to the following two points:

1. The people cooperate with the Islamic government employees, so that they
could do their job in that vast territory.

2. The deposals and appointments of employees and directors of government
offices should be handled by the government of the Islamic Republic.

14
He also request that you issue orders for conpletely disbanding the Hoslen
People's Republic Party. It is obvious that your influential words through-
out the country and abroad and the special obedience which the honorable peo-
ple of that territory have towards you, both of the above aentioned issues
will be carried out."

The Clergy of Hazandaran

The clergy of Hazandaran have also sent a telegram to the grand Ayatollah
Shari'ataadari. A part of the telegram states: We request that you take
prompt action as you may find advisable vis-a-vis the Hoslen People's Repub-
lic Party; either to disband the party or liquidate the anti-revolutionaries
who have penetrated the party. Also, throw out the persons who have pene-
trated the religious city of Tabriz, the city of heroes, and have attacked
the radio and television station so that any anti-religious conspiracy could
be stopped and tragic events would not take place.

The Religious Authorities of Mashhad Send a Telegram
The Grand Ayatollah Shari'ataadari:

The tragic events which recently took place in One and the death of the dear
guard beside your house have caused a great sorrow. Undoubtedly the plot had
been arranged by Iaperialist and Zionists agents. Fortunately, it shortly
resulted in defeat with disgrace. It proved for several tines that anti-
revolutionaries will have no fate but defeat in this country. By condean-
ing this anti-Islaaic action we seriously ask that you issue orders for the
disbanding of the ﬁnale. People's Party as unfortunately various anti-revolu-
tionary agents have deeply penetrated the party, so that their violent and
anti-Islaaic actions would not hurt your reputation. Signed by Seyyed Kazan
Har'ashi. Abol Hasan Shiraai, Ali Phlsafi, Hehdi Noghani, Ali Tehrani, Abbas
Va'ez Basi, Seyyed Abdolkarin ﬂasheai-Hezhad.

The Hassage of the Clergy of Gilan

In a message the clergy of Gilan Province have asked the grand Ayatollah
Shari'atnadari not to allow the enenies of Islam and the revolution to cause
disturbances in the beloved Province of Azerbaijan.

The Ewan Joa'e of Ker-anshah Sends a Telegra-

In a telegral Hojatoleslan Haj Aqa 'Ataollah Ashrafi Bsfahani, the Bonn Joa'e
of Kernanshah (the chief nollah for Friday prayers and ceremonies) has asked
the grandAyatollah Shari'atnadari to disband the Hoslen People's Party. A
part of the telegram indicates: Hhile condeaning the attack on your house
and the plot in Tabriz, I expect that you disband the party and exonerate
your holy presence.

15
The Clergy of lorestan

The clergy of lorestan Province have also sent a telegras to the grand
Ayatollah Raj Seyyed Kazeu Shari'atnadari. A part of the telegram indicates:

"At this time that the hands of conspirators intend to carry out their in-
auspicious plans and fulfill the treacherous plans of inperialisn and dan-
age Iran's Islanic revolution, the clergy and the people of borestan have
been deeply saddened by the unfavorable news received fro. Tabriz about the
ﬂoslen People's Republic Party who affiliate the-selves to you as undoubted-
ly they are related to the conspirators. He therefore request that you is-
sue orders for disbanding the party as soon as possible."

9156
C50: 10906

16
BACKGROUND IMPRESSIONS 0? NE" LEADERS DISCUSSED
Stockholm SVENSKA DAGBLADET in Swedish 29 Nov 79 p 6
[Article by Bobo Scheutz]

[Text] Tehran--Almost every day, late in the after-
noon and sometimes in the evening, they gather in the
round Senate building in Tehran. Thirteen men, more
or less well-known in Iran and the rest of the world.
They make up the Revolutionary Council, the institu-
tion that rules Iran today and these 13 men are the

most influential people in the country after Ayatollah
Khomeyni.

The Revolutionary Council was secret when Khomeyni
set it up while he was in Paris waiting out the shah.
He was afraid of assassination attempts and for that
reason he wanted to keep the core of the revolution
a secret.

On Wednesday Abol Hassan Bani Sadr was removed from his post as foreign
minister of Iran.

Until now Abol Haasan Bani Sadr, foreign minister and finance minister,
belonged to the Revolutionary Council. But recently he has acted very
independently, irritating the rest of the council. However he has re-
tained his post as finance minister.

Bani Sadr is definitely an intellectual, well-known in Iran as an eco-
nomist. He was educated at the Sorbonne in Paris, where he spent most
of his 16 years of exile. He had been known as an advocate of a hard
Islamic line but ironically enough during the current crisis he has
stood out as the hope of Uestern diplomacy.

l7
Sadeq Chotbzndeh

His successor is the colorful chief of radio and TV, Sadeq Ghotbzadeh.
Ne ls also a member of the Revolutionary Council. Like Bani Sadr
(:hotbzndeh received most of his education in France but he speaks fluent
linglish too as a result of a period of study in the United States. He
is always well-dressed and very self-assured. Ghotbzadeh has never hesi-
tated to use the power he has and he is very unpopular in certain groups.
especially employees of Iranian radio and TV.

Mohanlned Beheshti

The most influential Ian on the Revolutionary Council is probably its
secretary, Ayatollah Mohamed Beheshti. it is likely that he is the
most powerful man in Iran after Khomeyni. He is the leader of the
dominant Islamic Republican Party which played a vital role during the
death throes of the shah's regime.

He also holds a number of other important posts. Among other things he
heads the "holy war for reconstruction," an enormous project over the
entire country aimed at getting the economy back on its feet.

Belueshtl's background is somewhat confusing. Under the shah he acted
as adviser to the Ministry of Agriculture, among other things, and thus
cannot flaunt the martyr's halo assumed by several of the revolution's
central figures. Many of them were forced into exile or spent hard
years in the shah's prisons.

l-‘or lo years Beheshti was head of the Islamic Center in Hamburg and he
speaks excellent German and Arabic. His English is also good but in his
contacts with the media he prefers to talk through an interpreter.

He is a cautious man who chooses his words carefully and when he speaks
in his deep, authoritative voice he makes a very calm and dignified im-
pression.

His name will undoubtedly be mentioned often in the future.

Mehdl Baza rgan

To the surprise of many former Prime Minister Mehdi Bazargan is still on
the Revolutionary Council following his resignation from power when the
American Embassy was occupied. He is regarded as the liberal represen-
tative of the middle and upper classes on the council. These groups are
on the outskirts of Khomeyni's Islamic Republic and therefore Bazargan's

position is not very strong. But he has a long history of opposition to
the shah and that gives him points in Iran today.

18
Originally he was an engineer and a businessman (Baaargan means business-
man in Persian). On several occasions he has been on a collision course
with the religious leadership, as in a recent speech when he defended
lran's importation of Western technology. He pointed out that reli-
gious leaders liked to appear on TV and reminded them that TV is a Hest-
ern import.

Al i Akbar Hoinfar

Perhaps one of the least influential members of the council is Oil
Hinister Ali Akbar Hoinfar. He is a decided technocrat, a close friend
of Bazargan and to date he has made no political statments at all in
his meetings with the foreign press corps. At a recent press conference
he answered only questions dealing with oil and oil exports. replying to
every political question that it was not his task to solve political
problems.

Abbas Shalbani

Abbas Shaibani is a doctor of medicine and a former president of Tehran
University. He too is one of Bazargan's close friends and was often
imprisoned during the shah'a reign. His profile on the council is not
particularly sharp but he was part of the group of experts who prepared
the draft of the constitution.

Bus to l lah Sahabi

Ezzatoilah Sahabi is an engineer and serves as budget and planning min-
ister in the government that doesn't really exist. He is part of the
delegation negotiating with the Kurds with unclear results. Sahabi was
jailed by the shah and subjected to brutal torture.

ﬂassan Habibl

The last of the seven nonreligious members of the Revolutionary Council
is Hassan Habibi, the official spokesman for the council. He belongs to
the generation of lrsnian intellectuals who were educated in France
where he joined Islamic opposition to the shah's regime. Habibi also
serves as minister of culture. and higher education and he wrote the
first draft of the constitution for the Islamic republic.

Hashemi Ali Akbar liafssnjani

0f the six religious representatives on the council Hodjatolleslam (a
religious title below the rank of ayatollah) Hashem Ali Akbar Rafsanjani
holds the position of minister of internal affairs, a vital post. Not
much is known about him but he spent a lot of time in the shah's jails
and was not released until just before the revolution. It is generally

19
believed that at one time he received Palestinian training in guerilla
warfare in Lebanon.

Mohamed Javad Bahonar

Ayatollah Mohamed Javad Bahonar has written many books on islam, some
of which are now used as school textbooks. He is the Revolutionary
Council's representative in the Ministry of Education.

Husavi Ardeblli

Ayatollah Musavi Ardebili is as devout a Moslem as he is an anti-Marxist
and he has devoted much time and effort attempting to shield the youth
of Iran from the Marxist concept of the world. He was one of the
founders of the Islamic Republican Party along with Ayatollah Beheshti
and Ayatollah Bahonar.

Mahdavi Kani

Ayatollah Mahdavl Kani is the powerful leader of all the revolutionary
committees that sprang up all over Iran after the revolution. The com-
mittees range all the way from police stations, courts and social wel-
fare offices to a kind of neighborhood authority and they have a central
po.-itien in everyday life in Iran. In Tehran there are now 16 of these
Consulttecs after the great number that flourished soon after the revolu-
tion were weeded out.

Kani is one of the religious leaders who actively combated the shah and
he is regarded as being very close to the average man on the street. Me
received his religious education in Qom.

Sayed Ali Khamenei

The latest star in the Islamic revolutionary sky is Ayatollah Sayed All
Khamenei who is the council's representative in the Defense Ministry.

He was recently named by Khomeyni as the new leader of the Revolutionary
Guards following the departure of Ayatollah Lahouti for unknown reasons.
The Revolutionary Guards have reluctantly accepted their new leader.
Khamenel was formerly entirely unknown to most Iranians.

Normally the Revolutionary Council consists of 15 members but two seats
are being kept open for the time being and many names have been men-
tioned as conceivable candidates. These seats will probably not be
filled until after tensions on the council have been resolved. No one
knows for sure when this will happen and where the split will occur.
But much indicates that it will be on the side of the table where Abol
liassan Bani Sadr sits.

20
Today the council is no longer quite as secret but its members have
never been presented publicly. In spite of that it was possible to
obtain information from various sources resulting in the 13 names listed
here. Another name often mentioned in connection with the Revolutionary
Council is that of the religious leader of Tehran, Ayatollah '1meh
Hontazeri but i was unable to get reliable confirmation of whether or
not he is actually a member.

The council member most often mentioned during the current crisis is
Foreign Affairs and Finance Minister Abol Hassan Bani Sadr. His inde-
pendent behavior recently has left a number of question marks concerning

his position on the council and his future actions will be followed with
great interest in Tehran.

6578
C50: 3109

21
MEANS T0 COUNTER U.S. SANCTIONS AIRBD

Tehran KEYHAN in Persian 11 Dec 79 p 11

[Text] In an open letter, the teachers of Abadan School of Petroleum who
are members of the ”Committee To Fight 0.8. Economic Sanctions” present the
results of their talks and views on v.5. economic embargo:

l. The Government of the Islamic Republic should handle the monopoly of
foreign trade. Considering the great importance of improving the agricultural
condition, the government should do its best in establishing and developing
agricultural and road construction industries. The government should only

buy the primary industrial products from abroad and avoid buying any pre-
fabricated foreign comnodities as such as possible.

2. To establish an organized staff in Tehran and the captials of provinces
called "Self-Sufficient Staff." Based on this project self-sufficient com—
mittee will be organized in educational centers, offices, government and
non-government organizations, factories, etc. Each committee will provide
a report and submit to the central staff their practical capabilities, type
of work and their specialty. As an informatiOn and coordination center, the
self-sufficient staff will find out about the needs of the organizations on
services and equipment and will direct them to the proper sections, thus
meeting their demands.

3. He suggest that from now on all the universities and higher educational
institutes prepare a plan, so that if Iranian students residing in the United
States return to the country, they could continue their education in the
universities of the country. We, in our turn, are ready for any cooperation
within our capabilities. Establishing night classes will be a great help in
this respect.

4. We suggest:
a. To make a general evaluation and study of the existing vocational schools

and workshop in Khuzestan and to provide a report (statistical) in this re-
spect. The workshops can be used for training technicians.

22
b. To make an overall revision in the training and educational program of
Abadan School of Petroleum to make the school meet with the fundamental
changes that are made throughout the country.

For this purpose, engineering departments in the field of discovery should
be established and excavation and information charts (well logging) depart-
ments should be strengthened.

5. He suggest that the Central Department of the Ministry of Oil which has
so far been in Tehran be transferred to Khuzestan. He also suggest that an
extensive cooperation in research he established between Abadan School of
Petroleum and the oil industries. The Research Center of the Ministry of Oil
in Tehran should be combined with the School of Petroleum in Abadan to estab-
lish an extensive research and training center in the south.

6. Abadan School of Petroleum announces its multi-directional cooperation
and technical assistance in the required fields especially in training tech-
nicians for getting information on Mud Logging and the use of related equip-

ment which is very much needed by the Excavation Department of the Ministry
of 011.

With the experiences of the school, it can help in selecting. choosing and
the rental of the equipment and the companies in charge of operating them,
so that the cheapest and best equipment could be selected from various coun-
tries in the world (other than the United States) and the least number of
experts would be invited to Iran. In the meantime, it will directly and
closely supervise their operations and role in organizing an Iranian cadre.

7. He suggest that a seminar be held at Abadan's School of Petroleum in
order to study the self-sufficiency of oil industries with the participation
of experts in oil affairs in the country.

8. We ask the Oil Ministry to send us the copies of the projects of oil in-
dustry that have so far been sent to foreign companies and universities for
implementation or completion, so that we would study the possibility of
accomplishing them at this training center.

9156
C80: 4906

23
STRATEGY OF POSSIBLE U.S.-IRAN CLASH DISCUSSED
Mexico City JUEVES DB EXCELSIOR in Spanish 6 Dec 79 pp 10-11

[Article by Jesus Pavlo Tenorio: "Hhat War Between the U.S. and Iran Would
Be Like")

[Text] "hen the president of Mexico, Jose Lopez Portillo, was asked his opi-
nion on the critical situation that has arisen between the U.S. and Iran,

the chief executive replied that it was for problems of this kind. the essen-
tial motive for which is oil, that he attempted to offer a peaceful solu-
tion when he proposed his World Energy Plan to the United Nations.

And, as in the case of our president, statesmen the world over have been
particularly concerned over how close to conflict Teheran and Haahington
have come when. after the occupation of the United States Embassy in the
Iranian capital, President Janes Carter ordered dangerous military maneuvers
in order to assure the Ayatollah Khomeini that the United States would not
apathetic if the hostages held captive in its diplomatic premises were not
released.

It was not long before the international public received an accurate picture
of the hostile situation from the alnost irrational positions assumed by the
aged leader who, at 83 and because he lacks a knowledge of international
law, is acting in Iran as if he were the master of everything.

without, of course, claiming that the United States is totally dissociated
from these reactions on the part of the Ayatollah. this nevertheless does
not mean that the Muslim leader can violate all vestiges of law and civiliz-
ed coexistence with impunity. This has obviously established a favorable
view toward any initiative by the United States, including. of course, the
invasion of Iran and the consequent overthrow of the Ayatollah.

what the War Hould Be Like
If all prospects for saving the hostages were exhausted, and the U.S. forces

were in three locations at the same time, the military action would occur,
but not so easily as to warrant expectations of a swift victory.

26
Although the United States would not deploy a considerable number of forces
with the aircraft carriers "Midway" and Kitty Hawk" in the Arabian Sea, the

naval landing force stationed in the Mediterranean would have a military
balance with the Iranian army and fleet.

Those aircraft carriers comprise over 200 aircraft of various types. Their
landing forces, certainly fewer in nuaber than the Iranian, would be in
serious straits before the Air Force cleared the way from the coast of the
Persian Gulf to the Iranian capital, which is located a few kilometers from
the Caspian Sea, on the border with the Soviet Union.

It would be an excessively bloody war because, according to the Internation-
al Institute for Strategic Studies, in London, the Iranian armed forces con-
sist of 45,000 men, distributed among the Army, Air Force and Navy. It

also has 30,000 reservists. who would be immediately mobilized; and 75,000
national guardsmen who, in turn, would also be potential human resources.

The Iranian forces, which were armed by the United States itself during the

Shah's time, are still regarded as the best equipped in the entire Middle
East.

For example, they have 2,800 tanks, as well as an extremely powerful artil-
lery, equipped with the most powerful missiles. The Navy has one submarine,
three destroyers and four frigates, all provided with missile systems; and
four corvettea, seven rapid gunboats, two coast guard vessels, two mine
sweepers and three rapid cutters which France is about to deliver to it.

As for its Air Force, it consists of 500 combat planes and about 100 heli—

copters, all of United States manufacture, except for 16 Super Prelons of
French origin.

Added to this would be religious fanaticism, if not patriotic zeal; because,
as we have observed recently, the fanatical Khomeini has placed more stress
on his "holy war than on the national interests of Iran." Therefore, the
war would be excessively bloody.

The "aging of the War

On 22 November of this year, in a telephone interview with the British agen-
cy Reuters, Ahmed Hadani, commander of the Iranian Navy, disclosed that a
first step in defending his country would be to close off the Strait of Hor-
muz. a narrow deepwater channel at the entrance to the Persian Gulf, used

by tankers which carry over half of the oil used by the industrialized na-
tions.

This step would, of course, evoke a combined reaction from all those coun-

tries, which might well protest against the United States intervention be-
cause it would affect highly important interests of theirs, such as their

25
energy supplies; or, on the other hand, they might join the United States
invasion, perhaps certain that, with a political change in that nation, the
endless supply of black gold would be guaranteed. Of course, that poli-
tical change would have to be pro-Heatern, even more so than the Rees Pah-
levi regime was at another time.

when this step had been agreed upon by all those countries, the first con-
flict would occur between the Iranian vessels and the two United States
aircraft carriers, backed by a convoy of torpedo boats provided with mis-
siles and implemented with logistics.

Obviously, before embarking on a conflict, the Iranian Navy would attempt
to blockade the Strait of ﬂormuz; but the Yankee Navy has the necessary
equipment for clearing the way. Hence, this futile attempt to stop them
there would only last a few hours; that is, if the United States decided
to land inside the Persian Gulf. Because. if it did not do so, it could
seize land in the part of Iran bordering Pakistan, which lies in front of
the Strait of Hormuz. It would be a little farther from Teheran, but the
Air Force would go into action in an attempt at barrage bombing, and the
release of contingents of paratroopers.

The Impossible Rescue

The lrnnian antiaircraft defense would have already gone into action. Its
500 airplanes and 100 helicopters would be taking off to curb this offen-

sivc. And the first really important battle would be the one in the air.

Whoever prevailed there would have the situation under control.

At this point, the United States hostages would already have been executed;
while the fanatical Khomeini would have sought refuge, as he did by fleeing
to Paris, while his people had to fight against the tyranny of Reza Pahlevi.
Rescue would be impossible, but it is logical that, if this situation were
to occur, the United States would have considered that impossibility. eva-
luating it from the standpoint of clearing up the unfortunate circumstances
in which it was left in the Middle East by the fall of the Shah.

The Iranian military equipment would last for about a month in an overt war.
But, since all of its ordnance is of American make, it would lack spare
parts; and its 500 aircraft would gradually be destroyed, as would tanks
and its supply of missiles.

Meanwhile, the United States would have behind it all of its light as the
number one nation in the military realm.

what would the Soviet Union Do?

Under these circumstances, there would be only one unknown quantity: "hat
position would the Soviet Union assume with respect to this action being

26
carried out in its backyard; because it should not be forgotten that Iran

has a border with the USSR. which it shares along the entire width of the
Caspian Sea. -

On Friday. 23 November. in the city of Bonn, in the Federal Republic of Ger-
many, the eternal Soviet foreign minister, Andrey Cromyko. upon being asked
about the role that his country was considering in the Iranian crisis, would
only reply that the Soviet Union steadfastly backs the principles of inter-
national law and the preservation of diplomatic ill-unity.

In other words, that the USSR by no means supports the occupation of an en-
bassy and the resultant capture of diplomatic personnel. But this is no
guarantee of the kind of action that it would take in the event of war.
However, it must not be forgotten that the presence on its borders of a
country which has become converted into an Islamic theocracy is more dan-
gerous than anyone could imagine; particularly when Hua Guofeng. the top—
ranking Chinese leader, has just stated that the real threat is the wave
of Muslims that could set fire to the world.

As we can observe. a U.S.-Iranian conflict is mre than a landing of Marines,
like the last one conducted by Johnson in Santo Domingo, in 1965....

2909
680: 101. 10

27
PLAN TO END mm mm
Tehran mm in Persian 18 Dec 79 p 12

[Text] The Revolutionary Council passed a bill to
end unenployment in the country. The topics were
exclusively put at the disposal of mm.

Based on this bill, jobs will be created for all of
the highschool and vocational school graduates and
the unemployed in order that Iran would reach self-
sufficiency fro. the agricultural and industrial
point of view.

Hojatoleslam Ali Akbar Hashemi Rafsanjani. neaber of the Revolutionary Coun-
cil and in charge of the Ministry of Interior described the details of the
fill in an exclusive interview with WAN.

The head of the Ministry of Interior presented the bill to the Revolutionary
Council and had it approved said: According to one of the principles of the
Constitution approved by the Islamic Republic, the government is bound to
provide jobs for all the unemployed in the country by taking the existing
capabilities into consideration. Based on this, the Hinistry of Interior
received a proposal from Khorasan's governor general's office and it was
taken into consideration. Hashemi Rafsanjani added: Based on the bill, soae
task units will be established in various parts of the country. These units
called Cooperative Production Units will absorb all the unemployed who are
skilled by giving them adequate training.

Hasheni Rafsanjani added: The units will utilize the unemployed in the
development and revival of agriculture and animal husbandry to terminate
reliance on foreign countries.

He added: Sinultaneously with the approval of the bill, the Ministry of
Interior presented the necessary guidelines to the offices of the governors
general throughout the country for the precise implementation of the bill.
Very shortly the offices of the governors general will provide precise

28
reports on the unemployed to include the graduates of vocational schools,
high schools etc...to be submitted to the Central Staff of the Ministry of
Interior.

The Minister of Interior added: The cooperative companies will have admini-
strative, technical and management cadres. Each of these companies will be
officially registered on the part of the Ministry of Interior in the first
phase with 50 or more members. They will receive adequate training regard-
ing the regulations of the cooperative company system.

Hashemi Rafsanjani said: The total amount of oil income in one day which is
allocated to the provinces will be spent on the implementation of this pro-
jcct and to help set up the above mentioned units.

In describing the details of the bill, Hashemi Rafsanjani indicated that the
members of the cooperative production companies will be the share holders and
without any unfair job exploitation, they will continue with their work and

activity. Sufficient authorizations have been given to all governors general
offices in this respect.

The head of the Ministry of Interior added: The cooperative companies will
be a central unit which will provide the major needs of the country. Further-
more, in addition to financial aid, landandother capabilities will be put

at their disposal. It is quite natural that the activities of these con-
rnuies may be expanded and that the graduates of vocational schools, high

schools and all of the unemployed will be covered by this project without
any limits.

In the end Hashemi Rafsanjani said: Thus, the initiative of our youth will
be used and small units and industries will make us self-sufficient from

importing industrial parts from abroad in the future and unfair exploitation
will no longer be an issue.

9156
C50: 6906

29
IRAQI POSITION 0N IRANIAN SITUATION ANALYZED

London AL—HAUADITH in Arabic 23 Nov 79 p 27

lArticle: "Baghdad Speaks of 'Iranian bloc in the Arab Ranks' and Khomeyni
Speaks of Personal Vengence Against Saddam")

[Text] When it was announced in Damascus that a visit to Iran would be
made by Syrian President Hafiz al-Assad. the first Arab head of state to
receive an invitation to visit Iran since the Khomeyni revolution, an
important Iraqi official told a Lebanese politician who visited him re-
cently that the Arab position vis-a-vis Iran is extremely delicate. and
that it is not allowable for the Iranian card to be used in the sensitive
areas among the Arab states, "because that would erode Arab solidarity
and give Iran more power to involve itself in Arab conflicts." Similar
contents were made by other Iraqis while Syrian Deputy Prime Minister
‘Abd-al-Hal in Khaddam was making his comendable efforts with Tabatabai
during the sudden crisis that flared up in the wake of Ayatollah Ruhani's
statements concerning the Iranian claim to Bahrian.

The lraquis have become extremely sensitive about any exuberant Arab
position supporting Iran. For at a time when Iraqi-Iranian relations are
deteriorating day by day, and propaganda and other camaigns have reached
their peak--the recent effects of which have included the closing of the
Iraqi Consulate in Khorraashahr--the lraquis no longer view positions of
support for Iran as a positive shift toward the revolution of Khomeyni
which can be profitably used against the United States and Israel. Rather,
the Iraqis have begun to view these positions as a "trap" for Iraq and its
role in the Gulf!

while Libyan-Iranian relations have taken a new path since 'Abd-al-Salam
Jalud's visit to Tehran-which ended recently in the establishment of
diplomatic relations at the ambassadorial level, after the Iranians had
previously opposed such a move until the issue of the disappearance of
Imam Husa al-Sadr could be cleared up--Iraqi officials have begun to speak
of what they term an "Iranian bloc within the Arab ranks." although they
have no evidence which proves the existence of such a bloc. Their
suspicions in this regard grew to the point that they regarded Algeria's

30
celebration of the 25th anniversary of the Algerian revolution as evidence
of such a bloc merely because the celebrations brought some Iranian
officials (Bazargan and Yazdi) together with Bendjedid. Qadhdhafi, al-Assad,
and Yasir 'Arafat!

when Iraq! Foreign Minister Dr Sa'dun hammadi not recently with hls
colleague. Libyan Foreign Minister Dr 'Ali 'Abd-nl-Salam al-Turaykl, he
told aI-Turayki that the exuberance which Libya is displaying toward Iran
is very hasty. because it will be difficult to back off if it later proves
erroneous and detrimental to the national welfare. He said that in Iraq's
View. thinking must become clear on the other considerations in this matter
so that it will become possible to form collective Arab relationships with
Iran which guarantee the interests of everyone.

However, Iraq's image of Iran is different from either Libya's or Syria's
image of Iran. For while this image is a sensitive point between Damascus
and Baghdad, it is something else to Libya. It is very important to Colonel
Qadhdhafi to obtain a certification of innocence in the disappearance of
Husa al-Sadr, and he can obtain such certification only from Iran. The
Arabs who are rushing to support Iran and Khomeyni have different views
on Iraq's hostile position vis-a-vis Iran. Some of them say the Iraqis
are making a mistake by being alarmed at the good relations between some
of the Arab states and Iran, because these good relations will te.d to
help hold the crisis between Baghdad and Tehran within reasonable Limits.
It is lraq which is the loser in its war against Khomeyni because of the
Iranian leader's capacity for influence within Iraq. where he lived for a
long time and where there is a Shi'ite majority which the Iranians could
stir up in a way that would threaten the fate of all Iraq.

There are radicals who say that. by its hostility to the Iranian revolution,
Iraq is serving American policy, whether it means to or not. In their view.
the United States is more capable of profiting from Iraq's stand on Iran.
even though there are those in Baghdad who believe that Iraq is in a
position to profit from the American stand on Iran. In fact. some of these
radicals say that there are secret Iraqi-American negotiations to supply
Iraq with advanced American weapons in the wake of the freeze in Iraqi-
Soviet relations and Iraq‘s being compelled to diversify its sources of
armament. Those who hold to this belief base it on the Iraqi assertion

that Baghdad plans to double its naval force in the Gulf following the
recent naval maneuvers. However, the Iraqis feel that the Iranian maneuvers
were not innocuous. and that they were originally intended to achieve the
occupation of Bahrain before the Iranian position was met by a strong stand
on the part of Iraq, Saudia Arabia. and the rest of the Gulf states.

For their part, the Iraqis chide these Arabs for their silence on the
demands of the Arabs of Khuzistan (Arabistan) at s time when these demands
had become realizable. They say, for example, that during the reign of
the Shah, the Libyans issued a publication called ARABISTAN in which they
called for the liberation of this Arab region from Iranian rule and chided
Iraq for its silence on and disregard for this problem at that time. They

31
even accused Iraq of collusion with Tehran. But not that Iraq has moved
to support Arabistan, the Libyans remain silent about the issue, as if
Arabistan no longer needed to be liberated!

Despite the short period of harmony between Baghdad and Tehran, from the
signing of the Algeria pact between the Shah and Saddam Husayn in March
1975 until the victory of Khomeyni'a revolution some lo years afterward,

the two sides have had many inroads and have made many attewts to inter-
fere in each other's internal affairs. The Iranians supported and kindled
the Kurdish uprising in northern Iraq, and the Iraqis supported and kindled
the uprising of the Baluchis and supplied them with weapons. The Iranian
organization SAVAK had agents in Iraq, Iraqi intelligence had agents in
Iran. and both countries conducted secret operations within each other's
territory. The two best known operations which SAVAK conducted in Iraq
were the assassination of General Bakhtiyar, who took refuge in Baghdad
after he was expelled from Lebanon, and the poisoning of the son of Khomeyni

himself in al—Najaf. The Iraqis did not fail to respond to these actions
in Iran.

The Khomeyniites act on the basis that Khomeyni has a personal vengeance
against Saddam Husayn because Husayn expelled him from lraq in return for
the Shah's expulsion of Mulls Matafa al-Barazani from lran, in accordance
with a deal concluded between the two leaders in Algeria, and they consider
this to be payment of an account which was overdue. The Khomeyniites also
say that during the peak of the Iranian people's revolution against the
Shah last year, the former Empress Farah Diba was permitted to visit the
holy shrines on the occasion of 'Id al-Ghadir in order to defuse the revenge
of the people. In fact, they say, the empress was received personally by
Saddam iiusayn, who defiantly allowed himself to be photographed with her
and complied with her request that iOIomeyni be expelled from al-Najaf.

The Iraqi Ba'athists, however-who behave toward Khomeyni as if he will
eat them unless they eat him first--say that they received Khomeyni in
their country from the time they came to power in 1967 and never once
disturbed him, but helped him and made things easy for him. It was he
alone. say the Ba'athists, who profited from their hostility to the Shah
during the 7 years prior to the Algeria agreement, and even after the
Algeria agreement they did not disturb him or ask him to leave the country
until after he rejected their urgent request that he limit his political
activity and respect the principles of political asylum so that the Shah
would have no excuse to renounce his obligations. As a consequence, they
feel that it was Khomeyni who, without any justification, assailed them
with hostility, and some even accuse him of showing ingratitude to Iraq
and the Iraqis!

when Khomeyni returned Victoriously to Tehran, a member of the National
Command of the Ba'ath Party asked Saddam Husayn about Iraq's position on
the Khomeyni revolution. Husayn said to him in effect: If this revolution
is an internal Iranian affair, then we have no connection with the matter,
and indeed we support it and give it cur blessings. If it is a general

32
religious revival. we are politicians and do not preoccupy ourselves with
religious matters. Politicians belong in politics, and clergymn belong
in religion. But if they want to use religion as a cloak for Persian
editions in the Arab nation, then we will resist them unequivocally and
with determination.

Comenting on this. :1 (2qu official says that this carefully defined
position is the position of one who knows but does not admit something.
For the Iraqi regime knows. but does not admit, that the Khomeyni movement
is slated to bacon an internal Iraqi affair, if it has not already done
so.

8591
680: 6802

33
NEH OIL PROJECTS INAUGURATBD IN IASRAH, WASIT
Baghdad AL-THAHRAH in Arabic 18 Oct 79 p 6

[Article by Yahya Kazim al-Najjar: "Our National Oil Cadres Present Another
Example of Direct Implementstion"]

[Text] The numerous projects directly implemented here and there in our
country are a clear demonstration of the high competence and expertise
achieved by our national cadres.

Yesterday. for the comemoration of the sixth anniversary of the national-
ization of the last foreign control in the nationalized Baarah Oil Cowany,
we accowanied a member of the Revolutionary Council, the minister of oil,
on a field trip to the governorates of Basrah and Hasit for the inaugura-
tion of a number of oil projects were directly ilplemented by our national
cadres for the first time. He observed at close range the degree of ex-
pertise achieved by our cadres, as well as the advanced ability to handle
modern technology.

Three Products in One Pipeline

This is a pipeline project to transport petroleum products between al-
Nasiriyah and al-Kut, which was realized by the Public Institution for Oil
Projects for the first time at the cost of 6 million dinars. It is 187
kilometers long and transports three types of white petroleum products in
the same pipeline, i.e.. gasoline, white petroleum and gas oil. It makes
them available to meet the requirements of the Hasit and Dhi Qar governor-
ates, and possibly other nearby governorates, so they do not have to resort
to trucking supplies from Baghdad and Basrah, as was done in the past. The
capacity of the projects. which was completed in 1 1/2 years according to
Mr Talib Dakhil, the director of the project. is 800,000 tons of white
petroleum products a year. The project includes nine gigantic storage
tanks; a loading unit, equipped with a control cabin. for loading tank
trucks; a pumping unit; a fire unit; administrative and maintenance
buildings; as well as other installations related to the project both in
al-Kut and al-Nasiriyah.

31¢
in this project, in which the most sophisticated equipment was used. the
director or the project added. the storage process is automatic. The
snmv is true or the safety equipment. particularly the fire-extinguishing
«nummmt.ﬂdﬂnMiﬂmﬂyMMem:mdishehgamﬂlﬁrﬂwiimttmo

in this country. The fire-extinguishing equipment used in this project
operates in three ways, including automatic fire extinguishers for the
storage tanks and automatic foam fire extinguishers.

Both types of equipment are self-activated at the first indication of danger.
The third method involves the use of manual foam fire extinguishers. One
hundred technical specialists were trained at the project and subsequently
sent to the Biji refinery's storage stations in the north.

Celebration in al-Rumaylah

In the governorate of Basrah, the minister of oil inaugurated additional oil
projects in the midst of the enthusiastic cheers and songs by the workers
and staff of those projects. They wished a long life to the party, the
revolution and President Saddam Husayn and praised him for his direct
supervision and sustained support which brought this project into existence.

Big festivities took place in al-Rumaylah to celebrate this occasion. It
was :ttended hy Comrade Muhammad Hamzah. secretary of the southern organi-
zation of the Ba'th Arab Socialist Party and the undersecretary of the
Minn-try of Oil. Comrade Radi Hasan, secretary of the coumsnd of the party's
Basrah branch; the chairman of the Public Institution for Oil Projects;

and numerous people from the Ministry of Oil and national cadres who
participated in the implementation of these projects.

0n tnis occasion, Comrade Tayih 'Abd al-Karim, member of the Revolutionary
Council and minister of oil, gave a speech in which he pointed out that the
revolution exists. renews itself and flourishes with the help of its
children's hard work, their enthusiasm and their willingness to sacrifice,
to give and to build. The command of the revolution and the party, he said,
has entrusted the oil sector with great tasks, especially after nationali-
zation succeeded in reconstructing the oil sector and building a self-
sufficient national oil industry, as well as incorporating that sector

into the national economy and creating deep interaction between itandother
economic sectors thereby creating a balanced and strong economy. The
numerous oil projects which spread across the country after the outburst

of the 17 July revolution--such as new oil fields, refineries. gas plants,
pipelines, ports, tankers, and so forth--stand as testimony to the apprecia-
tion you deserve and the esteem in which we hold you. And, here you are
today. presenting your revolution with another series of projects.

Your revolution, the member of the Revolutionary Council and minister of
oil added. does not build only for Iraq. Its scope actually extends to
the whole Arab fatherlaad. All its strength and capabilities acutally have
been consecrated to the realization of the aspirations of the great Arab

nation for unity. freedom and socialism. This actually shows the magnitude
of your responsibility.

35
Since you have already performed the greatest achievements in the field of
the petroleum industry. the minister told our cadres. I am fully confident
that you can accomplish sure and even greater achievements, because you
have armed yourselves with the shining principles of your party. The
minister concluded his address by thanking the Public Institution for

Oil Products, the Rational Oil Company, the Public Institution for
Southern Oil, the Public Institution for Oil Refinery and Gas Industry.

as well as the Public Institution for the Distribution of Petroleum Pro-
ducts for their efforts and cooperation which brought these projects into
being. The minister also thanked the Public Company for Building contracts
for its valuable efforts and great awareness of the importance of realizing
the oil projects. He also thanked the friendly foreign companies and in-
stitutions which cooperated with us in implementing these projects,
prominently the Soviet company, "Technoexport."

New Projects and Their Importance

The minister of oil subsequently cut the inaugural ribbon symbolizing the
launching of the operation of the water-pumping project north and south
of al-Rumaylah. He then inaugurated the project instituted by the Public
Institution for the Distribution of Petroleum Products to build several
installations in al-Shu'aybah, the project for the development of the
al-Huftiyah depot in Basrah, the project to build pillars for the al-
Huftiyah pier, and the project to lay two fuel and crude oil pipelines

to the al-Harithah power plant.

Refering to the importance of these projects. Mr 'laam 'Abd al-Rahim,
chairman of the Public Institution for Oil Products, said that they are
characterized by their diversity, their respective operating systems,
and the purposes for which they were conceived. First among them is the
water-pumping project in the areas north and south of al-Rumaylah, which
involves three stages. The first stage was inaugurated today. The pre-
paration for this stage actually started gradually last April, and the
work to complete the next two stages will continue gradually. It is
expected that they may be conpleted toward the end of next year.

The implementation of this project, he added, was made possible with the
cooperation of a Soviet institution. The Public Company for Building
Contracts actually took care of the civil engineering work. which repre-
sents the bulk of the work actually completed.

The importance of this stage. the chairman of the institution said, concerns
the pumping of water in the field north of al-Rumaylah. This involves the
construction of a canal from the shores of Basrah; a refinery and a pumping
station with a capacity of 95 million cubic meters a year; a main pipeline
08-inches in diameter connected with the five pumping stations located in
various areas north of al-Rumaylah; in addition to the flow lines [al-
Jarayan] and the pipelines connecting the pumping stations and the insula-
tion stations, the high tension towers and lines, the secondary power stations.
the central control and long range control station. the wire and wireless

36
communications network, and all the basic requirements of the project.
The cost of the first stage reportedly amounts to about 40 million dinnrs
whlrh will increase to 65 million dinurs when the three phases are completed.

Other Projects

With reference to the project instituted by the Public Institution for
the Distribution of Petroleum Products to build installations in al-
shu'aybah,Hr'isam said its purpose is to establish a center for the
complete operation of the distribution units in the governorate. This
includes the construction of a plant to handle the maintenance and repair
of the transportation system, a plant for construction, electric power,
buildings. warehouses. car wash and lubrication garages. as well as other
facilities, all of which will cost about .15 million diners.

The project to improve the al-Huftiyah depot in Basrah was also implemented,
the chairman of the institution added. This project includes the construc—
tion of service buildings and a workshop for the maintenance of equipment
and machinery. This is in addition to the establishment of a network of
paved roads and areas squares at a cost of half a million dinars. The
project to reinforce the platform of al—Hurityah was also implemented.

This Includes the construction of concrete pillars for docking oil tankers
with a capacity ranging from 8,000 to 25,000 tons. The total cost involved
amounted to about a quarter of a million dinars.

All these projects, Mr 'lsam continued, were completed under the supervision
and with the cooperation of the agencies of the Public Institution for Oil
Projects.

With reference to the project concerning the fuel and crude oil pipelines,
the chairman of the insitution said, its purpose is to transport fuel oil
and crude oil to the electric power station of al-Harithah, which consists
of four units whose total coutput is estimated at 840 megawatts. Thus, it
will become the largest electric power station in the country. The purpose
of this project is to provide this station with fuel oil and crude oil in
two ways. First. by means of a fuel oil network consisting of a major
pipeline between the refinery in Basrah and the station in al-Harithah,
stretching above ground over concrete supports. The entire pipeline was
equipped with an electric heating system. The operation of this pipeline
includes a number of electric power stations and high tension lines. This
30 kilometer pipeline is considered to be the longest of its kind in the
world.

The second way in which the station is supplied with fuel oil and crude oil
involves the use of a crude oil pipeline consisting of a major pipeline
branching off the Bazarkan-Faw crude oil pipeline to the electric power
station of al-Harithah. It includes measuring, pressure-checking, protective
and other instruments and devices.

The institution, the chairman of the Public institution for 011 Projects
continued, directly undertaken the designing and implementation of this
project by its national cadres and in accordance with the time table set
for its implementation. The total costs amounted to 2.75 million dinars.
The institution consequently saved about 2 million dinars, representing
the difference in cost if the project had been carried out by a foreign
company.

The chairman of the institution pointed out that a third pipeline is under
construction to carry gas to the electric power plant in al-Harithah. This
pipeline will be 68 kilometers long and will cost 3.9 million dinars. It
is expected to be completed early next year. 6 months ahead of schedule.

Cadres and Future

The number of national cadres working for the Public Institution for 011
Projects has grown from 600 in 1977 to more than 2.000 at present. Their
number will continue to increase and reach 3,000 next year, in order to
cope with the current and inportant evolution of the institution's work

in direct implementation of the various oil projects. As Mr 'Isam 'Abd
ul-Rahim, chairman of the institution, said, in the next few years the
institution must implement, under the approved plan, huge and gigantic
projects which are many times larger in both size and cost than those
which have already been mentioned and have just been inaugurated. The
agencies of the ministry are implementing those projects thoroughly and
energetically through advanced work methods, which have never been used

in the other public sectors. The final results of some of those projects
will become evident during the next few weeks. especially those related to
the implementation and in particular with reference of gas projects in the
north and the south. as well as the refinery project in the north and
various other projects.

2693
650: 0802

38
BRIEFS

INDUSTRIAL INVESTMENTS—The overall costs of Iraqi industrial investments
over the past 6 years have increased above In 6 billion ($13.2 billion) ac-
cording to official statistics published by the Iraqi News Agency recently.
The agency said the Iraqi industrial projects include electrification, oil
production and refining, petrochemicals. fertilisers and iron and steel pro-
jects. The cost of 011 projects and other relsted projects have reached

II) 1.1 billion ($3.630 billion) while electrificatioa projects costs amounted
to ID 950 million ($3.135 billion) and petrochemical projects costs amounted
to ID 898 million ($2.930 billion). [Text] [Beirut THE ARAB HORLD WEEKLY

in English 31 Nov 79 p 12]

IDCAS T0 BACIIDAD--The fifth Arab conference for industrial development held
between the 15th and 18th of this month and attended by Industry Ministers
of Arab countries has chosen Baghdad for the headquarters of the Industrial
Development Center for Arab Countries (IDCAS). The IDCAS. originally head-
quartered in Cairo was moved temporarily to Tunis after the conclusion of the
Egyptian-Israeli peace treaty last March. [Beirut THE ARAB "031.0 "3va

in English 31 Nov 79 p 13]

PETROCHDiICAL COMPLEX CWLETION--Iraq's petrochemical complex at Basrah,
being built by the State Establishment for Industrial Project Planning and
Implementation in cooperation with foreign coapanies is now 84 per cent com—
plete. According to the project manager experimental Operation of all units
at the complex is scheduled for early next year. The manager Hr. Uthman said
comercial operations at the plant and marketing of the products will not
start before 1981. Mr. Uthman pointed out that the planned capacity of the
plant is 150,000 tonnes and its overall cost is ID 350 million. The complex
will utilise some 1 million tonnes of hitherto flared gas. The project
manager added that the technical skilled cadres for the project have already
been trained and that some of them have already been to the Soviet Union
and back while some 120 engineers are being trained abroad at present. The
project will provide employment for 1,000 Iraqis (engineers and labourers).
The complex includes 12 units some of which are already ready while the rate
of completion for others ranges between 77 and 99 per cent. [Text] Beiruit
THE ARAB WORLD WEEKLY in English 31 Nov 79 p 13]

39
NAVAL IMPROVEPENTS SOUGlT-~Negotiations are underway between the Italian
FINCANTIERI shipyards and the Iraqi government with the aim of purchasing
some modern warships. Iraq would also like to set up, with Italian help,
its own naval [shipbuilding‘l] industry, since the Iraqi government con-
siders the strengthening of its navy a priority requirement. [Text]
[Paris DEFENSE IMMRHEES in French Dec 79 p 7]

C80: 6800

60
POLL INDICATES BECIN'S POPULARITY AT UNPRECEDBNTED LOH
TA2b1046 Tel Aviv HA'ARETZ in Hebrew 24 Dec 79 p 1 TA

[Text] Prime Minister Begin's popularity continued to decline in December

and has reached an unprecedented low. Only 28.7 percent are now satisfied
with him as prime minister. This emerges from the nation-wide public opinion
poll conducted by the Pori Institute at the request of HA'ARETZ.

In October, the percentage of people content with Begin as prime minister
stood at 30.8 percent, and now it has declined by 2.1 percent to 28.7 per-
cent.

In addition, 60.1 percent are not satisfied with him as prime minister,
26.8 percent are "more or less" content and 4.6 percent have no view on
the matter.

Academics. people in managerial positions with above-average incomes, peo—
ple of European and American origin and people who lived in Israel even
before the establishment of the state are outstanding among the dissatisfied
stratum.

Defense Minister Heisman continues to be very popular: 61.7 percent are
content with him as defense minister in contrast with 12.3 percent who are
discontent with him and 20.1 percent who are "more or less" content. Of
all those polled, 5.9 percent have no opinion on this matter.

Youths and natives, high and elementary school graduates. manual laborers
and people of Asian and African origin feature prominently among those
pleased with Weizmsn.

The poll comprised a representative sample of 1,200 men and women above 18
years of age who were interviewed in their houses throughout the territory.

C80: 6805

41
[Text] whatever observations can be and. about the occupation of the Uni-
ted States and British eabassies in Iran. the entire operation indicates
an extensive oaspaign of use incite-ant of individual Iranians against
American iaperialisa.

The Iranian people will never forget that it was the mited States which
ruled Iran for scores of years throw: the dissolute Shah. The Iranians
tasted the fruits of this Aaerican dosimtionu aurder. torture, iaprison-
sent in Savak detention csaps. and the plunder-1m of Iran's resmn-ces.
Therefore. it is only natural that the pitch of the hostility towards il-
perialisa should rise and tint iaperialisl should be canhatted on all lev-

els.

As opposed to this course uhich the Iranian revolution is following, we

see the Arab regimes' slackness. concealed beneath the banners of the Bagh-
dad summit. The regular yearly pilgrinages to the Hhite House continue.

as do the petroleus supplies. The petroleua states are operating out of

a strong desire to support the exhausted Aasrican econoau and to revive
the ailing dollar. The Sanii leaders do not forget to reaind the world
fros tine to ties that they will not use oil as a weapon for the sake of
Palestinian rights. The Gulf leaders clearly affira that their enemies
are not to be found in the United States or in Israel; in fact. they cre-
ate apparitions of eneaies in Moscow. Teheran. Aden and the no as well.

The definite conclusion we arrive at is that those regimes which have some-
thing to fear froa the mess because theyuthe regiaesuare plundering
and sonopolizim the resources for their own benefit want to build allian-
ces with the forces opposed to these asses. Therefore. we must not ex-
pect such regimes to tales any decisive stand sinilar to the one declared
yesterday by the Iranian oil sinister. about the revolution's readiness

to cut off oil to the United States. But we at least expect these states
which nise anti-inperialist slogans to sever their overt and secret lines

with Hashington.
42
There are two courses and two ways to fight taperinllsl. No one would ever
find fault with our rulers, if only they would learn the way to fight the
United Stutoa, ovnn if they learn it fro- Iron.

355‘)
C30: #802

63
ARABS MUST TAKE MR3 THAT OIL HEAPOﬁ 15 W TURNED AGAINST THEM

Jermalen AL-QUDS in Arabic lb Nov 79 p l
[Editorials "The Neutralization of the Oil Heapon?"]

[Text] President Carter's decision to stop iaporting Iranian oil became
of the detention of the hostages in the Anerican Babassy in Teheran night

becoae a turning point in the iaportance of the oil weapon, although it is
too early now to Jugs the results of this decision.

The aost likely possibility. prior to the announce-em of the decision. was
that Iran would stop the oil. and not the other way armznd. Instead of
Teheran's pressuring lashington by stopping the flow of oil. it appears as
if Nashington has switched the pressure to Iran by stopping its imports.

The cessation of oil iaports does not seen that Anerica can dispense with
Iranian oil. Indeed, it is capable of ensuring the lost quantities fro-
other sources. These sources will either increase their iaports from other
countries than Iran. or will bug Iranian oil through a second party state.
In both cases, Aserica is ready to overcoae the shortage and turn the oil
weapon towards the throats of its owners. or it will try to do so.

It is well-known that lost of the consuming countries have taken precautions
after the world oil eabargo during the October 1973 war. and have prepared
eaergency stockpiles to last the. at least 90 days in case of any oil en-
bargo or am sudden crises as happened with Iran. Thus they have become
wore capable of maneuverirg and dealing with the oil countries individmlly.
The differences along the oil states, and the conflict in their interests,
sake it easy to exploit then. The increase in Saudi oil production is a

close. live exasple of what we are saying.

Does this experience mean an atteapt to neutralise the oil weapon? Is
Anerica. or other consuaing nations, working either individually or collec-
tively to invalidate the effectiveness of the oil threat and its use as a
weapon to achieve the jut demnds of the exporting states?

lob
The only thing which will amntee the preeervetion of oil'e influence is
a unified attend by the exporting autos. without thet, the consulting ne-
tione will be able to pit one state epinet another, eccording to tine and

interests. In the current America: stand there is a nrning to anyone
who wants to be turned.

8559
0508 138(2

45
ARABS mm TAKE HARD STAND manor mono"
Jerusalem AL-SHA'B in Arabic 15‘ “av 79 P l
[Editoriall "Is This the Nucleus of a New sumr]

[Text] Two years ago today. the president of the greatest Arab state ar-
rived at Lad Airport to begin the process of reconciliation and autual al-
liance with Israel. unier Aserican sponsorship. in the lost significant
strategic turnaround the region has seen in 30 years.

Two year-enduring which the Cap David agree-ants and the unilateral treaty
were signed and the autonow talks began.

Two years-during which differences and separation in the Arab world inten-
sified, and the loyalty to Aaerica of soae Arabs. who declared that their
oil had no relation to the Arab came. increased.

Nowadays we hear new voices and extraordinary signals coaing froa Syria.
He hear the extensive propaganda caapaign against the forces of Arab reac-
tion. and we hear of plans to strike at their positions inside the Syrian
hoaeland. Yesterday we heard a etateaent by a Palestinian official to the
effect that Syria will ask the Arab suaait to talne a decisive stand, with-
out which the Arab regiaes will begin fighting one another.

A hard stand auet be translated into practical reality. A hard stand has
been delayed for 2 years. but it has finally cone. Hill it be the begin-
ning along the road towards the creation of a hard. national Arab stand
which will go beyond the ainiaua requireaent?

8559
080: 08¢!

46
DEFENSE AGENCY PLAN FOR SETTLBJBITS VIEWED
Tel Aviv HA'ARBTZ in Hebrew 19 Oct 79 pp 13,20

[Article by Zeev Shiff: "The Defense Ministry's Plan for Settlement
(A): Reservations on Paper")

[Text] The Ministry of Defense has been prevented from bringing up its
plan which opposes the system of settlement of Gush Bmunim for considera-
tion and government approval. Because of the settlers' choice of site,
the army has been pulled into the center of an area populated by Arabs.

It is hard to believe, but it is a fact, that Menachem Begin's government

has not. to date, conducted an exhaustive and basic inquiry into the

subject of Jewish settlements and has never tackled it witha master plan

or a broad perspective. It was kept from developing such a program before
the Camp David agreements and has refrained from dealing with the subject
since the peace agreement with Egypt. 'l‘ill now there have been only sporadic
considerations and permits for one activity or another (the establishment

of a settlement, an expropriation, bringing a unit to an army camp. etc.),
but there has been no clarification with respect to national goals and
through a concern with defensive, demographic and political factors.

There are exaggerated declarations about many Blon—Horehs; about the Jewish
right to settle anywhere in Judaea, Samaria or the Gaza Strip; and the right
of Jews to acquire land anywhere in occupied territories. From an opera-
tional standpoint, these declarations are only patchwork and improvisation.

The Israeli Government has not accepted, nor has it determined. an inclusive
settlement plan. It has, therefore, been following the plan of Bush-Emunim,
or Minister Sharon. Actually, in the government's alinement, as well, no
single plan has been adopted by the government. and the conittee dealing
with settlement matters (at first headed by Allen and later by Calili) has
been concerned with approving proposals for this plan. Rabin's government
acted without constraint on the subject of advancement. Due to Sharon's
intervention, Rabin and Peres capitulated to Gush-Emunim, and the Defense
Ministry began to cooperate behind the scenes with the settlers who violated
the government's decisions.

(07
By A linnwlng Action

It is amazing that even Begin's government, which openly subscribes to the
settlement of Judaea and Samaria, has also failed to establish a government
program. Apparently this is because it fears an endless argument in the
government and the coalition.

There are a number of unofficial programs. Outside of the government. in
the Jewish Agency, there is the maxi-alist and annexist program of Drobles
as opposed to the program of Ra'anan Weiss. within the government. two
other program are current: One is that of Agriculture Minister Ariel
Sharon, which is brought up in a fragmentary way from time to time and
which is supported by the religious faction. Uhat appears between the
lines is quite clear. The idea is to prepare a foundation for the maximum
number of Jewish settlements in Judaea and Samaria and the Gaza Strip; to
establish political realities in centers of Arab population. to split up
these centers and. finally, to bring about, in actuality, their annexation.

As with other issues in the past, Sharon operates in this matter as well

by means of eating away, by establishing small facts in the territories
which, when combined, form a unified line. Sharon does not bother himself
much with questions about Israel's image or the fear that we will be blamed
for hurting the peace process. His plan suffers from a lack of money and,
apparently, of manpower; although he argues that there are many candidates
for settlement. These two sources are low in Israel (apparently the Jewish
nation is not so enthusiastic about settling in the occupied territories
or else there would be more than 7,500 Jews in the territories at this
time). Sharon. therefore, is not interested in the fact that the few
sources turn to Galilee. For this reason, he has even set aside the sug-
gestions of Major-General Ben-Gal with respect to the Galilee.

The second program is that put forth by the Defense Ministry. Something
strange happened to this program. it was presented formally to the govern-
ment about 1 1/2 years ago. Despite this, a detailed discussion was not
organized and it was not approved. It remained a program of the Defense
Ministry and not of the Israeli Government. It is surprising that Minister
Weizmann does not push for a debate or make an effort to get his ministry's
plan approved. lie is probably afraid that it will not win a majority in
the government. To those close to him he says that he is responsible for
defense and not for settlement and does not want to be a leader in this
matter. "hen the government decides to consider this subject of settlement
generally, be will be ready to bring up his ministry's plan as well; but
he does not wish to initiate the deliberation.

Negative Aspec ts

This position is not accepted by all the leaders of the Defense Ministry

and the army. Others argue that one cannot separate settlement from defense.
Broad defense is based on settlement, and if settlements are established

in the territories without the army's agreement, they will be a burden

for the army and for defense. At any rate, the Defense Ministry's

£8
settlement plan has been revised (in April of this year an addition in-

volving south Mt. Hebron was implemented); but even in its revised form,
it has not been brought up for government consideration.

The Defense Ministry's settlement plan (or as it was called at tr time

of its preparation: "The Swelling Jewish Settlement in Judeea .nd Samaria")
opposes many activities which have been resumed and are being carried out

in the territories being settled as evidenced by Weizmann‘s opposition to
the establishment of Elon-Horeh on the borders of Nabulus and his suggestion
to lot a military installation suffice or his opposition to the expropriation
or private lands in order to expand settlements. It is interesting that
program originated from opposition to the method used by the Gush-Emunim

in its settlement activity of Gosh-Emunim. As early as the beginning of
1978, the Defense Ministry pointed out negative aspects in the development
projects and the settlement in the occupied territories.

The sites for settlement were chosen, by and large, by the settlers them-
selves. This vas noted in the introduction to the Defense Ministry's plan.
The result was that the government has been dragged along behind the settlers.
As a way of compromising. the principle was established that the settlements
would be attached to army camps. This resulted in an unhealthy mix of
settlers who lived in the camps or on their borders and the army. After

a time, the army tried to shake free of this connection.

The Defense Ministry's plan points out that one of the main goals of the
settlers in choosing sites for their settlements is to purposely pick an
area populated by Arabs. This stems from "the desire to establish a Jewish
presence in a region populated by Arabs and thus influence the future of
the region." In other words. this is a blatantly political goal to prevent
the partition of the territory. As a result, the army dragged after the
settlers into the center of an Arab-populated region.

Unnecessary Costs

Another of the settlers' considerations is set against a religious or
nationalist background. A place is chosen because the site has significance

in the history of the people of Israel; for example, the settlement established
under the guise of archaeological excavations at Shiloh or the camp of

Samaria. Earlier, during the alinement government, this was the reasoning

for the establishment of Kiryat Arba'.

According to the Defense Ministry's plan. this system causes great and
needless problems and costs. Because they choose their sites on such
principles, the settlers are placed in temporary camps. After a short
time. the settlers exert pressures to expand, as happened recently with the

six settlements whose situation was brought up for deliberation by the
government.

The costs are generally multifold. Since the extent of the population in
each settlement is restricted to several dozen families. it works out that

#9
the basic start-up costs are extremely high. The smaller the settlement,
thelnwre is invested for each family. Since some of the sites were selected
In distant areas without taking into account economic and defense factors.
lhu iHVvstnrnt In bnslr costs--uccess roads. telephones. water. etc.--nre
wwmﬂunylﬂmh

The defense Ministry's plan points out that all the financing for these
settlements comes from the budgets of the government and the Jewish Agency.
and that this system of dealing with settlements automatically puts a
damper on private investment by the settlers themselves or from other
private sources. Small and poor settlements are not likely to draw men

of wealth, even if they agree with the group's political position with
regard to the territories. As early as the beginning of 1978, the plan
pointed out that this system eventually results in the expropriation of
territory from the Arabs, "because at most of the sites from the outset
there is a restriction on the land which commits them in their planning

to be permanent settlements. The answer to this restriction is, generally,
the expropriation of territory."

9348
C50: 6805

50
MAJOR DEVELOPMENT ACTIVITY UNDERHAY IN GALILBB
Tel Aviv HA'ARETZ in Hebrew 19 Oct 79 p 20

[Article by Judah Ariel: "Development of the Galilee: To Turn Mountains
Into Plains"]

[Text] Many residents from central Israel want to love north in order to
find a better standard of living. In Galilee, development projects are
underway and roads and highways are being paved.

The [ace of Galilee is changing. It has been a long time since extensive
work has been undertaken for the purposes of settlement in northern Israel.
Residents of central Israel want to move north to find a better standard
of living. Dozens of posts are being established. Access routes which
are cut out of the mountains can be seen from afar. Some have already
been settled. and others will be settled by this coming Passover. Pour
settlements are awaiting settlers. In the settlements, tile units have
been added. Major roads with new boundries are spreading northward, and
these are likely to transform the traffic pattern. It appears that since
the wave of settlement in Galilee that occured ilmediately after its
capture, at the time of the establishment of the state, there has not been
such widespread activity in the north.

Tb Complete Shlomi

The coordinator of government projects in Galilee, Haim Haham, in coopera-
tion with Zohar Cindel, head of the unit directing development towns, a

few weeks ago began to work on settlement in Galilee. The first steps were
very hesitant ones. It was announced that there would be an operation to
"migrate to Ha'alot." Hundreds of families expressed interest in leaving
central Israel to go to Ha'alot, to the low mountain, to a good dry climate.
For some, this was an opportunity to find housing. Till this week, 130
families were in this category. About 300 fanilies'are on the waiting
list. A hundred families are building villas and 160 others have submitted
applications for building lots. In other words, this consitutes a genuine
advancement and expansion of Ha'alrt.

Sl
The head oi the council of Ha'alot Tarshikhs, Shlomo Bukhbot, argues that
the advancement could have been faster. In the area of the villas, the
foundation is ready. There is a problem because of lack of coordination
between the housing department and the administration of Israeli real
estate before the announcement about the plots was made. The head of the
cauncil asked the departments of housing and absorption to free up 150
housing units in Hs'alot set aside for new immigrants during the waiting
period--in other words, a transition spot. According to Mr Bukhbot, it is

better to fill these apartments with permanent residents and to advance
the town.

Ha’nlot's story was a successful one. At present. those involved are
carrying out the project of continuing to settle Galilee with the saying:

"To complete Shlomi." At a registration held in Tel Aviv, about 1,500

people showed up. It was truly astonishing. No one had expected this,

and the staff was not able to deal with such large numbers. Of those

who applied, 380 paid immediately to go to visit Shlomi. This week, hundreds
of those requesting residence in Shlomi visited in seven buses, and many

came in their own vehicles. They talked with residents, visited work

places that could possibly provide them employment. looked at apartments

and signed all the documents. in the coming days, the first people will

arrive to complete Shlomi, a town that for years had a population of only
2,200.

"err is the same story as in Ma'alot. The local council is demanding the
inmwdiate release of the 100 dwellings which are set aside as an absorption
center in case of need and that they be put at the disposal of applicants.
They are also demanding that the 100 dwellings which have not been completed

because of the contractor's bankruptcy be completed and given to the new
residents.

The organizers of this plan to populate Galilee are certain that the settle-ant
wave is just beginning. Soon such projects will be organized for Upper
Nazareth, Afula, Kiryat Shmoneh and other towns. It appears to them that

nanv residents of central Israel, and especially young couples. realize

that only in an area far from the center where they can find superior
conditions will they be able to advance and find their own housing and a

better standard of living.

Conpletion of the Posts

The district committee for design and construction in the northern district
recently approved the construction of 30 new posts. The official appointed
over the northern district, Hr Israel Konig, said that by this coming
Passover one can expect that all the posts will be settled. Roads have
been cut through to all of them and paved with material that will make

them passable even in rainy weather. The levelling of the sites was
recently completed.

52
A gap exists between the design of the posts and their settlement. It is
being said that all of them will be settled by the New Year or. at the
latest. by the beginning of the rains. In fact, the posts settled now by
units of Nahal in Marveh Eshkhar and Beit Rinon 3. Nahal has already been
statying in the settlement of Tzalmon for over a year in the same bloc as
Lotem and Mordan, two new kibbutzim of the Kibbutz Heuhad which sprang up
more than a year ago in central Galilee. The post which will be occupied
in the near future is in Neve-Heled in area nine.

Recently, the speedy establishment of a dozen additional posts was begun
by utilizing prefabricated housing units. Each 70 meter unit has three
bedrooms. a living room, dining nook, kitchen and bathroom. In addition.
they are building a social center in every post where there will be an
infirmary, a secretariat, a kindergarten, etc. The existing regional and
local councils accepted some transporting of students and some studies in
the existing schools as a solution to the education problem.

Tefen and Shegnev. two of the roughest regions in Galilee which had no
settlements. are now gaining energy and the looks of the area are changing
rapidly. In Tefen, Tuval, a kibbutz of the Ikhud, has been completed and
will be settled by an army unit formed at Beit Haemek. Not far away. they
are now completing construction of the houses of Kibbutz Kishor, which will
be settled by a unit which has been staying at a nearby Rahal camp for
several years. In that very same region, two posts are being built now—-
Tefen 3 and Tefen a. They have also started to build Hoshov Lapidot for
the children of the moshavs.

Manor and Shokhnia are the new moshavs being completed in the Shegev region.
They will be settled by units who want to work the land. The people of
Hanoi, immigrants from South Africa who have been waiting for many months
in an absorbtion center in Karmiel, claim that they could have been in
their homes already if the timetable for the establishment of the settle-
menr had been followed. This, in turn, would have allowed many additional
families who are waiting outside Israel to migrate and settle on their
cooperative settlement. The people belonging to the Shekhnia unit are
staying at a temporary camp in Shegev together with the Koranit unit whose
settlement will also be built on Mt. Shekhnia. The road has only been

cut to this point.

Development and Hatred

Mt. Shekhnia is named after the service of priests, Shekhnia, who were in
this region. It is a mountain ridge which stretches from Kabul in the West
to Yodfat in the East. Nearby is the village of Kokhav el Heyg'a which.
thanks to the development of the settlements, got a grade A road and a
direct road to their village. Despite this. One of the residents refused
to turn over a parcel of land (which was not being cultivated) to allow
[or the paving of a direct road to the new settlements. The man argued:
"Even if it were all rock and they wanted to give me all cultivable land,

I would not exchange it. I will not be a traitor to my brothers."

53
When I wanted to photograph the completion of the construction in khishor.
the workers shouted: "Get away, don't photograph here," and they picked
up tiles to throw at me while they shouted their threats. "He will break
your camera." All this happened without any prior conversation.

New Arteries in Galilee

The watchman for the Jewish National Fund's forests. who is also responsible
at present for land development equipment. told me: "I am in agreement
with the setting up of posts. I have been working for the Fund for years
and have no conmlaints. But the people in my town who are working on
setting up these posts and are earning a lot are sure of one thing‘. They
are building these posts with Jewish money for Jews; but, in a short while,
Arabs will be settling in them." When I asked if he believes this. he

answered: "You asked me what people think in the villages about the posts
and Ianswered you. What mre do you want?"

Within the framework of the establishment of these posts and settlements,
the aajority of which will have to support themselves by means of industry
and trade. centers are needed. The first has been established in Ramat
Tefen. an industrial region in which more than a 100 million pounds were
invested. At present. work has begun to prepare an area for an industrial
region for Shegev. There are in addition to the loeai industrial areas
such as Ha'alot, Karmiel, Tzfat and Kiryat Shmoneh. Industrial areas have
also been established with an eye to providing emloyment for the residents
of Golani and Makhanaia. All of these will provide a center for industry
and ewloyment for the new residents of Galilee.

when such centers are established. they will need transportation arteries.
Galileo's roads are known to be rough, tortuous and steep. This makes
transport more expensive. The Public Works Department is now breaking
through and advancing a new network of roads, son of which existed as
roads or caravan routes in the distant past and were Eorgotten—-a new road
from Haifa to Tiberias which will not have to go over the dangerous rises
and dcscents and a new road that will by-pass Hr. Tzfat and will save a lot

of wear and tear on vehicles and will make rapid transport to Upper Galilee
possible.

The work that goes into building these roads is hard to describe to someone
who has not seen it. Hundreds of thousands of mounds of earth and rocks
are brought to turn the mountains into plains. They want to establish new.
wide transportation arteries which will be able to handle motor transport
dozens of years from now as well. These roads will open new landscapes for
those tied to the roads. It has already been promised that along these
roads there will be Jewish settlement. new posts and not desolate and empty
areas. It is clear to the planners that these roads will not be enough.
Additional roads will be needed for Shegev. Ksrmiel and Tefen.

9548
C80: £805

51.
m we: s'runzms same 8mm na uurvansm mnIssrou m
Raaallah AHISAD in Arabic No 17, Oct 79 p 5
[Editorials "we in Opposed to the Standardization of the Questions"]

[Text1 Recently soae infatuation nedia reportedﬁhe deeande of soae East
Bank officials that the fifth grade examination Ltawjihiyah] questions on
both banks be standardized. and that the ﬂeet Bank exsainations be come-
ted in 'Amn. There has been such talk about this utter, and we have
tried to exaeine the facts objectively am! iapartially. intending only to
reveal the truth. whatever it is. to the citizens.

During our research. we case upon a letter sent by a Host Bank education
official to the education officer in the Host Bank cm. The letter is
numbered 385/6 and is dated 8 Aug 1979. A copy of the letter was sent to
the education directors. The signer of the letter refers to discmsions
conducted with Jordanian officials in 'Ann, during which they expressed
their displeasure that the ﬂeet Bank students excelled over- East Bank stu-
dents. which has an effect on university enrollaent and the Jordanian stu-
dent lission policy. The letter indicates that the Jordanian officials
raised the East Bank sttﬁeots' averages.

The sender of the letter excuses the Jordanian officials for this conduct.
and uses the words. The Jordanian officials were forced against their will
to raise the marks of East Bank students!" Yesnto put it silply. in or-
der for the East Bank students to excell over the ﬂeet Bank stulents, and
so that the stuients fro- the occupisd areas would not get university
places or govern-ant lissions. the averages and nrks were raised "with
Iinisterial pemissionl"

The letter indicates that the above-sentimed Jordanian officials request-
ed that the questione be statuardised and that they be corrected in 'Amn,
threatening to not recognise fifth-grade emination results next year. or
to lower the averages of ﬂeet Bank stuients, in case the Jordanian instruc-
tions are not agreed to!

SS
we contacted a number of education officials, who corroborated the informa-
tion contained in the letter. and who affiraed that the letter did not re-
fer to any other aspects which the an "refrained" from enumerating.

'de learned froa then that the Jordanian government will not recognize the
third group of the teachers' qualification class. while it did recognise
the first and second group. carefully streesmg that "we will not enroll
then and we will not surpass then."

The Jordanian officials stressed tint when the nuaber of stuients to be
accepted at Jordanian universities is calculated. 2,000 seats mt be set
aside for East Bank stuients, as opposed to Host Bank students. who enroll
in their local universities. Another group of seats is reserved for sass
governorates tor-ed "miscellaneous," such as al-Karak and Ha'an. and a nun-

ber of seats are reserved for superintendants. teachers. psrsoulities. and
so forth.

Thus. with the raising of the grades of East Bank students. only a limited.
almost insignificant. number of seats are left for the Nest Bank.

we have heard about discussions and debates in 'Anan which were devoid of
any responsibility, as if the concept of "supporting the resistance" ap-
plies only to the East Bank residents. and as if there is no call to sup-

port the Heat Bank and Gaza residents' resistance, for they are resistim
without any help!

He are ispartially passim on the facts of what we have read and heard,
without consent. Us say to ourselves that perhaps this conduct is unusml
and does not express any official policy. we hope so free the depths of
our hearts. his hope that these stories will be refuted in whole and in
part. not in a rhetorical, stylistic statesent but by practical translati-
on. boiling down to the abolition of the idea of standardizing the ques-
tions and insisting on correcting the bank's papers as was done in the
past; the allocation of seats for students fro. the Vest Bank and the Gaza
Strip on the same basis as if they were from the occupied areas; the accos-
odstion of sufficient nusbers of Best Bank stuients in governssnt missions;
recognition of and support for the teachers' qualification courses: the
dispatching of aissions conposed of west Bank teachers. for those who want
to continue their studies, just as for the East Bank teachers; and noral
and material support for our universities to enable them to accosodats our
students.

we all hope that we won't have to look into this latter again.

5559
250. have

56
SOLUTION TO TEACHERS' SALARY PROBLEMS PROPOSED
Tel Aviv HAZOFEH in Hebrew 22 Oct 79 p 3
[Article by Yitzhak Shnserson: "The Crisis in Education and Its Heaning"]

[Text] The current crisis facing the teaching community appears strange

and different in a number of respects. First of all, it is difficult to
understand how it can happen that a state committee appointed by the Israeli
Government and headed by a superior court judge is not able to get simple
data from the Treasury Department about the salaries of engineers.

Hatters reached such a state that the chairman of the committee handed in
his resignation since, as is known, teachers are tied to the salaries of
engineers. if details about their salaries are not known then it is
impossible to determine the teachers' salaries.

This is truly a disgrace and not simply due to oversight or negligence. It
is unlikely in a nation of law and order that a junior or senior civil
servant would refuse to pass on information to a public state committee
which had been given its authority according to all the rules and pro-
cedures of the state, democratically and in a parliamentary fashion. Here
we have to ask the simple question: "ho is actually running this country--
the parliament and the government or a bunch of officials who arbitrarily
make their own rules and determine the fate of the people and the country,
the economy and education? And no one opens his mouth and there is no
justice and no judge.

To this point, we have dealt with the technical failure, although. as has

been said, there are fundamental flaws which the ordinary mind has difficulty
understanding. There is still room, however, to clarify certain things so
that it will be possible to find a solution to the crisis that comes every
year to every family in Israel which has a member in the field of education.
This applies to hundreds of thousands of Israeli youth, the future generation.
who are being wasted and deprived without the chance to fight and defend
itself and its future. lts fate is being determined and played out, at

times, by those whose purpose is to watch out for them and assure them a
normal and proper education.

57
The re Is No Logic to the Linkage With Engineers

If the truth he told, the main source of the trouble lies in the issue

of linkage. It is not logical to link a teacher to an engineer or a nurse
to a teacher or a welfare worker to a nurse. etc.. because every profession
demands particular expertise and specific skills. What justlfication is
there for linking a kindergarten teacher with some academic education. whose
esteemed preoccupation is in getting 3-year old children to eat their
bananas and to sing "cookie cookie," to an engineer working with an atomic
reactor who has devoted many years to the acquisition of advanced knowledge
and who bears an incomparably heavy responsibility? Moreover, even within
the educational field itself. there are several incouprehensible imbalances
which deserve further examination. It is hard to understand how a first-
grade teacher who does marvelous and invaluable work, but all the same hangs
a sign on the blackboard which says: "Good morning. class A" and changes it
the next day to another sign that says: "Dan is clean and Dan is healthy,"
can be compared to a 12th grade teacher who has to analyze a literary work

and to develop the deeper meaning of "The Dead of the Desert" and "The
Scroll of Fire."

There is no justification whatsoever for comparing the two. There is no
need for unusual preparation or skill to prepare a poster once the teacher
has managed to write the words on colored Bristol paper. If she bought it
at a bookstore. she only has to unroll it during class and store it in the
attic and bring it down again at the beginning of every school year.

in contrast. the teacher who has to prepare a class for matriculation exam
must measure himself personally and intellectually against theoretical
material. constantly open new horizons, develop new ideas. read copious
amounts of background material and nuke sure that the work discussed is
absorbed and becomes a magnet for exciting inspiration that will assure a
spiritual spark and joy of creativity.

The Distance Between the Two Sides

Now can two teachers be lumped together who. though sharing a single crown,
have such a qualitative difference between them that it is impossible that
that difference should not be expressed and manifested in their paychecks?
Although the idea of equality is very noble. its practical translation in
every case without distinction results in discrimination and injustice
which is quite alien to essential equality. Technical mechanical equality.
after all, does not guarantee equality in the worth of a person and the
worth of work and skills from the perspective of their quality and value.
There is. however. another even more serious defect which is especially
surprising in that no noise has been made about it. This is the fact that
a woman teacher receives the same pay as a man. More than this. a woman
teacher who is a mther is paid a higher salary than a man because even if
she does not work full time she receives a high cost-of-living increment as
though she were working full-time. 0n the face of it. this policy appears
noble and generous and worthy of praise. We are obliged. however. to look

58
closely to see if this approach doesn't have a stumbling block to the
discovery of a solution to the crisis as a whole.

Discrimination Between Men and Women?

First of all. it aust be remembered that in all the enlightened and pro-
gressive nations, women teachers are paid a much lower salary than men.
No one has ever complained bitterly about it, nor have we heard protests
about this discrimination between men and women who do the same work even
in classes which are identical in level, numbers of students. etc.

it makes sense that there is a social, economic and moral logic to this
discrimination since, generally. the woman provides a secondary source of
income in the family and is not the main breadwinner. It is not so terrible,
therefore, if her salary falls below that of a man who is the family's
principal breadwinner. He should not be forced to have his wife leave the
house and go to work when her place is to care for her household.

In addition. the woman teacher. by nature of her physical condition. earns
justified but extensive vacations such as 3 months maternity leave and time
off when. God forbid, her child is sick. Generally, she also uses her 30
days sick leave every year, and no one checks into whether these are actually
used for illness or feigned (special study has been conducted concerning
this use of sick time but this is not the place to go into it). If we add
to this picture the fact that the majority of teachers are of the weaker
82X. then a solution to the crisis, from a budget point of view, appears

on the horizon. Only the men, who are a minority, could get higher wages.
From an educational viewpoint, there is the possibility that more talented
men would enter the field of education.

In summary, it should be said that this is a daring proposal likely to
arouse anger and excitement. If, however. in the United States, Europe,
South Africa and Australia, it is accepted and normal to find a substantial
difference in the salaries of men and women, there is no reason for us not
to adopt this path which has been proved efficient and good. If we add to
this the one fact that the subject of linking is not anchient tradition and
that the internal division between types of teachers within the system bears
close investigation. then we have before us to all appearances the first
signs of a fundamental solution to the crisis. In this way, it would not
surface every other day and cause harmful and unnecessary upheavals to the
young generation now and in the future.

9348
C50: 6805

59
RECENT BEDOUIN DEMONSTRATIONS DISCUSSED

Beirut AL-HURRIYAH in Arabic 12 Nov 79 pp 2849

[Article: "Have the Rural Areas and the Bedouins Begun to Offer Open Resis—
tance to the Authorities?"]

[Text] The repercussions of the central Bedouin movements
which emerged into the open with the demonstration of 20
October have not yet ended. The suppression of the
demonstration and the successful move to prevent it from
advancing toward Amman have not brought this movement

to an end--either with respect to its causes or with
respect to its effects. 0n the contrary, these actions
have led to the continuation and development of this
movement, as is clearly shown by the Bedouins' for-
nation of a hugh delegation to meet with the king and
protest the authorities' policy devoted to oppressing
the citizens by continually raising prices-not to
mention the authorities' devotion to neglecting the
Bedouins' other basic needs.

"hat are the details and repercussions of the central
Bedouin movements? what are their immediate causes
and who is taking part in them? where will they lead?
These things are the subject of the following report.

Demonstration of 20 October

The central Bedouin demonstration included approximately 1,000 men from the
Bani Sakhr, Bani Hamidah and 'AJarimah tribes which live south of Amman in
the Dhiban area and in the villages located between Ha'dsba snd_Ammmn.
Peasants and Bedouin children also participated in the demonstration, and
village leaders, tribal shsykhs, retired officers and students presided

over it. The citizens gathered from the various villages and marched toward
Anmmn along the desert highway. In the triangle of desert connecting Ha'daba
and Na'ur, the demonstration was blocked by a heavy concentration of army

60
and general security vehicles which prevented them from continuing the
march toward Arman. 'l'he demonstrators were clubbed and gunshots were
fired over their heads, forcing them to disperse.

The demonstrators shouted consents criticizing the policy of the Hudhar
Badran government and its decisions to raise the price of food, especially
bread, flour and flour products. The demonstrators carried a petition
protesting inflation, the increase in the cost of living and neglect of
their basic needs for services. water, and electric lighting. however,

the army and general security forces prevented the demonstrators from con-
tinuing their advance to Amen to deliver the petition to the prime minister.

The demonstrators protested their suppression by the army and general security
forces, and declared their determination to hold another demonstration if
their demands are not met.

Bedouin Meeting and Formation of («O-Han Delegation

The Mudher Badran government, which has been accustomed to using suppression
to confront protest demonstrations opposing it, was apparently surprised at
the sharp reactions which followed the breaking up of the demonstration. 0n
the day following the demonstration (21 October), the Bedouin shaykhs and
leaders of the central area held a crowded meeting which included shaykhs
from other areas. The people at the meeting deliberated on the government's
metlm-L: of dealing with the just demands of the citizens, the after extensive
discussions decided to form a delegation representing them to meet with King
Husnyn and inform him of their protest against government neglect of their
areas, the decisions to raise prices, and the authorities' disregard of
their needs. In the event. the meeting elected ’00 representatives from
among the shaykhs and leaders of the Bedouins and clans of the area to meet
with King Hussyn.

Delegation Refuses to Meet With Badran and the King Refuses to Meet With the
Delegation!

After the delegation had made its way to the palace, some high officials of
the Royal Chancellery attempted to dissuade the delegation from insisting

on a meeting with the king and convince it to meet with the prime minister
and discuss their problems with him. However, the delegation sharply refused
to meet with Hudhar Badran, whom they charged with direct responsibility for
inflation and the deterioration of living conditions. In a sharply worded
comment. they said in effect, "He will not meet with the man who took our
flour." But the king refused to meet with the Bedouin delegation while it
remained so large, seeming more like a pressure demonstration. The Royal
Court officials then began to negotiate with the delegation about appointing
a small number of representatives to meet with the king, but they rejected
this, saying that. "We are all Bedouin shaykhs and none of us is better than
any other; if the king wants to meet with us, it will be without conditions."

61
The king again refused to meet thea en masse, however, and the Bedouin
delegation was informed that the king was busy with political contacts.

They were promised a meeting with him after he returned from the pilgrimage.
Informed sources reported that the delegation left the palace angrily when
they received this reply.

Where Did the Demonstration Cone From?

The area in which the protest movasents began is suffering from a severe
lack of basic services despite its proximity to the capital. The concen-
rrntion of Bani Hamidah Bedouina is divided among 30 villages within a 30-
by loo-kilometer area. In these villages live more than 100,000 people who
are suffering from a lack of electric lighting, water, paved roads, schools
and health services and are plagued by debts, an inability to pay agricul-
tural loans and the absence of governaent assistance in developing agricul-
tural lands.

The 'Ajariaah villages, which are centered around the town of Na'ur, are
suffering from similar problems, as are the villages in the Bani Sakhr
district. Like other rural areas in Jordan, these areas have suffered
increasingly because of the lack of effective official measures to combat

the successive periods of drought which have plagued the- during the past

1: years. The citizens have also experienced increasingly serious hardships
due to the continuous rise in the prices of basic comodities—and especially
food--the latest of which was the increase in the costs of bread, wheat

and wheat products by 25 to 60 percent.

Continuous Increase in Prices Aggravates Popular Discontent
in accordance with "defense orders," the government has raised the price of
native bread from 60 to 80 fils, and that of European bread to 160 file,
while the price of the small loaf has remained at 20 fils. The price of
flour has been increased by (.0 percent. The price increases for flour, flour
products and bread were made within the framework of the policy of gradually
raising prices. Thus, the Hudhar Badran government made price increases

of 12 percent for tools, 60 percent followed by 75 percent for fuel, and 20
percent for meat. The prices of transportation and animal feed were also
increased, followed by increases in the prices of wheat, barley and bread by
the percentages mentioned previously.

As usual, the authorities justified this continuous increase in prices on
the pretext of rising world pricey-or in other words, their continued
dependence on importation due to their historical neglect of agriculture and
the other productive sectors—-and on the pretext of "easing the burden on
the budget"-—this huge budget, inflated by nonessential expenditures and
luxury, which is not large enough to support basic connodities and ease the

pressure of living costs which is bearing heavily on the majority of the
citizens.

62
Corruption and Thefts

The exposure of vnrhuu forms of corruption. thefts and business dealings

at the expense of the sustenance of the citizens is another reason for the
eruption of the protest movements among the Bedouins and the population of
the central area. The news has spread that some governors have stolen large
quantities of flour and grain dedicated to the fight against the drought
affecting the Bedouins of the central area and the south, with sons of the
stolen food being sold to citizens at high prices and some of it being
replaced with spoiled flour. Legal proceedings have been initiated against
the governor of Ha'daba concerning the handling of grain.

Members of Consultative Assembly Call for Discussion of Food Supply Policy

Despite the fact that the circle of discontent has widened and has reached
the level of protest demonstrations by the Bedouins of the central area,
government measures to deal with the situation have remained trivial and
limited. Thus. in the wake of the demonstration of the Bani Sakhr, Bani
Hamidnh and 'ijarimah tribes, the Jordanian cabinet decided on 28 October
to lower the price of improved wheat from 110 to 100 diners a ton, and the
price of barley free 90 to 80 dinars a ton. However, this trivial and
limited decision did not put an end to the widespread wave of discontent
which is still growing. This has been reflected in various forms of pressure
on the members of the National Consultative Assenbly, which has been in a
stale of continuous recess for more than a month. Several members of the
council (most of them representatives of the [tribal] areas. particularly
the central areas) have begun to take steps to correct the decline in the
government position by calling for a special session to discuss the govern-
nent's food supply policy and its recent measures related to raising the
prices of wheat, wheat products and feeds. A memorandum to this effect
addressed to the head of the National Consultative Assembly was signed by
10 assembly members early this month. Meanwhile, reliable sources confirm
that the Mudhar Badran government, which was formed 4 years ago, may become
:hc authorities' scapegoat if public discontent worsens--especially since
the Bedouin movements have laid direct responsibility for the severe
deterioration of their living conditions on the Hudhar Badran government.

Widespread circles in the country feel that. while the bold initiative of
the Bani Sakhr, 'Ajarimah and Bani Hamaydah tribes to demonstrate and protest
in various ways in an indication of the level of general discontent among
the people, it is equally an indication of the general mood prevailing in
the circles and sectors considered by the authorities to be pillars of
support of unwavering loyalty. While the rural and Bedouin base of support
has, in various ways. expressed its distress due to official policy and the
hardship it is experiencing because of the pressures of living and the lack
of basic services and facilities, the fact that the Bedouins' dared to
demonstrate, submit petitions and form a huge delegation to carry their
protest directly to King Hussyn, and their refusal to occupy their time

63
with the prime minister. reveal an important side of the authorities'
dilemma. This side confirms that the domestic policy of the authorities
(which includes their economic measures) contains irremediable contra-
dictions which are liable to develop and deteriorate into an open political
crisis. For this policy will tighten the stranglehold on all the popular
sectors. including the Bedouins, the rural producers, the soldiers and the
lower officers. The worsening of the factors which brought about the crisis
is being hastened by the fact that the authorities are devoted to suppressive
and repressive measures and to dealing with growing discontent through
postponement and promises on the one hand, and repression and restraint of
public freedoms on the other.

8591
C80: 6802

64
RAYMOND IDDIH GIVES VIEWS OF LBBANESB SITUATION
London AL-DUSTUR in Arabic 12-18 Nov 79 p 6
[Article: "Increase in International Forces lnevitable“]

[Text] Dean Raymond Iddih is not optimistic about the French and American
"fact-finding" missions to Lebanon. He does not believe that they will
produce clear results, "especially since both France and the United States
have ambassadors in Beirut, and these ambassadors are necessarily familiar
with the situation." Therefore. Iddih does not agree with the wave of
optimism which the Robin and Philip Habib missions have set off in Lebanon
and the region.

Dean Iddih says that he will remain in Paris until Syrian forces withdraw
from the Ministry of Information near his home. I had questioned the dean
after learning that circles in the "hational Bloc-Iddih Party" had discussed
this matter with him a few days earlier.

I asked Iddih if there had been a change in the American position vis-a-vis
the situation in Lebanon. He replied: "The Kissinger plot to partition
Lebanon and allow the Palestinians to settle in it continues."

Iddih wondered what could possibly come out of the Arab summit which will
be held in Tunis. "if it is held at all!" He returned to his three pro-
posals. which he believes constitute the only means to a solution in
Lebanon. What are these proposals? Iddih replied:

"First, the Cairo Agreement should be abrogated and replaced by a new
agreement with the PLO. with the condition that the new agreement not
conflict with the 23 March 1949 Armistice Agreement between Lebanon and
Israel, Security Council Resolutions 625, 426, 6‘4 and 450, and Article
103 of the UN Charter.

"Second, Arab forces from states which have no ambitions in Lebanon, along
with European forces, should replace the Syrian forces. These forces would
be put at the disposal of the secretary general of the United Nations, and
would include 15,000 to 20,000 Arab troops. This is my opinion. Otherwise,

65
funds must be placed at the disposal of the secretary general so that he
ran expand the UN forces. Some European states hesitate to put forces
at Haldheim's disposal because of the enormous expense. Therefore. the
Arab states should put the required amount at the secretary general's
disposal so that the European states could no longer use the excuse that
they do not have the necessary resources."

Thus: Arab forces from states which have no ambitions in Lebanon, in
addition to European forces--especially since the presence of Syrian

forces conflicts with the Arab League resolution issued on 9 June 1976
and the resolutions issued by the Riyadh and Cairo summits in November

1976, for the Syrian Army cannot possibly be considered Arab forces of
deterrence.

"Third, these European-Arab forces would be deployed throughout all parts
of Lebanon, and then the authorities would be in a position to form a new

Lebanese army, disband the militias, and gather the weapons of war from
the people."

But why does the Cairo Agreement conflict with the Armistice Agreement?

Iddih answered: "I wish the foreign ministers of the Arab states and the
secretary general of the Arab League would examine the Lebanese-Israeli
Armistice Agreement and the provisions of the Cairo Agreement so that they
could be convinced that Article 3 and Supplement 1 of the Armistice Agree-
ment contradict the Cairo Agreement. Israel wants the Cairo Agreement

to remain in force so as to provide a legal pretext for it to continue

its aggression against Lebanon, which is adhering to the agreement."

in accordance with Article 103 of the UN Charter, precedence is given to

resolutions issued by the United Nations and, of course, by the Security
Council.

"However, it appears that all Arab states want Lebanon to remain the sole
battlefield of the war with Israel. But the Arabs must become convinced
that sooner or later the contagion could spread from Lebanon to the [other]
Arab states. The Arab borders are so extensive that weapons could be moved
from state to state with absolute ease. In every state, there is a group
of people whom the common enemy could incite to revolt against their
leaders. Thus, if the Arab states do not want to establish a Palestinian
state. as President Jimmy Carter has said, and if they only want the war

in Lebanon to continue. then they must wait for their turn at the ruin and
destruction to come."

8591
080: #802

66
PHALANGIST PARTY REPORTEDLY TRAINING HOSLEH BROTHERS
Beirut AL-HURRIYAH in Arabic 12 Nov 79 p 8
[Article: "Phalsngist Party Trains Hoslem Brothers"!

[Text] Sources close to the Phalsngist Party have confirmed that the

party leadership has held a series of meetings with the leadership of the
Hoslem Brothers organization during which the two sides agreed to establish
complete political and military coordination. By the terms of the agreement,
the Phalsngist Party leadership pledged to train groups of Hoslem Brothers
in explosion and demolition techniques and assassination operations. in
addition to securing quantities of light and medium weapons to be sent in
batches to Syria, provided that the Brothers carry out sabotage operations
against the regime in Syria. The Phalangiat Party also pledged to use its
local information organizations and its contacts with outside information
organ!zations--especially Zionist information media--to publicize military
and political actions carried out by the Hoslem Brothers. The first step

in the implementation of the information-related part of this agreement

was taken when APP carried a news item from Tel Aviv concerning disturbances
which occurred in the city of Aleppo, while the Phslsngist Party radio was
responsible for broadcasting the item in Lebanon. This integration between
the Phalangist Party and the Hoslem Brothers confirms that both organiza-
tions are working under the same direction.

8591
CSO: 6802

67
FATHI YAKAN, SHAYKH HAJDHUB RELEASED BY SYRIA, INTERVIEHED
Interview With Pathi Yakan
Beirut AL-ANUAR in Arabic 13 Nov 79 p 7

[Text] Hr Fathi Yakan. the secretary general of the Hoslem Confraternity,
who had been forcibly arrested in Tripoli and detained for 3 weeks, disclosed
upon his release that several political and religious leaders were instru-
mental in obtaining his freedom. In an interview with Hoslem leaders from
north Lebanon, Hr Yakan revealed yesterday that Syrian Security had inter-
rogated him about his rumored complicity in Hoslem Brotherhood activities

and suspicious schemes in Lebanon and Syria. He said that upon being cleared
of the charges, he was released and, accompanied by several party members

and security agents, was driven back to his home in the private automobile
of the regional commander of the Syrian Deterrent Force in north Lebanon. He
added that he was well treated during the routine investigation, and that he
had met with military, political and party leaders during his detention.

In a press interview with AKHBAR AL-YUM, Mr Yakan disclosed that he had met
once with Shaykh Hajdhub, the imam of Qabb Ilyas.

[Question] How do you feel toward those who stood by you and attempted to
help you?

[Answer] There was a cannon denominator to all their humanitarian efforts.
I do not distinguish between one sect or religious group and another. or
between one party and another. The problem was humanitarian in essence,

a problem of conscience. The problem, which started as an alleged accusa-
tion against me, was finally clarified. It did, however, reveal numerous
incongruities and led to some positive things between me and my Syrian kid-
nappers. As a result of numerous meetings with Syria's highest leaders,
many issues and former misunderstandings have been resolved.

[Question] With whom did you meet?

[Answer] Hith Syria's top military leaders.

68
[Question] Hith nl-Shihsbi hilaelf?

[Answer] I prefer not to mention names, but I did meet with the top military
leaders without exception. The fact is that what started as an interrogation
turned into a political dialog regarding the Lebanese and Palestinian prob-
lems in general.

[Question] when you were arrested, what were you charged with?

[Answer] It is clear to me that belonging to the Hoslem Confraternity was

the principal reason for Iy arrest. This organization poses a threat to
Syria's security. I was implicated by informers whose identity is now known

to me. The informers' motives are now clear to the Syrian authorities. I
received many apologies over my treatment during the arrest. I was subse-
quently treated with great respect, and have no 111 feeling toward the authori-
ties over my earlier treatment.

[Question] It is rumored that you were physically abused in the beginning.
Is this true?

[Answer] During my arrest. I did resist. The identity of my captors was not
clear to me. You know that kidnapping is a way of life in Lebanon. Initial-
ly, I thought I was to be killed. I was slightly injured during the scuffle.
Beyond that, I was not mistreated. 0n the contrary, when I arrived in Damas-
cus and the authorities learned of my forcible arrest, they condemned the be-
havior of my arrestors. They blamed those who arrested me for the mistreat-
ment.

[Question] In what prison were you held?

[Answer] I was detained by the military and kept initially at a military
center with other detainees. Host of the time, however, was spent at the
military hospital and at the homes of military personnel.

[Question] Did your interrogation last for 15 days?

[Answer] Of course not. The interrogation was discontinued during the
feastof al-Adha. Host employees go home for the holiday. There were 5 days
without interrogation.

[Question] Here you kept with other detainees?

[Answer] No, I was alone.

[Question] Have you ever seen Shaykh Hajdhub, the imam of Qabb Ilyas?
[Answer] I saw him there briefly.

[Question] Did you talk with him?

69
[Answer] No. we did not talk.
[Question] How was his physical health when you saw him?

[Answer] He looked fine to me. Someone asked him how he felt. and he said
he was fine. He did not appear ill or tired.

[Question] How did you get to the Lebanese-Syrian border?

[Answer] Sone friends in Damascus arranged for my return home. I requested
that I go back by way of Home. I was taken there by private car, accompanied
by other cars. At Hons I was met by a military officer who took me to a ban-
quet attended by many military personnel. I was later driven in the military
officer's car to the border. He were accompanied by other military vehicles.
At the Syrian-Lebanese border, next to Dnbbusiyah, we were met by a number

of Fatah vehicles and a Syrian security agent. Major Ahmad ha'mari was also
waiting for us. He accompanied my motorcade all the way home.

[Question] How do you feel since your return to Lebanon?
[Answer] I am deeply moved by the united effort on my behalf. Ordinary peo-

ple, Hoslems and Christians, and people of different parties and political

persuasions were united in their effort to help me. It was more than I had
expected.

[Question] How did you react to what happened during your absence?
[Answer] of course, I was told yesterday evening of the effort to help me.

It seems that the president. the prime minister and the entire government
apparatus all intervened on my behalf.

[Question] Did you expect your case to reach such proportions?
[Answer] Yes. In fact I was sure of that, even while I was in Syria.

[Question] Do you have anything to say to the Lebanese and Syrian people?

[Answer] I long for the day when the Lebanese people will stand united
against our connon enemy. I also ask the Syrian people to try to understand
the Lebanese people before they take measures against them.

[Question] What do you read in the eyes of those who come to congratulate
you?

[Answer] Host eyes are filled with tears.
[Question] Did your family abandon hope for your return?

[Answer] Only once. Only my wife, who does not give up easily. remained
optimistic. I wish you would meet her sometime.

70
Interview with Shaykh Hajdhub
Beirut ALPANHAR in Arabic 21 Nov 79 pp 4. 15

[Interview with Shaykh Hajdhub by AL-ANHAR correspondent; in Hajdhub's home
in Zahla]

[Text] Shaykh 'Abd al-Rahnan al-Hsjdhub, imam of Qabb Ilyas, discussed his
27-day detention. he told AL—ANHAR's correspondent in Zahla during an inter-
view at his home soon after his release that he did not inform on Hr Fathi
Yakan, the secretary general of the Hoslem Confraternity in Tripoli. Accord-
ing to him, Mr Pathi Yakan was introduced to him as a "doctor" while both
were under detention in Damascus. He added that they did not recognize each
other. In response to our questions, Shaykh Hajdhub related the details of
his detention. He said he was taken to Damascus by civilian security agents
to clear up certain misunderstandings with the authorities. He said that

he went without hesitation. In Damascus, he was asked about his views regard-
ing the Syrian initiative in Lebanon. He added that he responded by praising
the Syrian initiative. describing it as a helpful and compassionate move.
aimed at alleviating Lebanon's suffering, while the rest of the Arab world
stood idly by, watching the Lebanese tragedy on television. This, in his
view. he told the authorities, was what prompted the Syrian move.

[Question] Dr Fathi Yakan, the secretary general of the Moslen Confraternity
in Tripoli, claims that you informed on him during your detention, and that
that was the reason for his arrest.

[Answer] During the interrogation, I was asked about the Hoslem Brotherhood
and whether that organization was active in Lebano l denied any knowledge
of that group, but I did tell the authorities about the existence of a reli-
gious group known as the Moslem Confraternity. I told them that the organ-

ization's secretary general was Dr Pathi Yakan, a man I knew personally.

I also told them that I had met Mr Yakan in the interrogation room, that he

was introduced to me as a doctor, and that I recognized him by his handsome

blonde beard.

[Question] It is rumored that you were arrested because of your membership
in the Hosiem Brotherhood.

[Answer] I was asked about this and cleared of this charge. The interro-
gators were convinced that I was the victim of a conspiracy.

[Question] Here you mistreated?

[Answer] Initially, I was treated like any other prisoner. "hen the author-
ities learned of my true role in Lebanon, I was treated with respect and
given a private room. In fact I later met with Syria's minister of informa-
tion and had a long discussion with him about the Arab situation in general.
I also had a 27-minute television interview, which will be aired Thursday
evening. The interview sets forth my views on the situation in Lebanon

and Syria. as well as the Arab world.

71
In another interview. Shaykh Hajdhub told AKHMR AL-YUH that he neither re-
lishes nor regrets his month's stay in Damascus. His only regret, according
to him, was that his charitable and social work was interrupted during that
period. He added that. unlike others, he does not accuse certain quarters
of having created a problem in his home town [or homeland]. He thanked the
president. the prime minister. the mufti [supreme religious leader], min-
isters al-Qadiri and al-Mara'bi. the counander of the Deterrent Force [peace-
keeping force in Lebanon]. and all those who interceded on his behalf.

Speaking of the specific charge leveled against him, he said that he was ac-
cused of voicing his criticisms in inflammatory oratory. "A particular
group was displeased by my outspoken manner and sent emissaries to tell me
so. when the Deterrent Force restored stability. I stopped my attacks.

But that group never forgot my criticism. Now. after long discussions. all
misunderstandings have been cleared up."

Referring to his views on the situation in south Lebanon, Shaykh Hajdhub said
that he informed the authorities of his extra-e indignation over the situa-
tion in that part of the country. He said he "was saddened by the daily
toll in lives as a result of the Israeli bombardment, whose aim is to expand
the mini-state begun with Israel's initiative and America's blessing in order
to protect Israel's northern border." He added that they [the Israelis]
provide the mini-state [Haddad's territory] with weapons and men from Cyprus
and Europe. to avoid a direct confrontation with the Palestinians."

SPF-“king of the national movement in south Lebanon, Shaykh Hajdhub said:
"The national movement is not very effective. It is unable to defeat Israel
or to put an end to Haddad's mini-state. The mini-state is growing larger
and the national movement is not able to halt the deterioration, and its in—
evitable defeat is imminent."

9063
C50: 4802

72
KURDISl-I PARTY OFFICIAL RELEAS- BY SYRIANS
3eirut AL-NABAR in Arabic 25 Nov 79 P 6

[Articles "Jamil hahu. Returning fro. Damcm. Says '1 Thank the Syrian
Authorities for Releasing Hem]

LTextW Yesterday Secretary General of the Kurdish Democratic Party of keba-
non (BAR’I‘I ) Jail Hahu returned fra- Danaacue, after having been detained for
a year, 6 months ani 10 days.

At a reception for Hahn at the party headquarters in the al-ilatuat quarter
upon his arrival at 1830 yesterday there were a nu-ber of party leaders and

a throng of Kurds.

Hahn announced. ”I thank God that l have been released. and that I have been
able to see In] second hoaeland. Lebanon. I hope that national unity will be
achieved and that the struggle in dear Lebanon will end. for we are all fed-
ayeen for the homeland. I trunk the Syrian authorities for my release."

8559
350: 1:8(2

73
HEHBERS o.=' snuccuuc. coumamzrrmc Rm; Amman-
Results of Investigations
Beirut AL-NAHAR in Arabic 28 Nov 79 p 6

[Text] Yesterday security personnel completed their investigations of
Hmtafa Hahnud Harun (52 years old). Janil Ilyas al-Baytar (155 years old).
'Isa mm rum (50 years old). and Antoine mm'n al-chusayn (#6 years
old). who are charged with counterfeiting Aaerican $100 bills. passports.
state-ems of no prior convictions. and nrket licenses. and with dealing
in narcotics.

Soon 3? counterfeit Aaerican $100 bills. four forged passports. and quanti-
ties of heroin. cocaine and hashish were confiscated from the smpects' res-
idences.

The four were referred to Beirut Public Prosecutor Zahi Kan'an. who charged
then with the specified counterfeiting. punishable according to Articles
M3. Add}. 1561 and 1&3? of the criainal code and by Decree No 30% pertaining
to narcotics. These penalties call for I; to 10 years iaprisonaent.

iron the prisoners' confessions it beoane clear that they were part of an
international network for counterfeitim and circulating American currency,
which has its min headqmrters in Bin-ope. and which also sauggles narcotics
on a wide scale. its aenbers wing forgcd passports to divert suspicion

froa thenelves. They also sold counterfeit one-kilograa gold bars for
150,000 Lebanese pounds to Fugitive Suspects Karin 'Isa and Elie Dew.

It also became clear that Antoine al-Ghusayn carried a false passport in
the name of George Jean Zuwayn. and that he had accomplices who are still
at large.

It as also learned that the large-scale counterfeiting of Aaerican aoney
was done in a Eurman country. and that the counterfeit notes were brought
in by the network's agents.

The public prosecutor referred the dossier to First Busining nagistrate of
Beirut George Abu-Hurad.

710
Nrther Details
Beirut AL-NAHAR in Arabic 29 Nov 79 p 6

[Text] Yesterday Ennining hgiatnte Hu'in 'Asiran began his investigati-
ons of hustafa Mahmud Harun. Jaail {has al-Baytar. 'Isa hilki uilki. and
Antoine hikha'il al-Ghmayn. who are charged with counterfeiting herican
$100 bills. dealing in narcotics. and forging the seals of foreign count-
ries. passports. and state-onto of no prior convictions. Warrants were is-
sued for the arrest of all of then. even though Jaail al-Baytar stated that
it was he who exposed the gang to one of the lebanese security agencies.

The investigation of the prisoners revealed that this international network
has scores of agents. in Baghdad. Egypt. Jordan. Syria. Italy. Ger-any.
Holland. France. Turkey and Britain. (he of the newborn has scores of fake
eta-pa to give entry visas for sons of the countries which are the scene of
the network's activities, incluling Sauii Arabia, Venezuela and Italy.

It was also learned that one of the network seabers is a lebanese living in
a northern town. who travels between the wriom countries on a false iden-
tity card hearirg the naae of a senior Interpol officer. It also bees-e
clear that the guru had counterfeited qmntities of gold bars and sold the-
to an Armenian dealer in Ram' Street at a price varying from ‘60,000 to
15,000 pounds during the world rise in the price of gold.

Jamil al-Baytar confessed that the network would counterfeit the currency

in Lebanon by eeans of a secret press guided by aned Ian. and that a tech-
nical expert dealt with the network an! gmranteed currency printing plates
which he would very precisely forge. He said that the network had begun
counterfeiting Egyptian loo-pound notes. and that in September an Egyptian.
Sa‘d Dahshan. took 10.000 notes with his to kypt to circulate then. Then
on it October he returned and took an estiuted l5$10.000 worth of counter-
feit American money in order to circulate it. and then disappeared without

a. trace.

The prisoners mentioned that the network ensured the narcotics. opiua and
heroin, fro: Turkey through its agents. and that 'Isa Kilki would go with
Antoine al-Ghusayn to the town of Fsrdin in Turkey to buy raw heroin at
500,000 Turkish pounds per kilogm. Then they would snuggle it to Italy
to the account of the Italians Salvador Ranelli an! Vittorio Spiciliano,
who would send young wosen to Lebanon to transport the narcotics. (he of
then. named Suzy. was in Beirut recently; she stayed a week in Beirut and
Duascus and delivered the narcotics after the secret word was revealed.
and then left Beirut and took the narcotics with her in her own special

“mere

The ennining magistrate issued a warrant for the security police to pursue
the network nenbers in Lebanon.

8559
cso; uses

75
IHL‘IH MASSACRE SUSPWI‘ SPRUNG non JUNIYAH PRISM

Arned Attack on Prison

Beirut AL-HAHAR in Arabic 26 Nov 79 p 6

i_ Excerpt. A security source announced that at 1500 yesterday almost 100
armed men attacked the prison at Juniyah castle and encircled it with heavy
arms and equipaent. Sons of then entered the prison and released one of
its innates. Hanna 'Abdallah. who is charged with participating in the
.hdin incident of June 1976.

Th. .olicenen were unable to resist the attackers because of their nulbers
am zueir many weapons.

Imr-iiately afterwards there were prompt contacts between security and par-
ty officials for the return of the prisoner. but as of late last night
there were no results.

'Al-Harsdah' Statenent
Beirut AL-NAHAR in Arabic 28 Nov 79 p 6

iTcxt. ‘ In Zagharta yesterday. Sum-an P‘ranjiyah received Archbishop Ilyas
Na nah. Ronn Catholic pastor for the Tripoli parish. and then Kourah Dep—
ut ies 'lakhus Hakim and Fu 'ad Ghusn. and reviewed with then the general sit-
nation and the issues of the northern region.

In the morning the "al-Haradah” leadership held a meeting during which it
~tn-1 10d t!- .e Juniyah Prison break-in. the release of one of the Ihdin inci-
dent prisoners. th'. matter of the northern kidnap victim. and the inter-
relations of all these issues. After the aeeting the "al-Haradah” spokes-
ran 1c‘ivered a statement as follows.

"Ahen the officials arrested Hanna 'Abdallah at Beirut Airport, it would
have been. rare appropriate for then to have handed hit: over to the Phalan-

.-:is'.r. right away. instead of transferring hill to Juniyah Prison. which as
tho state knows is under the control of the militias just like all organ-
‘.zations in east Beirut. Menu and Jubayl. Therefore, suspicion is

76
directed at those who ordered his transfer to Juniysh Prison. became by
so doing they were endeavoring to preeeditate and plan his release. The
funny thing here is that the release of the criminal who participated in
the Ihdin massacre was accomplished without firing a single shot for cover,

which reveals the disgraceful way the officials connive with the Phalan-
niots."

He added. "At the very tine the official infomtion agencies are expound-
ir.g to us the state's willingness to carry out the Tunis resolutions, we
see the state's real stand oonflicting with its propaganda. The govern-
ment is disregarding the issue of the northern kidnap victims and is pre-
tending not to see the Phalangists' military extent. It is blocking its
care to the din of Israeli arm and equipaent in the Karentins, and at the
same time it is working to return the Phelsngists to their militias. know-
ing that they are a threat to its security and the citizens' security."
BRIEFS

PHALANCIST AIRPORT--The Phalangist Party is currently constructing a
military airport, after losing the airport it had set up in Haunt, al-Batrun
District. The new airport is located between the villages of Hishnish

and Ram on a 50.000-square-Ieter tract of land owned by 10 of the in-
habitants of the two villages. The Phalangist Party had sent an engineering
expediation to the locality with several maps of the area in their possession.
At first the local inhabitants thought the purpose of the expedition might
be to establish a military base. and so they were surprised, several days
after the engineers returned, to see earthaoving equipment leveling the
grnund in preparation for the paving of runways suitable for landings by
small military and civilian aircraft. The airport is located in the

middle of the Jabay] district, 10 kilometers from the border of the
ai-Batrun district and 15 kilometers from the border of the Kisrawan
district. [Text] [Beirut AL-HURRIYAH in Arabic 12 Nov 79 p 9] 8591

C50: 4802

78
ANALYSIS OF THE LIBYAN REVOLUTION, QAIMHIAFI'S 'GREEN BOOK'
Paris LE MONDE DIPLOMATIQUE in French No 308, Nov 79 P 4

[Article by Charles Zorbigbe: "Power and Democracy in Libya: the Quest for
a 'Third Way‘")

[Text] "No democracy without people's congresses!" The slogan bedecks the
regular plane of Libyan Arab Airlines. Spread over the walls of the Tripoli
airport: "The party system aborts democracy." At Khan Yunis University in
Benghazi, the lesson in constitutional law approaches paradox: 'Whe very
existence of a parliament means the absence of the people."

Mass education: the revolutionary slogans are quotations from ﬁu'aanar Qadh-
dhafi's "Green Book."‘ The leader of the Libyan revolution denounces the
parliamentary system as a "truncated solution to the problem of democracy."
because the representative is no sooner elected than he "cuts himself off
from the masses"; because parliament "usurps" popular sovereignty for its
own gain and becomes a "legal screen" between the people and political power.
He demolishes the political party as a “tool of modern dictatorship": the
party appears to reflect democracy by "creating assemblies and commissions,
not to mention its members' propaganda," but it represents the “power of
only a fraction of the whole people." is based only on the "despotisn of

its members" and their "corruption"; as for the existence of several parties.
it "exacerbates the struggle for power...which leads to the destruction of
everything the people have gained and sahotages any plan for the development
of society.“ Social classes are shown no mercy by the author of the “Green
Book": "like the political party, tribe, or sect," the social class is a
"group of people who share the same interests"--“it is only a fraction of
the people and represents only a minority." if a political party is formed

 

' "The Green BooW'(Paris: Editions Cujas), vol. 1, "The Solution to the

Problem of Democracy" (1916, in French and Arabic, 95 pp); vol. 2,
"The Solution to the Economic Problem" (1978, in French, 30 pp).

79
in the name of a class, "it is automatically transformed into a substitute
for that class " If a regime claims to be based on the working class alone,
"groups appear and transform themselves into classes exactly like the classes
that have been abolished, and the Struggle to govern society begins again."

1b the French visitor the message may seem familiar. ls criticism of the
representative system not rooted in the French doctrine of public law since
the 3rd Republic. as, for example, in the analyses of Carre de Malberg on
the deviation of "parliamentary sovereignty" and in the political class,

as is shown in Andre Tardieu's pamphlets on the "captive sovereign" and the
"parliamentary profession"? Hasn't the exposure of political parties as
oligarchics motivated the foremost European sociologists since the beginning
of the century, people like Ostrogorski and, especially, Roberto Michels,
who undertook the exploration of Western political regimes? The rejection
of class struggle and the apology for "participation" are so close to De
Gaullc's thought that one may wonder whether they were inspired by certain
leftist Gaullist writings. True, Colonel Qadhdhafi rejects the referendum,
which "postures as democracy," while Rene Capitant saw in this procedure
the indispensable "question of confidence" that is a part of semi-direct
democracy.

Ten Years After the Revolution

The "Green Book" is a problem especially with respect to Third World poli-
ticn' trends. ls il a return to the sources of the Koranic "law," an abso-
lute truth to be respected, as some lslamic fundamentalists seem to believe,
or are they simply a citizen's ideas that tend to carry forth the debate on
the Ideal structure of government, as Colonel Qadhdhafi sometimes says him-
self? Is it a universal message, or should it be limited to Libya, as some
Near Eastern Marxists suggest? whatever, the "Green Book" is significant
primarily in the political development of Libya. it implies a certain remo-
val from the Nasirmodel that so fascinated the leaders of the 1969 Libyan
revolution that they imitated it in two ways. First, in the conquest of
power: since the beginning of the 60's, young officers impatient to have
their country achieve the status they thought it deserved and who as ado-
lescents cheered the Egyptian "rais," organized a group of "free officers";
on 1 September 1969 they pulled off a bloodless coup against King ldriss
and the Sanusi dynasty, which had become too dependent on foreign countries
and caught up in the contradictions caused by the increasingly crucial role
of oil, and they proclaimed the republic. Second, in the exercise of power:
a Council for the Command of the Revolution was instituted--it is a struc-
ture that is strongly reminiscent of Nasir'a Egypt, which freed the country
economically by forcing the oil companies to restrict their production and
pay a higher price for crude (Occidental, which was particularly vulnerable
because almost all its production profits came from Libya, was the first to
submit) and which was to show spontaneous fervor for Arab unity in the Tri~
poli pact (December 1969) with Egypt and the Sudan, to the Union of Arab
Republics (April l971) with Egypt and Syria, and in the "Islamic Arab Repub-
lic" (January 1975) with Tunisia. The "cultural revolution" launched in
the spring of 1972 opened the way to the gradual implementation of "direct

80
democracy" and put an end to imitation: Nasirism had never rejected govern-
ment centralism and party structures.

The "taking of power by the people" logically implies the incumbent higher
authority withdraws. 0n 5 April 197d, Mu'ammar Qadhdhafi transferred to his
second in comand, Major 'Abd-al-Salnm Jailld, some of his executive and core-
monial functions in order to devote himself to ideological activities and
citizens' organizations. The great reforms of 1976-77 followed: on 1 Sep-
tember I976 a "direct people's democracy" was implemented; it was based on

a pyramid of congresses and committees. On 2 March I977 the general congress
of the people met, announced that the era of the masses had come, and pro-
claimed the Wlamahiriya" (an Arabic neologism that means "popular assembly"
or "nopulocracy," according to the curious official translation of Tripoli),
the "people's socialist Arab and Libyan Jamahiriya"; Colonel Qadhdhafi be-
came general secretary of the general congress of the people; on 7 November
l977, being disappointed in the grassroots people's committees' lack of ini-
tiative, he launched the "revolutionary committees," which were to "motivate
the Arab masses to take advanced positions in preparing a new society."

For Mu'ammar Qadhdhafi, political ascetic, Savonarola of Islam, whose pres-
tige is undiminished among his people, are no less than the "sole way to
democracy." In his "Green Book" he describes how they are constructed: 'ﬁhe
people are divided into grassroots people's congresses. Each congress chooses
its committee.... All public services are directed by people's committees
that are responsible to the grassroots people's congresses, which tell them
what policies to follow and monitor how they are carried out.... The problems
brought up by the grassroots people's congresses shall take final form at the
general people's congress (whose debate will be submitted in turn to the ori-
ginal committees...)." But doesn't this pyramid of committees look something
like a party structure? And a party structure that would increase arbitrary
|XlliCO and bureaucratic power. We experienced this arbitrary power ourselves
when we were held at length by the Benghazi police in the company of other
participants at the recent international colloquium at Khan Yunis when an
official of the local revolutionary committee denounced us for photographing
the marketplaces in the center of town (which is by no means forbidden, inci-
dentallyl.

Libertarian Impact

The international colloquium at Khan Yunis had as its "primary objective to
give the lie to the stereotypes of Libya as a home for international subver-
sion and as the leading danger to the West after Cuba," as the chairman of
the organizing committee said in his opening address. has this objective
achieved? The discussions were completely Free, and the dialogue between
foreign university people and Libyan participants--including Colonel Qadh-
dhafi--was quite open. He rill particularly remember the lively diatribe

by the American Clement Henri, which was brilliant though its scepticism
was somewhat affected, against the Libyan doctrine of the "power of the
masses." and the dense and courageous criticism by the Syrian lsam Noman

81
of the role of the unions ("professional congresses") in the Libyan consti-
tutional view and of the necessity for a political awakening for the exer-
cise of democracy. More generally, the long-term libertarian impact of
Colonel Qadhdhafi's message should not be overlooked: the Libyan leader's
most committed partisans believe firmly in denouncing "such myths...as the
party of the working class." and this has a chilling effect--whatcvcr new
m)ths may be substituted for the old. Of course there remains the task of
creating a new man: will Libyan society advance as fast as the governing
officials in Tripoli would like? This is the eternal problem of ideocracy.
A new diplomacy must also be conceived: though Libyan leaders are eager,
as is legitimate, to extend their influence in Africa. they have damaged
their international image for the sake of a too-narrowly conceived Islamic
solidarity by supporting the African regimes that most blatantly ignored
civil rights.

Colonel Qadhdhafi turned away from his quest for the absolute at the end of
the first part of his "Green Book" by showing a remarkable sense of relati-
vism: "The era of the masses" (whose advent he announces) "may be accompanied
by an era of anarchy and demagoguery." Then he concludes with a discon-
certing about-face: 'ﬂhis is true democracy from the standpoint of theory,
but in practice, the government always goes to the strong."

5232
(:50: 4800

82
COUNTRY SAID TO 38 THREATEN- WITH FAHIRE
liouakchott cm in I-‘rench 6 Nov 79 pp 1, 8

[- Press conference held by Lt houlaye hachen, Golanissionsr for Food Assis-
tance, 5 November 1979, place not given]

flext_7 Yesterday the oomissioner for Food Assistance
launched an appeal urging all friendly countries and organi-
zations to come to our aid to realise the emergency program
whose basic oojective is to avert the famine that is a dan-
gerous threat to our country.

Lt Houlaye Hechem, commissioner for Food Assistance, speci-
fied that the government is planning to take a series of
measures intended to mobilise all the nations resources.

Thus, in the days ahead, a support fund will be opened
and will receive an initial deposit of public funds, the

voluntary contributions of our busineseasn, civil servants,
and all others of good will.

This appeal is included in a statement to the national
press, in which the commissioner for Food Assistance also
refers to tne egro-livestock raising situation and the

extent of the cereal deficit experienced by our country
this year.

The full text of this appeal follows.

[Question] The Comission for Food Assistance. in conjunction with the
Ministry of Rural Development. has just organized a survey mission on the
agro-livestock raising situation after the winter season. May we know the
essential characteristics of this situation?

[Answer] The Ministry of Rural Dewlopuent and Commission for Food Assist-
ance. in collaboration with the representatives of friendly nations and

83
organizations, organized a mission to evaluate agro-livestock raising re-
sources throughout the country after this year's winter season. The mission
visited --betwcen 1b and 28 October last -- the regions of Trarza, Brakna,
Gorgol, Guidimakha, Hodh el-Charghi, Hodh el-Gharbi, the regions of Assaba
and Tagant. Hhile awaiting delivery of the evaluation report under prepara-
tion, we can already accept the following conclusions which the'mission was
able to draw.

First, on the level of crops; the crop situation is causing anxiety among
both regional authorities and the populations of all the regions inspected.
Several factors explain this state of affairs.

To begin with, the inadequacy and the bad time and space spread of recorded
rainfall have seriously compromised harvests.

Pending the weather report which will be included in the evaluation report,
it may be considered that this year rainfall measurement shows a deficit of
at least 50 percent compared to normal. In addition, the poor rainfall
recorded during July and August, as well as intervals of sometimes over a
month between two good rainfalls have unfortunately forced peasants to repeat
sowings several times. Then, the river level measured at M'Backel is slight-
ly below the level for 1972-1973, the first year of severe drought. Accord-
ing to some experts in the river valley, only h,000 hectares could be flooded
this year, compared to about 31,000 hectares in an average year. To the
$1006 d:.icit was added a very short soil submersion period. Lastly, desert
encroachment and environmental deterioration have reduced the fertility of
the soils not yet covered with sand.

Secondly, on the level of livestock raising. Even though the health and con-
stitution of the cattle appear satisfactory at the moment, a particularly
long and difficult interim period is still to be expected. Indeed, the
uneven distribution of grazing grounds will result, as of the beginning of
next year, in great concentrations of animals in the zones where there are
still a few grazing grounds left, that is, the south of Trarza, Guidimakha,
and the south of Guerou. The movement of herds has already begun for

Tamchekett and H'Bout, which are .- as you know -- particularly affected
this year.

Concentration of this sort will result in the appearance of numerous hotbeds
of disease, and will certainly raise the problem of water supplies for the
animals and protection of the few pockets of grazing grounds that still exist.

As a conclusion then or this very sketchy account we can take as facts three
basic observations.

First the present year and next year are, from every point of View, similar
to ‘97?» 73' "1d 1977-78.

Second, the agro-livestock raising regions that have been until now least
affected are the most threatened this year.

84
Third. Contrary to last year, human beings --this year -- are more threat-
ened than animals.

/—Question_ 7 What in your opinion is the extent of the deficit strictly in
terms of cereals that our country will face this year?

/_lnswer_ 7 It is very difficult to answer that question, for all the figures
needs to estimate the deficit -- expected harvests, existing stockpiles,
promised gifts, expected commercial iaports, etcetera -- are not yet avail-
able, and will only be available in a few months' time. Under reservation.
then, of the data in accurate figures which will be supplied in the evalua-
tion report, it is estimated that the harvest will be on the order of
2h,000 tons, and that the cereal deficit -- taxing into account the other
elements as a whole .- will be around 70,000 to 80,000 tons.

/_Question_ 7 What measures are envisaged to meet this situation, which
appears to be a difficult one?

/-answer_ 7 To meet it, the government expects to take an important series of
:neasures, whose basic objective is to avert famine and stimulate effort and
the spirit of initiative among the population. These measures -- for the
moment -- are under study by the serious administrative groups involved.

The measures will bear -- generally speaking -- on -- first of all .- the
protection of a few pockets of grazing lands that still exist, and against
predators.

Secondly, the supplying of seeds to food-producing farms that have land,
especially, and horticultural equipment for the truckfarming country areas.

Thirdly, the acquisition in the form of gifts of commercial imports of cereal
deficit /'is published 7.

Fourth, organization of the movement of herds toward the zones that have

grazing lands, the boring of wells in the zones lacking in watering places
but supplied with grazing lands.

Fifth, acquisition by the state and by private economic agents of 10,000 tons
of animal fodder.

Sixth and last, the fight against brush fires.

For implementation of these measures, the government will depend -- above all
-- on national effort, which will consist of mobilizing all resources --
private or public -« to combat the effects of the disaster assailing our
country for the last 10 years. A support fund will be opened in the next

few days. The fund will receive an initial deposit of public funds, as well

as all the voluntary contributions that our businessmen, civil servants,
~nd other persons of good will are kind enough to set aside for it.

85
Unfortunately, the national effort will be inadequate to meet the serious
situation our country is facing. That is why I am taking this opportunity
to launch an appeal to all friendly countries and organizations to come to
our assistance to realize the planned emergency program.

I am, certainly, already convinced that this appeal will indeed be heard.

121b9
C80: LL00

86
MINISTER ASSIGNS PRIORITY T0 HATER, ROADS, HOUSING
Nouakchott CHAAB in French 28-29 Nov 79 p 7

[Text7 Major Anne Amadou Babaly, minister of equipment and
transport declared in a recent statement to the national press
that the government is planning to operate 46 drilling units
maintained by regional hydraulic brigades and establish 120
reservoirs in 19 0 throughout Mauritania to solve our critical
water situation. This problem has appeared in the form of
drought since 1968, decimating our livestock and leading to
rural migration.

Regarding communications problems which require sizeable invest-
ments because of the extent of territory, the government intends
to regularly maintain highways, which we have paved ourselves,

by creating brigades in Rosso, Ncuakchott, Atar, Kiffa and Nona.
According to Major Babaly, the state is also contemplating train-
ing personnel and improving dirt roads to develop the road net-
work, although that may be too expensive. In answer to a question
about the housing policy to provide for “the poorest," Major
Babaly th'nks that the housing units already constructed by
SOCOGIM auritanian Construction and Housing Management Compan ,
which has few resources, are not very accessible to officials.

He reports that the government is negotiating with Saudi Arabia
to purchase 469 housing units and that it intends to expand con-
struction with local materials throughout the country, as it has
already done with a company in Hosso.

Regarding prices and methods of assigning housing units con-
structed by SOCOGIM, Major Babaly justified their prices because
of the length of time required to construct them, which is
marked by absenteeism of job laborers and regular workers,
shortage of materials and expenses for labor, which is not used.
The minister did not express any opinion about distribution
which is the subject of an inquiry. He said the government has
set for itself the goal of distributing land, selling it at a
reasonable price to allow people to build, thanks to credits
which will be granted them by organizations which have yet to

be created. The Minister finally spoke during this interview
about the deep water port built by the Chinese People's Republic,

whose construction begin in April 1979.

8490 87
080: 4400
BRIEFS

FRENCH LOAN AGREEMENTS SIGNED--Major Moulaye Ould Boukhreiss,
member of the CMSN [Expansion unknowﬁ7, minister of planning
and fishing and Quezel Colonb, director of the Central Eco-
nomic Cooperation Bank in Nouakchott signed four loan agreements
Saturday, involving 20 percent of the total cost of the fol-
lowing projects: l—plant health protection; 2—encouraging dry
crops in Assaba and Guidimaka; 3-irrigated areas in Tamourt
Naaj; 4-sma11 irrigated areas in the oghe Plain. The signing
of these agreements is included within the special assistance,
which France is offering the eight Sahel countries. The loan
is estimated at 100 million French francs or 1 billion UH

Z; nansion unknow§7 payable in 30 years at an interest rate

of 1.5 percent and with 10 years of deferred payments. [Tex
Nounkchott cum in French 26 Nov 79 p 1.7 8490

FRENCH COOPERATION AGREEMENT--Hajor Anne Amadou Babaly, CHSN
member, minister of equipment and transport and His Excellency
Maurice Courage, French ambassador to Mauritania, signed yester-
day a cooperation agreement between Mauritania and France on
maritime signal systems. In a statement made to the national
press, Major Babaly said that this agreement "will make it
possible to strengthen the existing cooperation between our

two countries." The minister added that ”the reliable operation
of signals on our coast guarantees the security of seagoing
transport and trade and helps to move the national economy
forward." Discussing the benefits of this agreement, Major
Babaly again said that "with the cooperation of the French
technical service, it will especially allow making studies
aiming at the coordination and development of our network of
lighthouses and buoys, but also the training of personnel
assigned to assure the most efficient operation of shore and
ship equipment, in view of the specialisation demanded in this
field.‘ n conclusion, the minister indicated that "cooperation
between our two countries can only go forward." He finally
thanked the French authorities in the name of the government

88
and uhe CMSN and he asked the ambassador to convey his thanks
to ill the French people. His Excellency Maurice Courage,
speakine in turn, declared he was very impressed by the minis-
ter‘s cordiality. He then said that this agreement is a great
advantage for Mauritania and is a sign of the deep-rooted

friendship between our two countries. [Text7 [Nouakchott CHAAB
in French 24-25 Nov 79 pp 1, §7 8490

NATIONAL EDUCATIONAL SISTEM--0n being questioned recently about
government policy on national education,ﬂashi Ould Didi, minis-
ter of primary and secondary education, declared that its ob-
jective was to achieve a genuinely national educational system.
This policy has two stages. An initial transitory stage which
|"Il last 6 years. During this preliminary stage, "it is not
w mutter of our national languages which will be developed by
nhlﬁ organization, to be created and introduced in the frame-
work of the future national system." The minister said it
actually involves ”two languages of education, with the lan-
nuagc of education being the medium through which the child
learns beyond the language itself, all the disciplines." In
these cases and regardless of the field chosen, each student
:;11 have one of the languages as the language of education
nu! the other as the language of communication. The second

--;¢ will begin at the end of 6 years in our national educa-

uqal system. This system, considering the circumstances,
”.ll be based on the following principles outlined by the CMSN.
"Pricialization and transcription into Latin characters of our
L;tional languages (Pulfulde, Soninke and Volof). Creation of
l" institute for the transcription and development of the
national languages. Teaching of our national languages which
in time, must provide the same opportunities as the other
national language, Arabic. Hashi Ould Didi was to add that
"what seems certain and undeniable to me is that in this sys-
tem, each Mauritanian will have to master at least two national

languages, in addition to Arabic." [rug [Nouakchott cans in
French 28-29 Nov 79 p 57 8490

l'i-l': 14400

89
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007102100: ClA-RDP02-00050R00020006001 3-1
COFI‘IEKCIAL AND ECONOMIC ACTIONS IN 1979 REVIEKED
Oman 'UHAN in Arabic 18 Nov 79 p 37

[Excerpts] The following text is a review of the most important actions
affecting the structure of the economy in 1979:

Industry

A law for the regulation and encouragement of industry and an insurance
law were enacted.

Trade

It was resolved to establish a computer unit to collect and analyze com-
mercial and food statistics.

A resolution was issued requiring merchants to put price tags on goods
which they offer for sale and to supply the ministry and comer-cc with
their price lists.

Standards and procedures to regulate the making of advertising signs Here

adepted so that they will describe comercial operations better and more
accurately.

An inSpection unit was created to supervise signs and pricing at places of
business.

The comercial register was reorganized by the introduction of regulations

which will insure that work is performed with more prolptness and effici~
ency.

Dates

The ministry received and registered 1 160 applications for certificates
for the 1978 date crop. The harvest was weighed at the ministry's
warehouse in the presence of the delegate of the office and recorded, and
checks totaling 530,880.628 riyals were issued for then. The value of

the ministry's sales during the 1977 and 1978 seasons was 672.119.2312
riyals.

90
The ministry nranted 134 permits to export other foodstuffs.

The ministry granted 373 permits to import fruits and vegetables.

The ministry is preparing a tourism program.

The eomittee for the settlement of controversies settled 48 contract
cases, 6 rental cases, 20 cases of disputes between companies, and 129
compercial transaction cases.

The ministry participated in the following meetings and conferences:

The regional preparatory meetings for the Asian component in the 77

Group [of nonalined countries] in Colombo, which took place from 8 to 17
January 1979.

The preparatory meetings for the 77 Group, which were conducted in Arusha.
Tanzania from 6 to 16 January 1979.

The meetings of the fifth session of IINCTAD, which took place in Manila
from 7 to 15 June 1979.

The ministry also studied the drafts of economic, technical, and comer-
rial agreements, including the following:

The draft of the agreement to create the Arab Organization for Industrial
Development .

The draft of the new agrcenent between the Arab nations.
The draft of the agreement to create an Arab center for technology.

The draft of a comercial agreement between Romania and the sultanate.

630 8 (0802

91
OIL AND MINERAL DEVEIDPHENT AND PROSPECTING REPORTED

Oman 'UHAN in Arabic 18 Nov 79 pp 35. 36

[Excerpts] The following text is a brief description of the most important

petroleum. mining, and quarrying activities which were carried out in the
sultanate in 1979.

Since the beginning of the year, five seismic survey teams have been
engaged in surveying 8.000 kilometers of earthquake lines to evaluate the
geological structures and phenomena in the various areas of their conceso

sions, especially Hadi Arawnab, Rims, Haradi. Suwayhat. Ruwaylah, Khasqah.
Jihal, and Tawf Dahm.

The British Petroleum Group undertook to survey 1.200 kilometers at the
beginning of this year. and will drill an exploratory well during the
coming year when the geophysical studies have been completed.

The Gulf Oil Company undertook to survey 960 kilometers.

The Oman Petroleum Development Company drilled 10 exploratory wells since

the beginning of this year. and found petroleum in the areas of Jalmud.
Arawnab. Qata. south Barba, Rina. and Hahjur.

Petroleum development in the south of Oman was begun in 1978. and cost 365
million dollars. Operation there is expected to end in October 1980. The
project hopes to produce petroleum in the Anal and Marmul fields.

The petroleum of the Barba. Rims. and Qahrir fields is of the light type,
which is considered to be of the best quality, and that of the Jalnud,
Arawnab. Amal (southeast). Irad, and Qata fields is of the medium type.

lwoduction from Marmul, Qahrir, and Barbs will begin on 1 October 1980 and

from Anal and Rehab in January 1981. Planning for the rest of the fields
is in progress at the present time.

The Southern Region is expected to produce 1,000,000 barrels per day or
more in 1982.

92
The Alif Company of Oman is now drilling a new confirmation well in the
Samhah field, which it discovered last year. The company is going to
develop this field. and production from it should begin in October I980.
The company also drilled the Ramlat exploratory well, a deep well in the
al-Tubul area, but was not able to produce petroleum from it because of
technical difficulties.

The Alif-Jilf [apprr .mation from Arabic spelling] group drilled the
ﬂukha experimental deep well in its maritime concession area in Hasandam.
and discovered compressed gas in it. Plans for production from this well

have been postponed pending the completion of technical and economic
studies.

The Amoco group has drilled an exploratory well in its maritime concession
area south of Maslrah.

At the present time, the Oman Petroleum Development Company is drilling
60 development wells. including the al-ﬂaqn and al-Tawkidiyah wells.

An engineering study is now being done in the Yabal and al-Khuwayr fields

to determine the possibility of increasing the petroleum extraction from
them.

The nuantity or gas which has been discovered in the sultanate is estima-
1nd at 0.2 trillion cubic feet, and may amount to more than that with the
aid of modern methods of research and exploitation. Studies indicate that
there is enough gas to last half a century, and therefore the national
economy is concerned with the construction of a gas pipeline 330 kilo-
meters long to transfer it from Yabal to al-Ghabrah.

In January l"78, the government signed an agreement with the 0.5. Marshall
company and the Canadian Baruskabshan [Prospection?] company to form the
Oman Mining Company for the exploitation of copper in the mines of al-Asil,
'Arja'. and Bayda' in the area of Suhar.

This company will begin processing 3.500 metric tons of copper per day in
1981. The government owns 75 percent of the shares in the company, and

all of its activities are done under the direct supervision of the ministry
of petroleum and mining.

The ministry discovered large quantities of gypsum on the surface of the
ground in the area north of Salalah.

During a comprehensive survey of the Ra's al-Hadd area, the ministry dis-
covered manganese ore.

Studies which the ministry has conducted indicate the presence of large .

quantities of marble near the capital. in the area between Nazwa and
Takhal. and in the area of Bidbid.

93
In a geological survey of the Hedi Suwi area in al-Sharqiyah, the ministry
discovered coal. Coal deposits have also been found in Wadi Has, to the
east of thearoa where it had been found previously.

The ministry discovered new chromium ore deposits in the areas outside or
lht-(hnan Mining Company concessions and also near Samad.

An agreement has been concluded with the government of the German Federal
Republic to perform geological studies in research and prospecting for
chromium ores in the area between Sama'il, Izki. and Samad, the area south
of Nazwa, and the area west of Nakhl, all of which lie outside of the area
of the concession of the Oman Mining Company. Work will begin in these
areas at the beginning of 1980.

An agreement was made with the government of Japan for geological survey-
ing and prospecting in the area between Mirbat and al-Hasak to search for
minerals in the lowland rocks and also to search for uranium and other

radioactive minerals. The Japanese team will also operate in the area of

Ra's al-Hadd in al-Sharqiyah to perform studies on manganese ores and to
prospect for manganese ore.

The ministry is exercising complete supervision of all quarrying which is
in progress in the sultanate. and is issuing special permits for it. It

recently granted a permit to the Oman Cement Company to extract limestone,
potter's clay, silica, and gypsum.

C50: 6802

96
IMPROVEMENTS MADE IN HATER AND ELECTRICITY SERVICES
Oman 'UMAN in Arabic 18 Nov 79 p 32

[Text] Since the creation of the Ministry of Electricity and Hater by a
decree on 14 June 1978. it has been working to provide and improve serv-
ices in those two fields to meet the requirements of the increasing move-
ment of settlement both in the area of the capital and in the towns and
villages of the Sultanate.

Electricity

Allention is being directed toward increasing the quantity of electrics]
power produced in the capital and providing services for the towns and
villages. Twenty-six electrical power stations have been constructed in
several areas of the Sultanate.

The government bears about 66 percent of the costs of consumption of
electricity. Among the accomplishments which the ministry has made in the
field of electrical services are the following:

On 19 September 1978. it contracted with the French Alsthom Company for the
installation of 6 gas turbine units in the al—Gharbah electricity station
with a total capacity of 205,000 kilowatts at a cost of 8 million riyals.
This unit began operation during September and October 1979.

It contracted with the Sojex company [approximation from Arabic spelling]
for the operation and maintenance of the al-Gharbah station for the gene-
ration of electricity and purification of water from 1 September 1979 to

23 December 1980 at a cost of 6.4 million riyals.

1L contracted with the Omani National Electricity Company to operate and
maintain 12 electricity generating stations in the towns and villages of
the Sultanate for 3 years beginning in June 1978 at a cost of 1.2 million
riyals per year. It undertook, through the directorate general of elec-
tricity and the Salalah Electricity Office and with the collaboration of
a group of national electricity companies. to carry out several projects
to improve and renovate the electrical system of the capital and the
southern area of Salalah by extending aerial lines of 33,000 and 11,000
volts. Ground cables have also been laid. Total costs of these projects
are 2.5 million riyals.

95
0n 5 September 1979, it contracted with the Japanese Seito Company for the
constructioncf a 33,000-volt transformer station at al—Falaj at a cost of
1,4 3,000 riyals. The project will be completed in June 1980.

On 10 October I979, it contracted with the Belgian 1.T.S. Company for the
construction of a 2-circuit 132,000-volt aerial line to carry electrical
power from the al-charbah electrical station to the al—Falaj transformer

station at a total cost of 1.6 million riyals. Work on this project will
be completed in May 1980.

It constructed a 33,000-volt aerial power line 30 kilometers long to con-
nect the administrative region of Barka' with the system of the capital.

0n 8 November 1978, it contracted for the purchase of 2 Marleys-Blackstone
[approximation from Arabic spelling] diesel generators with a capacity of
6,800 kilowatts each to meet the increasing consumption in the southern
region, at a cost of 720,000 riyals. The two generators were installed in
the Salalah electrical station.

It contracted with the U.S. Global Company for the operation and mainte-
nance of the electricity generating and water desalinating station on the
island of Hasirah from 21 August 1979 to 20 August 1972 at a cost of

1.2 million rivals.

Water Services

A water desalinating station in al-Gharbah, which produced 2.5 to 3 million
gallons per day when it was opened in November 1975, now produces 6 million
gallons per day.

Efforts are being made to find stable sources of water by digging wells.
The ministry has also done the following:

It contracted with the TRAFO [approximation from Arabic spelling] Company
for the construction of three reinforced concrete water reservoirs with
special distribution systems. One of these, with a capacity of a million
gallons, is for the district of greater al-Hatrah; another, with a capacity
of one million gallons, is for the district of al-Hatiyah; and the third,
with a capacity of 4 million gallons, is for the district of the al-Qarm
heights. The total cost of this project is 3.3 million riyals, and it is
expected to he completed in May 1980.

It has also contracted with the same company for the construction of a con-
crete water reservoir and a public water system for the town of Sur at a
cost of 2.1 million riyals. It is expected that this project will be com-
pleted in October 1980.

A contract was concluded for the construction of a water pipeline linking
the main line with Bayt al-Barakah at a cost of 250,000 riyals. Construc-
tion on this project was started in May 1979.

96
The ninistry is now prospecting for subterranean water to meet the water
requirements of the capital in 1980, and new lines are being planned to
facilitate the distribution of water to various parts of the capital. This
project will cost 66,000 riyals and work on it will be comleted in

January 1980.

C50: 4802

97
BRIBPS

POLICE FORCE-~11": national police force has 13 security units in the various
districts of the country. It has an acadeny, a naval unit, an office of

imigration, emigration, and passports, an air wins, a fire-fighting unit, a
cavalry unit (which was formed in 1974), a traffic unit, a men's unit, and
an office of public relations. [mcerpts] [Oman '0“?! in Arabic 18 Nov 79

p 17]

C50: 4802

98
EVALUATION OF EFFORTS TO STIMULATB EXTOKTS URGBD
Damascus AL-THAHRAH in Arabic 11 Nov 79 p 5

[Interview with Mr Selah 'Alwash by S.'.: "Public Sector Products Export
Committee and Attempts To Stimulate Exports; Exports Suffering From weak
Capabilities and Red Tape; Ten Proposals To Be Studied Until Required
Formula Is Pound"]

[Text] The rise of imports has serious effects on the balance of trade and
the balance of payments. It also has harmful effects on the national
industry, especially if such growth in imports is not accompanied by a
similar growth in exports.

An awareness of these effects did not stop the trend towards an unreasonable
level of imports until last year. 1978. Exports, meanwhile, remained at a
constant level with crude oil being the primary and the principal commodity
exported. followed by cotton. Together, both constituted between 75 and

80 percent of total exports. Remaining exports consisted of a broad variety
of goods exported by the public and the private sectors. Some of these
goods were engineering goods; some were chenical goods or textile or
agricultural products. If we were to say that [this was the case] until
1978. our statement most certainly means something.

During that year the capacity to cover exports rose from 60 percent to about
55 percent as a result of a set of measures that were taken. But this does
not constitute the entire solution: one measure or more must be taken.

The solution lies in two principal matters:

First. imports should be reduced.

Second. exports should be increased.

This is the only way we can achieve equilibrium in our balance of trade

which should show a profit. If not. it should at least not show a loss.
This is a very important matter.

99
The Status of Public Sector Products

The state places major importance upon the public sector. The National
Action Paper for the coming period and the statement of the Progressive
National Front have enphasized the importance of this sector and of its
leadership. The public sector's production index continued to show that
production was increasing, but that it was suffering from several probleas,
one of which was distribution. Scores of plants were suffering from an

overstock of their products. In fact. sone of them would occasionally
stop production because of the lack of storage space. This is a problem

fron which most public sector companies suffer. It is, therefore. imperative
to have a solution.

This time. the solution comes from one direction.

The solution lies in exports, which. as is said, will get two birds with
one stone. 0n the one hand, exports will contribute to correcting

our trade balance, and on the other hand. they will contribute to reducing
the burden and the problems of storage. Exports will also push the produc-
tion process forward after such a channel for distribution is found.

Examples

Until late 1978 overstocked merchandise at the Hons Textile Conpany amounted
to approximately 1.5 million yards of fabrics.

At the Silk Industries Company-.SATEx--in Aleppo. the quantity of overstocked
fabrics amounted to approximately 1 million yards.

At the ready to wear plant in Aleppo there were approximately 3 million
articles of clothing. There were also 30,000 cases of beer. and the
production of alcohol reached the satiation point.

The case was the same at the glass. matches. underwear and canning plants.

In other words, we had nothing to suggest that we were engaged in exporting
in spite of the fact that we have several foreign trade organizations that

are engaged in export activity. In other words, the export process was
almost stagnant.

Rescue Resolution

it was, therefore, inevitable that there be a rescue attempt. Such an

attempt would begin with a resolution that would set down practical ideas

and give the green light that would set them in motion. The prime minister's
Executive Order No 271 was issued on 17 August 1978. It stated the following:

"Out of a desire to stimulate the export of surplus public sector products.
and based on public interest requirements, a committee is to be formed to

100
devote itself. though not exclusively. to [promoting] the export of all public
sector products. It would regularly submit to the deputy prime minister for
economic affairs a comprehensive report of its accomplishments. This report
would show its activities and the results of its efforts."

The Committee's First ﬂeeting

On 26 August 1978 the cmittee that was formed in accordance with the
aforementioned resolution set for the first time to review its functions
and the requirements for carrying them out. It began by sending the
ministries of industry, supply. economy, oil, agriculture and defense as

well as other ministries a form which it called the Form of Surplus Products
Prepared for Exports.

The form included the following: the nuns of the comercial product; the
technical specifications of the product; the unit; the cost of production;
the cost of sales; proposed profit ratios; export sale price; place of
delivery; the quantity presently available: the quantity available monthly;
time of delivery; method of payment; and packaging.

The form included other essential information which the importer would
want to know.

The Committee's Ideas

On 12 August 1978 the consittee had set down its ideas on an appropriate

export formula. It attempted to reply in this formula to the following
questions:

whit goods do we produce in [Syria]?

What are the materials with which these goods are produced?

For whom are these goods produced?

what is the volume of production compared with available production capabilities?
what are the surplus capabilities or what are their shortcomings?

How are these different goods produced? to this quantity consistent in
general with the requirements of consuners?

The cmittee also emphasized the importance of defining the following
matters:

Hhat are the goods that are ready to meet the needs of the local market?
Does our local production meet those needs?
Is there a surplus in [our] production capability that has not been

untilized?

101
Are we producing in accordance with the needs of the local market or in
accordance with available production capabilities?

if production capabilities are greater than local demand. are we to
utilize those capabilities to produce what is required by local demand?

There were other essential questions in this regard.

"hat is important is that the comittee attempted to respond to the questions
it had raised. It came out with a set of proposals. and it took action on
those which concerned it. It left the inplenentation of the other proposals—

which we need not review here because this is not our subject—to the authorized
agencies.

A Meeting With the Chairman of the Co-ittee

The subject at hand for which we made this preface pertains to the conittee
which was charged with the task of exporting the pods produced by the
public sector. He interviewed Hr. Salah 'AJwash the chairman of the
comittee in an attempt to find out information about its activities and,
accordingly, an answer to this question, "has the counittee fulfilled

and is it fulfilling its objective, or should it be considered a stage that
we mnet go beyond and a preliminary formula that we must develop?

lQucuzion; 'dhy was the comittee formed, and what are its functions?

[Answer] The connittee was formed out of a desire to stimulate the export

of surplus public sector products. It was formed in accordance with the
Prime Minister's Order No 271 on 17 August 1978. This comittee is not
cxclu-=lve1y devoted to this task, and it is convened by its chairman during
and after working hours to study all products that are intended for export and

to make proposals and recounendations that would overcome all difficulties
and bring about the success of the export process.

The Committee and Foreign Trade Organizations

[Question] There are special organizations that are affiliated with the
Ministry of Economy and Foreign Trade. These organizations carry out import
and export operations. How is coordination between these organizations and
the comittee brought about? Does the couittee curb the activities of
these organizations?

[Answer] In accordance with the aforementioned Order No 271 the committee
has considered all the authorized agencies-«he ministries. the organizations.
the companies and others--as being under obligation to facilitate the

function of this committee and to provide it with all the information
pertaining to the export of products. This includes specifications. prices.
payment conditions, delivery. times and location of delivery as well as any

other information that would help the committee accomplish its mission
successfully.

102
The comittse has not replaced any authority. organization or any other
agency that carries out any export Operation. It also has not abolished
anyone of the roles played by these authorities, organizations or agencies.
It came into existence to complement these organizations in an energetic
and a flexible manner that would help these organizations move with more
speed and more flexibility so that the process of exporting Arab-Syrian
products would assume a dynamic and an effective dimension that would go
beyond the framework of exporting a conventional comedity and include the
possiblity of not only exporting surplus goods, but also those goods that
can be produced for export in an organized, regular and permanent fashion.

An Equation

[Question] L'e in Syria. like in any other country, still depend in our
exports in a principal way on raw materials. whereas we rely in our imports
on manufactured and semi-manufactured goods in a principal way also. How
do we solve this problem? In other words, how do we reverse the equation?

[Answer] It is possible to reverse the equation. This requires sincerity
and devotion to work until we rid ourselves completely or to a large extent
of the structure of a consumer society and become completely or to a large
extent also a producing society that sakes major contributions not only in
the spheres of the national economy, but also in those of the international
economy.

Continued imports in this manner will in time become a heavy burden on our
economy. Accordingly. what is required is the reversal of the equation.

The Status of Export Activity

[Question] Let us talk about the status of export activity. Does proceeding
from this status guarantee the reversal of this equation?

[Answer] In addition to what we have stated about this status, the
capabilities that are offered to support and encourage exports are weak.

Information that is necessary about foreign markets is almost nonexistent.
The methods that are followed are lacking. and the red tape is totally
backward.

An Important Step

This status of the process. the tools and the methods of exporting has
become the state's primary concern. especially after a large number of
industrial projects, agricultural projects and combined industrial and
agricultural projects were established. and the need to establish a firm
and a developing policy for exporting goods became very urgent. The idea
of a Public Sector Products Export Comittee was a step on the road and
does not represent the complete policy that is expected. Although the
creation of this connittee was a step on this road. it was a driving and an
effective step in stimulating the industrial exports that are necessary to
ensure the publications it needs for correspondence and other purposes.

The Connnittee's Activities

[Question] After this. can you tell us about the volume and the kind of
trade operations that the comittee has carried out?

[Answer] The comittee's first export operation, completed less than
3 months after it was formed. was the export of 500 tons of white alcohol
to Lebanon for over 140.000 11.8. dollars.

Afterwards. there were visits to North Yeuen, to South Yemen and to Kuwait

to study the aarltets there. Some of the products of the Public Organization
for the Trade and Manufacture of Grain, of the Syrian Public Organization for
Class and Cerasics Industries, of the United Arab Company for Hatches and
Particle Hood and of the Conversion Industries Company were exhibited in
thuse markets. The connittee sold some of these products at these markets.

Then the comittee visited Iraq and sold goods worth approximately 37 million
Syrian pounds to the Socialist sector.

The committee has received in Syria a delegation from the Public Organiza-
tion for Trading Consumer Goods in Iraq, and it sold Syrian products worth
almoat 33 million Syrian pounds.

In Jordan, products of the Conversion Industries Company and white medical
alcohol worth 170,000 dollars have been sold.

We have also exported goods worth 50.000 U.S. dollars to different markets
adjacent to Kwait.

Last July the committee oversaw the setting up of an exhibition of Arab—

Syrian products in Baghdad. Goods from the public. the private and the
vocational sectors worth 40 million Syrian pounds were sold. Other contracts

were signed with public sector organizations. The contracts are worth almost
20 million Syrian pounds.

Proposals for Establishing an Export Organization

[Question] We ask again about the status and the functions of the cosaaittee
and about the justifications for the existence of foreign trade organiza-
tions. We do not believe that this situation can be logical. Do you have
an idea of a suitable formula for an organisation, for organizations or
comittees that would carry out the export process?

[Answer] The comaittee has proposed to the supreme responsible authorities
a comprehensive view of an appropriate formula for establishing a public

104
organization that would specialize in exports. It has emphasized that until
such an organization is established, we must do the following in order to
continue the export process with all available capabilities:

1. we must direct all the sectors of production to reconsider the produc-
tion capabilities that are available to them and to indicate these surplus

capabilities that may be utilized in exports through annual plans that make
note of those capabilities with the foreknowledge of the committee.

2. These sectors are to be directed to reconsider their cost accounting for
export purposes.

3. These sectors are to improve and to develop their productivity. They
are to pay attention to the principles of packaging and of preparing
such packages appropriately and safely.

4. We are to assist these sectors in lifting many of the restrictions that
prevent them from taking flexible action to export their products.

5. We are to study markets that are socially similar to ours, and we are
to establish trade centers there where our products would be displayed to

familiarize these markets with our products so we can market then through
these trade centers.

6. We are to utilize our embassies, the chambers of commerce and industry

and banks to furnish ourselves with all the information possible about all
the markets.

7. We are to take advantage of international expositions that are held
either in Arab countries or in foreign countries.

8. We are to establish all the terms that are necessary to make it easy
for the different production sectors to stimulate the export of their

products which are ready for export or their surplus products and their
exportable products.

9. We must also utilize all possible means to advertise our products well.
This includes full compliance with the ideal conduct for exporting goods
and finding the necessary appropriations for this purpose.

10. We are to establish. train. develop and motivate on different levels
the cadre that is necessary for this process.

An Evaluation Process

These are proposals whose possible application and effectiveness in
stimulating the work of the committee or of other organizations, we cannot
determine alone. However, we do think that these proposals are important

105
and reasonable. but so that we can be more specific , we are asking for an
evaluation of this committee and of its activities. If the result of the
evaluation shows that the cmittse succeeded in the mission with which
it was charged, and we believe that it has accomplished this mission. we
must continue to support it until we succeed in finding a suitable and a
permanent formula for carrying out the export process. We believe that

expanding this comittee is possible and that its nabers ought to be devoted
exclusively to the proposed organization.

Giving export [activity] major, exclusive and specialized attention will
have numerous effects on the national revenue. It will balance the Syrian
balance of trade and will make a glorious contribution to the international

econony .

8592
C80: 10802

106
NEH ECONOMIC VISTAS PROJECTED
Damascus AL-BA'TH in Arabic 12 Nov 79 pp 10-11
[Interview with Dr ﬂuaayn Ibrahim by 'Abd al-Ru'uf al-szri]

[Excerpts] Economic policy is being concentrated on developing resources
and self—capabilities, both material and human. This means that we are
heading toward true progress.

The exploitation of oil nationally has important repercussions on our
growth progress, but in practice, we had not thought about concentrating
on developing the remainder of our resources and mineral wealth, most of
which being of more importance than oil, until after confirmatory action,
especially when it was done by the General Institution for Geology and
Mineral Health.

Despite the short life of this organization, it has been able to establish
its credentials and capabilities on different levels, since it has supplied,
and will continue to supply our national economy with enormous capabilities
and has surpassed oil potentials scores of times.

This organization has been able to complete the geological survey of many
parts of the country. The results, established on a scientific basis, were
excellent. Thus survey was badly needed. since it is considered the basis
for the raw materials exploration program.

This organisation, without our knowledge or our being told by the public
industrial sector organizations, has submitted economic feasibility studies
for several proposed projects. At the same time, this organisation advo-
cated the preparation and training of national cadres which will be required,
commensurate with the determined capabilities during the next few years,

for the development of our mineral resources, especially the exploitation

of iron ore in Zabdani. salt mines, asphalt, chrome and copper, as well

as the exploitation of sandy limestone, magnesium, basaltic wool, red brick
and gypsum, and increasing our exports of phosphates and other kinds of
mineral wealth not yet exploited in a manner required and desired.

107
Our conversation with Dr Husayn Ibrahim, director general of the General
Institution for Geology and Mineral Health, which has lasted more than

10 hours, is based on facts which the organization has established during
its young life, and at the same time deals with a comprehensive review of
this organization's accomplishments up to the present time, as well as the
future probabilities for our national economy. Finally, it is a candid
discussion of the directions of industry as a whole in the country.

However. permit me to say. before setting forth the dialogue, that I had
imagined that our industrial potential, or more precisely our raw material
resources, were modest and limited. But after this conversation I was per-
suaded that the contrary was true. The organization will supply our economy
with enormous capabilities, and our country, as soon as the raw materials
are exploited and industrialized, will surely be among the wealthy and de-
veloped nations. However, this organisation has difficulties and problems,
the foremost being interference, routine, and so forth.

However I don't wish to prolong my introduction. It is better that we be-
gin the interview.

[Question] It is well known that since its inception, the institution has
raised the point of the need to exploit raw materials, particularly building
materials, as substitutes for cement. How far has this got to, and what is
the -mportance of that with respect to the local market?

[Answer] We raised the idea of manufacturing building materials on the ba-
sis that they could be a replacement for cement, at a time when our construc-
tion sector was relying especially on cement. This is what creates a kind

of monopoly, as well as encouraging the growth of the black market. This

is a well-known economic fundamental in all of the world. From this stand-
point, we raised the matter of cement substitutes, relying upon the availa-
bility of raw materials for construction in the country and in various lo-
calities. For example:

Limestone, or lime in general, is abundant in the country in a ratio of ap-
proximately one third to the soil. As for sand, I don't believe that any-
one would deny that we have many types of sand. Then there is marblized
limestone, I mean marble. Then there is another material, natural gypsum.
There is a sixth of the country's area covered with basalt rocks, which

can be used as stone for construction or which can be smelted and industrial
materials extracted from it, to be used in several industries, for example
basaltic wool. The raising of these ideas requires their clarification and
simplification to enable us to give a clear picture of all the aspects, such
as new industrial materials to assist our national economy, so that we can
increase the diversity of the construction [industry]. This is what is im-
pairing our economy so far.

[Question] “hat can be said about asphalt and its two types, and is the re-
serve sufficient to be industrialized? "hat is the economic extent of this
project in the event of industrialization?

108
[Answer] He have a huge reserve of natural asphalt material in its two
types. calcic and sandy. from which the heavy oils and so forth can be ex-
tracted. The overflow can be used as raw materials for construction. and
also red brick can be manufactured from it. Arab and foreign countries

have a more than 10 year headstart on us in this industry. i say that re-
gretfully because these raw materials are abundant in our country and readil
available in all parts of the country. No one has so far done anything to
exploit them.

[Question] “hat is the economic extent of this project in the event of in-
dustrialization?

[Answer] It would certainly be economical. Studies which we have done
so far have proved that it is economical and that there is absolutely no
reason to delay implementing these projects. I must emphasize that these
projects should have been carried out 20 years ago, or at least begun.

He now have a study for the asphalt project, for the purpose of setting up
a factory in Latakia to produce asphalt tiles at the rate of 1.25 million
squares annually. We are now on the verge of completing it once the tests

and analyses of samples have been completed.

[Question] "hat about economic feasibility studies for the rest of the
proposed projects?

[Answer] First of all, the economic feasibility study for the gypsum pro-
ject has envisioned the establishment of three economic production units
in areas where this raw material is available.

The second project concerns marble, for the purpose of industrializing
this very important material, which the country imports at an annual cost
of more than 100 million Syrian pounds in hard currency.

Two facilities will be established in Latakia and Damascus. We have been
eager for that, because we can show solid evidence of this industry's fea-
sibility and importance for the country. We have found in those areas ex-
cellent types of marble. comparable to and competitive with Italian marble.
Our reserve is sufficient for 100-200 years and comprises seven different
types of marble. He proposed the establishment of two facilities several
months ago.

[Question] "hat about the cost of these two facilities?

[Answer] We completed the economic feasibility study for the marble pro-
ject in 1978. At the same time we did a parallel study of soliciting

bids based on economic factors and on the size of our initial production,
and we settled and committed ourselves. However. I'm sorry to say, certain
bureaucratic actions and some interference forced us to postpone the pro-
ject until the second half of this year. I was unable to give the go-ahead

109
to the specific foreign company until 26-7-79. The costs of the project
have not increased much despite the fact that we compressed the construction
costs and made use of every element and material. The costs will not ex-
ceed 50 million Syrian pounds for the two places, including the equipment
needed for the quarries and overseeing the civilian installations. The

production value of the project for a year and s half will fully cover these
costs.

The third study is an economic feasibility study for the sandy limestone pro-
ject. I would like to emphasize this because it is of considerable impor-
tance, if we realize that the country as yet does not have a single lime
factory. This is very regrettable if we recall that a third of the country's
soil is calcic. Us import burned lime from Lebanon. and lime is used in
various chemical industries. He did a study on erecting a lime factory, in
addition to a sandy limestone works. It is less expensive than concrete and
pumice stone. Its costs might be less than half the cost of pumice stone.
Apart from that, limestone is more suitable than pumice and more resistant.
From all aspects, it can be an excellent substitute for pumice and for ce-
ment in the construction sector. He also have some other studies which

will be completed soon. such as red fired brick. Hhen I obtain the results
of the semi—finished tests, we will complete the feasibility study for red
brick and submit it to higher authorities.

[Qurztlnn] Hhat about magnesium; is it possible to produce that locally?

[Answer] Magnesium is a heat—resistant element well-known in the world and
is used in vast quantities in all industries which use ovens. The raw ma-
terial for this element is abundant here in the area of al-Basayt. It is
the "green rock" whose scientific name is "serpentine," and is found in
huge quantities. we have made preliminary studies with respect to explora—
tion, geological survey, excavation and digging. Samples were taken and
analyzed, and we have sent off semi-finished samples. He hope to receive
the results soon so that we can complete the economic feasibility study for
this project. This will be one of the most important of our projects and
most ideally suited for a developing country such as ours. One ton of this
material sells for 700 dollars in most world markets. and the demand for

it is increasing as time goes on.

Then there is the salt project. We are now working to amend the previous
study. A preliminary study has been drawn up to erect a small complex in
the al-Tabbanah area to develop the mine, to establish a small facility,
In addition, to package the salt for cooking and for industrial uses. and
a third small facility to produce hydro- and sodium chloric acid. This
is what is called integration of small industries and integration of raw
materials industry.

[Question] What about the institution‘s new projects in accordance with
the Fourth Five-Year Plan?

110
[Answer] The fact is that the institution has no Fourth Five-Year Plan, be-
cause it was established in the middle of the foerth plan. The previous di-
rectorate of geological research had a plan limited to exploration activi-
ties and certain geophysical survey operations.

Re have deviated from this plan, not at all out of a desire to deviate,

but because the institution has been tasked with new duties. It has been
made incumbent upon us to propose extra-ordinary projects outside the scope
of the fourth plan. For example. the iron ore project in the al-Zabdani
area. After the exploration and survey operations were completed, we proved
the increase in the reserve quantities, in a way which could be said that
we have a reserve sufficient to establish the industry, if this industry is
confirmed after completion of the economic feasibility study now being pre-
pared. In the light of exploration and other operations, we signed a memo-
randum in which we referred to the reserve. His Excellency the president
issued an order to follow up on this benefit. We are inspired by this di-
rection and this august wish which motivates us to continue our work.

The amount of our reserves has increased remarkably and surely. If the
economic feasibility is proved, I see no reason not to establish this in-
dustry. Bear in mind that we import more than 800,000 tons per year of
iron and steel products, using hard currency. This is what overburdens the
national economy.

[Question] Hhat about the institution's budget and its new projects for
next year?

[Answer] I was told that we asked for a huge budget for 1980; I believe
these words to be somewhat exaggerated, because I have not asked for peo-
jects which existed previously. These projects are being broached for the
first time. I look at the returns from the project and at its economic
benefit. I want to begin the project when the economic study is completed.
but the fact of routine and bureaucracy stands in the way of that.

It was not at all our fault that these projects have not been broached
before. This does not mean that they are bad and that our scientific con-
victions should not be carried out. We have broached them in all confi-
dence. sincerity, and truthfulness. bolstered by statistics. legal opinions,
expertise and hard work, and our projects cannot be delayed.

Therefore. we only ask in light of what our studies in the institution show.
after the time-table for implementation for this industry has been drawn up.
Next year we will be ready to begin implementing the sandy limestone pro-
ject. But actions are taken at times which affect the economic feasibility
study. The world is in constant and continual motion. Moreover. the gyp-
sum project was delayed 217 days and the marble project 6-7 months. I am
afraid that the plans and the implementation schedule. which I am now set-
ting up in the institution, will have to be skipped, if the routine and the
bureaucracy oppose us. "hen I planned to carry out four projects next year,

111
I was opposed by the same obstacles and roadblocks placed in our way for
the previous projects. Naturally we will not be able to implement these

projects. They appear, at the end of 1980, to be uneconomical, although
this evaluation is incorrect.

Horeover. next year we have the magnesium project. I emphasize it because
it is one of the very important projects of its kind, since it introduces
a new factor into our national industry. It is not technologically diffi-
cult but it does require new expertise. Re are now acquiring that.

I believe that these studies. the previously mentioned economic feasibility
studies. along with the magnesium. salt and fired brick studies, all will
be completed in the first quarter of 1980. I stress this date because I
am also committed to it. In the event higher authorities approve. we will
be ready within 2 weeks to begin. You see, my timetables to implement

these projects are subject to the bureaucracy and to certain obstacles and
hindrances.

[Question] Are the laws the obstacle or what?

[Answer] I think and believe that our present laws are suitable. If we
apply them lock. stock and barrel, and unless our work is hindered, I be-
lieve that they enable us to fully carry out whatever actions we wish
in order to implement the projects. The obstacles are not in the laws

but in their execution. Bad execution is the basic obstacle and hindrance
to these endeavors.

We have requested 390 million Syrian pounds for next year. I wish to note
here that this amount is no more than what one production line in an exist-

ing cement factory in our country requires. Does this take into account in-
flation? At the time the reverse was true.

Then there is the al-latrite project. This is next in importance to bauxite
in the extraction of aluminum. He made a study in the institution, and

this material is found here west of Eons. We have made several tests, dur-
ing which we worked more than 7 months. He are awaiting results of the
analysis of the samples. Note that Poland for years has exploited alu-
minum from this same material found here in abundance. Note that we have
not charged the state anything.

He in the institution, because of our expertise. offer the desired author-
ity, initiative, and cooperation with specific. professional units.

[Question] "hat have you prepared for the coming Fifth Five-Year Plan?
[Answer] We are now drawing up time-tables for the fifth plan. I believe
that we will expand in the area of exploiting raw materials, exploring for

them, evaluating them in terms of economics, and attempting to industrialise
them as a matter of course.

112
Re have the matter of chrome and copper in al-Basayt. This has special in-
portance especially for the president and for the institution as well. We
have surveys underway in many parts of the country for certain of the colored
minerals, such as zinc and lead. We are exploring new for these things and

are coming up with initial signs and indications, calling for optiaism.
This is also the case regarding oil shale.

"e are now putting our efforts on the fifth plan, and we will work out the

details for some of the projects whose studies were not completed during
the Fourth Five-Year Plan.

I think that the Fifth Five-Year Plan will be tantamount to a phase of in—
plementation, to implement not less than six projects of the most economi-

cal and most feasible projects of the national economy and which will sup—
port the remaining areas of industry.

Nevertheless, I think as concerns the five-year plan: you know that some-
times three-fourths of a five-year plan's projects generally are recycled
from the previous plan. Therefore, we err in estimating the record of timely
programs for an industrial project; the influence of development forces the
matter to be the reverse of what is planned, and the scientific language

of the age must be dealt with and understood.

We are new setting up a study group in the areas of geology and mineral re-
sources, which included geological survey and evaluations of competence. For
the next 20 years future surveys for mineral wealth in the country will be
based on this. This survey will mean indications for us either to implement
the Fifth Five-Year Plan or to conceive features of the plan to follow.

This will give us a great deal of protection from error.

[Question] Our country is in a technological transition stage; is it pos-
sible for the institution and the country to shorten and compress it?

[Answer] In fact. this is what I wanted to respond to, under the slogan of
small production units without recourse, or rather instead of large indus-
trial complexes, beginning with industries which do not need very high tech-
nical expertise and do not need very high technology, and without recourse

to a need for complicated industries, which would compel us to import nearly
everything from abroad.

We are now asking ourselves to build an industry fro. the bottol to the top.

The industrial pyramid must rest on a base, and cannot begin the other way
around.

The large industrial complex creates and brings with it probleaa which can
be summarized by two factors:

1. The administrative factor. He do not have this now, because the indus-

trially advanced foreign nations developed this eleaent during more than
100 years.

113
2. Complex technology in large industrial complexes requires public utilities
and so-called supplementary industries which must be ready at any time to
supply these complexes not only with spare parts or raw materials. and the
like. We have examples. but let us urge it. we have proposed the small
industrial facility whose economic feasibility can be proved before anything
is committed to the raw materials. In the future, these small industrial
units can be expanded. This small installation is like a building brick.

the first foundation stone, upon which we can add more stones in the future.
Therefore, the small complex which I envision for the rock salt in Dayr al-
Zawr is composed of three production units joined together. These small in-
dustrial units are of great social importance. The technology of these units
can be controlled and consequently, we are qualified, throughout, to solve
their small problems, whereas it would be the reverse with large industrial
complexes, looking out for problems which we had never before faced, be—
cause we had never passed through the stage of developing small industries.
This is currently being done in India, Algeria, and some African states.

The industrially advanced nations never advocate the establishment of these
units and these installations, because they see that as a danger to their
interests. since the developing nations in this way can rapidly reach a
specific industrial level and will be able to do without imports.

In the small units, the maintenance time can be compressed, and their pro-
duction capacity can in fact be achieved.

(Question) It has been observed that many of the country's old and new in-
dustrial installations cannot achieve the production capacity set for them.

Why?

[Answer] Such installations as these lacked economic feasibility studies.

In all candor we must say that no economic feasibility study has been found
for many of the large projects. The truth is that the country's economic
capabilities are vast, but the workforce has been located badly in some
areas. Within the scope of our organization, we have taken steps to correct
this matter diligently and with scientific conviction. Before everything
else. we use statistics to prove specific quantity, type. length. width. and
depth of any operation in its place. I believe that during the next 20
years, if we continue on this program, you will see very small industries
but they will be effective and will support the national economy effectively,

and will be preparing themselves for expansion.

Comment: A conversation like this with Dr Husayn Ibrahim is lengthy. and
there are several different and positive comments about iron, phosphates,
etc., which we will deal with in detail next time.

7005
CSO: 6802

11k