APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/00: ClA-RDPOZ-00080R000200030012-3
Near East/ North Africa Report

No.2054

FBIS FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE
m

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and mterial enclosed in brackets
[I are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
0-: [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original intorntion was
processed. Hhere no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was sunnarised or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Hords or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriaze in content.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.8. Government.

PROCUREMENT OF PUBLICPTIONS

JPRS publications my be ordered fro. the National Technical
Information Service, Springfield, Virginia 22161. In order-
ing, it is reconended that the ms number, title, date and
author, if applicable, of publication be cited.

Current JPRS publications are announced in Goverment hearts
Announcements issued semi-monthly by the National Technical
Informatics: Service, and are listed in the Monthly Catalog of
11.8. Government Publications issued by the Superintendent of
Documents, 0.8. Government Printing office, Hashingron, 0.6.
201002.

Indexes to this report (by keyword, author, personal name. a,
title and series) are available from Bell & Howell, 01d
Mansfield Road, Wooster, (laio “691.

Correspondence pertaining to matters other than procurement
my be addressed to Joint Publications Research Service,
1000 North Glebe Road, Arlington, Virginia 22201.
u. lbw-M Hum: 200 um)

 
 

   

  

Political Science
Sociology
Economics
Culture (Social
Sciences)
Ethnology
Geography
Techolugical
Hilitary Sciences

    
   
    
  
    
  
  

  

   
  
   

1|. Anna-hold, tulmnl

Sold by NTIS;

[5N ANSI-l” I.)

O7. Dot-none" Mum I Duet-men

b Idenul-vnlOumM form

t manta-alum. SD, 5C, 5K. 15

l-nlinuted Availability

Springfield, Virginia 22161

Liner-Arab Affairs _x__l.ibya

_North African __Hauritania
Affairs LMorocco
__Afghanistan _People's Demo-
_x_A1geria cratic Republic
LBahrain of Yer-en
__Egypt ___Persian Gulf
Llran Area
_Iraq _x__Qatar
_x_Israe1 _Saudi Arabia
_Jordan ___Spanish North
_Ll<wait Africa

Lebanon

    
 
    
  

_x__ Sudan

  
  
 
   
  

quotass_rrreo_
UNCLASSIFIED

80. lulu-thou on loam

1‘ ”My CD“ "In. I'IOIII— 31.”..00 Pun

Hymn-ycwtmu rm: I V

—————————+

This serial report contains information on socioeconomic. government. political.
and technical developments in the countries of the Near East and North Africa.

LSultanate
of Oman

___Syria

2: Tunisia

:United Arab

Emirates
Haste rn Saha ra

:Yemen Arab

Republic

9.7

52'." vim—

 
 
 

."MAL '0.“ 211 “-1"

am", Ills-”l

n.-.‘_.4n .a l ..—_....
NEAR EAST/NORTH AFRICA REPORT
No. 2954

Cou'rsurs

INTER-ARAB AFFAIRS

DFFLP's Havatimh Urges Further Opposition to U.S.
Policy
(Nayil’ Hauabimh Interview; AL-VATAN, 26 Oct. 79)..

PLO's 'Awad: Iranian Moves 'Pavo. the Hay' for Aral:
Anti-ms. Action
(AL-"ATAN’ 20 NOV 79) once-cocoo'o-ooooooooone-coo

PFLP Spokesman on ReLstions With Egpt. United States
(Bassam abu-Sharif Interview; AL-HAI‘ , 31 Oct 79)

Klibi Holds Press Conference Following Arab Summit.
(TAP, 23 NOV 79) coo-coco.oooeooooeoocveeonooao.on

FLC's 'Arat'at. on Tunis Summit, Sahara Problem, Governmmt
in mile
(Yasir 'Amfat Interview; AL-RA'Y AL-‘Am, 8 Nov 79)

Foreign Minister Urges Lebanon To Solve Its Woolen:
('Ali Hashim; AL-NAHAR AL-‘ARABI WA AL-DWALI,
5-11 NOV 79) coo-e-cocooouooo.eoouotooeoovooooonon
WIN

'DAILY NHS' Views Events Shakng Middle Bet
(Mitorial; cum: DAILY was, an Nov 79)

Briefs
mbassy Takeover 'Barbaric'
Treasury Secretary Talks

IRAN

Takeover of U.S. Embassy Gets Massive Support
(Various sources, 5, 6 Nov 79) ..................

Backing of Political Parties
Student's Approval

Support From Provinces

Mich Favorable mil

Healer Attempts To Reassert Authority
(3mm, 25 Sep 79)

numeyni's Son Sets Limits on Rule by Clergy

(Hojjatolenlm Seyyed Ahmad honeyni;
KEYHAN, 20 Oct 79) ..............................

Amy Parse Deemed Vital for Islamic Regime
(liabibollah Peyman; mm, 21 Oct 79)

Conandcrs Give Stern Warnings to Kurds
(13mm, 23 Oct 79)

ISRAEL

Israeli Settlement Policy Called Threat to Peace
(Ed:toria1;AL—QUIX3, 15 Oct 79)
KIHAIT

Kuwaiti Papers Assess Implication of Seizure of U.S.
Bnbassy

(KUNA, 12 NOV 79) onson-uoooooooo-ooooonoooooooooo

'AL-ANBA" Comments on U.S.-Iranian Crisis
(KUNA, 15 NOV 79) soa.ooouoI-Iaoo-oooo-ouooooec-so

'Mr-RA'Y AL-‘Am' 'Ridlcuies' U.S. Statement on Mideast
Policy

(Kl-INA, 8 NOV ’9) oncocoonooaooaooao-ooooooooooaoso

'AL-RA'Y AL-‘Am‘ 'Regrets' Arab, Palestinian 'Rush'
To Save U.S. Hostages
(m, 11 Nov n) OOOOIICCIIIIIIDIDOOCOOO000......

‘AL-HATAN': U.S. Completes Preparations for Nile Basin
Union

(m,10 "0V w) I.0......BOO-IIIOOIIIIODIOOIOIIO

Briers
Iranian Revolution Second Stage
Iran's Loss of Prestige
Possible Iranian Military Coup

LIBYA

Libya. Urges Arab Nation To 'Reviw' Deposits in U.S.
Banks

(Tripoli Voice of the Arab Homeland, 15 Nov 79)...

'IENA': In September Assassinations, Explosions
Occurred in Libya
(HERA, Ill NOV 79) non...poooooo-oooo-oounoaouo-ooo

meco

Morocco's Boucetta Views Tics HiLh Spain, Equatorial
Guinea, Sahara
(M'hamed Boucettn Interview; 1.! MATIN, .11 Nov 79)..

Istiqlal Party Memorandum Candemm; Algerian: 'Fmtricidal'
Var

(LE MATIN, 3 39v 79) .............................
Brut-1:;
U.S. Policy Toward Iran

SUDAN

Briefs
Call for 'National Govemmcnt'
Registering of Refugees
Airport Project Loan
Romanian Petroleum Delegation
Bank Deposits Increase
Loans for Railway
Anti-Locust Campaign

SULTANATE 0? MN

Qabus Views Problems of Safegmrding Strait of Romuz
(Qabus Ibn 83' id Interview; AL-wA'mI, 16 Nov 79)

TUNISIA

Political, Economic, Social Conditions Reported
(Paul Balca; LB norms, various dates)

Briefs
U.S. Freezing Iranian Assets

m ARAB REPUBLIC

Aden-Moscow Treaty Seen Ending Unity Projects
(AL-m AL-‘ARABI WA AL-DWALI, 12-18 Nov 79).

Brie fs
Trade Agreement Hi th Czechoslovakia
DPFLP'S HAHA'I'IHAH URGES FURTHER OPPOSITIGI 1'0 0.8. POLICY
13021105 Kuwait Ala-"ATM! in Arabic 26 Oct 79 p l, 13 Lb

[Interview with DPFLP Secretary General Nayif Hawatinah granted to Yusuf
al-Shuli—date not given]

[Excerpts] Beirut—~The 0.8. Proposal. Camp David

[Question] “hat is the Palestinian attitude toward the proposal on Lebanon
outlined by 0.8. Secretary of State Cyrus Vance?

[Answer] The recent U.S. proposal is a "Lebanese Casp David" to inpose
capitulation on Lebanon through a conciliation [sulh] treaty, to curb Arab
and Palestinian opposition to the two Camp David agree-eats and to break
the Arab blockade of al-Sadat's regime. It is no coincidence that the 0.8.
call for an international conference on Lebanon has been concoaitant with
the rightist sides' call for an Arab sunit on southern Lebanon instead of
a suit conference for pro-sting the Baghdad conference resolutions and
boycotting American isperislisn, now that the Arab wager on gaining tile
in order to persuade the United States to change its attitude, on the one
hand, and to fragsentize the Baghdad resolution, on the other, has failed.
In practice the 0.5. proposal scans the withdrawal of the Palestinian
resistance from south Lebanon and its replacement by the Lebanese Arty. the
substitution of UN forces for the deterrent forces and the establish-ant
of a so-called general and lasting truce (a treaty of capitulation). Thus.
the resistance would be fettered and Syria weakened.

Our attitude toward this plan is based on couplets rejection of all 0.8.
liquidationiat formulas. He call for a fourth sullit of the steadfastness
and confrontation front and strict implementation of the Baghdad sumit
resolutions. We also call for an ending to the phase of rushing to the
United States under the illusion that it is the sources which will regain
Palestinian rights. At the sane tine, we call for the convening of a

10th Arab su-it conference to adopt measures against the United States,

now that a year has elapsed since the Camp David agree-eat and the al-Sadat-
Israeli treaty--a whole year of inaction with the United States is enough.
A move toward practical and tangible neasures is required, particularly
the use of the oil weapon.

[Question] The Palestinian attitude appears to be divided on Rev Jesse
Jackson's statements and the proposals he brought with him during his re-
cent tour. Is this true? What is the DPP'LP's attitude?

[Answer] We nust differentiate between Jackson's visit to learn the facts
and promote the American blacks' solidarity with our people and an agitating
but suspicious task which essentially amounts to U.S. containment of the
PLO.

The change that occurred in Rev Jesse Jackson's task from visitor to "media-
tor" promts us to adopt a stand toward this new mediation. Hhst Jackson
proposes was aimed at getting the PLO to make concessions under the guise
of moderation in return for establishing a relationship between the no and
the United States.

Therefore, Jackson wanted to disarm the resistance, contain the PM), bring
about reconciliation with al-Sadst's regine and end the Arab blockade of
this regime. Thus the PLO or any Palestinian side representing it would
then be forced to the Camp David table after being divested of all elements
of strength.

Therefore, we reject part and parcel all Rev Jackson's proposals and call
for the continuation of the struggle against the U.S. policy and schemes
until the United States is conpelled to acknowledge our people's rights in
keeping with the widespread international will which has recognized our
people's right to struggle to return to their homeland and achieve national
independence.

The Possibilities of War Exist

[Question] Regarding the dogfights over Lebanon between Syrian and Lebanese
[as published] aircraft and the possibility of the south triggering a new
war. is such a war ininent? What is your estimation?

[Answer] The Syrian aircraft's interception of the Zionist enemy's air-
craft over Lebanon has added a new qualitative factor to the continuous
Zionist war of attrition. Since the start of the intermittent Zionist war
the Arab states have contented themselves with supporting us with statements
when they should have extended all elements of support and steadfastness

to the Palestinian revolution and the Lebanese patriotic and national
(stmiyah) noveasnt. For the first time in this dramatic Arab atmosphere
the Syrian air force has entered the battle to defend the Palestinian and
Lebanese peoples, thus breaking the wall of Arab inaction and affecting the
field of action of the Zionist air force, which had been using Lebanon as
an open training ground and as an open area to carry out all its aggressive
schemes and to test the most modern U.S. weapons against the revolution of
the Lebanese and Palestinian people and shed their blood.

We are not exaggerating when we said that the parties to Camp David are in
a critical position. The bilateral agreement has not expanded to include
other Arab countries. The agreements are still being denounced and blocked
and the Palestinian seat is still vacant. All this made the enemy lose his
senses and prompted him to con-it one massacre after another. believing

that this method would surely break the chain of opposition to Camp David.

Therefore, the factors of war still exist and we, as a Palestinian revolu-
tion, must prepare for it through coordination with Syria, the Lebanese
patriotic and national movement, the steadfastness and confrontation front
and the Arabs who are truly prepared to translate words into deeds on the
basis of the resolutions of the Baghdad summit and the third confrontation
states sulmnit.

Battleship and Fleet Policy

[Question] Continuing threats to invade the oilfields of the Arab Gulf
have become the "daily bread" of 0.8. policy. How significant are these
threats in the light of the current balance of power in the Arab area and
how can these threats be confronted?

[Answer] By throwing itself into the lap of U.S. imperialism and Israel,
al-Sadat's reactionary bourgeois regime has greatly encouraged the offensive,
aggressive 0.8. policy in the Middle East and Africa. All this has prompted
the more aggressive and reactionary circles at the "hire Imuse to adopt the
direct gunboat policy well known from the history of colonialist empires.
This is in addition to the constant U.S. reinforcement of Zionist Israeli
military power with every sophisticated instrument of war. This was in-
pudently revealed to Congress by U.S. war [as published] Secretary Harold
Brown recently under the slogan of reliance on the presence of the 0.8.

war flag in the Middle East and the Indian Ocean alongside the Israeli
military. we can now see the u.s. Fifth Fleet in the Indian Ocean close

to the sources of oil in the Arab Gulf. He are also witnessing efforts by
the United States to build military bases in that area to replace the old
British colonialist bases.

Return to Old Imperialism

The U.S. gunboat diplomacy represents a reversion to old imperialist methods
in the huddle East and Africa and constitutes a direct threat to the Arab
and African peoples and their national security, being coordinated with

the Israeli nilitary clique and al-Ssdat's bourgeois regime--the agent of
U.S. imperialism. The policy of the DPFLP in particular and the Palestinian
revolution in general is basedon rejection, denunciation and confrontation
of this aggressive U.S. policy and on the need for all the forces of libera-
tion and progress and all honest Arabs to unit against this 0.8. gunboat
diplonacy aiaed at imposing a capitulationist solution on the Arab states
and turning the Hiddle East into a 0.8. oil lake guarded by 11.8.. Israeli
and Egyptian forces. each of which has a role in serving ".8. imperialisa
and Israeli expansionisn.

Effective confrontation of the policy of inperialist ailitsry presence in
the Middle East requires a united stand against this policy and a firu
principled strategic alliance aaong the Arab liberation and progressive
forces and all the world's forces of liberation, socialists and peace which
support our people against 0.8. and Israeli aggression to protect the

Gulf and enable its people to liberate their national wealth in order to
develOp their countries and, at the sane time. use the oil weapon to liber-
ate the occupied Arab territories and insure the rights of the Palestinian
people return to their country and determine their own fate unconditionally
within an independent state.

[Question] PLO Executive Comittee Chairman Yasir 'Arafat's recent visits
to Amen have apparently created a new franework in Palestinian-Jordanian
relations. that is the DPm's stand on these contacts?

[Answer] The Pm executive col-ittee delegation's recent visit to Ann
produced nothing new. Jordan continues to insist on pursuing the line of
extracting every benefit from the current dialog with the PLO without
taking any tangible step toward inpelelnenting the Baghdad resolution or
toward develOping the dialog on the basis of recognizing the PLO as the
sole representative of all of our people, whether inside or outside the
occupied territories, and PLO's right to carry out political and organiza-
tional work anong our people in Jordan.

Abu 'Allnar'a [Yasir 'Arafat] recent visit to Jordan at the head of the eas-
cutive co-ittee delegation has proved that Jordan continues to overlook

the demands of the no stipulated in the Baghdad resolutions and to work to
turn the joint connittees fornsd a few nonths ago to coordinate efforts at
the level of the occupied territories into committees to inpleaent Jordan-
ian policy in the occupied territories, strengthen Jordan's influence there
and use the Arab funds which the Baghdad emit earlarkad for bolstering
and enabling [the Palestinian people] to stand fast to create establishents
operating under Jordanian control in order to strengthen Jordan's influence
in the Heat bank and Gaza sector.

He met give serious consideration to the note which the people in the oc-
cupied territories presented to the PLO executive co-ittee last' week de-
nouncing and rejecting the work of the joint couittee and openly calling
for the rectification of this serious situation which puts the people in the
occupied territories at the asrcy of the Jordanian side in the joint con-
sittee.
The brothers in the PLO executive committee must respond to the note of our
people in the occupied territories by correcting the source of the Jordanian-
Pslestinisn dialog through adherence to the Baghdad resolutions to enable

the revolution to be present anon; our people in Jordan and prevent the
wasting of funds meant for steedfsstnese.
PLO'S 'AWAD: IRANIAN MOVES ’PAVB THE HAY' FOR ARAB ANTI-U3. ACTION
1.0261231 Kuwait AL-UATAN in Arabic 20 Nov 79 p 13 U)

[Dispatch by AL-QUDS PRESS? "Arabi 'Awsd Tells AL-HATAN: 'The Expulsion
of sl-Shak'ah Has Triggered wrath Against the Autonomy Plan"']

[Excerpts] Beirut--'Arabi 'Awad, secretary of the occupied lands office

in Beirut, member of the PM Central Council and member of the Jordanian
Communist Party Central Comittee, is one of the leaders of the National
Front in the Occupied Homeland. The front includes representatives of the
Palestinian resistance movement groups, the Palestine comunist organization,
professional unions, trade unions, student unions and women's unions. The
Zionist enemy has banned the activities of these organizationsin the belief
that they are a link between the nationalist forces and the PLO.

The following is the text of the questions put to 'Arabi 'Awad by AL-QUDS
PRESS and his answers to these questions?

[Question] How do you View the situation in the occupied homeland in light
of the recent developments?

[Answer] Following the two Camp David agreements which include the autonomy
plan, the situation in the occupied territory has been characterized by
increasing Zionist arrogance and denial of the Palestinian people and their
legitimate national rights. The Zionists have also given free rein to their
expansionist racist tendencies. The terrorist Henahem Begin professed this
when he said that autonomy should apply to the inhabitants only but that
Israel should have sovereignty over the land and its contents, particularly
the vital resources.

0n the basis of the Can: David agreement, which resulted in Egypt moving
from the anti-Zionist and anti-imperialist trench and joining the ranks of

the Israel-v.8. imperialist alliance, the Zionist occupiers persisted in
realizing their expansionist inclinations and in seizing Arab territory.
To confront this aggressive policy, the resistance of our masses in the
occupied homeland escalated. They rose valiantly to reply to the conspiracy
of Camp David and the autonony plan and to face the onslaught of settle-
ments and seizure of homes. This was highlighted in the prompt resistance
to the Camp David agreement through strikes, demonstrations, processions
and mass meetings held in Jersualem, Bir Zayt, Bethlehem, Gaza, Nabulus

and Hehron. Our masses in their thousands participated in these mass meet-
ings, inlcuding representatives of the professional unions, workers and
women organizations, students councils and chambers of commerce, resulting

in the emergence of the ”higher national commuttee" to follow up the struggle
against the autonomy plan.

This atmosphere brought stronger unity among the national forces and pro-
vided an opportunity to reactivate the "national front" which has been
joined by broad masses of the nationalist forces, resistance movement or-
ganizations in the occupied territory (the Palestinian communist organiza-
tion, al-Patah, the Democratic Front and the Popular Front, as well as
partiotic personalities and representatives of professional, students, work-
ers and women's unions). The "National Front" has announced a political

and struggle program based on the national unity program passed by the
Palestine National Council at its 15th sessions, including struggle duties
as dictated by the conditions of occupation, such as defense of the land

and national heritage, and defense of and solidarity with the prisoners.
This infuriated the Zionists. The military governor of the West Bank and
Gaza sector issued decisions banning the "National Front," regarding it

as illegal because, in his opinion, it is the link connecting the national
forces in the occupied homeland with the PLO and because of the front's role
in activating popular struggle against the autonomy plan.

[Question] In your opinion, what are the aims of the recent oppressive
campaign, which was highlighted by the imprisonsent and expulsion of the
mayor of Nabulus, and the ensuing development?

[Answer] The purpose of the Zionists occupiers' terrorist step of expel-
ling the mayor of Nabulus is to strike at the national forces which are
resolutely confronting the autonomy plan and to pave the way for imposing
this plan on our occupied land. In addition to this step, the occupiers
have taken measures against the mayors of Ramallah and al-Birah and brought
them to trial.

[Question] The Plo's diplomatic contacts in Europe and the United States
are undoubtedly beneficial to the Palestinian cause, notably in gaining more
support for the Palestinian people's rights in areas which have been closed
to the PLO. However, some people believe thatthese contacts involve the
risk of giving way to bargaining over the Palestinian people's rights,
especially because the West European countries and the United States are
imperialist in nature. What are the advantages and risks, in your opinion?
[Answer] The diplomatic activities undertaken by the PLO to win more recog-
nition for itself and support for the Palestinian Arab people's rights are
really an important aspect of the Palestinian struggle and serve the just
Palestinian cause. Undoubtedly, the visits made to a number of Heat Euro-
pean countries come into this category.

However, this does not mean that these countries now support a just solution
to the Palestinian issue based on achieving the national rights--the right
to return, the right to self-determination and the right to establish an
independent state. Despite their approval for the establishment of con-
tacts with the PLO, these countries continue to revolve in the orbit of 0.8.
policy because they consider the two Camp David agreements faits accomplis
and believe that any solution must be based on them and that the Palestin-
ians must participate in the current negotiations within the framework of
the Camp David agreement on the autonomy plan. Through these contacts,
therefore, they are trying to drag the Palestinian Arab people into the
imperialist trap. Meanwhile, they seek to foment division within the
Palestinian ranks by talking about moderation and extremism.

[Question] How do you view the Iranian-0.5. confrontation? In your opin-
ion, what repercussions will this confrontation have on the Arab liberation
movement, particularly its focal point, the Palestinian resistance move-
ment?

[Answer] It is natural for the Iranian revolution to confront U.S. imper-
ialism, which was the basic force supporting the shah's despotic regime and
enabling it to steal the Iranian people's wealth. It is natural for this
confrontation to take place, because U.S. imperialism is continuing to
engineer plots against the Iranian revolution with a view to striking it
down and reinstating the shah's regime or something similar in Iran. This
was revealed in the secret documents found at the 0.3. Embassy in Tehran.

This confrontation constitutes an incentive to the Arab liberation movement,
particularly the Palestinian revolution, to intensify its struggle against
0.5. imperialism. The Iranian revolutionaries' challenge to this imperial-
ism does away with the myth of the American might about which sl-Sadat has
been braggingin his numerous speeches, saying that America holds 99 percent
of the area's cards in its hand. The Iranian example clearly proves that
the Arab nation, once resolved, could challenge U.S. imperialism.

[Question] what alternatives would cutting off oil to the United States,
withdrawing Iranian funds from 0.5. banks and boldly confronting the im-
perialist threat of economic blockade offer in terms of an appeal for the
use of the oil and assets weapon at the imminent Arab sun-nit?

[Answer] The step taken by Iran constitutes a blow to the United States
bcause it exacerbates the energy crisis and the economic problems in the
capitalist world. It will pave the way for the Arab countries to take
steps and make decisions to pressure the United States to abandon its
discredited stand against the Arab nation and support for Zionist aggres-
sion.

This bold step taken by the Iranian revolution deserves to be put before
the Arab summit in Tunis to persuade it to adopt a firu stand toward the
United States. The Baghdad summit, despite the steps it took against al-
Sadat's regime, avoided adopting a stand toward the United States in spite
of the fact that it is the author and engineer of the Ca-p David conspir-
acy. Al-Sadat and Begin are only iuplements of world imperialism, which
is led by the United States.
PPLP SPOKESHAN ON RELATIONS WITH EGYPT. UNITED STATES
LDO61623 Kuwait AL-HATAN in Arabic 31 Oct 79 p 10 Lb

[Interview granted by PPLP official spokesman Bassam abu-Sharif to AL-HATAN
correspondent in Beirut-date not given]

[Excerpts] [Question] How true is it that a senior Palestinian official
visited Cairo recently or are you sure that there are no Palestinian con-
tacts with the Egyptian regime at present?

[Answer] We have no knowledge of a Palestinian official visiting Cairo and
I doubt that there is any truth in this information. I also believe that
there are no political contacts between the resistance and al-Sadat's re-
gime despite the attempts by the Egyptian regime to reestablish contact
with the PLO and Syria. The Egyptian regime is now feeling the extent of
its isolation and is therefore pretending to be in dispute with the Zionist
entity over the interpretation of the term "self-rule" and referring to its
attitude in this dispute as a hardline stand. But as far as we and all
the nationalists are concerned the Egyptian regime is a treasonous regime.
In other words, our relations with it are relations of conflict and will
remain so until it collapses.

[Question] "hat is your attitude toward recent- calls in the Palestinian
arena for the building of bridges with Egypt on the one hand and the United
States on the other?

[Answer] Any voice calling for the establishment of relations with the pre-
sent Egyptian regime ia a voice dissenting with out revolution and with the
national stand and, therefore, is condemned. The PFLP liquidated al-
Khazindar in Gaza because he was involved with al-Sadst and his plans.

This was a lesson for anybody who night be tempted to deal with al-Sadat.
There is no doubt that the Sbth Palestinian National Council [PRC] prograa,
which clearly deter-ined the attitude of the Palestinian revolution factions
toward Camp David and the al-Sadat regime, is the political guide governing
the actions of the Palestinian revolution groups.
As for the United States, I would like to make it clear that the 0.8.
Administration, represented by the 0.5. Government, is the leader of the
imperialist camp and our masses' number one enemy. It is trying to domin-
ate the Arab area and its markets; it is also providing the Zionist entity
with economic, military and technological aid so that it will remain super-
ior and continue to be the imperialist tool to strike at the Arab libera-
tion movement and the Palestinian revolution. Therefore, this being the

attitude of the United States, we object to and refuse any contacts with
this government.

With regard to the democratic forces inside the United States, we support
and are working with enthusiasm to establish the closest relations with
such democratic groupings, foremost among which are the groupings of black
Americans who suffer from 0.5. Government persecution in American society.
Consequently, making earnest efforts to win over popular public opinion in
the United States is legitimate and something we are trying to achieve with
all means available to us. There is no doubt that creating a movement op-
posed to the war which the United States and its allies in the area are

waging against our people and revolution will be in the interest of the
Palestinian revolution and the Arab masses.

[Question] According to some, the PLO recently made many concessions,

especially during Jesse Jackson's tour of some capitals of the area. Do
you believe this is the case?

[Answer] The most serious situation the PLO could face in its political
and diplomatic moves is the ability of imperialism to obtain concessions
from it "in doses" in a manner that might appear democratic. Jesse Jackson,
who came in his capacity as a black American leader interested in finding
out about the situation in the area, appeared in the end to have another
capacity, that of an intermediary or a messenger between Carter and some

of the leaders in our area. Jackson was made to understand that the Pales-
tinian revolution will not stop the armed struggle because it is fighting

a just battle and aims at just and legitimate targets. This goes to prove
that the Palestinian revolution did not and will not retreat.

[Question] Do you believe that the coordination and unification between
the resistance factions are equal to the serious and fateful dangers the
Palestinian resistance is facing on the various fronts?

[Answer] I regret to say that the level we are aspiring for has not yet
been achieved. But this does not prevent the Palestinian revolution factions
from making steady progress. The Palestinian revolution is now armed with
two programs: a political program and an organizational program, both
endorsed by the PRC at its 14th session. These two programs, if imple-
mented, represent suitable grounds for reaching the required level of co-
ordination and cooperation between the resistance factions.

C80: 6802
KLIBI HOLDS PRESS CONFERENCE POM-WING ARAB SUMMIT
1.0231962 Tunis TAP in English 1523 GMT 23 Nov 79 11)
["Pool" item]

[Text] Tunis. 23 Nov (TAP)--"Por the first time, Arab heads of state agree
on adopting the principle of the elaboration of an Arab cannon strategy of
action of which they defined the big lines with all required frankness.
seriousness and realism. This strategy includes the political. economic

and military fields and aims at ensuring a complementarity between the Arab
possibilities and potentialities in the different fields by taking into
account the Arab nations struggle against the Zionist forces and the neces-
sity to strengthen the Arab nation's stand in all international instances,"
Hr Chedli Klibi, secretary general of the Arab League stated in a press con-
ference held Thursday at the end of the tenth Arab sunit closing session.

"The tenth Arab aux-it," Hr nibi added came up to the Arab public opinion
expectations when it confirmed the solidarity of all the Arab League member
states and the fidelity of Arab leaders to the principles and resolutions
jointly adopted during the Baghdad unit.

The tenth sunnit did not confine to confirm all the resolutions taken in
Baghdad but it too]: important steps in the implementation of these prin-
ciples and in the strengthening of these resolution.

The su-ait moreover managed to find an Arab solution to the problu, of
south Lebanon in the framework of the Palestinian Lebanese brotherhood and
in such a manner that the Lebanese state strengthens its authority and that
the Palestinian revolution is allowed to assume its historical responsibili-
ties always within the framework of the Arab solidarity with the brother
Lebanese country which faces firmly and with dignity a hard trial.

The emit furthermore reconnended to accelerate the reorganization of the
Arab League administrative structures and to propose a new conception of
structures to be adopted by the league in the future.

12
Hr Chedli Lkibi afterwards answered a series of questions put by represent-
tatives of the infornation bodies who covered the activities of the tenth
Arab emit.

These questions dealt mainly with south Lebanon, the Palestinian resist-

ance, the economic cooperation and the Arab strategy in the field of
economy.

South Lebanon and the Palestinian Resistance

The tenth Arab aulnit recommended the reactivation of the Jayt al-Din Com-
mittee to which a representative of the Arab League will be joined and

which will ensure the follow-up and the execution of the Tunis sulmait deci-
sions.

The au-it decided that the Arab states will help the Lebanese state in the
effort he cakes for protecting the Lebanese people-nain1y in the south--
from the material constraints and rebuilding his national economy. A five-
year plan has been implemented and the league's nember countries granted
for this effect a 2 billion dollar donation.

The sumit moreover took note of the PLO engagement to refrain from now
onwards launching military operations against Israel fru the Lebanese

territory and also to refrain from diffusing news on the operations of

fedayeen from Beirut.

The Arab Economic Strategy of Action

The tenth Arab emit charged the Arab Economic Council to prepare a paper
on an Arab economic strategy of action to be included in the agenda of the
coming Arab emit. However, the coming emit will the examination of eco-
nomic issues for which other sunits would be entirely devoted once the
world would have done a new decisive step in the way of economic coopera-
tion and complementarity. [Sentence as received]

The Mia sumait also tackled the new economic world order, stressing that
the Arab strategy of joint action is not in contradiction with the efforts
made by third world countries with a view to (?install) this new economic
world order.

The Arab Stand Vis-a-vis the Separate Peace Agreeaents

Concerning the condemnation of the u.s. policy in the Middle East, Hr Klibi
said that this condemnation results from the role played by the United
States in the conclusion of the Camp David accords and form the "good ser:

vices" that the White House is presently doing in order to [word indistinct]
the current negotiations between Israel and Egypt succeed.
Answering the questions of several journalists who asked what would be the
solution of replacement to the Israeli-Egyptian separate accords. Hr Klibi
stated that there were no other solution of replacement to a deceitful
solution apart from a just solution.

The solution of replacement consists in continuing the struggle by all leans
until the recovery of the Palestinian peoples legitimate rights and until
the total recovery of all occupied territories.

"No other solution can be admitted" the secretary general of the Arab League
stressed.

Answering a question on the visit recently paid to Tunisia by an Iranian
delegation Hr Chedli Klibi stated that the presence of this delegation in
Tunisia is normal if we take into account the relations between Tunisia
and Iran and that the contacts it had with some Arab delegations pratici-
pating in the tenth sunnit were bilateral contracts which had nothing to
do with the sunnit's preoccupations.

C80: 6620

lb
PLC'S 'ARAFAT 0" ms SUMT, SAHARA PROBLBI, GOVERNMENT IN EXILE
13161109 Kuwait AL-RA'Y Alf-'Am in Arabic 8 Nov 79 p 19 1.!)

[Report on interview with no Executive Co-ittee Chains: Yasir 'Arafat
by 'Abdallah al-Shiti in Lisbon-date not given]

[Excerpt] Lisbon-AL-RA'Y Alr'Am asked Yasir 'Arafat if the Baghdad sun-
nit conference resolutions have borne any fruit. It also asked him about
the suit conference which is expected to be held in Tunis on 20 November.
Yaair 'Arafat said: "I can say that the Baghdad su-it has achieved 95 per-
cent of its resolutions, nost of which have been i-plsnented. 0n the day
the bsghdad sun-lit convened. there were claies that the Arabs would not
eeet without al-Sadat, but the Arabs net without al-Ssdat and no one could
obstruct that historic neeting. We adopted decisive resolutions without
al-Sadat. I regard this as a turning point in our nation's history--I
eean, the Baghdad sun-it and the resolutions it adopted.

Regarding the sin-it conference which is expected to be held in Tunis on
20 Noveeber, I hope that the conference will be convened on the scheduled
date and that it will succeed, as the Baghdad emit succeeded, under the
canopy of Arab national unity and canon destiny and appreciation of the
present circmtances through which our nation and our just basic cause
are passing. In coordination with our Syrian brothers, we have prepared
a joint working paper for subaission to the suit conference the Arabs
are expected to convene in Tunis. I do not wish to anticipate aatters by
saying anything more. I will say aore only after the conference.

"hen Iasked hin if the Heat Sahara issue has reached a deadlock following
the Tunisian and Palestinian aediation between Horocco and Algeria, Yasir
'Arafat expressed hope that this subject would not develop in a nanner
contrary to our wishes. He said: The probl- lust be tackled with great
cal- and cool nerves because it is very sensitive. what I fear nost, if

we do not tackle the utter in this spirit and with cool nerves, is that
this would provide Horocco with an ucuse to go along with "Camp David" and
deviate from the collective Arab will, which aies to overthrow the capitula-
tianist solution agreenent.

15
Regarding the establishment of a Palestinian govern-ent in exile, 'Arsfst
said: The usual thing would be for such a decision to be nude by the Pales-
tinian ecu-and when it sees that such a decision, for emple, would help
and advance the struggle. The usual thing would be for such s proposal as
toning a goverment in exile to be discussed in the Palestinian con-end
like all other projects and views which could benefit the Palestinian
people.

C80: 10802

16
FOREIGN HIMSTKR URGES LEBANON T0 SOLVE ITS PROBLEM
13161337 Paris AL-NAIIAR AL-‘ARABI HA AL-DUHALI in Arabic 5-11 Nov 79 U)

[Report by 'Ali Hashim "Kuwait Has Nothing To Say and Sarkis Must Revive
the Pour-State Calaittee"]

[Excerpt] Kuwait—Deputy Prime Minister and Foreign Minister Shsykh Sabah
sl-Ahmad al-Jabir al-Sabah has said that the Kuwaiti Government has no work-
ing paper for the Arab foreign ministers conference scheduled (in principle)
to be held on 16 November or the suit conference scheduled to be held on
20 November.

In a statement to AL-NAHAR Alr'ARABI HA AL-DUHALI, he said that Kuwait has
nothing more to say about the Lebanese problem because it has said much
and done much "but in vain."

Shaykh al-Sabah has called on the Lebanese regime to "move and do something...."

He added: "Even if we go to the summit, what does Lebanon expect us to
say? He participated in the Riyadh au-Iit, Bayt al-Din conference and the
four-stateconittee. We took decisions and made recounendationa. He won-

der: where are these resolutions, what has happened to then and how any
of then has been inplenented"?

Shsykh Sabah wondered: "Where is President Sarkis and what is he doing"?

"If I were in his place I would revive the four-state co-Iittee, sun-on its
numbers and ask then: What have you done? Why are you not moving?

"I would then ask the couittee neabers-or take it upon myself--to con-
tact all those involved in the conflict, all the parties, rightist and
leftist, the so-called nationalists and isolationists, be they in the north
or the south. and the Syrians and Palestinians and as]: then all: what do
you want from Lebanon and what are your demands?
"After hearing their answers and in the light of the infomtionl obtain,
I will act.

"It is of no use at one the saying you Arabs cone and solve our probleu.
help us to find a way out of it and at another tine running after foreign
countries to solve this problea as long as several aspects of the prob}-

are purely Lebanese. "
BRIEFS

BOSTAGBS IN I'M-Doha. 12 Nov—Bassam abu-Sharif, PM Central Canittee
member and official spokesman, has asserted that it is not in the interest
of the Palestinian revolution to aediate between Iran and the United States
concerning the occupation of the 11.8. hbassy in Tehran. lie said in an
interview published by the Qatari newspaper AL-‘ARAB today that the Pales-
tinian revolution is supposed to support the Iranian revolution. He added
that the resistance will not withdraw from southern Lebanon as long as

Sa'd Haddad's enclave and the Zionist forces are there. Abu-Sharif said
that a strong Arab stand is inperstive to wreck theCamp David accords. This
is the responsibility of the upcoming Arab su-it, he added. The Palestin-
ian officials asked what has been done regarding the inplenentation of the
Baghdad su-it's resolutions. Has the nininun of the resolutions been in-
plenented. He then said: This has not been implelented. Rather, some of
the sides which were supposed to proceed toward offensive positions have

remained in defenselve positions. [m12093lo Doha QIIA in Arabic 0900 GMT
12 Nov 79 JR]

C30: 4802

19
ALGERIAN PAP“ DENOUNCBS U.S. ECONOMIC MEASURES AGAINST IRAN
10231657 Algiers AL-SHA'B in Arabic 20 Nov 79 pp 1, 6 LI)
“Editorial: "Between Political Peudalisn and Monetary Peudalisn"]

[Excerpts] After opposing the shah's regime and overthrowing it, the Iran-
ian people are continuing their battle on the international level by opposing
the dollar domination of international relations. Iran has announced that
henceforth it will request payment for its oil exports with currencies

other than the dollar. This was in response to the real econonic war de-
clared by the United States and represented in freezing the Iranian state's
assets in American banks and boycotting the Iranian oil.

Our country, in the light of its own experience, cannot but give its total
support to the Iranian decision in response to the grave assault on its
economic security by reviewing the dollar's doninstion of the world monetary
system wtich is subjected to 0.8. interests.

The role of the dollar as an international reserve and payment currency has
enabled the U.S. authoritiu to strike, without fear, at the oil-exporting
countries' desire to increase or, at least, maintain the purchasing power
of their basic wealth.

As if the indirect plundering of oil revenues was not enough, the United
States is now trying, through actual acts of robbery by the state under lsga1
excuses, to continue to plunder the wealth of third world countries.

The time has come for OPEC member states to review the dollar's role in the
fuel market. The OPEC ministerial conference in Libreville in 1975 had
already dealt with this problem. It suggested replacing the dollar-while
still keeping it as a payment currency—by units of withdrawal rights (a
new reserve currency established by the International Honetary Fund based
on a basket of convertible currencies) as an accounting currency.

The tactical rise in the dollar rate, which was followed by a sonewhat con-
vincing political pressure, was sufficient to freeze this decision. This
time Iran created a new situation by demanding changing the payment
currency itself.

The issue of replacing the dollar by another currency can no longer be
avoided. It is the duty of OPEC to include it on the agenda of its coming
meeting in Caracas in December. In fact, some of the organization’s member
states are afraid that the interest on the deposits they invest in the U.S.
currency markets will drop if OPEC resorts to an accounting currency or

to another payment currency.

But it is the duty of these members to consider carefully the dangers to
their deposits in the United States in the light of the "serious precedent
in international relations" as confirmed by the Arab League Hinisterial
Council meeting in Tunis.

The danger is not confined to the United States alone in view of the fact
that it says that it has "ordered" the foreign countries where there are
branches of American banks--thus showing contempt for the sovereignty of
these countries—to act in accordance with the political decision adopted
by Hashington. The prestige of these countries and the confidence in their
currencies will depend on their response to "Washington's order."

It is the duty of the nonalined states group to condemn this serious viola-
tion of Iran's economic security, Iran being a new member of the group,

in accordance with regulation number 3 regarding economic security which
was endorsed by the Algiers [nonalined] sun-nit conference in 1973. The
regulation stipulates: "International security msut be basedQllrcfraining
from the use of force as well as on refraining from all kinds of aggression
in economic relations, whether through pressure, coercion, economic block-
ade, freezing capital or by any other direct or indirect means aimed at
encroaching on the sovereignty of countries and. preventing them from exer-
cising their right to independent development suitable to their nature."

It is indeed harmful that the world economy should always be dependent upon
an international monetary system which the United States can use as a wea-
pon in its bilateral relations. The result of such a situation would be
plunging the world economy in an increasingly turbulent sea and keeping
it in a state of stagnation that no country however powerful can avoid.

C50: 4602

2.1
ALGERIAN-SOVIET MITI‘BE DISCUSSBS ECONOMIC RELATIONS
LDl9lOl9 Algiers AL-SHA'B in Arabic 11 Nov 79 pp 1, 5 LD

[Unattributed report: "Algerian-Soviet Cooperation: Governmental Coopera-
tion Comittee Begins Fifth Session")

[Excerpt] The meetings of the fifth session of the Algerian-Soviet standing
governmental couittee for economic, scientific and technical cooperation
opened yesterday evening at the government palace.

The Algerian delegation to the meetings is headed by Brother Mohamed Hadj
Yala. member of the Central Comittee and minister of finance. The Soviet
delegation is headed by Skachkov, member of the CPSU Central Co-ittee and
chairman of the USSR State Oomittee for Foreign Economic Relations.

The two delegations discussed cooperation between the two countries and the
traditional relations between the two peoples.

In landing the Soviet Union Brother Yala said that Algeria does not forget
its friends in tines of difficulty. the friends who during the severe hard-
ships of the war of liberation gave it the moral and material support of
which it was in great need.

He added: "Liberated Algeria is fighting another war aimed at achieving
genuine economic independence. Since 1965 the efforts of our leaders and
people have been devoted to development. to which all the country's re-
sources have been subordinated, including the resources of all our economic
sectors and the country's national wealth."

With regard to strengthening and consolidating economic relations between
the two countries. the finance minister said: "Algerian-Soviet coopera-
tion has nintained its vitality because we have known how to preserve
our relations and protect them against the influence of the world capital-
ist market whose crisis is affecting all economic activities."
On his part Skachkov said: "The Soviet people are well aware of the heroic
history of the Algerian people. We follow with interest Algeria's develop-
ment and are happy with the relations that link us to it."

Head of the Soviet delegation added: "There is rapprochement in the poli-
tical field that is bringing the two countries even closer."

Concluding, Skachkov affir-ed that the work of the fifth session will grest-
ly contribute to cooperation and trade relations between the two countries.
'APS' CW1 APPLMIDS man's OIL-DOLLAR DECISION
13201845 Algiers Donestic Service in French 1300 GMT 20 Nov 79 Lb

[Text] The national news agency Algerie Press Service devotes a co-entsry
to the Iranian-0.5. dispute. Having opposed with success, as is well known,
in the donestic field the shah's feudal regime, the agency writes. the
Iranian people, continuing the sane struggle in the international field,
have undertaken to contest the dollar's feudal position in international
relations. Reacting to the veritable declaration of economic war which is
the freezing of the assets of the Iranian state in 0.8. banks by the 0.8.
Govern-ent, Iran has just announced that it will see to it that its oil ex-
ports should be paid for in other currencies than the dollar. Algeria, after
its decision on nationalizing the hydrocarbon resources, has also found it-
self exposed to foreign econonic pressures sined at forcing it to give up
its policy of national independence. We have known, in particular, the era
of red oil, a tern used to give legitinacy to the boycott that has nade us
its victin. Today. as then, the countries imosing the boycott can count,
as was resffirned by the secretary general of the International Energy
Agency recently, on an attitude of solidarity of all industrial countries.

Strong in its own experience, our country can do nothing less but lend its
full and uholehearted support to the Iranian decision to react against this
grave attenpt at its econonic security by calling into question the strangle-
hold of the dollar on the international nonetary system, which is thereby
rendered subordinate to the interests of the United States.
BRIEFS

MIMI-SOVIET OOOPERATIWIUnattributed report: "Algerian-Soviet Co-
operation: Discussion of Bilateral Cooperation in Heavy Industry Sector"]
Brother Hohsned Liassine, Central Omittee nae-her and minister of heavy
industry. yesterday held talks at the ninistry headquarters with Skachkov.
CPS!) Central Conittee nesber and chairman of the State Co-ittee for For-
eign Economic Relations. The talks dealt with studying the most isportant
aspects of the present cooperation. The two sides lauded the good progress
made in the work to expand the al-llsjar iron and steel complex. They also
exchanged views on future possibilities with regard to expanding and strength-
ening cooperation ties between the two countries in the heavy industry sec-
tor. I'rext] [13201701 Algiers AlrSHA'B in Arabic 1!; Nov 79 p 3 LD]

cso: 6602

25
'DAILY NEHS' VIEHS EVENTS SHARING MIDDLE EAST
GFZbl700 Manama GULF DAILY “EMS in English 24 Nov 79 p 2 GP

[Editorial]

[Text] The events over the past few days involving the Grand Mosque in
Hecca have been traumatic. Not only for the lslamic faith but for the
American expatriate community in different parts of the Middle East.

The situation in this part of the world is volatile and for this to be
the time for religious fanatics to make a move like they did is incredi-
ble. They could have sparked off a bloodbath by their blinding stupidity.

Naturally. when such a horrendous thing happens we are engulfed by rumour
and counterrumour. And. of course. there are always those who will seek
to turn any situation to their own advantage.

But the result of this rumour swayed the Middle East dangerously towards
a flare-up. The group who triggered off the events have been responsible
for the deaths of many innocent people. The exact number of dead and
wounded around the Grand Mosque has not yet been determined.

But the sacking of the American Embassy in Pakistan by a mob too ready to
blame the Americans for every sparrow that falls led to the death of
seven people.

Saudi Arabian authorities have given the assurance that the fanatics who
committed the unforgivable will be dealt with. The Pakistan Government
have promised an investigation into the causes surrounding the Embassy
violation. We hope that they too will be just as uncompromising in bring-
ing the leaders to justice.

It would appear that the savaging of diplomatic buildings and personnel
is not the heinous crime it once was. The Saudi Government is demon-
strating that no one dare tamper with the holy places. It is a principle
that should also apply to the personnel and buildings of foreign guests.
BRIEFS

EMBASSY TAKEOVER 'BARBARIC'--He note that the Iranian foreign minister
has called for a meeting of the United Nations Security Council because
he fears "an atmosphere of war" is being created in the U.S. Is it
really surprising that the American Eagle is ruffling its feathers? No
matter how placid the giant, no matter how conciliatory and easy-going,
if a mosquito keeps biting, it is going to react. And as long as there
are 100 men. women and children locked up in the American Embassy and
trotted out at intervals blindfolded to be paraded before jeering mobs
then there is going to be a groundswell of American and world condemna-
tion to this act of barbarism. [Editorial] [Text] [0?150530 Manama
GULF DAILY NEWS in English 15 Nov 79 p 2 GP]

TREASURY SECRETARY TALKS-Stability and energy must go hand-in-hsnd if

the world is to overcome lurching economies and rampant inflation. While
there are many factors that contribute to this unhappy situation-~not
least the greed of multinational concerns who owe no allegiance but to

the balancesheet--the eyes of the world have fastened on oil which may well
be used as a scapegoat. but which nevertheless is an important factor.
America, anxious to play her part in bringing about an atmosphere that

can lead to this stability in relation to oil, is now sending Treasury
Secretary Hilliam Miller to hold talks with three major oil producers in
the Gulf. This is to be applauded as long as he is prepared to see the
Arab point of View and not look at the question from just one side. Saudi
Arabia has always led the way in an honest and balanced policy regarding
production and pricing. If Secretary Miller can lend any weight in
supporting this View at the approaching OPEC meeting, then his tour will
have been a success. [Editorial] [Text] [GFl90635 Hanana GULF DAILY
NEHS in English 19 Nov 79 p 2 GP]

C50: 4820

27
TAKEOVER OF 0.8. EMBASSY GETS MASSIVE SUPPCRT
Backing of Political Parties
Tehran KBYHAN in Persian 5 Nov 79 p lo

[Text] The takeover of the U.S. Embassy by Moslem students who follow
Bmam's policy has now entered its second day and has been supported by

various groups, societies and parties. The emery of statements issued
in this respect are as follows:

The Conittee of Emma's Syndicate Affairs:

The takeover of the “.8. Embassy by a group of Moslem students has not
been an accidental or unexpected matter. According to the law of action
and reaction. it was quite natural that by following the Enam'a policy,
Iran's revolutionary youth would take such an action on a day which
reminds us of the responsibility for the death of young students by 0.8.
imperialism.

The U.S. goverment should know that since its political and military
threats and even her actions taken on eccllomic grounds have not affected
the hero nation of Iran. with this revolutionary action taken by a group
of Hoalem youth who believe in the revolution. the reaction of the risen
nation of Iran to the United States .n hosting its mercenary servant
Molten-lad Reta Pahlevi, has entered a new phase and it is going to affect
all of the interests of that country in Iran.

Hith full awareness of that world imperialism--under the leadership of
America--is making preparations for, we, the syndicates in Tehran.announce
to America and its mercenary allies that it is in the interest of the

U.8. goverment to turn over the deposed shah as soon as possible to Iran's
court of Islamic justice and revenge and not to create further anger in
Iran's aware and revolutionary nation.

The Iranian Society of Cooperation Vith Palestine:

Our regards to you, our Moslem high school and university students. You,
who follow the Enam's policy and have taken over the center of shame, crimes.
espionage, treason, imperialism and Zionism-for the hero nation of
Iran's Islamic Republic.

On this historic day on which Iran's decisive leader had been sent into
exile and is also the anniversary & the death of dozens of students,

the Iranian Society for Cooperation with Palestine supports your
revolutionary action and asks the United States to deliver the treacherous
shah immediately and stop encouraging Israel in its crimes toward
Palestine.

Iran's Moslem People's Revolutionary Movement (JANA):

Iran's revolution against world colonialism and U.S. imperialism enters a
new phase. The anti-imperialist demonstrations of the Iranian people

on 'Eyd-e Qorban [Feast of Sacrifices] by taking over the U.S. Embassy

has brought the anti colonialist movement of Iran's Hoslem people to its
peak. Fifteen years ago, 13 Aban [4 November] became a turning point in
the history of our people's liberation movement when the ban was sent into
exile. Last year with the death of our devoted youths on 13 Aban in the
university, a decisive move was taken toward achieving victory in the
revolution. This year 13 Aban the revolutionary action taken by the
victorious students of our revolution, opens a new chapter in anti-
colonialist struggles. we hope that next year 13th of Aban would mark

the movement's victory over capitalism and colonialism. JANA supports

the students' revolutionary action against the interferences and aggressions
of 'J.S. imperialism and together with all Moslan revolutionary forces, it
will accept the guidances of the honorable revolutionary leader.

In the statement. the Cossaunity of Kurdish Residents of the capital city

has announced its support for the students and Moslem scholars [of religious
studies] in taking over the U.S. Babassy and has demanded that relations with
the United States be broken.

The statement indicates that the bloody events in Kordestan are fomented by
U.S. imperialism and international Zionism and that the Islamic Connunity
of Kurdish Residents of the capital city has announced that it heartily
supports the honorable leader, Emam lOnomeyni and obeys him.

The Union of Islamic Association of Students in Europe with headquarters
in Germany has sent the following telegram to the Hoslen students who
follow the Bmam's policy and are stationed in the U.S. Embassy:

"In the name of God, our brave and Hoslan brothers, students, breve
guards of Iran's Islamic revolutionary achievements and those who follow
Bmam's way. Our revolutionary regards to you, the people's Moslem children.

"He heard your message and admire the holy action that you have taken.
God is also pleased with what you have done. We hereby announce our
decisive support of the truthful way you are following. We promise that
we will not remain silent until final achievement of our demands. We are
with you. With God's help and the people's effort which is our backing,
we wish you success."

Signed by the Union of Islamic Students Association in Europe. headquarters
in Germany. 29
In a message, the Islamic Students Association in America and Canada

has supported the revolutionary action taken by Hoalen students. The
message is as follows:

"Dear brothers and sisters. the Hoslem students following the man's
policy, The Islamic Association of Students in America and Canada
supports the revolutionary action taken by yew-the takeover of the U.S.
Embassy. You, the beloved and courageous ones who bravely gave a positive
response to the proclamation of Iran's Islamic revolutionary leader,

Email IOIaneyni. we ask the government to follow the anm and the nation's

way and not to fail in taking action in returning the criminal deposed
shah.

"In the continuation of our revealing efforts, simultaneously with you,
who went on food strike. we had a sitin demonstration in the Statue of
Liberty and made the world hear the voice of Iran's Hoslem people. He
protested to the U.S. government and demanded the delivery of the deposed
shah. The criminal masters of the treacherous shah arrested our brothers
and broke up the demonstrations and took these beloved ones into

captivity. To support your action, we will continue with our revealing
programs.

"Regards to you, the dear children of Iran's Mosle- people snd regards
to our great leader, ham Imoueyni.

"Long last Iran's Islamic revolution, the true defender of the deprived
in the world.’ Death to the enemies of the Islamic revolution, especially
U.S. imperialism!

Student's Approval
Tehran mm in Persian 5 Nov 19 p 12

[Text] In an interview. some of the Hoslem students who have demmstrated
in the U.S. Enbassy in Tehran expressed their views regarding their
revolutionary action in the takeover of the U.S. Embassy.

One of the students said: "He are a group of students who believe in the
man's policy and we believe that this revolution, that is, the movement
which has brought the society up to this point, especially until 22 Batman
(11 February) political and military move. has been something of absorption
of man's revolutionary policy in society. Those students who think like
us form a group believing in the Boar's policy and they are not affiliated
to any party or group. Now, what was the purpose of this action? Many
anti-imperialist positions were observed in our ideological belief system
with which we had started and achieved the revolution for fighting against
domination, colonialism and dictatorship. The school of thought had the
capability of arousing a nation against other schools of thought and bringing
the movement to the final point. The movement continued until 22 Bahman
and afterwards. He expected the school of thought which had brought us up
to this point to meet with our other demands such as economic and cultural
independence. However, we were seeing that the matters that the country
was dealing with. especially actions taken by the executive pillars of the
country were not accepted by this school of thought and that very easily
grounds had been prepared for U.S. imperialism and Israel and, in general,
the deviationist forces against which the nation has always fought, to
penetrate into various pillars and take over various areas and not to
allow the revolution to grow and even sometimes take it backward. It

was in connection with this issue and the fact that we were seeing that
America was deeply penetrating into our country. Unfortunately, the
government we have is not an efficient government, as observed in various
dimensions-whether from the viewpoint of foreign policy, dmestic policy
or the manner of running the country. The youth who made the revolution
and believed in their school of thought saw that the ruling government had
created a series of problems and that spies were found in various pillars.
A series of military contracts were concluded and the nation was not

aware of them. Or, a group of government officials would hold negotiations
with an American delegation abroad. Anyway, things are getting out of hand
and there is the possibility for a series of deviationist events. Revealing
this issue. especially the grounds that the Emam has prepared--an anti-
American policy--led us to revealing this matter and telling the whole
world that our nation is still an anti-imperialist nation and that it will
not accept‘any domination. That is why we saw the 0.8. Embassy as an
espionage nest where conspiracies were planned.

"Even the contacts established were for revealing this issue to say that
the main enemy of our nation, the Emam and our school of thought is

still the United States which has brought so much adversity for the
Moslems. This is why we decided to take over the embassy and express our
demands and protests."

Another student expressed his views as follows:

"Regarding the manner of occupying the 0.5. Embassy, I should say

that we could have acted in two ways: by military attack or by the
people's participation, which was the specialty of our revolution. We
chose the method of political action. In other words, by demonstrations
our brothers would enter the embassy and take over the buildings. And truly
all brothers were ready for martyrdom, if they had been faced with any
resistance. Because they believed that they should fight with America

and carry out the Bmam's view. It has been anticipated that if there had
been any shooting and we had martyrs, we would carry the martyrs to the
streets by the people who would be covered. we did just that and succeeded
and the problems were overcome."
Support Bron Provinces

Tehran KEYHAN in Persian 5 Nov 79 p 2

[Text] In support of the brave action taken by Hoslem students who follow
the Emam's policy in taking over the 0.3. hbassy in Tehran. the Islamic
Association of Iranian Students in London has sent the following message:

"Regards to the Hoslem student brothers who took over the filty nest of
the American CIA in Tehran. Regards to the brave Hojaheds [fighters

of holy war] who frustrated criminal U.S. imperialism and revealed its
inauspicious plans to give shelter to the deposed shah under the pretext
of illness in their infidel anus in order to inflict a blow on Iran's
Islamic revolution.

"In supporting this brave action taken by our Hoslem brothers, the Islamic
Students Association in London condemns any conspiracies Eastern and

Hestern worldeating imperialism and believes that our Islamic ideology

under the uncompranising leadership of Bmam Khmeyni, the indefatigable
mojahed and the firmness of the hero nation of Iran has closed the way for
any negotiations or talks with Brzezinski that is. the infidel who started
their open encroachments against our poor nation from many years ago.

One should not stand, not even for one second, behind these clored doors
because it is non-Islamic and vain."

Signed by the Islamic Students Association in London affiliated to
the Union of Islamic Students Association in Europe.

The takeover of the American espionage nest in Tehran by Moslem
students following the Emam's policy has aroused a wave of excitement
among the people of various cities in the country.

Esfahan--After taking part in 13 Aban [lo November] ceremonies and finding
out about the takeover of the U.S. Embassy in Tehran, the people of
Bsfahan supported this action my matching and shouting anti-American
slogans.

Today, the Hoslem Students Association of Bsfahan Industrial University
issued a statement invitng the people to participate in a march on this
occasion.

HashaduAfter finding out about the takeover of the 11.5. ﬁnbassy, the people
of Hashad made demonstrations and by shouting anti-American slogans, they
demanded the return of the deposed shah.

Khorram AbaduVarious groups of people in Khorram Abad, especially

the Lor tribesmen referred to KBYHAN's office in this city, supported the
takeover of the 0.5. Bnbnssy by Hoslem students who follow the Emam's
policy. They amounted that they are ready for any anti-American activity.
Kerman--Yesterday, in a splendid gathering of the people of Kerman on

the occasion of 13 Aban [a November] the people supported the action taken
by Moslem students who follow the man's policy in taking over the U.S.
Embassy.

0runiyeh--In honoring the memory of 13 Aban martyrs [a November] in
Druniyeh in which thousands of people participated in Oruniyeh University,
the revolutionary action taken by studentsuthe takeover of the American
Embassy in Tehranuwas supported.

Shiraz--‘l‘he Hojahedin Organization of Islamic revolution in Shiraz has
issued a statement announcing its unsparing support of the takeover of the
Anerican espionage nest in Tehran, the natural reaction and anger of the
poor people toward the United States.

Qasr Shirin--Yesterday, following the takeover of the 0.8. Babassy in Tehran,

the people of Qasr Shirin marched in the streets supporting the students'
revolutionary action.

QonuLast night in supporting the revolutionary action taken by students--
the takeover of the [1.8. Embassy, the people of Qom made huge demonstrations.
The demonstrators were shouting "Death to Carter and his guest" in the

streets and they condemned the meeting between the Iranian Government and
Brzezinski, Carter's security adviser.

In a telegram, the comunications personnel in Qon have also annOunced
their support of the revolutionary action taken by student who follow the
Bean's policy in occupying the espionage nest of the 0.8. Embassy.

Karaj--'ln a statement the Pasdaran Corps [Guards Corps] of Kara} has announced

its support of the takeover of the 0.8. anbassy by students who follow
the Emam's policy.

Yazd--‘l‘he Pasdaran Corps of the Islamic Revolution in Yazd has also issued
a statement announcing its support of the takeover of the 0.8. Embassy.
They have stated that they are ready to neutralize any conspiracy and turn

over the executioner, Hohamad Reta, under the order and leadership of Ema-
Khomeyni.

Kemanshah--The Operational Staff of the Pasdaran Corps in the western

part of the country has issued a statement announcing its support of the
takeover of the American Bubassy.

Ransaru'rhe students, members of the Islamic associations, the employees
and personnel of Ramsar's Revolutionary court and Dr Shari'ati Hospital
announced their support of the takeover of the 0.8. Bnbassy by marching.
Arab-Ayatollah Haj Sheykh Abol Fazl Khonsari. Emam Khancyni's te-
presentative in behalf of the people of Arak and himself, also sent a

telegram to the 11.3. mbsssy today, praising the revolutionary action
taken by the students.

The telegram indicates that the rotten roots of world imperialism should
be thrown into history's garbage can.

The Democratic Youth and Students Organization has also announced its

support of the takeover of the 0.8. Embassy by Hoslan student brothers

who follow the Bloom's policy. They have asked all progressive and anti-
imperialisr youths and students to hold each other's hand and unite in

this sensitive moment in the country's political life against (LS. imperialism.

U.S. imperialism.

The Islamic Iranian Students Association in Manchester has sent a message
in support of the students who follow the man's policy. They have
announced their support for and cooperation with the hero students who

have now occupied the U.S. Embassy and in revealing the conspiracies of the
United States and its allies.

Signed by the Islamic Students Association in Manchester affiliated to the
union of Islamic Associations in Europe.

The employees and the Islamic Council of Iran Air Lines have announced
their support of the revolutionary and brave action taken by Iran's
revolutionary students in occupying the 0.8. Embassy. They have indicated
that they are ready for any cooperation even to shed their blood.

Much Favorable Hail
Tehran BAHDAD in Persian 6 Nov 79 p 12

[Text] Following the takeover of the 11.8. Embassy in Tehran by Hoslem
students who follow the man's policy, yesterday various Islamic groups.
societies, associations and centers issued separate statements announcing
their support of the students' action. In the messages. various groups

in the country have condesned the conspiracies of imperialism, headed by
the United States, have supported the takeover of the 0.3. hbsssy and have
demanded the extradition of the former shah.

The names of the groups and societies that have announced their support
are as follows:

The Islamic Society of PARS News Agency, the Iranian Society for Cooperation
with Palestine. the Comittee of the mam's Syndicate Affairs, the Islamic
Society of Personnel of the Civil Defense Organization, the Islamic societies
ant. personnel of government organizations in Hazandaran. The Sistan and
Baluchestan Pasdaran Corps, the Pasdaran Corps of Hausadan, the clergy
of Chahar Mahal Bakhtiyari, the Pasdaran Corps of Shahr Kurd, Moslem teachers
following the mam's policy in Shah: Kord, The Islamic Society of the
Hanif Nezhad Educational Complex. Kerman's Construction Jehad, the judges
and employees of the prosecutor '8 office and the Islamic Revolutionary
Court in Kennan. the Islamic Society of Personnel of the Voice and Pace
of the Islamic Republic of Kerman, the employees of Ministry of National
Guidance, PARS News Agency in Roman, the Pasdaran Corps, the Islamic
Cosmunications SOciety, the Coal Employees Council in Bab Mizu area,

the struggling peeple of Khanuk. the students and teachers of Khalq in
Cilan, the Islamic Society of College of Literature and Foreign Languages,
a group of employees of the Geology and Mineralogy Research Organization,
Sympathizers of Mojahedin Khalq Organization, the Center for Fighting
Against Freemasonry, Imperialism and Zionism, a group of employees of the
Ministry of health and Welfare, Iran's Democratic Youth and Students
Organization.

A group of Moslem employees of the Ministry of Power, the Islamic Society
of the employees of the Ministry of Justice, the Hoslem employees of the
Environmental ProtectiOn Organization, the Islamic Society of Ministry

of Power, the Palestinian Students Union in Iran's Islamic Republic
Branch, the Islamic Society of Iran National Air Lines, the Islamic
Revolutionary Council of EMA Personnel [Iran Air], the Islamic Society of
Students of the Economic and Political Science School of National
University, the Moslem Students Movement of Tehran University, the struggling
clergy of Qir and Kazerun area, the employees of governors' offices and
the Islamic societies of teachers and students in Sari, Behshahr, Anal and
the Office of the Construction Jehad in the cities of provinces.

Students. teachers and employees of Meshkin Pam Agricultural School
following mam Khomeyni's policy in Kerman, the Pasdaran Corps, the
syndicates, teachers and various classes of society in Islam Shahr, the
Islamic Society of the Employees of the Sar Cheshmeh Copper Complex, the
Islamic Revolutionary Continuation Complex in Kerman, the Construction
Jehad Staff and the Islamic Society of 'l‘aleqani Ban, the Knitting and
Needlework Workers Syndicate of Tehran and Suburbs, the Islamic Revolutionary
Pasdaran Corps of the cities of Orumiyeh and Miandoah, the Moslem Students
Society of Tehran University Law School, the Pasdaran Corps, the syndicates
and the bazaar businessmen, the Institute of the Islamic Cooperative Fund,
the office of the Islamic Republic Party and the Islamic Council in Yazd
Province, the students of the Natural Resources School in Gorgan and the
Construction Jehad Staff in Gorgan, the Islamic Society of Assdi Arab
Teachers College in Corgan. the clergy and people of Arsanjan, the
Construction Jehad Staff in Yard, the Moslem Students of Sistan and
Baluchestan University, the Moslem personnel following the Bmam‘s policy,
in the Kahkiluyeh Province, the Contenders Council of the Pasdaran Corps,
in Gilan Province, the Moslem Students Society of Mine Kuchek Khan High
School in Rasht, the Students Society of Azadegan High School in Rasht, a
group of sympathizers of the Mojahedin Organization, the personnel of the
Ministry of Housing and City Development, the personnel of Camnunications
and the Department of National Guidance of the Province, the employees
students of Azad University in Behshahr, the teachers society and Pasdaran
Corps in various cities in Mazandaran, the offices of the Islamic Republic
Party throughout the province, the community of Moslem engineers in Mazandaran,
the Society oi Moslem Youth and the personnel of medical services in
Behshahr, the Islamic Societies of Students of Samadiyeh Labaf College in
Dubai, the College of Econqnics in Babolsar, the personnel of the Ministry

of Education in Babolsar and Shahsavar, the Islamic societies and personnel
of most of the govermnent offices in Mazandaran, the Students Council of
Sharii’ Industrial University, the employees of the Royal Garden Hotel, the
Mos lem students associations of the universities of Science and Industry,
Polytechnique, Teachers' College, and the National University, the

Justice Society, the Islamic Soeiety of the anployees of the Vahed [Bus]
Company in Tehran, the Islamic Society of Iran's Custans Personnel, the
Islamic Society of Oil Industry Personnel in Tehran, the Society of Moslem
Mothers, the lath of Khordad [25 May] Youth Society, the Islamic Society

of Children and Youth Mental Development Center, the Islamic Society of
Employees of Bank-e Melli Iran, the Movement of Vanguard Moslems. the
Employees of Tehran Reconstruction and Development Corporation, the clergy

of had, The Islamic Society of Qom, Iran's Student Center, the Monica
Horker's Movement, the employees of the Islamic Society of the General Depart-

the Pasdaran Corps of Borujen, the Construction Jehad of Borujen, the
Moslem Students of Borujen. the employees of PARS News Agency in Shahr

Organization of the Islamic Com-unity, the Social Welfare Organization,
the Islamic Ccununity of the Ministry of Labor and Social Welfare, the
employees of the Chamber of Comerce, Industries and Mines, the employees
and students of Husayni Islami Elementary School; District 5 Tehran, the

the students and employees of Parvin Btesami High School, District 17 in
Tehran, the Pickup Taxis Union, the Islamic Association of Students of
District 12 of the Department of Education, the Islamic Saciety of Razi
Psychiatric Center, the Is lamic Society of Vahdat, the Workers of the
Printing Deparnnent of the Ministry of National Guidance, the Islamic
Cmmunity of Iranians Residing in Kuwait, Iran’s National Front, the
PREMIER ATTWTS 1'0 RUSSBRT AUTHORITY
Tehran MAD in Persian 25 Sep 79 pp l, 2

lérticle: "‘l'he Prine Minister: A Five-Han Connittee Has Been Charged
with 'Cleaning up' Each Ministry 80 To Speak: Eng Bezargan: By Order of
the Buy. No Figure or Body lies the Right To Interfere in Governnent Ac~
tivityﬂ/

ljl'exgl Eng Beeargan, the prime minister, gave a radio and television
speech to the lranian nation describing the country's political and econom-
ic problene and issues and declaring the government's viewpoints concern-
ing national affairs.

At the start of his message, Eng Basergnn dealt with the reasons for his
previous speech, thanked the people for their sentiments following the
broadcast of that neesage and then proceeded to describe the nation's
economic and agricultural condition, saying:

"The Irenian banking system has given such assistance to agriculture, to
industry and to connerce; however, there are problem with regard to open-
ing credit end other things, and the fact that debtors are not treating
the banks as they should and met. Although the tax revenues are propor-
tionately far better than they were lest year--that is, the year in which
the new regime, the Islamic regime, had not yet errived--nonethelsss, our
non oil revenues, one of which is tax, along with cuetons and duties, are
low as a consequence of Ministry of Finance neaeuree and sons reductions
and changes which the Ministry of Finance has made, and from the economic
standpointnthe budget and plan econoey--our current situation is in no

way sound or proper, although, thanks be to God, expenditures have been
met and God willing will continue to be net. No country can live on

special revenues from a god-given resource, without any real revenues fro-
work, effort and toil. The unenloyeent situation is much better than it
was 6 or 7 months ago but its future situation is not very assured and it
is still one of our threatening matters."

The prime minister than referred to the need for expansion and growth in
the private sector and to the damage that sector has endured, stressing
that it is the most repressed of sectors. He examined the question of
security and the state of the security forces and emphasized that although
these forces, from the physical corporal, material and personnel stand-
points and the standpoint of protection of the nation's security, are in no
way comparable with their state when the regime was being overthrown, they
are in a state of readiness in the face of domestic and foreign attacks
through the protection and aid of the Army of the Guards of the Revolution
and the committees, although they are still much less than what is needed
and required by the country.

Revolutionary Movement

In another portion of his message Eng Basargsn dealt with the condition
of white collar workers, stressing "The situation in the departments has
improved.

"However, the revolutionary movement which I talked about 2 months ago is
still not being felt.

"The situation is probably better than it was last year, that is, 7 or 8
months ago, but we are nonetheless still very far off. In short, the most
important thing of all is that an imperial system, a tyrannical system,
which ruled the country, has been eliminated. However, the system of the
Islamic republic, which must take its place, has in no way established its
foundations in any of the three stages, that is, Islam, the republic and
freedom, and then the system, nor have their places been filled.

"Not only has Islam as it could and should rule not been recognized or be-
come a factor--neither has the republic, freedom or that democracy whose
special condition was part of the government's program, whereby the govern-
ment would gradually follow these stages, the stages and program decreed

by the easm, which I have discussed a number of times. we have now reached
the point where the council is occupied with the constitution. Thus the
government has performed its duty and it is now in the hands of these gentle
men; let us see what is produced and to what degree they discharge this
trust and this assignment. God willing, they will discharge it in a way
that will bring them prestige and the attention of coming generations and
the generations of all time."

The Effects of the Revolution

Referring to the deficiencies arising from the revolution, and evaluating
this revolution, Eng Bazargan then said "This revolution is s great, all-
encompassing one. Its measure and extent go even beyond the borders of
Iran and it has assumed the guise of a world revolution. Such a revolution,
which also took place with great speed, was not only 'nation shaking'--

from certain standpoints it was 'world-shaking.’ It is natural that it

has had consequences and effects. Revolutions in other countries in his-
tory, for the past 300 years, for the past 500 years, have had the same
characteristics everywhere but rarely have they been more intense, more
shattering and on occasion more encumbered with objections, faults and

mistakes." ;p
Cooperation with the Council of the Revolution
The price minister edded,

"There ere teeny volunteers in this revolution. All the numbers of the
cmitteee end the Cuerde of the Soldiers of the Revolution poeness religi-
oue, politicel or perty centere which ere coming into exietence in ell
towne end provincee, end ﬂlny people ere cheeing tee-here of Sevek end oth
ere. They receive files, investigete depertnente, present the: to courte
end people even come end go end Ineke erreete without orders heving been
given to then, elong with the occupying forcee end leedere who teke plecee
over. however, it is proper here thet we fece week points end put our
fingers on their existence, on the week epote--this presence of ebundsnt
volunteers. Hhile eclrnowledging, honoring. respecting end epprecieting
their originel necessity, their presence end their services, since there
ere es elweye portione which heve not turned out to be properly ordered

or errenged, they eleo heve e week spot. As I heve eleo eeid in previous
speeches, it ie thie group of decision-melting centere, people with divieive
teetee end opinione end views, who ere eneng the points of weeknese end

ere inflicting e greet blow on our revolution, thet ie, in the ere follow-
ing the initiel victory.

"The eolution which wee discovered end which hee fortunetely to e lerge
extent elinineted much of this deficiency end weeknees wee the proceee of
orgenizetlon, coordinetion end in fect more or lees reguletion which ceue
into being between the government end the Revolutionery Council, both of
which ere under the fleg end under the leederehip, the greet leederehip,
of the revolution. Everything hes in reelity cone into en orgenieetion
under the persons eubject to this cooperetion end eoliderity between the
Revolutionary Army end the comittee. It is for thie reeeon thet I geve
the good news et one point thet the problem hed to e reletively lerge ex-
tent been eliminated end thet fortunately, thenke to God end thenke to
these young people end gentlemen, friendly sincere reletione hsd come into
being between the soldiers of the revolution end the guerds end government
officiels end the government-although the cooperetion of gentleuen in the
Revolutionery Council end their wey of epending tine, eepecielly the feel-
ing of responsibility which we were looking for, to the extent desired end
expected end in the eerly pert elso e bit more eveileble, wee not there-
fore ee it could heve end ehould heve been, end they heve been more et
tentive to their own dutiee end reeponeihilitiee end preoccupetions then
to whet the government end country require. Hettere met soon be resolved.
This is the first eepect of thie revolution; it hee been both e etrong
point end e week point, end it is e fector from which these effects heve
erieen. The eecond ie the netter of differences which eriee in feelinge
of reeponeihility. Every person feele reeponeihility in hie own feehion:
'whet should I do, whet should I not do'." On the besie of differences in
feelings of responsibility, interferences eriee, end there interferences
ere s lot of wood jeuned into the wheels of the goverment, be it this
government, or eny other government. There it e comon proverb in verious

39
lengueges which in Persien is 'Uhen there are two mothers s child's heed
becomes twisted,’ not to mention the situation when there ere s hundred
mothers. For this reeson e greet desl wee seid end s greet deel wee dis-
cussed, until two or two end s helf months ego when ll of my honored col-
lesgue ministers resigned, resulting in my going to visit the enem.

"These gentelenen considered four things to be en essentisl end necessery
condition if they were to serve end eccept responsibility, end these things
required very close cooperetion end prosecution on the pert of the govern-
ment. These four things were the easy of the revolution, the comittees,
the revolutionery courts end the eedie, the redio end television. The
first two things were hendled In e reletively good feshion but the second
two reusined with I do not went to ssy bed will being involved, but it
wee not until 2 weeks ego thet en ennouncesnent wee issued by the revolu-
tionsry public prosecutor generel, Hr Qoddusi, who geve s very correct.
logicsl, sincere, friendly end brotherly opinion on the government, ed-
dreseed to the comittees end so forth. In sccordence with the men's
orders, no comittee, no public prcsecutor, no revolutionery court, no
guerd, no soldier end no officisl hes the right to intervene in letters

related to the govermnent. This utter, just like the previous one. hes
been one of the government's greet victorious steps.

"dhen I ssy thet the government hes no selfish aspects, 1 do not ween to
sey the victory of this government but the victory of my government; it
hes been one of the victorious steps of the Islenic revolution end the
Islsnic Republic of Iren thet such sn order, such s proclenetion, such e
decree hes cone to be issued by the order of the leeder of the revolution.
To e degree, of course, it hes been obeyed, end i hope thet the orders
of the leeder of the revolution will be csrried out coupletely in s neen-
ingful, sincere, profound end obedient wey, end thet we, thet is, the em-

ployees of the government end the workers end servsnts of the country, will
not experience problems or interference."

The Need for Order in Aduinistrstion

In snother pert of his euessege, efter describing the people's desires end
expectstions, the goels end negstive destructive plens of some people,
the etste of vengefulness which is still to be found, end the need to ob-
serve order end principles in edninistretion, Eng Beesrgen seid:

Counterrevo lution

"To the extent thet this first etsge of the revolution, which is e nege-
tive one, is insepereble end synonymous with speed, severity end even
hershness, it met be tolerent, considered, studied end even eesygoing.
All the criticisms end disputes which heve existed between us end the rev
olutionsry young generstion from the tine the goverment wee for-ed up to
now end into the future ere besed on this very thing, two views end two
different progrems. The result of these two different progreee is two

u
-"v
different views, a difference in views and programs. The government is a
government charged with making an accommodation with this revolutionary
group, the severe and harsh group which still views the government employ-
ees and apparatuses with an eye to enmity and continued enmity, an eye to
the question of how we are exploiting this system, these employees and
these individuals. He observe that these people are looking with an eye
to what job a person previously held and whether he is a counterrevolution
ary hostile to us. They want that person to have no head on his body and
we, to the contrary, want the head which is on his body also to have a hat
end very good clothing and we want his information and resources also to
be greater. This is a contradiction which has come into being in differ
ent forms and these two actions, that is, this constructive act of recon
ciling the revolution are not compatible with that fact."

The prime minister added, "My entire concern, all my appeals and all my
talks, have been to say, Look, these two programs are not compatible--
either the negative program must be carried out to the hilt, and every
building and everything that exists must be eliminated and destroyed, and
later when the opportunity arises the work of construction will be carried
out, and we will carry them both out together--this one destroying that
and that person destroying this. The element of difference and the prob
lem between the government and those people who pursue that has a well-
known frequently used title, 'liquidation.‘ The problem lies in the fact
that we have two actions whose natures naturally are not compatible. The
crusade to build is a crusade. There is some construction and it is also
very necessary, but one cannot carry out the crusade of construction with
a J-3. The reason why I went to Khusestan with my beloved colleagues yes-
terday was because people had written me a letter the previous week with
a large amount of complaints and these complaints prompted me to see what
was going on there.

The prine minister added, "My entire concern, all my appeals and all my
talk, have been to say, Look, these two programs are not compatible--eith-
er the negative program must be carried out to the hilt, and every building
aw] everything that exists must be eliminated and destroyed, and later
when the opportunity arises the work of construction will be carried out,
and we will carry them both out together--this one destroying that and that
person destroying this. The element of difference and the problem between
the government and those people who pursue that has a well-known frequently
used title, 'liquidation.’ The problem lies in the fact that we have two
actions whose natures naturally are not compatible. The crusade to build
is a crusade. There is some construction and it is also very necessary,
but one cannot carry out the crusade of construction with a J-3.

The reason why I went to Khuzestan with my beloved colleagues yesterday
was because people had written me a letter the previous week containing a
large amount of complaints, and these complaints prompted me to see what
was going on there. I wish those who wrote letters would come and see how
and in what way the employees of the government and persons who are cooper-
ating are serving with enthusiasm, desire and efficiency. Their complaint
was that they went as part of the holy war of construction and a broken-
down pump by the river--it is natural, in the thinking of Islam and the
revolution, to maintain a farm; drawing from a river is not a crime or a
sin, indeed it is very virtuous, but, because there was no irrigation
season in that area and no need for one, they went there and wanted to put
a pump in operation and on their orders and by force of arms threatened the
owner of the farm and the pump on grounds that 'you are against development
and the revolution and so on and so forth, we are going to put this pump in
operation so the cannon people can farm.‘ This is not a holy war of con-
struction, it is a holy war of destruction, it is a holy war of confisca-
tion. I do not know, the holy war is an attack, a revolution, and this is
the first stage. The holy war of construction should not be like that."

The prime minister added, "A bill was drawn up and ratified by the Council
of the Revolution to the effect that a five-man committee would be in charge
of so to speak purification in each ministry. However, the views of these
committees are mostly connected with the present_and the future and mostly
Supervision over what people are doing now and lruling/ 'let him stay, we
also did this, and must do so.‘ we are in no way opposed to purification
out the matter has a different face and form, just as, from the beginning

of the triumph of the revolution, the enemy, through his domestic and his
foreign agents, proceeded according to a plan and put a very organized act
into motion every month or every few weeks; it is as if this matter, this
matter of purification, has developed dimensions and criteria, part of which
is a plan--that is, people set out and, with very compassionate faces, like
wolves in sheeps' clothing, on all sides bring out accusations, information,
espionage and old files. It is very easy to grow a beard and hold a string
of beads in one's hand. These days a title of Islamic Society of Workers,

1 do not know, workers have been attributing such-and-such qualities to
themselves whereas, when we look into individuals and their files, we see

that a given person up to the revolution was a Rastakhiz head or repre-
sentative in charge of collecting the members of the ministry and on the
first page of someone else's file is an order which Ardeshir Zahedi issued
and on another person's first page is a letter which for example he wrote

to Dr quel and there is the flattery and the accolade he made begging and
impioring the Shah and qusl or others and the rest of them, or, for example,
writing to Dr Eqbal and prostrating himself before him. we have often seen
people in the name of the committee or other than the committee pouring
poison-filled goblets of charges against our ministers, against the deputies,
against the general directors and against other people. Now. for perhaps

2 or 3 weeks, or a month, this intensity and haste have increased and people
have been receiving assignments from the Revolutionary Court, the assign-
ment to conduct a purification- 'bring the donkey all at once and take the

beans away'--just as if they were setting bombs and pinning Savak labels on
each other. It is still not known what happens when such an earthquake

and such a state of affairs arises in an office or agency where for example
25 or 30 million canons of the country's budget are being spent, in the
steel mill or the railway, in the National Oil Conpany or for example the
Ministry of Commerce--people drop all of these [responsibilities], set out
under the pretext of purification and so on and so forth, and create dis-
turbances, disorder and disruptions, and finally it becomes clear that when
they draw up files like this on the head of a department or factory or
hospital and stick the worst labels on him, he has no way out except to
escape so he doesn't get caught or, if he is very self-sacrificing, to re
sign. The same with lower persons--whether this xovernnent comes in or
another one, they have no choice but to [work/ carefully and cautiously

and sometimes remove or substitute. The overall view should be to protect,
preserve and look after them so that nobody, whether the government or en-
thusiastic higher officials, should make an effort over these rumors, whose
unin part and basis and principle is satanic destructiveness and ill will,
or pay any heed to them. God willing, we are also taking the third step so
that after ratification of the constitution and the elections, the govern-
ment will recite the lament 'if we become heavy laden and depart, we will
refer your judgment to God and depart' and at least the subsequent govern-
men: will inherit a country which is in good order and therefore can carry
out the basic significant plans which will take a long time and will need
sacrifice, whether now or later, will need effort, will need self-denial,
with divine support and your cooperation, affection and grace."
KHMEYNI'S sou SETS LIMITS 0N RULE BY CLERGY
Tehran KEYHAN in Persian 20 Oct 79 p 9

[Second letter of Hojjatoleslan Seyyed Ahnad Khoneyni to Ayatollah
Hontazerl: "The Extent of Religious Authority Should Be Clearly
Defined"]

[Text] The second letter of Hojjatoleslam Seyyed Ahmad Khoneyni, son
of the lean, concerning the religious authority of the highest clergy-
Ien [hereafter called 'Paqih'] has been received by His Excellency
Ayatollah Hontazeri, chairman of the Assembly of Experts.

In this letter, Hojjatoleslan Khoneyni, while proclaiming his 100 per-
cent support of Paqih, emphasized that its limits should be made clear.
The text of the letter is:

In the Name of God the Merciful, the Compassionate:

Great warrior of the faith, Your Excellency Ayatollah Hontazeri, Chair-an
of the Assenbly of Experts, nay your spiritual power endure. After greet-
ings are nade and before anything else I must say that I an 100 percent in
support of Faqih, but I believe that its limits should be clearly defined.
In my previous letter, I submitted that if tl’temost knowledgeable man of
the tine should be a citizen of another country and he should have control
of all the forces of Iran and war should break out between his country

and Iran and he sees Israeli and A-erican involvement in the war and he
has no power to intervene politically or militarily in his country, what
could be done?

Hith him being unable to declare war in his own country and being in fact
against war, what would our responsibility be, as defenders against an
attack? Your Bxcellency's answer was: "The acknowledged Paqih has
always been in Iran, and if the people's religious allegiance goes to a
non-Iranian, and if it should be agreed that such an Islamic Jurist should
have control of Iranian politics, he must cone to Iran." I have heard no
other answer from you, but there are questions:

hh
1. My point of focus was not the highest Iranian clergyman, but the world's
highest clergyman. and the assumption was that it might be an Iraqi, for
example, who is the most aware, knowledgeable. religious and couitted,

and our deprived people should be obliged to take him as their leader, in
which case my hypothetical situation night thus come about.

2. As I said before, knowledgeability in religion does not depend upon
being Iranian, and until now we have seen no learned opinion to the
effect that religious allegiance must be given to Iran if the Paqih is
in another country.

3. You have asked, if the people follow a non-Iranian I-‘aqih, is this
discipleship, which brings about a reverence for skill in Islamic law so
that there is no need for a guidance council, the discipleship of the
people of Iran or of the Shi'ites of the world? You know well that the
fortunes of Iranian Shi'ites cannot be seen to unless the fortunes of all
Shi'ites be taken into consideration. The Shi'ites of Pakistan, Afghanis-
tan, Iraq, India, Kuwait, the rest of the Arab Gulf states, of the Soviet
Union, Saudi Arabia, Egypt, Lebanon, Syria, Indonesia, and the Shi'ites
of Africa and other countries and continents should be taken into account.

In. Only about 27 million of the 100-150 million Shi'ites in the world are
Iranian. The renown outside Iran for the authority of the Islanic
Jurisprudence of Najaf is so great that the Shi'ites of most foreign coun-
tries are loyal to it. If Iraq decides seriously to expel the Iranians
from the domain of Najaf, from then on all Shi'ites would be loyal to
Arab Islamic legalists, and Iraqi Faqih would always possess the alle-
giance of the majority of Shi'ites.

5. You have asked: "And if it should be agreed that such an Islamic
jurist should have control of Iranian politics?" The I-‘aqih of the time,
who is sanctioned by the parliament, should control the politics of Iran.
The above phrase implies that the writer thinks it possible that a reli-
gious jurist night be foremost in the world, but not be given the poli-
tical reigns because he is Iraqi. and that it is through the indulgence
of the people that he would become involved politically.

6. You have said: "He must come to Iran." First of all, according to

what parliament would have confirmed, "must and must not" are the preroga-
tives of Paqih, not of the law of parliament. The ordering and forbidding
by the law (that he most or lust not) of that clergyman would be a viola-
tion of the authority which had been granted him by the parliament.
Secondly, if that clergyman, for any imaginable reason, or out of per-
sonal preference. or due to his own country's refusal to allow him, should
not come to Iran, would he lose his Paqih for this reason?

Thirdly. nonratification of a clergyman's world authority by the Assembly
of Experts because he should come to Iran, increases his authority, and
the ratification of it takes something away from his authority, because
this Faqih is a divine latter and is affimed through that channel.
A right that is confirued by God for s theologian cannot be denied.

7. The basis of difficulties is that if someone considers himself Faqih
and you know his nerit is not inconsiderable and he has a number of
followers, he hilself will consider it an obligation to interfere accord-
ing to his authority. This is a broad subject. I ask that you write a
full answer to the questions or give an explanation.

Sincerely, Aimed Khoneyni, Friday, 19 October 1979.

9310
C80: 4906

1&6
ARK! PURSE DEEMED VITAL FOR ISLAMIC REGIME
Tehran KEYHAN in Persian 21 Oct 79 p 10

[Discussion by Dr Hebibollah Peyman: "The Time for Talk Is Over.
Action Must Be Taken"]

[Text] Doctor Habibullah Peyman, who had partici-
pated last Hednesday in the loOth—day funeral
ceremonies of His Excellency Ayatollah Taleqani.

in the course of his talks, part of which were
published by KEYHAN on Friday night. brought up a
number of important subjects related to various
issues. Part of the concluding reearks of Dr Peynan
are presented below.

Now the time for talk is past and action is necessary. Good intentions

by themselves are no longer sufficient to get things done, the process

is what is important. Urging and supporting such-and-such actions and
such-and-such programs is pointless. He must have action. what has
happened in Kordestan, Khuzestan. and other parts of the country is un-
settling. By what means does the government intend to curb these catas-
trophes? The army should not be used to overturn the evils of Kordestsn
and other places where disturbances exist. This army has not been purged
and it still contains elements connected with and loyal to the previous
regime. The office of the has and other groups have studied the situation
of the array several times. and the result is that the army is still the
same and there has been no practical. fundamental purge. The sane con-
wanders are still serving in the army, who. as an investigation of
Kordestan's past will show. in the midst of the people or the military
proclaimed that the previous shah was a stupid man. and when America
perceived he could no longer protect his interest they overthrew him.

Such is the situation of the commanders who are still serving in the array
creating disunity among the people and working actively in the guise of
peacenakers in Kordestan. Here this question is raised, that has Khoaeyni
exists and his existence is a manifestation of the unity and solidarity

of the people. A gesture from his and millions of true believers will pour
into the streets to hear his contend, but in lieu of answering this question.
that this situation exists right now. and Emam Khomeyni's existence is

the best unifying factor for the people what is to be done in the future?
what about tomorrow. that distant day when there is no Ema-i? what must we
do then? who will unify us then? it should not be based on this army and
basically this army should not be relied upon. The power of the people

is greater than that of any army. “hen we have a 100 percent people's ~rmy.
then the power of the people and the power of the people's army. side by
side. will bring down any foe. The clergymen who have taken control of
things and who also have good intentions, should know that tangible
realities and these matters being proposed and matters necessary for con-
tinuing the revolution are necessary and have priority. Involvement with
historical Islamic events does not solve problems. A people's government
is a principal element and is important, and giving importance to the rule
of the people and their involvement with securing their own destiny is the
most important principle which must be dealt with. Its importance is so
great that Father Taleqani also continually spoke of it, and we saw to
what an extent he insisted on this. He called on us to take the people
into account and to regard their demands. thoughts, and views as impor-
tant. This is a necessity for us now and we must believe in its abundant
inportance. The Assembly of Experts, as it is working now. as the assem-
bly of people who are compiling the nation's future constitution. has

an important responsibility on its shoulders. it has such a serious
responsibility that if it does not exercise enough care in assembling

the elements of Iran's future constitution. the people and future genera-
tions of this nation will be in a bad situation. The religious authority
who is now confirming the representatives of this assembly is without
object ion now. and the pertoa who has been proclaimed the governing
clergyman is fully qualified. But will we have someone in the future
whose authority and religious knowledge will equal that of Emam

Khomeyni. governing religious authority of this age?

The representatives of the assembly should know that whoever in the
future should be considered to be the governing religious authority and
be confirmed legally should be qualified. In the event that the require-
ments are brought forth and he is found lacking. and not well enough
acquainted with the realities of society to govern. what should be done?
When it comes to the people's government, with the people participating in
all matters, this kind of problem does not arise. The responsibilty for
us now, and of the people who consider themselves responsible, is to

open up and clarify the essence of- current events and to show the way
along the noble path of the revolution's future. Being unified and per-
forming prayers together in order to say that we are united is of no use.
Praying together does not solve problems. We should know who we oppose
and what people are enemies of iran and of the Iranian revolution. If
standards are not defined and discussed, unity of action will not be
obtained. Today we are in such conditions and danger is so near that. if
we do not speak the truth and bring forth the issues. we are going to be
involved in many problems.

The principal enemy of Iran and the Iranian revolution is imperialism.
What is proposed is complete dissociation with imperial ism. The com-
bined efforts of the clergy and the intellectuals will. solve the prob-
lem. The essential solution is that we should not be dependent.

9310 “-‘5

Pen 0 I. An:
COMMANDERS GIVE STERN HARNINGS 1‘0 KURDS

Tehran BAHDAD in Persian 23 Oct 79 pp 1,2

[Text] UruaiyehnFrom BN-iDAD's correspondent—Following the wounding of
20 soldiers in Hehabad, General Zahir-Nezhad, con-ander of the 64th

Army of Uruiyeh, announced yesterday afternoon that unrler no circum-
stances will such activities be tolerated any longer and he added: I
will not tolerate any note of this militarily, and if any hotel. home,
ruin, apartment, window, barricade or place is the source of an attack
against the army, it will be brought down over the ears of the people
inside it. I will no longer allow the opponents of Islam to obstruct the
Islamic clergy. I an warning them for the last time that [will not
tolerate such armed obstructions. I will destroy them with all the force
at my disposal." He added: "The Iranian nation should know that these
soldiers have been under orders not to take any action unless attacked,
but henceforth this will not be the order. He have a responsibility to
the country. These faithful soldiers receive no reward or salary from
the country. The nation has entrusted us with its innocent sons, we will
no longer suffer any bad behavior from the opponents of Islam and the
enemies of the people, until the rumors of the colonizers and the sup—
porters of these mercenaries without a country are silenced." Concerning
the revolutionary guardsnen and the reasons for opposition to them,
Timsar Zahir-Nezhad said: "Those who are opposed to the revolutionary
guardsnen are opposed to the Islamic Revolution, and since they cannot
Oppose the revolution itself out of fear of the people, they oppose the
organizations which constitute the revolution. The guardsnen are the only
organization which has come into existence since the revolution for the
purpose of defending it. In my belief these people are anong the moat
honorable and respectable elements of our current society, but they are
young, of course. and they are enotional. He cannot expect the conport-
ment of older people from young people. It is not clear why they only
attack these people. They should protest against the Zionists, the
South Africans, and the Americans." The comander of the 66th Army of
Urumiych, in another portion of his talk, said: "The Kurds are one of
the noblest, and at the same tine one of the simplest, peoples in Iran
who have become captivated by the poisonous propaganda of the traitorous
Democratic Party. These people. who claim to be legitimate, illegally
take up arms, plunder garrisons, and do everything they can to undermine
the security of the country, but you should not be involved in this. If
we go on this way, the world will laugh at us as long as it exists

and as long as there is time. Should the revolution, brought about by

the people with their bare hands, now be defeated by a few traitors with
cannons and guns?

At the conclusion, referring to issues raised by Radio BBC, he said: "Uhere
do these hypocrites come from?" General Zahir-Nezhad, in another comment,
mentioned that no one except Emam Khoaeyni can undertake to guide the
revolution, that the revolution is not an export from other countries,

and that this revolution must be brought to fruition at any price.

Timsr Vali Palahi, commander of the infantry, in an interview with
Urumiyeh radio yesterday said that the readiness and strength of the
infantry to answer any threat from the clandestine Democratic Party of
Kordestan is far greater in winter than in the summer. Referring to the
armed activities of the clandestine Democratic Party, he said: "When a
political organization has a military dimension or seeks to secede or
intends to overthrow the central government, in any of these cases the
army has a responsibility to intervene." He added: The actions we take
in the area are based on legitimate and conditional defense. Always when
attacks have been begun by hostile troops we have merely defended our-
selves, according to the Shari'at, which considers defense a right in any
situation, and our defense has been limited, meaning that if we are
attacked by Kalashnikov rifles we try to respond with machineguns, not
with artillery and tanks." Responding to the question of why the clean-up
is taking so long. he said: "The extremist groups, and especially the
leftist extremist groups, inhabit densely pop.‘ated areas in the midst of
innocent people, and the clean-up has been prolonged out of respect for
these people."
ISRAELI ss‘mmm POLICY CALLED TREAT T0 PEACE
Jerusalem ALvQUDs in Arabic 15 Oct 79 p 1
[Editorial: "Settlanent and Peace“)

[Text] The occupied Arab territories are continuously shrinking, sometimes
by expropriation and other times by striking a siege around them. Hhile
the methods used to devour these lands may differ frm one case to another,
yet the goal is always the same.

The recent decision of the Israeli Goverunent to enlarge the seven set-
tlements by confiscating what the Israeli Government considers to be state
domain lands will not be the last measure emphasizing the intention of this
government to pursue its settlement policy.

The Arabism of these lands will not be annuled by the different mes,
categories and classifications they are given. There are no such things
as governnent lands and privately-owned lands. The Arab lands have been
inherited by one generation from another. There is no law which allows
the confiscation of other people's land for the purpose of establishing
settlements on then.

The great agony we. the sons of the occupied territories, suffer stems
from lack of recognition by the Arab world of the danger threatening our
lands and from the failure of our Arab brothers outside the occupied
homeland to agree on a well studied and unified stand to avoid the loss
of what remained of the Palestinian lands.

The Arab indifference toward what is happening will lead to the settlement
of one million Jews on the west Bank and encircling every Arab village and
city with Jewish settlements and cities. Then. we will have to add to the
list of the Arab catastrophics a new one that will not be the last!

We know that the mere denunciation of the expropriation of the Arab

lands will not affect Israel's determnation to continue its policy

and to carry out its settlement plan. But, we reiterate that the road
taken by Israel is full of dangers. This policy is considered as a threat
undermining the chances of po -:e. This threat will inevitably push the
wise among the friends of Israel to force it to retreat from the excessive
position of pursuing its current policy.
Then: is still a significant remark to make: The recent Israeli decision
affims the fact that the Israeli Government and the Cub Emunin
group are two faces of the lane settlement coin. All the allegations that

this goverment is fighting against the eo-called "settlement by force"
are mere nonsense that nobody can believe.
HIGHER EDUCATION IN THE "331' BANK
Jerusalem AL-SIIA'B in Arabic 18 Oct 79 p 2

[Article: "higher Education Board Executive Con-littee Keenly Pursues

Question of Placing Gaza Strip Students in the Three Universities of the
West Bank"]

[Text] The Board of Higher Education Executive Comittee yesterday
(Wednesday) held its 13th session at the official headquarters of

the Board of Higher Education in the Trade Unions Complex in Beit Hanina.
During that meeting, the comittee continued discussion of its general
report about the current state and future of higher education and the
ways and means of developing and improving it to secure a better future
for the children of our people in the occupied Arab territories.

As a result of its deliberations, during two consecutive sessions held
last week, the Executive Ca-ittee approved the final draft of its report
endorsing recounendations on planning, coordinating and financing higher
education and emphasizing the necessity of continuing the role of the
Board of higher Education, in its capacity as the supreme national body

in charge of those issues pertaining to higher education and Arab culture
in the occupied Arab territories.

The Executive Cmittee decided to send copies of its report to the members

of the Board of Higher Education and all the concerned circles within and
outside the occupied Arab territories.

During the afternoon part of yesterday's session, the Executive Comittee
set with a number of members of the Board of Higher Education from the
Gaza Strip. The conferees discussed the dimensions of the problems faced
by the graduates of secondary schools in the Gaza Strip and the ways and
means of helping them enroll in the universities in the West Bank. As

A result of that discussion, the Executive Coamittee decided to ask the
three universities in the west Bank. namely the Bit Zeit University,
Iethleh- University and al-Najah University, to submit to the committee
statistics about the numbers of students who applied for enrollnent,

how many were admitted. and what can be done to facilitate the admission
of others for the first and second semester of the current school year.
The Executive Committee will resume the discussion of the problem of the
Gaza Strip students after receiving the answers from the three universities
In order to coordinate the activities of the three institutes in helping
higher education in the Gaza Strip.

AL-SﬂA'B knew that the Executive Cannittee's report called for drawing
an agreed upon comprehensive and coordinated development plan for higher
education and Arab culture in the occupied territories that would be
implemented under the supervision of the Board of higher Education.

Discussing the financing of higher education projects. the report
stressed the necessity of financing the programs of the universities and

higher education institutes under s camprehensive plan through the Board
of Higher Education.

It iswnrthwhile to mention here that the Board of Higher Education last
July invited an educational expert specializing in planning for the
deveIOpment of education. Dr Norman Charles Hunt from the University of
Edinburgh in Britain [sic] visited all the universities and educational
institutions in the West Bank and Gaza Strip. As a result of his visit,

he submitted a report which contained several recommendations. The
Academic Sub-cunnittee of the Board of Education as well made a comprehensive
review of the education situation in our country. Both the recommendations
of the British expert and the Academic Sub-committee were taken into
consideration when the Executive Committee discussed its general report.
approved yesterday.

6800
650: 4802
KUWAITI PAPHIS ASSESS DIPLICATION 0P SEIZURE 0P 0.8. NASSY
1.0120826 Kuwait KUNA in Arabic 0712 GMT 12 Nov 79 Lb

[Text] Kuwait, 12 Nov—Three local papers consent today on the current
situation in Iran in light of the continued detention of the hostages at
the 0.8. Eabassy in Tehran.

The newspaper AL-ANM' expresses its opposition to the occupation of the
embassy as a nattar of principle but expresses surprise at the reaction of
the citizens in the West to it. It writes: The occupation operation con-
stitutes a violation of all diplomatic traditions and usage. It is wrong
to believe, for even one single meat, that such an operation will serve
Iran's national objectives. For all it will do is to bring disrepute to
the prestige of the state in the international and political circles.

Referring to the wave of anger that has swept the United States and other
countries over the occupation operation, the newspaper says "we are extreme-
ly astounded by this wave of wrath; for the fate of the 60 hostages at the
embassy is certainly less ilportant than the limof an entire people and
the destiny of an entire nation."

The paper says that the Anerican people are urging their government to
wage a war "even if that means the destruction of the whole world," but
they consider it outrageous for the Palestinian people and their revolution
to wage such war for their rights to return to their usurped homeland.

AL—ANBA' then advises the Anericans to ask thmelves about the reason that
lakes then so hated in the world and that turns their flag into a aynbol

of plotting and their name into a synonym for international crine. If the
Americans were to look at the up of the world and put their blood-stained
hands over the wounds of men in Palestine, Lebanon, Vietnan, Canbodia, Chile,
Pakistan, Iran and elsewhere, the paper adds, "then the ugly Anericans will
realizewwhy they alone of all the world's people are singled out for Inn's
hatred.
The Kuwait paper ALFSIYASAH writes: To control the situation in Iran will
always require a stand that conflicts with highly delicate and sensitive
emotions and feelings. The paper points out that control of the situation
must come at the expense of some factions that have found in the Iranian
revolution an emotional if not material gain. These factions are content
"to be able to raise their voices and call for the death of the shah and
his henchmen, and perhaps for the lynching of Carterand facing up to the
United States."

The Iranian leadership must be truly anxious to restore order, the paper
adds. but "many are still intoxicated by the frenzy of the situation, parti-
cularly those who carry arms and find pleasure in chanting slogans against
the shah. although he is no longer an important matter, and against Carter,
the United States and imperialism."

For 30 years, the paper says, the Iranian people expressed their feelings
only in whispers, and now, suddenly, they have got the opportunity to

cry out. "Such people." it adds, "cannot be easily steered and directed.
The situation will become critical if Khomeyni were to disappear from the
scene in Iran where the people are still intoxicated by what has happened."

The English-language KUWAIT TIMES expresses sympathy for the Iranian people's
demand for the trial of the ex-shah because of the crimes he conmitted
against the Iranians during his 37 years of rule. But the paper also ex-
presses its opposition to the use of forceto detain the hostages in the
enbassy to bring pressure to bear on the United States to hand the shah

over to Iran "because such acts are inconsistent with the Islamic laws."

The paper expresses its concern for the political anarchy that threatens to
do away with Iran "where the Kurds seem bent on continuing the fight for
independence and where it is very easy to drive the Arabs into bloodbaths
there, as they number over 3 million in Arabestan [Khorasan]."

The paper says that a wise leadership can lead the country out of catastrophe
and this is something the present leadership in Iran can do.

The paper goes on to say that the Carter Administration is now under pres-
sure from the Congress, the American people and the American press who are
all in rage, "and hence it would be illogical for it to hand the shah over
to Iran."

The paper concludes that perhaps the ideal solution for ending the crisis
is to hand over the shah's wealth to the present government in Iran as pro-
posed by the former U.S. delegate to the United Nations, Andrew Young.
'AL-AHBA" manners 0N U.S.-IRANIAN CRISIS
LD150759 Kuwait KIM in Arabic 0708 Glﬂ‘ 15 Nov 79 ID

[Text] Kuwait-~loca1 papers here dealt today with the develo manta in the
American-Iranian crisis and its reflection on various aspects of the situa-
tion in the Middle East region.

AL-ANBA' said that the occupation of the American Essay in Tehran was no
more than a severe reaction to the shsh's entry into the United States which
had resulted in the cutting off of the oil and the freezing of the Iranian
assets in Aasrica as the beginning of an economic war. It added that what
is aore serious than this is the Anerican ailitary daunstration, which
resmbles the tripartite battle against Egypt in 1956.

The paper ruled out the possibility of the outbreak of war and said that
it was the econoaic blockade whose signs began to energe. However, it
added that this blockade was difficult to enforce due to the interests of
Japan and Europe. which need the Iranian oil.

AL-ANM' called on Iran to take the initiative to "settle" its differences
with the Gulf States out of the principle in which we believe. nanely the
rejection of foreign invasion and intervention. It said it goes without
saying that this should be our stand when an Islamic state is being sub-
jected to a real threat. The paper concluded its cos-lent by saying that
it was essential that Tehran should realize the importance of consultation
and coordination in the policies of the states of the region and not to be
hostile to then and create crisis with then so that none of us would find
himself alone in the battle of destiny.
'AL-RA'Y AL-'MI4' 'RIDICULBS' ".8. STATEMENT ON "IDEAS? POLICY
L0080808 Kuwait KUNA in Arabic 0710 GMT 8 Nov 79 Lb

[Text] Kuwait-AL-RA'Y AL-‘AHH said here today that if there was any bene-
fit from occupyingtheAmerican Embassy in Tehran it is summed up at least

in making the Americans taste occupation. The paper hoped that the occupa-
tion of the embassy would make Americans realize the weaning of the occu-
pation of Palestine and the deprivation of its people of their right to
their homeland and for its people to have a secured existence against
threats, terrorism and killing. It said that this was an opportunity for
the United States to learn how to deal with people by respecting and recog-
nizing their rights and not by means of subjugation, plotting and supporting
aggression against them.

It ridiculed an American statement which stated "that the aim of American
policy in the Middle East is to help the states in the region to preserve
their independence against any outside interference." It said: who be-
lieves such words? It stressed that the United States was the only source
of threat to the Middle East states. It explained that Palestine was the
best example of this. It pointed that the mediation of the PLO for the
release of the hostages at the American Embassy will not lead Washington
to recognize it (the PLO) unless it abandons its demand for a Palestinian

homeland.
'AL-RA'Y AL-‘ADH' 'REGRETS' ARAB, PALESTINIAN 'RJSH' '10 SAVE U.S. HOSTAGBS
1.0110854 Kuwait KUNA in Arabic 0738 an 11 Nov 79 LB

[Text] Kuwait, ll Nov—The Kuwaiti AL-RA'Y AL-‘Alﬁ expresses its deep re-
gret at the Palestinian and Arab rush to save the 11.3. citizens detained at
the Anerican Bnbassy in Tehran, saying that such an initiative gives the
United States "a certificate of good conduct it never dreaned of ever hav-
ing, particularly since it has been murdering us for 30 years and is still
doinguso through Israel and is doing away with any dignity we might still
have.

The paper adds: "The Anerican comander in Washington. who couittad all
sorts of nassacres in nsny countries, including Palestine, now talks about
humanity and involves the Arabs and the m in washing away his sins, there-
by raising before the Anericans themselves and before the world a certifi-
cate exonersting hin fro. shedding our blood and supporting Israel's sg-
greasion on us. This rush will show that we have been false in denouncing
the United States, so nuch so that Washington can declare: "Can you not

see the Arabs and Palestinians rushing to save the 0.8. prestige in this
crisis"?

The paper then points to the contradiction in the attitude of the Arabs who
are rushing to secure the release of the hostages and says that s nunber

of Arabs are still being detained in the prisons of the Phalangist Alliance
in Lebanon. but no Arab has loved to save them. "Should these Arabs becone
Anericans so that we may care for then"? the paper asks in conclusion.
'AL-HATAN': U.S. C(HPLETBS PREPARATIONS FOR NILE BASIN UNION
1.0101058 Kuwait KUNA in Arabic 0729 GMT 10 Nov 79 Lb

[Text] Kuwait—A Kuwaiti paper today says that the United States intends

to set up a security alliance anong seven African countries along the Nile
basin, most prominent of when is Egypt, for the purpose of confronting Soviet
"infiltration" in the continent.

AL-HATAN attributes to sources which it describes as closely linked to the
11.8. State Department, reports to the effect that the 0.5. Government "has
completed the final touches to the scheme" which will begin in the form of
technological and economic cooperation along the African states and will
end by finding a kind of political and security cooperation along then.

It says that Egypt will play a "basic" role in this schue which will be
called the Nile Basin Union [Ittihad Hand al-Nil] "to replace the Arab
League and the leadership role which it had along the group of Arab coun-
tries." This is a reference to freezing Egypt's nenbership in the Arab
League as punishment for signing the peace treaty with Israel.

AL-HATAN adds that the other member countries in the proposed union are
Sudan, Uganda. Zaire, Ethiopia, Kenya and Chad.

The paper says that the advisers of the u.s. President do not believe that
the present sharp political disputes among sone neabers of the proposed
union. such as the dispute between Harriet Ethiopia and sole of its neigh-
bors, would reduce the changes of success for the scheme as they consider
"that possibilites of change in the directions of the am of 0.3. strategy
are not unlikely even in the short tern." [as received]
BRIEFS

IWIAN REVOLUTION SECOND STAGE—The newspaper AL-HATAN today discussed the
situation in Iran. It describes the recent events in Tehran as being the
start of the second stage of the revolution which blew away Bazargan's
goverlment and returned the reins to a new revolutionary council differing
in form and content from its previous composition." The paper explains
that lameyni's revolution in the first stage was "the revolution of the
people against their ruler" but today's revolution is "the revolution

of the state against its colonizer." It adds that the former shah in the
first stage was unable to face the revolution and that President Carter, so
it appears. is unable in the second stage to move against it "and finds
that all he can do is to pray and await solution fron heaven." AL-HATAN
says that the crisis of the 0.5. ﬁnbassy in Tehran is not just linked to
oil and 11.8. interests "but it opens the file of the revolutions of the
third world against the American octopus." It adds that it could be said
"Iran's coaing triumphant out of this crisis will be an international
triunph for the oppressed people against American domination and influence.”
[Text] [13162235 Kuwait KUNA in Arabic 0729 GHT 16 Nov 79 Lb]

IW'S LOSS OF PRESTIGE—MPSIYASAH underlines the losses suffered by Iran's
international prestige as a result of the incident in the U.S. Hussy in
Tehran. It says that the Iranian regime, "which believed that the oil will
be a decisive weapon," now has learned "that American itself does not want
Iranian oil." It adds that what has occurred in Tehran ”vill remain un-
acceptable to the oil-producing countries and they are against it although
they are not saying so." It continues to say that "the peoples of this
region do not find in such actions ideal dennds and ails, especially now
that they have become peoples concerned with the logic of dealing with the
peoples of the world with conprehensibie and convincing languages." The
paper stresses that there are nany countries "ready" to sell oil to the
United States "as long as the conditions for the compensatory request are
justified humanely by an incident which is rejected internationally. AL-
SIYASAH concludes its conmentary by saying there is nothing new in the sit-
uation in Tehran "other than an increasing loss of the international pres-
tige of Iran." [Text] [13142305 Kuwait KIM in Arabic 0701 Off 16 Nov 79 L0]
POSSIBLE IRANIAN MILITARY COW—Kuwait, 15 Nov—Reports published here say
that Iran will witness a military coap aimed at keeping men of religion
away from power. The paper AL-SIYASAH quotes diplomatic circles as saying
that reports circulated between Tehran and Paris say there are increasing
possibilities of a coup .‘ed by Adairal Ahmad Madani, with the support of

units free the Iranian Navy, Army and Air Force. [Text] [JN150949 Bagh-
dad INA in Arabic 0940 err 15 Nov 79 JR]

650: 4802
LIBYA URGES ARAB NATION T0 'REVIEH' DEPOSITS IN U.S. BANKS
LDlSl936 l‘ripoli Voice of the Arab Homeland in Arabic 1715 GMT 15 Nov 79 1.!)

[Text] The policy of imperialism is based on aggression and piracy. Imper-
ialism wants to impose its influence over people; to suck their resources
and exploit them in order to make more profit and as a result deprive

people of development and progress and keep them from overcoming poverty
and hunger.

The money deposited in Western banks is not secure from danger. when .-‘r.--
perislism fails to impose its conditions or use armed force against people,
it does not hesitate to act against money in its banks which belongs to
such people. This can be seen in the current case in which the imperialist
U.S. administration frose $12 billion of the Iranian people's money in

American banks in an attempt to apply pressure to free the American hostages
in Iran.

America, whose fingers were burned by the flames of the Vietnamese war,
makes a thousand calculations before using the battleship and the gun.
Therefore, it threatens to use these armed methods and if this is to no
avail inerialism resorts to aggression in another way. The American ac-
tion against the Islamic people's revolution in Iran has been the freesing
of Iranian deposits, that is the seizing of those deposits. This American
act of piracy, in addition to being theft and robbery, forces people to
draw a lesson from this event and know that when they deposit money in
Western banks this money becomes endangered and subject to bargaining by
the imperialist pirates.

Perhaps the nation most in need of being aware of this fact is the Arab
nation because the Arabs have huge deposits in the United States and the
Rest in general from which imperialist countries benefit. The racist enemy
which has usurped Palestine also benefits from thm. Despite the role of
Arab deposits in strengthening the Beaten economies and the American econ-
omy in particular, the United States is totally biased in favor of the racist
enemy and is totally hostile to Arab rights. In other words, despite the
fact that it has interests in the Arab world, it supports the Zionist in-
justice and is hostile to Arab rights and fights them.
Aral» drpunlts In the west and in the United States. in addition to U.S.
interests in the Arab world, mean that the Arabs are in u position to
threaten the United States and impose their will on it, but the United
States behaves as though the reverse were true. It threatens and it is
the one to belittle the Arabs. This forces the Arabs to take measures
which will make the United States stop dreaming or stop ignoring the Arabs,
such as making the United States understand that if the Arabs wait this
does not mean that they will continue doing so and that if they have been
patient there is a limit to their patience. One such measure is to review
our deposits in the west and the United States so that the time does not
come when the United States tries to freeze or seize Arab money, causing
us two losses: Losing the money and losing because we did not use it to
transform and develop our economic capabilities.

The Arab homeland needs the Arab deposits. The Arab nation has priority

and is more deserving of its money and the use of our Arab money in the
construction and development of our nation. This is more beneficial and
more lasting than transforming this money into deposits in Western banks,
which benefit our imperialist and racist enemies. Before us is the exper-
ience of Libya, which benefits from every penny and where money is trans-
formed into projects of development and great transformation. The use of
this money was behind the great transformation in Libya, which has astonished
the whole world. This experience is the biggest incentive for all of us to
stop depositing our money in Western banks and to review our deposits in
western banks in order to protect them from what has happened to the deposits
of the Iranian people at the hand of American imperialism.

There is no doubt that the best and most secure protection for our deposits
is that they should be in our hands and in our country, where they should
be used in deveIOpment and transformation and not kept as paper or bank
balances. It is strange that your money should be one of the weapons in
the hand of your enemy, used against you, but the policy of imperialism

is full of such contradictions. There is no way to deprive the imperialist
enemy of the chance to use this weapon other than disarming the enemy of
the weapon. If this is done the enemy will suffer the two losses: Its
loss of this money which eases its economic problems, and its loss of the
money as a weapon or a means of pressure and bargaining against the people.

Finally. the seizure by the U.S. imperialist administration of the deposits
of the Iranian people is good lesson and a serious precedent that people
should not take casually. The nation most in need of benefitting and learn-
ing from this lesson and precedent is the Arab nation.
'HENA': IN SEPTEMBER ASSASSINATIONS, EXPDOSIONS OCCURRED IN LIBYA
NClblOOS Cairo HERA in Arabic 0835 GMT 14 Nov 79 NC

[Text] Cairo, ll. November-The weekly magazine MIR SA‘AH says that
Colonel al-Qadhdhafi is becoming increasingly concerned about his weak
position at home and more aware of it, particularly since the oppositio --
hitherto active abroad-mow has forces in Libya itself.

Citing infomd sources in Tripoli, the magazine says that on the night of
(‘21) September these forces succeeded in launching s surprise attack on

six fuel stations in Tripoli and on another station in Zuwarsh. The Libyan
authorities kept quiet about this incident despite the fact that the opera-
tion was carried out by an opposition organization consisting of people from
(Khazzan). The planning for the operation was done in Tripoli, Zuwarah and
Sabhsh. This last Operation, however, has failed. [as received]

The magazine adds that on 12 Septed>er Colonel al-Qadhdhafi was scheduled
to inaugurate both a big seven-storey administrative couples: housing the
health, education and services offices in the town of Sort, and a nearby
hotel. The two buildings were blown up. Eighty Libyans and Pakistanis
among the people preparing to welcome the colonel were killed. The purpose
of the operation was to assassinate al-Qsdhdhafi.

AKHIR SA'AH also says that 21 people were assassinated in al-Zawiyah last
month including the deputy chairman of the pro sl-Qadhdhafi people's com-
nittee. The tom of Zuwarah is openly showing hostility toward al-Qadhdhsfi
and his regime.

The magazine confirms the appearance of a new organization in Libya under
the name of the "Black Cat." This organization sends threats to wealthy
ministers who cooperate with the regime. Pictures of a black cat are being

stuck on cars in some Libyan towns. It has been said in Libya that this
organization has links with Iraq and that it appeared after the return of
the Libyan military personnel who had been training in Iraq.
HOROCCO'S BOUCETTA VIEWS TIES WITH SPAIN, EQUATORIAL GUINEA. SAHARA
13260925 Casablanca LB HATIN in French 11 Nov 79 p 5 LD

[Apparent text of Madrid interview with Moroccan Foreign Minister H'haaed
Boucetta originally published in Madrid DIARIO 16: "The Ratification of
the Moroccan-Spanish Fishing Agreement Has Been Delayed as a Result of
Statements on Sahara"; date not given]

[Excerpts] 0n the occasion of his official visit to Spain Hr H'haaad Bou-

cetta gave Madrid newspaper DIARIO 16 an exclusive interview. We publish a
full translation hereunder.

QUESTION: Minister, how do you explain the contrast between the big plans
for Spanish-broccan cooperation and the neager results so far achieved?

ANSHBR: Great opportunities have arisen for concrete achievements, espe-
cially following the meetings between their najesties King Juan Carlos and
King Bassan II.

Sone opportunities for finding solutions to ainor problem have been aissed
but we should not despair. We have now reached understanding on a funda-
aental problem.

Our relations should not be founded on unbalanced bases, and the interests
of both sides should be safeguarded. Territorial problsnsnrelating to
“rarfaya, Ifni and Sahara-have existed in recent years and they have poi-
soned our relations. I hope that once the core of these problems is dealt
with we will be able to start work on these projects.

The project for the tunnel to be built under the Strait of Gibraltar gives
us an idea about the future of our relations not only with respect to the
tunnel itself but also with respect to many other problems which our two

countries nust consider. There now is a desire to outline a fraaework for

such talks which will enable us to establish bases for our future relations.
All disputes must be settled.
QUESTION: Can you now talk about a Hashington-Hadrid-Rabat axis?

ANSHE'R: No. It is of vital importance for our two countries to harmonize
their foreign policy. especially in anticipation of the coming security
conference in Madrid. Our trade policy should also be coordinated since
Spain will soon become a member of the Counon Market.

QUESTION: what is your view on Spain's new Maghreb policy?

ANSWER: He can very well understand that Spain seeks equilibrium but we
also want it to understand us. We will be able to progress on this basis.

quasnm: “hat is the reason for the presence of a contingent of soldiers
in Equatorial Guinea?

ANSWER: Our African policy is based on solidarity which we show any time

a country needs and asks for help. Guinea needed hurnnitarian aid to insure
stability. He hope that that country will achieve stability as soon as
possible.

QUESTION: how do you explain the inadequancy of Moroccan diplomatic action
at the OAU and the United Nations?

ANSUER: The Sahara problem has been misunderstood. Its assessment will
change once the problem is better understood. Even though decolonisation
has taken place a fundamental error is still being conitted in this sphere.
Self-determination is being confused with referendum and elections. just as
nethods for expressing desires are being considered whereas our territor-

ial integrity is at stake. People refuse to consider the min problem and
this has been further complicated by the fact that they have hegemonist plans
and want to seize a territory for ideological reasons through subversion.
ISTIQLAL PARTY MW“! COKDWS ALGERIA“ 'FRATRICIDAL' "AR
LDl90903 Casablanca LE HATIN in French 3 Nov 79 pp 1, 3 LD

[Unattributed report: "Istiqlal Party Condemns the Fratricidal Har and Asks
for Help for Morocco in Its Fight for Its Territorial lntegrity"]

[Text] During its meeting on 6 October the Istiqlal Party executive conic-
tee published the text of its appeal to the Arab nation to intervene to end
the threat of war facing this region of the Maghreb.

The note stresses that this appeal is part of a series of warnings given by
the Istiqlal Party to Arab leaders since the last appeal launched by the
late Allal el Fassi from Kuwait [sentence as published].

The neuorandun recalls the conditions whereby elements of various nationali-
ties were enlisted, recruited by Algeria, heavily arsed and put forward un-
der the hale of the "POLISARIO."

This menorandun denounces Algerian naneuvers which, in fact, are ained at
distracting Morocco, an Arab country, fro. its real objectives of economic
and social development and at dismantling it as a state so as to create
other artificial entities from it.

The Algerian maneuvers are also aiaed at preventing Morocco fro: assuring
its full responsibilities with the regard to the vital question of the
liberation of occupied Palestine.

The note also protests against the Algerian leaders' practice of imposing
an (undeclared) war with the aim of:

-setting up a puppet entity-~the so-called Saharan Arab Republic;

-iaolating Morocco geographically which would produce, as colonialisa pre-
viously tried to produce, econonic and political suppression.
Hhile recalling the process which led to the decolonisation of the Sahara
and its reintegration into the fatherland--especially the green March and
the Madrid tripartrite sgreement-the memorandum expresses the Istiqlal
Party's firm conviction that a Zionist and imperialist plan is behind the
Lenaion prevailing in Northwest Africa aimed at:

-distracting the attention of the countries in the region from their es-
sential objective, namely building the Arab nation and liberating the Pal-
estinian Arab territories;

-prepsring the ground for foreign intervention which a fratricidal war
would render inevitable, as was the case for other countries on the conti-
nent.

The appeal launched by the Istiqlal Party executive committee then recalls
the escalation in tension highlighting the increasing number of armed
attacks from Algerian territory against Morocco in the past 4 years and
the sophisticated nature of the weapons used by those mercenaries who re-
turn to Algerian territory when their job has been carried out.

Morocco. the memorandum continues. is prepared to make any sacrifices neces-
sary to defend its territorial integrity and will not abandon an inch of its
national territory. However, the memorandum adds, Morocco refuses to take
the war into other areas in order to avoid shedding Arab blood. Morocco,
the memorandum recalls has agreed to all the Arab and African initiatives
aimed at finding a solution to the Algerian-Morocco quarrel. It also re-
calls his Majesty King Hansen II's idea of calling a conference of all
states bordering on the Sahara with a view to making the region a zone of
cooperation and giving enclaved countries access to the sea.

In the spirit of Arab fraternity and solidarity, the memorandum concludes,
and to counter the imperialist-Zionist plans, the Istiqlal Party repeats
its appeal to Arab leaders and all political and social organizations with
a view to averting the threat of a fratricidal war.

To that end the latiqlal Party executive committee advocates:

The mobilization of political and trade union organizations and Arab news
organs against the enemies of Arab unity.

The condemnation of the fratricidal war.

Aid for Morocco in its fight for its territorial integrity.
BRIEFS

U.S. POLICY WARD IRAN—Doha. 14 Nov—In its editorial today, the Qatari
newspaper (“L-MBA!) denounced the 0.8. position on the Iranian revolution
and the recent measures freezing Iranian funds and assets inthe United
States. The paper says: Despite 0.5. attenuate to deluda the world into be-
lieving that the measures the United States had adopted are limited, the
world realizes that the biggest power. which claiss to be defending the
free ecomic systu, is practicing piracy on a worldwide scale. The paper
stresses that the UN Security Council has been subjected to 0.5. black-ail
and explains how the big powers found thesselves with a cmon interest

in rejecting the Iranian calls to convene an emergency us Security Council
session to discuss the political and econoaic U.S. aggression against Iran.
The paper then compares state-eats ends by the United States on tarrorisa and
the fact that it is the principal power supporting terrorisn on a world-
wide scale and launching a campaign of acononic intisidation against the
Iranian Muslin people. In conclusion. the paper says that Hashington sup-
ported the deposed shah in the past in his terrorism against the Iranian
people. According to the paper, the 11.5. intelligence services helped the
shah kill more than 300,000 Iranians during his reign. [$171156 Doha QNA
in Arabic 1130 CHI 17 Nov 79 JR]

C50: (0802

70
BRIEFS

CALL FOR 'NATIORAL GOVERNMENT'uAt the direction of Mohamed 'Utl-sn sl-
Hirghani and under his leadership, 10 of the top Unionist leaders [leaders
of the Democratic Unionist Party] have met at al-Hirghani's house in
K‘hartomn and decided to send a national political note to the leadership
of the regime. The historic note contained specific demands on which the
Sudanese people are unaninously agreed and which are considered the only
way to rescue the country from the abyss into which the agent regime has
plunged it. The note is summed up in the following points: l--‘l'he Union-
ists see that a national goverment of all parties should be formed im-
mediately in order to rescue the Sudanese hoaeland. 2--President Ja'fsr
Nunsyri can continue in office as a figurehesd divested of all his powers
until the end of his term of office. 3--'l'he Socialist Union and the
People's Assewly should be dissolved immediately. 6--All parties should
be permitted to resume their activities inediately. The note warned the
regime that if the contents of the note are not met, the hungry will stage
a revolution that would devour everything. There has been no reaction
from the leadership of the regime but Foreign Minister and Second Vice
President al-Rsshid al-‘l'shir has attacked the parties and party activities.
'l'nis serious historic note is considered the first major political action
the regime has encountered in the country. It can be compared only with
the note which the conference [Mu'tamar] subaitted to the colonislists and
which marked the beginning of the national aovement. We have learned that

al-Ssdiq al-Hahdi is preparing a similar note. [Text] [13260823 London
AKHEAR AL-SUDAN in Arabic undated 1979 o 3 LDI

REGISTERING OF REFUGBBs—-Khartomn, Nov. 1.1. (SUNA)--The process of re-
gistering all refugees residing here will be completed nid Novenber. The
refugees office has issued 21,000 travel docuents for refugees who wish
to leave the country. A general ID Card will be issued to all refugees
with exception of those already employed. Meanwhile. the 0.". has endorsed
S9 nillion for rehabilitating the refugees in Sudan in addition to contri-
butions from the UNHCR here MC, and La 50,000 from the Sudan government
to implement the social and health programme for refugees. 0n the other
hand, the People's Assenbly's Security and Defence Cosmittee Chairman

Col. Babikar Abdel Rahin stated that the sub-comittees emanating from

the Committee have held a series of meetings with authorities in the
refugees concentration areas dealing with refugees influx into the Sudan.
The Comittee has sent a team to Port Sudan to study the condition of

Eritrean refugees in the Red Sea Province. he concluded. [Text] [Khartoum
SUNA BULLETIN in English 11 Nov 79 p 5]
AIRPORT PROJECT LOAN--Khartoum. Nov. 15. (SUNA)~-A delegation from the
Civil Aviation Department will leave for Saudi Arabia by the end of the
month to negotiate a loan agreement with the Islamic Bank for Port Sudan
airport project. The loan, equivalent to $7.2 million will constitute
part of the required foreign component. The Saudi Fund has offered

a 35.2 million Saudi Riyals loan for the same purpose. [Text] [Khartoum
SUNA BULLETIN in English 15 Nov 79 p 2]

ROMANIAN PETROLEUM DELEGATION-’Khartoum. Nov. 16, (SUNA)--A delegation
from the Romanian Petroleum Company is due to arrive here next week. The
delegation will discuss with officials at the Petroleum Public Administra-
tion (P.P.A.) the implementation of a project in increasing storage
capacity for petroleum products at Port Sudan. A reliable source at the
P.P.A. said the project's initial costs are estimated at $25 million and
include the establishment of ten depots. The project will secure the
country's requirements of petroleum products and ensure a strategic
reserve for emergency. The project will be financed by the Socialist
Republic of Romania according to a protocol signed between Sudan and
Romania last April in Bucharest. [Text] [Khartoum SUNA BULLETIN in English
16 Nov 79 p 4]

BANK DEPOSITS INCREASE—-Atbara. Nov. 16, (SUNA)—-First Vice-President Abdel
Hagid Hamid Khalil yesterday said here that as a result of the new economic
policies, the deposits of the Bank of Sudan of foreign exchange have jumped
to $52 million and that $9.3 million of these deposits have come from the
Sudanese nationals working abroad. Addressing the leaders of national
action in the Nile Province, Sayed Khalil also said that Sudan will attain
an estimate of $280 million in loans as a result of the Economic Stabiliza-
tion Programme. Lt. General Khalil is now on a tour of the Nile Province.
He has met citizens and leaders of national action and inspected the

Armed Forces Units in the Province. [Text] [Khartoum SUNA BULLETIN

in English 16 Nov 79 p 9]

LOANS FOR RAILWAY--Atbara, Oct. 25. (SUNA)--The Kuwaiti Fund for Arab
Economic Development, the Arab Fund for Economic Development and Abu Dhabi
Fund for Arab Economic Development have agreed to provide Sudan with a

12.9 million Kuwaiti dinar loan for developing Railway Corporation ser-
vices. said Managing Director of Financial Affairs at the Railway
Corporation Rasheed Saad El Soufi. The loan agreement was reached after a
6-day discussion in Kuwait conducted by the visiting Sudanese Railway
Corporation's delegation headed by Abbas Ali Raji. Board Chairman of the
Corporation, he said. [Text] [Khartoum SUNA BULLETIN in EnglishZSth 79 p 3]

ANTI—LOCUST CAMPAlCN--Khnrtoum. Nov. 15. (SUNA)--The Department of Plant
Protection has prepared itself to wage a campaign to combat desert locust
and hopper during the rainy season in the Red Sea area. according to a
reliable source at the Department. The source added that the existence
of desert locust in Eastern Sudan will not affect agricultural regions of
Central Sudan. [Text] [Khartoum SUNA BULLETIN in English 15 Nov 79 p 5]

cso: 4820 72
QABUS VIEHS PROBLEMS OF SAFEGUARDING STRAIT OP HORMUZ
L0211621 Kuwait AL-HATAN in Arabic 16 Nov 79 p 10 Lb

[Interview with Omani Sultan Qabus lbn Sa'id by Najib 'Abd-al-Hadi--
date and place not given]

[Excerpts] Muscat--[Question]. How would Your Majesty describe the
Sultanate's relationship with the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and the other
Gulf states?

[Answer] This matter is obvious to all, really. Relations with Saudi
Arabia and the other Arab brothers in the Gulf are excellent. This is
the least description of these relations. because we are one family and
the relationship among the members of this family is a fraternal one. I
say this not out of courtesy and not in an attempt to play with words.

[Question] There has been much talk recently about the security of the
Gulf. What is your interpretatbn of this designation and how can the
states concerned draw up a strategic plan for the proposed protection
of the Gulf?

[Answer] The security of the Gulf has been worrying the Sultanate for
a long time. We have always taken every opportunity to talk to our
brothers about the area's security. In the past there was much talk
but little concentration on the problem.

A genuine change in the understanding of the magnitude of the Gulf
security issue has occurred recently. He now can say that there is

now a clear and serious concentration on the subject of Gulf security--
a fact which inspires optimism. The area's states have begun to gain

a better and deeper understanding of the reality of the dangers threaten-
ing the area's security and safety.

The Sultan of Oman continued his answer to the question by telling AL-HATAN:
He went to keep the area away from international conflicts. 1 say inter-

national conflicts because this area is the center of conflict and is
rich in oil and mineral resources, not to mention its strategic position.
Since we are talking about keeping the area away from international con-
flicts. we must ask: How can a strategic plan be drawn up to insure the
proposed security? The ansrer is: By strengthening ourselves and by
relying more and more on our intrinsic power until we are completely
capable of protecting our security and maintaining the area's stability.
We must utilize all our forces. capabilities and energies to achieve
economic. industrial and military integration and establish a solid base
for achieving political understanding on matters that concern us and on
matters that concern others. He must have identical views and complete
agreement, particularly when talking to brothers. This method of dealing
with each other will give us competence and win us world respect. The
enemy, who is lying in wait for us, will then realize that we are capable
of defending ourselves against dangers without having to resort to foreign

aid and we will also foil every opportunity and every excuse for any
foreign intervention or role.

[Question] What is the Sultanate's attitude toward the PLO?

[Answer] The Sultanate's attitude is like the attitude of any other Arab
state. Our policy is based on the fact that the Palestinian people have
been robbed of their rights and have been displaced and that they must
regain their legitimate rights and their usurped land and determine their
own fate. "c are very pleased to see signs of new understanding prevailing
in the world at present--an understanding which will most certainly lead
to theemergence of a new trend in world public opinion supporting these
legitimate demands instead of continuing to consider the issue as an
issue of refugees. In our opinion, the picture has now begun to change.
The Palestinians now have a presence in international political circles
and have been able to strengthen their position and enhance their role.
This is gratifying.

[L0211623] [Question] The recent Al-Ta'if meeting of the Gulf states'
foreign ministers agreed to continue coordination among these states, par-
ticularly at Arab and international conferences. Can you tell us what were
the most important subjects discussed and agreed upon by the foreign minis-
ters?

[Answer] All that I can say is that we are satisfied with the results
of the Al-Ta'if meeting. I believe that the results achieved by the
foreign ministers augur well. The Al-Ta'if meeting has laid preliminary
foundations for greater solidarity, more comprehensive understanding and
stronger mutual support. In our opinion. this achievement is a very good
and unprecedented sign.

He added: God willing. the future will reveal that this meeting was good
and a blessing.
[Question] The Omani plan for the protection of the Strait of Horuuz has
provoked several and different reactions in some Arab capitals. Can you
tell us some of the details of this plan? is the Sultanate continuing
with its plans to insure navigation on this vital economic waterway? Also.

why did the Sultanate have the United States. Britain, Vest Germany and
Japan participate in this plan?

[Answer] it is time we had such a plan. Among the things Oman believes
in is that we should not give others an opportunity to interfere in our
nifai:a. There has been much talk about the Strait of Hormuz: shipping
might face difficulties, ships might be hijacked or destroyed and the
Strait might be mined. which would make shipping difficult. If we are not
equal to safeguarding this vital Strait, which is important to most of the
states of the world. and if we do not have the necessary and adequate
capabilities to safeguard it. shipping there could be obstructed. And
because we are incapable of protecting the Strait, the big states which
have interests could take this as an excuse to come and impose themselves

on us and undertake the protection of the Straits and safeguard shipping
there.

Therefore. we had to take the necessary measures. hence the Omani propo-
sal. The Strait of Hormuz lies within Omani territorial waters and it
belongs to Oman. Therefore, the Sultanate must provide adequate and
necessary capabilities to safeguard this Strait without having to resort
to other states which could intervene and impose their own protection.
in order to face up to our responsibilities, we have worked at securing:
(l) minesweepers; (2) helicopters fitted with specific survey equipment;
and (3) the necessary facilities for our navy to enable it to play an
effective role.

Securing these capabilities is very costly but if no decision is made in
the meantime, the solution might come too late. For this reason, Oman
proposed its plan and we told our brothers in the Gulf that it is to their
benefit because if something happens to the Strait Oman would not be
affected economically; the greater harm would befall the oil producing
states and their economy would be affected.

Safeguarding the Strait and insuring shipping there is necessary. All we
have asked for is coordination of the program for financing (the Sultan
laid emphasis on the word financing) the plan on the basis that we do not
want any foreign intervention to be imposed on us.

On the other hand. in view of the fact that world interests have become
interlinked and the world has become small. with its states no longer
looking upon each other as they used to in the past but calling for
economic unity. why should we not make the other parties which benefit
from the Strait. contribute some money? He only want money (he again
laid emphasis on the word money) in order to insure their interests and
safeguard our mutual interests so that protection would he demanded not
just from the proaucer but also from the consumer.

We now hear that the major industrial countries are training cadres from
the developing states to enable them to be self-sufficient. Why should
they not help us with just funds and training?

Through training in the use of such equipment we would have skilled and
trained technical cadres and the equipment required for this protection.

Sultan Qabus added: We told our brothers in the area: If you feel
embarrassed at having foreign states participate in the protection of
the Strait, and if you are prepared to provide the necessary funds for
safeguarding shipping in the Strait, we will not ask for aid from the
United States, Britain, Heat Germany and Japan.

C50: It 802
POLITICAL, ECONOMIC, SOCIAL CONDITIONS REPORTED

Paris LB MNDE in French 31 Oct, 1, 2 Nov 79

[Article by Paul Balta: "The Tunisia of Paradoxes"]

[31 Oct 79. pp 1, 7: "The Two Faces of the Government"]

[Text] Some 2 million voters will go to the polls Sunday,
lo November, to elect 121 deputies; for the first time,
they will have a choice between two candidates per seat

to be filled; however, this choice will be limited to
slates of the Destourian Socialist Party [PSD].

All the factions of the opposition, in fact, have decided
to boycott an election which they consider undemocratic,
since they are not authorized to for- parties; and, apart
from the Socialist Democratic Movement [HDS], they are
not permitted to publish newspapers. Before renouncing
participation in the election, they had asked for a general
aunesty for political prisoners and exiles and guarantees
with respect to the proper conduct of the election cam-
paign, involving particularly the neutrality of the
adlinistration, access to public information nedia and
the right to monitor voting and vote counting operations.

This is an "accusation based on suppo.:ed intentions,"

Prime Minister Hedi Nouira retorted. On this score, he
told us, "The law is the same for everyone; the guarantees
are the same for everyone. On what past experiences can
those who question the regularity of the election base
their arguments? Why are they already acting like victims?
In reality, it is because they are afraid of revealing what
they truly represent." In a series of three articles, our
special correspondent, Paul Balta, describes the social.
economic and political situation on the eve of the

election.
Tunis--0n Avenue Nabib-Bourguiba-—the Champs Elysees of the capital--
between the equestrian statue of the Supreme Combatant and the standing
statue of lbn Khaldun (1332-1606), the son of Tunis. and great ancestor
of sorioloSY. on all the kiosks, in the shade of a quadruple row of fig
trees, there are posted the organs of the Socialist Democratic Movement.
DEMOCRATIE, in French, and AL-RA'Y, in Arabic. in which other factions
of the opposition express themselves on this occasion.

"You have seen them there," we are told by Ahmed Hestiri, former minister

of interior and one of the leaders of the MDS. "However, try to find them

in the suburbs and in the provinces where the police can use discreet
pressure on the vendors.... In a year, we have had 11 trials and, if the
articles are no longer signed, it is to avoid many persecutions." The reader
on his own found another reason for this anonymity: "The writers fear that
they will have problems or even be beat up at night on a street corner by
attackers who go unpuniahed." The fact is that this has happened," comments
another liberal personality sidelines [en reserve] by the republic, Bahi
Ladgham. Since his removal from the government in 1970, the former prime
minister who is 66 years of age, has been cultivating his roses but keeps
well informed of developments in the country.

For his part, a former deputy director of the Destourian Socialist Party
who was the personification of the left faction. Brahim Hayder notes that
the MU? [Popular Unity Movement], of which he has become one of the
leaders, has not always obtained authorization to publish a newspaper.

"The Constitution grants everything; however, the law takes it all back,"
he said tersely before explaining: "Re are prevented from touching the
Constitution, which is modeled after those of European democracies; however,
over the years, it has been emptied of its content by revision, in a
restrictive sense, of texts and laws, particularly those dealing with
public freedoms, the election code--for all that provided by the multiparty
systen--the press and even the internal regulations of the PSD in power.

"Members of the opposition are tolerated; however, the police system is

very effective and we cannot recruit, express ourselves and be openly
activist. Under the circumstances, how could we participate in the

legislative elections?“

A rather remarkable thing for a Third World country, the government has
authorized the creation of a League of Human Rights although, as Daly Jazi
laments, "In spite of our many initiatives, the bureau has never been
received by the minister of interior." 0n 3 August 1979. the entire world
acclaimed President Bourguiba's action in pardoning Habib Achour and eight
other political prisoners, "the forgotten ones of Bordj-Er-Roumi." Since
then, however, as underscored by other interested parties, the former
secretary general of the Tunisian General Federation of Labor [0611] is
under house surveillance and the others, relegated to their residences.
enjoy only "conditional freedom," while their arrests had no legal basis.
One of them. Ben Othmane, is relegated to a very isolated region and up to
now has not been able to locate his wife in France or even arrange for

her to rejoin him. "He could give you many examples to emphasize the
contradictions existing between the image of liberalism and tolerance which
the government is attempting to give itself abroad. even though it is not
always successful in doing so, and the reality which Tunisians are experi-
encing daily inside the country," we are told by a member of the opposition.
who recalled that there are still 100 persons being held in prison for

their trade union or political activities.

Opponents of the government who have been exiled for a long time abroad too
often describe the situation in Tunisia as apocalyptic, which their comrades
who remained in the country have to attenuate. The latter. even though they
criticize the policy followed for 10 years by Hedi Nouira, prime minister,
say with Hestiri, "Tunisia looks good in comparison to most Arab and
African countries." In fact. there is no doubt that the country has
changed considerably since attaining independence and that the results
achieved are unquestionable.

The Education Effort

The desire for modernization is evident in the sector of customs. Legislation
on women. for example, even though they are still running into sociological
impediments, is the most progressive in the Arab world and at times is
ahead of that of certain Western countries: forced marriage. polygamy,
repudiation and the wearing of the veil have been abolished. Adultery is
punished equally for the two spouses; abortion is easy to obtain and free;
divorce by mutual consent is authorized; and, in many sectors. including
labor, the rights of women are recognized and protected.1 As the result of
an active policy of family planning, the rate of population increase was
reduced from 2.9 percent to 2.3 percent; and some planners estimate that
there are some 50,000 births “avoided" in this way every year.

However, it is clearly the education sector in which the effort has been
most spectacular. Thus the rate of illiteracy is 72 percent for a population
of 6.1 million inhabitants, of which 60 percent are under 25 years of age.
Today, more than 1 million children are attending primary school (the

ratio of girls to boys is 3:5 versus 1:5 in 1958), to which are added the
260,000 children in secondary school, 60,000 in professional schools and
30,000 university students. The opposition denounces the "de factor
selection" which has been in operation for several years involving an
important "wastage": nearly 75 percent of the primary students do not go
on to secondary school. Mohamed Mzali, minister of education, does not

deny this; however, he is interested in improving the technical and profes-
sional training of the country, which is well endowed with higher management
personnel but has need above all for middle level managers and qualified
workers.

The effort has also been qualitative: in the Arab world, Tunisia is doing
pioneer work in teaching and its schoolbooks--at modest prices—~are the
most modern and best made. In this connection, an original experiment
supported by UNESCO has been conducted for 4 years: the experiment is
designed to train educators who familiarize children within the normal
school framework with all the problems concerning population (sex educa-
tion, emigration, rural exodus, urban overpopulation, etc).

In Tunis and the big coastal cities, the young people seem "to feel great."
0n the other hand, in the regions of the interior, which are still neglected.
universities are nonexistent; the density of schools in inadequate; and

the teachers talk of television, rockets and contraception to students

who, at home, do not have running water or electricity. Many youths, who
represent half the some 180,000 registered unemployed persons, were active

in the riots of 26 January 1978 in the UGTT, of which they were the most

dynamic element; now—-perhaps they are not the same persons--they fill the
mosques on Fridays.

what do these young people want? what are they thinking? Commenting on

the trial of activists of the clandestine newspaper, ECH CHAAB, who are
considered to be "leftists" in the small minority, Jean Lagadac, representa-
tive of the Association of Democratic Jurists. recently said. "This trial

is of importance in principle because it is the trial of young persons who
in their way symbolize the new generation without ties to the political
class which issued from independence." It is enough to chat with the

young people seated on the steps of the Tunis theatre, which rarely opens
its doors--this notwithstanding. the country has one of the best playwrights
in the Arab world in Ezzedine Madani--to see that the Byzantine quarrels

of this political class do not interest them. The man in the street looks
around him, sees what is happening to his neighbors in the northern and
southern parts of the Mediterranean and, as everywhere, worries first about
the problems of daily life.

Seated facing the sea, Tunisians--government or private sector officials--
confide their thoughts and concerns: "Life in France is becoming very
difficult for the emigrees. The only ones who can feel comfortable there
are those of the middle-class with money and students on scholarships. We
others, management types, have opportunities in Libya and in the gulf
countries. Many take advantage of these opportunities; however, we prefer
to remain in our own country," one of them says. Another adds, "This

year during vacations, Algerians came here en masse. We got to know then.
They are proud, but they are not disdainful like the Libyans. Their inter-
occupatiogal guaranteed minimum wage is nearly double our own which totals
49 dinars ; however, the cost of living is higher in their country and many
products are not available." He adds with visible satisfaction, "They saw
that in our country the elevators operate and that the water faucets in

our houses and hotels work; however. for us, prices have risen too much
recently. As for taxes, a 504 costs 10 million French centimes. That is
the price of an apartment. where are we going to find the money when we
earn 150 to 200 Tunisian dinars, which is still a good salary?"

The conversation next turns to the too rapid profits of businessmen, the
"fabulous villas" they had built for themselves and their "ostentatious"
luxury. We ask. "And what about the opposition?" There is a pause, then,
"It has a certain amount of credibility; but it is weak and above all very
divided." In fact, when a few months ago personalities of the PC [Communist
Party]. "UP, HDS. UCT1'and the Moderate Hosiem Movement wanted to prepare a
joint text on the essential democratic demands, they were unable to reach

an agreement; and the project has become a dead letter.

No Freedom for Non-Destourians

If it is difficult to reach unanimity on a platform of this kind. opinions
are even more at odds with respect to the strictness of the multiparty
system. Some persons note that in the countries of the Third Horld, which
are inadequately structured and where regional solidarities still prevail,
the existence of several parties favors the influence of clans and the
wealthy on the state. A social plan which assures the development of the
whole country and prepares the way to democracy seems, in their opinion,
to come under the program of a single, national party. would not the
coexistence of several factions within the PSD be a transitional stage?

It seems not to be. Announced a year ago as the opening congress. the 10th
Congress was the congress of "closure" or at least of the status quo. "We
have the impression of going back 10 years." we were told by several
activists disappointed by these sessions.

Recalling that before its prohibition in 1963, the Conunist Party was the
only opposition party, one of its two secretaries, Mohamed Harmel. comments
on this ostracism and the "sclerosis" of the PSD in these terms, "He were
the first to say that if there is not freedom for all non-Destourians

there will be no freedom for the Destourians either. Over the years. the
leadership role of the PSD has been progressively called into question.
Normally, in the face of an event such as that of 26 January, a great popular
demonstration called by the party would have been enough to restore order
whereas it was necessary to call upon the army and the police. That is

the result of a policy which has emptied the PSD of its nationalist and
reformist ideological content. For a long time, the expression 'Destourian
socialism’ has had meaning. Now an effort is still being made to carry

on socialism; however, it is called liberalism when in fact it is 'adjusted
capitalism.‘ There is talk of the 'intermediate [medianel society';
however, inequalities are becoming accentuated. The ideological themes

of the government are no longer mobilizing themes because they are
mystifiers."

The fact is that, since the traumatism brought on by the "black Thursday"
of 26 January. calm has returned; however, the climate remains sullen. In
his modest villa. Lagham explains this development. "In 1970, the people
had demonstrated their maturity; and they were awaiting a new breath of
air from Bourguibism. But we witnessed successive purges which had an
impact on the administration. culture and thought, creating a feeling of
oppression in all sectors. Nouira has not righted the situation in the
political sector, even thOugh he succeeded in the figures sector..." He
suspect that the prime minister does not share this view. Hith assurance,
he defends his development program which is to bring about the birth of the
"intermediate society." In the meantime, taking up again a phrase which

he likes particularly. he feels that Tunisia, such as it is, is "viable

and livable."

[1 Nov 79, p 5: "For the Record"]

[Text] we have learned from the family of Ben 0thmane, who was sent to

live in an isolated region of Tunisia (LE HONDB, 31 October), that he was
authorized to return to Tunis a few days ago; however, his wife still cannot
rejoin him.

[1 Nov 79, p 5: "Nouira's Right Triangle"]

[Excerpt] Tunis--The rue de la Grande Hoaquee-de-l‘Olivier, the celebrated
Zitouna--place of culture, a center of education and a political focal

point founded in 732-—traverses the Arab quarter and its markets and runs

to Dar—El-Bey, the government palace, an elegant 18th Century building
which houses the offices of the prime minister. It is there that for the
last 9 years Hedi Nouira has received journalists in a small room. Although
the decor has not changed. Nouira seems to have taken on a new assurance,
since our last interview.

When he first took up his duties, the chief of government, beneath the
surface of whom the former governor of the Central Bank still showed through,
was not at ease except when handling figures and statistics: he avoided
political subjects, which he considered to be within the purview of the
president, and the problems of the party which he willingly left to Mohamed
Sayah. director of the PSD.

Nouira. having retained none of that somewhat tense demeanor, moves to the
offensive, takes up political questions and does not hesitate to execute
his opponents with a phrase. Thus, Hestiri and his friends are a clique

of persons nostalgic over power who, column after column, have never been
able to do anything except express sour grapes"; and an official of Amnesty
International who particularly irritated him by his interventions is "an
ecclesiastic who is purple in rank but red in ideas."

Fortune which has smiled on the prime minister for 9 years and the good
results he has obtained in the economic sector doubtless explain his
metamorphosis. "The rains voted for me," he liked to say not long ago
when commenting on the setback in the experiment of the agricultural
cooperatives of Ben Salah, former minister of economy, who did not benefit
from them. When the drought began to make its appearance in 1977,
terrorism in Spain and Italy opportunely turned tourists in the direction
of Tunisia which this year attained a record figure of 1.4 million visitors.
That influx of foreign exchange will contribute to reduction of the balance
of trade deficit which totaled 227 million dinars for the first 6 months

of 1979. Finally, Nouira has benefited from oil discoveries--5.6 million
tons 50 percent of which was exported-~whose impact, although limited, is
not inconsiderable.

Roots in Tradition

Breaking with the socializing and voluntarist actions of Ben Salah, he opted
for a policy of incentives within a bilateral framework. He was able to do
so all the more easily because he had inherited from his predecessors large
plants destined to exploit the natural wealth of the country, particularly
phosphates and iron ore. It was in Mantel-Bourguiba that the first high
furnace of the Maghreb was placed in operation in 1959, while an industrial
complex was set up around Bizerte in 1962. Other focuses of development
were then brought into being, particularly in the Gabes region. Nouira
feels. however, that a number of these industries were "established under
bad conditions and are a disguised form of assistance to the unemployed,
financed by the state." He also elected to place emphasis in the period
since 1974 on manufacturing industries (clothing, hosiery, footwear, assembly
of small mechanical, electric and electronic devices), while agriculture
continues to exploit its strong points: citrus fruits and olives.

"The 10th Congress of the PSD," Nouira tells us. “was supposed to evaluate

the results of the policy followed for a decade. The activists said 'no'

to the multiparty system, judging that formula unsuited to Tunisian realities.
They approved the social policy and the development model which we are
applying to reach the intermediate society." The prime minister, illustrating
his favorite phrase, compares Tunisian society to a "right triangle" of

which the two acute angles are occupied by the most advantaged and the most
disadvantaged sectors of the population, while the middle class, the greatest
in number, occupies the rest of the figure.

"Our objective." he says, "is a unified and harmonious society, within which
the method of succession and exercise of economic authority will be
democratized, in which the distribution system will not be unjustly
egalitarian. in which the spread of incomes will be reasonably narrow, in
which everyone will have the same opportunities for social advancement.

The intermediate society. in conformity with our moral traditions, will

thus transform our deep roots into a way of life and thought to the defining
and shaping of which we have contributed throughout long centuries."

Bringing up the name of an illustrious patron, Nouira recalls that, according
to Ibn Khaldun. the prosperous periods in Tunisia have corresponded to
those during which the middle class was flourishing. He cites figures to
illustrate the results of his actions. Thus, in the "right triangle." the
acute angles have already been reduced. with the percentage of wealthy
persons dropping from 8 percent to 5 percent between the 2 census year,
1966 and 1975, and the angle of the poorest from 27 percent to 16 percent.
During the same period, the total number of persons having fewer than 100
diners per year dropped from 67 to 69 percent, while the sector of the
population having from 100 to £00 dinars per year rose from 31 to 46 per-
cent; and today is in the neighborhood of 50 percent.
A walk along the markets where customers squeeze up against overloaded
stalls confirms the rise in the standard of living emphasized by the
statistics covering the increase in per capita and per year consumption.
The latter, between 1970 to 1977. rose from 13 to 16 kilos for cooking
oil, 11.6 to 19.4 kilos for meat, from 15.5 to 21.5 kilos for sugar and
from 16.3 to 23.4 kilos for citrus fruits. Despite the rise in cost of
living. which Nouira says he "maintained at 6 percent per year" since 1970,
some staple products remain at reasonable prices: 100 millimes per kilo
of bread, 250 per liter of oil. 20 to 25 per egg and 1.5 dinars per kilo
or meat, while the average annual per capita income rose from 169 to 200
dinars (in constant dinars) between 1973 and 1976.

Taking up a subject which is close to his heart, Nouira says, "He are
establishing five jobs per hour, 105,000 per year." The active, employed
population being about 1.5 million persons (930,000 in 1966). the prime
minister admits that the additional demand for jobs—-"which reveals the
great thrust of young people"--continues to be strong: 56,000 per year
for the duration of the 1977-1981 5-year plan which will attempt to create
50.000 jobs annually. The difference should be absorbed by emigration.
whose annual flow has dropped from 16,000 to 8,000 persons in the course
of this decade.

Criticisms from the Opposition

Nouirs has created jobs but at what price, his opponents ask? They maintain
that the April 1972 law which was designed to attract foreign industries

is giving them the lion's share: infrastructure work without charge, import
of capital goods exempted from customs duties, unrestricted repatriation

of profits. fiscal advantages, etc. Moreover, the manufacturing industries
which they set up do not involve any transfer of technology while increasing
the country's dependence vis-a-vis international private capital. Finally,
these jobs. above all poorly-paid jobs for women are vulnerable: the
textile crisis in the BBC has impacted upon Tunisia and some companies are
not hesitating to pack their bags in 21. hours to set themselves up again

in countries where manpower costs a few centimes less.... The prime minister's
reply is simple: "Employment was a priority problem which we have almost
resolved. Therefore. let no one come to us and quibble over fine points."

The members of the opposition also reproach the government for having
reduced the infrastructure works, neglected the public industrial sector,
which requires heavy investments, and slacked off on sectors of activity
with great possibilities of integration. particularly the agricultural-food
industries, "which the private sector finds less profitable than parasite
activities such as real estate speculation and import-export." They also
feel that the agrarian policy accentuates the social contrasts between the
traditional sector, which the government is not seeking to transform even
though it is nourishing its man poorly. and agriculture, "concentrated and
profitable," which is often in private hands.
Noulra retorts that the fifth plan. which is half implmented. provides 4.2
billion dinars worth of investments compared to 1.5 diners for the fourth
plan and has a targeted annual growth rate of 7.5 percent compared to 6
percent previously. which was already quite respectable. To which his
critics, including some high officials, respond, "Tunisia is living on its
forward thrust and its reputation. Today. it is receiving dividends on

the capital accumulated yesterday; tomorrow, it will be in danger of a

rude awakening."

The regional imbalance is probably the weakest point of the policy being
followed. "The disadvantaged regions of the interior (Beja. Jendouba. Kef.
Kasserine, Kairouan and Gafsa) which had received 22 percent of the industrial
investments during the 1962-1971 decade, saw their share fall to 6 percent
from 1973 to 1976, while the coastal governments (Bizerte, Nabeul. Sousse.
Sfax. Gabes and Hedenine) were receiving 60 percent and Tunis 36 percent.
asserts the MU? brochure. The planners explain that it was necessary to
concentrate efforts on profitable regions to obtain a yield from which the
interior of the country could benefit.

The Tocqueville 'Paradox'

in the meantime, the rural areas and the disadvantaged regions have become
depopulated while one-sixth of the total population is living in Tunis: the
growth rate of the rural areas fell from 1.8 to 0.9 percent from 1956 to
1976, while that of the capital--5 percent-will in 10 years result in its
harboring one-fourth of the count ry's inhabitants. These distortions
threaten to give domestic confirmation of the "Tocqueville paradox" according
to which political instability may set in when things are going "a little
better"; such improvement frustrates the excessive hopes which it engenders.
In this regard. the events of 26 January 1978 appear to be the first alarm
signal.

The authorities have maintained. without offering proof. that Habib Achour
and the leadership of the 116‘” had fomented a "plot" to seize power. One
thing is certain: the scope of the bloody confrontations which pitted
the demonstrators against the forces of order gave an indication of the
degree of deterioration in the social and political climate. Since then,
calm has been restored. the leadership removed and replaced by another
headed by Tijani Abid. Everything seem to have been settled for the
better; in fact, such is really not the case; and there is great malaise
within the trade union. It is enough to visit the 0611‘ headquarters, in
the heart of Tunis. midway between the "post districts" and the native
quarters. to be convinced: formerly teeming with activists. the small
square bordering the building is now deserted.

Small. timid and discreet. Tijani Abid offers a striking contrast to Achour.
a loquacious official. Hore endured than accepted. he attempts to use his
small talents as best he can: "We succeeded in getting many comrades
released." he said, "including Achour. of whom I spoke to the president.
We expect that the 14 prisoners will be released at the time of the
6 November elections or the UGTT anniversary on 20 January."

ue underscores the actions he has taken and says that all the sections and
federations are in touch with the new leadership, except higher education
and doctors. "In 1978," he said, "we made a check and found that we did
not have a half million members as was claimed but 287.000. Since then

we have shot up to 360,000." How are the figures to be verified? Our
speaker also emphasizes that at the PSD congress he had stressed the
independence of the trade union vis-a-vis the party; however. there. too,
his arguments left the other union members sceptical: "He was selected
and put in office by the PSD," they say, "because he was the only member
of the former leadership to break off with Achour."

Abid is attempting to put on a good show by pleading the difficulty of the
dossier. In fact, most of the foreign trade unions and the international
confederations are persisting in recognizing only the former “legitimate
leadership." The new secretary general is caught between the contradictor"
exigencies of the government and his "rank and file." The authorities plan
to limit wage increases to increase investments which generate jobs, in
conformity with the "social pact" which the workers are contesting. having
already reproached Habib Achour for signing it in 1977. Moreover,
modification of Article 13 demanded by Abid to restore several benefits
would not be enough to appease a working class which has become aware of
its power and is seeking to reorganize.

Dnubtless, Abid realizes the precariousness of the present situation. Elected
a few weeks ago after the events of 26 January by an extraordinary contested
congress, he is seeking confirmation of his "legitimacy" by an ordinary
congress which would be held at the beginning of 1981 or even at the end

of 1980. "In any event." he adds, "we will not convene the congress until

all of our comrades have been released." In the meantime, no one is

hazarding a prediction as to what will happen from now until then, as the
social situation is closely linked to political developments which are
themselves dominated by the struggle for power started 10 years ago.

[2 Nov 79, p 4: "The Hat of Succession"]

[Excerpt] Tunis--In the evening, when the televised news presents the
audiences at the Carthage palace. Tunisians scrutinize the face of the chief
of state. Comments flow from all sides: "He is at the to; of his form
right now..." "Look, he smiled at Sayah but frowned at Nouira..." "It

is said that after the elections there could be a new prime minister..."
"But no, look now. you know very well that the president has never angled
for two big fish at the same time; he is going to sideline ?arhat by
removing him from the Ministry of Defense...“

For a little over 10 years, during which President Bourguiba's health has
begun to decline, Tunisia has been living in an end-of-rule atmosphere
which does not let up. In the struggle for power which started then no
politician envisaged taking the presidency away from the Supreme Combatant
during his lifetime; but each of them has made an effort to be in the best
position with a view to "post-Bourguibism." This small war of succession
has taken on the pace of a race in which the Horaces, after having knocked
the Curiaces out of the game. eliminated one another.

Nabib Bourguibn has always succeeded in being the sole master of the game.
As early as October 1955. during the Sfax congress, when he was "only"
president of the Destourian Socialist Party. he had pushed aside his only
real rival. Salah Ben Youseef3 by replacing him in the position of secretary
general with Bahi Ladgham. Following that, the chief of state. who knows
the political personnel perfectly well for having shaped them, always
allowed clans to be set up. which neutralize one another. If one of then
becomes too influential, one sees Bourguiba, whom one thought weakened by
illness. rise up again spectacularly. reestablish the balances by brutally
if necessary sweeping aside the audacious individual who advanced too far
and appear as the supreme arbiter.

"What A Congress Has Done.. ."

The process began in 1969 with the clan of the "socialists" whose leader
was Ahmed Ben Salah. As was to be confirmed later by other similar happen-
lngs, disfavor was not to take place with one fell swoop but was preceded
by telltale signs. Thus, in September, he was removed as head of the
Secretariat of State for Planning and Economy; in November, he lost his other
positions. including that of P50 secretary-general. In March 1970, he

was arrested and a little later tried and found guilty of high treason.

Ben Salah had, of course. made mistakes in the cooperatives policy which
he had conducted with--it must be remembcrEd—the support of the chief of
state; however, the coalition he created at the time he became too powerful
and touched upon too many interests was fatal to him.

The next victim was to be Bahi Ladghnm. This old and faithful comanion of
Bourguiba, who had been arrested often by the colonial authorities. was
appointed Secretary of State to the Presidency of the Council in 1956 and
served as prime minister until this position was officially established

for him in November 1969. Unanimously respected, he contributed to the
liberalization of political life. acquired thereby great popularity and
appeared to be "No 2." In June 1970, the chief of state called upon him
to make plans for the Monastir congress with other personalities, including
Nouira. governor of the Central Bank; Mohamed Masmoudi, ambassador to
Paris; and Ahmed Hestiri. member of the Central Comittee. ‘l'he presumed
"heir apparent," he saw those who were supposed to help him combine
against him: in November, Bouguiba dismissed him and replaced him with
Nouira, who was named minister a few months earlier.

As the leader of the liberal faction, Hestiri decided to change the methods
being used within the party and to impose his views. Nouira and Hasmoudi
made cannon cause against him but did not succeed in keeping him from
holding the Nonastir congress (1971). a victory for his theses and his
person. President Bourguiha then threw his weight into the balance and
accused him of having loaded the dice: the decisions made by the rank
and file would be ignored. then changed. "What one congress has done,
another can undo," the chief of state said.

In 1971., the congress, known as “Monastir-Z," took care of that chore.
Mohamed Sayah, the director of the PSD temporarily ousted by Ladgham,
returned to Tunis and strengthened his hold on the party. At the congress,
his opponents were eliminated: the activists were given orders to remove

all the names to be found in ninth place for the Central Comittee election.
The operation was described sarcastically as "nein by nine" [preuve par
neuf].

In the meantime, the lightening rise of Nouira told his opponents that the
president had chosen him because he was a loner, without a popular base
and without real support in the party which saw in hill a high-level state
clerk, rather than a Destourian activist. Quite naturally. he allied
himself with Sayah against Hasmoudi, who proved to be a brilliant Minister
of Foreign Affairs and did not conceal his ambitions. One weakness: his
business relations made him vulnerable. "Somebody" hastened to tell the
chief of state about it.

In August 1973, the president ingratiatingly expressed surprise at the
"wealth" of his minister. Providently, Hasmoudi then accelerated prepara-
tion of the Djerba accord which. at the beginning of 1974. was to give
sanction to the "merger" of Tunisia and Libya: in the event of success,
he would strengthen his position; but if he failed he would be considered
the unfortunate champion of Islam and Arabism. Basically hostile to the
projected union, Nouira won out, with the support of Sayah. Masmoudi was
out of it.

In 1975, Bourgiba, whose absences for reasons of health were becoming more
frequent and longer, had the Constitution changed in such a manner that the
prime minister, who was also secretary general of the party, would auto-
matically succeed the chief of state, in the event of a vacancy in the
presidency. On that day the "post-Nouirism" struggle began, with the
rivals of the "heir apparent" seeking to get a hold over him if he remained
in power and to be well placed in the event they succeeded in having him
ousted.

Nouira expects that their rival ambitions will result in two leaders of

the rising generation neutralizing themselves: Sayah, who has the party,
and Tahar Belkhodja, minister of Interior, head of administration. A
skilled politician, Sayah assured himself of the support of the president

by having a history prepared of the national movement which highlights the
role of the Supreme Combatant. Belkhodja, who points up the aggravation

of the social crisis, plays the trade union game--the number three organized
force of the country, along with the party and the army—and has not
hesitated to oppose Nouira since June 1977.
Belkhodja has in effect understood that the youth sector. identifying
neither with the party which is becoming sclerotic nor with the state which
is congealed. is taking the route of the mosque or the 0611', whose
secretary-general. liabib Achour, wishes to profit from this new blood to
permit the trade union to exert all its influence in the upcoming legis-
lative elections. Concerned over their connon peril. Nouira and Sayah
again joined forces. Shortly thereafter. Belkhodjn was fired while on

a trip to Nice.

It was at this time that Abdallah Farhat, minister of Defense, caused the
army to enter the political arena. while Bourgui'oa had always kept the

army out of it. As acting Minister of Interior for (.8 hours. he took
advantage of the time to appoint his men to key positions in the offices

of state security and transmissions and in various services and the television
sector. The military also intervened to repress the demonstrations on 26
January 1978; for the first time since independence. there were many victims.
Arrested and found guilty. Achour in turn left the scene.

A Ha rning Shot

It was against this background that from 5 to 8 September 1979 the 10th
Congress of the PSD took place, which was to seal the de facto alliance
between Nouira and Farhat against Sayah. Paradoxically, the planning for
these sessions had already been entrusted to the Minister of Defense in his
capacity as "party treasurer," rather than to its director, as is customary.
During the opening session. the president paid exceptional homage to Nouira
for "the colossal job he is doing." He followed the proceedings on closed-
oircuit television from the Carthage palace and made strange discoveries:
activists were performing preservation of order duties and were witnesses

of the party's internal quarrels. Pat-hat saw to it that hours was reelected
secretary-general by acclamation. although such an honor is reserved for

the president alone. Sayah was elected to the Central Committee by a narrow
margin. Old activists found themselves at the bottom of the slate or pushed
aside to make room for technocrats. When he was presented the list of
elected officials. Bourguiba sarcastically observed, "1 think it should be
read from bottom to top." 0n television, he denounced the manipulations,
dismissed Parhat. removed several high officials appointed by the prime
minister and the minister of defense and, finally. resoundingly confirmed
Sayah in his duties and responsibilities.

This theatrical coup--described by the opposition as "the second 10th con-
gress"--had several consequences: it confirmed Bourguiba as the sole
master of the game, directed a warning shot at Nouira, reminding him all
that was necessary was a two -line presidential decree to put an end to a
political career, demonstrated that the hold Sayah had on the party was not
as great as thought and, finally. r-inded the army chiefs who might have
dreamed of participating in the "war of succession" that their place was
in the garrison.
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00880R000200030012-3
Since then. three hypotheses have circulated persistently in the political
sectors of Tunis. According to some of these sectors. the chief of state
has permitted clan fights to develop in order to impose his son as his
mu'rossnr. Opponents of this thesis admit that he might have entertained
this dream in the past but that assuredly since then has given up the idea.

Others feel that Nouira is "condemned over the middle term." They explain
that the chief of state perceives the social and political changes and
knows how to turn them to his account. Reportedly he has been even more
sensitive to the demonstrations of Hoslem integrationists for the last 2
years than to the events of 26 January. For the past few months, however,
this movement, which here is said to be "the sole rank and file party of
the opposition," is divided over the political tactics to adopt and fears
that it will be the victim of repressive measures; therefore. it has
adopted a ”low profile" while discreetly continuing the recruitment of new
activists. Meanwhile. Nouirs, say those who sense his fall from grace,
handles French better than Arabic and is speaking a language of Western
technology which is seductive to the middle class but is not understood

by the main the street. Therefore, the time has come to replace him
with a man closer to "Hoslem sensibilities." There is even persistent
repetition of the name of Hzali, minister of National Education.

Chadli Klibi, secretary-general of the Arab League, who continues to be one
of the counselors who have the ear of the chief of state. feels that a
change in the near future is not very likely. For his part. Nouira does
not give the impression of a concerned man; indeed. he has never seemed
more sure of himself: he has curtly informed the members of the opposition
that they represent nothing. that any dialog was subject to his conditions
and that such dialog would have to take place inside the party. However.
in .1 Tunisia which is wondering about its future and in which paradoxes
are not lacking, experience has shown over more than 10 years that the
Tarpeian cliff is close to the Capitoline hill and that crises break out
when .1 sullen social corps allows the belief that it is satisfied.

FOOTNOTES

1. Cf. the excellent book by Souad Chater, "The Algerian Hanan. Citizen
or Subject?" on which we reported in LB MONDE dated 24 October.

2. l dinnr - ll francs

3. Salah Ben Youssef was assinated on 12 April 1961 in Frankfurt
by two Tunisian hired thugs.
BRIEFS

U.s. FREEZING IRANIAN ASSETS-4111’ headline: "The Tunisian .Press and Presi-
dent Carter's Decision To Freeze Iranian Assets in USA"]—-‘Ihe Tunisian daily
AL-SABAH col-ants today on President Carter's decision to freeze all [as
received] assets in the United States, describing this decision as a ser-
ious precedent in international relations which can be conpared to the na-
tionalization aeasures adopted by sole third world countries, except that
the letter ai- only at recuperating part of the national wealth stolen dur-
ing the colonial period. The daily AL-SABAII takes a strong stand against
the 11.8. decision which it calls "illegal" and "arbitrary." The oil pro-
ducing countries AL—SABAB adds, should learn fr:- this example and not in-

peril their assets deposited in foreign banks. [13151530 Tunis TAP in Eng-
lish 1610 GIT 15 Nov 79 Lb]
ADEN-MOSCOH TREATY SEEN ENDING UNITY PROJECTS
L9161333 Paris AL-NAHAR AL-'ARABI "A AL-DUUALI in Arabic 12-18 Nov 79 p 25 L0
[Unattributed report: "Aden-Moscow Treaty Ruled Out Unity"]

[Text] San'a' -Leaders in San'a', capital of the Yemen Arab Republic
[YAR], have said that the friendship treaty between the PDRY and the
Soviet Union was the final nail hammered by the Aden Government into the
coffin of the plans for unity between the two parts of Yemen.

The leaders told AL-HAHAR AL-‘ARABI "A AL-DUHALI that PDR President 'Abd
al—Fattah Isma'il, concluded the treaty to embarrass North Yemen and make
its leaders give up all thought of unity between the two countries. The
officials said that many countries are linked via friendship treaties with
Moscow but have preserved their national line.

They pointed out that the regime in Iraq is hostile to con-unists and
the Arab Socialist Ba'th Party has combated them strongly when they

have dissented with the regime's national policy. Furthermore. Baghdad
has refused and continues to refuse any Soviet military presence whether
in the air force or the navy.

The Yemeni leaders accuse the Aden Government of taking Soviet orders
even before the treaty was concluded and that it was the only Arab
country that, with the help of Soviet experts and Cuban soldiers, fought
against Somalia, which is an Arab League member state. and against the
Eritrean rebels.

AL-NAHAR AL-'ARABI HA AL-DUHALI has learned that all unity dialog between
Aden and San'a' will stop or. if it continues, will be a formal dialog

or similar to the dialog of the deaf. San'a' is expected to convey its
views on the matter to the Saudi Kingdom and to the Gulf states. particu-
larly Kuwait which recently sponsored the Yeoeni summit. San'a' sources
believe that one of the reasons that have led to the treaty with Moscow

is Aden's fear of the development of the North Yemeni armed forces as a
result of their receipt of large quantities of 0.5. and Soviet weapons and
the upsetting of the military balance between the two countries. Until a
year ago Aden was superior with its disciplined army and militia.
BRIEFS

TRADE AGREBiENT HIT“ CZECHOSLOVAKIA--The YAR and Czechoslovakia signed a
trade agreement at the Ministry of Economy today. The agreement covers

the expansion of Yul-Czechoslovak trade and economic relations on the

basis of mutual interests and equality. The agreement was signed for the
YAR by 'Ali Al-Inad al-Khadir, YAR Economy Ministry undersecretary. while

it was signed for Czechoslovakia by Engineer (Yazid Puqi). director of the
Foreign Trade Ministry's Arab department. The signing ceremony was
attended on the YAR side by officials from the ministries of foreign
affairs and economy. On the Czechoslovak side it was attended by the
members of the Czechoslovak delegation and the Czechoslovak charge d'
affaires in San'a'. The Czechoslovak delegation left San'a' this after-
noon at the end of a 10-day visit to the YA! during which delegation members
held talks with officials of the ministries of foreign affairs, economy

and information and culture. The talks focused on strengthening
cooperation between the two countries in the spheres of economy and culture.
[Text] [JNl92001 San'a' Domestic Service in Arabic 1700 GMT 19 Nov 79 JR]

650: 4802 END

93