APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/00: ClA-RDP02-00050R000200020069-3
Near East/North Africa Report

No. 2051

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRs. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. "here no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the U.s. Government.

PROCUREMENT 0? PUBLICATIONS

JPRs publications nay be ordered from the National Technical
Information Service, Springfield, Virginia 22161. In order-
ing, it is recommended that the JPRS number, title, date and
author, if-applicable, of publication be cited.

Current JPRS publications are announced in Government Reports
Announcements issued semi-monthly by the National Technical
Information Service, and are listed in the Honthlz Catalog of
v.8. Government Publications issued by the Superintendent of
Documents, u.s. Government Printing office, Hashington, D.C.
20h02.

Indexes to this report (by keyword, author, personal names,
title and series) are available from Bell a Howell, 01d
Mansfield Road, Wooster, Ohio 44691.

Correspondence pertaining to matters other than procurement
may be addressed to Joint Publications Research Service,
1000 North Globe load, Arlington, Virginia 22201.
It Atari“! IIIM no '0'.)

This serial report contains information on socioeconomic, govern-ant. political,
and technical developments in the countries of the Near East and North Africa.

‘ I! cum “1:. a MM
('4!!! tea] Sclvnce X Inter-Arab Affairs Libya __Sultanate

 

 

Suciolosy __North African __Hauritania of Ouan
Econonlce Affaira _Horocco LSyria
Culture (Social _x_Afghaniotan _ P'aople s Deno- _‘runisia
Sclencrs) ___Algeria cratic Republic __United Arab
Ethnology _Bahrain of Yemen Emirates
Geography __Bsypt _Persian Gulf Lweatern Sahara
Techological Linn Area __Yenen Aral:
Military Sciences ilraq __Qatar Republic
Lionel ___Saudi Arabia
LJordan :Spaniah North

Africa

o tau-ween!“ 'm

    
   
   

e. coat-mom. SD, I5_C. 5K. 15

lemon-mm Ithaca.”

 
 
  
   
  
   

nUrn in te Vailnbility UNCLASSIFIED K 42
Son. by xms .mm_;n—- ""122." m. '
Springfield. Virginia 22161 UNCLASSIFIED

(“Man-am. ”Waco-luau. mun-tutu?”

UM mm
m‘m
NEJ\R EAST/NORTH AFRICA REPORT

No. 2051

CONTENTS
INTER-ARAB AFFAIRS

Briefs
Iraqi Aid to Lebanon

AFGHANISTAN

'Kabul Radio' Cites Amin on Revolution's Ultimate Triumph
(Kabul Radio, 17 Nov 79)

Briefs
People Return Hue

Prisoners Released
GDR Envoy

IRAN

Army Begins Hunt for Foreign Agents in Kordestnn
(KEYHAN. 17 Oct 79)

Officials Describe Critical Situation in Kordestan
(KEYHAN, 22 Oct 79)

Islamic Revolution Arouses Interest of Soviet Hoslens
(Mojtahed Shabestari , Goldzadeh Ghsfuri Interviev;
KEYHAN, 6 Oct 79).....................................

Oil Minister Advises Caution in NIOC Purge
(KBYHAN,19 Oct 79)

Minister Discusses Ban on Agricultural Imort
(KEYHAN, 24 Oct 79)

-a- [III-NEBA
SUDAN

Political Leaders Analyze Recent Student Demonstrations, Strikes
(Ghassan Sharbil; AL-NAHAR, 5, 6, 8 Oct 79).............

SYRIA

'AL—SHARQ AL-AHSAT' Interview With Foreign Minister
('Abd al-Haliu lChaddam Interview; AL-SHARQ AL-AUSAT,

17 Nov 79)..............................................

HESTERN SAHARA

Journalists Accompany APLS to Western Sahara
(Francoise Germain-Robin; L'HUMANIIB DD‘IANCHB,

3-9 Oct 79)....
BRIEFS

IRAQI AID To LEBANON--Beirut. 15 Nov-wit was announced here today that
Iraq will grant $5 million in aid to southern Lebanon to bolster the
struggle of the southern Lebanese masses in their confrontation of the
continued Zionist attacks. It is to be pointed out that this aid is the

third of its kind. [Excerpt] “11151226 Baghdad INA in Arabic 1200 GMT
15 Nov 79 JR]

C80: 10802
'KABUL RADIO' CITES ANIN 0N REVOLUTION'S ULTIMATE TRIUMPH
LDl?2303 Kabul Radio in English to Europe 1900 GMT 17 Nov 79 Lb

[Text] We present you our commentary under the title of "Antirevolution
Elements Are Doomed":

Hafizollah Amin. general secretary of the Central Committee of the People's
Democratic Party of Afghanistan, president of the Revolutionary Council

and prime minister of the Democratic Republic of Afghanistan, while answer-
ing the questions of the German Democratic Republic television corres-
pondent in an interview recently said:

Nowadays. not only the elements who are against our revolution are fleeing
but their masters and foreign allies are also fleeing. This is because
hard blows have been inflicted by the toiling people on these elements.

The people have now understood that they are a factor, a main factor.

in the process of development of this country. They have realized that
they have been the basic and real producers in the land and they have fully
realised that the international imperialism and black reaction are the
cruellest enemies of mankind who are desperately trying to provide grounds
for the exploitation and bloodsucking in the backward and underdeveloped
nations.

All these achievements haVc. of course, been secured in the light of the
Khalqi revolution and the loftv guidance of our party, that is the people's
Democratic Party of Afghanistan, the vanguard of the working class of this
land. This is why they are joining ha is with their epoch-making party and
Khalg‘ Government to eliminate (?cruel hands) and treacherous collusion

of the enemies of the revolution, their masters and supporters.

The people of the Democratic Republic of Afghanistan are now fully con-
vinced that no elements whatsoever are of any importance inside the
country to combat the power of the people here. Such elements, if

existed here. could hardly bear to take any (2fraudulent) measures against
our people and Khalqi order. They may, however, carry their malicious
activities like (?teeth) against our people, which is done everywhere.
They are not that much important. The foreign elements about which the
Democratic Republic of Afghanistan and other oppressed peOple of the world
are really concerned are the international imperialism, black reaction and

2
leftist-looking allies of imperialism which are treacherously interfering
in our internal affairs and are trying to create tension and prepare
grounds for, God forbid, foiling our victorious revolution.

Otherwise. the treacherous Ekhwanis and other enemies of our Khalqi order
neither have the power nor the arms and ammunition to use against us.
These materials are prepared by the imperialists and their leftist-looking
allies. At any rate. if they are connected together and help each other
against the oppressed people of the world and against the heroic people of
Afghanistan, and they will be soon doomed (?to) complete failure today

or tomorrow. because their hostility against human well-being. [words
indistinct] actions and their exploitative nature have totally been
revealed and realized by all the people of the world.
BRIEFS

PEOPLE RETURN HOME-Those compatriots of ours who have left their homes owing
to the treacherous provocations and poisonous propaganda of the enemies of
the Sawr revolution and the enemies of our sacred soil. in light of the
total amnesty by Comrade Hafizollah Amin. today too, returned in large
numbers, happily and shouting revolutionary slogans, to their homes in

the Spinbuldak District of the Qandahar Province and the (Tazai) District
in the Zabol Province. They were warmly welcomed by the officials and

the noble people of that district. [Text] [LDl92304 Kabul Domestic Service
in Pashto 1530 GMT 19 Nov 79 Lb) Some of our compatriots left their homes
because of the treacherous provocations and false propaganda of the enemies
of the Sawr revolution and the enemies of our sacred soil. Following the
total amnesty decreed by Comrade Hafizollah Amin, a large number of them
returned happily to their homes in the following areas: the Hardak.
District of Seyyedabad. in Kabul Province; Alingar District. in the Laghman
Province. and the Zazi District, in Paktia Province. They were warmly
welcomed by the district officials, provincial party organizations. members
of the committee for the defense of the revolution, and by a large number
of the people of these districts. They expressed their revolutionary
feelings by pledging support for the government and demonstrating that they
are prepared to defend the revolution with sacrifices of any kind. [Text]
[LD171836 Kabul Domestic Service in Pashto 1530 GMT 17 Nov 79 LB] of those
of our compatriots who left their homes because of the treacherous provoca-
tions and false propaganda of the enemies of the Sawr revolution and the
enemies of our sacred soil, in the light of the total amnesty offered by
Comrade Hafizollah Amin, a large number returned today, happily and by
giving revolutionary slogans, to their homes in: the center of Farah
Province. the Keahandoy Subdistrict in Balkh Province and the Kohestanet
District of Jowzjan Province. A IAKBTAR correspondent reports from Farah
that upon the return of these compatriots to Far. I a meeting was held there
where the governor of Farah, some members of the provincial committees;
members of the committee for the defense of revolution and a large number
of the toiling people of the province welcomed them to their homes. These
compatriots in Farah Center and the other two district: in turn expressed
their total unity with our Khalqi Government and promised to make any

kind of sacrifice. [Test] [LD182215 Kabul Radio in Pashto to Europe
1530 GMT 18 Nov 79 Lb]
PRISONERS RELEASED—~ln accordance with the slogan immunity, legality and
justice, 25 political prisoners of the Farah Province were released from
prison. after the investigation of their case by the authoritative

commission for the release of prisoners. [Text] [LD192305 Kabul Domestic
Service in Pashto 1530 GMT 19 Nov 79 LD]

GDR ENVOY--His Excellency. (Klaus Sandel). ambassador designate of the
German Democratic Republic to Afghanistan. arrived in Kabul today. He
was received at Kabul airport by the chief of protocol departeent of the
Ministry of Foreign Affairs and charge d'affsires of the German Democratic

Republic Embassy in Kabul. [Text] [LD180702 Kabul Radio in English to Europe
1900 GMT 17 Nov 79 LD]

080: 0920
ARMY BEGINS HUNT TOR FORE'AGN AGENTS I.\‘ KORDESTAN
Tehran KEYHAN in Persian 17 Oct 79 y 9

[Text] In order to separate the counterrevolutionaries from the innocent
people in Kordcs.1n and to totally cieanse the region of counterrevolutionaries,
psychological units of the territorial forces have been sent into Kordestan
with broad powers, and have begun their work.

Gen Valiollah Falahi, commander of the territorial forces, who is currently
in the hospital, told a KEYHAN reporter this morning that "since the counter-
revolutionaries have not yet been separated from the defenseless, innocent
and loyal people, and the army is progressing slowly in cleansing the region,
we are sending psychological units into Kordestan to learn the people's needs
and to separate them from counterrevolutionery agents and meabers of the
proscribed Democratic Party, so that we can proceed quickly with purification
of the region. Following their activities. the army yesterday began a major
campaign to purify the region. As the army gains experience, its casualties
decline; in the last 2 days we have lost only one killed and two wounded."

The general added: "Following these steps the enemy has gone on the defensive,
avoiding engagements with our forces and seeking refuge. In two operations, we
captured a large quantity of rebel arms and munitions in the lamina Pass."

According to the general, "in areas where steps have not yet been taken to
separate the counterrevolutionaries. the army has been unable to act."

Concerning the gunfire which goes on at ssae times of the day and night in
various areas, he said that "this is natural in combat zones. As you know,
all sensitive areas, garrisons in particular, are under guard by soldiers and
other armed personnel. These guards shoot as soon . they see a shadow nearby.
Hearing shots, the other guards also put their finger to the trigger. After
the firing dies down, it turns out that it was only a tree branch shaking.

The same sort of thing happens on the counterrevolutionary side."

The general concluded by saying that "the government is ready to iaplement
social and economic measures in Kordestan, as well as continuing political
discussions, which hopefully will lead to the desired result."

8921
C50: 10906 6
OFFICIALS DESCRIBE CRITICAL SITUATION IN KORDBSTAN
Tehran KEYHAN in Persian 22 Oct 79 p 3

[Text] Orumiyeh and Sanandaj--Yesterday the political deputy to the governor
general of Western Azarbaijan announced: "The recent involvements in Hahabad
are in no way to the benefit of the region especially the city of Mahabad
and it will only be to the interest of the colonialists. Whereas we want to
maintain our independence and cut off the hands of colonialism from our
country."

In an interview with PARS. Dr Atabak. political deputy to the governor general
of western Azerbaijan talked about the causes of involvement in the city of
Hahabad and its current condition. He said: "Based on the report I received.
two personnel carriers belonging to the army were taking lunch for the
Pasdaran [guards] when they were attacked by antitank guns and four of them
were injured. The military returned the fire and three of the attackers

were killed."

Dr Atabak added: "Of course. there was some shooting from the roofs of
houses which continued until yesterday morning. Yesterday morning we heard
that no one was seen in the Streets of Hahabad and that everything was
closed in the city."

About controlling the city of Hahabad, the deputy governor general said:
"The city is surrounded by security forces and the general control of the
city is in the hands of the army."

He expressed his hope that the Mahabad probleu vauld be solved as soon as
possible. He asked all of the Moslem fellow-citizens in Mahabad not to give
shelter to the bunch of irresponsible and adventurous persons who had pene-
trated into the city.

The deputy governor general added: "This fighting is not to the benefit of
the region, especially the city of Hahabad. It will only be to the benefit
of the colonialists. Whereas we want to maintain our independence and cut
off the hands of colonialism from our country."
0n the other hand. the PARS correspondent talked with Amir Mosseyn Shajari
and Abbas Immpur. two of the injured guards who had been transferred from
Hahnbnd to Orumiyeh. Amir Mosseyn Shajari told our reporter in the hospital:
"With a group of guards. we were taking lunch for other guards in two
perso.-.nei carriers the day before yesterday at noon. when we were attacked.
At first one of the personnel carriers was danolished and six of the nine
passeng:.rs were injured. One of the Pasdar was killed. His name was Hosseyn
Jamal Kashani."

Anir Husayn Shajsri added: "I was on the second personnel carrier and I was
the only person who was injured. All of the injured were transferred to
Orumiyeh and are under treatment. The rest are 0.x."

Fighting on Hills

Another of the injured men said: "Eighteen of our military brothers were also
injured and two tanks sustained heavy damages". Imampur, a guard, added:
"Last night on one of the hills overlooking the city. three soldiers were also
attacked and injured by attackers."

This injured guard said: "Since the arrival of the army in Hahsbsd the city
has not been thoroughly purged. Even armed Democrats gradually penetrated
into the city. Even our required food supply was dropped from the air. In
the first days, the Democrats would get involved with the guards. However.
as of 2 days ago. they are also attacking the military."

lmampur. the injured guard said: "At least 25 Democrats were killed and 50
injured in the fighting which took place Friday night in Hahabad. Last night
again 10 Dsnscrats were killed and 8 injured. The Democrats mostly shoot from
the houses and schools and the guards have less chance of fighting back. On
the other hand, the PARS correspondent contacted the new governor of Hahabnd
at 1330 hours yesterday by telephone and inquired about the situation in the
city.

The governor said: "As the governor, at present I do not have any executive
power in the city and severe shooting is still going on. The city is under
economic and military siege and it is in dire need of fuel and oil products.
Only three to four bakeries are open in town."

The governor said: "The roads leading to Hahabad are closed and the army is
in control of the situation."

Regarding the number of casualties in the past 2 days in Hahabad. the
governor said: "It is not possible to provide statistics on the number of
casualties and the damage to the city." The PARS correspondent in Sanandaj
also talked with a Hahabadi resident by telephone.

This person said: "Following negotiations held between the goverment re-
presentative and some of the Kurdish religious and political leaders. it
was agreed that there would be a cease-fire until agreement was reached.
However, unfortunately the fighting started again and at present the city
is surrounded by the military and the guards. For the last few days the
city of Haiwbad has been besieged economically. All of the offices. schools.
and the market have been closed for dnys and nuhmly dares to leave his house.“

Statements made by Imam's representative

Hojjatoleslsm Raj Sheykh Bosseyn Kermani, mes Khomeyni's representative in
the west of the country told PARS in Kemnshah last night that there had
been 74 casualties in the recent events of various cities in the west but
that the statistics had not been given to him from reliable scurces.

Here. we should point our that yesterday Bojjatoleslam Kermsni had told the
correspondent that 7!. persons had been killed or and injured in the events
of Hahabad.

On the other hand, the operations staff of the Pasdarsn Corps of the western
region stationed in Kermanshah reported to PARS last night that 1 guard was
killed and 13 soldiers and guards were injured in the fighting which took
place yesterday in Hahabad.

Telegram to Emam

In a telegram to imam Khoseyni, the leader of Iran's Islamic revolution,
the Parent-Student Consultation Board of Hahabad has sent the following
message: (A copy of the telegram was received by WAN.)

"The presence of the guards dispatched to Kurdestan has caused desolition
and sassacre of the Kurdish nation due to religious and ideological narrow-
mindedness. We ask the Islamic government of Iran to remove the guards
from this area and let the people of this area choose its own guards.
Obviously this is not contradictory to holy Islamic rites. human rights,
territorial integrity and the sovereignty of the Iranian government.
Otherwise. the Islamic Republic is responsible for the massacres and the
demolition of places.

Funeral of two Martyred Guards

0ruaiyeh: Funeral ceremonies were held yesterday in the city of Orumiyeh
for the two guards who suffered martrydom. One of them. Hosseyn Jamal
Kashsni was killed in Hahabsd the day before yesterday and the other one,
Ali Ardalan was killed in Bukan. Iiosseyn Jamal Kashani was one of the guards
dispatched from Tehran and Ali Ardslsn had been dispatched from the city of

Bijar in the western part of the country. Many people in Orumiyeh attended
the funeral ceremonies.

In an interview with mm. the provincial governor of Kurdestan
amounted that important security actions are being taken to study the ruaor
about two Iraqi divisions being dispatched to the border of Iran.
Kcrmanshah- KEYHAN Correspondent. The rumor that two Iraqi divisions have
been dispatched to the border for the strengthening and controlling of the
Iran-Iraqi border is not true.

Yesterday in an interview with KEYHAN. Mohammad Rashid Shakiba. provincial
governor of Kordestan said: "I was informed that two Iraqi divisions had
been dispatched to the border of Iran and that they were stationed on the
border areas of Kordestan. Immediately we held a meeting with the commander
of the Kordestan Division and other security officials in the region. After
detailed discussions and reviewing aerial photos taken of the area, the news
was considered invalid and nothing but a rumor."

He added: "Of course it is likely that the Iraqis would take action in dis-
patching troops to the border of Kordestan. However, so far they have not
done so. because according to the reports that we have received, the Iraqis
themselves have enough problems and involvements in the Kurdish areas of
Iraq.“

The governor added: "Our sources in the area have reported that a camp is

being set up on the other side of the border for the Democrats. The information
is 100 percent true. This shows that by establishing a camp and offering

other aid the Iraqis are inflaming the differences between the Iranian Kurds

and the government."

Regarding other information, he said: "I was informed that the [raqi Kurds
are against giving asylum to Iranian Kurds and that they have admonished
them severely saying that staying in Iran is much better than seeking refuge
in Iraq because the way the Iraqis treat the Iraqi Kurds is not watisfactory
and pleasant at all."

Shakiba said: "In recent years. with full force the Iraqis had cleared the
Kurdish inhabited areas in Northern Iraqi of all Kurds, transferring them

to warm climates. Naturally. the Iraqi Kurds are not pleased with the Ba'th
government. The governor added: The Iraqi action in giving refuge to Iranian
Kurds fighting with the Iranian government is similar to the scenario that

the deposed shah of Iran played by giving refuge to Hulls Hostafa Barzani and
his Kurdish supporters. Later, we saw that with the agreement between the

two governments, Hollah Hostafa and the Kurds were sacrificed."

By bringing up the subject of every Iranian Kurd who goes to the other side
of the border being given a tent and a specific food ration. the provincial

governor said: "He do not approve of this Iraqi po“1y. Now what their aim
is from doing so, we do not know."

On the other hand. yesterday Dr Hehr Asa, Governor of Harivan told KEYEAN:
"There are rumors in the city of Marivan regarding the dispatch of an Iraqi
Division to help Sheykh Osman Naqshbandi, the region's feudal lord. Three
days ago Naqshbandi caused an involvement in Darakay village of Harivan."

10
he added: "Of course we should accept these rumors with a little doubt and
suspicion. I still do not trust it."

The governor added: "The report on the dispatch of the Iraqi Division was
given to me by one of the officials of the security forces of the Harivan
Police Department. I told hin to write down his report and give it to Be in
order that I could take action about it."

He also said: "Perhaps some other individuals night have cone to the help
of Sheykh Osman, the region's feudal lord. in the clothes of Iraqi soldiers.
We are looking into this matter."

In the end, the governor announced that the man who had been killed 3 days
ago in the fighting which took place in Darakay was buried in Marivan today.
The attacks of Sheykh Osman Naqshbandi and his son who have armed men at
their disposal had been repelled by gendarmerie.

9156
C50: 6906

11
ISLAMIC REVOLUTION AROUSES INTEREST OF SOVIET HOSLEHS

Tehran KEYHAN in Persian 6 Oct 79 p 10

[Interview with Dr. Mojtahed Shabestari and Goldzadeh Ghafuri by KEYHAN
On Their Retu From An International Conference of Soviet Moslems]

[Text] In the Soviet Union, the anti-imperialistic
aspects of Iran's revolution have been depicted more
prominently than its Islamic aspects.

The determination of economic, cultural. and political
policies in the Soviet Union is in the hands of the
Communist Party.

Soviet Moslems do not have a settled position confront-
ing the socialist revolution. But recently they have
manifested great interest in rediscovering their Islamic
identity.

In the constitution of the Soviet Union, religions are
free, but this freedom is based on the individual as-

pect of religion. not on the foundation of a social
order.

Last week His Reverence Golaadeh Chafuri and His Reverence Mojtahed
Shabestari left for Moscow at the head of a committee to take part in an
international conference of Soviet Moslrms. We have arranged an inter-
view to inform everyone on the situation of Soviet Moslems and the effect
there of Iran's Islamic revolution.

Question: Summarize for us the manner of your in.-.ation and trip there.

Answer: They informed us from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs that the
USSR had asked that two of Iran's religious scholars take part in an in-
ternational conference of Soviet Hosiems and they said that Mr Ghafuri
and I, would be the ones. He accepted the invitation, and Monday we flew
to Moscow; then we went to Dushanbe, where conference was held. They
gradually assembled from various countries of the world-that is, from 30

12
Luuuu. ac: duu Laaalluc HSSOCIHLLUIIB, sun on lnursoay, u. snanrivar [14
Sep], the conference began. The subject of the conference was constituted
as "The role and Influence of the Hoslems of Central Asia in the Growth
and Progress of Islamic Thought." The holders of the conference comprised
the joing council of the four religious administrations of the USSR's
Hoslems. The conference lasted 3 days; then the participants in the con-
ference visited some of Dushanbe city's industrial establishments. and
they also made a trip to view the cities of Samarkand, Bokhara, Tashkent,
Ufa, and Baku, which are centers of states inhabited by Moslems. But
Iran's delegation did not agree to continue the program beyond Tashkent,
since there were duties in Iran for which we were compelled to return
early.

Question: What is the extent of the terms of the liberties which Soviet
hoslems possess?

Answer: In the 10-day period that we spent in the Soviet Union, there

was not enough time for a reply to this question. Hhat we can say in this
regard is based on passing impressions that we had in our encounters with
Soviet Moslems. On this basis, I should state that the Soviet Noslems'
freedom exists to a striking extent, as far as what pertains to the per-
formance of religious duties and Observances. But we imagine that it is
not an easy task, within the Soviet order, to speak of Islam as a divine
universal on which the political and economic and cultural order should

be founded. 0f two proofs, the first is that it has been stipulated in the
constitution of the Soviet Union that the setting of all political,
economic and cultural policies of the Soviet Union will be in the hands of
the Soviet Communist Part, and it is this party which determines the manner
of the progress of socialism in the Soviet Union. This confirms that, in
such conditions, one cannot speak of an Islamic society in the sense which
we understand in Iran. Admittedly it was stipulated in the same consti-
tution that religions are free, but this freedom is based on the fact that
religion is an individual matter and cannot be the basis of a social order.
The second proof is this, that socialism in the Soviet Union has striven
to array economic justice to a great extent in the dress of production.
Hence all the Soviet people, including Moslems, do not feel so much de-
ficiency in what relates to their material wants. And for this reason
there do not arise any powerful motives for them to create another new
social order. My conclusion was this: Only in the event that there
should arise a profound spiritual concept of man and the completeness

of man in the shape of a cultural thirst or wave and the Soviet Hoslems
were not content with the securing of material needs, would the ground

be prepared for a cultural movement that would be based on s new social
order.

Question: Does the Islam which dominates the Soviet Hoslema have the aspect
of a custom or of true Islam?

Answer: Approximately in the same way that has been related in answer to

13
the second question. the Islam Juulnuut over the Soviet Moslems has been
barred to a great extent From all policies relating to the social, economic,
and political side, and the Moslcus there are not of a mind to speak of a
new society in the name of Islam. ﬂy conclusion was this, that they do
not have a settled position towarc tee socialist revolution. But we also
followed with one further point and that is this, that in these recent
years Soviet Hosloma haVv shown a greater interest in rediscovering their
Islamic identity in the sense of a connection with the rest of the world's
Moslems. And they were very desirous of being informed about conditions

in other Islamic countries. From this attitude, we can say that an Islamic
movement is being observed there among the MoslemS.

Question: Khat is the method of propagating the religion there?

Answer: tht I found on this subject was that more than 2,000 official

and semiofficial scholars of the religion take part in sermons and preach-
ing in mosques and houses on various Islamic occasions. They have also
established st.u theological schools in which some of them learn the Islamic
sciences. And overall four clerical administrations hold on their hands

the reins of religious affairs as the central apparatus of the Hoalem
religious organizations. Details respecting this matter can be summarized
in the address of the grand mufti of the Soviet Moslems which was delivered
on the first day of the conference; I have produced the complete text of
that address in issue No 5 of ISLAMIC THOUGHT, ll Hehr [2 Oct].

Question: How are the relations of the Soviet government with the Hosiems.
and is the clergy there dependent on the government or independent?

Answer: I observed there that. at least in these recent years, the clergy
does not encOumter so much difficulty in the process of developing their
activities (in that sense of Islam which has been noted). Of course they
carry out their programs with the knowledge of the government bureaus.

From a financial standpoint, the clergy there is independent; that is,

its affairs are administered out of the payment of voluntary religious
gifts. One thing which was quite noticable was that the relations of
Soviet Moslems and the Soviet government cannot be separated from the
Soviet government's relations with Islamic comtries. In this sense, in
which the Soviet Hosiems have an intense concern. they may strengthen their
connection with the world of Islam. But this matter will be effected in

a way subject to the Soviet government's agreement that its foreign policy
should be on the basis of the need for good relations with Islamic countries.

Iran's revolution and the Soviet Hoalems

Question: what is the effect of Iran's revolution on the state of mind of
the Soviet Hoslems, and their reaction to our revolution?

Answer: IN meeting with us, the Moalems there were showing great interest

in Iran's revolution. They were asking us many things, but the problem of
lack of time and in many places the problem of language prevented our

14
complete mutual understanding. Some people related that scenes of the
demonstrations ofthepeople of Iran and of the support to resistance against
the satanic regime were disseminated regularly by film and broadcasts over
Soviet radio and television. Films on this subject were also shown in the
cinemas.

But it was clear that the information of the brothers and sisters there
excludes the Islamic details and particulars of this revolution. In one
of the theological schools for the training of students in the religious
sciences at Boukhara, in a conversation I had with some students I re-
turned to this same point, that their information excluded the particulars
of our revolution. In the Soviet Union the anti-imperialistie aspects of
Iran's revolution have been depicted more prominently than its Islamic
particulars. Of course, this was not unexpected by us, since in the Soviet
Union all matters of this kind are publicized in this context.

Question: Recently a dramatic series about Iran's revolution has been
publicly presented in the Soviet Union. In your opinion. to what extent
may these events be significant?

Answer: He were not aware of the circumstances of the Islands theaters

that have been started there recently. But we can say decisively that the
establishing of such theaters is a response to the Soviet Hoslema' thirst
for the information which is provided regarding the conditions of the world's
Moslems, and it is very significant.

Question: What general impressions do you have of Soviet society?

Answer: As I have said, 10 days is a short period. and also our contacts
during this period were limited because of the abundance of programs. Thus
one cannot answer this question in a satisfactory manner. Our superficial
impression was that socialism in the Soviet Union esteems itself as to
some degree successful in what relates to economic justice, and that the
chief suffering of people there lies in the fact that this same socialism
(successful from the economic viewpoint) does not deea itself successful

in the field of responding to the longings of the striving intellect of

the people. And so I think that the liberties which have been granted to
religious activities, especially in recent years, to a great extent are
with the intention of compensating for this lack. In this regard, it comes
to mind that Soviet thinkers are in theprocess of a renewal of thought in
many of its traditional modes, and they are trying to alleviate the dan-
gerous dogmatism in which the founders of the society had been trapped.

One cannot say that human problems have been resolved in that society; the

truth is that we can say that there, too, new experiaents are in the pro-
cess of creation.

952‘
C50: 4906

15
OIL MINISTER ADVISES CAUTION Ih‘ NIOC PURSE
Tehran KEYHAN in Persian 19 Oct 79 p 12

[Text] "For years, the Iranian people have sat next to the fire and have not
been pure or sin re with one another." said the petroleum minister yesterday
at Abadan. "In our society. there has been meanness. flattery and bootlicking.
The opportunity to reflect on our misfortune would not exist except for a
miracle which came to break down the barriers and bring us nearer to each
other." According to a PARS reporter who was present at the Abadan club

where Mr Hoinfar addressed a meeting of oil industry workers and employees,
the minister concluded his opening remarks by saying that "the old regime

when it came into existence took away our opportunity to think, so that we

did not have the opportunity to reflect on our misfortune."

Hoinfar spoke of the early days of the Islaaic revolution, and the support
given by the oil workers. He said that the cutoff in oil exports "was a heavy
blow against despotism and imperialism, but it also led to domestic unrest
and endangered the people's winter fuel supplies. Under Imam Khoseyni's
orders. by exercising real discipline you ensured that domestic requirements
were met. so that Iran's eye was clear and the enemy's eye was clouded. If I
called you brothers earlier and referred to your exploits, it was with good
reason." Hoinfar said that "last year you. the people of Abadan, witnessed
the deadly fire at the Rex Cinema. You saw our martyrs burned up in the
flames. Since the revolution, we have lost more martyrs, such as the Revolu-
tionary Guards who went into danger and fell, wallowing in their own blood.
h‘e lost martyrs like Hotaheri, but Iran still stands on its own two feet,

and is advancing toward freedom and self-usreea and happiness. we have the
legacy of Islamic culture as an example, and follow neither the banner of
East nor Heat. The Prophet is our example. We have a great culture, which
we want to pass down to our descendants. A nation 6" 'ch has the culture of
Islam and the martyrs of Karbala wants to express this culture to the world.
Its enemies are not only the son of Reza Khan, but also imperialism and
Zionism, as well as the former agents of SAVAK."

Hoinfar, referring to discrimination in the oil company, said, "Let us set
aside words like 'worker' and 'employee' and stress the fact that we are

public servants, not a special class." Regarding a purge of the oil company
ranks, an issue which was raised by several of the workers, he stressed the

16
need to look at both sides of the question. "He must distinguish between
those who served the previous regime because of weakness. and those who
actually were traitors to the people. Those weak individuals who were
guilty of crimes under the old regime can possibly now follow the revolu-
tionary path and do a good job. Do not condemn an individual just because
he is not pious or has not acted piously. I agree with you on the need for

reform. but I do not want to make it so strict that no employees are left
tomorrow."

8921
C50: 10906

17
MINISTER DISCUSSBS BAN 0“ AGRICULTURAL IMPORT

Tehran KEYHAN in Persian 26 Oct 79 p 9

[Text] Minister of Agriculture, 'Ali Mohammad 'Izadi, went to Mashed for a
seminar on prevention of agricultural pasts and crop protection, and the
agricultural problems of Khorassan Province. At a meeting of the employees
of the province's General Directorate of Agriculture, in describing agricul-
ture's important role in the national economy and enumerating the tasks of
agricultural engineers and specialists, he said: "A vistory for agriculture
is a victory for the revolution. By the same token, we must act in a
revolutionary manner in agricultural work and providing foodstuffs to the
people. In satisfaction of this expectation. we will have nothing except
God's satisfaction."

Next he referred to the increase in agricultural production. saying that "this
year the wheat and barley crop is up 7 percent, oranges 12 percent, beets 9
percent and poultry 120 percent." He expressed the hope that. with sufficient
credits, agricultural programs would continue to move ahead.

The minister said that "the Ministry of Agriculture has presented 80 bills to
the Council of State and the Revolutionary Council. One of these bills was
for the establishment of local banks in the villages, which would be run by
the village councils with the participation of local supporters and the help
of the people. These banks can help insure the villages against floods,
earthquakes and other disasters."

At the seminar's opening ceremonies, the minister also attached particular
importance to the quarantine and banning of agricultural imports as a defense
against pests. He cited the example of the orange stemborer and the enormous
expenditures required to combat it, which makes clear the importance of the
quarantine and said: "He will prohibit agricultura' 'mports as long as we
have to."

The Minister spoke of the important role played by agriculture professors and
researchers in promoting the use of correct and scientific methods in agri-
culture. "The continuing growth of population forces society to increase
agricultural production. One way to increase output is to cut down on losses
caused by pests, which in somecases amount to 40 percent of the total crop.
More work is needed on the use of sprays and insecticides and the relationship
between ecological factors and the insect population."

18
He stressed that more attention must be paid to production of food crops
such as wheat, oranges, sugar beets, oilseeds and other vegetables.

"Equipping the quarantine sections with more personnel and resources at the
ports and sirfields, as well as farms and orchards within the country, are at

the head of the list of steps which the quarantine organization ought to
implement . "

The minister said that the senseless increase in poisons being used in Iran
has turned the country into a dumping ground for foreign companies and a

large-scale, cheap laboratory for them. Experts should study ways of limiting
the range of poisons in use."

He concluded his remarks by emphasizing that the seminar should continue its
work towards the above objectives and also the improvement of ground and
airborne spraying systems.

At the seminar, the general director of agriculture for the province presented
statistics on crops under cultivation in Khorassan and the losses caused by
pests and parasites. He added: "Uith the prevention of pest- and parasite-
related losses of fruit, sugar beets and sheep, the country will gain abOut
11.10 billion rivals." Dr Hovasghi, head of the Plant Conservation Organization,
also spoke about pest prevention. Taber Ahnadzadeh, governor of Khorassan
Province, addressed the seminar. He spoke, among other things. about credit
facilities for farmers. He added that other rural centers, such as sugar
factories, could obtain loans in any amount desired within 2 hours.

8921
(:80: 4906

19
BRIEFS

acamc PROTOCOL WITH YUGOSIAVIAnBelgrade, lS Now-Iraq and Yugoslavia
signed a protocol here tonight on economic, technical and scientific
cooperation fur 1980. The protocol aims at promoting trade exchmge;
increasing Iraqi exports to Yugoslavia; developing relations in industn,
oil industry and construction; and increasing training opportunities an!
exchange of expertise in the fields of scientific and technical coopera-
tion and in transport. The protocol comes at the conclusion of the fi£:h
session of the Iraqi-Yugoslav joint co-aittee. which began on Monday.
headed by Iraqi RCC member and Trade Minister Hasan 'Ali and Yugoslav
Vice President of the Federal Executive Council Zvone Dragon. who signei
the protocol. [Text] [31152111. Baghdad INA in Arabic 2050 GMT 15 Nov 79 J11]

C80: 4802

20
BRIEFS

SAHARITAN QUARTERS IN NABULUS-dordan will give the young Samaritans of
Nabulus 20,000 dinars for the construction of apartments in the Samaritan
quarter. This is reported by the Samaritan organ ALEP-BBT. The promise
was given to a Samaritan delegation visiting Anan which was received by
Jordanian Information Minister 'Adnan Abu-‘Avdah. The minister also
promised them a periodic allowance of 100 dinars per year from 1967 if
they submit an official application. A member of the delegation said that
the Jordanian offer was welcomed because the Israeli military government
has never consented to sinilar request made by the Samaritans. [Text]
[11191721. Jerudalem Domestic Service in Hebrew 1600 cm 19 Nov 79 TA]

050: 10805

21
NCC DISCUSSES GOVERNMENT SUPPLIES POLICY
JN121718 Amen Domestic Service in Arabic 1600 GMT 12 Nov 79 JR

[Text] The Rational Consultative Council [NCC] met today. NCC Chairman
Ahmad al-Lawzi presided over the session which was attended by Prime
Minister Hudar Badran and the ministers. The NCC discussed the government's

supplies policy and its recent measures to increase the prices of grains
and fodder.

The goverment made a detailed and comprehensive statement on the govern-
ment's supplies policy. The statement was discussed by ncc members.

Several NCC members discussed the government's supplies policy as outlined
in the statement. Prime Minister Mudar Badran spoke in answer to queries
by several NOC members on the state's supplies policy. He said: The main
reason for the increase in prices in Jordan, as elsewhere throughout the
world, is due to the continual increase in the world prices of oil. This
is especially true in View of the fact that we are not an oil-producing
state and in view of the increase by industrial states of the prices of
their products by a greater proportion than the increase in oil prices.

The prime minister said: The basic and ideal solution to the rising price
increases lies in adopting a clear and stable production policy and doubling
food production--both animal and vegetable production.

The prime minister added: The government has taken a number of measures
to implement this policy.

Answering a remark on the government subsidizing supplies from the aid
given by the Arab states, Hudar Badran said: He refuse to allocate such
aid for financing supplies because this aid has been earmarked to strengthen
Jordan's intrinsic power, defend the Arab nation and confront the dangers
facing it. Our people are aware of this and are aware of the facts. The
day will come when we shall show what has been achieved in the way of
developing our intrinsic power.

Hudsr Badran added: The state's local revenues, which totaled 180 million
dimers only, do not enable us to subsidize supplies adequately in light

of world price increases, especially as our imports totaled about 500 mil-
lion diners. In spite of this, the government has been able to provide
the citizens with the basic couodities at resemble prices and has
succeeded in eliminating the phenomenon of quequeing.

080: 6802 22
POLITICAL LEADERS ANALYZE RECENT STUDENT DWSTRATIONS, STRIKES
Bcirut AL-XAHAR in Arabic 5, 6 G 8 Oct 79

[Interview With Key Sudanese Figures by Ghassan Sharbil: "On-The-Spot
Tour of Sudanese Continent; First Vice President: Student Demonstrations
Exploited Unconditional Aid; No Egyptian Forces; Al-Sadiq al-Hahdi: Recon-
ciled Non-Participant; Against Camp David. Integration and Opposition Prom
Abroad; Al-Turabi: Reconciled Participant; Opposition From Abroad Is
Futile"; Part I of this Four-Part Series Carried in the 1. Oct 79 Issue of
AL-NAHAR pp 1, 9 Not Translated]

[5 Oct 79 pp 1, 9]

[Text] Khartoum—The regime in Sudan considers what happened in August a
transient crisis that will result in no political consequences and that ,it

is a purely economic problem. Beyond this, you ask him [presumably first vice
president] about Camp David and he refers you to President Nmyri's reser-
vations. He stresses that there are no Egyptian forces in Sudan now.
Regarding the relations with Ethiopia, he refers you to the Freetown meeting
between President Nuayri and Hengistu and stresses the need to find a
solution to the Eritrean problem. Regarding aid from the [Arab] Gulf and

the conditions for this aid, he says there are no conditions.

Gen 'Abd-al-Hajid Hanid Khalil, the first vice president and the sinister
of defense explained this in an interview with AL-NAHAR.

[Question] What is the truth of the recent incidents in Sudan and is Sudan
on the threshold of important political and economic transformations?

[Answer] The talk about incidents or a popular revolution in Sudan is,
regrettably, tendentious propaganda aimed against .sdsn first and against
the Sudanese regime second because Sudan refuses to be persuaded by certain
ideologies that are spreading the current rumors. The said ideologies
were hit in the past and are rejected by the Sudanese people who refuse
systems imported from abroad. First, I would like to assure you that the
Sudanese people have no political problem. The experiences that took place
have proved this fact. The Sudanese will be united in confronting all

the attempts to topple the regime, whether those attempts made on the
instructions of major powers or those on the instructions of minor states.

23
Hhat happened in recent days is no more than demonstrations by students of
the first secondary stage. It is our opinion that the demonstrations were
exploited by sumo elements hostile to the regime, be 'hey t-ummunlst nr 33'
Lhist elements opposed to the reconciliation or elements disowned by the
revolution for reasons that they know. These elements infiltrated the ranks
of the students whom we refuse to confront with anything but wisdom despite
the damage they caused on the instigation of the intruding elements, such

as the destruction of vehicles. The regime's tolerance and its refusal

to confront the demonstrations with any violence have allowed the information
media hostile to Sudan to convey a distorted picture of what took place.
implying that Sudan was in turmoil whereas the truth is that order was
prevalent, foreigners were touring the streets until the morning without any
guard and the embassies were aware of this. We asked the embassies to make
these facts known. Some refugees and homelss people took part in the demon—
strations with the aim of looting. The whole issue ended in 24 hours.

Naturally, there is another aspect that must be discussed. Those incidents
may have coincided with some living crises. He, as a regime. acknowledge
the presence of these crises which have their causes.

Another reason for the incidents is that the state has undertaken a plan

to amend and re-classify the civil service jobs as the greatest accomplish-
ment of the revolution's recent history. Such a civil service system has not
been implemented so far in more than four or five countries. The natural
result of the salary increases, which have amounted in some cases to 50
percent, has been a rabid increase in prices that have absorbed the salary
raises. As a consequence, the disturbances took place. These are the limits
of what has happened: Inflation and the unavailability of some commodities.
As for the talk about political incidents, it is mere exaggeration and wishes.

As a result of the direct meetings held by President Numsyri to correct

the course, we have had the changes in the Soeialist Union. the reductior in
the number of its agencies and of the people working in them and the intro-
duction of the principle of voluntary political action. The Socialist Union
is now operating according to the new system, with full conviction from

all the people's sectors and in a way that may lead us to our ideal political
organization. There is no disagreement over the basic principles and the
debate has always been over the actions. The cabinet reshuffle took place

in this climate. It is normal for a reshuffle to take place every now and
then in order to meet the requirements of the phase. Perhaps the cabinet
reshuffles we have in our country are, in comparison to all the countirea
around us, almost insignificant [in number]. Speedy measures had to be taken
to eliminate the people's suffering. The recent financial reforms, of which
the entire world has heard, were carried out. We are proud that the crates
of these measures were felt within no more than 2 weeks. Commodities haxa
become available and prices have dropped considerably. Establishments
monopolizing commodities were stormed and it became evident that they hat
horded vast quantities of food supplies.

24
Measures have also been taken against the black market merchants and the
citizens have been made aware of the need to help the government to expose
the manipulators. For example. most prices have dropped by nearly 30 percent

and we have supplied oil derivatives, thus reducing the phenomenon at long
lines.

Officers' Demands

[Question] It has been said that the high-ranking [army] officers demanded
certain reforms during their meetings with President Numayri and with you.
Is there an inclination to escalate the army's role in the political life?

[Answer] The discussions of the officers during their meeting with the presi-
dent and with me never deviated from the president's talk about correcting

the political and administrative course. In both meetings, the officers
blessed the path followed by the president to correct whatever is impeding the
procession. First, the officers did not submit any demands but expressed
their opinions which were within the frameworks projected by the president.

As to what you want to insinuate about their asking the president to ouster
certain personalities, this is not the character or role of the officers.

I don't know why the appointment of the minister of defense and general
commander of the armed forces as the first vice president has been given the
meaning of a change in the regime. It seems that the circles that attribute
this meaning assume that the move is military. The answer is that all the
members of the armed forces are, by virtue of the political organization,
members of the Sudanese Socialist Union. They are one out of five groups
forming the people's forces alliance. The appointment of an officer on
active duty in the armed forces [to a civilian position] is normal and
codified constitutionally. I would like to draw your attention to the

fact that for the first time in Sudan's history since the Hay 1969 revolution.
the participation of the armed forces in the political systemr-as an in-
separable group in the alliance and a group that cannot be isolated from

the masses--has been codified within the framework of military discipline,
laws and traditions.

ho Egyptian Forces

[Question] Are there still Egyptian forces in Sudan and what is their
role specifically?

[Answer] I would like to assure you that there are no Egyptian forces in
Sudan. In accordance with the joint defense agrec‘ at, we would not conceal
such a thing if the forces were present. As we were with the Egyptian forces
in the Sinai and as we were in Kuwait and Lebanon, I do not believe that

there is cause for disgrace if an Arab force is with us, should the need
arise. However, this is not happening now because the joint defense agreement
stipulates that one state will participate if the other state is exposed to

an aggression. Moreover, this commitment is binding to all the Arab countries
in accordance with the Arab League agreements. If Sudan is exposed to danger,

25
will it not be the duty of the Arab countries to proceed to support it?
What is being rumored about the presence of Egyptian forces in Sudan is
pure illusions. The [joint defense] treaty is aimed against foreign attacks
and has nothing to do with the regime, as some people imagine, because the
regime is protected by the people's forces with their alliance, including
the armed forces. and they are able to defend it.

[Question] You have depicred the recent crisis as being the outcome of
certain economic measures. that is the status of the political situation
and where has the reconciliation reached?

[Answer] First, the recent incidents have not affeCted the reconciliation
atmosphere or the relations between the reconciliated parties because the
incidents took place within the framework that l have pointed out. More-
over, the reconciliation is proceeding with persistent steps made by those
who have accepted it—l am referring here to brother al—Sadiq al-Hahdi--and
who are working with us on the basis of the following fundamental convictions
and principles: Sudan's unity and refraining from the resmption of conflict
and from providing the opportunity to any force hostile to Sudan and to its
stability, be it a domestic or a foreign force. Any reconciliation must
proceed carefully and without any haste, as long as good intentions prevail,
confidence is firmly established and the national interest is the sole goal.
1 am telling you frm a position of responsibility that all the brothers

that have been reconciled and that have actually returned to Sudan are working
with us with utter sincerity and devotion for the enhancement and prosperity
of the country. As for those who have not been reconciled, you can read what
they publish abroad. The fact that they are abroad and far from the country
makes them unaware of what is happening in Sudan.

This has been the situation concerning the brothers who have returned,
familiarized themselves with the situation and participated in Sudan's
problems and concerns with the goal of attaining solutions that are unknown
to those who are remote from the stage and who receive misleading reports.
Perhaps our success in the recent measures that have been lauded by the
citizens and by the entire world is what has caused these groups to escalate
their campaigns [against us] in a race with time. But we are in a race
with development and reform and we will leave these people behind us. They
will never catch up with us or be able to harm us.

Reservations

[Question] The official Sudanese statements regarding Camp David are
ambiguous abroad and few inside Sudan. So, what is Sudan's position,
especially after normalization of the Egyptian-Israeli relations, and is
integration with Egypt going ahead?

[Answer] Sudan‘s positions vis-a-vis Camp David are clear and the leader
president has underlined them on more than one occasion. The reservations
expressed by Sudan are evident and the principles within which Sudan believes
the solution should be achieved are clear, unanbiguous and require no
explanation. He are convinced that the Arab territories must be returned

26
sentative [of the Palestinian people] and that Jvrusulcm is Arab.

Because Sudan's positions are clear. they have had no impact on the recon-
ciliation and on other issues contrary to what some people rumor. 0n the
other hand, the economic. social and cultural integration [with Egypt] is
proceeding with ceaseless steps. I would like to point out here that intr—
gratiou with the fraternal Egypt is, in accordance with Sudan's philosophy.
a step toward an integration that includes the Arab sisters and is not.

and will not be, a pivotal integration. Two days ago. 1 announced that

we hope to achieve integration between the Red Sea Province and Jiddah,

in the fraternal Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, and so forth.

(Khalil prefers not to embark on the alternatives to Camp David and on the
U.S.-Palestinian dialogue and prefers not to anticipate matters prematurely.)

Ethiopian Neighbor

[Question] Ar. the Sudanese-Ethopian relations still stranded in the

Eritrean station. especially in the wake of the failure of the Freetown
summit?

[Answer] Principally, we seek good neighborly relations. We have sought to
improve our relations with Ethiopia and we worked for the Freetown meeting
between President Numayri and Mengistu. This meeting has not produced the
desired results because the crux of the difference lies in the Eritrean
problem which. we believe, must be solved. We have not imposed a solution
on Ethiopia but we believe that there has to be a solution because, like it
or not, we are affected by the hundreds of thousands of [Eritrean] refugees.
You in Lebanon are aware of the consequences of such an issue. Perhaps
Ethiopia has a different opinion. even though the entire world, the refugee
aid [presumably meaning UNRUA] and all views on this issue underline the
presence of a problem which, we hope, Ethiopia will settle peacefully.

A meeting was also held in Monrovia between the president and the Ethiopian
minister of foreign affairs. The signs there were good and underlined the
continued dialogue as a principle for solving the problems. There is

conviction in the need to proceed toward normal relations. He on our part

have clear positions and we hope that all states will work the way we are
working because we believe in non-intervention in the affairs of others and
in the OAU principles, we denounce foreign intervention, especially in the
African continent, and we hope that the citizens of this continent will be
given the opportunity to settle their problems within the framework of the
OAU and its charters.

Arab Summit
[Question] what is Sudan's position vis-a-vis Lebanon's call for an Arab

summit to discuss southern Lebanon exclusively, especially since you were
commander of the Sudanese unit operating within the Arab Deterrence Forces?

27
[Answer] Arab movement is as necessary as uniting the Lebanese will first. It
is my belief that the Lebanese are better aware than us of what is happening
in their country. The solutions and initiatives deemed appropriate by
President Sarkis are the outcome of living with the problem on the spot.

An Arab summit, even a mini-summit, can perhaps offer something, at least
psychologically. because it will give Lebanon the feeling that it is not
isolated. He may perhaps not be interested in a mini-summit but such a
summit was held in the past and did offer something. He support the efforts
to help Lebanon and we have no objection to any step within the framework

of Arab solidarity.

Loans and Conditions

[Question] Monies in the form of loans have begun to reach Sudan from

international organizations and Arab countries. Have there been any conditions
imposed for the delivery of this money?

[Answer] There are absolutely no conditions. In this regard, we hope that
observers will seek the facts.

[6 Oct 79, pp 1, 9]

[Text] If you mention al-Sadiq sl-Mahdi's name, people remember the Nation's
Party. al—Ansar [Partisans] Sect, the National Front. the 1976 incidents,
especially near the Libyan borders, and the series of bloody clashes with
President Numayri's regime before everything else. However, people tell me
that many things have changed in the stances of the opposition and of the
regime after the Port Sudan reconciliation between Numayri and al-Sadiq on

7 July 1977. Al-Sadiq has returned to Omdurman, has written articles in
papers and has given lectures. however, his current position is delicate
becasue he is a reconciled non-participant," as he has said. For him to
become a reconciled participant, the regime has to take some difficult steps.

Al-Sadiq has "fundamental observations" concerning the foreign and domestic
policies and these observations are coupled with a conviction that prevents
their transformation into an action program on whose basis he can agree with
the unreconciled opposition. He does not now approve action to topple the
regime from abroad because such action requires, in his view, aid from close
or remote countries and results, as a consequence, in the participation of
foreign wills in the Sudanese affairs. Al-Sadiq's weapon is his experience.
He believes that a return to partisanship and factionalism will destroy

Sudan and he calls for acknowledging that the regime has spread an atmosphere
of democracy after the reconciliation.

Al-Sadiq spoke frankly to AL-NABR about Sudan's situation. his position and
the reasons for his opposition to integration with Egypt in the form in which
this integration is projected currently. Here is the text of the interview:

28
Common Denominator

[Question] What is the truth of the recent incidents and is Sudan on the
threshold of important political and economic changes?

[Answer] He must define the incidents that took place recently. The incidents
you are referring to are the strikes of nl-Jazirah farmers, the strikes of
the railroad workers and the demonstrations staged by the students of
secondary schools. All these incidents have direct causes. Al-Jazirah
workers strike was staged in protest of the tax levied on the water irri-
gating their crops. The railroad workers stike came as a result of

stopping the second raise stipulated by the "job emendment and classification
program." The student strikes and demonstrations took place because
inflation. the black market and the unavailability of commodities have
affected them and their guardians. What made matters worse was a sudden
increase, amounting to 66 percent, in fuel costs which resulted in higher
transportation fees. The students marched spontaneously to protest the
economic deterioriation and they expressed their wrath at the aforementioned
measures by semi-revolutionary actions: Obstructing traffic and harassing
private vehicles. These are the incidents. Inflation is the common
denominator between all the moves that have taken place. The enormous
inflation and the black market's domination are two sufficient reasons to
increase the rasies, not stop them. There is also no doubt that supplies
were distributed unfairly. Some people ended with a big share and others
had no share at all. The incidents can be considered a protest against

the state's economic policy. The official inflation rate is 25 percent but
the value of the Sudanese pound has shrunk to one tenth what it was [a few]
years ago. In addition to inflation, there is the scarcity of goods. the
shipping bottlenecks and the distribution problems. The problems doubled
when the officials sold the shares to the black market merchants [sic].
imported commodities are very expensive. and so are local cmmmodites.

It has been said, for example, that the recent incidents are coenunits
[-instigated]. I believe that they are incidents that had nothing to do
with any foreign planning but are rather reactions to the conditions that we
have mentioned. They have nothing to do with foreign circles. except that

some of these circles have tried to attribute the incidents to themselves
unfairly.

0n Threhold of Changes

Yea. I think that everyone in Sudan believes that Sudan is on the threshold

of important political changes, even President Numavri projects the issue of
change in his questions. The change that the ata. projects can be contained
within the framework of the questions raised by President Numayri. The

state acknowledges that big mistakes have been committed and that big problems
exist. It is trying to introduce reforms, such as the reforms that have taken
place in the Socialist Union. in the cabinet and in the provinces.

[Question] You are reconsiled and you are present in Sudan. Are you ready
to accept a government position?

29
[Answer] 1 am not ready to take part in any government position because I
do not believe that the current level of reform is enough to deal with the
existing problems. I have believed and I continue to believe that what we
need is not a partial reform of the conditions but a fundamental change of
these conditions. I describe this fundamental change as a new beginning

to deal with the country's conditions. For example. insofar as the political
organization is concerned, I believe that it should he dissolved and that

a new comprehensive popular organization should be formed. I have already
submitted proposals in this regard. Insofar as the economic and develop—
ment policy is concerned, I do not believe that what is projected is enough.
Concerning the foreign policy. I believe that it should be frank and clear.
1 do not approve action through the current Socialist Union. There should
be a single and comprehensive democratic popular organization which should
be completely different from the said Socialist Union.

Camp David

[Question] Can you explain to us how the Sudanese foreign policy can be clear

on the Camp David issue. What, in your opinions. are the effects of the
offical position toward Camp David?

[Answer] Our policy should be frank and clear in condemning the two Camp
David accords and in abandoning any dealings with the Egyptian regime that
has bought a part of its regional interests and sold the Arab cause and
that has normalized its relations with Israel while Israel continues to
occupy Arab territories and to deny the Palestinian people's rights. For
these reasons, any relation with this regime must be abandoned. I believe
that the stance toward Camp David has denied Sudan its traditional role in
uniting the Arab ranks and realizing Arab solidarity--a role always founded
on the basis of concern for the Arab right. In the stance toward Camp David.
Sudan should have been eager to join Arab solidarity and to explain to the
Egyptian regime the terms on which it could cooperate with it.

[Question] And the policy of integration with Egypt?

[Answer] The principle of integration with Egypt is a sound principle. But
we do not want this integration to be polarized. He want it to be open to
all the Arab states with which we have ties and interests. The integration
that is being trumpeted by some people who say that Sudan has the natural
resources and Egypt has the expertise is rejected altogether. Sudan is
presently the source of professional and technical skills and is competing
in the Arab labor market. The view that we only have the land is not a
sound one. Sudan should be integrated with the countries with whom a true
partnership can be established in certain economic activities. Insofar as
integration with Egypt at present is concerned, there is an obstacle, namely
that Egypt has normalized its relations with Israel. There is a major
political obstacle. I believe that this should constitute the end to any
integration. But we should continue to talk. Egypt is facing big problems.
One of the failures which we can attribute to ourselves as an Arab nation is
the lack of sufficient concern for the critical Egyptian situation. In

30
Egypt. the cultivable land cannot be increased and the industrial endeavors
have not succeeded. Therefox .-, what has been required is an integration
organized by the Arab states to rescue Egypt. This is the true meaning of
any integration, i.e. integration for rescue under difficult conditions.

Ethiopia

[Question] How do you view the relations with the neighboring countries.
especially with Ethiopia?

[Answer] Insofar as our relations with our neighbors are concerned, regard-
less of the regimes they have, I would like to draw attention to a very
important issue. Sudan borders eight countries and it must exert efforts
to have cordial, or at least unantagonistic, relations with them. Sudan is
a vast country and naintaining its security is a political matter, i.e.

it is achieved through understanding and not with military presence on the
borders because such a presence is impossible.

Sudan's relations with Ethiopia can be founded on the basis that Sudan seek a
peaceful settlement to the Eritrean issue. But EthIOPi-‘I must be dealt with
in accordance with the international and African charters. Regardless of
our sentiments toward the Eritreans, we cannot realize the Eritrean demands
with our force. Hummely, we can be a refuge for the refugees, and this is
true [happening]. He can also mediate for a peaceful solution. But we must
not and cannot adopt the Eritrean issue with force. Our fundamental duty

in our country is to be concerned with good neighborly relations with
Ethiopia on the basis of the agreements between us.

Reconciliation

[Question] what has the reconciliation achieved in the 2 years since its
announcement?

[Answer] The view toward this issue should be realistic. The reconciliation
has achieved the following:

First, replaced violence and oppression by free dialogue.

Second, established bridges of understanding between yesterday's foes.
Third. given the people reasonable liberties to discuss their issues.
Fourth. made it possible to hold the elections for the People's Assewly,
the local people's assemblies and the unions. These have been relatively

free elections.

Fifth, eliminated the sharp hostilities between the regime in Sudan and some
of the neighboring countries. such as Libya.

Sixth, enabled both sides to reach a reconciliation program that was actually
announced in Sudan in July 1978, even though it has not been implemented.

31
The current position is as follows: Had the program been implemented,
this would have led to participation and fusion in one form between us and
the regime. The failure to implement is what explains our current stance.
We are reconciled but we are not participants. we are reconciled in the
sense that we have replaced violence and oppression by freedom. We are
not participants in the sense that we criticize the regime's policies and
that we believe that dealing with the problems requires, as I have already
pointed out, a more fundamental direction.

Relationship with al-Rindi

[Question] What is the current relationship between you and al-Sharif Husayn
al-Hindi and what are the possibilities and horizons of agreement?

[Answer] Brother al—Sharif al-Hindi took part with us in the reconciliation
decision and was part of the National Front when the reconciliation was
agreed upon. He later decided to oppose the reconciliation. He believe

that he is opposing in such a way as if Sudan was still in 1976 or 1977.

At that time, there was no dialogue and no freedom for any side in Sudan and
the Sudanese regime was proceeding entirely toward an axis with Egypt. Tlose
conditions have changed and it is no longer right at all that the regime he
opposed with action from abroad or through alliances with a foreign circli.
In this regard, brother al-Hindi issued a joint statement with the Iraqi
Ba'th Party. We approve the relations with the Iraqi Ba'th within the fr;me-
work of confronting al-Sadat's defeatist policies and within the frameworL

of figting Zionism and colonialism. But we see no logic at all for any
Sudanese party's alliance with the Iraqi Ba'th for any other reasons. The
circumstances under which the Ba'th Party was formed in the Arab East are
totally different from Sudan's circumstances. The Ba'th proceeds. for
example, from a visualization of Arabism that is almost independent of

Islam and existing by itself. Sudan must understand Arabism within a cultural
and civilizational framework first and a framework bound to Islam second.

The Ba'th has cut short the path to power wherever it has ruled whereas
Sudan has a degree of political awareness and diversity that does not permit
such methods [Ba'thist coups]. There must be a kind of democracy and partici-
pation in Sudan.

He do not understand how the segment of the Sudanese political movement led
by brother Busayn al—Hindi has reached such an alliance.

[8 Oct 79 pp 1, 10]

[Text] Khartoum--The Muslim Brotherhood is reconciled and a participant. It
controls at present most of the Sudanese higher education institutes and it
considers this the beginning of an Islamic tide in Sudan. It views the Iranian
change with interest. The Brotherhood rejects Camp David and opposition from
abroad. It is brought closer to the regime by the "escalating Islamic direction
in the regime's approach" and is moved further away from the conunista and

the Ba'thists by “their non-Islamic approaches."

32
Dr liasan al-Turabi, the grand master of the Muslim Bro:herhood lin Sudan}.
holds at present the post of attorney general, or minister of justice. In
an interview with Al-NAHAR, Dr al—Turabi has reviewed the recent incidents.
the domestic and foreign policies and the reconciliation.

[Question] Uhat is the truth of the recent incidents in Sudan and is Sudan
on the threshold or significant political and economic changes?

[Answer] The incidents that took place in Sudan recently were limited. They
arose as a result of hard economic conditions due. on the one hand, to inter-
pretation mistakes in the economic planning and economic policies and due,

on the other hand, to passing and trasient conditions that engulfed Sudan.
such as floods that swept away the new railroads.

Such incidents cannot but be reflected at the political level. The official
media did actually try to attribute the- to some circles hostile to the regime
whereas those circles tried to depict the incidents as a fundamental ailment
in the regime :...i the beginning of a popular movement aimed against the regime.
Abroad, where .he information picture has continued to be unfair to Sudan. the

theory that depicts the incidents in a political light and that overeaphasizes
and their significance has prevailed.

As for the economic problem, it is inevitable but to acknowledge its presence,
even though the country has overcome the sharp crisis. Meanwhile, the
political crisis hardly exists. 1f the regime's political base were threatened.
it would have been possible to exploit and develop these incidents. But

the political conditions in the country are stable and the circles hostile

to the regime have no noteworthy base with which to fight the regime and

have no cause behind which to rally the people against the regime. All that
these circles can do is to exploit such incidents to engage in information
distortions against the regime.

The gist of it all is that the regime is stable politically and that it is
suffering the effects of mistakes in its economic policy and of international
and local conditions that influence the country's economy. A person cannot
at all exclude the possibility that if the economic crisis deteriorates it
will undermine the political regime's safety. But the existing stability

is capable of overcoming transient crises and it is hoped that the economic
problem will be overcome in not the too distant future, if not shortly.

I expect the political development in Sudan to persist and to lead to a
tangible change in the country's political conditions in the long run.

But Sudan is net facing at present a political con or a fundamental change
in its political conditions. The political stability has (spread) with the
occurrence of transformations in the system reflecting an Islamic political
direction in the country, with popular and democratic openness and with the
instatement of the political and technical capabilities in leading positions
in the country. All this will constitute a systematic change that will

take place within the existing ﬁamework without producing any disturbance
in the country's political procession.

33
Reconciliation and Opposition

[Question] What is the status of the reconciliation now that 2 years have
passed on it and what, consequently, are the opposition’s conditions?

[Answer] The elements that were reconciled 2 years ago have agreed to adopt
the existing political system and the Sudanese Socialist Union as the basis
for the nation's political and popular representation. It has been especially
agreed on the need for the unity of the political vessel [organization] for
fear of retreat to partisanship and factionalism because they will lead to
grave economic harm and will end up, as we have already experienced. in total
collapse. The parties will fight and the result is well-known. The reconciled
parties may disagree on the form. name and structures of the political
organization and on the nature of the thought it carries and whether it is
western socialist. eastern or Islamic thought. This is something that will
be settled through domestic interaction in which the will of the masses shall
become clear because the political organization shall truly reflect popular
will on the entire matter. There is nothing to prevent forming or dcvelOPinﬂ
the organization in accordance with the popular will. The political organi-
zation has actually developed to a large degree since the reconciliation and
it has absorbed elements and inclinations that were unknown to it previously.
It has also criticized many of the bureacratic aspects and aspects of
(decisions-from-nbove) that accompanied the organization in its early days.
It is now in the process of developing. As I have already pointed out. what
is projected on the Sudanese arena is to develop the conditions without
restrictions, but also without violence.

[Question] Can we define more precisely your relationship with the regime
and with its opponents?

[Answer] We are in a state of interaction with authority. It is customary.

in any political authority established on the difference of parties, for a
party opposing the policies of any ruling regime to be outside the regime

and to work to topple it either constitutionally or by force and for whoever

is within the regime to abide by a single partisan opinion and to work for

the continued presence of the policies and of the regime. But within the
framework of the Sudanese system; the regime is founded on a comprehensive
organization with different, but not opposed, inclinations. Within this system,
there are those who call for change and development without being compelled

to leave the regime.

I have been participating in the regime for a year and a half, i.e. since

the reconciliation. Hhat was agreed upon in the reconciliation was to give
evary citizen the opportunity to find a way into the system without any
preconditions and to allow this citizen to interact within the system according
to what he accepts and views as conducive to achieving the country's interests.
as long as he does not deviate from the principle of national unity. Since

assuming my office. I have been working and will continue to work to
rejuvenate the political and legal system. Here I am today calling for

the development of our economic, social and political conditions in the

34
light of my belief in the values and goals of the Islamic culture and in
the light of my experience with the modern political and cultural systems.

As for the relationship with the opponents, the stance of Mr al-Hindi (al-
Sharif llusayn al-Hindi) toward the reconciliation was a stance of approval
in principle. He was in agreement with the other parties to the reconcili-
ation over the general directions of the desired refonn but he has preferred
to stay away until these directions are achieved. We on our part have
preferred to participate positively in realizing these directions. Even
though not all the desired reform has been achieved in Sudan--and reform is
almost an endless road-what has been actually achieved indicates that reform
is an accessible and a needed goal in Sudan. Moreover, the National Front
which included all the opposition elements had different political inclina-
tions, even though it was united in its opposition to the regime. The
elements that accepted the reconciliation and entered the country were close
to the Islamic direction. With their participation in the daily political
work, they see the country proceeding in this direction. Seeing this, these
elements are not concerned with the issue of power sharing.

No opposition from abroad will be any use, unless it relies on a domestic
base. Such a base is not available to the Ba'thists, the conluunists or the
other national opposition factions. I see no meaning in opposition from
abroad by any patriotic element because the regime is open to accepting the
opposed view and to giving this view the opportunity to gain popular legit-
imacy and to find its way to implementation if it truly represents the
people. 'Ihe connunist and Ba'thist elements are founded on principles that
are in conflict with the Sudanese nation's fundamental principles of faith
in the Islamic course and in the political system required by such a course--
a system founded on freedom and consultation--and in an economic system
founded on ethics.

Camp David

[Question] Hhat is your opinion on the Camp David issue and its conse-
quences and what are the effects of Sudan's official positions?

[Answer] Sudan's initial positions toward the Egyptian-Israeli peace
initiatives took a form that confused the observers. This is because Sudan
remained comitted to the principles of the approved Arab policy regarding
the Palestinian issue and, at the same time, approved the first peace
initiatives, being confident that Egypt would abide by the Arab and inter-
national resolutions. Sudan's position then began to develop with the
progress of the negotiations, the retreat of the Eg,,.tian position and the
emergence of the final results that distWed the minimal conditions of
the Arab policy vis-a-vis the Palestinian issue. 'ihe initial Sudanese
positions caused some confusion inside Sudan because the Sudanese public
opinion was opposed to the peace inclinations. The reconciled parties
adopted a stronger stance of opposition. 'i'hose initial positions created
an even greater confusion outside Sudan because they were distorted by
certain information media which had a purpose behind their depicting Sudan
as a supporter of the Camp David accords.

35
nu.- development of the Sudanese position has ended with Sudan's cannitment
to the Arab League in its new form and cotmnitment to the league's repeated
declarations. Sudan is still firmly comitted to the fundamental principles
of the Palestinian issue and is ready to cooperate with the Arab countries
in whatever serves the Arab cause, whether peacefully or by war.

The Arab position toward Egypt is understandable because Egypt has deviated
from the Arab consensus on an issue considered one of the most serious Arab
issues. But the rejectionist position has been negative and has not formed
any alternative befitting the Arab group that has adopted this position.

As for Sudan, it has taken into consideration special bonds that tie it to
Egypt and well-known strategic needs and has maintained [its relations] with
Egypt, regardless of its opinion of some of Egypt's policies.

Khartoum University

To be able to form a complete idea about the Muslim Brotherhood, a visit to
Khartoum University, whose loo-member union council is controlled by the
Muslim Brothers, is a must.

Amin Banna'i, the Students Union foreign affairs secretary, believes that
"there are no political motives behind the incidents that have taken place.
But the incidents have exposed the opposition‘s weakness. Had there been an
organized opposition, Maayri's regime would have fallen because of the
deteriorating economic situation. ‘lhe crisis that erupted came as a result
of the political organization which is not popular and not productive. Its
approach is not definite and is ambiguous in thought and in means. In the
memorandum we presented to President Mayri in the wake of the incidents,
we stressed an amendment of the constitution, on the independence of the
judiciary and on the need to define the powers. Ue are against the state's
foreign policy, against Camp David and the peace with Israel and against
integration with Egypt. He are also against the negative position of the
rejectionist states and their failure to adopt practical steps."

He added: "‘lhere is no coordinated opposition. In our opinion, opposition
from abroad is futile and dangerous at the same time. He tried it and it
almost led to the full internationalization of the Sudanese conflict. One
half of the militias were being trained in Ethiopia and Libya and the Soviets
could have exploited this fact. There is no possibility for meeting with

the comnunista because there is nothing to bring us together. The minimum
that can make us meet with any organization is the Islamic projection. Our
relations with the Ba'thists are like our relations with the comunists."

in freedom in the university, he said: '"iheae are entrenched gains and
there is no backing down on them."

On the Iranian experience, he said: "Hhat has happened in Iran may be
repeated in Sudan. lhere is an Islamic tide."

8494
CSO: 10802

36
'AL-SHARQ AL-AHSAT' INTERVIEW WITH FOREIGN MINISTER
LD201131 London AL-SHARQ AL-AHSAT in Arabic 17 Nov 79 pp 1. 2 [.0

[Interview with Syrian Deputy Prime Minister and Foreign Minister 'Abd

al-Halim Khaddam by AL-SEARQ AL-AHSAT correspondent in Tunisudate not
given]

[Text] [Question] Hhat are the features of the Syrian working paper
which you submitted to the [Arab] foreign ministers at the meeting of the
night before last?

[Answer] In preparing our paper we proceeded from the critical stage
through which the Arab nation is currently passing as well as from the
current develOpments and what we should do as an Arab nation in the light
of such developments. Obviously. at the Baghdad conference we discussed
the Camp David accords and what immediate measures should be taken to
confront than. At that time we did not lay down a joint Arab strategy
or a long-term plan that would. at the political and military levels,
enable us to restore balance between us and Israel. Therefore, Camp David
was the basic issue dealt with at Baghdad conference whereas it has now
become clear to us that we must nova to a new stage. Therefore, we have
submitted a working paper based on the following principles:

1. The manner of strengthening joint action. He have proposed principles
that would insure the continuation and consolidation of the basis of Arab
action as well as the continuation of inlemcnting the resolutions.

2. Taking into consideration the importance of world opinion and the need
to expose the enemy by bringing pressure to bear on it and to further
isolate the enemy as well as to expose the grav / of the Camp David
agreements. we have proposed in the paper a plan for an international
move in various fields and on several levels. We have also proposed that
international action should be based on our interests and on further
isolating Egyptian regime so that nobody will have any dealings with any

of the parties to Can David. We have proposed the following in this
regard:

37
A. The suspension of dealings with any state that resumes its relations
with israel or any state that recognizes Jerusalem as Israel's capital
or that opens an embassy there.

B. Banning Arab citizens froe dealings with any Egyptian citizen or body
that has dealings with the Zionists. 0n the other hand, we have proposed
drafting a new charter for the Arab League inspired from the political
programs adopted at the Algiers. Rabat and Baghdad suimnits.

It is to be noted that the ideas we proposed in the Syrian working paper

agree with the proposals submitted by the Iraqi and Jordanian foreign
ministers.

[Question] It is obvious that Syria has become the major confrontation
state following Egypt's withdrawal. And, consequently. the role it is
plujiﬂg in the Arab-Israeli conflict has become greater. What have you
prepared in order to play this role and how do you. on the basis of this
role. intend to deal with the Lebanese situation?

[Answer] In fact, I would any first that our relations with the Lebanese
and Palestinian brothers are organic and deep-rooted in history. Many

of the issues might not be correctly understood or might be understood
separately from the reality in which we exist. Our family ties with the
Lebanese and Palestinians clearly underline the special considerations
that govern the Syrian stand in the Lebanese and Palestinian arenas. I
believe that the continuation of the present situation in Lebanon serves
only the Zionist enemy. The Camp David scandals only lead to the continua-
tion of this situation which is now giving us a greater opportunity to
tackle the fundamental problem, namely the Arab-Israeli conflict. We
will say at the Tunis summit and/or outside the emit that the solution
of the present situation in Lebanon must be based on the following points:

1. The integrity of Lebanon and its sovereignty over all the Lebanese
territories with all the results consequent upon this.

2. The right of the [Palestinian] resistance to exist in Lebanon and to
struggle for the liberation of Palestine. We believe that there is no
contradiction between the two principles. It is Israel and the parties
to Camp David that are trying to assert such contradiction.

In any case I an optimistic that the sunnit conference will arrive at a
formula for Palestinian-labanese relations. I would say in advance that
the matter first and foremost concerns our conflict with the enemy. I
believe that whatever formula the summit arrives at on this subject. the
enemy will continue to interfere in Lebanon and to comnit aggression
against the (refugee) camps. In my opinion it is a question not of the
existence or nonexistence of the resistance in Lebanon but of the deter-
mination of the enemy to liquidate the resistance in all circumstances

so as to move toward a new stage of implementing the Camp David agreements.

38
0n the other hand. I believe that Lebanon must be supported and that

we must accept with satisfaction any Lebanese decision to send the army
to the south.

[L0201133] [Question] Do you have any particular plan in mind in order
to find a way out of the severe crisis in Lebanon?

[Answer] I believe that Egypt and its allies are now trying more than

at any time before to liquidate the PLO as a revolutionary organization
and turn it into a political organization that would lose all links with
the bases of the revolutionary system. In the Egyptian-Israeli field
there are clear imperialist efforts to end the revolutionary character

of the resistance. It is true that we should not forget that mistakes
have been committed in certain practices but it must also be asserted that
these mistakes were not the reason for the repeated Israeli aggressions
against the Lebanese territories. The reason is political and aims at
creating a new link on the path to accepting the Camp David agreements.

[Question] What is the solution in your opinion?

[Answer] The solution is impossible if we look at the matter from a narrow
angle. The solution must be comprehensive. Lebanon will be relieved and
so will all the Arab countries when the Arab-Israeli conflict ends. Syria
will be relieved too in View of the fact that, because of this conflict.

it is having to endure more than many can imagine. Moreover, Syria now

is the second country after Israel in terms of the volume of military
expenditure. We have no choice in this matter because we are facing any
enemy whom we must constantly confront however great the burden may be.

Our conflict with the enemy is a national and historical conflict. Those
who say that it can be ended in 2 or 3 months' tins are dreaming. The
enemy has its objectives and we have our own. The conflict between us

will end only when these objectives are achieved, which requires heavy
sacrifices on our part.

[Question] Two months ago there were signs of unity between Syria and
Iraq which then came to a standstill. Does this mean that the unity
project between the two countries has been shelved?

[Answer] The question of unity is basic. Our party incorporates it in

its slogans as the first demand. It is not a political stand but an

ideological one. We will spare no efforts to at ave it because it is the
central cause of our struggle.

[Question] Are there any new practical steps toward this end?

[Answer] No talks regarding such steps are now taking place.

39
[QUéStiOﬂ] As far as we know you have met with the Iraqi foreign minister
during your stay in Tunis. Did you discuss unity?

[Answer] My Iraqi colleague and I discussed what we can do at present to
contribute-to the attainment of the objectives of all the Arabs and to
creating a climate that would enable us to regain our usurped rights.

muesli-00] DO you believe that Arab boycott of Egypt since the Baghdad
sumit has actually affected it?

[Answer] The Arab boycott has certainly affected the Egyptian regime.
The economic situation in Egypt has reached a deplorable state and is

worsening every day. The Egyptian citizen is perplexed at seeing that
nothing has been achieved as a result of the resounding speeches he hears.

T‘w poor have become poorer and the rich have become richer and the open-
door policy has created a new class which is worse than the Pashas class.

Political decision-making in Egypt has become part of Zionist occupation.
which is the most dangerous kind of occupation. [sentence as published].
We have seen how Egypt has sold 011 to Israel on Israeli terns. What
proves the deterioration of the economic situation in Egypt is that debts
in Al-Sadat's era have increased fro- $3 billion to $15 billion in less

than 10 years despite the fact that Egypt exploits the Suez Canal and the
oil fields in Sinai.

[Question] Should the oil weapon be used?

[Answer] We Syrians cannot discuss this subject in isolation from our
Arab brothers. It must be discussed by the Arab countries as a whole.
He used this weapon in 1973 war when the need for its use was ascertained.

I believe that all the conditions that would allow its use again must
be fulfilled.

080: 10802

40
JOURNALISTS ACCOMPANY APLS TO WESTERN SAHARA

Paris L'HUMANITE DLMANCHE in French 3-9 Oct 79 (Supplement pp 30-34)
[Article by Francoise Germain-Robin]

[Text] The APLS (Saharan People's Liberation Army)
exists. Moroccans know a thing or two about it.
Francoise Germain—Robin and Gerard Noel accompanied
them on the trails of southern Morocco.

Friday 21 September, somewhere with the APLS- Three landrovers still
emblazoned with Moroccan heraldic bearings are spinning along at top speed
toward the west. We have just left some sort of a base hidden behind some
sparse bushes where we had been taken that same morning by two Saharan

fighters named ﬂamed and Nah, who will be our companions in all our long
and complicated journey.

This time we left accompanied by an APLS patrol, two landrovers equipped

with heavy machine guns and soldiers who never leave their Kalashnikov.
Direction: southern Morocco.

The sun has just set. Pale and immense in an almost white sky. We are
still rolling along more than one hour after it had disappeared; all lights
out. Night which is growing darker barely slackens our pace. These men

evidently know the terrain perfectly. During the night we bivouac in a.
sandy grove, and twice lights illuminate the horizon. Giving the 313'”-

An alarm of short duration. However, our friends tell us that they are
friendly lights as for a long time now Moroccan vehicles have not left
the garrisons, which they still hold. during the night.

It is the following day in the early hours of a chilly morning, the wind
has not abated and we are now entering Moroccan territory. Our advance

is much more cautious. The landrover which is escorting us climbs every
hill very slowly and pauses long enough for a quick inspection with the
field glasses, before giving us the signal to follow. As we get closer to
our objective the terrain is more uneven and is marked, as it was on the
previous day, in all directions by a multitude of wheel tracks. here the
Sahara is far from being a desert...

41
To be suddenly confronted with what the Horoccans call "Death Valley" is
a haunting experience. He go down between enormous boulders into a sort
of a canyon embanked on the rocky pitons which surround us. In the dry

pebbly river beds, the thorny groves and shrubs there is no sign of life.

The silence is total under a heavy and relentless white light. Ideal spot
for an ambush.

Death Valley

In fact it is quite near the site that the stage was set for the scene which
occurred on 26 August when the relief column arrived from Ask to rescue the
Lebouirate garrison. One month later a stage still stiff and stark in death
ever present everywhere. Charred and broken tanks, VVT's, landrovers and
missile carriers were left on this flat and naked terrain covered with
hundreds of abandoned helmets and shoes. Haversacks and ammunition scattered
all around. The position of two tanks, a missile launcher and two land-
rovers destroyed almost half-way down the hill is evidence of a mad and frantic
flight to unattainable safety. Close by in a hollow rock we make a macabre
discovery. a Moroccan soldier surprised by death during the retreat and
foregotten...Three other charred bodies near their demolished vehicle. This
is all that remains between Ask and Lebouirate of this unfortunate royal
army which Hassan II does not hesitate to sacrifice unnecessarily for the
ideals of another generation.... He has no feeling about these corpses,

he makes speeches and holds forth in safety sheltered in his palaces.

About 30 km from the town of Lebouirate the road leading to that city is
covered with similar vestiges. All evidence points to a total flight.

Lebouirate, finally, wedged in at the bottom of the valley, its walls still
intact, absurdly, roofs collapsed, gaping holes and shutters still flapping
and creaking in the motion of the wind. Life stopped here unmistakeably in
the early morning of a day which should have been a holiday: the Bid, and of
Ramadan.

And yet! This was not a modest garrison without defense. There were 32
positions all around in a 52 km area equipped with tanks and casematea
buried in the ground for their protection. A multitiude of trenches and
look-out stations. A month ago 1,200 soldiers were waiting for death here.
The officer in charge had fled before the beginning of the attack. The
proof was found in a document in the command post of the garrison. Defeat
was judged inevitable by the soldiers and the officers who had been destroyed
and demoralized by two previous attacks by the POLISARIO Front, the men
refusing to return to their advance post. According to a report sent to
Rabat by an officer who had come to conduct an inquiry on 20 August, the
soldiers in Lebouirete were only able to "give the alarm and die." This was
the fate of 800 of them. The royal army command had remained deaf to the
repeated SOS sent by Azelmat, the commanding officer of Lebouirate. To

be more exact he had refused to accept the responsibility of sacrificing his
men, he had been called to Zak 2 days before the attack and was to be shot.
The truth is not very pretty to narrate in the kingdom of Reason 11.

62
Agnony, Hell

i heard the convincing truth a little later from the mouths of Lebouirate
prisoners and from those who had been in the Zak operation, where more than
600 dead were counted a few days later, on 16 September.

Men of all ages and the ageless, defeated and humiliated in a war which they
know is unjust and lost neforehand. Mohamed Dakhi, his face strongly marked
and wrinkled, smiles sadly when I was surprised to know his age: 27 years
old. "i know...l look like an old man. It is fear. poverty, despair...l
have been in Zak for the past 3 years. Attacks, encounters, death never
stops. Agony, hell. We are all poor people. Our families, our mothers,
our brothers are struggling in poverty. This war is an injustice. It is not
in our interest. He cannot win as everyone knows.... For a long time we
believed what our leaders said. That the Sahara was our land and the
Saharan people did not exist. He were told and we are still told that our
enemies are Algerian, Cuban, Vietnamese mercenaries and now they have added
the Mauritanians. I believed it too. but it has been finished for a long
time. in the southern garrisons we see the Saharans. They pound and badger
us. This is an army which is quite sure of itself and is well organized.
These are men. Our army is demoralized. It does not want to go to war
anymore. There are disturbances in the posts at each attack. the soldiers
refuse to go into action. There are suicides, desertions. Our officers
are not men. They are the first to run away. However, they think they are
very important, we cannot even approach them."

It is not really due to the lack of arms that the Moroccans are meeting with
defeat after defeat. From what I could see in a few days, the Moroccan
kingdom has become the meeting-place for all the gun hucksters in the world.
The captured or destroyed material by the Saharan forces is counted in the
hundreds; lnndrovers, GMC, VVT, tanks, machine-guns. FM and even missile
launchers, and aerial batteries, as though it was expected that the Saharans
would arrive by air? The trademarks are American, English. German, Spanish,
Soviet. but especially, and above all, French. The most recent material,
especially the high speed tanks equipped with radar which have intervened
for the first time in Zak, were supplied by France. France does not confine
itself to selling arms. The French government participates directly in the
organization of the war. Many Moroccan soldiers mentioned the presence of
Frenchmen who had been their instructors in Fez and Meknes. They gave us
their names: warrant Officers Laboritrle and Caresmel, Major Mazy. The
documents seized in Lebouirate state that a visit of inspection was carried
out by two French officers. On their part the Zak prisoners spoke of three
other French officers, captains, who had spent a ‘ek in the garrison in
January 1978. They had studied the defense system and had advised them as

to how to reinforce it.
Mirage Unit
The Saharan minister of defense finally confirmed the presence in Smara.

an occupied city in the Western Sahara, of a unit of French operational
Mirage. As one can see, French neutrality can perform miracles.

63
For the past 2 months Soviet arms can also be found here: tanks. machine
guns. SAM 7 rockets, and it seems some HIG'S. These arms furnished by the
new ally of Hassan ll. Sadat, and by lraq.

"This is a new attempt to make Morocco come out of its isolation and
accentuate the war against the people in exile, and perhaps expand it"
declared B. H. Sayed, deputy secretary general of the POLISARIO Front.

"But in spite of all the support it gets. it can be said that, virtually.

the Moroccan army does not exist any more. The most operational and strongest
regiment has just suffered a defeat in Zak. The army lacks morale. All the
sophisticated material which it has at its command is uselss against the
unshakable will of our people to recover its territory and its independence."

One can better understand while wandering around for hours when the wind

and the light play their score without obstacle, alternating between violence
and infinite softness, why these people can be so passionately attached to
liberty and independence. Within the nomad tribes which were in existence

at the time of colonialism not even half of the population has ever been
brought to subjection or even controlled. The past, as well as the present,
refutes the facts by which Hassan II attempts to justify his war of
occupation, the Moroccan character of its sull,as well as the submission of
the tribes to the horoccan sovereign. A story which we were not able to

find in the books but in the memory of the oldsters we met one night under

a tent around the traditional Saharan three types of tea. "The first one

is as bitter as life, the second soft as love and the third sweet as death"
they say... He understood, as we listened to them recount the story of the
40 Saharan tribes united in the past five centuries in a council called

"the hand of the 40," who elected their chief and made decisions on war

and peace. that it is also in their tradition that these people numbering
600,000 men found the strength in exile to resist these enemies so infinitely
superior in numbers and in endurance. Their heroes are not all at the front.
They are also in gigantic camps on the Algerian soil where they were allowed
to take refuge during their exodus under French bombs. Today, under very
precariOus conditions, the Saharan people, who had been scattered in the
past. are reassembled united around the POLISARIO Front. The social
organization. taken over by the women, has one objective for the time

being: fight to liberate the country and prepare to return to the native
land. If these women are asked how they envisage the future of their people
in the regained homeland, they reply "what we wish is to recover our land
and our property. Then only the people will decide what it wishes to build
with its own power and according to the conditions we will find. All that
can be said is that the society it will build will be progressive and

revolutionary in the real meaning of the term, because it will be the
same people who knew how to become organized in exile and fight."

The Only Dream: Return

An experiment in democratic organization, a considerable effort in training
and political and civic education, which doubtlessly will be invaluable
tomorrow in the reconstruction of a country ravaged by war. Although

66
everyone dreams of going back, no illusion is permitted. It will take

place on a soil where everything has been destroyed. The cities liberated
by the Saharans have been erased from the face of the earth by the Moroccans.
They have been crossed off the maps. Soon with the help of the wind and

the sand, there will not be even a trace of them.

Some cities are still occupied by important Moroccan garrisons: El Ayoun
the capital, the two provincial capitals, Smara in the north and Dakhla

in the south. the mining town of Boucraa where the guerrillas have made

the installation unusable, finally Birenzarane, in the center of Rio de Oro.
Mabhes, near the Algerian border. A total of 65,000 men of the royal armed
forces hold six fortresses where the Saharan soldiers prevent them from
coming out. They are holding hundreds of Saharan prisoners, as they are
prisoners themselves, who could not or would not flee under heavy bombard-
ment at the opportune time. Trapped, they symbolized Moroccan occupation to
which all the newspapcrmen (ourselves included), who were able to penetrate
and circulate in the APLS, can testify that it is nothing more than a
hopeless murderous boast.

It is so painful to hear the name of the country who is mentioned as
supporting this policy - the name is "France."

7993
CSO: 4600

65