APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/00: ClA-RDP02-00050R000200030030-5
Near East/North Africa Report

No. 2.059

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also fron news agency,
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from Bngl iah-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and mterial enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was su-narized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or nanes preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items ire as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the u.s. Government.

12mm 0? PUBLICATIONS

Jms publications may be ordered fro- the Netional Technical
Information Service, Springfield, Virginia 22161. In order-
ing, it is recollaended that the ms number, title, date and
author, if applicable, of publication be cited.

Current Jl’Bs publications are announced in Goverment hearts
Announcements issued semi-nonthly by.the National Technical
Informtion Service, and are listed in the Monthly Catalog of
u. Government Publications issued by the Superintendent of
Documents, 0.8. Government Printing Office, Hashington, 0.0.
20402.

Indexes to this report (by keyword, author, personal names,
title and series) are available from Dell & Howell, Old
Mansfield Road, Rooster, (bio “691.

Correspondence pertaining to utters other than procure-ant
my be addressed to Joint Publications Research Service,
1000 North Glebe Road, Arlington, Virginia 22201.
I II. Dorm W: O. Bunion"

n Idiom-94109" tau 1m

c. mum-clam. SD.5_C_,5K,15

1'0 Mung-my unmet

Unlimited Availability

Sold by N'llS
Springfield, Virginia 22161

(30. 5049-231!“

 

   
  
  
 

Political Science _xInter-Arab Affairs _x_Libya _
Sociology _North African Luauritania
Economics Affairs _x Morocco _
Culture (Social _foghanistan _People' 8 Demo- _1
Sciences) _Algeria cratic Republic _
Ethnology ___Bahrain of Yenen
Geography __x_Bgypt _Persian Gulf _1
Techological _x_Iran Area __
Military Sciences _Iraq _Qatar
_x Israel ___Saudi Arabia
__Jordan _Spanish North
_Kuuait Africa
X Lebanon _x Sudan

”- M can (IN: mm)
UNCLASSIFIED. ‘ _

3a- tocumy Clan an" Pm)
UNCLASSIFIED

    

to town“... on loam
NEAR EAST/NORTH AFRICA REPORT
No. 2059

CONTENTS

MEX-ARAB AFFAIRS

Islamic Congress Secretary Interviewed on Iran, Islamic
Issues
(Habib Chatti Inzerview; AL-SARQ AL-AWSAT, 6 Dec 79)

Kuwaiti Paper Cites PID's Abu Lyad on Mideast. Developments,
Issues
(Michel al-Nimri; AL-HA'I‘AN, h Dec 79)

Timetable for Implementing Tunis Sumit Resolutions
Adopted
(AL-SHARQ mm, 3 Dec 79)

Kiibi Cements on Pm Mediation of Iranian Crisis
(Tunis Domestic Service, 6 Dec 79)

PIO's hmd 'Azsri Grants Interview to UK Paper
(Ahmed 'Azari Interview; mm} STAR, 7 Dec 79)

Briefs
Arab Communist Parties' Annual Conference
Libya Pays Cypriot Press
Ill-Sadat, Iran, Mecca Events

AFGHANISTAN

Representative of Afghan Dissident Group Interviewed
(AL-warm, 12-18 NOV 79) cocanteen-oceaeooeoooeoooo
carrewrs (Continued)

Supreme Constitutional Court Chair-nan Explains Court
Structure, Jurisdiction
(Ann-m Manda}: 'Atiyah Interview; Ross AL-YUSUF,

12 NOV 79) a.aoooooooocvloouuecoccoooaeooooo-oooao

Liberal mrty Official Resigns
(AL-JMIURIYAH, 13 Nov 79) .......................

University Students To Elect Unions This Month
(Labib 51mm; AL-Anam, 9 Nov 79)

Labor Unions Blect Btecutive Councils
(AL‘IW, 12 NOV 79) on...oucoeoocooooooe-ooncc-

Characteristics, Potential of al-Sadat's Possible
Successors Analyzed
(M‘mm, 15-21 001‘: .79) noooooooooo'oosoosoecooc

IRAN

National Guidance Minister Bares American Espionage Secrets
(mm, 2“ NOV 79) cocoone.oesocsosooeosoooooooao

Iraqi Government Begins Expelling Iranians
(W, 22 NOV 79) o...ooooooonooooooooooooone...

Sheikh Montszeri Discusses His Political Views
(ENQBIAB-E 13mm, 10 Oct 79)

Briefs
Opposition to Bases Against Iran

ISRAEL

NRP Role in Government Coalition Viewed
(Editorial; mm, 19 Oct 79)

Interpretation of Autonomy Program To Be Clarified
(Editorial; mzom, 19 Oct 79)

Effect of Emulation in Lebanon Analyzed
(Yhoshua' 'i'admor; DAVAR, 21 Aug 79) ..............

LEBANON

Iranian Takeover of American Enbassy in Beirut Described
(Ssdeq Musavi Interview; W, 19 nov 79).......

-b-
commas (Continued)

Major Eaddad Consents on Iranian Volunteers
(Various sources, 6, 7 Doc 79) ....................

Request for Israeli Intervention
Arrival of Iranian Troops Uncertain, by
Bat-'ami ﬂamizrahi

CP Secretary General Havi Vicvs Political Situation
(L'numurrz, 20 Nov 79)

LIBYA

Construction of 'Great Hall' on Border Hith Egypt Reported
(AL-EARADITH, 30 Nov 79)..

MAURITANIA

FRO Financial Cooperation A rcement Signed
(cams, 13-11: Oct 79

French language Education Retained Temporarily
(LE nouns, 25 Oct 79)

MOROCCO

Madrid Paper Interviews Bouabid on Sahara, Ties With Spain
(Misti Boua‘oid Interview; LE mrm, 30 Nov 79)

Briefs
French Loan Agreement
Grain Production Drop
SUDAN

Possibilities of Change in Country uplored
(AL-NARA}? AL-‘ARABI VA AL-DWALI, 5-11 Nov 79)

Maltreatment of Political Prisoners Cited, Riots Discussed
(AL—HIRRIYAH, 12 Nov 79)

Briefs
Recomendation for Islamic Republic
comms (Continued)
TUNISIA

Briefs
Earth Tremor Registered

WESTERN SAHARA

POLISARIO Leaner Reports on OAU Committee Resolutions
(Algiers matic SeTV1Ce, 8 me 79) coo-oncc-eeoeo
ISLAMIC CONGRESS SECRETARY INTERVIEHED 0N IRAN, ISLAMIC ISSUES
LDlOloO3 London AL-SHARQ AL—AHSAT in Arabic 6 Dec 79 pp 1, 2 LD

[Interview with Habib Chatti, general secretary of the Islamic Congress
Organization, by 'Irfan Nizam al-Din and Diyab Hafs'i in London--date not
given]

[Excerpts] [Question] What action plan has the Islamic Congress Organiza-
tion laid down for the coming stage in the light of the present critical
conditions in the area?

[Answer] In fact I took up my post in the organization only a week ago.
and I am now busy studying the organization's files and position from all
aspects. I cannot at the moment define the plan that I have drawn up

to manage its affairs, but I am fully aware of the role the organization
is expected to play in serving Islam and the Arabs, particularly in the
present conditions. I hope to be able to achieve results that will
satisfy everybody.

[Question] What are the first steps that you will take in this regard?

[Answer] The first step in my opinion is to make Islamic solidarity a
reality. He are now in constant contact with the Islamic countries in
order to coordinate their policies toward world problems. such as the
problem of Islamic minorities in some outside countries and the race issue
in black Africa. This is in addition to helping to consolidate the
nonalined movement, which is considered the Third Horld power standing
between the two other blocs.

[Question] what role have you played with regard to the situation in Iran?

[Answer] We have played a role in this regard. I personally contacted
the Iranian authorities during the first week of the present crisis. I
told the Iranian officials that, as head of an organization of which Iran
is a leading member, I place myself at their service for anything they
want me to do. During the Arab summit conference in Tunis an Iranian
delegation visited us, and I repeated the same offer.
[Question] Do you mean by this: playing the role of a mediator?

[Answer] No, not mediation. As a Muslim and member of the Islamic
congress which includes Iran I have the duty to work for this cause.

I belong to the same family to which Iran belongs and I am prepared to
help it overcome this crisis in a manner satisfactory to the other Islamic
countries. I believe that the Iranian authorities made a mistake on the
issue of holding the hostages, but the blame mainly falls on the Zionist
lobby which brought the shah back to the United States at a time when
U.S.-Iranian relations were showing clear improvement. I would recall
that adviser Brzezinski twice met with former prime minister Hehdi Baaargan,
and both agreed on most of the points of coupon interest to both countries.
But the Zionist lobby came in to play its game and sabotaged these rela-
tions. It was able to bring the shah to the United States and to disturb
relations between the two countries. I believe that there was foul play
in the matter and that the shah was not 111, as was claimed, because his
house in Mexico was closed up before his departure for New York.

[Question] Hostility to Islam in the Rest has been on the increase. what
is the organization's role in replying to such campaigns?

[Answer] That is true. I am very pained by the reaction in the West. and
I am following events closely. I was recently in hence. where I made
important contacts. The west's attitude toward Islam is wrong and un—
justifiable. The question of Iran is one thing and Islam is another.

With regard to Iran there is a crisis of relations with the United States.
It is an acute, ratified and major crisis but it is a political, not an
Islamic crisis. Before anyone defines his stand on the embassy incident
he must define his stand on the events that preceded it, because if someone
understands a problal from its roots, then he can solve it. If we say
that this was a violation of international law and the inunity of
embassies and are satisfied with that, we will not achieve a practical
result. Another point is that some people describe the Iranian revolution
as an Islamic revolution, thus giving it this purely religious character.
But in fact it is a political revolution inspired by the Islamic religion.
He now see many similar examples in Europe and many associations that call
themselves Christian Democrats. Those people too are inspired by
christinity in their political methods. As I said-, the Iranian Revolution
is a political revolution based on the rejection of a certain political,
economic and social system, which the Iranian people expressed in a manner
aimed at creating a new regime based on principles inspired by Islam.

[LD101605] [Question] Jerusalem, as everybody agrees, is an Islamic
responsibility. what have we offered on this issue so far, and what is
the organization's role in it?

[Answer] I believe that the resolution adopted on this subject at previous
[Islamic] conferences had positive effects. had it not been for these
resolutions and the clear Islamic stand on this problem, Israel would
have committed greater acts of destruction against Islnic landmarks.

2
This is a positive result which may not be perceptible but does deter Israel
from doing what it wants. He succeeded in preventing the Canadian Embassy
in Tel Aviv from moving to Jerusalem thanks to Islaaic solidarity. The
question of liberating Jerusalem requires further planning and falls within
the Middle East problem. The Palestinian problem and the problem of
Jerusalem are one. The Arabs have their own strategy in this regard. that
is important is that we stick to our demand for the return of Jerusalem
and continue to express our dissatisfaction with any action that does not
help to restore the Holy City to Islamic legality. Eventually we must
restore Jerusalem either by war or by any other means. I am not calling
for war, but we must move when conditions :arise for war or peace. The

Camp David agreements will never bring peace. However. I would not be
surprised to see significant changes occurring in the world which could
bring a peaceful solution. Until that time comes we must adhere to our
stand and continuously seek to achieve our objectives.

[Question] Does this mean that in your view peace will be coming shortly?

[Answer] I do not believe that it will happen shortly. As I said. the
Camp David agreement harmed the Arab cause. changed its course and divided
the Arabs into two camps, which has given the Israeli side the strength
it was seeking. But everybody must understand that this agreement will
never bring peace. Whoever really wants peace must understand that it
comes only through negotiations between all the parties, particularly

the PLO. and through a comprehensive solution satisfactory to all the
Arabs.

The decision to reject Camp David is a unified Islamic decision. It is
also a universal rejection by the Nest. The Americans have now begun to
reconsider their stand and to wonder whether they have made a mistake.
The Camp David policy is bankrupt, and I challenge anybody except for
the few parties involved to say that he is with the Camp David policy.
KUWAIT]: PAPER CITES PLO'S ABU IYAD 0N HIDEAST DEVELOPMENTS. ISSUES
1.0061601 Kuwait AL-HATAN in Arabic 1. Dec 79 p 13 Lb

[Dispatch by Michel al-Ninri: "Abu Iyad at a Closed Session: Kreisky Is
wise; He Sunnoned al-Sartaw'i To Try Him"]

[Text] Beirut—“hen Abu Iyad [Salah Khalaf] talks to the press, he tells
one-tenth of the truth. when he talks at a general meeting. he tells
one-fifth of the truth. but when he finds someone to debate his statenents
with him, he will either tell the truth or remain silent.

A few days ago, Abu Iyad met with a group of Jordanian students in a quasi-
closed meeting. He wanted to tell all but retreated when he observed that
some journalists were present. when he was asked to speak frankly, he
feared that his stateaents would leak to the press. Therefore, he could
tell but half of the truth. however, he asked the journalists to forget
their profession and consider themselves listeners only. But can a
journalist be a mere listener? Personally, I do not think so. I do not
believe that Abu Iyad would be upset if a journalist was true to himself.
For this reason, we decided to publish some of Abu Iysd's statements-—
because not everything Salah melaf says is publishable.

The Summit and Lebanon

Oomenting on the Arab sunnit conference, Abu Iyad said that the results
of the Tunis sunnit were more advanced that the results of the Baghdad
sumit, because this is the first time such clear resolutions against
L'.S. imperialism have been adopted. Abu Iyad regards the [Tunis] summit
results as tantamount to a victory for the Palestinian revolution because
the plot to hit the Palestinian revolution by having the Arab leaders
issue a resolution calling on the Palestinian fighters to withdraw from
south Lebanon was completely defeated.

Abu Iyad revealed that [Lebanese] President Sarkis came [to the Tunis
sumit] with a loo—percent "isolationist" working paper--the same working
paper which was drawn up by 0.5. envoy Philip Babib and which provides

for clearing the south of Palestinian fighters and crs-ing them in the
area north of Al-Litani River.
Abu Iyad cited [PLO Executive Connittee Chairman Yasir] 'Arafat as having
said at the conference that he refuses to give up through political
maneuvers what "Israel" has failed to achieve militarily in over 10 years
of war. He added: "The adamant Palestinian stand at the summit frustrated
the suspicious plot to hit and liquidate the Palestinian revolution."

The Steadfastness and Confrontation Pront

Regarding the front of steadfastness and confrontation. Abu Iyad said:

We are aware of the reality and size of the steadfastness front but we
are faced with two choices only: We either accept this "front" with its
weaknesses and limited effectiveness and work from then on at developing
and strengthening it. or wash our hands of it. I do not believe that the
latter step would serve the cause of the national struggle.

Abu Iyad disclosed how this front materialized at the Tripoli conference
when the Palestinian revolution leaders entered the conference-after the
participants had agreed on the famous Tripoli document on Palestine--and
demanded that the front leaders reach a mutual agreement. Abu Iyad said
that, were it not for this step and the moral pressure it generated. the
front would not have materialized.

We Are Not a Salaried Revolution

Abu Iyad attacked the [Libyan] Jamahiriyah and said: "We are not a
salaried revolution." While the Jamahiriyah gives aid to this or that
Palestinian organization, it refrains from giving support to the liberation
organization. Abu Iyad added: "He refuse to turn ourselves into a salaried
revolution. He refuse to be tamed by the nonthly salary they want to pay
us."

Iran and the Palestinian Revolution

0n the Iranian Revolution, Abu Iyad expressed his astonishment at the
attitude of some Arab states which are adopting a stand hostile to Iran.
He said: "This is a questionable matter indeed. The Arabs appear to
have become aware of Lesser ‘i‘unb and Greater Tunb only now whereas during
the shah's era none of them uttered a word."

Abu Iyad strongly denied what has been said about Palestinian mediation
between Iran and the United States. lie said that Brigadier Sa'd Sayil'a
visit to Teheran was to see what was happening on the spot and to convey
the Palestinian revolution'a solidarity with the Iranian Revolution.

Abu Iyad expressed his conviction that the United States will not risk
launching a military aggression against Iran. He said that if the
United States embarks on such a desperate adventure. then "we in the
Palestinian revolution would not hesitate to participate in the battle

and would connit all our military and political capabilities alongside
it" [Iran].
Abu Iyad regards the lrsnian-American confrontation as the most serious
confrontation since the nationalization of the Suez Canal. lie disclosed
how the Iranian delegation to the 'Dunia summit was not received properly
and how the Palestinian delegation received it in its own quarters and
arranged for it a series of meetings with some Arab delegations to the
summit. thus enabling it to meet with the Arab League secretary general
and the Syrian and PDRY delegations.

[LD061603] The Jordanian—Palestinian Dialog

Connenting on the Jordanian-Palestinian dialog, Abu Iyad defended the work
of the joint comittee but protested at sone loopholes. He said that this
dialog is bound by its objective circumstances to confront Al-Sadat's
capitulation and the Camp David conference [as published] and to consoli-
date the Palestinian people's struggle in the occupied territories.

Abu Iyad also defended the role of the Palestinian side in the joint
Jordanian-Palestinian comittee, particularly the role of Abu Marin,
Fatah Central Couittee member and head of the Palestinian side.

Abu Iyad, however, strongly attacked Jordanian intelligence, which, he
said, is indirectly working to explode Jordanian—Palestinian relations

by continuing to harass the Palestinians. Abu Iyad revealed how Jordanian
intelligence lets no opportunity slip for attacking Palestinian officials
in the ugliest words. He said: "We do not know what this double

dealing means."

The Situation in Syria

Regarding the situation in Syria, Abu Iyad strongly attacked the subversive
groups which try to distract Syria from its national battle against the
Zionist enemy and Al-Sadat's regime.

Abu Iyad said: I can understand it when political opponents of Al-Asad‘s
goverrment assassinate Ba'thist elements and personalities, but when a
person is killed merely because he belongs to a particular creed, it is
the depths of political and moral degradation.

He accused the American Central Intelligence [Agency] and Egyptian intel-
ligence of organizing sabotage operations against Syria from Turkey and
from across Syria's northerr. border. Abu Iyad said: Irrespective of
whether it is the "Hinslim Brotherhood" or others who carry out these

operations, we believe that their sin is to distract Syria from its
national battle.

Relations With America
Abu Iyad again strongly denied the existence of overt or covert contacts

with the United States. He said: "He would be very happy if we could
secure U.S. recognition of the liberation organization as the sole
legitimate representative of the Palestinian people, but this, however,
would not prevent us from continuing to confront u.s. imperialism as the
archenemy of our Palestinian people and the Arab nation."

Kreisky Is Wise and He Will Try AI-Sartawi

Abu Iyad welcomed the Palestinian-European dialog. He said: "'Arafat's
meeting with Kreiaky is considered a victory for the revolution." But
he warned of Kreisky's intentions, "without thismeaning that we agree
with him" [as published]. He said: "Kreisky is a wise Zionist but Begin
is a hypocrite and an extremist Zionist. Despite our complete awareness
of what Kreisky represents, we used to meet with him and debate with him
on clear grounds. We know exactly what we want from him. without relin-
quishing our objectives." Abu Iyad expressed his respect for Kreiaky
because of his clear stands. even "those with which we do not agree."

Abu Iyad disclosed that the resistance command has summoned Isam al-Sartawi

and decided to put him on trial because he had agreed to share an Austrian
medal with an Israeli personality.

The Lebanese Army Is 23,000 Strong

Discussing the Lebanese situation, Abu Iyad said that he will meet with
President Ilyas Sarkis in the near future. He emphasized the strong
alliance with the Lebanese national and patriotic movement.

Replying to a question on the condition of the Lebanese Army, Abu Iyad
said that it now musters about 23,000 soldiers and that two-thirds of
them directly belong to the isolationist Lebanese front. He expressed
doubt about the possibility of a cohesive Lebanese Army ever emerging
in view of the nature of the divisions in Lebanon.

Abu Iyad revealed that it is Israel which is objecting to the Lebanese
Army's deployment in the south because of the truce agreement signed
between the two countries, which does not permit the presence of more than
2,000 soldiers in the border areas. He added: "We do not know if now there
are new agreements with Israel that permit an increase in the size of

the Lebanese Army in [the] south."

Abu Iyad concluded his talk by emphasizing that the Palestinian revolution
will strongly continue its struggle, stressing the importance of national
unity among the revolution groups.
TIMETABLE FOR IMPLEMENTING 1'!!le SUMMIT RESOLUTIONS ADOPTED
L0060933 London AL—SHARQ AL-AWSAT in Arabic 3 Dec 79 p 1 LD

[Excerpt] London, AL-SHARQ AL-AHSAT--Arab diplomatic sources emphasized
to AL-SHARQ AL—AHSAT yesterday that the contacts which took place among
Arab capitals last week have resulted in the adoption of a timetable

for the implementation of the secret resolutions adopted at the tenth
Arab summit conference convened in Tunis last month.

The sources said that these steps consist of strengthening the eastern
front, achieving Jordanian-Palestinian understanding on various current
issues and starting to find a solution to the problem of south Lebanon
in the light of the resolutions issued by the summit.

It has been learned that Arab League Secretary General Chedli Klibi will
personally supervise the implementation of these steps on the authoriza-
tion of the Arab leaders. It has also been learned that Klibi's upcoming
visit to Beirut is aimed at reviving the Arab followup co-ittee and at
bringing the Lebanese and Palestinian sides into line with the inter-
Arsb agreement.

Meanwhile, an official Jordanian source yesterday confirmed the report
AL-SHARQ AL-AHSAT published on Saturday to the effect that PLO Executive
Comittee Chairman Yasir 'Arafat will arrive in Arman on Wednesday on a
brief official visit to Jordan during which he will meet with King ﬂusayn.

It has been learned that King Husayn's discussions with 'Arafat will deal
in particular with PLO-Jordanian relations and the strengthening of the
steadfastness of the Arab inhabitants in the occupied territories.
KLIBI COMMENTS 0“ PLO HBDIATIOR 0F IRANIAN CRISIS

LD062215 Tunis Domestic Service in Arabic 1900 GMT 6 Dec 79 Lb

[Excerpt] Arab League Secretary General Chedli Klibi answered journalists
questions at a luncheon organized in Paris today by the French society

for the diplomatic press. His answers dealt with the Arab perspective
following the 10th summit conference. In this context he said: The
latest Arab summit was a very important event for two reasons. First,
there were some fears resulting from rumors about splits in the Arab
ranks. The Tunis summit proved that the Arab countries represented at

the highest level did not leave the ranks of the united front formed at
the Baghdad meeting. Second. for the first time an Arab summit has agreed
on a unified action plan and not merely on general nessures. This plan
takes into consideration the political and economic reality of the Arab
world.

The Tunis summit also recommended the opening up of Arab action to informa»
tion. The matter concerns a coordinated action toward friendly countries.
toward Europe and America in particular, especially now that Europe has an

important role to play in influencing world opinion. Ours is to be a
decisive information action.

As regards southern Lebanon, Klibi said the 10th Arab summit conference
reached positive results, although they did not fully satisfy the two
parties to the problem. He described the steps achieved along the road
of reconciling requirements of the Palestinian revolution and the Lebanese
state as important steps. Klibi spoke about the Arab—European dialog and
said in particular that he studied with the head of the French state

and with the foreign minister during his visit [words indistinct] the
possibility of resuming the dialog between the BBC and the Arab League
countries. He added that Arab countries hope to resume this dialog in

a comprehensive way, without separating political and economic matters.
He said that if we looked at our attitude in a comprehensive way, our
interests could lie in the same direction.

Answering a question on the Western Sahara, Klibi said: Each time tension
is created among Arab countries the Arab League moves quickly and this is

what happened when Mauritania called for a meeting of the league's council
to discuss the withdrawal of the Moroccan forces from Mauritania. The
Arab League sent a special envoy to Rabat and Nouakchott. The consultations
carried out by this envoy led to Mauritania revoking its request. Morocco
presented Mauritania with written outlines of arrangements for withdrawing
its forces. The problem is thus on its way to solution. As to the
possibility of the league's mediation in the conflict, Klibi said we did

not receive any request for intervention with the parties to the dispute.
The league, however, is making great efforts to avoid tensions and to
countenance all possibilities. The situation seess quiet, and with the
passage of tine attitudes will nature.

Kiibi was asked his opinion on the American hostages in Teheran. He said:
He hope that this regrettable matter is solved thanks to the mediation

of the PLO. Had the PLo's first mediation attempt been successful. its
results would have been positive in relation to all parties and Iran would
have come out of this predicament and the American diplomats would have
been freed and the Iranian revolution would have rendered an important
service to the Palestinian cause, which is that the PLO would becolug in
the eyes of Washington, a capable speaker. I hope that this solution
will enjoy the support of Iran.
PLO'S AHMAD 'AZARI GRANTS INTERVIEW TO UK PAPER
1.0071525 London MORNING SEAR in English 7 Dec 79 p 10 LD

[Interview with Ahmad 'Azari of the PLO by Pater Avis in London-mo date
given]

[Text] Palestine's liberation movement cannot compete equally on the
battlefield with the armadas mounted by American imperialism and its allies
in the Middle East "but on the political field we have made many gains

in the last two years," says Ahmad 'Azari of the Palestine Liberation
Organisat ion .

Hr. 'Azari, judicial adviser to PLO Chairman Yasir 'Arsfat, was in London
to attend the 36th congress of the British Comunist Party as a fraternal
delegate. He is an optimist for the future of his people.

"I could not be a revolutionary if I was not optimistic that out just
cause will triumph," he says.

Mr. 'Azari recognises that the Camp David accords and the Egyptian-Israeli
treaty represents a blow to Arab unity by taking Egypt out: of the struggle
for the liberation of all Middle East lands from imperialist domination.

Those agreements have emboldened the leaders of Israel, armed with the most
sophisticated U.S. weapons, to increase their attacks on Palestinian

refugee camps and bases in southern Lebanon in the hope of killing off
the liberation movaaent.

But, says Ahmad 'Azari, continued Palestinian resistance has made it sure
clear to the world that it is an absurdity to believe there can be a Middle
East solution without recognition of Palestinian national rights.

Even the 0.3. now has to take into account the Palestinian reality-awhile

seeking to impose a phoney autonomy on the Palestinian people that would
leave them bereft of sovereign rights over their own country.

Mr. 'Azari maintains that international solidarity with the Palestinian
cause has increased in the last two years-was witness the recent meeting

in Lisbon which gathered 1,000 representatives from over 300 countries and
organisations .
11
He points also to the evolution of thinking within the socialist inter-
national. Hhen Harold Wilson in Britain and Golda Meir in Israel were
in power all social democratic parties supported Israel's position up
to the hilt.

Now, social democratic leaders like Hilly Brandt in Hest Germany,

Bruno Kreisky in Austria and Bulent Bcevit in Turkey have indicated the
growing acceptance within the socialist international of the PLO's case
for a free and independent Palestinian state.

The recent reception of Yasir 'Arafat by Premier Suarez of Spain is
another sign of the PLO's increased prestige.

"He can also say that the fall of the shah of Iran is a political victory
for the Palestinian revolution," says Mr. 'Azari.

"Israel and the U.S. have lost a fortress in the Middle East. and the
imperialists have been obliged to withdraw in silence from the Cento
Pact."

Hr. 'Azari said it would be [a] mistake to write off Egypt--historically.
the main force in advancing Arab liberation-«as a definite loss to the
national liberation movement.

"He must not forget that the Egyptian people have already made revolu-
tionary gains in their struggle for progress," he says. "Such a tradition
cannot be cancelled in 26 hours just because President Sadat has done a
separate deal with Israel."

Hr. 'Azari is confident that the development of the progressive forces in
Egypt will sooner or later lead to a clash between the masses and the
present reactionary regime.

"They can deceive the people for some of the time. but not for all time,"
he said.

"Economic crisis and inflation are now suffocating the Egyptian people.
The trade unions have found that the working class is not ready to go
on living under these conditions, and the student movements and the
peasants are being organized.

"The unified progressive party led by Khaled Hoheiddin is gaining more
members and the Egyptian Cmmnunist Party-uwhich is illegal-has doubled
its membership in six months.

"When you think that those who join the communist party are liable to be
sacked from their work or put in prison, you can see how important that
increase is."
Hr. 'Azari said Britain had a special responsibility to work for a solution
of the Palestinian question.

"British forces were in India and they left, and India is an independent
country," he says; "they were in Egypt and they left, and Egypt is
independent.

"The only country that was under British mandate and is not independent
is Palestine.

"I am sure that the British people understand the realities, but they must
influence more those who speak in the name of their country. I am sure

that, if there is a continuous campaign, the British Government can at
least be made to recognise the PLO as the French Government has done."

Hr 'Azari said that relations between a future Palestinian state and
Israel must depend on the attitude of Israel toward Palestinian rights
now.

"He cannot talk of recognition of Israel before the Palestinian state
exists. At present the Israeli leaders are continuing to ignore. not only
Palestinian rights, but the mere Palestinian existence."

Hr. 'Azari said nobody at this stage could decree what type of governnent
and social system the Palestinian people would choose when they estab-
lished their state-~"anywhere on Palestinian land."

"But I am an optimist," he says. "I am sure it will be a democratic

and progressive state. with good relations with at least all those
who have stood with us in our long fight."

C50: £802

13
BRIEFS

ARAB COMMUNIST PARTTBS' ANNUAL CONFERENCB--The Arab communist parties
are to hold their annual conference next month but the precise venue

of the meeting is not yet known, while some sources say that it will be
held in Beirut, other sources assert that it will be held in Europe.
Communist sources say that the conference will issue a political state-
ment on the present Arab situation. A similar statement was issued by
the previous conference which contained the first attack on the ruling
Iraqi Ba'th Party. [Unattributed report] [Text] [LD301605 London
AL-HAHADITH in Arabic 30 Nov 79 p 8]

LIBYA PAYS CYPRIOT PRESS--Cairo, 6 Dec--The weekly magazine ALFHMSAHHAR
publishes photostat copies of six checks which Libyan President Hu'allar
al-Qadhdhafi gave to the Cypriot Socialist Party which is led by
Lyssaridis. In its Friday issue, AL-HUSAHHAR says that Lyssaridis and
his party played a disgraceful role in the assassination of Yusuf
al-Siba'i. The aagazine further reports that the checks were given to
the TA NBA newspaper, the organ of the Lyssaridis party to be spent on
attacks against Egypt and the United States which do not approve of

al-Qadhdhafi's theories. [Text] [NCO60950 Cairo HERA in Arabic 0900 GMT
6 Dec 79 NC]

AL-SADAT, IRAN. MECCA EVENTS--In reply to questions asked by members at the
French Diplomatic Press Association Thursday. 6 December. Arab League
Secretary General Klibi welcomed some of "President Al-Sadat's courageous
gestures" and expressed the view that "the reproach which can be leveled
at him is that he has persisted in following a path which leads nowhere."
According to Klibi "the Arab League can operate without Egypt" although
it is suffering from the absence of this "great country." while "Egypt

is nothing without the Arab world." The Arab League secretary general,
who is making his first visit to France, said he thinks what is happening
in Iran is not in keeping with Islamic reason." [quotation marks as
published] He expressed the hope that PLO mediation will be accepted in
the hostages affair. It would be "a good thing" for everybody, he said.
Finally he said he thinks the events in Mecca "are far removed from what
is happening in Iran. This is a local irritation which must be stopped

quickly, but it does not have deep popular roots." [Text] [L0110907
Paris LB HONDE in French 8 Dec 79 p 3 LD]

1h
REPRESENTATIVE 0F AFGHAN DISSIDBNT GROUP INTERVIENED

London AL—DUSTUR in Arabic 12-18 Nov 79 pp 31-33

[Interview with Representative of Afghanistan Islamic Society: "Representative
of Afghanistan Islamic Society Tells AL~DUSTUR: 'Iran Is Not Helping Us and
Government Is harassing Us; Islam Is Guarantee for Independence from East and
Hest"']

[Text] Hhen one arrives to Iran coming from the Arab countries, one feels
that one's proximity to Afghanistan is not only geographical. Although there
is a news blackout or at least a lack of interest in the Arab countries on the
question of Afghanistan, one hears discussion about Afghanistan everywhere in
Iran: in the press, on the radio, on television, in public meetings and in

people's conversations.

The coup that Hafizullah Amin-carried out in Afghanistan aroused broad interest
in Iran. But this interest declined after it was clearly affirmed that there
would be no significant change in Afghan policy and specifically in the Afghan
position on the Islamic Movement there.

The Iranians are praying for the victory of Islamic Afghanistan in their Friday
prayers. They consider participation in the Islanic Movement in Afghanistan

to be participation in a holy war. Thousands of people have actually signed
their names [to express] their willingness to volunteer. None of this.
however, means that there is official support for the Afghan insurgents.

AL-DUSTUR took advantage of the opportunity of the presence in Tehran of the
repersentative of the Afghanistan Islamic Society. It interviewed him about
the most recent developments in the Afghan question, and the following inter-
view took place:

He began our interview with a question about the history of the Afghanistan
Islamic Society and the beginning of the armed struggle.

[Answer] The history of Islamic Afghanistan is an ancient history. Buddhism

and Zoroastrianism were widespread in Afghanistan before Islam. After the
victory of Islam and the liberation of our country Afghanistan became strongly

15
attached to the Islamic religion and to the Arabic Islamic culture. Some
Moslem Arabs lost their lives in the battles that took place to liberate Af-
ghanistan. The people of Afghanistan are still keeping up the tombs of those
martyrs and are upholding their dear memory, whereas they have forgotten their
ancestors who had fought against the Moslem Arabs. After that our country
became the point from which Islam was spread to India, to (Turkumanistan) and
to other countries as well. The Afghans contributed to building the Islamic
ciVillzation, and there is a large number of scientists and writers whose
origins are Afghan. Everybody remembers Jamal al Din al-Afghani who played

a prominent role in the awakening of Egypt and of other Islamic countries
during the latter of the last century.

In spite of the barriers that British colonialism tried to build between
Afghanistan and the Arab countries. the Afghans remained careful of maintaining
their relations with the Arabs and the Moslems. Al-Azhar continued to be an
important center for Afghan students. From there, [knowledge] was radiated to
us again. During the fifties strong ties developed between some Moslem Afghans
who were studying at al-Azhar and the Islamic Movement in Egypt. The most
prominent of those Afghans were Muhammad Niyazi, Burhan al-Din Rabani and
Sayyid Muhammad Musa Tawana. After completing their studies in al-Azhar.

they returned to Afghanistan to teach in the University of Kabul, and there
they established in 1957 the Afghanistan Islamic Society under the leader-

ship of Muhammad Niyazi, who is still a prisoner.

The society's activity was secret because of the dictatorship of King Muhammad
Zahir Shah. But the society stepped up its activities in the sixties, and
especially since 1963 when there was openness in the political climate and the
activities of the opposition were stepped up in general. This opposition was
Islamic and leftist, and it was opposed to the government of King Zahir Shah.
These activities weakened the government and prepared the climate for Daud
Khan's coup in 1973.

independence First
[QueStion] “hat is you judgment of Daud Khan's coup?

[Answer] In the latter days of King Zahir Shah there were two forces vying
for control of the mainstream. There was the leftist movement. on the one
hand. and the Islamic forces, on the other. The Russians sensed the danger

of the Islamic Movement, so they planned a military coup that was supported

by the two leftist parties that had always been vying with each other in their
loyalty to the Russians: The Khalaq Party (the People) and the Barjam Party
(al-Rayah [the Flagl). Except for one minister, the first cabinet that

Daud formed was made up of members of these two parties. But in the end,

Daud did not accept playing the part of a puppet. While he continued striking

at the islamic forces, he also began liquidating the positions of the leftists.
This was an attempt to establish autocracy, so the Russians took action again

and engineered the coup which brought the Khalaq Party to power.

16
A few days went by, and it became evident that the principal target of Taraki's

government was to liquidate the Islamic forces. Therefore, we had no alterna-
tive but to begin organizing the armed resistance.

[Question] You are always talking about the Russians and about Russian in-
fluence. Can you define this Russian influence for us in specific terms?

[Answer] The army is the most important seat for Russian influence.

Host of the army officers received their training in Russia. You can see
that all the coups and the changes are brought about by this subordinate
institution. It was also for this reason that our only alternative was to
turn to the people and to begin the armed struggle because the upper echelons
of the army have become hopeless. They take no action unless such action

is part of a foreign plan.

There are more than 10,000 Russian experts and advisers in the armed forces.
Three thousand of them are working in the air force. In general, the number
of Russians working in the economic and educational institutions in our
country exceeds 150,000. Russian adivaers are distinguished in the 19 minis-
tries which make up the government, in all the public departments and in all
the responsible agencies. In the city of Hazar Sharif alone there are
approximately 120,000 Russian experts and technicians working in the ex-
traction of oil and gas.

If you wanted an example of the economic exploitation that our people are
subjected to, there is the example of the oil and the gas which the Russians
are plundering in the form of raw materials. For every cubic meter of natural
gas they pay 75 Afghani (less than half a French franc), and then they sell
us the refined oil and gas at world prices.

In addition, they take the gold and the emeralds that are mined out of our
country at trifling prices. They also take cotton, our most important agri-
cultural product. They get it at a price that is much lower than the world
price. To a certain extent, they also monopolize grain imports from Afghan-
istan.

The other aapect-—and perhaps the most important one--in the Russian interest
in Afghanistan is its strategic location and its proximity to China, Iran and
Pakistan as well as Russia itslef. Therefore, the advent of any independent
government in Afghanistan would be considered a threat to Soviet security

in the judgment of the Russians who want Afghanistan to be a bridge they can
use to cross to the other countries where they can achieve the Kaiser's old
dream of reaching warm waters.

[Question] What is your basic goal, and what policy will you adopt if the
Islamic Movement came to power?

[Answer] Islam itself is the armor that protects independence. Our goal is
to achieve the independence of Afghanistan from the superpowers and to

17
establish strong relations with the Islamic world. We are certain that these
relations will give our country the strong bases for preserving its indepen-
dence. Islamic Afghanistan will become part of the Third World and of the
Non-aligned Hovement in the world.

we want our country--just as Khomeyni wants Iran—to be neither eastern nor
western. The application of Islam will not be a step backwards for Afghan-
istan. We have no plans to impede progress, but we rather want Islam to be

a tool of awareness and awakening for the people and an incentive for progress.
We know that Islam has certain applications, just as is the case in some sub-
ordinate countries, but we are as far as we can be from such Islam.

[Question] What is your relationship to the other political forces? How do
you regulate life in the areas that you control?

[Answer] There are other Islamic organizations besides ours. The most im-
portant of them are the Islamic Revolutionary Movement, the Afghan Islamic
Party and the National Front for the Liberation of Afghanistan. At the pre-
sent time the Afghan Islamic Party is suffering from a split.

Our efforts so far have yielded the unification of the efforts of these basic
organizations into the Islamic Alliance which is a framework for coordinating
activities in the liberated areas and for planning operations. We hope that
this will develop into full unity among the organizations.

There are efforts to bring together other organizations such as al-Ra'd [Thun-
der], al-Nasr [Victory] and the Islamic Afghan Movement. These organizations
were originally formed in Iran. under the influence of the Iranian Revolution
which is working basically among the Shi'ite minority in Afghanistan.

[Question] Are the other basic organizations Sunni organizations?

[Answer] They do not have a sectarian character, but the majority of the
Afghan people belong to the Sunni sect. Out of 15 million, which is the
number of Afghanistan's population, for example, there are a number of
Shi'ites.

The Islamic Alliance. which represents the basic fighting organizations,
directs the struggle and regulates public life in the liberated areas. Local
authorities and courts have been formed to look into disputes and to regulate
the different aspects of life. These comitteea and authorities are guided
in their activities by the charter of the Islamic Alliance which all parties
signed.

[Question] Are there non-Islamic parties that are participating in the
Revolution?

[Answer] There were other parties, but they were swept away by the tide of
the Islamic Movement. The New Democracy Party, for example, which is known
as the Jawid Flame-the Eternal Flame, was active in the struggle that preceded
Taraki's coup. But its members were subjected to severe oppression afterwards.
and they were weakened considerably. There were other organizations that were
formed on a national or on a patriotic basis. The most important of these
organizations is the Afghan Halat Party. It had socialist. democratic ten-
dencies, and it was tied to Western Europe. But this trend has also been
weakened. The infrastructure of these organizations rallied around the

banner of the Islamic Movement which became the movement of the entire nation.

0n the other hand, there are at present forces that have been left over from
the regime of King Zahir Shah (he himself is now living in ltaly), and there
are western efforts to revive these forces. However. the effect they have is
not worth mentioning.

The Rescue Coup

[Quest ion] What is your judgment of the recent coup, and who is iinl’izullah
Amin? it is being said that the fact that he belongs to the Pushtu tribes
may give him a popular base. Is this true?

[Answer] Hafizullah Allin is the son of one of the major feudal I'usto families.
His family lives in a luxurious mansion near Kabul.

He began his political life cooperating with band Khan, and he had a strong
relationship with the Shahi family. He benefited from this relationship.
and he had an opportunity to complete his studies in the United States. He
was known at that time to be influenced by U.S. culture. When the 0.5.
president visited Afghanistan, Hafizullah organized a major demonstration
to welcome him. 'ihen he joined tne Khalaq Party, and after a while became
the second man after Taraki, or rather his competitor.

The fact that he is a member of a certain tribe does not mean that he has its

support. His family has removed itself from the tribal environment and has
no influence on the tribe.

But in my judgment the recent coup was an attempt to play the last hand and

to salvage whatever can be salvaged from the deposed regime. It was exactly
like [the coup which] removed the Shah and brought Shahpur Bakhtiar. In other
words. it was an attempt to keep the same merchandise under a different facade,
with the knowledge that the facade here (Hafiz) had been used up from the very
beginning. However. he was considered stronger and firmer than Taraki.

No Assistance from Iran or from China
[Question] Let us get to a discussion about Iran, the Iranian Revolution and
about what is being said about Iranian support for you or what is called

Iranian interference .

[Answer] The prospects of our being affected by the Iranian Revolution are
broader than the discussion about interference and support. They are even
broader than the relationship with the iranian government. Regardless of the
format of the relationship. the lranian Revolution remains a major event in
our area; in fact. it is a major event in the world. It gave the struggle

of the Afghan people a new thrust. He learned that by depending on the powers
of our own people, it was possible to achieve victory over a regime that is
supported by a major power. The Iranian people were also able to annihilate
the Shah's regime which was supported by the United States.

it is in our interest that the Iranian Revolution remain strong and invincible.
we would consider this a victory for us even though Iran has not offered us
any assistance.

Regarding assistance. we have not been receiving any financial support from
the government so far. The people here are collecting contributions for us
and are helping us. But we did not receive anything from the government.
Ayatollah Khomeyni has expressed his support for us more than once, and
this is great moral and political support.

Thousands of persons have expressed their willingness to volunteer with us.

- at we do not need manpower; we do need weapons, munition, and financial
assistance. The liberated areas are suffering from economic difficulties
since we have to nake plans for the food and the livelihoods of the population
in the shadow of an economic blockade that was set up by the government of
Kabul.

Officials in the Iranian government have stated that the borders with Afghan-
istan must be checked. They did actually place restrictions on activities
across the borders, and these measures impede our work.

At any rate, the historical ties between Iran and Afghanistan are too deep
to be separated. There is no doubt that a major change, such as what hap-
pened in Iran, will affect Afghanistan. This effect is ongoing and I am af-
firming that there is no Iranian interference. In fact, the support that we
are seeking does not exist; were it to asterialize, we would not consider it
interference.

[Question] h‘hat about what is being said about Chinese support?

[Answer] This is what the regime in Kabul is trying to connect to us. In
order for the regime to conceal its subordination to foreigners, it is trying
to portray the opposition movement as the handwork of foreigners. The Kabul
regime is saying that we are being trained in China and that we are utilizing
Chinese territory as a background base. The fact is that we are not receiving
material support from China. China took a strong position agath the coup
that was planned by the Soviets, and this was beneficial to the Afghan Revol-
ution, but this does not signify that we benefited directly fro. this posi-
tion.
We Support Independent Movonwuus

[Question] How are your relations with the liberation nmvenwnts in the
world, and especially the Palestinian Revolution?

[Answer] He have good relations with all the Islamic Movomenls in the world.
Some of these movements offered us material and moral support. sad they
offered to send us volunteers. bul as i said we do not need nmnpower.

We support all liberation movements whose origins are independent and those
which seek liberation from colonialism and foreign control. but it fills
our hearts with grief to see that some of these movements are not aware of
the danger of the Russians; nor are they aware of the importance of preser-
ving the independence of their movements and their countries. The result.
therefore, is that they become liberated from one foreign country and fall
under the control of another major foreign country. Therefore. all the
sacrifices of the people are ultinmtely made in the interests of a foreign
power. This erroneous position of some lﬂnration movements impedes the
establishment of relations of solidarity between us and them.

Let us take. for example. the Palestinian Revolution. Our support for this
revolution is unlimited. We consider the liberation of Palestine the ques-
tion of all Hoslems in the world. Some Palestinian leaders. however. have
considered Taraki's coup to be a progressive revolution. They are sliil
favoring the Afghan regime which is hostile to the people. and they are
adopting an unfavorable position towards us. 'niese positions are misled by
false. leftist slogans and are oblivious to the most important matter of
the revolution. which is independence.

What happened in Afghanistan has also happened in Arab and African countries
where the Russians organized a coup within the national governments and
brought their direct agents [into power] by means of bloody. violent
operations. in spite of this. we find some people insisting on corsidering
the new regimes of change to be revolutionary and progressive changes.

[Question] On your part, can y0u guarantee the independence of your move—
ment so that the Americans and the Nest would not benefit from your struggle
against the Soviets?

[Answer] I want you to be certain that we are careful about our independence.
i told you that Western colonialist forCes want to revive the remnants of

the old regime and to establish a foothold for themselves. But the Islamic
Hovement in Afghanistan is an independent movement and will never permit
another colonialist power to impose its influence on our country.
FEATURES OF NEW PRESS BILL BXAMINBD
Cairo ROSE AL-YUSUP in Arabic 12 Nov 79 pp 8-11

[Article by Hahmud al-Maraghi: "After 60 Days of work. These Are New Press
Laws; Private Papers Permitted To Be Published After long Absence; Press
Comittee Wonders: How Do We Avoid Phenomenon of Political Boutiques;
Partisan Papers in Heated Argument Until Midnight; National Papers and New
System of Self Rule"]

[Text] After 60 days of work, the Press (Jo-litres has completed studying
the issues presented to it. During this period, the General Comittee held
11: meetings and the subcomittees held more than 30 meetings. The work to
draft the bills started after the members had completed 140 hours of work.
When the bills which will be discussed by the People's Assembly are drafted.
these figures will rise and the urgent question will become: What have all
these efforts produced?

Journalists' Concerns and Readers' Concerns

The answer to the question "what has the committee accomplished" might be

a matter of form. The committee has accomplished a constitutional amendment.
has drawn up a bill regulating the press and has proposed something new
insofar as the journalists' rights and duties and insofar as the guarantees
that should be included in their union law are concerned. The coanittee

has also formulated its visualization concerning ownership of the papers
left behind by the Socialist Union. The conittee has also formulated

its visualization concerning the Supreme Press Council.

The comittee has cowleted all this. This is the form. As for the content,
it is determined by the committee's goals.

There have been numerous interpretations from the outset. Some have said:
The most important thing facing us is the Supreme Press Council and ownership
of the national papers. Others have said: Rather, the most iamortant

thing is to translate what the constitution contains regarding the freedon
of the press. Some talked about the means to bring journalists to account
and others spoke about the Journalists' concerns.
hmmnmumsMwbunmmmmbuthfmhmmﬂqmuhnmmmusm
be: what does all this mean insofar as the written word is concerned? Hill
the reader find a greater expression of his concerns through new organiza-
tions of the Egyptian press? How will the reader find this? With greater
freedom, which is something on which a popular referendum has agreed, with
more papers and opinions or with both, as a paper submitted by the Journalists
Union indicates?

Once again, what do we mean by freedom? [3 it freedom with no limits, i.e.,
a liberal western-style freedom, or a restricted eastern-style freedom?

If freedom is one of the two sides of the press, then how will the other
side, namely responsibility. be?

Another question is: How is the slogan of freedom realized? With the
multiplicity of press platforms and, consequently, the multiplicity of press
owners or with the people's ownership of the press and with ridding the press
of private interests?

Freedom and Press Ownership

The proposed constitutional amendments include a clear provision concerning
the freedom of the press.

In the first meeting, a member proposed the formation of a subcommittee
for the freedom of the press. The answer was: The issue of freedom is the
responsibility of all the committees.

The paper submitted by the Journalists Union Council contains 10 principles
concerning the freedom of the press as part of the public liberties and as
a fundamental means of expressing a democratic life.

The paper contains an endeavor to define the concept and framework of freedom:
Where it begins and where it ends. The paper says that the right of the
freedom of the press belongs to society and th-t "the journalist has no

right to relinquish this freedom and must not be pressured to do so." The
paper adds:

The rule in freedom is generality and the exception if restriction.

The journalist's basic co-itment is the constitution. Anything else may

be a subject of disagreement. Disagreement with some public policies

cannot be considered to undermine the state or its fundamental components.
Moreover, criticism, suggestion and disagreement are the instrument of
development and of overcoming stagnation. Safeguarding the right to criticism
and to disagreement is evidence of democracy. But for this to happen, the
discussion must extend to the details that embody the principles: The laws,
the predominant form of press ownership, the journalist's rights and duties,
the press relationship with the state and the meaning of having the press

as a popular authority.

23
Regardless of the major significance of the legal framework governing the
press, the organizational framework is no less important. when it was
decided in 1960 that the National Union would own the papers and when this
situation persisted under the Socialist Union, the organization became the
law.

Until a few years ago the state did not, for example. resort to the pens]
code or to the section concerning publication crimes. Everybody was within
the same framework because there was a single owner and because the owner
was a political organization.

The question is: Hill this situation persist or will it change?

Some people discussed the issue and could imagine no situation other

than the existing one. Others discussed the matter and could not imagine
but that freedom would be synonymous to termination of public ownership.
The committee has ended up with a compromise. Those saying "nothing better
than what has been is possible" had been defeated and those calling for a
western-style liberal press have been defeated. The third inclination,
that of acknowledging the real situation "and trying to improve it" has
triumphed.

At the outset, the question was: who should own [the press]? The committee
rejected a specific proposal calling for ownership of the existing papers,
representing the Socialist Union's legacy, to be distributed among three
sides: The press workers to own 50 percent of the shares, the Consultative
Council--or the Supreme Press Council--to own 30 percent of the shares and
the rest to be offered for subscription "by whoever wishes."

Some people said: This would provide the opportunity to thoae with various
political purposes to be owners.

Others answered: And what harm is there?

The discussion persisted but within a different framework, namely: 51 percent
for the Consultative Council and 49 percent for the workers. The Journalists
Union said: We do not want a superficial ownership. Every side must exercise
its ownership right, as is happening in the various projects. A general
assembly representing the two sides of the ownership should be formed and
each side should have its voting strength commensurate with what it owns.

The general assembly should be the supreme authority within each press estab-
lishment, should elect the board of directors. should watch the work, should
issue the budget. should approve the final accounts, etc.

Some were apprehensive and so they suggested that the general assembly
include the workers only "but through appointment." The subcommittee dis-
cussing this matter rejected this proposal. The members resorted to the
general committee where the surprise was waiting.

2h
The discussion was predominated by a general acceptance of the idea that the
press establishments should have, for the first time, general assemblies
running them and boards of directors whose membership is shared by the
workers and the public ownership representatives, provided that the selection
is restricted and consists mainly of people within the press establishments.

Thus, a kind of self-rule has been realized by the papers and the question
has become: This being the case, will this situation lead to improving the
conditions of the press? will the press enjoy greater freedom and will the
economic and administrative independence be reflected on their intellectual
and journalistic independence?

It is agreed that the press should be free of any governmental influence.
Hhen formation of the Supreme Press Council was discussed, Hansur Hasan 'Ali
objected to a proposal on which some people insisted. namely the proposal
that the minister of information be a member of the council.

Also, when the rights and duties document was discussed, the committee agreed
that the national papers should be independent and should not reflect the
opinion of a party or of a government.

When the powers of the Supreme Press Council-which will begin its work at
the level of the entire press--were defined afterwards, not a single provision
giving the council the right to political guidance was included.

But are provisions enough to achieve greater press freedom?
This is what will be answered by practice.
Hill Balance Change?

The national papers will thus continue to exist. The development is in the
form of their management.

The question is: Hhat about the other papers?

One of the members said: We know that we cannot change the form of ownership
decisively. However, we want to keep our eyes on the future. Another
balance must rise between public papers owned by the people and private
papers owned by partisan organizations, private publishing houses or cultural
or non-cultural groups. Prosperity of the press and prosperity of opinion
require more papers and more sources from which such papers emanate.

Some people underlined some of the contents of the Journalists Union paper,
namely: More than 50 papers and magazines were shut down in the past 30
years and no other papers or magazines emerged to replace them; the readers'
needs have increased; the level of education and of culture has risen and
the number of journalists has increased. But the number of papers has not
increased by the same proportion.

25
The committee discussed this situation and said: The principle is that of
the freedom of publishing papers and this freedom is stipulated by a
constitutional provision.

In practice and when the role of the law came into the picture, the comittee
ended up with restrictions:

Individually-owned papers are not permitted and when the owners of the
existing individually-owned papers die, their licenses shall be withdrawn.

Collectively owned papers shall be permitted, provided that they take the
form of joint-stock companies or cooperative associations and provided that
the capital of a daily is no less than 250,000 pounds and that of a weekly

no less than 100,000 pounds. Some people objected, saying: What is required
is to facilitate things. Others countered this objection by saying: “A
minimal financial comitment is necessary to guarantee seriousness." There
is no need for the press to turn into "political boutiques."

The latter inclination prevailed and those advocating the first inclination
demanded more deliberations on the issue of the individually-owned press,
saying: "It is unreasonable for a paper to shut down because its owner

has died. If the publication of a paper constitutes an extension of a situ-
ation preceding the proposed law, then let this situation persist or let

it be the power of the Supreme Press Council to discuss such an extension."

The coandttee turned down this proposal with a majority of one vote.

It has thus become possible, in accordance with the law that is being drafted,
to publish new papers with such financial commitments or to have papers
published by associations, unions and clubs--papers within the sphere of the
interests of such organizations, i.e.. specialized papers.

A history paper prepared by a committee of university professors deals with
two press theories: The theory of licensing and the theory of notification.
In the first case, the paper needs to have a license from an executive
authority to be published, as happens in the case of a commercial or an
industrial business. In the second case, the paper needs no such measure
and it is enough for it to notify the authority concerned. This strengthens
the idea of the freedom of the press.

The discussions on this issue in the subcommittees were long. Some people
cannot imagine the publication of a newspaper "without advance licensing"
and others see in the law the only required restriction. The General
Committee approves a report which puts the power in the hand of the Supreme
Press Council, but according to the notification, and not the licensing,
theory. This means that for a paper to be published, it need not apply

for a license and is only required to submit a notification to the Sypreme
Press Council which examines the degree by which the notification meets

the legal requirements. If the requirements are met, then the council has
no right to object.
This constitutes an advanced point in the proposed law.
And Partisan Papers?
Does this also apply to the partisan papers?

The parties law contains a provision that releases the freedom of publishing
partisan papers. An amendment introduced into this law this year contains

a provision that stipulates that a party should have 10 seats [in the People' s
Assembly] to be able to publish a paper or to continue to publish a paper.

A proposal was made in the Press Codification Committee to discuss this
issue. More than one half the committee members signed the proposal. The
last part of the 16th meeting was set aside for this important discussion.

A working paper for this proposal was prepared by representative of AL-AnRAR
newspaper.

The Journalists Union representative said:

We demand that what was introduced into the law this year, namely meeting

the lO-seat requirement, be abolished. It is unreasonable that the law
should facilitate the formation of a party, should exempt it from the People's
Assembly membership quorum and should then require this quorum for founding
the party's newspaper. It is unreasonable to assume the presence of a party
without a newspaper or to assume the success of a party in elections without
contact with the public opinion through a newspaper or a magazine. Other
addresses in the same vein followed.

Some proposed that the membership quorum be replaced by a quorum of the
votes received by a party in elections. Others replied: "hat if a party
is founded after the elections? Does it have to wait for a full parliamen-
tary term? What if a party boycotts the electiOns? Should it be denied
having a paper?

Some people wondered about the status of AL-AHRAR and AL-AEALI newspapers.
Safwat al-Sharif, the Information Authority chairman, said that their status
"is no longer legal."

The discussion went on until 2300. The committee then decided to be content
with the deliberations and the minister said: "The representatives of

the parties have expressed their views on this issue. This is enough to be
taken into consideration by those who will discuss the matter in the People's
Assembly. The consittee includes more than a People's Assembly member."

There Remains Issue of Journalist
Throughout all this. the subco-ittees and the General Conittee were engaged

in a constant discussion on the issue of the journalist. How can he be freer
and more responsible? what are his rights and his responsibilities? How
does the law deal with him and how should it deal with him? When do we say
this is freedom of expression and when do we say this is violation of the
law? If the committee has decided that the Journalists Union will remain
the vessel including those engaged in this profession. then what are the
union's powers vis-s—vis its members? Can the union bring them to Account
for a political matter or for a violation of the public law?

This is the subject of another discussion.

8694
650: 6802

28
SUPREME CONSTITUTIONAL COURT CHAIRMAN EXPLAINS COURT STRUCTURE, JURISDICTION
Cairo ROSE AL-YUSUP in Arabic 12 Nov 79 pp 12-13

[Interview With Counsellor Ahmad Hsmduh 'Atiyah, Chairman of Supreme
Constitutional Court, by 'Isam Hiram and Suhayr Shamardal; "First Interview
With Supreme Constitutional Court Chairman; We Have chosen System of
Subsequent Control So That Laws May not be Hampered; Court Decisions Are
Binding to All State Authorities With Retroactive Effect")

[Text] Nobody can deny the gains achieved by the people since the correction
revolution.

we can even assert decisively that we have accomplished under the canopy of
the supremacy of the law achievements that even old-established democratic
countries have not been able to accomplish.

0n the Judiciary Day this year, the Supreme ConstitutiOnal Court became a
reality. Its chairman and members took the constitutional oath before
President al-Sadat after 8 years of study and discussion until the law
estab1ishing the court was issued. It is a lav that keeps up pace with the
latest democratic laws in the world.

In an interview with Counsellor Ahmad Hamduh 'Atiyah, the Supreme Constitutional
Court chairman. our discussion centered on the role of the Constitutional
Court in serving democracy and entrenching the supremacy of the law.

Supremacy of Law Is Basis of Government

Counsellor 'Atiyah began the dialogue by talking about the jurisdiction of the
Supreme Court and why it was agreed to give it this name. He said:

ConStitutional provisions have defined the jurisdictions of the Supreme
Constitutional Court. The court's main jurisdiction is judiciary control
over the constitutionality of lava and statutes so as to prevent violation
of any constitutional provision, especially the provisions concerning
liberties, rights and fundamental components of the Egyptian society.
The court is thus considered a guardian of the constitution and the top
authority in safeguarding the supremacy of the law. Article 64 of the
constitution stipulates that supremacy of the law is the basis of govern-
ment in the state.

The court is also empowered to settle the cases involving the dispute of
jurisdiction and to interpret the legislative provisions. But considering
that its main jurisdiction is to observe the constitutionality of laws and
statutes. as I have already pointed out. this court has been called the
Supreme Constitutional Court to highlight and stress this meaning.

Here I would like to explain a point concerning the court's jurisdiction

in interpreting laws. When the court issues a decision which contains in
a general and abstract manner an interpretation concerning a certain ruling
in a legislative provision, then this interpretation becomes binding to

all after it is published in the Official Gazette and with a retroactive
effect dating back to the time when the provision became operational.

[Question] 50 what is the difference between the abolished Supreme Court and
the Supreme Constitutional Court?

[Answer] Our permanent constitution, which was issued in September 1971,
devotes a special section--na.me1y section five of chapter four concerning

the system of government--to the Supreme Constitutional Court. The law pertain-
ing to this court was issued recently in implementation of the provisions of

the constitution.

The Supreme Court was formed on the basis of law by decree No 81 of 1969.
The 196s provisional constitution made no provisions for that court.

It is obvious from this that the Supreme Constitutional Court has no connection
whatsoever with the previous Supreme Court, not to mention the fundamental
differences between the two insofar as structure and jurisdiction are
concerned. For example, the Supreme Court consisted of a chairman, his
deputies and counsellors for only a term of 3 years-a term that was renewable--
whereas the structure of the Supreme Constitutional Court insofar as its
chairman and members are concerned is permanent and until they reach the

age of retirement. Moreover. the previous Supreme Court exercised the right

to interpret the provisions of the constitution whereas the new law of

the Supreme Constitutional Court stipulates that this court shall only
undertake to interpret the provisions of the laws and laws by decree. The
People's Assembly Legislative Committee has stated in [one of] its reports

that this is compatible with the sound implementation of the constitution
which cannot be interpreted or amended except with the will of the people

only and in accordance with the measures stipulated by the constitution

itself.

[Question] How does the Supreme Constitutional Court exercise its control
over the constitutionality of the laws and the statutes?
[Answer] In the past and under the previous law pertaining to the Supreme
Court. control was restricted to appeals presented to any judiciary authority
conteSting the constitutionality of a provision necessary for settling a
court case. If the authority concerned considered the appeal sufficiently
serious, it suspended the court case and instructed the plaintiff to present
his case to the Supreme Court.

The new law pertaining to the Supreme Constitutional Court has added two

new channels. The first is that of having any court or judiciary authority
refer to the Supreme Constitutional Court, without any fees, the question of
deciding the constitutionality of a provision necessary for settling a
dispute and yet seeming to be unconstitutional to the referring court.

The other channel is that of having the Supreme Constitutional Court deal with
any provision presented to it while exercising its jurisdiction if the
provision is connected with the matters with which the court is dealing so

that this court may pronounce it unconstitutional if it becomes evident that
the provision violates the constitution.

[Question] Hhat are the effects of a decision pronouncing the unconstitution-
ality of a provision in a law or a statute and does the power of such a
decision extend to all cases or is it confined to the case in question?

[Answer] A decision pronouncing the unconstitutionality of any provision
means that it is not permissible to apply the provision as of the day
following publication of the decision so that the courts may refrain from
applying it not only in the future but also retroactively. provided that
this retroactive effect exclude the legal positions [marakiz] established
earlier.

If the decision of unconstitutionality pertains to a penal provision. then
all the sentences isaued in reliance on this provision are considered null
and void. even if they have gained the force of a fait accompli.

The decision of unconstitutionality. like all the rulings and decisions of
the Supreme Constitutional Court, is binding to everybody and to all the
state authorities and its impact is not confined to the case in question
alone.

Advance and Subsequent Control

[Question] Does the Supreme Constitutional Court have the power of advance
control over laws and statutes?

[Answer] Some countries, including France, follow the system of advance
constitutional control which requires that important laws be submitted to

a constitutional council, which is similar to a supreme constitutional

court. and that they be approved by this council before they are promulgated.

31
However. this jurisdiction has received criticism, even in France itself,
because of the delay it causes in promulgating laws and because it assumes
that the legislative authority does not possess the legal skill and experience
to avoid violation of the constitution.

This is why we have not adopted in Egypt the system of the advances consti-
tutional control and why we have followed the subsequent control system
which is founded on watching over the legislative activity by abolishing

the laws and legislations violating the constitution after they are promul-
gated. This kind of control is often undertaken by an independent judiciary
authority. namely the Supreme Constitutional Court.

[Question] What is the court's role insofar as the dispute of Jurisdiction
is concerned?

[Answer] The Supreme Constitutional Court is the authority empowered to
settle the dispute of jurisdiction by appointing the judiciary authority
with the jurisdiction if the same legal case is presented to two judiciary
authorities and if neither relinquishes the case-~this is known as the
positive dispute--or if both relinquish the case--this is known as a negative
dispute.

The dispute of jurisdiction passed through more than one phase before it

was undertaken by the previous Supreme Court. Such dispute had come previously
under the power of the Appellate Court, meeting in the form of a general
assembly. when it was pointed out that the administrative judiciary was not
represented in this assembly and could not, therefore, present its view. the
judiciary authority law promulgated in 1959 was amended and so the assembly
came to consist of chairman of the Appellate Court or one of his deputies,

of three counsellors of the Appellate Court and three counsellors of the
Supreme Administrative Court of the State Council--a11 counsellors were
selected by the general assembly snnually--as members.

However. this structure also aroused criticism because the majority in it
came from the Appellate Court and because the members were changed annually.
thus precluding the stability of principles.

For these reasons. it was deemed that a neutral authority not coming from
either the ordinary or the administrative judiciary should be entrusted with
the power to settle the dispute of jurisdiction. The Supreme Constitutional
Court meets this requirement.

[Question] Can the court stop the implementation of two final and conflicting
sentences?

[Answer] The Supreme Constitutional Court has the power to determine the
sentence to be carried out. The court chairman has the power to instruct,
at the request of those concerned, that one or both sentences be suspended
until the dispute is settled.
[Question] There were numerous observations on the previous bill prepared
last year for the Supreme Constitutional Court law. Various symposium
were held to express those observations. "hat is your opinion of these
observations?

[Answer] I would like to point out a fact, namely that the observations
focused not only on the previous bill but on all eight preceding bills
throughout the past 8 years and until the new law saw the light in its

new form. 1 would like to Stress that all the observations were the

subject of detailed and alert study. Many of them were taken into considera-
tion in the new law which was issued after being discussed in three sessions
held by the Supreme Council of the Judiciary Authorities. The law was also
discussed by the legal and legislative conittees of the People's Assembly
before it was issued in its final form. free of all impurities.

[Question] The Supreme Constitutional Court is followed by an assisting
agency. namely the Council of Comissioners. Can we know what this agency is
and what its powers are?

[Answer] The Council of Conissioners is empowered to examine the court
cases before they are presented to the court. As of the moment the case is
presented, the Clerical Office registers it and notifies the other side in
the dispute which has the right to a rebuttal within 15 days. The plaintiff
then has the right to counter the rebuttal within 15 more days. Another
rebuttal to the counter rebuttal is permitted within 15 acre days. As soon
as these procedural steps are completed, the Clerical Office presents

the case to the Council of Comissioners which is comprised of a chairman.
counsellors and assistant counsellors whose tea]: is to prepare a full
report containing the statements and arguments of both sides, as well as
the council's legal opinion on the dispute.

Iwould like to stress that the report of the Council of Commissioners is

not binding to the court and that it is tantamount to some sort of assistance
to the court. This system is not new but is rather in operation in the

State Council. In the Appellate Court, the appellate prosecution under-
takes this task.

[Question] (Because the man's time is precious and because he and his court
members, have numerous tasks facing then. we asked him our final question)
what is the authority under whose control the Supreme Constitutional Court

cones?

[Answer] The court is an independent judiciary authority that does not come
under the control of any other authority. Its budget is independent even of
that of the Ministry of Justice. Insofar as its budget is concerned. the
court chairman and General Assenbly have the powers of the minister of
finance, the minister of administrative development and of the chairman of
the Central Organization and Management Agency.

8494
C80: 6802
LIBERAL PAR‘IY OFFICIAL RBSIGNS

Cairo AL-JMURIYAH in Arabic 13 Nov 79 p 1

[Article: "'Abd-al—Shafi Resigns Prom Liberal Party"]

[Text] Hubs-lad 'Abd-al-Shafi, the deputy chairman of the Liberal Party,
has submitted his resignation from the party. The resignation has its
causes and will be presented today to a meeting of the party secretariat.

Muhammad 'Abd-al-Shafi has resigned for three reasons:

The unclear positions of the party on undertaking the task of the national
opposition in this phase.

The inability of the party and its leadership to exploit some situations to
declare its opinion to the masses.

The party paper which does not express the party leadership's opinions truth-
fully and which is governed by whins.

8496
C50: 10802
UNIVERSITY STUDENTS T0 ELECT UNIONS THIS MONTH
Cairo AL-AHRAM in Arabic 9 Nov 79 p 10

[Article by Labib Siba'i: "Elections of University and College Student Unions
During This )bnth; Council for Coordination of Activities in Each University
and New Policy for Leadership System")

[Text] It has been decided to hold the elections of the student union
councils in the colleges and universities before the end of the current

month of November. The president of each university will issue next week a
decision setting the dates for elections at the various levels. Only students
registered in the election lists and having paid the union fees will have

the right to vote.

Dr Subhi 'Abd-al-Hakin, the vice president of Cairo University. has stated
that it is required for the elections of the student union co-ittees in
the colleges and institutes to be valid that at least 50 percent of the
students entitled to vote to be present. If the figure is not met, the
elections will be postponed until a later date within the following 3 days.
In this case, for the elections to be valid, it is required that at least
(30 percent) of the students to be present. If the figure is not met,
then the student group which fails to show up for the elections with the
required number of votes will be excluded from representation.

It has been decided that as of this year, each committee will be formed
under the leadership [riyadah] of a faculty member appointed by the college
or institute dean and with the membership of two students from each study
group [discipline] elected annually by the students in their study group.

It has also been decided to form the student union council in each college
or institute under the leadership of the dean, the membership of the leaders
of the various comittees. the chairuan of the technical youth welfare
outfit in each college and the student secretaries of the union council

committees.

It has also been decided for the first cine this year that a council for
the coordination of student activities will be formed in each university

35
section will have a faculty member as a leader who will be assisted by an
instructor or a tutor who meets with the students of his group periodically
to familiarize himself with their educational problems, to provide the
students with guidance and to exert efforts to solve the problems.

To be nominated for membership of the union council connitteea, a student
is required to be Egyptian, of good character and regular [presumably in
terms of attendance]. He is required to be new [mustajid] to his group
and not to have repeated for any reason (connected with the work) of the
conittee for which he minates himself. he is also required not to have
been sentenced to any punishment restricting freedom and not to have had
his membership in a student union or committee dropped or suspended.

It has also been decidedto hold the elections in each college and institute
to form five conittees: The Family [al-usar] Committee. the Cultural and
Artistic Activity Conittee, the Scouting [al-jawvaiah] and Public Service
Comittee and the Social Activities and Trips Comittee [no fifth cauittee].

The Family Committee encourages the formation of families in the college
and coordinates their activities. The Athletic Activity Committee encourages
and develops athletic talents and organizes athletic events in the college.
The Cultural Activity Co-ittee familiarizes the students with the character-
istics of the society and with its development needs. The Scouting and
Public Service Committee organizes the scout movement activities and carries
out the environmental service programs approved by the college council
and aimed at contributing toward society's development and at having the
students participate in these programs and in the national public service
projects. The Social Activity and Trips Col-nittee undertakes to develop
the social relations between the students. the faculty members and the
workers and to spread a spirit of cooperation and the spirit of university
[fraternity] and to organize trips and social. cultural and recreational

camps .

\

The Alexandria university Council has decided to hold the student union
elections on 29 November.
LABOR UNIONS ELECT EXECUTIVE COUNCILS
Cairo AL—‘UMMAL in Arabic 12 Nov 79 p 3
[Article: "Results of Elections for Executive Councils of General Unions"]

[Text] Host of the general unions completed the formation of their executive
councils in the past few days, except for the Educational Services Union

and the Conerce workers Union which formed their councils at a late hour
last night when the paper was all set for printing.

Following are the names of [chairmen and members] of the executive councils
of the general unions:

The General Textile Workers Union: This union's executive council has been
formed as followa:

'Ali Mahmud Difda', chairman of the general union; Ibrahim Huhauad Shalabi
and Sani 'lzz-al-‘Arab. deputy chairmen; Hasan Tulbah Harzuq. general
secretary; Ahmad Sulayman Kashshaf. assistant secretary general; 'Abd-al-Latif
Mahmud Abu-al-'Aynayn, treasurer; 'Asim 'Abd-al-Ilaqq Salih, assistant
treasurer; Khayriyah 'Abd-al-Karim Muhammad. Pathi Hamid 'Abdrabbuh,

Anwar Salim al-Shalmna' , Kamil Riyad Taha. 'Abdallah Mahmud al-Nizami, Lutfi
'Ali Husayn, al-Sayyid Muhammad Rashid, Sa'd Ibrahim al-Jayyar. Tharwat
Hakkawi Sayyid Ahmad, Abu-al-Su'ud Hahmd Subul, 'Abd-al-Sabur 'Abd-al-Hm'il
Ahmad, Ibrahim Muhammad al-Anwar, Muhammad al-Sayyid Badawi and 'Ali Rafi:
'Ammar, members.

Executive Council of General Union of Food Industry workers: This union's
executive council has been formed as follwa:

Sa'd Muhammad Ahmad. union chairman; Mahmud Hubs-mad al-‘Askari, first

deputy chairman; Bakir Khalil Ibrahim, second deputy chairman; 'Adli Tanyus
Ibrahim, general secretary; 'Abd-al-Latif Huhauad Mustafa 'Aysh, assistant
secretary general; Mohamed Shafiq Mustafa, treasurer; Hasan mainland Hasan.
assistant treasurer; Ahead Salih Aimed, secretary for social security; 'Ali
Yusuf Abu-Yusuf, secretary labor services; Puli Mahlud Hanafi, plan and

production secretary; Ahmad Shams-al-Din Baghaghu, membership and organiza-
tion secretary; Sayyid Hasan Darwah. secretary for education; 'Abd-al- Sattar

37
Sa'd Muan and Muhammad 'Abd-al-Latif Rayyan Mukhluf, union comisaioners,
[uakil]; 'Abd-al-Sattar Barakat, Jalal Ahmad Rawtan. 'Abd—al-Wahhab Masan
'Abd-al-Majid; 'Imran Mustafa Badri, 'Ali Shahatah Radwan, Hajjnji Hanan
'Abdallah and 'Abd-al-‘Azim 'Abd-al-Hafiz al-Sughayyar. members.

General Union of Banks and Insurance:

Mahmud Dabbur, chairman and member of the General Federation of Workers;
Muhamd al-Shaykh 'Abd-al-‘Al, Khalid al-Sayyid Muhammad and al-Snyyid
Abu-al-‘Izz Kishkah, deputy chairmen; 'Abduh Huaayn Muhammad 'Ali, general
secretary; 'Abd-al-Qadir Ahmad Shaman, treasurer; 'Abd-al—Wahhnb al-Hadidi,
assistant secretary general; Muhsin Ghazi 'Abd-al-Ghani. financial comptroller;
Rif'at Salim Muhammad, assistant treasurer. Amin 'Ali al-Sa'id, Hamdi Amin
Aub-al-Dana, 'Abd-al-Mun'im Musa Ibrahim, Muhammad Mahmud Kaylani, Nabil
Muhammad Labib 'Abd-al-Hamid, Na'im 'Abd-a1-'Alim, llusayn 'Uthman 'Abd-al-Rahim,
'Abd-al-Rahman 'Ah‘ld 'Abd-al-'Aziz. Muhammad Mahmud Abu-Sudayruh. Mustafa
Muhamd Abu Shiffal.‘ Khalil 'Abd-al-‘Aziz Khalil and 'Ali 'Abd-al-Latif

'Ali, members of the union's executive council.

Council of Press. Printing and Information General Union:

Muhammad 'Ali al-Faqi, chairman; Muhammad Allin al-Sayyld, Ahmad Mass-an,
Salah—al-Din Husayn, Fathi 'Abd-al-‘Al and 'Abdrubbuh 'Abd-al-Khaliq, deputy
chairmen; Sayyid Mahmud Farahat, general secretary; Mahmud Muhammad Khalil
and Ibrahim Davud, assistant secretaries; Muhamad Qutub Ibrahim. treasurer;
Ahmad Muhammad Disuqi, financial comptroller; 'Abd—al-‘Aziz Qanauh al-'Alami
and Salah 'Abd-al-Khaliq 'Abdrubbuh, assistant treasuresrs; Ahmad Ibrahim
Mirik, Muhammad Ahmad Hamzah. al—Sayyid Mansur Ibrahim, Ahmad llasan Masan,
Muhamd Mahjub Sa'id, Ahmad 'Abd-al-Wanis 'Abd-al-‘Alim and 'Abd-al-Mu'izz
'Abd-al-Badi' 'Abd-a1-'Ati. members of the executive council.

General Union of Health Services:

Abu-Bakr Jad-al-Maula, chairman and member of the General Federation [of
Workers]; Muhamd Mukhtar 'Azzam, deputy chairman for Lower Egypt; Rajah
MuhaInad Almad al-‘Attar, deputy chairman for Upper Egypt; Wahbi ‘Abd-al-
Mawjud. comissioner [Hakill for Upper Egypt; Muhammad Ahmad Adam, counsellor
for Lower Egypt; Ahmad 'Abd—al-Latif Salim, general secretary; Muhamd
'Abd-al-Salam Ibrahim, assistant general secretary; 'Abd-al-Hamid Ibrahim
Raduan, treasurer; Ramadan Muhammad Ibrahim. assistant treasurer; Yusuf
Najati Ahmad, financial comptroller; Ibrahim Abu-al-Ma'ati, Mustafa

Salamah Muhammad, Kamal-al-Din 'Abdallah Mahmud. Kamal Masan 'Umar, Tulbah
'Abd-al-Wahid Tulbah; al-Sayyid 'Abd-al-Rahman Abazah, 'Abd-al-Hamid Muhamd
Ibrahim, Muhammad Muhammad Salem, Ibrahim al-Mubi. Muhamd Hasan 'Abdallah
and Ibrahim Ghalib 'Abd-al-Masir, members.

Executive Council of Maritime Transport General Union:

Muhammad Abu-Tur, chairman and member of the General Federation of Workers.
Salamah 'Abd-al-Hsmid, Muhammad Abu-al-Su‘ud, 'Adi Subhi and Sa'id Muhamd
'Abdallah, deputy chairmen.

'Abd-al—Hunim MuhatmIad Ibrahim, general secretary.
Jabir 'Abd-al-Huhaymin al-Siba'i, assistant general secretary.
'Awad Muhammad Sa'd, treasurer.

Huhamad al-Sayyid Samahah. assistant treasurer.

Um Kslthum 'Abduh Shalsbi, Hidad Shalabi, Hamdi 'Abd-al-Hahid, Huha-ad
Mahmud Hadid, 'Uthman Ahmad, 'lzzat 'Abd-al-Hadi, Jabir al-Sayyid, Ahmad
sl-Qadi, Sayyid Ahmad Muhammad, Sayyid al-Rifa'i Normand, Hasan hamsdah
and al-Sayyid Muhammad Sayf al-Sandubi, members.

Executive Council of General Union of Land Transport:

Muhammad Muhammad Ahmad al-‘Aqili, chairman and newer of the General
Federation of Workers; Huhslnad Ahmad al-Mihrath, Lsma‘il al-Dsmlawi, Salih
Nuhamad Salih and Muhammad 'Abd-al-szad Mas'ud, deputy chairmen; Huhanmaad
Kamil Labib, general secretary; Sulayman 'Abd-al-Tawab, assistant general
secretary; Munir Bade Shata, treasurer; 'Ali 'Ali lbstafa, assistant
treasurer; Diyab Qasim 'Ali, 'Afaf Hamid Isma'il, Ahmad Huhansd sl-Sughayyar,
'Awad al-Sayyid 'Avad 'Ashur, Muhammad 'Abd-al-Ilamid 'Abbadsllah, Badran
'Abd-al-‘Ati Badran, huha-ad al-Ssyyid al-Sananiri, Isma'il Ahmad Paraj,
Kamil sl-Sayyid Haaanayn, Muhammad Muhammad Hilal, Huhmd Amin 'Ali and
Khudari Hamid Hammam, members.

General Union of Construction and Lumber Workers:

'Abd-al-Huttali' al-Sayyid Salim, chairman; Huha-sd Pahmi Badr. first
deputy chairman; 'Abd-al-Ghaffar Muhammad al-Paqi, second deputy chairman;
Muhamd Hunir al-Dirghami. general secretary; al-Sayyid Taha Husayn,
assistant general secretary; Huhamad Ahmad 'Unar, treasurer; 'Atif Huhauad
Tahir, assistant treasurer; Nu'man liuhamad Nu'man; Hamid Mahmud Sha'ban,
al-Tuhami Sa'id. 'Abd-al-Rahman Tal'at Ibrahim, George Zarifah; Huhaanad
Taj Nushur, 'Abd-al-Ghani 'Ashmawi 'Amir, Mahir Sanusi, Kamal Hasif,
Muhammad Muhammad al-Khayyat, Muhamd Yahya 'Ahd-al-l’ettah. Husayn Shahin
'Abd-sl-‘Aziz, Jabir Ahmad Wahbi and al-Sayyid Muhammad Hassansyn 'Amarah.
members of the executive council.

Huhsmsad Ahmad 'Umar and Pahmi Badr members of the federation also.
PTT General Union:
Muhammad Khayri Hashim, chairman; Rasan Kuhn-ad 'ld, first deputy chairman

and official in charge of labor and social security services; Subhi Taha
Muhammad, second deputy chairman and the official in charge of membership.

39
organization and the engineering branch; Muhamad 'Abd-al-Ra'uf Darraz.
general secretary and the official in charge of labor relations and wages;
Muhammad Mahmud Kishshik, assistant general secretary; Lutfi Mahmud Hamudah,
assistant general secretary; 'Ali Badawi Ahmad, treasurer; Sami Muhamad
Qabil. assistant treasurer and the official in charge of the radio brunch;
Muhammad Ahmad Mahmud. the official in charge of the mail branch; llnmdi
Mursi Mahmud, the official in charge of education and information; Khndijuh
Masan 'Abd-al-Rahman, the official in charge of the affairs of working
women; Musni Muhammad 'Abduh, the official in charge of the Lower Egypt
telephone sector; Mahmud al-Sadiq Mahmud, the official in charge of
Alexandria and Lower Egypt mail; Sayyid Mahmud Mansur. official in charge
of Upper Egypt telephone sector; Abu-Zayd Muhannad 'Isa, official in charge
of Upper Egypt telephone sector [sic]; 'Abd-al-Fadil Ahmad Husayn, official
in charge of Upper Egypt mail.

General Union of Railroad Workers:

Mahmud [middle name indistinct] Ahmad, chairman; 'Abd-al-ﬂamid Isma'il Sadiq
and Muhamad 'Azab Muhaunad Badaui, deputy chairmen; Muhammad Sha'rnvi
Muhamad, general secretary; Ibrahim Imam Salman, treasurer; Muhmmnad al-Sayyid
Mursi, assistant general secretary; Yasin Sulayman 'Ali Salamah, assistant
treasurer; Shihatah 'Ali Diyab; Muhamd Hamid Sa'id, Ibrahim Hashim 'Abd-al-
'Aziz, Ibrahim Abu-al-Su'ud 'Abduh, Kamal Ibrahim 'Atiyah, Muhamad al—Fuli
Sharif. Sabir Ahmad Husayn, Muhammad 'Ali Abu—al-Nur. 'Abd-al-‘Aziz Muhannad
Mansur and Muhannad Ahmad Yusuf, deputy chairmen for the various departments
and technical areas and affairs; Ahmad Sabri Muhammad Mu'awad, Muhammad
Mustafa al-Jayyar, Muhandis 'Abdallah al-Gharbawi and Ahmad Abu-al-Padl
Ahmad, members.

Petrochemicals General Union:

Ahmad Muhamad al-‘Amawi. chairman; Ahmad DiSuqi Khalil and Anvar 'Ashmawi,
deputy chairmen; 'Abd-al-Qadir Hnsan, general secretary; Ibrahim Lutfi
al-Azhari, treasurer; 'Abd—al-Zahir Sayyid Ahmad, deputy chairman for
Alexandria; Muhamad al—Sayyid Sulayman. treasurer [isc]; Muhamad 'Abd-al-
Rahim, assistant general secretary; Rashad Pikri, Ahmad al-Jamal. Muhammad
Salah Maghazi, 'A'ishah 'Abd-al-Madi, Mulxauaad Zad-aI-Din, Ibrahim Ayyub,
Ahmad Mahmud 'Idah. Muhamad Shauqi 'Abd-al-Fattah. Muhammad Thabit Ahmad.
Isma'il Abu-al-Hawayil, Muhamd Muhmud al-Batiti, Muhamad Muhammad al-Tuni
and Ja'far 'Abd-al-Mun'im, members.

General Union of Tourism and Hotel Workers:

Amin Mu'awad 'Ali, chairman; 'Ali Mahrus Ghanim and Samir Taha al-‘Asqalani,
deputy chairmen; Muhammad al-Bandari Kamil, Shavqi Muhamd 'Abd-al-Jawad,
Muhaunad 'Abdallah and Muhammad Sukkari, co-issionera [uukala']; Mustafa
Ibrahim Mustafa. general secretary; Ahmad Lutfi aI-Shal and Pathiyah

Ahmad al-Sayyid, assistant secretaries; Sa'id Muhammad Huaayn al-Jabiri and
al-Sa'id al-Sayyid al—Sayyid, treasurers; Amin Muhamd Abu-Bakr al-Sharif.
administrative comptroller; Subhi Ahmad al-Ghazali, financial comptroller;

ho
al-Mubi Yusuf Jawhar, Sa'd Bayyumi Mutawalli. Shawqi Muhammad al-Aahqsr,
'Ahd-al-Majid Bashir Makki. 'Avad 'Abduh 'Iaa, Muhammad Hamid 'Avad, Farruj
'Abdrabbuh al-Qallini and Nafisah Mustafa Kamil, members.

General Union of Utility Workers:

Mansur 'Abd-al-Mun'im, chairman; Mustafa al-Shurbaji, Salim al-Faqi. Faruq
Husayn and Hasan Siddiq, deputy chairmen; Muhammad ‘l'al'at Rassn, general
secretary; Muhamd a1-Sayyid Mursi, assistant general secretary; 'Abd-al-
Mun‘im Farid. treasurer; Ahmad Mahir, assistant treasurer; Jamal Masan,
accounts comptroller; Zaydan al-Imami aI-Basyuni, Sayyid Muhammad Salihayn.
Yusuf 'Abd-al-Muttalib, Jabir Makki, Muhammad Rif'at Husayn, 'Abd-a1-Wahid
'Izzat, Tawfiq al-Sharqawi. Muhamd Amin Abu-al-Layl, 'Abd-al-Razzaq
Qindil and 'Abd-al-Karim Sidqi, members.

General Union of Agriculture and Irrigation workers:

Hukhtar 'Abd-al-Hamid, chairman; Ahmad Hashim Sadr, Muhammad Isma'il Jawdah
and Ahmad Ahmad Yunis, deputy chairmen; Amin al-‘Ashri and Muhammad Abu-
Talib, comissioners; Mohamed 'Abd-al-Khaliq Jawdah, general secretary;
Fahim 'Abd-al-Samad, assistant treasurer; Muhammad Fahmi Qauurah, ‘Ahdallah
'Abd-al-Salam 'Awad, Anwar Qasim al-Balahi, Mamduh Ibrahim Masan, al-Badri
'Ali 'Abd-al-Salam. Muhammad Mahmud Isma'il, 'Abd-al-Hamid Muhammad Ibrahim,
Ibrahim al-Sayyid Nassar, 'Abd-al-lialim Ahmad 'Abd-al-Hafiz, Sa'id 'Abd-al-
Qadir Isma'il and 'Abd-al-Razzaq Ahmad al-Baradi'i, members.

General Union of Har Production Workers:

Mustafa Munji, chairman; Mohamed Ahmad Kamil and Zaki al-Shadhili, deputy
chairmen; Ibrahim Lutfi Zanati, general secretary; Mohamed al-Burudi,
assistant secretary; Muhamad Murjan, treasurer; Imam 'Uthman, assistant
treasurer; 'Abd-al-Ghani Ahmad 'Abd-al-Ghani, Pathi al-Tukhi, Ahmad Yusuf,
Muhammad Ahmad Murai. Hilmi Khalil, 'Abd-al-Rahman Sulayman, Ibrahim
al—Zayyat. Ahmad 'Amarah, Fikri Imam, 'Abd-aI-Hakim Muhamd 'Ali, Ibrahim
'Abd-al—Rahman, 'Ali Darraz, Kamil 'Abd-a1-'Alim and 'Abd—al-Raziq Muhammad
Ibrahim, members.

General Union of Administrative Service Horkers

'Abd-al-Rahman Khadr. chairman; Yusra Abu-al-Hafa Naji and Isma'il Thabit
Rashwan, devuty chairmen; Mahmud 'Abd-aI-Khaliq Nada, general secretary;
Yasin Hamid al-Dib, assistant general secretary; Ibrahim ‘A-Iar, treasurer;
Mukhtar Hamudah Lama'i, assistant treasurer; Ahmad 'Abd-al-Zahir 'Uthman.
Mahdi al-Sayyid Ahmad, sl-Sayyid Quman Salim, Ibrahim Abu-al-Khayr Dayf,
Salah-al-Din al-‘Ashmawi, Subhi Muhammad al-Sayyid, Fathi 'Ali 'Ali Shihatah,
Muhammad 'Abd-al-Hamid sl-Jushi, Muhammad Ibrahim Mustafa, Mustafa Muhammad
'Uthman, Ahmad Rabi‘ 'Abd-al-Ghaffar, Badavi Sayyid Mustafa, Muhammad Maghazi
Mahmud Mahmud 'Allam and Ksmil Ahmad 'Ali [presmbly members].

hi
General Union- of Air Transport Workers:

'Abd-al-Mun'im Faraj, chairman; Almad 'Atiyah Qurtam. Isma'il Ibrahim Pahmi,
al-liadi Ahmad Rajab, Jawhar Mahmud Ahmad Jawhar, Shihatah 'Abd-al-Hamid
Shuman. 'Ali Sayyid Ramadan, Amin 'Ali Nassar, Pikri Habib Sa'id. Mustafa
al-Sayyid Ahmad Yusuf, Shakir Husayn Mahmud 'Ali, Shihatah Huharmad Shihatah.
Mahfuz Sadiq al-Misri, Hamid 'Abd-al—Rahmad Idris, 'Abd-al-Raziq al-Sayyid
Dhahab, Ibrahim Sulayman 'Umar. Zakariya Salah-al-Din Mabruk, Zakariya
Mahmud Muhamad al-Shahhat, Nabil Muhammad Hashim, Paruq Habib Askarus and
Muhammad Muhammad Ibrahim 'Abd-al-Mu'ti [no identification given].

Executive Council of Engineering Industries Union:

Sa'id Jum'ah, chairman: Sulayman Idris, first deputy chairman; 'Abd-al-‘Azim
Abu-Haulah, deputy chairman for unionist comittees affairs; Kamal anr,
deputy chairman for central activities; Jamal al-‘l'arabishi. general secre-
tary; 'Isa a1-Mahdi, assistant secretary; Muhamad Paris, treaSurer; Jalal
Husayn, assistant treasurer; Ahmad Zayyan Sultan, Rajah 'Abd-al-Hadi Surur.
Paruq Ahmad Harun, Huh.“ 'Abdallah Najm, Fathi 'Abd-al-Qadir al-Burmavi,
Faruq Sayyid 'Ali, Shawqi Farghali Muhamad, Salah al-Ansari Muhaunad,
Niyazi Muhannad 'Abd-al-‘Aziz, Pathi 'Abd-al-Latif Ahmad, Fayiz al-Karatah,
Parahat Khalil Zaydan and Ibrahim Mal-mud Khattab, members.

General Union of Mines and Quarries:

'Abbas Mahmud, chairman and member of the Federation; Yusuf Mansur and [first
name indistinct] Hasan 'Amir, deputy chairmen; Sa'd al-Imam and 'Abd-al-Hafiz
Bakr, deputies [deputy chairman] for provincial affairs; Muhammad Fu'ad
Darahim, general secretary; Hamid Sabbaq, assistant secretary; Abu-al-Majd
Rifa'i Ahmad. treasurer; Muhamad Fathi Mutavi', assistant treasurer; Husayn
Ibrahim, Muhammad Zaydan 'Isawi, Muhamd Pathi Basyuni, Muhamd 'Ali
'Abd-al-Karim, Muhamad Ahmad 'Abd-al-Fattah, Muhamd Malnud 'Auadallah,
Mahmud 'Abd-al-Hahid al-Jirmani, 'Atif Rabi', Mubarak 'Azzam, 'Umar 'Ali
Abu-al-Hasan, Muhannad al-Sayyid Zaydan and Bakhit Jad-al-Mawla, members.

81096
050: 10802

h?
CHARACTERISTICS, POTENTIAL OF AL-SADAT'S POSSIBLE SUCCESSORS ANALYZED

London, AL-DUSTUR in Arabic 15-21 Oct 79 pp 8-12

[Article: “What Is the Truth About the Struggle within the Government in
Egypt? Who Hill Succeed al-Sadat? Disagreement Between al-Sadst and
Egyptian Diplomats Threatens To Become More Grave; Husni Mubarak Plays
Same Cane al-Sadat Played with 'Abd-sl-Naair; Maj Gen Ahmad Badawi Is
Army's Strong Candidate Because Current Defense Minister Is an Intelligence
Han and a Gentleman; the Hafd Party Is Closest to Power and the Host
Serious in Asking for It; Dr ﬂilmi Hurad Will Be Prime Minister of Next
Hafd Cabinet; The Hoslen Brotherhood Has the Strongest and the Host widely
Spread Organization; 'Umar al-Talnasani Complains About al-Sadat to God;
the left Is Divided and Khalid Huhi al-Din Is Trying To Unify It;
Zakariyya Huhi al-Din ls Iron Man and the Army's Devoted Son"]

[Text] Those who are close to Egyptian diplomats have begun to sense
that there are limited disagreements between President al-Sadat and
Egyptian diplomatic circles and that these disagreements are likely to
become more grave. Stories are gathered from here and there. and they
ultimately converge toward the following narrative:

when President al-Sadat announced that he was fully prepared to support
the Moroccan regime in the battle of the western Sahara. he was contra-
dicting statements made by Dr Butrua Butrus Ghali, the minister of state
for foreign affairs. to some chairmen of African delegations at the
Morocco Conference. Dr Ghali had told them that Egypt would contribute
no more than moral support to the war.

At that time Chali's statements constituted a prelude to an Egyptian-
African negotiating effort, according to which the African states would
soften their position on al-Sadat's policy, especially since the Confer-
ence of Non-Aligned Nations in Havana was looming over the horizon. Egypt
urgently needed African support with which it could confront the Arab-
socialiat opposition. But President al-Sadat ends the statement that he
did make, and all Africans and non-Africans took his remarks to mean that
he had become involved in the battle over the Sahara. The negotiating
effort that Butrus Ghali had put together collapsed.

i‘3
There was an outcry in the Gulf states that paralleled the Moroccan
outcry. lamenting the level of interference in Oman or the level of the
statements.made on the Gulf states by Vice President Husni Mubarak. These
statements gave an adequate impression that Egypt was preparing itself for
a role in the Gulf that would be separate from and perhaps even against
Saudi policy.

It is worth noting that despite the disagreements that had broken out
between al-Sadat and Saudi Arabia and despite the Egyptian president's
attacks on the kingdom, the Egyptian Ministry of Foreign Affairs had been
careful to maintain a moderate tone and to make well considered statements
regarding the Saudi family and its policy.

Information leaked from Egyptian diplomatic circles indicates that al-Sadat's
propensity to showmanship and to publicity in [the questions of] Morocco

and the Gulf states will have negative effects on Egyptian policy and
primarily on the prospects for a settlement.

Al—Sadat is behaving as though political considerations and details were
of inconsequential. Egyptian diplomacy, however, is placing all its bets
on such considerations and details. Egyptian diplomats are not absolutely
opposed to interference, just as they are not opposed to inflicting some
kind of "limited harm" on Saudi Arabia and Algeria. But their "preferen-
tial" logic proceeds according to the following sequence.

1. According to their analysis Syria is facing one of two alternatives:
either its regime will fall under the pressure of its domestic and foreign
crises, or it will join the cavalcade of the treaty. Egyptian diplomats
are not taking into account any considerations for the possibility that
the Syrian leadership may hold out and overcome the crises--something
which the Syrian leadership has so far proved it can do.

2. For this reason [Egyptian diplomats find that] the focus in this period
must fall on Syria's allies or on Syria's provisional allies more than on
Syria itself. It was in this sense that al~Sadat's recent interview with
Ania Mansur in the magazine, OCTOBER conveyed a harsh attack on Saudi
Arabia, on Libya, Iraq, Iran and on Algeria more than it did on Syria,
which is supposed to be Egypt's bitter enemy. (Al-Sadat, however. did

not to a large extent abide by this priority in his subsequent statements.)

3. [Egyptian diplomats think] that such a focus must not reach a state
that would complicate conditions for Syria's joining the treaty. Egyptian
diplomats think, for example, that priority must be given to applying
political pressure rather than military pressure on Algeria. But in case
military pressure is adopted, it would be more useful for such pressure

to remain limited in scope and confidential so that the Algerian position
may be defeated before it becomes public, thereby leading to the severance
of the last frail link between Egypt and Algeria. The effect of such a
degree of tension in the Egyptian-Algerian crisis will make [the position

uh
of) Algeria, which is a partner in the Defiance and Opposition Front,
more hostile and intransigent to the treaty, and this would place more
difficulties for Syria's joining the treaty out of fear of "Algerian
oneupmanshlp . "

The same latter applies to relations with Saudi Arabia. With its econonic
and political influence. Saudi Arabia is capable of placing serious
obstacles to counter Syria's joining the treaty.

But it seens that sl-Sadat's thoughts are turning in another direction
where convulsions and reactions predominate. This not only explains the
current disagreement, but it also explains all of al~Sadat's disagreements
with his former ministers of foreign affairs even though those former
ministers did not deviate from the general strategic boundaries of the
settlement. Isna’il Pahmi, to use one example and not to list all, was
one of the architects of the settle-ant policy. He did, however, resign
on the eve of the Jerusalem visit which overstepped "the details and the
considerations." will the disagreement over tactics within the single
strategy recur once again?

The best explanation one can find for this disagreement is that which
one finds after re-reading an outline of the political struggle in Egypt
in the light of the reactions of different powers regarding the Egyptian-
Israeli negotiations and the Camp David Accords and in the context of the
deteriorating domestic socio-econonic crisis which several groups are
trying to exploit to julp up to the forefront of events and to seize the
helm of government.

The question that directly thrusts itself now before one goes into the
details of the struggle within and outside the government is this:

Why Has the Struggle Over Power in Egypt Been Delayed?

Al-Sadat came to power after 'Abd—al-Nasir's death under the slogan of
"collective leadership." At the beginning of his sd-inistration he governed
but did not exercise power. But this situation did not continue for long,
and the subdued struggle over power between him and 'Ali Sabri and his
group broke out on 15 Hay 1971. Al-Sadat thus terlinated the duality in
government. and he rearranged his house, threatening everyone with "the
meatgrinder"-- [in effect, with annihilationluas he said [at that time].

Afterwards some unsuccessful attempts to overthrow al-Ssdat surfaced, and
Lt Gen Kuhn-mad Sadiq was ousted from the Ministry of liar. Kuhn-ad
Hasanayn Haykal was kept away fro. the limelight and froa positions where
political decisions in Egypt are made. Before October 1973 circumstances
were quite ripe for an open struggle for power. At that time the govern-
ment was weak and in disgrace to the point that in 1972 university students
had insisted on sumoning al-Sadat in person for public questioning after
having refused the testimony delivered to them by his representatives,

1.5
Sayyid Mar'i and Dr Ahmad Kamal Abu Majid who was the minister of youth
at that time. It was to this level and more that the government in Egypt
had sunk. But no one dared to stretch out his hand and pick the fruit.

The left was gathering its scattered parts together so it could build its
organizations which had been disbanded in 1965. The Hoslem Brotherhood
was still in a state of "perceived weakness." But this alone was not
sufficient reason to expalin what was happening. The truth is that all the
forces that were proclaiming their rejection of al-Sadat and his policy
did not basically have the desire to take over the government or to

remove him from power.

Anwar al-Sadat was the only candidate to play the role of "the dirty
missions man." He would fight; he would negotiate; he would surrender.
Ultimately, he would go, and the status quo would remain. And thus it was
that the serious struggle for power continued to be postponed or was only
confined to spheres of public condemnation beyond which it did not go.

But there are some new changes that are taking shape now even though they
have not yet been cyrstallized or ripened; all these changes foreshadow
that the struggle will be reopened.

Who um Be the Winner of the New Variables?

Many people believe that al—Sadat is about to end his historical missions
in spite of the fact that he suggests and continues to suggest that there
are new strategic missions. There is a number of variables whose results
are not quite to his advantage.

Several powers in Egypt have overcome the dangers of the stage of birth
and are now completing the stages of their disorderly growth. There is
also an increasing rapproehement for coordination between these forces.
Some of them have proposed political ideas around "a united national front"
in Egypt.

0n the international scene, it seems that Western Europe, acting under
pressure of its urgent interests in the area, has begun efforts to estab-
lish another "solution" that may go beyond the treaty, thereby dealing a
severe blow to al—Sadat's strategy. European visits to the Arab area
recurred, and Cairo was not one of the stopping points. The French

posit ion which has reservations about the treaty is being crystallized,
and as Kreisky and Brandt meet with Abu 'Amar, al—Sadat's project
crumbles. Ill-Sadat is searching for a basis for the completion of this
project: the search is directing him to break the isolation that the
Arabs imposed on him.

Even within the 0.5. administration there is a trend—albeit still weak-
to establish a course of action that would parallel that of the treaty and
would open the circle that has been closed around al-Sadat and Begin.

Through its envoy, Bob Strauss, the United States offered a proposal that
would amend the well-known UN Resolution 242, but al-Sadat turned it down
quickly. For him the 0.8. proposal signified the existence of unsettling
indications that the United States was abandoning its support for his
project and his plan. In this light we can understand al-Sadat's naneuver
of approaching the Soviets again. It seem that his approach has been
favorably received as is suggested by news that has been leaked about
secret meetings between him and his assistants and the Soviet aabassador
in Cairo.

Saudi Arabia heads the list of moderate countries in the area which forsook
al-Sadat's policy with its regional and pan~Azab parallels. In addition.
al-Sadat launched public campaigns against the rulers of these countries.
It is no secret that Saudi Arabia, the Gulf states and Kuwait are playing
a role that is influencing Egypt's policy. In fact, it was al-Sadat him-
self who gave them the opportunity to play this role which is now running
counter to his interests.

The outcome of these new and hitherto imture variables has merged with
the goals of the opposition policy in Egypt at several jmctures, and
the struggle continues over who will win over these variables for the
power elements that he controls.

Let us now review the political forces that are candidates for taking over
power in Egypt.

Wait for Husni Mubarak

The list begins with the strongest of the candidates despite all the reser-
vations that some people may put forth to keep [the name of] Musni Mubarak
off the list. Some hide behind the Egyptians' sarcastic spirit which
called Musni Mubarak, "La Vache qui rit"-—[the laughing cow]. But what
Egyptian has not made fun of al-Sadat when he was vice president and today
when he is president? There is an answer to this argulent also. One cannot
judge Musni Mubarak now while he is the second man in power. 'Abd—sl-
Nasir was the vice president of President Najib, and al-Sadat stood for a
long time behind 'Abd-al-Nasir. These are the characteristics of every
vice president, and anyone who deviates fron then jeopardizes his political
future.

Husni Mubarak will be the next president "legally" and constitutionally if
God were to take al-Sadat close to Mil or if others were to sand al-Sadat
to God. Moreover, he is the actual conander of the air force. and be
regularly visits the air bases. He has strong relations with all the crewa
and navigators of the airplanes at these bases all of whom still show him
due appreciation and respect. liusni Mubarak has begun to show his bril-
liance as a speaker and an orator. This became evident in front of the
Parliamentary Comittee of the National Party. he also delivered the
address of the anniversary of the revolution this year. He stands ahead
of all his civilian competitors. and the army, which can always weigh the
scales in his favor, backs him up.

1‘7
0r...Haj Gen Ahmad Badawi

It was 'Abd-al-Nasir who brought the age of military coups in Egypt to an
end. The composition and the size of the army no longer allow the repeti-
tion of another 23 July. But al-Sadat is forever trying to prevent the re-
currence of the phenomenon of al-Hushir [Field Marshal 'Abd-al-Hakim

'Amir] who was killed or committed suicide. Although it seems to be re-
moved fron politics, the Egyptian army continues to be the primary insti-
tution of actual power and it cannot be overlooked. This fact is firmly
established in the consciousness of the youngest lieutenant in the army.

There are several factors which promote Maj Gen Ahmad Badawi's candidacy
to take over power in Egypt by means of one of two possibilities. The
preponderance of one of the two possibilities will depend on the develop—
ment of events and the balances of power in Egypt.

1. Maj Gen Ahmad Badawi may come to power by means of a military coup
within the government. Al—Sadat will resort to this matter as the last
card he can use against the opposition inside the country so as to bring
an end to the corruption of the new party life. There may be outside
attempts to overthrow al-Sadat by favoring a civilian competitor. The
candidate for carrying out this mission is Maj Gen Ahman Badawi or the
commander of the presidential guard of the Central Region (Dahshur, a1-
liaram [the Pyramids] and Hudstep). In all cases the door will be open to
remove al-Ssdat after [removing] the opposition.

2. [Maj Gen Badawi may come to power as a result of ] a direct military
initiative. Direct action by the army is one of several possibilities.
Among these possibilities is a general popular uprising which the police
cannot oppose; the army would then interfere to quell the uprising and
would take over the government directly. This would follow a war that
Israel launch against the Arabs. Al-Sadat would prevent the army from
participating in the war, or he would weaken politically in opposing Israel.
Furthermore, "himiliating" the army [by assigning it to] civilian action
and expanding this action would be unacceptable to the army and would
encourage a direct military initiative against al-Sadat.

These and other possibilities remain open to the army. But why are we
nominating Maj Gen Badawi in particular?

Maj Gen Ahmad Badawi was a brigadier general in October 1973, and he was
chief of staff for the entire armed forces in 1978. He succeeded his
official commander, Maj Gen 'Abd-al-Hun'im "sail, to the comnand of the
Third Army that was surrounded in Sinai and Suez. Al-Sadst promoted
Badawi's command role during the siege. Maj Gen Badawi is known for his
combat capability and for his military firmness. He is also know for
moral courage. This made Minister of War al-Jsmasi tell him in 1976 during
a meeting of the officers of the Third Army at the Cultural house in Suez,
"Badawi. are you going to create an opposition in the army similar to that
in the People's Assembly?" He also demonstrated severe cruelty and prompt
decisiveness in confronting the uprising in the Governorate of Sue: where
the masses were the most violent during the 1977 riots of January 18 av"
19. Dressed in battle fatigues. he personally led his troops where hey
surrounded the workers in the fertilizer plants in 'Ataqah and in the
oil refineries in al-Zaytiyah. He prevented the workers from joining the
rioting masses in the city.

he continued to climb above the members of his class and above those who
were his military superiors. Fu'ad 'Azit Ghali, contender of the Second
Army; Maj Gen Fu'ad Zikri, comander of the navy; Maj Gen Huhalmaad 'Ali
Fahmi, comandre of the air force; Maj Gen Sa'd al-Din Ha'mun, the current
governor of Cairo; and scores of others were removed from their positions
while he continued to climb upwards. Badawi is the one who. al-Sadat per-
sonally trust the most. His wife, who is a graduate student at the Girls'
College at 'Ayn Shams [University], had a close relationship with Egypt's
First Lady, Jihan al-Sadat.

Horeover, it is Ahnad Badawi who remains the army's first nan because

Kamal llasan 'Ali, the current minister of defense is a military intelligence
man and, ultimately, a gentleman when conpared with the militant army man,
Ahmad Bsdawi.

The Stern Mustafa Khalil

Dr Hustafa Khalil, the prime minister and the minister of foreign affairs

is forever alluding to the American card that he holds. He is the Hiddle
East representative of the well-known telephone company, ITT. Before

that he was a graduate of the well-known American HIT University which is
known for its contributions to the developnent of the 11.5. arms industry
and for having a strong relationship with the Pentagon and with the

Central Intelligence Agency. The miversity naintains a permanent relation-
ship with its graduates.

During a television interview in Cairo former U.s. Ambassador Herman Bilts
praised Hustafa Khalil in particular and said that he was certain of the
continued growth and development of U.S.-Bgyptian relations as long as
"our friend, Khalil in whom we have much confidence, is at the head of the
Egyptian government." This pressure [from the United States] preceded
al-Sadat's [decision] to charge Khalil with the task of presiding over the
cabinet again.

But the secret behind Khalil's political sternness and indisposition during
Begin's visit was to avoid meeting Begin. It was, on the one hand, part

of his clever tactics to leave al-Sadat uncovered and, on the other hand,
to present himself as an Egyptian figure that would be acceptable to the
Arabs. But despite its strong appearance the card that Khalil holds in

his hand is the weakest of cards. He is a civilian, and the army does
not support him. His reiationship with the Americans is at odds with his
supposed personal loyalty :1 the president. Furthermore. Egypt's economic
problems and the crisis of autonomy are greater than he is and greater
than the card that he holds.

The Prime Minister of the Future Wafd Cabinet

The Hafd Party is the party that is closest to power; it is the party

that is asking for power most earnestly. In 1954 the revolution disbanded
the Hafd Parry and confiscated its funds. its motto and its newspaper, etc.
In 1965 all of Cairo was moved by the funeral of Mustafa al-Nahhas: the
funeral turned into a wafd demonstration with people chanting, “There is
no leader after you, Nahhan!" This was when 'Abd-aleasir was alive, uas
strong and was presiding over the government which did at that time arrest
the leaders of the demonstration.

The Enid Party has restmnd its political activity in public. Ibrahim
Tal'at published his memoirs in the magazine, ROSE ALPYUSUP wherein he
expressed a political defense of the history of the "aid Party and its
leaders. During the days of its former president. the late Hustafa al-
Baradi'i, the Lawyers' lMion had been the starting point for the return of
the "aid. The union had hosted the Secretary of the "aid, Fu'ad Siraj
al-Din who delivered a lengthy address that was later printed in a book.

The Hafd Party was able “to take away" 36 members of the People's Assembly,
most of whom were members of the government's party, so as to ensure the
Legal provisions for practicing its political rights. There were scores

of other representatives who tried to join the Hafd Party but were turned
away. Hafd sources spoke about broad Egyptian membership in the party

that amounted to 1 year to 1 million members. The Hafd Party was careful
to make its return to political life surrounded with manifestations of

the fact that it had struggled for that right, that it was independent of
the government, that its representation of the nation was broad and that

it was in principle defending democratic freedoms. From his palace ‘ocated
on 7 al-Birjas Street in Garden City, Fu'ad Siraj al-Din used to manage

the plans of the Ward to penetrate the heart of the organizations and
institutions [of government].

The Hafd was preparing a democratic plan whose purpose was to bring about
a silent coup in the makeup of government. The Hafd Party advocated a
parliamentary republic and an amendment to the constitution that would
abolish the presidential system. This would practically signify taking
away all of al-Sadat's mandatory powers and placing them in the hands of
the partisan cabinet that would win a parliamentary majority. Hhen a1-
Sadat sensed danger, he initiated an attack on the Hafd Party. In a
superficial referendum, he issued laws for the political isolation of most
of the Wafd's historical leaders and especially Siraj al-Din.
But the Uafd Party decided to withdraw [from the political scene] tempo-
rarily and announced that it was disbanding itself voluntarily to protest
the violation of democracy and political freedoms. But the fact that the
party was disbanded did not prevent it from influencing political life.
in practice. the party does exist. and ‘Ahd-al-‘Aziz al-Shurbaji did
nominate himself for the position of president of the Lawyers' Union. He
partially entered the recent electoral battle.

And so it is that the Hafd-dsspite the decision to disband--remains the
party that is closest to power and the one that is asking for it most
seriously. The man of the Hafd Party is indisputably Dr Muhamd nil-i
Murad who had opposed 'Abd-al-Nasir in the past and either resigned or

was removed. In either case the masses appreciated him, and he won a vic-
tory over his opponents in the parliamentary elections in 1976. After the
return of the Hafd he became the leader of the parliamentary opposition
which won the sympathy and attention of the people. Hilmi Hurad opposed
the Camp David Accords. and he also opposed the peace treaty afterwards.
He refused to nominate himself again to the People's Assembly to protest
the undemocratic laws that were brought about bv al-Sadst's referendum.
Hilmi Hurad objected strongly to the ridiculous proposals that were made
by a majority of al-Sadat's party to amend the constitution, and he gave
many press interviews about that subject.

Hilmi Kurad is therefore the most likely candidate to preside over the
next Hsfd cabinet.

Hill Egypt Be Ruled by the Supreme Guide of the Moslem Brotherhood?

The Moslem Brotherhood Group has the strongest organization and is the most
widely spread group in Egypt now. There is hardly a location in Egypt now
where a Moslem Brotherhood group or one of its chiefs cannot be found.
AL—DA'HAH, the group's mouthpiece is published biweekly and disappears
[from the newsstands] in a matter of days [after publication]. Religious
groups control the vast majority of the student associations in all of
Egypt's universities and institutions of higher learning. The activities
of the Hoslem Brotherhood extend now to the armed forces and to the army
where the group had the strongest organization before 1952.

There is more than one indication to prove that the organizational
structures of the Moslen Brotherhood--fron the smallest group in the
villages of Egypt to the General Guidance office-hsve been completed.
These is evidence that the secret Iilitary agent" has returned to action
and to activity. The infiltration of the Hoslen Brotherhood within the
fabric of Egyptian society is spreading. The brotherhood has several
economic and commercial projects, some clubs and social organizations.
popular hospitals and charitable societ-¢s and schools for teaching the
Koran. More than 10 publishers are disseminating the ideas of the ﬁnale-
Brotherhood. Among these publishers, for example, are Dar al-Da'wsh

[the Da'wah House] for Printing and Publishing; SAHT ALPHAQQ [the Voice of
Truth], which is a monthly periodical published by the Islamic Group at

51
Cairo University; Dar nl-Ansnr [the house of Protectors] for Printing and
Publishing: Dar el-Kilaflh irhe House of Succession] for Printing and
Publishing in Alexandria; .nd the inrvrnationni Company for Printing and
Publishing. which is one 0; the firms of the inrernatioua; lnlamic (knter
for luvestmentn. And there are m1ny otners. Tr is also knoun that the
nosiem Brotherhood h.- more tnwn one public store authorized to sell and
to trade in weapons.

But who is the grand mrster of the Moslen Brotherhood? Some people are
nominating one of three persons living outside Egypt. They are Sa‘id
Ramadan, al-Shaykh Muhnmund ni-Ghazali or Dr Yuslf nl-Qardaui. Ht think
it more likely thnt it will be el-Shaykh and Dr aluQnrdawi who is respon-
sible for the missionary activity and for tho missionaries in the Guidance
Office.

But within Egypt the candidates are confined to these names:

'Umar al—Talmnaani who is the director and the managing [editor] of the
magazine. AL-DA'HAH. He is thn one who always wrires its editorial and
has spoken repo;tediv on behalf of the Moslem Brotherhood. Most recently
he spoke in front oi President nl—Sadat at the end of last Ramadan.

Sniih 'Ashmawi is one of the broruerhood‘s strongest men one a former
member of the General Guidance Office.

Rumors had nominated :ormcr v':e president Husayn al-Shafi'i as n grand
master for the brotherhood, but he denied those rumors, and the brotherhood
in turn denied this 'umor.

At any rate it is ﬂl-lenﬂSLﬂi who so far is the prominent figure [to
serve as] the grand master fer the brotherhooo. "hut rennin; to be af-
firmed is that the houiem Brotherhood may soon cross over from the stage
of "perceived weakness" to that of a "holy war."

But the brotherhood's struggle [or power is tied to the group's ability
to overcuue its poliLicnl vuueis. which means its ability to lead the
masses of hosiem brothers under slogans and under a political program and
its ability to escape the heritage of the past which used to represent a
recurring cycle of haughtiness leading to liquidation. Al-Sadat sensed
the danger of the brotherhood, and especially after the thrust of Iran
which revived the spirit of religious tendencies and encouraged the Hoslem
brothers to oppose the Camp David Accords and the treaty. Ai—Sadat
suspended publication of the magazine AL—DA'HhH, and then permitted its
publication and Launched a broad media campaign against the brotherhood.
[The last such example of this campaign] was a confrontation between him
and ai-Tulmnsani in no attempt to make the brotherhood subject to censor-
ship hy what ai—Sadat called the Supreme Islamic Council. Al-Taimasani
thought it was sufficient to refute the charge against himself and to
express his grievance against al-Sadat to God.
The Revolutionary Islamic Societies

If the Hoslem Brocherhood Group does not seem to be in a hurry regarding
the question of power in Egypt, this is not the case with the secret
revolutionary religious societies.

The first attempt [by a secret, revolutionary religious society] came to
be known at that time as the "Conspiracy [of the College of] Military
Technology." It was led by Salih Sariyyah who is known for actively
advocating the ideas of the Islamic Liberation Party. In the confessions
made by Sariyyah and by the organization's prominent member. the student
Karim al-Anaduli, the plan that had been devised to contact the Hoslem
Brotherhood and specifically the elderly matron Zaynab al-Ghazeli. was
revealed. Briefly, the plan called for Salih Sariyyah's small armed group
to take over the building of the College of Military Technology. Haters
of the organization who were students at the college were to assist
Sariyyah's group. They were to gain control of the experimental radio
station that is located in the college and is known as the Um: Kulthu
Station. and they were to proclaim the Islamic Movement from that radio
station. They were to call upon the brotherhood to support the movement
in the mosques and to try to get the masses out into the street under the
slogans and the cheers of the brotherhood so as to support the movement
and to prevent the police or the army from crushing it. In spite of
these confessions which are documented in the investigative reports, al-
Sadet decided not to expand the blow and not to drag the brotherhood into
it. He was satisfied with exiling al-Shaykh Muhammad al-Ghazali, one

of the leaders of the brotherhood and the Imam of the 'Amr ibn al-'As
Mosque, to Saudi Arabia, and he issued a warning to the rest of the brother-
hood. But Sariyyah and the leaders of his group who had dared to ask for
power were executed by hanging.

Al-‘l‘akfir We al-Hijrah [Atonement and Retreat]

The kidnapping and murder of al-Shaykh Dr Al-Dhahabi in 1977 created a
broad outcry that revealed [the existence] of a secret Islamic organization
which was called the Atonement and Retreat [Group]. The real name of the
group is "the Comunity of God," and it was led by Shukri Hustafa who had
originally been a member of the brotherhood. He was arrested with them

in 1965, and then he dissociated himself from them after his release from
jail. He led his highly structured organization, and he was popular among
young people. The Hoslem Brothers sympthized with the organization of
Atonement and Retreat in spite of the disagreement that existed between
them. The magazine AL—DA'HAH denounced the trial of Shikri and his group
by special military courts, and then condemned the death sentences that
were issued against the leaders of the organization.

It seems that the organization was not totally liquidated and that it
regained its strength and renewed its activity especially in Asyut in
Upper Egypt where Shukri Hustafa had begun his new mission.
Almost during the same period another religious organization that is

more vxterme surfaced in Alexandria. The name of the organization is a:-
Jihad. and most of its members are university students. In addition. [its
membership includes] some officers and non-commissioned officers as well
as soldiers in the navy [who are stationed] in the city. The investigation
with these individuals revealed the relationship between this organisation
and the murder of a guard at the Greek Consulate in Alexandria for the
purpose of taking his gun. [The investigation also revealed] that the
group was responsible for a number of explosions that took place in some
of the city's recreational facilities.

There is another organization called .lund Allah [the Soldiers of God].

its name indicates its semi-military nature even though it has not had
military activities.

An organization called Shaun's Sayidna i-luhamnad [the Youth of Our Lord
Muhammad} has spread in the universities. It controlled for a long time
the religious cmunity at Cairo University and at its colleges.

The fact that there are some differences among the religious groups did
not prevent them from uniting into one major Islamic group for each
university and electing a chief. for each group. The religious group at
Cairo University chose the student liilmi al-Jazzar as its chief. The
student Ahmad 'Umar is the chief of the Islamic Group at the University
of Alexandria. in al-Hinya the chief of the Islamic group is the student
Abu nl-'Ila Hndi. But in Asyut a young, religious leadership emerged
and led the demonstrations and the sit-ins at the university and among
the people prior to nl-Ssdat‘s visit to Asyut last June. The student
Ahmad Naji emerged as a prominent figure from these activities, and it
is likely that he will succeed Shukri Mustefa in leading the group of
Atonement and Retreat. There is other information that has not been
confirmed about the establishment of a new religious organization among
young people called the Ansar al-Khomeini [the supporters of Khomeni].

in spite of the scarcity of accessible information about these organiza-
tions, it is possible because of their nature and in spite of their mul—
tiplicity to list three phenomena that they have in cannon. These
phenomena are:

l. The [elastic groups charge the ruler and those he rules equally with
infidelity.

2. They adopt a method of direct action and armed violence against their
enemies.

‘1. Host of the leaders of these groups are young Islamic elements who
have an advanced religious education and superior courage.
It remains to be said in this brief review that there are other religious
[actions which carry significant prestige and weight and which constitute
along with the movements which we smarizsd briefly, the general religious
orientation [in Egypt]. These factions are:

1. Al-Jam'iyah sl-Shar'iyah [the legal Society] publishes the magazine
AL—I'TISAM. This group has previously revealed a hard-line approach and
has violently attacked the Egyptian-Israeli treaty. The government quickly
confiscated the magazine. This society has broad influence in the northern
parts of Egypt and especially in al-Hahallah al-Kubra. the center of
Egyptian textiles.

2. Al-Turuq al-Sufiyyah [Sufi Hays]--a1-Ahmadiyah al-Sadhiliyah, a1-
Barahimiyah al-Rsfi'iyah and al-Disuqiyah—constitute a huge religious
bloc that has its own organization which extends deep into the hearts of
most Egyptian villages. These groups are still remote or are kept away
from the scene of political struggle.

The Left Is Divided and Has One Candidate

Every object can be divided into two parts, but not every two objects can
be united into one. This was how the Egyptian left was born; it was born
with the disability of division, and it is still divided.

The organized comunist movement in Egypt began in 1921 and was liquidated
with a general blow to the movement in 1924. The second wave of communism
began late in the thirties and received two strong blows in 1968 and in
19519, but it grew after that until it experienced the first broad unity
among its factions in 1958. One year later, however, the government
arrested most of the members of the Egyptian communist organizations for
a period of 5 years (1959-1964), and the col-mists who proclaimed the
dissolution of their comunist organizations were released.

The third contemporary movement began approximately in 1969. There is now
in Egypt a legitimate, open, leftist organisation which is the Unionist
Progressive National Coalition Party and is led by Khalid Huhi alln. It
includes several national movements: Marxists, Nasirista and enlightened
religious persons. The party had turned from a platform into a party, and
it had four members in the last session of parliament. One of them, 'Ali
'Abd-al-Khaliq resigned from the party and joined the government's party.
The membership of the second prominent representative, Abu a1-'Izz a1-
Hariri, was suspended. The two other members, Qabari 'Abdallah and Khalid
Muhi al-Din failed to win re-election in the new parliament. Those
elections took place under the most violent campaign of terror and
falsification.

lhe party used to publish a widely popular weekly newspaper called AL-ARALI
[the People]. It was confiscated several times by the government. The
party [now] publishes a house bulletin called Ab-TAQQADUH [l’rogress]

which has now replaced the confiscated All-mu.
There is anothe: semi-public organization which calls itself al—‘I‘ayyar
al-Thawri [the Revolutionary Movement]. Most of the leftists in Egypt
consider it to be to the right of the Egyptian Marxist Movement. After
al-Sadat's visit to occupied Jerusalem, several of its members dissociated
themselves from the Revolutionary Movement and formed a new organization.

The Marxist Leninist parties include the Egyptian Commist Party. It is
rumored that the Egyptian Communist Party won recognition for being

an international party by representing the Egyptian Conunist Memnt.
The party publishes a public bulletin called AL-WA'YI [Awareness]. The
Egyptian Conmunist Party—-the Congress grew out of the Egyptian Comunist
Party and separated itself from it. The new organization publishes two
bulletins: one is public, AL-‘AMIL [the worker]; and the other is Ab-UFUQ
AL-AHMAR [the Red Horizon].

There is also the Egyptian Comunist Labor Party which punishes a public
bulletin called AL—INTIFAD [the Uprising] and a theoretical, organizational
bulletin, AL—SHUYU'I AL-MASRI [the Egyptian Communist]. This party has
also been subject to division in its ranks, and it generated the Revolu-
tionary Commist Labor Party. There is a bloc within the party which
carries weight and prestige.

There is the Egyptian Cumunist Party--8 January. It chose this date [for

a name] as an indication of the fact that it amplified the unification

of the Commist Party on 8 January 1958. It is proud of the fact that its
leaders were the ones who refused to disband the party. It publishes a
public bulletin and an organizational bulletin called MYAH AL-HIZB [the
History of the Party]. In addition. there is a small Trotskyite organization
that has limited influence, and another small circular group.

The Egyptian left has never been close to power in spite of its radical
opposition to it. The Egyptian Left has always paid for this opposition
in the form of oppressive blows and broad arrests inflicted upon its
ranks. Host of the factions of the left are now in agreement on their
opposition to al-Sadat about the slogan of overthrowing him. But no
suitable. practical tactics have yet appeared that would make this slogan
materialize.

In spite of the fact that popular leaders do exist in some locations-—
university colleges, labor and union command posts and the command posts
of popular districts--they remain confined to their limited sectors. Un-
fortunately. the Egyptian Left has not yet produced a national leading
figure who enjoys the popularity that would qualify him to have the
confidence of the Egyptian people in presenting an alternative to al-Sadat
and his policy. The Coalition Party is trying to rally its efforts
behind its leader Hr Khalid Muhi al—Din whose national history and long
struggle have earned him the respect and the appreciation of many of the
national forces.
It seems that the absence of public popular leaders for action among

the masses is one of the features of the problematic nature of the secret
and open action which the Egyptian left has not yet resolved. Some Leftist
factions are calling for the establishment of a front along the Egyptian
political forces to confront sl-Sadat. But this is also one of the problems
of the Egyptian National Movement for which no one has yet come up with a
realistic solution.

Zahariyyah Huhi al-Din or Kamal al-Din Husayn?

Zahariyyah Muhi al-Din, ‘Abd-al-Latif al-Bughdadi, Kamal al-Din Husayn and
Husayn al-Shafi'i announced their national position in opposition to the
Camp David Accords in the memorandum they sent to al-Sadat and to the
People's Assembly. Their action signaled their reappearance on the poli-
tical scene and demonstrated the spirit of coordination that their signs-
tures on the statement implied.

Zahariyyah Huhi al-Din had disappeared from political life after 'Abd-al-
Nasir had "stepped aside" on 8 June 1967. Ever since that time he pre-
ferred to raise poultry and to tend to agricultural affairs rather than
political affairs and responsibilities. His first practical appearance
was in the parliamentary elections in 1976 when he supported Khalid mini
al-Din in their village of Kafr Shukr despite their well-known ideological
differences. He supported his colleague in the Revolutionary Command
Council, Kamal al-Din Husayn in the district of Bsnha, and then he signed
their Hell-known statement.

In spite of his absence Zakariyyah remains the candidate of those forces
that may need a strong man of government. If he comes very close to
power, the army may not oppose one of its own. Kamal al-Din Huyayn had
won a sweeping victory over his governmental opponent in the 1976
parliamentary elections, and he appeared among the ranks of the independent
opposition. But then the parliamentary government majority suspended his
membership in the People's Assembly because of the well-known telegram

he had sent to al-Sadat in which he condemned the laws that al-Sadat had
issued after the people's uprising in 1977. auaayn had said in that
telegram. "The worst kinds of injustice are those which establish in-

justice into the law.

Kamal al-Din iiusayn nominated himself again for the recent parliamentary
elections. In spite of the forgery. he was able to have a rmoff election
with his opp-uncut. Then he issued a statement in which he condemed the
government and al-Sadat's party for their blatant falsification of the
elections results and told his constituents. "I promise you that I will
continue to preserve the course of freedom that we began together."

This meant that he will continue his political activity. Kamal al-Din
Husayn is trying to gather together many political cards in his hands: he
is fighting for power; he is an army man; and he is one of the leaders of
July. He is defending democratic freedoms now; he is working among the

57
masses, and he is coloring this movement with Islamic religious
tendencies.

The one who is left is Husayn al-Shafi'i, and he was the last vice
president before Husni Mubarak. During the last days of his term as
vice president al-Shafi'i used to be sharply critical of al-Sadat's
policy on religious occasions in front of crowds of worshipers. Some
rumors nominated him as a candidate to serve as the grand master of the
Hoslem Brotherhood, but he denied those rumors and so did the brotherhood.
Many questions remain: those people cannot come to power individually or
in a group unless they can answer those questions. The most important
questions deal with their domestic relations and with the comprehensive
view that looks upon the army one way and upon the political mainstream
another way.

The Official Opposition

Ibrahim Shukri, who has been the son of the Socialist Party since the
forties, is the governor of al-Hadi al-Jadid, the former minister of agri-
culture and the leader of the Socialist Labor Party which al-Sadat has now
recently adopted and turned into "the serious official opposition." It
seems that lbrahim Shukri intends to enter the game of competing for power.
After his success [in the elections] the party issued the weekly newspaper
AlrSHA'B [the People] which criticized the government severely for falsi-
fying many elections results and for interfering [in the elections process]
to prevent his party from obtaining a parliamentary majority. Shukri asked
al-Sadat to give up the chairmanship of the National Party so he can main-
tain his neutrality as patriarch of the family. He critized ni-Sadat's
decision to invite the former Shah of Iran to reside in Egypt and to give
him political asylum there.

Will these critical remarks be confined to the superficial context of the
majority and the opposition? This appears to be the case so far, but there
is nothing to prevent the opposition from aspiring to majority rule if
changing circumstances coincide with its influence in organizations and its
activities in popular circles.

what remains for us to mention are some of the other forces that have
recently come upon the scene of political struggle in Egypt. The most
prominent of those is the National Front Party which has two characteristics:

First, the National Front Party believes in national front action.

Second, its leaders carry real weight among the people; they are appreciated
by the people and respected by other political forces. Among those leaders
is Judge Huts: Nassar, a former member of parliament, one of the founders
of the party, and the only member of the former parliamentary opposition
who was able to return as a representative to the People's Assembly in
spite of the vicious electoral campaign in which his supporters used
gunfire to respond to the provocations of the government and to its
attempts to falsify the results of the elections in his district of Asyut,
which is south of Cairo.

Among those leaders also is Dr Mahmud al-Qadi. the former representative
from Alexandria for three consecutive sessions. He was a pioneer of the
national opposition in the People's Assembly. He is very popular in
Alexandria, and is respected by the broad masses throughout Egypt. There
is Attorney Ahmad Nasir. former meaber of the People's Assently for the
district of lnbabah in the Governorate of al-Jizah. The recent electoral
battle [in which he was engaged] resulted in two casualties and injuries
to 10 persons. This indicates the intensity of the competition despite
the government's blatant interference on behalf of his opponent.

There is Attorney Abu al-Padl al-Jizawi. he is a member of the second
line of leaders of the July Revolution. His popular support in the Cover-
norate of al-Jizah was passionate and caused him to enter two run-off
elections against his government opponents. There is also the former
representative Mahmud Zsynahum, representative of the popular district of
al-Jamaliyah in Cairo. The nemhers of the party had proclaimed their
rejection and their opposition to the Camp David Accords and to the treaty.

There is another party called al-Tali'ah al-Hafdiyah [the Hafd Vanguard].
It was established by Engineer Dr 'Abd-al-Hubsin Hamudah. lie is a promi-
nent union figure who always participates in union and professional ac-
tivities. It is being widely circulated that Mr Pathi Radwan. the chairman
of the Supreme Committee of the old National Party intends to revive the
party as the legitimate extension of its national leaders—Kustafa Kamil
and Muhamd Farid. It is being said that he filed a lawsuit against
al-Sadat for usurping the name and the history of the Rational Party.

It remains for us to affirm that power will not descend upon any one of
these figures overnight. If al-Sadat does not give up power because he
will succumb to his old heart disease, no one has the right to dream of
another peaceful method by which he will give up power.

Soon many heads will roll. He who wants power has to keep his head away

from the slogan which al—Sadat had proclaimed in 1971: "If they want to
remove me, I will bring destruction to all."

8592
680: 4&12

59
NATIONAL GUIDANCE MINISTER BARBS AMERICAN BSPIONAGB SECRETS
’l‘ehran KBYHAN in Persian 2!; Nov 79 p 9

/Article: "Dr Hinschi, Minister of National Guidance, Has Declared that
Savak Center and American Embassy Documents um Reveal Important Secrets'_'/

/3ex_t/ At a press conference attended by domestic and foreign correspond-
ents, Dr Naser Hinachi, minister of national guidance, stated "An irqmrt-

ant disclosure will be made with the use of documents and evidence obtained
from the Ssvsk Center as well as the American Embassy in Tehran." lie said,
"A special comisaion is to be formed to collect and organize the documents."

The minister of national guidance invited correspondents to pay a visit to
the National Documentation Center and see pictures, posters and evidence
regarding torture which establish the role of American CIA and Israeli
Mossad intelligence officers.

In last Thursday's press conference 250 international press and television
correspondents, photographers and cameramen took part. Following Dr Minachi,
Abolhasan Banisadr, the supervisor of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, also
spoke.

In this conference Dr Minachi requested the correspondents who had come to
Iran from abroad to observe the professional newsman's standards of truth,
fact and conscience in reporting Iran's news. Dr Hinachi once again men-
tioned the regulations which have been set down for all newsmen and said
"If falsified, distorted reports are sent from one place in the world to
people in another place, isn't this treason?"

The Smell of Sepsratism and Discord

lie said, "Newsmn who want to come to Iran from foreign countries must re-
fer to the Iranian embassy; the embassy will just investigate to make sure
that they really are newsmen and have no other objective or goal, such as
espionage. Included in the articles in the regulations which have been
set out for foreign newsmen by the Ministry of National Guidance is the
swearing of the oath only to report the truth and the facts. In spite of
this, some foreign newspapers have made an uproar to the effect that the
free dissemination of news has been avoided through this oath."

Dr Ninachi said, "Some foreign correspondents want to go to sensitive areas
as soon as they enter Iran, such as the border area of Kordeatan, which is
in a state of combat, instead of visiting news centers and news sources;
unfortunately they transmit news and materials which emit the odor of
separatism, discord, war and violence."

As an exanple, the minister of national guidance referred to an article
which stated how and by what resources one could blow up oil pipelines in
Iran. He also said "In several cases where contrary, falsified reports in
regard to Iran were published in foreign newspapers, the Minister of
National Guidance requested these publications to publish descriptions of
Iran according to the regulations in their first subsequent issue, but they
unfortunately refrained from including the facts."

In his talk the minister of national guidance said "Some people who lived
under the government of the tyrants the last 50 years said 'Hould that we
had no oil and lived off our natural agricultural resources.’ Evidence
shows that in the time of the government of Dr Mosaddeq, Iran's trade hal-
ance was very high and agricultural products were also exported--axports
exceeded imports for she first time. However,unfortunately, with the coup
d'etst of 19 August 4952/ and the fall of Hosaddeq, the imperialists gave
the good news 'With the arrival of imported technology we will bring you
to the gates of world civilization.’ But see how far we have gone back
since that date--not only were the promises not carried out, the Iranian
people were further subjected to oppression and tyranny every day. The
economy reached the point where if the Shah had not fl_e_d the basis of the
economy would have been overturned in 2 months lgnywayl, since we were
paying the $20 billion in oil revenues directly for state expenditures
which were expanding without justification; $150 billion were deducted
from the development plan budget and it was not known where that was to
come from.

"Bear in mind that we had oil income from 6 million barrels of production
a day at our disposal whereas today, with half that output, we are able to
administer the country and coordinate development projects more rapidly."

ln the Process of Being Laid Out

Dr Hinachl stressed "America, in order to be able to profit from its inter-
ference, put the security, political, espionage and secret police organiza-
tions of the CIA into operation in Iran in conjunction with the Mossad and
Savak. .‘\ plan was set out by the fonner American ambassador to Iran,
Richard Helms; all the activities of intellectuals and religious fighting

men were translated and obtained by Helms so that the anti-national,
nnlirp and eprnrirv nnlirv nF lr-nn nnuld h. ans- mm "
Dr lzinachi said, "We have much proof to establish this interference and
this is in the process of being laid out in the National Documents Certer.‘

In the course of his talk, the minister of national guidance laid bare a
project in which it is blatantly apparent that Sadat's representative,
with security consultation from the CIA, has been charged with comhatting
the activities of Moslem militants and that Israeli prime minister Begin's
advisor is also cooperating with them on Islamic matters.

"The plan has been prepared in such a way that Egypt will have a role very
close to Iran's.

"The main outlines of the plan are as follows:
"i. brainwashing the young.

"2. Arrangements for disrupting the relationship between religion and
politics.

"3. Reviewing Islamic history materials in schools.
"(0. Spreading corruption in the schools and universities.
"5. Spreading rumors and defaming religious leaders and spiritual persons.

"6. Introducing girls and women into schools so that their genuine religi-
ous beliefs may be destroyed.

"7. Destroying confidence among people by writing reports in their hand-
writing against one another.

"3. Keeping spiritualism remote from politics and keeping people busy
struggling against Communists.

"According to this report, which wz-s prepared in Arabic and whose text was
published in London, Begin's representative says that he accepts the recom-
mendations cf the American embassy in Cairo and recommended that one must

not ignore the experience of the Shah of Iran in this regard. The Shah al-

so used Bahais and Jews in sensitive positions, and they kept his secrets
to the last moment."

In answer to one American correspondent, who asked what evidence there was
to prove espionage by members of the American embassy during the Iranian
revolution, Dr Minachi said "Even if we assume that what has been seen so
far is inadequate, I will raise one point.

"You remember that in the last 2 years the Shah of Iran sent a large num-
ber of Savak agents to fight with Iranian students. They all went with

diplomatic passports. Under pressure from Iranians living in America,
Kissinger expressly requested that the Savak agents be expelled from
America; in return, the deposed Shah threatened that if the Ssvak diplo-
mats were expelled from America Iran would also expel CIA agents from Iran.

"Under what title and position did these CIA officers work in Iran? Hasn't
part of [their cove_t_'/ to work under the title of political officers in the
embassy? Therefore if Iran is to be bound to observe the Vienna Agreement
and the Geneva Protocol regarding political officers, are espionage officers
also included in these regulations?

"Going by Kissinger's statements and the words of the deposed Shah, American
security officers had programs for the overt government in Iran

"Going by the precedent where America has tried and arrested foreign spies
in the past, can Iran do the same thing? Iran's conplaint in no way con-
cerns political officers, but Iran will nonetheless waive its legal and

legitimate rights on condition that the deposed Shah be returned to Iran."

The Human Conscience Rules

Dr Minachi requested the newsman to talk to the Iranian leaders of today
who in the era of the deposed Shah were tortured and kept in terrible
prisons for years; a number of them are in the Revolutionary Council.

He said, "Although it is a source of self-deprecation for me to talk about
myself, I was in prison and tortured under the worst conditions in the
years 1976-75. So realize with what emotions I am addressing today's words
to you. Human conscience decrees that the American government return the
deposed Shah."

One foreign correspondent said, "The Iranian government has not yet pre-
sented any evidence on international Zionism's role in the events of
Kordestan."

Dr Hinachi said, "when the time comes we will present the evidence and dot-
uments on the table of the court."

The minister of national guidance disclosed that someone went to the area
of Kordestan in the guise of a correspondent but was arrested in possession
of a military map of Kordestan.

He mentioned that Moshe Dayan, the Israeli, is always announcing that the
only solution is the military one. On the other hand, one must note
whether these missionsuexauples of which are not to he found in Iran--
are takina, place in Kordestan, and where the eruptions and plots are com-
ing from.

Concerning the reception of the deposed Shah in America, Dr Minachi then
stated, "with the wealth which he has, the deposed Shah can take all the
hospital equipment from New York to Mexico, but you do not even have the
permission to take one photograph of the deposed Shah's operation. Don't
you think that 35 million Iranians are suspicious of this matter?"

650: 6906
IRAQI GOVERNMENT BEGINS EXPBLLING IRANIANS
Tehran KBYHAN in Persian 22 Nov 79 p 11

lgrticle: "After Demonstrations againsg the Ba'thist Government and Saddam
Husayn, Iraq Begins Expelling Iraniansﬂl

liex£7 Extensive demonstrations were carried out against the Ba'thist gov-
ernment of Iraq and Saddam Husayn, president of Iraq, in the Iraqi areas
of Kordestan yesterday."

Mohaucud Sepehripur, governor general of Kermanshahan, stated, in an in-
terview with KBYHAN, as he discussed this subject, "Reports which have been
obtained on these demonstrations state that a number of Iranian Kurds who
were also in this section of the border participated in these demonstra-
tions." He then added, "The Iraqis have also recently started expelling
Iranians resident in Iraq, in response to these dennnstrations, because of
the unfavorable condition in Iraqi Kordestan and the fact that the demands
of the Iraqi Kurds have not been realised.

"Two days ago 20 Iranians were dispatched onto our soil from the border at
Khosravi and other Iranians were dispatched from the border at Ilam several
days earlier." The governor general added, "This action by the Iraqis and
the expulsion of Iranians living in Iraq is the same Iraqi scenario of sev-
eral years ago when a flood of Iranians living in Iraq were poured into
our border camps. Of course we are adequately prepared to receive these
brothers of ours."

Concerning encroachments and military movements by Iraqis in the western

borders of Iran, Sepehripur said "It is to be taken for granted that we do
not have good, proper relations with Iraq, but we are not at fault in this
matter and no kind of encroachment or movement has occurred from our side.

"Since Iraq is a neighboring Hoslem country, we seek good neighborly rela-
tions and hope that finally one day that country will also proceed along
the path of Islam." He then referred to disturbances in the vicinity of
the town of Paveh and said, "Recently a number of armed people arrived to
enter this town. So far, however, the people of Paveh have not agreed to
let them in. These people are from various groups and their goal is tn
settle in various areas of the town."

0n the subject of Shakva'ieh, the leader of the People of Truth of Kerman-
shah. the governor general said, "I have often asked the leader of this
group to guarantee the security of the area under his protection thrmudu
his agents but he has not met with much success in this field, because of
rifts and splits within this group." The governor general of Kermanshah
added, "With respect to the failure to apportion agricultural lands, I
must also say that this is to some extent correct and until a review is
made of the matter of farm land in the Kermanshahan area in accordance
with Islamic criteria, and until some of the feudalists of the area are
divested of their land and a just distribution of the wealth takes place
in proper fashion, this situation will remain as it is."

in conclusion, the governor general said "In any event purges of disruptive
persons have not yet been properly carried out in the border area of
Kordestsn and Kermanshahan, and some armed groups and brigands are busy
spreading terror, insecurity and brigsndage throughout this area. However,
we have great hopes that with the continuation of the goodwill dclenation's
talks in Kordestan and the expansion of talks in the Kurdish populated
areas of Kermanshsh, the Kurds in this area will be conciliated and the
ground will also be laid for an agreement in all fields with all groups in
this border ostsn."
[‘1me BIQHAB-EESIAMI reporter heldaninterviewthree daysagowith
Sheikh bbhamad tbntazeri. Now, because of the limitation on news print, we
are printing only a portion of this interview. We hope that we can make the
m1 text of this interview available to our readers in the future.

mastion: Mr l-‘ontazeri, these days your name is on the tip of mny people's
tongue because of the manifesto that your great father issued regarding you,
because of your smnnons to the public prosecutor's office, and also because
of your riot-inciting travels within the country and abroad. The people know
you only in this connection and because of your relationship to Ayatollah
Montazeri. If possible, would you explain a little sore about your life,
activities and struggles?

Answer: My father and I became involved in the struggle during the sane north
and on the same day, i.e., the year 131.1 [21 March 1962-20 March 1963 J men
the 1mm began his struggles. In that year, I was a very young an. or course,
during his life, my father had gained a series of experiences that I had not
had. During the first year of the struggle, I began by writing nanifestos;
than, I devoted melt to organizational problans and the “I?“ up of
personnel for the struggle. I was arrested in the year 13:35 a March 1966--
20 Farch 1967] and I was sentenced to three years in prison. Prison was very
useful to me, i.e., as a result of analysis and enunation, I reached the
conclusion that, in political and revolutionary affairs, it is necessary that
I behave like a professional in regard to ideological affairs. Of course, by
that time, it had been approximately four and a half years since I had gone
abroad to study where I had completed mperficial studies. After w release,
I became involved in a series of organizational activities, and I drafted a
plan for amed action and cadre building. At this point, I encountered a
series of problems, i.e., I saw that those who are religious usually do not
have any political insight and those who have political insight do not follow
the Islamic route. They are l-bslens, but they raise questions that do not fit
in with Islam. I told myself that it was necessary to start at the beginning.
On this very basis, I began cadre buildin' and we had made advances in this
direction, too, until, in the year 1350 21 March 1971-20 l'arch 1972], I
was betrayed and I had to flee. I went to Pakistan, Iraq, and later to the
Arab countries. Then I went to Afghanistan, and later to Ihzrope to expose
the regime. Of course, I did not believe in the value of disclosure and
political affairs; rather, I believed that it was necessary to take military
action against Imperialism, reactionary elements, and the Shah hecwse this
struggle is the struggle against the priests of blasphemy. Consequently, I
mbarked on guerrilla affairs and began assisting any Ibslem force which
wanted to take action in this regard.

hiring the struggle, I realized that the question of having discipline

.2093 not matter to militants, i.e., the problems of flattery, talking
bombastically end having collusion usually are among the problem that tiu'esten
revolutions. Consequently, I was worried that these proolers wou.—.-.i be repeated
in Iran's Islamic revolution in the name of 1919111. For maple, 1n Pans,

when the Imam was in Iieufel Le Chateau, I encountered these very same problems,
that is to say, haerica tried to launch in Iran, in another fare, the same
policy that it had from 1951. until Just before the victory of the revel ution;
but, fortunately, with the help of our brothers and sisters, we pc-rmntm that
to some extent. We were no match for them, however, because nanny of these
things had taken place beforehand.

In short, as the result of the activities of millions of human beings, one
struggle had become victorious, and this, too, had been achieved in the name of
Islam and it did not have any material and economic active, but, usually,
little by little, the discipline is forgotten, relationships replace it, and
the revolution yields to western denocracy.

Tumult and uproar, minority and majority, /.9 percent of the vote and 51 per-
cent of the vote, party politics, and power plays are replacing discipline.
Having titles, like having a doctorate or being an export in religious
jurisprudence, replaces the revolutionary discipline of Islam, and, instead

of having revolutionary insight and Mly accepting Islamic ideology and
refusing to compromise it, little by little, other ideas will dominate society.
Regarding compromising ideology, it is necessary to explain that, unfortunately,
from the first appearance of Islam, Greek philosophy occasionally passed
itself off as Islam and recently western democracy, I-iarxisn, or the views of
Jean-Paul Sartre have been presented in place of Islam. Hhen discipline is at
issue, however, the utter becomes a humane and Islamic matter. Just as I

have said several times in any speeches, some of the verses of the Koran are
addressed to the people in general, i.e., the humm masses, and some are
addressed to "salons and Moslem beliefs or believers and orthodox beliefs. If
we take action within the human and Islamic sphere, as a result, we will not
ﬂatter ourselves to a few people; rather, in regard to the week, we will

take care of four billion human beings on earth and one billion Neale-as, and,
1:8? think and act along these lines, this will hem revolutionary in-

8 t.
In Iran's revolution, I realized that n series of opportunist: and people,
who, perhaps, do not have any rmluuonlry insight, who do not steep and
have knowledge of the revolution and its problem, who we inexperienced,
Whose insight is either western or eastern, and uhoee ideoe were shaped in
the Shah's universities so that it is necessary to be mare of this manner
ofthinldngendtotrytoputuidethienennerofthinking, have oiesed
power me:- the revolution.

851/.
030: 1.906
BRIEFS

OPPOSITION 1'0 BASES AGAINST IRAN--Ankata--Sener Battal, National Salva-
tion Party deputy for Konya. made an off-the-agenda speech in the
National Assembly yesterday in which he said: "No concessions must be
made to the United States in relation to Iran. With God's help, we will
severely punish those who dare allow the NATO bases and military air-
fields to be used against Iran." Stating that those determining the
foreign policy for Turkey have to be very cautious. Sener Battal added:
"We deem it our duty to forewarn then. Neither the Incirlik base, the
territorial waters, nor Turkish air space can be used against Iran.

Let us not be an instrument of the intimidation policy of the United
States." [Text] [NCO707SS Istanbul CUNAYDIN in Turkish 6 Dec 79 p 1 NC]
NR? ROLE IN GOVERNMENT COALITION VIEHED

Tel Aviv HAZOPEH in Hebrew 19 Oct 79 p 2
[Editorial: "The Government's New Line-Up"]

[Text] The discussion in the National Religious Party (NR?) executive on

the government's position, and on the assignments of the NRL representatives
to improve its functioning, is the first clarification of the taking of an
unequivocal stand in domestic and foreign policies and the taking of energetic
and diligent means in the implementation steps.

In the government coalition NR? represents doctrinal beliefs, great
discretion. and mature leadership. In its favor are its great experience
in state functions, its constructive and unifying character, and its
responsibility for the people and the entire state.

Against a background of internal friction here and weakness there, the
absence of conservative participation in government work, and a lack of
suitable tinely application. one may point to the efforts of the "RP
representatives to encourage a trend in social and economic policies that
is most vital for the orderly continuation of the government, and to implement
an administrative emergency program that will be painful for everyone. but
will decisively put the brakes on galloping inflation and even push it back
some distance. This is the right time for NR? to reveal its full power to
extract the political, economic, and social possibilities of this govern-
ment. so that the coming 2 years will guarantee a steadily increasing
improvement in leadership.

This government has no alternative. In its present condition the Alinement.
involved at its summit in internal conflict, without authoritative leader-
ship, and containing manifestations of the defeatism of the extreme Left,
cannot be considered for leading the government after early elections.

There is no prospect whatsoever of establishing a united national emergency
government. It can be seen that this government will stay in power until
the end of its term. This conclusion requires all its partners to stop
playing games of alienation among themselves, to place their best men in
key positions. to "open a new road" in substantial activities. immediately
and without foot-dragging, so that in its new line-up the government may
conduct a program that arouses confidence, laying the burden on both
government and people, and with the authority of emergency leadership.

The coalition partners, headed by the Liberals and Herut, must certainly
know well, without any illusions, that if they fail, it will be a failure
for the state and a deep disappointment for the people. In the coming
elections they will suffer hard blows because they were concerned with
incidentals instead of fundamentals, with personal and factional quarrels
instead of managing the state, healing its economy, and improving its
society. All the coalition partners without exception must bear respon-
sibility for any deficiencies, if they do not repair what needs repair
within a very short time.

By an economic policy of extreme limitation of service expenses in order
to save many billions in lira in the budget; by lowering the standard of
living so that we can support ourselves without contributions and grants
from abroad; by cleaning out parasitism and substantially increasing
productivity; and essentially by efforts to remove the plagues of exhibi-
tionism, profiteering, and permissiveness, they will be able to change the
quality of life in the state.

with the will to live willing to rise above routine as it has risen during
hard-fought battles, with a wise, resourceful. and authentic leadership,

it will have great power to overcome inflation, to increase the productivity
of labor, and to significantly purify the streets of dealings in violence
and crime.

The NR? is called on to become an enterprising and active movement to change

the government structure and create new trends in the community. It must

be mobilized for this incomparably urgent mission in order to prevent admin-

istrative and social collapse. Our enemies abroad are examining our internal
life, seeking its weak points, and exploiting them in order to push us down.

He must stop scratching wounds, forecasting the fall of the government,
and preparing for a change of power. In the present circumstances we must
concentrate fully on rescuing the government from its partly-frozen
condition; energetically renewing thought and action; and making it a
mighty instrument of leadership for change in functioning and organization,
in readiness to do its share, and in the spiritual orientation of the
Israeli people.

"The day is short and there is much work." [Hell-known quotation from the
Hishna.] There is only one way, not two ways; a way that will change and
reinforce the government, and we must travel it and approach our objectives
with diligence.

9045
CSO: 4005
INTERPRETATION OF AUTONOMY PROGRAM TO BE CLARIPIED
Tel Aviv mom in Hebrew 19 Oct 79 p 2
[Bditorislz "Fundamental Positions"]

[Text] 0n the eve of next week's autonomy talks in London, the Prime
Minister of Egypt. Dr Mustsfa Khalil, has renewed his criticism of Israel,
whose interpretation of the autonomy program is opposed to the position

of the U.S., the European countries, and world opinion. In his opinion a
completely Arab administration should be set up, that would make self deter-
mination possible for the Palestinians on the basis of their legitimate
rights.

Does he think the talks are entering a blind alley? Hatters have not
reached that stage. However, he expresses the opinion that there is room
for a sunnit conference of Carter, Begin, and Sadat in order to advance

the program and its subdivisions in the direction that seems correct to
him.

The American envoy, Robert Straus, in the coming meeting in London will

express fundamental principles in order to advance the negotiations. It
is reported that at the meeting he will bring up the subject of the right
of the Arabs of east Jerusalem to vote for the institutions of autonomy.

This is a point on which there is an antipodal gap between Israel and the
Arabs. and between Israel and the American government. Raising this

subject in the talks will be a difficult test for the orderly continuation
of the peace negotiations. For the united city of Jerusalem as capital of

the state of Israel is a fact, and whoever challenges it is conspiring against
the very sovereignty of Israel.

The prime minister of Egypt strongly rejects what he calls "Israeli demands
based on religious doctrines or historic rights." This basis is the essence
of the bond between the Jewish pe0ple and its land. The autonomy program
confers local administrative rights on the Arab inhabitants of the area.
who will in no way be deprived of the right to manage their own services;
but it will in no way be a renunciation of the soil of the land of Israel,
for no people renounces any part of its historic land. Certainly it will
resist the scheme to tear Jerusalem again in two.

There is total opposition between the demand to attach the old city of
Jerusalem to the autonomy program and the aim to normalize relations
between Egypt and Israel.

The Israeli delegation at the London meeting will certainly present our
position on Jerusalem in the clearest possible manner.

9045
C50: 4805
EFFECT OF ESCALATION IN LEBANON ANALYZED

Tel Aviv DA'MR in Hebrew 21 Aug 79 pp 5, 6

[Article by Yhoshua' Tsdmor: "Escalation in Lebanon--Pressure for General
Negotiat ions")

[Text] The Syrian-Soviet announcement that was issued following Assad's
talks in Moscow; the report of Philip Habib's coming visit to Beirut and
probably also to Damascus, Riyad, and Jerusalem; the increased blaming of
the terrorists by the Christian enclaves. and the Syrian threats against
escalation—all these tell us how complex is the peacemsking process in
this region; the more so since the Soviets and their allies have definitely
Jccided not to let Washington exclude than from the regional negotiations

this time.

Through its diploaatic representatives in Beirut and Damascus, Washington
has been working for these 2 months, directly and indirectly, to achieve a
stable cease-fire in southern Lebanon. in the hope that this step would be
the first in a series of more comprehensive efforts to restore normal
conditions to Lebanon. Assad has agreed and has not agreed, as he
maneuvers between Hashington and Moscow. President Sarkis for his part has
not been hesitant, but has turned personally to every Western statesman of
world-wide influence, from the Pope to the [1.5. President, asking them to
act to rescue Lebanon and to neutralize the thousands of terrorists inside
her borders. Sarkis' cries for help have become more frequent lately, ever
since it became clear to him that all his appeals to the Arab states
(headed by Saudi Arabia) to convene an Arab sumit conference that would
take the responsibility for achieving a cease-fire and stabilizing the
situation, were in vain. The Saudis, after exploring the subject in
Damascus and the other Arab capitals and also with the heads of the PLO.
reached the general conclusion that it was better for them not to stick
their heads into a sick-room. [Literally. sick bed.] They preferred to
work in coordination with Washington, who repeatedly alines its moves with

Riyad .

75
At tempts to Avoid ueterioration

At this stage it is hard to know what Philip Habib will achieve or what
directives he will receive in Washington. It should be remembered, however,
that he belongs to the most senior administrative echelon in Hashington,

he comes from Lebanon, his daughter is married to King Husein, and he is
known and accepted among the foremost influential Arabs. His visit there-
fore is dovetailed with the persistent American efforts in recent months

to guarantee a stable cease-fire as the first stage of a much broader
effort. Only a little has been published on the almost daily contacts that
the U.S. representatives have established in Beirut to advance this
objective. They have met for talks with President Sarkis and his sides,

or with influential senior Syrians, or with the heads of the PLO. Likewise
the visits of Reverend Lowry and his delegation, and then that of Jesse
Jackson and his black associates, who concentrated on achieving a cease-fire
in southern Lebanon, were part of this over-all effort.

And indeed 2 weeks ago it seemed that their objective had been achieved.
The PLO representatives announced a unilateral cease-fire in the presence
of Jesse Jackson. But the Soviets, the Syrians, and the fanatical
influences within the PLO at once began to torpedo this move, which they
saw as part of the American peace that to them is inadmissible and defective.
The U.S. diplomatic representatives in Beirut already understand that this
sort of unilateral declaration is not a matter for Yasir 'Arafat alone;

he must get confirmation for such a decision from the central governing
bodies of PLO. These consist of the leaders of all the terrorist
organizations, each of which has its own protected territory, sources of
funds, and varied interests. They do not always fall in line with the
objectives of 'Arafat or the central stream of Pm, which is seeking a way
to negotiations without blowing the framework apart.

The 0.5. representatives in Beirut have therefore decided to carry on a
combined operation. First they probed to find out who are the influential
Palestinians who fix policy at the PLO summit, who are the forces that
disagree with them and what are their motives. After they had learned

the subject properly. they began to operate in Saudi Arabia, Damascus,

Amman and even Libya and Baghdad. Their goals were integrated: first of

all to probe ways of achieving a stable cease-fire in Lebanon, and in parallel
to promote ideas on advancing a general agreement in Lebanon and on bringing
the PLO closer to the conference table.

The immediate motive for these moves by the American administration was the
desire to prevent a new outbreak in southern Lebanon; in the Americans'
opinion this would be liable to deteriorate into a major conflict, as a
result of Israeli-Syrian air battles, or of the general heating up of the
region, even if the Syrians do not penetrate so far at this stage due to
their isolation in the inter-Arab scene and the annulment of the balance

of power to their detriment. Damascus has been thrown into a disturbed

76
situation due to internal weakness and to what it sees as a far-reaching
Israeli attempt to undermine its authority and bring it to its knees.
Since the Syrians are powerless to shape their own policy. they decided

to act--especia11y after Assad's last visit to doscowu-in close alliance
With the Soviets to prevent any partial arrangement in the Lebanese sector.
They are pressing hard to impose a policy for reducing the forces in
southern Lebanon. the withdrawal routes, and the boundary linen within
which framework the terrorist forces will remain. far excnediug those of
Lebanon in numbers and arms. This is a reli1hlc way to prevent a stable
cease-fire, the more so since within PLO there are those who are generally
postponing 'Arafat's efforts to focus at this stage on intensive political
activity that basically relies on Washington.

Very likely the subject of the cease—Eire in southern Lebanon nan ocen post-
poned lately in favor of a subject that touches the Syrians direct y. and
which the Soviets are not prepared to interrupt in their sensitivi'y to
their own non-participation on the overuall political processes. They have
many ways to sabotage the Innited attempts to pacify the sector. They are
Openly raising their price for an arrangement, and are demanding advance
assurance of the establishment of a Palestinian state, dissociation of the
negotiations on southern Lebanon and the whole Palestinian subject from the
framework of the Camp David agreements, and other demands, not to speak of
general withdrawal to the L967 boundaries.

Attempts to Conciliate the Soviets

It is therefore no accident that American representatives have recently
been trying various ideas on ronciliating the heads of PLO. the Syrians,
and even the Soviets, within the framework of the effort to achieve a cease-
fire and an arrangement in Lebanon. Already, to be sure in non-binding
fashion, various of these proposals have been considered, including the
possibility of convening a small international commission on this subject,
with the participation of Lebanon, Syria, and the PLO, with the approval
and perhaps even the participation of the Soviet Union. For the present
Washington has put off the proposal—-it is not yet ready to accept Moscow
as a recognized participant in an alternative agreement to the Camp David
agreement. The radical Arab influences, headed by the Syrians and the PLO,

are trying to extort the maximum out of Washington by strengthening their
dialogue with Moscow.

in spite of these efforts there is no doubt that in the near term Philip
Habib will return from his mission without having accomplished anything.
There will not be any kind of breakthrough, nor even a partial agreement on
a cease-fire. Thelun and the radical states, who are deeply involved in
these matters, are deeply fragmented, and Moscow is playing the radicals'
game and tearing apart any attempt, even in part, to quiet the northern
sector. what is distressing is Israel's attitude during this latest
development. All those Israel "experts“ who have constantly "depended" on
Arab fanaticism and Soviet rigidity, have again been held in hackneyed and
dangerous thought patterns. Instead of supporting the achieving of
agreements, even if partial, with bold and original ideas, they still
"depend" on the blind alley of Arab fanaticism, even though the Palestinian

state is already at our front door, and every escalation plays into the hands
of the PLO and their supporters.
IRANIAN TAKEOVER OF AMERICAN EMBASSY IN BEIRUT DESCRIBED
Tehran KEYHAN in Persian 19 Nov 79 p 9

[interview with Sadeq Musavi, Leader of Embassy Takeover Operations,
Declared How American Embassy in Lebanon "as Occupied by lraniansﬂ/

llextl Seyyed Sadeq Husavi, an Iranian spiritual figure residing in
Lebanon, who assumed charge of the operations of taking over the American
embassy in Beirut, is now in Tehran. In disclosing American plots in
Lebanon against the Islamic revolution of Iran, he stated, in an interview
with KBYHAN, "All the American embassies in the world are nests of espion-
age. He wanted to prove this point to the world by occupying th' American
embassy in Beirut and obtaining the documents and evidence present in the
embassy. We did not attain this goal, although our movement met an exten-
sive reaction on the domestic and international level which is still going
on." Let us read the text of the interview together:

unsavi, referring to the past history of the spiritual leaders' activity
against imperialism in Lebanon and the necessary aid for ending the Leban-
ese crisis, said:

"with the publication of the weekly AL-HAQQ, which is engaged primarily in
matters of the Islmaic revolution and the instructive sayings of Snow
Khomeyni, we have made extensive efforts to frustrate these plots and thus
managed to reflect the real issues of the Islamic revolution in the Leban
ese nedia, as well as having foreign news agencies convey news to the world
by quoting materials from AL-HAQQ magazine."

lhuestiony Nhy did you take over the American enbassy in Beirut?

lAnsweg/ Usually every small event which occurs in the Middle East is re-
flected very sharply in Lebanon, especially Beirut. The Lebanese publica-
tions, which enjoy freedom, generally pursue these kinds of subjects tire-
lessly and stir up public opinion. What however was surprising was that

the issue of the occupation of the American house of espionage in Tehran

did not cause the slightest impact in Lebanese society and, even more amaz-
ingly, the Lebanese press contented itself with just publishing this news.

79
Therefore we , with the coOperation of some revolutionary Iranian brethren,
decided to break this silence and make Lebanese public opinion take note

of this great revolutionary action. In conjunction with Seyyed lsa
Tahatsba'i, who is a fighting Iranian spiritual man living, in Lebanon, and
with i'" cooperation of ardent youths, I decided to carry out the plan of
UCCupying the American embassy in Beirut and thus prove to the world that
the American embassy in Lebanon, as in Tehran, is a house of espionage.
Since the American embassy in Beirut is situated outside residential areas,
we were faced with the problem of carrying out our plan without drawing

the attention of the Lebanese security forces. To this end we chose Sunday,
which is a public holiday in Lebanon, for this action and the personnel
who were to cooperate with us in this revolutionary act placed themselves
in a scattered fashion ser the American embassy, which is located on the
waterfront. Sunday at noon I went there with some spiritual figures. Al-
though our going to the seashore, where everyone was busy swinming, created
some doubt and suspicion, nonetheless, when we became convinced that all
the young people who were to cooperate with us were around the enbassy, I
went toward the embassy with Mr Isa Tabataba'i. I asked a policeman who
was standing guard by the door to the embassy where his commanding officer
was. He engaged in conversation with us and when we signalled a Lebanese
who was also in the area, by previous plan, started saying "Allahu Akbar"
and thus notified the other mobilized personnel. By the time the police
tried to react we were inside the embassy. The American Marines who were
on guard inside the esbassy imediately proceeded to mount a resistance
but, since we had known in advance that America never would dare to create
another big, problem for itself, they refrained from firing at us and we
then pulled down the Aaerican flag and on setting fire to part of it raised
it again as it was burning. He were thus able to take over the embassy for
a period of several hours. The Lebanese security forces and the Arab peace
supervisory forces stationed in Lebanon iumediately established a blockade
wall around that area on hearing the news of the occupation of the American
embassy and established total control over traffic in that area. We man-
aged to perform the noon and afternoon prayers in that embassy. In the
afternoon, toward dusk, the Lebanese and peace supervisory forces entered
into discussions with us. A_t_ first they asked us to leave the embassy but
we told them that we would lgnly/ do so in two cases-~if either the revolu-
tionary demands of the students following the emsm's way were realized and
the American government handed the treasonous Shah over to the revolutionary
court of Iran, or Ema- Khomeyni personally ordered us to cease occupying
the embassy . The attack forces, which could not attain results through dis-
Cussion, resorted to savage actions. One attack officer, who, from his
actions, was obviously drunk, started using foul language and threatening
terror. The Lebanese forces, which consisted mostly of Shiites, conplained
to this officer and declared their solidarity with us, but the truce super-
visory forces, observing this situation entered the act themselves and re-
sorted to excessive and unlimited brutality, to the extent that one of our
brothers, named Mr Abolfasi nahimi, was seriously injured and lost con-
sciousness as a result of a severe blow delivered to his head. In this
manner, these forces Succeeded in taking the enmnssy from us. 0! the
grOup of 23 people who had occupied the embassy, 20 of us were wounded.

lﬁuestiog/ What was the first reaction which this occupation treated in
public opinion:

lAnswer/ As soon as the embassy was occupied, the revolutionary personnel
who were connected with us announced this news to the areas near the
American embassy over loudspeakers which had been installed on curs, and

a large group of the Hoslem people of Lebanon set out to declare their
solidarity sith us. however, they came up against the blockade by [hm
Lebanese and Arab truce observation forces and could not proceed to lhn
site of the embassy. The Lebanese National Movement then held an extra-
ordinary session and described ours as a revolutionary act and supported
it. In an announcement it published on this occasion, this mnvenent re-
quested all Lebanese university and high school students to go on strike
the following day in solidarity with the occupation of the American houses
of espionage in Tehran and Lebanon. To this end the university and high
school students did not attend classes the following day but held meetings
in the universities and the schools, supporting this revolutionary action
of ours. On Tuesday of that week the American University of Beirut. which
is adjacent to the American embassy. declared its solidarity with the revo-
lutionary action of the students' following the emam's way and the action
of occupying the American embassy in Beirut. On that day a large umeting
was also held inside the American embassy as a measure of solidarity. The
other universities in Beirut, including the Arab University of Beirut, in
which mostly zealous Arab revolutionary youths are studying, supported the
iranian students' revolutionary measure and the act of occupying the
American embassy in Beirut by holding meetings and parades.

Therefore the silence which had settled upon the Lebanese scene was broken
and from that day on demonstrations and meetings began against American im-
perialism throughout Lebanon and the southern regions, especially Sur and
Sayda. Up to yesterday, when i left Lebanon, these demonstrations and
strikes were going on.

lguestiog7 What consequences and reactions did this measure of yours
create in Lebanese society?

/Answer/ The question of the occupation of the American embassy in Beirut
created a great uproar in Lebanese society, with the result that first of
all the Lebanese progressive forces asked themselves after this incident

why they had not embarked on this measure. Hosiem public opinion in Lebanon
also asked the same question of the leaders of the progressive moveuents

of Lebanon. Another upshot of this act was that we showed that we could
even perform great acts barohanded--that is, just as our Hosiem brothers

and sisters in Iran succeeded with their bare hands, shouting “Allahu
Akbar" and sacrificing their blood, so did this act of ours have an ex-
tsnaive inpact on the internationd.level. The American Department of State
published an announcement in this regard and discussed this action with
great anxiety. The Lebanese government has also deployed significant
forces around the American embassy in order to avert the repitition of
this revolutionary act and have even clad the forces in bulletproof vests
because it too fears that the progressive forces of Lebanon will once
again occupy the embassy and take its American employees hostage. Ilyss
Sarkis, the president, has also ordered a special force consisting of
Lebanese armed forces, police and Arab peacekeeping forces to be formed to
look after the sensitive embassies in Beirut, especially the American one.

Iguestiony in your opinion what was Arab public opinion's reaction to the
occupation of the American house of espionage in Tehran?

[Ansuegl I can confidently say that the people in the Arab countries view
this revolutionary act with approval and esteem. For example, when I was
in Syria a few days ago an ordinary Syrian told me that no one in the world
could humiliate the arrogant, conceited America to this degree, except for
the Islamic revolution and its leader Emam Khomeyni. I have much informa-
tion to the effect that this revolutionary act has had extensive repercus-
sions in Arab societies in Iraq, Jordan, Egypt, Syria, the Persian Gulf
emirates and other Arab countries and that the Arab people are following
news concerning the occupation of the American spy house in Tehran moment
by mmnent. Some Arab foreign ministers who have considered this action
reprehensible are now meeting with the general disdain of their public
opinion.

The hopeful eyes of all the Moslems in the world are riveted to the Islamic
revolution of Iran and they are hoping that the Islamic revolution will
also attain greater victories through a united voice.
MAJOR HADDAD COMMENTS ON IRANIAN VOLUNTEERS

Request for Israeli Intervention
TA061858 Jerusalem Domestic Service in Hebrew 1700 G)H'6 Dec 79 TA

[Text] The commander of the Christian Militias in southern Lebanon,
Major "added, said that about 100 Iranian volunteers will enter
southern Lebanon shortly and by the end of the month their number will
reach about 6,000. According to Haddad the Iranians will enter Tyre,
al-Nabatiyah and Hasbayya. He asked the Israeli Government to inter-
vene and to help the southern Lebanese residents fight against the
impending disaster.

Arrival of Iranian Troops Uncertain
TA070810 Tel Aviv HA'ARETZ in Hebrew 7 Dec 79 p 1 TA
[Report by correspondent in Upper Galilee Bat-'ami Hamizrahi]

[Text] In spite of recurrent reports on the imminent arrival of "Iranian
volunteers" to southern Lebanon there is still no evidence of this in the
field, Major Haddsd said last night.

However, the major emphasized that the reports themselves are worrisome
and indicates a trend which may be realized at any moment "because there
is an alliance between Khomeyni's and 'Arafat's extremism."

Major Haddad delivered letters on this issue to UN Secretary General
Dr Kurt Waldheim and asked the 0.8. Government to prevent such a trend.
Haddad also discussed the issue with UNIPIL officers.

It has also been learned that UNIFIL Commander Gen Emmanuel Erskine
held some contacts on this issue with Lebanese administration officials.
Travelers arriving from Beirut insist on claiming that preparations to
receive the Iranians are continuing in the PLO-controlled areas. One
of the possibilities is that the Iranians land in the airfield near the

village of Ansar. This airfield, in the vicinity of al-Nabatiyah. was
rehabilitated by the PLO in 1977.

CSO: 6805 53
CP SECRETARY GENERAL HAHI VIEWS POLITICAL SITUATION

LDOSle? Paris L'HUHANITE in French 20 Nov 79 p 8 LD

[Unattributed report: "Camp David's Objective: 'To Break' the Pales-
tinian Resistance"]

[Text] Since the signing of the Camp David agreements the Lebanese
crisis-~an integral part of the overall Middle East crisis, has grown
considerably worse. It will be one of the subjects debated at the Arab
summit which opens in Tunis today.

A Lebanese Communist Party delegation headed by party Secretary General
Georges Hawi visited Paris at the PGF's invitation. In an interview to
L'HUMANITE Georges Ravi explained that the aggravation of the crisis is
connected with the Israeli-U.S.-Bgyptian treaty in uhich Lebanon con-
stitutes the second stage of the plan drawn up at Camp David. The main
aim is to liquidate the Palestinian resistance in Lebanon.

"Three elements must be considered in order to better understand the
developaent of the situation over the past few months," Georges Ravi
explained.

”The first is the deadlock in which the Coup David agreements are
stalled.

“The second element concerns the success achieved by the PLO at inter-
national level.

“In this connection I would like to recall the inportant seeting in
Algiers between Georges Harchais and Yasir 'Arafst and the French
communists' action to have the PLO leader officially invited to Paris.

"The third element is the escalation of the Israeli aggression in
southern Lebanon and the aggravation of Lebanese ailitary, political
and ideological pressure aimed at liquidating the Palestinian
resistance."
Southern Lebanon's Problem: The Israeli Occupation

"It is in this context that we must place the U.S., French and other
'initiatives.’

"It is also in this context that the Lebanese authoritir; are trying to
deflect the forthcoming Arab sunnit due to open in Tunis; from its main
task which is to consolidate comon Arab positions against the Camp
David agreements. 0n the contrary they are counting on placing the PLO
in the stand and questioning its presence in southern Lebanon instead of
raising the real problem which is that of the Israeli occupation and the
formation of a puppet 'state' allied to lsrscl on our territory.

"The Lebanese national movement and our party have adopted a- very firm
stance on this question. The problem of the south is that of the
Israeli occupation which, with its local allies, is hindering the
execution of the US forces' mission laid down in Security Council Reso-
lution 1025 and hindering the establishment of legal government through—
out Lebanese territory.

"Our positions are determined not only by the support which must be
given to the Palestinian resistance, they are based on the national
interest, in other words the maintenance of our cauntry's unity, its
territorial integrity and its independence and on safeguarding the
Lebanese people's right to democratic development.

"A just settlement of the Lebanese problem necessarily requires an end
to the Israeli occupation of the southern part of our country."

With regard to the role played by the Lebanese Army, Georges llaui said:

"At present it is acting as a shield to protect the militia of Pierre
Jummayal's and Cecilia Sha'mun's extreme rightwing parties.

"Steps have been taken by the Lebanese reactionaries to go further and
make the army an instrument for carrying out the plans which the militia
cannot carry out themselves.

"In certain circles there are plans to make the army play a more. impor-
tant political role and there are moves to establish a military dicta-

torship as a 'solution' to the Lebanese 'problem.‘ This is a real
danger."

Questioned on the divisions which are apparently appearing within the
extreme right, Georges Nawi replied:

"In fact the differences are growing as these reactionarics are increas-
ingly isolated among the people and on the political plane. The over-
whelming majority of the Lebanese population and especially the people
living in the regions under the rightwing forces' domination, realize
that these forces are responsible for Lebanon's tragedy. Even major
sections of the big bourgeoisie—~which initially supported the reac—
tionary forces' plan-are starting to move away from them and to oppose
this 'suicidal plan.'

"The alliance with Israel, religious fanaticism taken to extremes. even
going all the way to racism, and dominant fascism, mean that the extreme
right is no longer just up against the progressive forces and the Muslim
majority but also against the majority of Christians who are also
attached to the country's unity, independence and democracy. That is
true of people such as Raymond Iddih and Sulayman Franjiyah, the
Armenians and others...“

For a Front of All Progressive Arab Forces

Georges Hawi then stressed the importance of the Fourth Lebanese Com-
munist Party Congress both for the party and Lebanon and for the whole
Arab national liberation movement.

Despite the very complex political conditions and the extremely delicate
situation on the security plane our party succeeded in successfully
convening its fourth congress with the active participation of all its
organizations and all its members.

0n the domestic plane the congress stressed the special importance of
cooperation between the broadest Lebanese political forces with a view
to safeguarding the country's unity, its national independence. its
Arnbism and its democratic development.

[LDOSléS9] This cooperation is necessary on the one hand to thwart the
fascist and racist hegemony plan of the forces allied to Israel and, on
the other hand, to prevent the Lebanese reactionaries from imposing a
military dictatorship as an alternative solution which would resemble
the fascist solution in content. differing only in form and means.

0n the Arab plane the congress considered that the most essential task
now is to defeat the Canp David agreements. That is a sine qua non if
the Middle East crisis is to move toward a just and lasting settlement.
Having made a detailed analysis of the content, significance and impli-
cations of these agreemerts our congress has put forward a program of
struggle on the basis of which it would be possible to form a front of
all Arab progressive forces on a democratic basis which would enable
the broadest popular energies to be mobilized.

Furthermore in its analysis of the situation in the Arab world the
fourth congress highlighted the painful fact that the Arab peoplea'
liberation movement continues to mark time if not to regress and suffer
defeats: This movement is passing through a crisis period which the
congress diagnosed as a leadership crisis due to the class nature--
petite bourgeoisie—of the leadership forces in mat so—called progres-
sive Arab regimes. This class nature results in a policy of irresolute
delays in all spheres both in domestic and in foreign policy and which
consequently is not capable of successfully withstanding the fierce
onslaught of imperialism, Zionism and reaction.

The fourth congress also studied the role of Arab coununists and the
responsibility they are assuming in this crisis. It pointed out that
the objective conditions for revolutionary change had developed more
than the subjective conditions. Therefore our party called for a "new
Arab revolutionary movement" capable of providing a leadership able to
insure that the Arab national liberation movement makes successful
progress in order to accomplish its current tasks and attain lts
strategic goals. In our times national liberation revolution is an
integral part of socialist revolution--a phase in its development.
'lhis confirms the leadership role of the working class and its vanguard
party in the framework of the broadest political and class alliance in
this national liberation revolution.
WSTRUCTIOII OF 'GREAT HALL' 0N BORDER HIT}! EGYPT REPORTED

LD301625 London AL-HAHADITH in Arabic 30 Nov 79 p 9 LD
[Unattributed report: "Libyan Wall Similar to China's Great Hall"]

[Text] Libya is building a "great wall" similar to the Great h‘all of
China along the border with Egypt from the Mediterranean to Jaghbub
oasis.

Information received by military quarters in Cairo affirms that Colonel
al-Qadhdhafi, not satisfied with the defense line 'which the Libyan
Jaumhlrhah forces are building on the borders "in order to repel any
potential attack by Egyptian forces." has ordered the building of a
high wall capable of repulsing any attack, regardless of its size and
strength.

The idea of this barrier, according to the same information, stems from
advice by Soviet experts who believe that a line of defenses is no
longer useful with the development of modern weapons, particularly in
view of the fall of the Israeli Bar-Lev line within a few hours despite
the existence of a water barrier. They also believe that the building
of an impregnable wall capable of standing against air and artillery
bombardment and even against tactical nuclear weapons is alone capable
of forming a strong barrier against any Egyptian advance if Egypt were
to contemplate invading Libya.

Therefore, work has begun to build a wall of great height and width.
The length. as we said, extends from the Mediterranean to Jaghbub oasis
and the depth is no less than the "all of China. It includes fortified
positions for observation and fighting.

Preliminary estimates of the cost of building the wall exceed $1 billion,
the lion's share of which, according to official information. will fall

to the Soviet Union. Apparently the idea is a concomitant of the
phenomenon of the accumulation of arms of all types in Libya to an

extent exceeding the requirements of the Libyan forces or any mercenary
forces which the Jamahiriyah might utilize.

080: 10802
FRG FINANCIAL WOPEMTION AGREFJEH'I' SIGNED
Nouakchott CEMB in French 13-11: Oct 79 P 1
[Article: "1516 Ouguiyas for the 'Gorgcl Hoir'"]

[Text] .‘Jlajo: Moulaye o. Boukhreiss, member of the cusn [Militery Committee
for National. Salvation] and minister of plan and fishing, and His Excellency
the ambassador of the PRC, Dr Burghart Hegel, signed yesterday a governmental
agreement on financial cooperation involving a total of 16 million TM (11.16
million ouguiyas) for the "Gorgol Noir Irrigation Program" proJect.

The purpose of this proJect is the preparation for farming of an area or 3,600
hectares in the Gorgol ﬁoir. This proJect will benefit 11,61-0 families. or
about 25,000 persons.

The parcel preparation work, with the populations participating, will extend
over a period of 5 years, from 1980 to 1985, at the rate of 1100 hectares in
the first year and 800 hectares per year in the following years.

he infrastructure work will be completed in 1980. The full production capac-
ity of 15,000 tons of rice, 2,200 tons of sorghum, 2,300 tons of maize and
2,000 tons of vegetables will be reached as of the winter or 1989.

At the conclusion of the ceremony, the ambassador of the PEG noted that this
ugreement is an additional proof of the desire of the two governments to
deepen their friendly relations and to encourage agriculturaI development.
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: CIA-PROPS2c00850R000200030038-5
FRENCH LANGUAGE EWCATIO! RETAINED TDIPORARIL‘!

Paris LE MMDE in French 25 Oct 19 p 5

[Article: "Mauritania-—'1he Authorities Are Retaining the Teaching of French
Temporarily”

I Text] Dakar (arm-Arne Mauritanian Military Comittee for lational Salva-
tion (CMSN) made public on Tuesday 23 October a reform providing for temporary
retention of education in French for those pupils whose mother tongue is not
Arabic, Radio Nouakchott has announced.

In its quarterly meeting (LB HOKDP.’ of 12 October), the CHSK, the supreme pol-

itical bow, decided to retain the role of French as a language of education
for a transitional period of 6 years, while at the same tine reasaerting the
preeminence of Arabic, designated to becaome the "unitary national language."

These measures amend n. preceding reform which made the teaching of Arabic
nandatory for the black community of southern Mauritania, which had demon-
strated its discontent.

The program proposed by the 016! also provides for decentralization of ad-

ministration, creation of regional councils, and a restructuring of the Judi-
cial apparatus, which will henceforth base its decisions on Moslem lav.

n26?
030: It 1400

90
MADRID PAPER INTERVIEWS BOUABID 0N SAHARA. TIES HITH SPAIN
L0071029 Casablanca LE MATIH in French 30 Nov 79 pp 1, 4 Ln

[MAP report on Madrid EL IMWARCIAL interview with Moroccan Prime Minister
Maati Bouabid: "Morocco Is Open to Any Dialog for Peace in the Region“]

[Text] Madrid, 30 November~~The Madrid daily newspaper EL THPARCIAL pub-
lished Thursday an interview given by Prime Minister and Justice Minister

Maati Bouabid to Arturo de Sienes, the paper's special correspondent in
Rabat.

Mr Bouabid answered a number of questions put to him by the Spanish
journalist on Spanish—Moroccan relations, his coming visit to Madrid,

the objectives of the "Ouhoud operation," the role of the Royal Armed
Forces and the Moroccan people's unanimous determination to protect their
territorial integrity.

The prime minister and justice minister stated first that Morocco is open
to any dialog for peace in the region but that it will never agree to
negotiate its territorial integrity from La Uera to Tangiers.

"Having said this," he added, "we are in favor of fair and fruitful
cooperation with all our neighbors. He have opened the way to a solution
of the conflict with a view to achieving real economic integration of

the African continent. This is the meaning of His Majesty the King's
proposal to the 06AM chairman. President Hilliam Tolbert of Liberia."

Referring to the objectives of the "Ouhoud operation," Mr Matti nouabid
emphasized that "It is not directed against any neighboring country."

"It is merely a question," he stated, "of strengthening our military

system in order to insure the security of our territory and its inhabitants."

Replying to a question concerning the Moroccan people's feelings toward
the Sahara conflict, the prime minister stated, recalling a statement by
His Majesty King Hassan II during a press conference in Fez in August 1979:

"You can ask any Moroccan irrespective of his origin. His answer will
always be: 'Sahara is Moroccan.'"
Hr Bouabid added that the Moroccan people "have Sahara in their blood" and
that "Horocco's enemies have always unsuccessfully tried to make a dent
in the Moroccan people's unity round their sovereign."

Replying to a question about a military parade in Kenitra on 17 Novenber.
Hr Bouabid stated that "Morocco has no intention whatever of displaying
its forces. This in no way lessens its determination :o defend its terri-
torial integrity by any means. The Kenitra military parade was a tribute
to an army united round its king and determined to face up to any external
threats, whether of a military or a subversive nature. a tribute to its
perfect organization, discipline and devotion to duty."

Referring to Moroccan—Spanish relations. the prime minister stated that
they are "excellent despite some unimportant incidents." "Our joint wish."
he added. "is to further consolidate them at all levels. They should
always truly reflect the ties existing between our two heads of state--

His Majesty King Juan Carlos and His Majesty King ﬂassan II--and our two
peoples, who share a great past."

In conclusion. Hr Bouabid stated that he will soon be going to Madrid and
that his coming visit to the Spanish capital will "further strengthen

the bonds of friendship between the two nations and help to increase
our privileged cooperation."

C50: #400

92
BRIEFS

FRENCH LOAN AGREEMENF-Paris, l December--Finance Minister Abdelknmnl
Reghaye and French Economy Minister Rene Honory signed a new financial
aid protocol in Paris Thursday afternoon whereby treasury loans and
guaranteed private credits will be placed at the disposal of the Kingdom
of Morocco. according to an official French source. These public and
private funds will be used to buy durables from France with a view to
carrying out the Moroccan development plan. The main projects chosen
concern the phosphorus and cement industries. the merchant navy sector
and the oils, lubricants and telecommunications industries. [Excerpt]
[L01071027 Casablanca LB MATIN in French 1 Dec 79 pp 1, 4 Lb]

GRAIN PRODUCTIGI DROP—~Casablanca, 27 Novembern-According to AFRIQUE
AGRICULTURE, a monthly magazine on agricultural matters, Morocco's grain
production for 1978-1979 amounted to 36 million quintals. Citing the
statistics provided by the Agriculture Ministry, [words indistinct] that
this represents a 21—percent drop compared with the amount harvested in
the previous year and comprises: 12 million quintals of durum wheat

5 million quintals of soft wheat, 16 million quintals of barley and

3 million quintals of corn. Unfavorable weather conditions have been
responsible for this drop in production. In addition. troublesome birds
have caused damage amounting to 10-15 percent of output. The ministry
estimated that the country needs 60 million quintals grain and this means
that we are 26 million quintals short. Furthermore, any importation

of grain to cover the country's needs will be carried out under conditions
prevailing on the world market and, as a result, we will probably have
to pay 120 billion-150 billion centimes for them. [Text] [LDlOlOl7
Casablanca LE HAHN in French 27 Nov 79 p 1 LD]
POSSIBILITIES OF CHANGE IN COUNTRY EXPLORED
Paris AL-NAHAR Alr'ARABI "A AL-DUWALI in Arabic 5-11 Nov 79 p 30

[Article: "Either Reconciliation or the Military"]

[Text] Khartoum--For years, Sudan has been going from crisis to crisis,
the opposition has been growing stronger and all the future possibilities
are revolving around change.

The opponents within the Sudanese regime expect changes v'at have been
described as "necessary" to establish stability in Sudan.

These opposition sources believe that there are three possibilities of change
in the near future:

The first possibility lies in having President Ja'far Numayri accept the
formula presented by the opposition at home and abroad. This formula focuses
on reducing the individual powers, on reorganizing the Socialist Union on
democratic bases and on re-examining the economic policy.

The opposition sources say that what is required in this case is a national
reconciliation government that includes the various inclinations and that

reduces. moreover, the religious exaggeration that is beginning to emerge.
keeping in mind that Sudan is well-known for its moderation in this regard.

The second possibility lies in the occurrence of a military coup within the
regime, especially since President humayri has, according to what the
opponents say, played a dangerous game when he involved the army in politics
and appointed [Army] Commander 'Abd-al-Hajid Hamid Khalil as his first
deputy.

The third possibility, and this is what the opposition is trying to avert,
is the possibility of the occurrence of a military movement similar to the
Ethopian or Ghanian movement, i.e.. the staging of a coup by junior officers
with no known and definite affiliations.
The opponents within the regime ascribe the fears they express to the con-
tinued deterioration of the economic and political conditions in the past

2 years, especially in the wake of the disappointment caused by the failure
of the open-door policy started 2 years ago when al-Sadiq al-Hahdi agreed to
deal with the regime on the basis of the creation of a national unity govern-
ment that would solve the problems of the south and that would exclude
nobody from within its ranks, not even the communists--as made evident by

the amnesty decisions that were issued and that included the communists.
However, the situation remained unchanged and al-Sadiq al-Mahdi, despite
returning to Sudan and becoming a member of the [Socialist Union] Political
Bureau, started his opposition anew after 6 months. The signs of division

in the south also began to appear after the appointment of a number of minis-
ters, the dismissal of others and the outster of certain southern elements
from the Political Bureau.

The opponents complain that President Numayri tried at a joint meeting of

the political and executive leadership: a month ago to place the blame on his
aides, thus ousting his first deputy, Abu-al-Qasim Muhammad Ibrahim, from
power and making him the sacrificial lamb whereas they believe that the crisis
is bigger and deeper than to be solved with a sacrificial lamb, keeping in
mind that a number of the political sectors are convinced that Numayri is
responsible personally.

The opponents also say that the written agreement with al-Sharif al-Bindi
stipulated that the constitution be re-examined so that all the provisions
restricting public liberties may be eliminated and so that absolute powers
may be eliminated to make the executive apparatus more democratic. They
point out that nothing of the sort has happened and that the principle of
adopting decisions through consultation, discussions and voting underwent the
test of the Camp David accords during which President Numayri adopted an
individualistic position without consulting with any of the political leaders.
This is what motivated al-Sadiq sl-Mahdi to submit his resignation.

The opponents add that the same thing was repeated insofar as southern Sudan
is concerned where, the agreement stipulates, the regional authoriti:: should
have their autonomy. But Numayri. according to the opponents, supported
Joseph Lago, the chairman of the south, even in measures conflicting with

the constitution, thus compelling a number of southern ministers, including
some who participated in the Addis Ababa agreement, to quit the government.

It seems that there are two schools in the Socialist Union. The first is
prepared to support the regime and the steps taken by President Numayri,

even if they violate or overstep the constitution. The second school believes
that it is necessary to bolster the concept of national unity, to entrench
democracy and, consequently, to curtail the president's powers and to put an
end to some violations. The elements of this school have been compelled to
resign and some of them have even left the country.

The opposition circles point out the phenomenon of the Muslim Brotherhood's
support for President Numayri-support given on the grounds that President

95
Numayri has begun to follow Islamic directions and that he takes Strong
positions against the communists. But these circles focus on the danger of
cooperation between Numayri and the huslim Brotherhood and b ‘ieve that
the Brotherhood has exploited him to take radical religious positions that
have caused reactions among the southern Sudanese because they are in con-

flict with the Addis Ababa agreement and with the provisions of the constitu-
tion.

As a result. the opponents say, social riOts started and the strikes of
workers, professionals, doctors, accountants and bank employees followed one
another in succession. Even the farmers in al-Jazirah Agricultural Project
went on strike. The opponents here say that there is no truth in Numayri's
charge that the communists are behind the troubles because most of the

organizations that staged strikes are organizations that follow the govern-
ment.

. Economically, the opponents point out the deteriorating conditions. The
World Bank has assessed Sudan's debts at 2.7 billion dollars. They believe
that the main causes of the deterioration are not due to the fact that the
plans are not sound but are rather due to the emergence of the corruption
that has exceeded all limits in the past 2 years and has led to the emergence
of international middlemen. All this has caused the government to adopt
harsh economic decisions compatible with the [MP resolutions which call for
devaluing the currency, levying high taxes and reducing government spending.
These measures have had a heavy impact on the development DTOJFCCS. the
services and the availability of conSumer connwdlttes.

The opponents believe that the current issue in Sudan is not so much the
issue of "protecting the regime" as it is that of "saving the homeland."

They believe that it is no longer possible for one individual or one political
organization to save the homeland. This is why they stress the need to
achieve the national reconciliation and to restore the regime's credibility.

Perhaps the opponents' more important objection concerning President Numayri
is his extreme reliance on Egypt--a reliance which they attribute to
"security reasons more than anything else." They acouse Egypt of scaring
Numayri with information on dangers coming from Ethiopia, South Yemen and
Iraq to push him toward stronger and stronger reliance on Egypt. Analyzing
the positions of the Arab states toward Numayri's regime, the opponents

say that these positions are alienating Sudan currently. They believe that
Saudi Arabia could have rescued Sudan economically because Saudi Arabia
knows that a part of the Sudanese problems is due to mismanagement, corruption
and the lack of desire on Numayri's part to cooperate with the patriotic
elements, such as al-Hahdi and al-Hindi. The opponents also believe that
Iraq's position is hos:ile. Despite Libya's lack of trust in Numayri, it
adopts an outwardly neutral position toward him. But what explains the
truth of the Libyan position is the presence of followers of ldi Amin,

the ex-Ugandan president, in southern Sudan [31c],
midst this turbulent picture of the political and economic conditions in
Sudan, no change seems to be ininent, even though the three possibilities
that the opponents take into their account are not far from the reality.
No possibility can be given precedence, considering that Nunsyri has

succeeded so far in keeping Sudan out of the heat of the inter-Arab con-
flicts.
HALTRBA'DBNT 0F POLITICAL PRISONBRS CITED, RIOTS DISCUSSED
Beirut AL-HURRIYAH in Arabic 12 Nov 79 p 32

[Article: "What Is Happening in Numayri's Prisons; 500 Political Detainees
in Sudan"]

[Text] "...The regime of the second dictatorship in Sudan is trying to
prolong its life through more oppression, torture and persecution of the
Sudanese nationalists and progressives, relying on the imperialis: uounLries
and on the parties to Camp David. This regime, headed by Numuyri. forgets
that Emperor Haile Selassie who used to live next door has ended it: hismry's
garbage dump, that the shah of lran has followed him and that the beads of
the reactionary string of beads are falling one after the other.

"Sudan, which Nunayri has turned into a country of starvation. [innurinl
deficits and of political and economic subservience, is still rising with

its democratic forces to overthrow the dictatorship and to build the
authority of the popular democracy. Prom Khartoum. the capital. we have the
details of the torture in a report we have received from there--details that ,
show that the life of the dictatorship is about to end." [Quotation marks

as published]

Khartour-Exclusive Dispatch to AL-ﬂURRIYAH--In one of the jails, colleague
Qasim Amin (one of the founders of the Comunist Party and of the Sudanese
unionist movement and chairman of the World Textile workers Federation)
suffered a heart attack which caused at the outset a complete paralysis
which then developed to semi-paralysis. The heart attack occurred on

1 September [1979] but the prison authorities did not transfer the colleague
to the hospital until 3 September on the pretext that they have neither
orders nor powers insofar as the prisoners are concerned. The authorities
did not mve until the colleague developed complete paralysis. Only then
was he taken to the armed forces hospital. In view of the wave of anger
and grief that developed as a result of what the colleague suffered. the
government withdrew the guard watching the colleague (even when coapletely
paralyzed). The colleague has been now transferred to the Khartoun Hospital
Clinic.

There is a large number of sick colleagues among the detainees and their
ailments have gotten worse as a result of the long periods of detention.

98
it is well-known that colleagues Qasim Amin, sulayman name. aELU-l muluaa,
Dr Muhammad Sulayman, al-Sirr Najib, Khalil Ilyas, Sabri Jasur. 'Abd-al-Qadir
al-Rifa'i. al-Sirr Shabbu. Tahs Sa'udi Darraj, 'Ali Idris, Bakhit Husa'id
and others have been arrested repeatedly and kept in detention for long

years without any trial since the July 1971 retrogression.

The number of detainees amounts to nearly 500 currently: 120 in Khartoum,
more than 100 in (Malaga) al-Jadidah. more than 60 in Port Sudan. nearly

50 in Ksrimah/(Harwa). 25 in ('Atbarah) and around it. 20 in Sannar. 2l in
al-Abyad and Kaduqli, 18 :in Sabkhah, 16 in al-Qadarif, 17 in Kusti, 5 in
al-Duwaym, 7 in Juba and 30 in Kasala. The overwhelming majority of the
detainees are communists, including a number of unionists, workers, teachers
and employees. There is also a number of democrats. including a member of
the Regional People's Assembly in Jobs. The detainees also include a number
of Ba'thists from Khartoum. Kadani and al-Abyad. 0n 8 September, the families
of the detainees (their mothers. wives, sisters and children) marched in a
procession which included nearly 200 w aen and a number of children. The
procession presented a plea to the head of the judiciary. The governmen:
confronted the procession with more than 600 policemen who used tear gas to
disperse the procession and the crowds gathered around it. The police beat
the women painfully. tearing their clothes and injuring a number of them.

The police then arrested Samlrah al—Bahr. Fa'izah Abu-Bakr and 'Alawiyah Thabir.
A total of 45 women and a nuber of children were kept under detention for

a time and then released at 2400 on bail. The police took statements from

each of the women separately and refused to sue them collectively. The
barbaric treatment of the procession aroused the anger and threats of the
(crowds). In all these cities, the governors and the security officials

were making contacts and saying that the orders came from Khartoum directly,
accompanied by names [sentence as published].

The students staged big deaonstrations which included the three cities
(Khartoum, Omdurman and Khartoum North) in the wake of the announcement of
the latest increases in gasoline prices. The demonstrations were staged
mainly by high school students and were characterized by violent clashes
between the security men and the students. The demonstrations demanded:

1. Democratic freedom for the masses.
2. improvement of the economic conditions.
3. The downfall of the murderer's regime.

As a result of the violence and of the ferocious attack [preambly by the
security men], a number of students were martyred and others were injured.
They are:

l. Kamal Faruq Khiraj, 15 years: Martyred as a result of fractured skull
bones and brain hemorrhage.
2. Ynsir Hasan, 15 years: Hartyred as a result of a skull fracture and
brain hemorrhage.

3. Muhammad ’Abd-al-Ghani Harith: Killed as a result of a broken neck.
4. Two other students were run over by an army car.
5. One homeless person [Eritrean refugee] was shot to death.

In the wake of the recent riots and of the union strikes, especially the
Doctors Union strike, the [authorities] retired a number of doctors without
explaining the reasons. The number reached 20 doctors recently (50 are
expected to be retired). Host of the retired doctors are members of the
administrative councils of the unions [sic] who supported the doctors'
demands firmly. The dismissals were concentrated on the communist and
democratic doctors. We expect further measures against the other unions.

The retired doctors include:

1. Ahmad al-Tijani, general surgeon.

2. Kamal 'Arabi, hone surgeon.

3. Al-Shaykh Kunaysh. internal medicine.

10. 'Uthman rasan Surakni, dermatologist.

5. 'Umar Hasan Amin, internal medicine.

6. Ja'far Muhammad Salih, neurologist.

7. Hummudah Patah-al-Rahman. general practitioner.
8. 'Umar Huhsnmad 'Abbas, general practitioner.
9. Ahmad Zakariya. general practitioner.

10. 'Adli Ahmad Sa'd. general practitioner.

ll. 'Adli Ya'qub Iskandnr, general practitioner.
12. Shaddad [no other name given], dentist.

13. Yasin Mnkki, dentist.

14. Ba'hara [no other name given], dentist.

15. Sayyid Ahmad al-Sitanni, eye specialist.

l6. Hamid al-Na'im, gynecologist.

It is well-known that the Doctors Union staged an open strike until rein-
statement of the doctors dismissed from their positions. In view of the
broad support from the workers, teachers and professional unions and from
the popular movement generally, the government backed down and reinstated
the dismissed doctors. Thus, the unionist and popular movement has taught
the government of the bloody retrogression another lesson in how it defends
its democratic rights despite all the government's oppression agencies and
all its fascist laws.
BRIEFS

RECOMBNDATION FOR ISLAHIC REPUBLIc--Dr Hasan al-‘l‘urabi. the Sudanese
minister of justice and leader of the Muslim Brotherhood in Sudan, is
exerting efforts for re-examination of the Sudanese laws to make them
compatible with the dictates of Islam. It is said in Khartoum that he is
doing this in accordance with a high-level recommendation for the declaration
of an Islamic republic in Sudan. President Ja'far Nmyri had earlier
dispatched aI-‘l‘urabi to Tehran to meet Ayatollah Kltomeini and to familiarize
himself closely with the progress of affairs in the Islamic Republic of
Iran. Sudanese sources have said that this proposal has not received the
support of southern Sudan, considering that Sudan is a state that includes
both Muslims and Christians and is founded on respecting the freedom of
religion. The criticism levelled at this attempt is not confined to the
southern Christian leaders but also comes fron Islamic groups in the north
that are not happy with this inclination, especially the Islamic Republicans
Group which is led by Nahum Muhammad Taha. The final word on the issue
remains with President Ja'far Numayri who is trying to find a formula that
will be acceptable to all and will preserve his alliance with the Muslim
Brotherhood. [Text] [london AL-HAWADI‘m in Arabic 12 Oct 79 p 8] 8694
BRIEFS

EARTH TREHOR RBGISTBRBD--The aeismographic center at Sidi Bou Said at
0507 today recorded an earth tremor. A preliminary analysis indicates
that the epicenter of the tremor was in the sea at a distance of 18 km
north of Sidi Said. It is estimated to have had a force of 3.5 degrees
on the Richter Scale. It is noted that there were 10 tremors in Italy
during the past 24 hours. The strongest tremor was on the western coast
of Sicily, but it did not cause any real damage. because according to the
seismographic center in Italy, its epicenter was 60 km under the crust

of the earth. The tremors continued until this morning. [Text]

[Tunis Domestic Service in Arabic 1600 GMT 8 Dec 79 Lb]

C80: 6602

102
POLISARIO LEADER REPORTS ON OAU MITRE RESOLUTIONS
1.0081032 Algiers Domestic Service in Arabic 0001 GMT 8 Dec 79 Lb

[Excerpts] Polisario Front Secretary General Mohamed Abdelaziz, at the
end of the work of the OAU Reconciliation Comittee. held a press conference

in which he explained the Saharan viewpoint on the resolutions adopted by
the comaittee.

The cor-ittee's achievements represent an advanced stage of African
contribution and efforts to restore rights to the Western Sahara's
rightful owner, the Saharan people. This contribution is appreciated

and makes clear that Africa understands the real nature of the Western
Saharan problem. the most important of which is the problem of decoloniza-
tion. which is connected with the expulsion of foreign forces occupying
the western Sahara and the efforts to prevent its people from exercising
their right to self-determination and independence enjoyed by the rest

of the people of the world.

The Polisario secretary general said that the special African committee
fully understands that one of the basic conditions which gives the Saharan
people the right to self-determination is the withdrawal of foreign forces
from the Saharan Democratic Arab Republic. He said that the Saharan people
appeal to the states which actually encourage Morocco to pursue its policy
of intransigence and expansion which in turn encourages Morocco to be a
source of tension and instability in northwest Africa and to reject inter-
national resolutions. primarily the OM] and UN resolutions. The Saharan
people appeal to these states to heed the call of Africa via the special
committee. which represents all of Africa. that the decision of Africa

be implemented and that rights be restored to the rightful owner, the
Saharan people. The Saharan peopl—e appeal to these states to end their
support for Morocco. He added that the Saharan Democratic Arab Republic
is convinced that Africa--via the special conittee-wwill continue efforts
to implement the African decision on respecting the right of the Saharan

people to self-determination, independence and sovereignty over all
their soil.

C50: “02 END

103