APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007102100: CIA-RDPOZ-OOBGOROOO“ 00030003-4
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R0001000300034

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/8300

1 March 1979

TRANSLATIONS ON NEAR EAST AND NORTH AFRICA
(FOUO 5/79)

U. S. JOINT PUBLICATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82—00850R0001000300034
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted. with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports. and material enclosed in brackets
[l are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Hhere no processing indicator is given. the infor-
nation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied asappropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within iteaw are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the u.s. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAHS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OHNERSNIP OF
MATERIALS REPFODUGED HEREIN REQUIRE TNAT DISSENINATION
0F TiiIS PUBLICATION 3E RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
1. ReclpleM’a Arron-on Nn.

 

musunous on «an 051 AND mam Anna. (1’0' 0 5/79)

  
  
 

          
 
 

‘ tron an

1 March 1979

0.

O. Pltlﬂﬂtu‘ ouaammn Nam and Adana |o. p..,¢¢./t..u'm, Unit No.
Joint Publicationa Raaearch Service
1000 North clebe Road

Arlington. Virginia 22201

      

         
 
   

  
  

  
  
  

ll. Count: Iva No.

 

  

I2. Spencer-n. Olaanlratiea Nana and Menu 1). Type cl Repen a Pain!

Coven;

l5. Smleneamy Mom

I . Abauaeu

     
    
 

  

Aa above

  
    

The aerial report containa information on aocio-economic, government, political,
and technical developmenta in the countriea of the Near ﬂeet and North Africa.

    
     

     
 

  

. r1 em and era-ear Aaalyeie. e- Deacrl'teu

 

 
     
          
      
     
      
      
    
    
      
          
 

Political Science __lnter-Arab Affairs _l.ibya _8ultanate
Sociology ___North African __X_Hauritania of Dean
Economica Affaira _Horocco _Syria
Culture (Social Sciencee) _Afdnaniatan __People'a Deaoo i‘l‘uniuia
Ethnology _X_ Algeria cratic Republic _uni:ed Arab
Geography _Iahrain of Yemen biratea
Technological _Bgypt __Peraian Gulf _Heatem
Hilitary Sciencea __Iran Area Sahara

_lraq Qatar _Yanen Arab

"5 “W“M'NM'W“ 7"" __larael 33am“ Arabia Republic

__Jordan _Spaniah North

__Kuvait Africa

__l.ebanon 48mm .

    
 
 
  
 
  

   
 
 

’
m COSA‘I’IFhll/Guv' so. 5c, SK, 15

Y Availability Sweeter
For Officiel Use Only.

united Nmber of Copiea Available From JPRS.

  
   
  
 

II. No. oi Pager
mm 34

7003 '0‘” HIV If Itnenmvrrn 909°“OC “”3“."

   
   

new vane-u ue'av. win
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS We
1 March

TRANSLATIONS 0N NEAR EAST AND NORTH AFRICA
(2000 5/79)

Conrau'rs

ALGERIA

Possible Csnd idetes for Presidency Discussed
(AL-"ATM AL..MI. 11-17 J.“ 7,)Osseesooseeessseeese'e

MAURITANIA

Ould Seleck Facing Difficulties at Every Turn
(Sirediou Diello; 1m APRIQUE. 17 Jan 79)......

Planning Hinister Discusses Country's Poor Ecooosic Situetion
(Hone-ed El Hotter Gold Zone]. Interview: AL-HATAN
“5"MI. 11-17 J.“ 79).ssseeeessesesoosssseeossossees

SAUDI ARABIA

Officisls View Soviet Encirclenent Danger
(Jerose Dmoulin; L'mnsss 13 Jon 79)

SUDAN

Nmyri Feces Diverse Internal. External Problems
(‘1'.me All-'MI. 1"20 DOC 7a)eeoosseesesssosesesos

TUNISIA

Brehin Tobsl Cells Role of Amy Increasingly Oppressive
(Bahia Tobel; AnIQUB-ASIB. 22 Jen-6 Feb 79)........ ..

Tijeni Abid undership of 0611' Denounced, Opposition Prsised
(Cheri! hehidg. Antone-A513. 25 Dec 78-7 Jen 79)......
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ALGERIA

90881313 CANDIDATES FOR PRESIDBNCY DISC'JSSED
Paris AL-HATAN AL-‘ARABI in Arabic 11-17 Jan 79 pp 20-22

[Articlez "Surprises in Search for Successor to Boumediene; Algiers: Un-
oppoaed Candidate Is Not Available and There Is More Than One Compromise
Candidate; Yahiaoui Is Continuation of Bowediene But Collective Leadership
Is One of Projected Solutions; Zbiri Group: Democracy Is Fundamental Demand
of All Algerians"]

[Text] Algiere--AL-RATAN Alr'AMBI correspondent'a dispatch-“They any dis-
avow me after my death and some of them may spit on my grave. but nobody will
spit on these edifices that l have built here and there by employing the oil
revenues to create a real industrial base in Algeria..."

This is what Boumediene said in an hour of contemplation during an interview
with a prominent European journalist who met with Boumediene a few months
before his death, when there were no indications that Boumediene would fall
the victim of a sudden malignant disease.

It seems obvious that President Boumediene felt, being a realistic man, that
people would disagree in judging him. But he also expressed absolute con-
fideuce that the establishments that he founded will survive by virtue of
their being the true support for any ruler who would succeed him if such a
ruler wants to actually rule the country of the 2 million martyrs and the

2 million problems.

It also seems obvious that the scope of selecting new establishments to re-
place the existing ones as executive and guidance bases is an extremely nar-
z'ow scope under the canopy of the transitional conditions under which Algeria
lives and under which the hairs coexist.

The awareness of this fact and acknowledging it as a measure for excluding
any disagreement on the post-Bonediene era were the motive for the unanimous
agreement in issuing the Revolution Co-and Council statement on continuation
of Boumediene'e course and policy in the ilmaediate phase.

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPVICIAL USE ONLY

But does this mean that the only change will be in the identity of the ruler
and not in his policy. even though the ruler's personal qualities and char-
acteristics are usually reflected in his directions and courses and even
though everything assumes. by the logic of things. the personal imprint of
the ruler? '

Yshiaoui on loumediene's Linc

There is an almost unanimous agreement that no noteworthy change will occur
in the first stage if agreement is reached on Col Mohamed Selsh Yahiaoui as
the sole candidate for the presidency, because the man is similar in many

of his qualities and characteristics to the departed president. he may even
surpass him in austerity and in the desire to keep away from the limelight.
Yahiaoui lives a modest life. Those close to him note that his wife, who
has borne him six children, each time entered a popular obstetrics hospital
and was treated like any other ordinary woman, because Yahiaoui has always
refused any privileges for his family and has refused any allowances ax-
ceeding his ealary--a salary rapidly consumed by the needs of his large fam-
ily and by inflation.

But this unanimous speculation is not based on a unanimous agreement to se-
lect Yahiaoui. Perhaps the list of candidates which will be presented to
the party congress on the 29th [sic] of this month so that the congress may
select one of the candidates is much longer than many think, especially if
there continues to be in the Revolution Command Council a lack of agreement
on selecting one candidate from among the council members.

Ahmed Ben Cherif Is Compromise Candidate

0n the occasion, some circles have begun to project the name of Ahmed Ben
Cherif. one of the Revolution Command Council members, who is Al years old,
as a compromise candidate whose selection can put an end to the competition
of the various wings and forces, in addition to the fact that Ben Cherif
does not evoke the fears that Yahiaoui data.

It is said in informed circles that there are high-level discussions to make
the new regime assume the quality of a collective leadership through a solu-
tion stipulating that Yahiaoui be selected as presidential candidate. pro-
vided that he appoint in return Abdelaziz Bouteflike prime minister and Ahmed
len Cherif, vice president.

In any case, everything seems to be hanging on the course and discussions
of the VLN Party congress which will be held in 2 weeks.

A decision has been taken setting the 25th of this month as the date for
convening the special PLN congress. The decision was taken at the beginning
of the new year at a joint meeting between nabah Bitat, the interim president,
and the Revolution Cos-mud Council members.

2
FOR OFVICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

At that meeting. it was decided to form a preparatory committee to assume
the task of holding the congress. which will nominate the sole candidate to
succeed loumediene. The committee includes Hrs (Jenroud). chairman of the
Hbmsn's Federation. and a number of ministers. including hen Hsmouda. the
minister of public works. and Belaid Abdeeselam. the minister of light in-
dustry (as representative of the Kabyle sector).

The participation of Col Slimane Hoffman. who is in charge of extra sensi-
tive security tasks and whose role has been expanding since President
Boumadiena got sick, has drawn the attention of observers. It has also been
noticed that the statement concerning his participation in the committee de-
scribes him as "chairman of the Foreign Relations bureau."

A new military element. namely Col hachemi Hadjeres who is commander of one
of the military districts. has entered the preparatory conaittee. Ahmed
Taleb Ibrahimi. who was tied by special friendship to the late president.
has also been included in the committee.

Contacts Hith Opposition

Informed Algerian sources have also said that the Revolution Command Council
has entrusted Col Slimane ﬂoffman with the task of contacting the opposition
leaders living abroad in an attempt to achieve a national reconciliation be-
fore the congress is held on 25 January to get complete agreement on one
candidate.

These sources have added that to win over domestic and external opposition
and to put an end to its attacks, the higher authorities are now studying
the possibility of introducing a constitutional amendment limiting the pres-
ident's term to 4 or 5 years as an initiative intended to reassure that the
door of disucssions for amendments will remain open so as to preserve
national unity.

It might be premature to speculate on what developments may crop up in these
2 weeks before the convocation of the PIN Party congress, but observers do
not find it unlikely that the element of surprise will play its role at any
moment. especially if the present shaky balance between the various agencies
in this period of compulsory truce is upset.

The consultative conference of the National Youth Federation, which started
its works at the Palace of Nations last Saturday and ended them at the be-
ginning of this week, is part of the preparations for the congress and for
completing its fundamental bases.

This conference is considered the last in a series of conferences to lay
down the permanent foundations of the PLN Party agencies. This conference
was preceded by a conference of the labor unions in Hatch last year. a con-

ference of the peasants in April, a conference of the war veterans in May
and a conference of the women's organizations in October.

3
’OR OPYICIAL USE OﬂLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

This student conference has attracted the special attention of observers
because of the state of restlessness that began to energe among the students,
especially at the beginning of the current academic year. and because of the
emergence of signs indicating an independent inclination that rejects or dis-
agrees with the organizations suggested for the student councils, and that
deasnds greater freedom in the university caapus. as it demands that the
stipulated student aid not be reduced, especially in regard to reduced trans-
portation fares and to housing.

Perhaps the source of the observers' interest in the student gathering is

due to the fact that it represents more than 70,000 students, who constitute
the future technical cadres in the various departments, and due to the ability
of the students to establish contact with and to influence the masses, in
addition to the presence of evidence that many of the student elements sym-
pathize with the underground opposition. '

0n the occasion of [the start of] the acadeaic year, the security agencies
prepared a report on the situation in the student circles in which they said
that the student circles have turned into a center for infiltration by the
Socialist Vanguard Party which uses many of the student gatherings sympathi-

zing with it as instruments. and which has inherited the cadres of the Al-

gerian Communist Party that turned into underground action after it was dis-
solved in 1962.

It seems that conflict has escalated recently in the student circles between
the leftist elements and the traditional Islamic elements. This conflict
was crystallized in the violent quarrels that erupted on the eve of the con-
ference in the city of Constantine because of differences over the method of
selecting delegation members to the conference.

Perhaps this explains the strict security measures which were supervised by
Col Slimane ﬂoffman on the occasion of the holding of the conference, which.
is considered a barometer of the political mood of the Algerian elite.

Lights on External Opposition

Even though there are indications of the escalating whisper campaigns that
are being launched by the domestic opposition which has refused the idea of

a truce until the convocation of the congress on the 25th of this month. con-
sidering such a truce an obstacle preventing it fro. expressing its opinions
in an effective direct or indirect manner in the congress or on its periph-
eries, other signs indicate that the external opposition is still feeling

its way to reach a common program toward the real goals of the inclinations
of the ruling Algerian agencies and establishments [to be founded] through
the PLN Party congress.

Interview with Ahmed Hahsas

Contrary to what has been recently said and reiterated by the western press,
no official contacts in the full sense of the word have yet been made between

6
FOR OFPICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFPICIAL USE ONLY

the opposition and the officials of the ruling leadership in Algeria. This
is at least what Ahmed Mahsus, one of the most prominent opposition leaders,
has stressed to AL-HATAN ALP'ARABI.

Hahsas (a former member of the Revolution Command Council and of the FLN
Political Bureau and a former minister of agriculture and agrarian reform)
formed with his two colleagues Taher Zbiri (commander of the chiefs of staff
of the people's army and former member of the Revolution Command Council. and
the wellmknown hero of the coup attempt against the late President loumediene)
and Kaid Ahmed, known as Major slimane (a former member of the Revolution
Command Council and minister of finance. planning and tourism and former FLN
official)-the three formed a popular organization known as the National
Coalition for Democracy and Revolution in Algeria.

(his coalition has several opinions on the developments in Algeria and on the
post-Doumediene era. These opinions were expressed by Hahsss in this inter-
view with AL-HATAN Al-‘ARADI:

[Question] how do you evaluate the post-Doumediene era or how do you view
things after Doumediene's departure?

[Answer] He believe that the late President Doumediene constituted the back!
bone of the entire regime. his departure means the fall of the main layer

of this regime. along with the subsequent results. we believe that the
existing regime is not fit for the Algerian society for several reasons, the
the most important being the absence of democracy and the handling of the
country's affairs in a dictatorial manner. Democracy is the fundamental
demand of all the Algerians inside and outside the country. He are fully
aware that the ruling group believes that the people are not qualified to
receive and absorb democracy to solve their historical problems. This is a
mistake. because there are political figures. currents and leaders capable

of organizing and directing democracy in the interest of the people. Recent
years have proven that the existing regime is incapable of solving the exist-
ing problems with the means that it is using, be they economic, social or
political problems.

Therefore. our view of the post-Boumediene era relies on the following main-
stays: Regardless of the type of developments that we or the new phase will
witness, it is important to lay down the foundations of the new regime on
democratic structures and establishments. This is a fundamental right of
every Algerian citizen and a right that should not be squandered.

Democracy is capable of safeguarding the revolutionary gains and the genuine
heritage, contrary to all claims to the opposite.

Socialist Democracy

[Question] Hhat kind of democracy specifically?

5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Answer] To put it briefly, we demand a socialist democracy based on the
multiplicity of parties, freedom of the press and of publication and freedom
of elections. .

[Question] Does thie require a comprehensive reexamination of all the exist-
ing establishments. and perhaps projected goals?

[Answer] As for the revolutionary goals and options. we express no reser-
vations or opposition that would foil these options. He agree on the main
goals, but reject the means adopted to achieve these goals. Specifically,
we reject the realization of the economic goals with the dictatorial method
adopted. This means that we call for adopting the nethod of democratic dia-
logue when discussing or examining any political or economic plan or visual-
izetion.

[Question] have there been any contacts between you and the leaders of the
present regime?

[Answer] There are numerous runors that have been circulated by many papers
on this issue, but we cannot say officially that such contacts have actually
taken place. All that can be said is that opinions and viewpoints have been
exchanged on several issues

we Will Take Part in Government if...

[Question] Can this exchange of opinions result in any certain developments?
He mean: Is there any possibility of your returning to the country to take
part in the government. for example?

[Answer] The issue does not lie in this question. i.e. it does not lie in
the possibility of our participating or not participating in the government.
The issue goes beyond opposition as individuals to reach goals and options
in whose light we must work.

In other words, the fundamental issue of concern to us as opposition lies in
this question: Hill the new regime produced by the post-Bomdiene era be
capable of proceeding in democratic directions?

Our position on participating or not participating in government will be
deternincd in the light of the answer to this question.

[Question] To put it differently, are there certain conditions for your
acceptance to participate in the new governnent?

[Answer] We will participate in the government if a specific agreement is
reached on the democratic options.

[Question] Do you have certain candidates to succeed BouIediene?

6
P03 OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Answer] The names are not inportant. I will repeat: that is inportant
is changing the systen.

[Question] Are you personally optiaistic in this respect?

[Answer] Yes. The will for change is present among the various sectors of
the people and this will must be ultimately translated at the practical level.

[Question] But the opposition did not move until after Boundiena's death.
"here was this opposition throughout the preceding period?

[Answer] No. the opposition has been and is; still moving domestically and
externally. Otherwise. how can you explain the liquidationa to which many

of those who had been in the opposition were exposed? As for the information
blackout. the harassment and the persecutions, they are all problaas emanating
fro- the oppressive character of the regime.

Our Position Toward Sahara Problem.

[Question] Where does the opposition's strength lie: in the army or in
the people? Hhat is. exactly. the opposition‘s strength?

[Answer] (Mahsss laughs before answering) why do you want me to reveal our
cards to you? Be sure that the opposition has roots in the various sectors
of the people.

[Question] Would a call to the opposition for a national reconciliation be
possible if the opposition itself is fragmented?

[Answer] The opposition is not united yet. This is true. however, cease-
less contacts have been made to unite this opposition or to reach agreement
on a future cooperation fornula. As for the issue of national reconciliation,
this is possible when democracy is achieved. This is the fundanental con-
dition and inlet.

[Question] A fine: question: "hat is the National Coalition's position on
the Sahara problen?

[Answer] Our position is clear. We are against any solution that leads to
the outbreak of war between Horocco and Algeria. Is it permissible to have
100,000 people killed, for example, in a war to have a state with s popu-
lation of no more than 60,000 people created? This is just a question.

COPYING“: 1970 Al-watnn Al-‘Arabi

8496
080: “02

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MAURITANIA

OULD SALECK FACING DIFFICULTIES AT EVERY TURN
Paris JEUNE AFRIQUE in French l7 Jan 79 pp 30-34

[Article by Siradiou Diallo: "Power Sometimes Feels Impotent Against Marsh
Reality"; passages in slantlines are emphasized in the text)

[Textr At dawn on In July 1978 the Mauritanian army overthrew President
Mokhtar Ould Daddah. Six months have gone by. The new leaders have had

to confront the same problems as the preceding government, in a Maghreb

that is still teetering between war and peace. Siradiou Diallo went to

see what they have already done and what they expect to do. "I never

thought peace would be an easy weapon to use," President Ould Salcck told him.

Six months after the coup that ended in the overthrow of President Mokhtar
Ould Daddah (10 July 1978) and the army's taking power, Mauritania lives in
the expectation of some miracle.

In the euphoria of their victory, Colonel Mcustafa Ould Mohamed Saleck and

his comrades on the Military Committee for National Recovery (CMRN) premised
all at once a quick peace in the Sahara, an early recovery of the economic
situation. the complete and immediate liberalization of commerce and measures
furthering national unity and assuring social justice.

But measured againstthe weight of the responsibility and the size of the job.
Mokhtar Ould Daddah's "losers" now seem to have been both prudent and careful.
Like many others before them, they quickly learned that power is only a shiny
veneer hiding the bedrock of special interests and that when faced with the
hard facts of domestic and foreign affairs, princes sometimes find they are
impotent. So it is in the Sahara affair.

Obviously no one can doubt their sincere wish quickly to achieve peace and
harmony in the region.

Under the circumstances, however, good intentions are not enough. The new
masters of Nouakchott have increased heir contacts and held secret meetings
with representatives of the Polisario Front and requested the mediation and
blessings of friendly capitals like Paris, Abidjan, Tripoli, Madrid or Bamako,
but all in vain: they have been unable to untangle the Saharan knot. At most

8
FOR 0F?ICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

they are said to be willing to let go of Tiris el-Gharbin. the piece of

Sahara that fell to then by virtue of the Madrid agree-eats of November l975.
however. they have realized in the last a months that giving it up unilaterally
would not solve the problem. Morocco does not intend to yield its Saharan pro-
vince at any price. As long as that is the case, the war will go on in the
region. dragging the Mauritanians willy-nilly into its wake.

it is hard for Mauritania alone to get out of the Saharan hornets' nest.

The sudden realization of these hard geopolitical facts sheds new light on
the hesitations and tenporlzing that occur in Mauritanian officials’ contra-
dictery declarations.

Two examples will suffice to illustrate their enharrassneat and outline the
changing shape of their diplomacy. where an increasing number of mistakes are
due to inexperience. On 28 September l978 the government press published a

list of important prefectoral changes. All the appcinted prefects were on it
except the one for Tiris el-Gharbia. /"We didn't want to upset the Polisario."/
a high official told us.

A second exanple: to respond to the good-will gestures by the Polisario. the
government decided to set free sale 50 Saharan prisoners on 8 Decenber. As

the Arah telephone works better in Nouakchott than in any other south Saharan
capital. the whole city was inforned of it well before it happened. Thus,

when In prisoners left headquarters that day to take the Iain road to town,

a large crowd was waiting for then. There was even an exchange of greetings
between the headquarters commanding officer, Lieutenant Colonel Mohamed Khouna
Ould Haidaila. and a spokesman for the liberated prisoners. The former regretted
having had to put l"hrothers"/ in jail, and the latter thanked the army for its
/"good treatment, especially since the events of l0 July."/

in a lordly manner the headquarters commander did not hesitate to summon forth
an officer designated to provide pocket money and provisions for the prisoners.
who were without supplies and obliged to lake a long trek home. Curiously,

the government nedia (radio and press) did not breathe a word about this amazing
display of fraternization , which was filled by French television and broadcast
to the f~ur corners of the earth that very evening. Ihy this excess of discre-
tion? Because. a high-ranking officer inforued us, /"we non of the desert do
not like to blow our own trumpet."/ '

The facts are ouch more prosaic. in both cases the authorities' behavior is
explained above all by their inability to extricate Mauritania alone free the
Saharan hornets' nest. Colonel Ould Saleck is a cat on a hot tin roof: he is
being called by Algeria and the Saharan fighters on the one hand to recognize
immediately the full and coopiete independence of Western Sahara, while Morocco
is urging bio, on the other hand, to honor the con-itnents stealing from the
Madrid agreements and. consequently. to continue the "war of resistance."
Salcek's all-points nissions. which often conclude with declarations about
/"eoatacts with the Polisario."/ do not feel anyone.

9
FOR OFFICIﬁL USE ONLY
Viiii ilr‘i’liillii. "Si-2 ONLY

uniting for Algeria. Waiting for Morocco...

A foreign diplomat confided to us that both Nouakchott and Rabat now think

that /"nothing is possible before a new team takes over in Algeria."/ The
presence of Mr Cheikhua Ould Mohamed haghdnt, Mauritanian minister of Foreign
Affairs. at the funeral of President Heuari Boumedlenne, then. at the beginning
of lauuary. friendly official declarations regarding Algeria and the Polisario
confirm this. Nouakchott seems to be seeking a rapprochement with Algiers in

hopes that hounedlenne's successors will allow them to move toward the "general.
definite" peace they desire.

The Mauritanian leaders‘ room for maneuver is all the more linited because
Morocco is dragging its feet in evacuating the troops it has stationed in

the northern part of the country. in Nouakchott, it is beingwhbpered about
that the Moroccans flatly refused to leave. /"There's nothing to it,"/
Colonel Moustara Ould Saleck confided to us. The Mauritanian head of state
nevertheless admits the Moreccans /"are being a little slow in organizing
their transportation for the evacuation."/ This did not keep him from stating
that [“hetween now and the end of the first quarter of 1979, the Moroccan
troops will be completely gone."/

The Heavy Burden of Foreign Debt

Though it is not as difficult, the economic situation is nonetheless delicate.
An official document entitled as a financial and economic recovery plan has
been prepared by tho ninistry of Planning with the help of two experts from
the World Bank. This document states that a /"precarious situation"/ exists

in the balance of payments and public finances. The result is that the foreign
finance situation is /"very disquieting."/ There are several reasons. First,
the persistent bad situation on the world iron market means less foreign cur-
rency coming in (almost exclusively from the sale of iron are). Second, import
prices continue to increase.

Added to that is the heavy burden of foreign debt resulting from past commit-
ments. The report states that in the last 5 years Mauritania borrowed about
suns million a year (about 25 billion francs CPA [African Financial Community])
for projects that will have no short or medium term effect on the gross domestic
product. This is especially the case with the deep-water port of Nouakchott
and the Nonakchott-Kiffn-Nema road.

There are also the prestige projects of doubtful profitability, like the sugar
complex built in the port zone of Neuakchott and the Nouadhibou oil refinery:
these two fine, coapletely built plants are rusting away because they cannot
be used. the former because after the plant was finished it was found that the
machinery did not meet the desired sugar cake production norms; the latter
because it was designed to process Aigerian oil and can no longer be supplied.

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0F?ICIAL USE ONLY

At the end of April lQYR foreign public debt reached $7ll'million. bvea if

the refinancing of debts to Libya and Morocco is taken into account. the amount
will still reach about $02 million (about l4 billion francs CFA) a year between
l97s and I983. This amounts to 30 percent of export earnings. it is under-
standable that moneylenders would hesitate to commit themselves in the absence
of awasures being taken to correct the situation quickly.

The government has undertaken to change course by putting a ceiling on opera-
ting expenses and by increasing receipts. While endeavoring to have creditors
refinance the debt, the government is thus striving to be very strict in the
choice of new investments. in particular, it intends to be very prudent in

granting endorsements or guaranteeing foreign loans to private or semi-public
concerns.

Liberalizing in Austerity

The experts' report recommends abandoning all projects that /"cannot be justi-
fied financially and economically."/ Because of the tight budget, the govern-
ment will no longer grant subsidies to projects that are in trouble, be they
public or private. The ﬂorid Bank experts even recommend that the Nouadhibou
oil refinery and the Noaakchott sugar complex not go into operation /"antil

it is clearly established that their operation will not encumber either the
balance of payments or the budget."/

As for the three important projects that started up a few weeks ago, the guelbs,
the port of Nouakchott and the Kiffa-Nema road. the first seems to have won the
approval of the experts called to the bedside of the Mauritanian economy while
the other two appear to have been saved from the world Bank experts' knife only
because they were so for advanced.

The austerityimeasures are already causing a certain morose outlook among Mauri-
tanian businessmen. Since the government is here, as elsewhere, the biggest
customer, a tight-budget policy could not fail to have repercussions on the
marketplace. That is why many companies have stopped work and laid off workers.
/"Ne will start up again,"/ a businessman told us, /"once the new government

has passed the exam that Saudi Arabia is now giving it."/ in fact, even the
immense rosque under construction in the center of Nouakchott through the genero-
sity of King Khalid is now only a giant ghost of steel and concrete where sea
birds brazenly hide from sandstorms and the dread desert wind.

The mothers of the liberal professions had been promised by the new government
that their activities would be quickly and completely liberalized, but they
continue to wait and are getting a little impatient. Doctors are in a hurry to
open private clincs and pharmacists, their own stores, but on the whole they
remain resolutely optimistic especially because the liberalization they wish
lbr has found an initial application in the nerve center of money.

11
FOR OFFICIﬁL USE ONLY
'. FOR orrtcm. use ONLY

Since September l978, the Central Bank of Mauritania has given up its power

to authorize imports in the area of products of prime necessity. Such opera.
tions are now given over to appointed intermediaries. Likewise, Muuritnninas
are no longer required to declare how much foreign currency they have in their
possession when they return to the country. A recent measure also tends to
align the ouguiya (the national monetary unit, equivalent to S francs CFA)
with the CFA franc. The new government is not satisfied with easing its con-
trol over exchange rates; it has also decided to join within the next few
months the West Africa clearing house, whence some have already hastened

to predict that Mauritania will soon rejoin the West African Monetary Union

(Inﬁll), a bank of issue that includes Benin, the ivory Coast, Upper Volta,
Niger, Senegal and Togo.

of course, Colonel Moustafa Ould ibhamed Saleck and his comrades on the CMRN
are in favor of close cooperation between the Central Bank of Mauritania and
the BCEAO (Central Bank of the West African States), the headquarters of which
was recently transferred from Paris to Dakar. Contacts are being made between
the two banks to establish the means of this cooperation, and Colonel Ould
Saleck has asked President ﬂouphouet-Boigny to help him find a formula that

is both quick and acceptable for both monetary systems.

However,ln Mauritania itself, officials who are knowledgeable about the matter
do not seem enthusiastic about a possible return to the UMOA, at least as it

now operates. They think that its credit mechanisms are so restrictive that

they deliberately block the economic development of member countries. it is

/"a real economic Malthusianism,"/ one of the opponents of such a return told us.

The Nnoritandanbusinessmen who were at first all for returning to the franc
zone are also beginning to show some reservations. /“lt seems that the credit
we now get without too much trouble will be doled out in an eye-dropper,"/

we were told by a seemingly disillusioned businessman who obviously no longer
knew where to turn.

As though the disenchantment caused by the situation of neither war nor peace
and economic difficulties were not enough, there is a third, even worse handi-
cap: the deep unrest of Mauritania's black community. it is an old problem
that was, as early as 1966 and 1971, behind violent riots between ﬂoors and

blacks. it was only through the skill and prestige of Mokhtar Ould Daddah
that the matter was hushed up for long.

Now waves of black opposition are threatening. A document that was furtively
slipped to us at the airplane gaagway as we were leaving Nouakchott is revealing
in this respect. It is entitled: /"8lack Africans and Oppression by the Mauri-
tanian Arab-Berber Government, or the Necessity of Solving the National Problem."/.

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

It is a real cry of alarm from black Mauritanian officials. it states that
black Africans are becoming disenchanted at all levels. They all helleved
air a while that the coup would bring ahout a real change in national socio-
enmoMc,poHtMnlnmluuuwnlstnwuwesandthm shwetheinfﬁrmu
ethnic groups would finally have the same rights they would unite against
foreign domination and confront the sane threats. According to the authors

of this deco-eat. /"the Arabicity of the Moorish ethnic group is no argument
for Arablzlng black Mauritanians."/

After denouncing political practices that keep all planning work for the Moors
while leaving the blacks to be satisfied with carrying out the jobs. the authors
of the manifesto advocate creating a new constitution /"thot cannot forget that
Mauritania is a nation of convention wade up of two ethnic groups, neither of
which shall force the other to hecoue Arab or black African, lest the state
split apart.”/ However, it lost be recognized that Mauritania is not the only
country in Africa to live under the threat of centrifugal forces caused by
ethnic and regional untagonisas. In this respect, all African nations are

in the some heat, whether they realize it or not. That in no way diminishes

the seriousness of the problem presented by the coexistence of the Moorish and
blues connunities in Mauritania.

Colonel Ould Saieck has his work cut out for him, whether it is Saharan entangle-
lent, economic recovery or national unity. Wherever he turns, he finds himself
faced with inextricable difficulties, problens that are all the sore serious
because they deaand both just and quick solutions. of course, the 6 months

that have gone by since the overthrow of Ould Daddah have only been a period

of "ohservation," to use the expression of Colonel Ould Saleck.

The latest positions taken on Western Sahara seen to indicate that a new and
more dynaaic phase has begun.

COPYRNJHE Jeuae Afrique GRUPJlA [979

8782
CSO: “Oil

13
FOR OFFICIM. USE ONLY
FOR OFVICIAL USE ONLY

MAURITANIA

PLANNING MINISTER DISCUSSBS COUNTRY'S POOR BCONONIC SITUATION
Paris AL-HATAN ALP'ARABI in Arabic 11-17 Jan 79 p 52

[Interview with Mohamed Bl Hoktar Ould Zaael. sinister of planning and mines:
”Nouekchott Opens Its Doors for Foreign Investments"; in Paris. date not
given)

[Text] hohnned Bl Hotter Ould Zanel. the Mauritanian minister of planning
and lines and acting ninister of finance. visited Paris this week to hold
econosic consultations with a number of French officials. This was an
occasion to conduct this interview.

The sinister of planning is considered one of the proninent econonic figures
in Mauritania. He is currently engaged in drawing up a comprehensive econolic
plan to rescue the country free the financial and econonic decline which it
has been experiencing since the time of the previous regine. The Military
Connittee for National Salvation and the govern-ant have entrusted his with
the responsibility of taking the necessary asasures to lay down the founda-
tions of developsent in the country.

he says in this respect: Re are currently trying to encourage the inflow of
foreign capital. since it has been decided to draw up a new investsent law
(expected to be proaulgated any day now) that would assure such capital of
full protection and of the necessary guarantees. in addition to tax advan-
teges. Our econonic visualization of the situation is based on the adoption
of a liberal econoay that encourages private establishments. In this context.
it has been decided to encourage anall and nediua-size establishments. in
addition to facilitating the adainatrative and financial procedures concerning
the creation of such establishments. Re are also encouraging cooperation be-
tween Hauritenian and foreign capital with the sin of enhancing eeonosic and
develop-en: projects in the country. This can provide new work opportunities
for the country's citizens.

Alaost Catastrophe

{Question} how do you evaluate the current econonic situation in the
country after the passage of sore than 5 months on the corrective noveasnt?

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Answer] 1 will not hide from you the fact that we have inherited a legacy
burdened with debtn. There was such a big deficit in the budget that the
prevlnuw regime had to atop paying a part of the salaries of the civil aer-
vantu.

The situation was alnost catastrophic. That regime resorted to borrowing
large suns of money from abroad and at hole to secure the payment of salaries.
State expenditures rose by 65 percent under the previous regime, which failed
to secure any additional revenues capable of meeting this deficit. Thus, the
state budget was previously prepared in a haphazard manner that relies on

no sound objective yardstick or criterion.

As for the current situation, we are facing a critical phase in the sense
that we are trying to impose some sort of austerity to deal with the legacy
of the previous regime.

It has thus been decided to adopt an austerity budget in the light of the
actual expenditures and revenues. In the 1979 budget, the expenditures have
been set at lo billion (uqiysha) whereas the revenues will not exceed 5 bil-
lion. This means that we will experience a deficit of 5 billion. To make
up for this deficit, we will resort to foreign aid. The austerity will cen-
tinue for 5 years before the budget can avoid any deficit.

[Question] th were the state coffers so empty in the previous period?

[Answer] For a simple reason, namely the absence of planning. This absence
led to unchecked extravagance and waste.

1 will be content here with two examples. The previous regime agreed with
a 0.8. fria to build the oil refinery. The project costs amounted to 100
million dollars. "hat has been the result?

it has become evident to us that the firm‘s installations are faulty and the
refiner' has not operated for a single moment. "hen we tried to contact and
pursue the 0.5. firm, it became evident that it was an "imaginary" firm with
no legal presence.

You may ask me: Hho collected these monies? ﬂow was the deal concluded?
"ho is behind the bribes and other similar questions? I will answer: I
will let you have the freedom to make your own conclusions.

There is another example. The previous regime agreed in 1973 with an Aus-
trian firm to build a sugar plant which cost 9.5 million dollars. As in
the previous case, the plant has never operated. Us are now in the process
of suing the firm concerned.

(He added:) Thus, a lot of money has been wasted on imaginary projects,
whereas no single developaent project was implemented: Not a single school
was built, not a single clinic was constructed...

15
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

I will also swntlun thin exnuple: The Rosse-Akjouji highway in 600 kilo-eterw
long. and in one or the nest inportent highways in the country. No nnin-
tenance work.whetsoever wns perforaed on this highway. The sale applies to
the Rounkchott-(Nilah) highway which links esstsrn with western Mauritania.
The asphalt is no longer fit and Isintenance of the two roads now requires
additional Ioney because of this negligence.

[Question] "hat about your visit to France?

[Answer] It is for the purpose of discussing the econolic and financial
relations between the two countries. It is on "economic“ visit that seeks
to discuss all the spheres of technical and econonic cooperation between
Mauritania end Prsnce.

COPYRIGHT: 1978 Al-Hntnn Al-'Arabl

8696
68°: 6‘02

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SAUDI AMBIA

OFFICIALS VIZ" SOVIET BICIRCIJIHENT DANGER
Psris L°mnsss in French 13 Jen 79 pp 92-93

[Article by Jerone Dueoulin. speciel correspondent for L'EXPRBSS in Seudi
Arable! ”Seudi Arebie: Soviet Bncirclenent"!

[Text] Iren. the Middle lest. Soviet ilperinlisn. so
Isny worries fsce the principsl petroleu- supplier.
Seudi officials eephesise the linits of their power
to Jere-e Dunoulin.

"He ere sfrsid." confessed e high Saudi government official. ”He sre
grsduelly being surrounded.” Seen fro. Ssudi Arebis. the lrenisn crisis.
which cut off the west unbrelle which the Shah hsd erected between the
USSR and the Gulf. hes tsken its place within s drsnetic series of events:
the arrivsl of the Soviets in South Yeeen on the very frontier of Ssudi
territory. the pro-Soviet coup in Afghenistan end the continustion of the
Soviet-Cuban offensive in Britres.

"In the nnthe to coee. we fesr the fell of President Numiri.“ continued
the Ssudi officiel. "If pro-Soviet forces take control of the Sudsn, the
encircleeent will be cosplete."

The lrenien crisis hes ceused renewed ectivity in the field of nilitsry
cooperstion between the comtries of the Gulf: in Decedaer Saudi diplonats
increeeed their contects with the enireteso-froe unit in the north to
Onen in the south-and else. it sees. with lreq.

The e-irstes. elweye preoccupied with their traditional petty disputes.
ere not yet ready to sign e defense psct. But the idea is in the sir.

The French Messy et Jedda is following these developsents with interest.
as they any provide a stinulus to the project for an Arab Nilitery-Indus-
trisl Orgsniretion (on). This orgenitetion depends for the nest part on
Ssudi noney. European technology end Bgyptian industriel potential. The
french point out thet severel eeirstes end lreq heve been equipped with
Hirege sircreft. end thet Prince Sultsn hes just neeed e person free the
United Areb hiretes se heed of the 0A1.

17
FOR OWICIAI. USE ONLY
FOR OFPICIAL USE ONLY

In the horn of Africe. where the Seudis acknowledge having spent "enornous
suns" to support Eritreen independence novenentn, they hsve preeticelly no
hope left. Now they ere reinforcing their eteke in Sonelie: Generel
hohened Ali Sumter, the second highest renking Soneli. hee just received
e lengthy reception in Riyedh.

But the stretegic successes of the USSR ney elso push Seudi diplonecy in
other directions.

Certein officiele. while totelly excluding eny "revereel of elliences.“
think thet Myedh could teke e new ettitude towerd Moscow. going to the
point of eetebliehing diplonetic reletione. "A-ericen inection." eteted
one high officiel. "risks leeding us to s sort of neutrelity which tekee
into eccount the new elignnent of forces in the eree.” The Seudie ere
cleer: their stay is still eebryonic. their oil wells ere very vulnereble.
end the finenciel weepon is not elweye effective. But ebove ell, they be-
lieve thet the United Stetes hes been overteken by events. '

A high Seudi officiel seised e copy of the Auricen weekly. 0.8. ms AND
WORLD REPORT deted 18 Decenber 1923 end opened it to e pege heeded "ﬂesh-
ington Runors.” "Reed this." he eeid. The psesege wee underlined. "lien-
bers of the Anericen edninistretion. on their return from Seudi Arebie,
feer thet this country will follow lren es the next hot spot in the Middle
Best. It hes the key elenente of e future crisis: week leedership end
nelcontent officere.”

"The Apericens should never write euch things," excleined the officiel.
"or we will cone to believe thet they ere sgeinst us. Certein people here
believe thet Alerice will drop us ee they heve elreedy dropped the Sheh."

This suspicion. which brings no word or gesture fro. the Certer edninietre-
tion-which. on the contrery. hes just sent e dozen ultre-nodern P15 fight-
ers to Seudi Arebie-u-expleine the profound feelings of insecurity of the

leeding Seedis. Even those who do not feer the terninetion of the ”speciel
reletionship.“ eonetines eeid to be es vitel ee thet which links Heshington
to Bonn. ere questioning the ebility of the White ﬂouee to think end to ect.

”Venitien-type Spies“

The ebendonnent without werning of Teiwen. one of the oldest end nest loysl

friends of the Seudi nnerchy. hes reieed the level of indignetion here end
sunlified doubts as to the value of A-ericen conirmre.

The office of this Seudi diploeet overlooks the Red See. stress the ter-
reced roofs of Jedde. "lren." he eeid. "is not Africe. Neither you nor
we heve the teens by which to intervene directly in this crisis. He ere

simply spectetore. One thing is certein: it is ebsolutely necessery thet
edditionel oil lust flow." Jedde, the greet co-erciel port of Seudi
Arebie. will continue for eeverel yeers to be the hone of the Hinistry of

18
M OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Foreign Affairs and the edussies. The 0.8. Bdassy is not inconspicuous.
It is in the center of the city. surrounded by a dark red wall guarded here

and there by nonchalont guards and enclosing a space of 10 or 12 hectares.
"Of course." renerked an American diploeat. "the Saudi nonarchy has a week-

ness for crowned heads. But it is also fond of rapid solutions to crises
such as that which befall the Shah."

Actuslly. the Saudis were elerned and surprised by the confusion and
peeeivity of Anerice during the Iranian affair. In the words of n French
diploeet. those who possess ”a network of Venitisn-type spies" are shocked
by the disintegration of the CIA. with which they have a long history of
cooperation. And they see the influence of Moscow in the Iranian develop-
nents.

"Fifth Colum”

The problen of the two Yeeens in itself denonstretes the relative powerless-
ness of Saudi Arabia end that of itu Alerican ally. In spite of the finan-
cial aid given to the one against the other. moderate North Yeeen reneins
fragile. and Isrxist South Yenen is still in Soviet hands. In North Yenen,
Riyadh. with nillions of dollars. tries with perseverance to esintsin this
little country as sparsely populated as she is-and which provides the bulk
of her unskilled labor-in the wake of her own development. Prince Sultan
ibn 'Abd el-‘Aeis Al Se'ud. the sinister of defense. is personally in
charge of Yeneni affairs.

In Marxist South Yensn. Saudi Arabia has resumed the financial seduction
of South Yenen according to good sources. without eeny illusions. Because
Soviets. Cubans and East Ger-ans are well established in Aden. At the
Anericsn Messy in Jsdda it is realized that the Saudis were disappointed
to see the United States abandon to the USSR a lightly populated but stra-
tegicelly inortant territory. They said. "Riyadh wanted direct interven-
tion. In other tines. wn would undoubtedly have tried it."

for the Saudis. the problen of Soviet iwerialisn has overtaken that of
limiting the Arab-Israeli conflict. More exactly. they include the second
in the content of the first. ”Per us," said a high Saudi official. ”the
settlenent of the Palestinian question is the prinery objective of Camp
David. because if the Palestinians continue to wander fron ca-p to can
they will continue to be terrorists nenipulated by Moscow. It is necessary

to get rid of this 'fifth colum.’ And to accosplieh this they out be
given land.”

President Sedat's position. insisting on the indispensable link between
the peace treaty and the subsequent creation of a Palestinian state is new
in perfect her-any with that of Saudi Arabia. Because. beyond the peace.

the guardian of the holy places of Islan has two nejor objectivea: the
reunion of Arab countries 'under its high spiritual patronage. and the ex-
pulsion of the Soviets fro. the region.

19
roe OFFICIAL US! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

According to the Seudis. Henuchel Besin is jeoperditing the effort: in
trying (or e seperete poses with Egypt he wishes to prevent Arab unity.
But st the seas tins he tries to force the triple end tscit enti-Soviet
enience. smoiized lest spring by the simultaneous sale of mricen con-
bet eircrsft to Isreei. Egypt end Ssudi Arebis.

At Jedde there use an optisistic note in the sidst of such concern: Ssudi
officisls end foreign diplouste agree thst there is "good" in the deleys
of the Isreeli-Bmtien nesotistions. They sey. "This my e11 the Arsb
countries heve tine to becose eccustoned to how nice it is to hsve peace
with Isrsel. Psychologiceuy. thst is excellent."

COPYRIGHT: 1979 S. A. Groupe Express

9287
030: ‘800

20
YOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SUDAN

NUMAYRI PACBS DIVERSE INTERNAL. EXTERNAL PROBLEMS
Paris AL—HATAN AL-‘ARADI in Arabic 14-20 Dec 78 p 21

(Article: "Sedat's Disaster Hill Over-take the Sudanese Compromise; al-Mahdi
lies HitMrawn. al-liindi has Refused To Return and the Brethren end the
Columnists Are Angry"]

[Text] Khartounulnforned sources have revealed that President Nuayri's
support of the policies of President al-Sadat. particularly his support of
the two Camp David agreements, has begun to encounter increasing tacit
opposition within the political office. ‘lfhis rising opposition has begun to
take for-s at which observers are taking a long look.

Al-Sadiq al-Hahdi. the leader of el-Ansar, resigned the nenbership in the
political office. and again left the Sudan for New York to visit his sick
wife. lie then headed for London, but without any fanfare. That was possibly
in order not to destroy the bridges [leading to] conpleting the national
compromise. and possibly to resune coordinating positions with al-Sha'df
al-liindi.

This development caused sudden conplications. President Nmyri was about
to issue a republican decree appointing el-Sadiq al-Hshdi as first deputy
president of the republic. however. al-Sediq al-Hahdi requested that the
decree be postponed. Ila then suddenly subnitted a letter in which he
requested that he be discharged fron his nenbership in the political
office of the Socialist Union. Evidently al-Sadiq al-Hahdi left without
seeking pernieaion for the trip.

The Hoslen Brethren l’roteat

Observers have noticed that the Hoslen Brethren. under the leadership of
Dr Hasen el-Turabi, have begun to intensify e caupaign of revenge on the
Sudanese Govern-ent'e being carried away with support for al-Sadat.

Dr al-‘rurnbi was the only what of the political office who announced his
party's tejection of the two Camp David agreenenta, warning of the conse-
quences to which the Sudan night be exposed as a result of its rash. support
of meal-lent al-Sadat's course.

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

That was when President Nunsyri discussed with the embers of the office--
which consists of the higher coalition advisory co-ittee in the Sudan--
the results of his trip to the United States and the couuniques that he
issued in agreenent with the scconplisbents of Caap David.

At that meeting the only senbsr who expressed support was Mr Abu sl-stin
huhs-asd Ibrahim. the first deputy to President Nunsyri. The other where
preferred to remain silent at that time.

It was said that the incentive for President Nmyri's point of view is
hidden in Anerican pronises to support the efforts that are being node to
discover oil fields in the Sudan and develop than. and on the basis of
nobilizing Anericsn and international assistance in inpleaenting the pipe-

line project for carrying the oil to an outlet on the Sudanese coast through
facilities that will cost approxinatsly $2 billion.

The Activity of the Conuniats

The intensifying canpaign of the Healer: Brethren is necting increasing
co-unist opposition to the point that it has roused the-anxiety of the
official Sudanese circles who recently deliberately leaked a rumor to the
effect that the Sudanese (to-unis: Party has renewed its attempts to
nobilise a revolution against the regiae of President Nunayri.

Informed sources have interpreted these runors as preparation for an arrest
calpaign that has been launched by the concerned authorities with respect

to a large nunbar of the officers suspected of naberahip in the Commist
Party and the National Denecratic Union which is headed by al-Sharif sl-Hshdi.

At the sane tine, sources close to President Nunayri are saying that these
arrests were a result of the sweeping Ethiopian attack which has so far
resulted in the reconquest of a nunber of Eritrean cities especially those
opposite the Sudanese border. This. in the opinion of these persons, is
what constitutes a danger to the entire Sudanese regine and requires the
renewal of the leftwing elements in the army. Thus, because ox‘ the speed
of these developnents. President Nmyri had no choice but to take this
step lest the Soviet Union instigate its group to take control over the
goverment.

The Deterioration of Living Conditions

In this envirouent the average Sudanese is experiencing unprecedented
inflation. The terrible inflation has hit all the essential foodstuffs.
Good bread is continually absent from the nsrkets, and the citizens stand
in long lines every dawn and evening in front of the bakeries to get a
mall number of leaves. A smll number of stores has cornered the market
in sugar. and its price recently reached 30 Sudanese pissters a kilo. This
price anounts to double the officially fixed price for it. There has been

22
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

a constant gasolino shortage for a long tine. The officials attribute the
continuad shortage to the difficulty of tranaporting gaaoliac from the port
of Port Sudan to Khartoua bacauaa of tho dilapidated condition of the
railroad lines and the continual strikes by the railroad workers.

Furtharsorc. inforasd sources ars expressing their balls! that during the
nsxt tau aonths Prasidant Nunsyri will again rcahufflc the cabinet. Perhaps
that will he the nsw shot in tho an that will relieve the anomua raaaat-
aunt along the Sudanese people throughout the country. and will open now
linaa of conunication o‘ith tho nationalist opposition. Until that in
accoupliahcd the Sudan will continua to be an araa wide open for surprisaa.

COPYRIGHT: Al-ﬂatnn Al-‘Arabi 1978

9123
CSO: 4:802

13
m ORIGIN. US! OILY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

TUNISIA

3mm roast. CALLS ROLE OF! AMY INCREAS'NGLY OPPRESSIVB
Paris thlm-ASIE in French 22 Jun-la Feb 79 pp 19-20

[Article by Brahia Tohal. leader of the National Tunisian Opposition:
"The Power and the Army"!

[Text] The Role of the Military Must be Conceived in Torus of National
Edificstion Action

At a tine when arbitrariness is reaching its peak by suppressing the
eaancipntion covenant of the Tunisian youth in its totality and systematic-
ally destroying the trade union movement as a forts of expression of the
population aspirations. relying on Sayah's fascist militia and openly
using the opportunist and repressive faction of the army. the palace
intrigues are increasing in an effort to resolve the succession prohles.

At the ease time. the opposition current within the people is developing
with the ease intensity.

However. this nobilization of the Tunisian people aspiring toward democrat-
ic freedoss triggers among the powers that be a reflex which tends to
strengthen this repressive apparatus.

This dialecties of violence between the powers and the lessee tragically
poses the prohles of the function of the army in terms of saintaining or
eliminating the Bourguiha move-eat as a power system.

The fact that a sinority of officials. solded by Bourguihian "ideology"
and by Hestern concepts within the establishment seems to provide an
initial answer as to the utilization of the army against the claims of the
people demanding a radical change in Tunisian political life.

The open utilisation of this army trend was verified in the course of the
26 January 1978 events. This plot against the people and national sov-
ereignty was contained in the frequence of trips to 'l'unis of American
Pentagon officials. officials from the French Defense ministry, Gen nery
specifically. and west German military experts. the lengthy visits paid
by the Sixth 0.8. Fleet. and increased western technical aid (training
and equipment). ‘lhe purpose of all such maneuvers. in fact. is to inte-
grate the Tunisian army within the "defensive" NATO nilitary forces.

2‘
PPR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The number of those who died on 26 January 1978 proves the desire to turn
the army into a ”nercenary" whose repressive role has been growing further
and further. specifically after the Rear llallnl incidents. The reticence
of young officers. nonco-issioned officers. and privates to accept their
assigned repressive role to chechute the popular revolt and the condoms-
tion triggered by the declarations of allegiance of zealous superior of-
ficers. who publicly intervened on 15 October 1977 and 26 January 1978.
confirm. nevertheless. that natters are not that sinple in the case of a
govern-ant engaged in the isolacable struggle which sarka this pre-
succassion period.

Miter Plans

A great deal could be said on the nature of the conflicts and disagreceents
anong rival groups which. within the powers that be or standing on the
nargins. are sharpening their weapons to take over. This. however. is not
the subject of our discussion. Let us sinply note that both will try. nore
or less skillfully. to protect basic nee-colonial interests and take into
consideration the nilitary inperatives of defending the Heat in the Hedi-
terranean and in the Arab world.

This balance of forces is so close within the political class that the
intrusion of an unexpected elenent in the classical gene could nislead or
even nischannel its course. This is what explains the interventionisn of
the reactionary trend of the "great silent nass" wed at neutralising the
any majority whose interests coincide with those of the people.

The bmher. consisting of Sayah. Neuira. Abdallah Parhat. Bourguiba Jr.
and Col len Ali. actually renoved its use]: in the course of the tragic

26 January 1978 events by asking the erny carry out the nest hateful task
in history: brown in blood peaceful popular denonstrations infiltrated
by provocatory elements of Ssyah's fascist nilitia. The twin purpose of
this diabolicslly conceived operation was the following: On the one hand.
to discredit the any in its totality by presenting it as an anti-popular
force; on the other. to suppress a novensnt by beheading the trade unions.
This defines. yet once again. the bunker design: To tane the only by in-
crersing its "cowlexity." in order to renove it once and for all free the
national arena. after eventually using it to settle internal contradictions
within the bunker. contradictions which are bound to develop when the tine
to succeed Bourguiba cones. lourguiba is still nurturing the dress of
seeing his son as the proper successor to the throne of the Bourguibian
dynasty!

It is true that the bourguibian systen has long tried to keep the Tunisian
any in a ghetto. isolating it free all patriotic and revolutionary cur-

rents within the country. Yet, by virtue of his political inconpetence
and abdication of all will to prooote national independence. he was unable
to block the opening of breaches within such a strictly controlled

25
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR Ol’PICIAL USE ONLY

institution. Clearly stated. today it is a question of reestablishing the
link between the people and their army. The purpose is no other than to
coordinate the claims of the live forces within this army and the require-
ments of the struggle against the regime. lat no one be mistaken. A jump
on the part of the 'Nnisian army would not be a simple concept or abstract
plan we would do everything possible to proaote. By virtue of its social
roots. the Tunisian army has always been particularly sensitive to the

deep aspirations and legitimate claims of the people. This is an undeniable
fact of historical evidence. This sensitivity is alive like coal under
ashes. It was manifested. the first time. 16 years ago.

h'hatever may have been said and written on the December 1962 attempt. it
was. first of all end above all. the manifestation of an alliance between
radical patriotic forces and honest nationalistic officers willing to put
an end to the Deatourisn regime. The uprising showed the extent of the
lourguiba movement crisis which was already then opposed. through their
specific means. by the various national social strata. At that time the
army proved that even ”confined” to barracks it listened to the people and
watched the country's evolution. Therefore. it is on the basis of an ob-
jective reevaluation of the missed step of 1962 that we should lay the
foundations of a daring but indispensable revision of the rather rigid

positions adopted by some Tunisian politically and military revolutionary
leaders concerning the armed question.

Hould the failure of the 1962 attempt have meant that we had to abandon
further activities within the armed forces so that they may not be utilized
as the weapon of the regime against revolutionary intellectuals. workers,
and peasants or. in other words. the Tunisian people? This is a decisive
question.

Unqueationably. it was necessary. at all times. to fight the idea that

the ailitary could asst-e the power and its exclusive exercise. However.
it was important. above all. not to fall into the opposite trap of ignoring
the military institution or considering it a homosansous bodv affiliated

in its entirety with the camp of the enemies or the revolution.

Actually. there are circustances in which the army could act as a catalys-
ar to resolve situations or speed up processes which otherwise we may
tend to consider inﬂatable.

In what is today known as the third world the military institution cannot
be accurately analyzed unless taking into consideration the following es-
sential factors: The professional nature. ideological training. and polit-
ical sympathies of soldiers. nonco-iesionsd officers. and officers. In
order to determine its position toward the system and society. we should
avoid two equally threatening and misleading dangers.

26
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The first is related to the heritage of an idealistic vision inherited
fros European culture. Starting fros the postulate that the state is
neutral. above social classes. it reaches the conclusion that the arsy is.

by the ease token. above the class struggle. uninvolved with political
struggles.

The Second Danger

In practical terse. the institution of military forces should. therefore.
be kept outside the political play. i.e.. in its barracks. Such a vision
is absolutely inconsistent with the lessons of history. The latter. con-
vsrsely. proves that the arsed forces is an organised social force for
the purpose of exercising a fors of violence (generally reactionary) to
the benefit of the doainsnt social strata. It is precisely this that is

the vision. plan. and the target of the bunker. as has been claised. with
all its contradictions and internal strife which. in fact. reveal sorely
the allegiance of its sesbers to different isperialist forces.

The second danger is that of silitariss.

The role of the arsy in the state and its position within the power systes
sssuse an even greater isportance as probless to be studied as the state
reveals. as is today the case in TUnisia. the cosplex and unstable class
realities and the fact that the ratio of forces has becose closer ssong
the various interest groups belonging to the siddle classes and local
bourgeoisie. In such a case the role of the orsy could range fros tacit
and silent approval of a faction or political clan. against its rivals.

to direct and open intervention in favor of one such clan. No revolution-
ary sovesent could or should ignore this fact.

It is not a question. therefore. to call for a conspiracy or a silitsry
coup d'etst to prosote a "revolution" or political change but of criticiz-
ing a basic attitude systesaticelly hostile to the arsed forces. unaccept-
able to the extent to which this could only consolidate the power of those
who benefit fros the current situation.

Taking all this into consideration. we could consider a different concept
which would reject equally the liberal Restern approach to the silitary
institution and the putchist and adventuristic approach.

To sun it up. we sust consider the role of the arsy in close connection
with the national edificstion action. This can be achieved only through
deep interaction and reciprocal understanding between the seas of soldiers
and noncossissioned officers and patriotic and progressive officers and
the popular. patriotic. and revolutionary sovesent. reaching its saturity
on the level of an efficient organization and proper political line. At
that point it could encourage the patriotic and progressive elesents with-
in the arsed forces to dislodge fros their strong positions all the
superior officers installed and supported by the regise. thus turning.
finally. the arsed forces into the progressive tool leading to a revolu-
tionary transforsation of Tunisian society.

27
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OPFlClM. 088 ONLY

Both the Bourguiba "successors" as well as the "rightful" leftist oleaents
who. for the past several months. have been making the final scalping
preparations around the agonizing High Han on the Totem Pole, in an effort
to preserve the essential aspects of the Dcetourinn ayatcn. will never be
able to understand the need for such an alliance. For essentially such an

alliance would reject any notion of Bourguiha-leuning heritage and con-
tinuity in order to inaugurate an era of political. social. economic. and
cultural renovation within a popular Maghreb and Arab environ-ant. . . .

COPYRIGHT: 1978 Afrique-Aaie

5157
€80: 6‘00

28
70R OPI’ICIM. USE ONLY

TUNISIA

TIJANI MID M33811" 0? 0611' MOWCBD. OPPOSITION PRAISE!)
Paris leUB-ASIE in l'rench 25 Dec 78-7 Jen 79 pp 19-20
[Article by uteri! ltachid: "The S Deceeber Call"]

[Text] 0n 5 Decenber 1952 Parhat lieched. a leader of the trade union
soveeent and of the Tunisian National Hoveeent fell stricken by the bul-
less of the Red hand. the colonislist organisetion. Through this ection
those related with the nest irredentist circles of the French general
residency in Tunisia hoped both to behead the 0011‘ [Misian General
Federation of Labor]. fomded six yesrs previously by lieched end stop
the thrust which the trade union soveeent hed given to the fight for in-
dependence. lut this failed. . . .

Now. 25 yesrs later. after enduring for the first 20 years of Bourguibe's
reign the oppressive tutorehip of the single Destourien Perty. in the
eutum of 1977 the trsde union organization underwent a decisive change.
Gradually. in a ueandering fashion. e desocratic evolution had developed
within the Misien trsde union love-ant. facing the neo-coloniel jut-ble-
sale and exploitation of the Nouire governsent.

The latter. ruled by the Deetourian "bunker.” and controlled by such as
Ssysh. Abdellah Farhat. lourguibs Junior. and the likes. chose the way of
provocation and conspiracy against the 0611' end for a show of force which
was to result. the day following the call to e general strike. in the
slaughter of 26 January 1978.

Abid Isolated

Once again the trade union eoveeent was beheaded and its nesbers and lead-
ers jailed. tortured. end sentenced in obvious violation of the February-

March 1978 terns end the term of lest sue-er'e triels which were real
Judicial parodies.

In appealing to Tijeni Abid. the only renegade of the leadership elected

at the 16th ucrr Congress. the systee had hastened to put his at the head

of a leadership which. itself. had been hastily appointed in February 1978
by an extraordinary lake-believe congress boycotted by the overwhelning
sajority of the trsde unions and the international trade union orgenieetions.

29
POI! OMCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPFICIAL USE ONtY

Isolated. Tijani Abid's henchaen were unable. regardless of the support
of the adainiatration. the bosses. and the single party. to pro-eta e di-
vereieh. It was on the basis of the support of the resolutions and line
aifira‘a‘d'ht the 16th Congress and the January 1978 National Congress that.
under last year's difficult circumstances. the trade union resistance was
organized. inspired by the legitiaata aoet active structures of the UGTT.
This will to ruin along with a powerful international solidarity were.

in fact. to trigger defections aaong the rare cadres who had joined Tijani
Abid.

It is within this context that we should put the soleen appeal issued on

the occasion of the 26th anniversary of Parhst hached‘a assassination.

The appeal was issued by three eeabsrs of the executive bureau and 17 secre-
taries general of the national trade unions or sectorial UGTT federations.

bearing in aind that the banks and Insurances Federation has been. for the
past six aonths. the instigator of this resistance aovenent. despite the
defection of Mr Graai. its secretary general. there are in fact ls nation-
al trade unions or federations which supported the 5 Deceaber appeal which
rejects "any leadership of the 061? other than the one elected at the lath
National Congress. headed by Conrads habib Achour."2

After denouncing the "severe atteapts against trade union freedoas." the
appeal ”notes with satisfaction the awareness of the workers who have
expressed their support for their trade union organization and its legiti-
aate leadership and who are pursuing their trade union action within the
framework of this legitieacy.” lt expresses the "deep gratitude (on the
part of the Tunisian working class) to all national Tunisian deaocratic
groups which have supported and still support, under such historical cir-
cunstances. the UGTT and its legitiaate leadership (as well as) all inter-
national and national trade union and political organizations which are
taking an ever stronger position of active solidarity with and continuous
support of the Tunisian workers and. particularly. their legitiaate trade
union leadership jailed since 26 January last.”

In conclusion. the signatories state being "convinced that the current

political cliaate cannot be iaproved without the opening of a frank and
general debate. This could not take place in the least without the re-
lease of all jailed coarades."

Along with the signatures of Abdellatit Bouraoui and Sadok Allouche. eel-
bars of the 0611 bureau. released at the end of the 10 October trial. we
see. for the first tine. the signatures at the bottoa of such an appeal
of the Deputy Khalifa abdi. another aeaber of the executive bureau who.
confined to his bed. had not been involved in the January 1978 repression.

Naturally. we also find the signatures of the central trade unions which
have been aost active over the past 10 eonths (higher school teachers.
lecturers. university hospital physicians. secondary teachers. and

30
FOR OFFICIAL 082 ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USB ONLY

technical and vocational teachers). along with aesbera of sectors which.
eo far. have been merely watching or whose eecreteriee general had been
iwriaoned (national teechers' federation. prisary school teachers. food
and touriee workere. national education. transportation. electricity and
gas. petroleu and chemical induetriee. construction. ports agencies.
Iquipeent hinietry. railroads. general justice trade union. and national
agricultural trade union workere).

‘Ihia list in itself represents a definitive and unappealable condemation
of the sis-elected ‘I‘ijani Abid "leaderehip." the sore. so since the cadres
around his. who dropped hie on the eve of the 10 October verdict. include
the proaotere of the trade union eachinery of two aajor areas: lieerte.
en isportent industrial center. and Gafsa and. particularly. the wining
workere' trade union whose ailitancy has never failed.

A Model Debate

Thus the S Dace-bar historical appeal eseuaes a very great ieportence.

The events which preceded its adoption enhance its nodal status. In a
clandestine fashion. the debate within the bases and headquarters of legal
trade unions have been quite lively and fruitful over the past six weeks.
"beyond any pole-ice or of reeorting to caluenies which. soot certainly.

we vigorously denounce, we should take into consideration.” soue trade

union leaders stated. "the fact the discussions held in Rove-bar and
October and. particularly. those involving Coarade Abdelleeiz Boureoui.

did not divide or weaken in the least tho covenant but. on the contrary.
sade possible a substantial progress in the area of trade union resistance."

In fact. after Ilabid Achour. Abdelleelz Bouraoui is one of the 0611‘ vet-
erans. After long years of work within the trade union apparatus. he has
gained undeniable faee and hie support of the secretary general in the

course of the critical Decoder ”77-January I978 phase co-ands respect.

Acquitted on 10 October. having been in Sfax rather than Tunis on 26
January. i-ediately after hie release fro. jail he tried to "rosuae con-
trol." whether hie activities had been interpreted rather strictly by the
soot radical trade union resistance ale-ants. or else whether Abdellaela
louraoui had effectively taken the initiative. soaathing which he vigor-
ously refutes today. aieed at a power split. the answer to this question
is. to say the least. eabarrassing. In any case. nothing allows us to
question the loyalty of a sen who nay be quite close to the international
circles of ”free trade unioniee" but who. for eight sonths faced all sorts
of pressures and iwrieomant difficulties with all their consequences.

Hhet letters is. in fact. the convergence which was displayed at the con-
clusion of this sidel debate.

In addition to the 5 Dace-bar appeal which. in a way. is the epilogue of
the debate. three other doom-ante drew our attention froa this viewpoint.
This includes. above all. the text entitled "Reesrks on the Characteristics

31
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I’Oll Oﬂ'ICIAL USE ONLY

of the Current Trade Union Situation." which definea the aix eooential
principloo ao a condition for the foraulation of the trade union anawer
baaod on eupport for the legitiaate 0611‘ otructureo. the deaand for the
liberation of Jailed trade union aeabera. and the refuaal to note up with
Tijani Abid.

According to tho authora of the docuaent which waa eatenaively diaaeainatod
along trade union cadrea. thou eix pointe auat "conatitute a conetruc-
tive ban for diocuaoiono oiled at defining and atrengthening trade union
action atratogy which could oppoao the unaware of the regiae. having
aaat-ed raoponoibility for tho 26 January blood bath and having beheaded
tho trade union organiution. it ia not excluded. in fact." noteo a couent
iooued by tho 26 January Miaian Collective. ”for tho goverment to try to
change on unaubatantial and all too cowroaieed leaderahip."3

Thia text "which. under ouch conditiono. repreaento a healthy warning to
anyone who would be teapted to aupport on operation aimed at neutralizing
trade union reaiatanco and gild the rather terniohed coat of araa of the
Deatourian."hao triggered. in turn. the answer of the uenbere of the
jailed leadarahip. ‘l‘hia aocond docuaent.‘ aober and very clear. confirm.
in ita eooential aapecta. the baaic roqueata lioted in the ”air: pointo."
In addition to ito aggreoaive nature. Abdollatia Bouraoui'a anawer. pub-
liahed in tho weekly AL-M'. together with the 5 Deceaber appeal. is both
uoeful and intereoting. It puto an end to the apeculationa of theee peat
few woeha but. above all. confine the tenor of the conaenouo which ralliea
today the broadeat poaaible and aoot active eectore of the Tunioian trade

union aoveaent. providing that ooctarian and epontaneoue behavior ia aur-
aomted.

The lira attitude diaplayed by liabib Achour. apecifically during hia talka
in jail. following the verdict. with repreoentativea of the ICE! and the

11.0. had an mueatlonable atiaulating affect on the developeent of thio
debate.

1he AL-SIM'B Affair

Following the nonouit directive iooued by the grand jury of the State
Security Court in the caoe of as of the 100 trade union aeabera charged in
Souaae. 16 leadera and aed>cra are otill awaiting. in any caae. their
trial. The action of aolidarity with then. aa well aa with trade union
aubero already oentenced becoae aore vigoroua. the aore oo aince. uaing ao
a pretext the inveatigation opened againat thoae who dioaeainote a publi.
cation called the "Clandeatine AL-SM‘B.” publiehed abroad. the police.
naturally. are trying to opread their not further and intiaidate trade
mien circleo and their faailieo. bot ua note on thio oubject that Amooty
International hao launched an urgent camaign in aupport of eight trade
union aodera detained in Stan in Noveaber.

32
POI! OFFICIAL I182 ONLY
IOR OFFICIAL 083 ONLY

The 26 January Miaim collective hae noted "ite aolidarity in the face
of repraaeion with theee new victiea of the renewed offensive of reprea-
aion and anti-labor launched by the ayatee." Yet. it ineieted on expreea-
ing "ite neat ewhatic raaervationa concerning the orientation which con-
eiata. Judging by the adventurea of acne groupa abroad. to uaurp the nane
of the non nawepaper M. slums and epeak on behalf of the trade union

organisation in ite totality. outeide the legitimate trade union atructuree."

Beyond the trade union debate. however. the big oueation. naturally. re-
aaina that of the ability of the patriotic and progreeeive oppoeition to
iqoae itaelf aa a force to be coneidered and when leaderahip could proeote
an alternative to meteorien power. Pro- thie viewpoint neither exceaaive
poleaice or naety internal quarrela. or aectarian practicee. whether aimed
at doninating or recovering poeitiona. that would contribute to the devel-
opeent of a apirit of unity.

WW

1. Recently the Tuniaian prine ainieter wee received at the White ﬂouee
with the poop ueually reaerved for chiefe of etate. The mricen
aenna will cauterite for a while. to a certain extent. the wounde of
the Tunieien econony. In the eilent bettlee for eucceeeion it ia not
a fact to be neglected that Nouire. reputed to rapreeent the French.
wae able to eucceed in obtaining the Aurican agree-ant. An Atlantic
policy obligation.

2. The latter. aantenced to lo yaara of hard labor ae a reeult of the
ahaaeful 10 October trial. haa juat been traneferred. together with
Abderratalt morbal. eentenced to the aaee tern. fro- the civilian
priaon in Mia to the Nader Convict Prieon in Biterte. The faaily
of the um preaident ie noet legitilately concerned with the inevit-

able coneequencee of ouch a tranefer to the already poor atate of
llabib Achour'a health.

3. "Plaah Inforeation Bulletin No 13 of the 26 January ‘l‘unieian Collec-
tive." 66 Rue de Vaugirhrd. 75006 Perla.

a. "Plaeh Infernation bulletin No 1‘."
cannon-r: 1978 Afrique-Aeie

5157
030: km m

33
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY