APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00860R000200030002-4
Near East/North Africa Report

No. 2052

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original infornmtion was
processed. Hhere no processing indicator is given, the infor-
nation was sumnarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Hords or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and encloaed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetin notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

ﬁle contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the U.S. Government.

PROCUREMENT OF PUBLICATIOIS

ms publications any be ordered from the National Technical
Information Service, Springfield, Virginia 22161. In order-
ing, it is recomended that the JPRS masher, title, date and
author, if applicable, of publication be cited.

Current JPRS publications are announced in Government Reperts
Announcements issued semi-monthly by the National Technical
Informtion Service, and are listed in the Monthly Catalog of
0.8. Government Publicationa issued by the Superintendent of
Documents, 0.5. Government Printing Office, Washington, 0.0.
20402.

Indexes to this report (by keyword, author, personal names,
title and series) are available from Bell a Howell, 01d
Mansfield Road, Hooater, (bio M691.

Correspondence pertaining to utters other than procurement
may be addressed to Joint Publications Research Service,
1000 North Glebe Road, Arlington, Virginia 22201.
37"!

. WV ﬂ.
'" °‘" ”mum” ' ms 746%

 

‘llthtﬂwma

NEAR EAST/NORTH AFRICA REPORT. No. 2052

1. mo!

‘ ...._...-... 0“

Km”

thematic”...

:3 December 1979

t

.- men-enamel!” a;~

IO. MN’IM M I.

Jolnt Publications Reaearch Service
1000 North Clebe Road
Arlington. Virginia 22201

n. ”Maia-Nana”

ll- 'malhaanhmcaxoaau-u

As above

 

 

This aerial report containa intonation on aocioeconoaic. governeent. political.
and technical develop-eats in the countries of the Near East and North Africa.

It. WW! 0 W
. Pulirical Science _X_lnter-Arab Affaira LLibya

__Su1tanate
Sociology __North African _llauritania of Oman
Bconoalca Affaira _norocco __Syria
Culture (Social ____Af;haniatan _People'a De-o- ‘l‘uniaia
Sciences) __Al;aria cratic Republic Inuit“ Arab

Schmlogy _¥_Bahrain of Yenen hiratea
Geography _Bgypt _Peraian Gulf __Ueatern Sahara
‘l‘echological _x_ Iran Araa ___Yeean Arab
Military Sciencea __Iraq _Qatar Republic

_X__Iaraal Lanai Arabia

_Jordan ___Spaniah North

_X_Kwait Africa

_§_Iabanoo _"_Sadan

O mac-a 'm

c. MW 50. 5C, SI. 15

'Mcmuubnity I" M”"“"""" ”' mm”

 

WSW!!!) 5§
Sold by nus -—'—......~ —' um "' "
Springfield. Virginia 22161 ‘mﬁg‘lbm
0a.”!- hawaam mumw’”
mm

We!”
NEAR EAST/NORTH AFRICA REPORT
No. 2052

CONTENTS Pm:

INTER-ARAB AFFAIRS

Report on Disagreements Along Arab Communist Parties
(AL-DUSTUR, 8-16 Oct 79).............................. 1

Arab Borrowing and Investment Policies Analyzed
('Adnan Kari-ah; AL—HAHADITH, 12 Oct 79).............. 3

Briefs
Joint Petrochemical Conpany 8

BAHRAIN

Information Minister, Officials Consent on Gulf Security
(AL-HAVADIN, 19 0C: 79)....ooeooooooeooeooooececoooone 9

IRAN
Kurdish Revolt Seen as Major Challenge to Kholeyni
(Kiekie H. Ngebay; ELIHA, II Oct 79)................... 16
ISRAEL
Expansion of Settlements in Judnea, Samaria Urged
(Bdltorul; “ZOE“, 50cc 79).OGDOCOOOOOOIOOIOOCOOOOO. 18
Establishment of New nightiet Party Scored
('Amoe Bylon; HA'ARETZ, 12 Oct 79)..................... 20
KUHAIT

U.S. Plot Seen Behind Gulf Security Proposal
(Editoru1;AL-RA'Y Alf'w, 23 SOP 79)....oeocoooooonoo 23
Boycott Against Anerican Goods Urged
(Editorial; Ab-RA'Y AL-‘AHH, 22 Sep 79)............

Shifting Alliances in Kuwait, Gulf Region Analyzed
(Salim al-lawzi; AL-HAHADITH. 26 Oct 79). . . . . . .. . . .

LEBANON

Statement of Haronite Patriarch Khuraysh
(All-SAFIR, 6 06! 79)..coo-geeoeeoaacoeoeooooeooosoa

LIBYA

Libyan Opposition Attacks Qadhdhafi Despotisn
(AL-JIHAD, Sep 79)

Qadhdhafi Said Destroying Slall Trades-en
(AL-JIMD. SeP 79)....oooss'toosoooooooooooo00.0000

Interview Uith Libyan Petroleum Secretary
(Ezzedin rhbruk Interview; AL-NAHAB ARAB REPORT
5m, 15 Oct 79)....OOOOOODIOOOOO.IOIIOOIOOOOOOOI

SAUDI ARABIA

Aid to Mali for Develop-ent, Islamic Activities
Reported
('Abd-al-Huhsin al-Daud; AL-RIYAD, 3 Oct 79).......

PBTROHIN Announced Aircraft Fuel Pipeline
(AVRIYAD’ 11 Oct 79).OOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOIOIt...

Briefs
Hell, Pipeline Maintenance

SUDAN

Khartoua Seeks Big Western Loan
(AL-NARA]! ARAB REPORT 6 HEX), 15 Oct 79)...........

Briefs
Arab Monetary Fund Loan

25

27

36

36

(00

1.1

63

47

109

50

52
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02108: CIA-RDP82-00850R000200030002-4

(”HINTS (Continued)

UNITED ARAB BHI RATES

Briefs
Resolution of Difference:

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA—RDP82-00860R000200030002-4
REPORT ON DISACREEHENTS AMONG ARAB COMMUNIST PARTIES
London AL—DUSTUR in Arabic 8-16 Oct 79 p 6

[Article: "The Lebanese Communist Party and Arab Communist Parties: Hill
Disngreements Become Critical?"]

lTextl it appears that the Fourth Conference of the Lebanese Communist
Party did not go well, because in no time at all, party pamphlets were re-

vealing the existence of disagreements within the organization which go
back to earlier periods.

The group of Hasan Qaritam and Sawaya Sawaya, which is called the "Marxist-
Leninist Platoons." announced that disagreements exist within the party and
charged George Hawi with dictatorship, juvenile leftist adverturism, and hos-
tility to the Soviet Union and the world communist movement.

in the pamphlet "Call of the People," which was distributed to newspapers,
magazines. and news agencies, the Qaritam—Sawaya group added that George

Hawi explo-.ed the exceptional security conditions which prevail in the
country to fabricate a "fourth conference" and appoint his own elements
directly and through his control. He then staged an internal "overthrow"
operation against Niqula al-Shawi, toppling him from the leadership of the
general secretariat, and installed himself in his place. He gratified al-
Shawi with an honorary position in order to turn aside resentment and contain
a series of protests and objections.

The Communist Party has not yet replied to these "accusations," and it appears
that the party leadership prefers silence to discussion with a group that

was purged during preparation for the Second Conference (1968), which came
immediately after the 5 June defeat.

The source of the Communist Party's fear of and aversion to issuing a reply
is the existence of certain hidden relationships between the Sawaya-Qari-

tam group and some Arab communist parties which have complained about the
criticisms of George ﬂawi.
it is worth mentioning that some of the Arab communist parties were alarmed
by Hawi's recent statements and charged him with opportuniam. a spirit of
adventurism. and ostentatiousness at the expense of destroying the legacy
and history of the other parties.

Some sources say that a certain amount of bloc formation has begun to mani-
fest itself within the Arab communist movement to confront the devisive
attitude of which George Hawi has been accused.

These sources add that some of the Arab communist parties (the group of
Khalid Baltdash in Syria. the Iraqi Conunist Party. and the Jordanian
Communist Party) have expressed their uneasiness about the haughty and
pedagogical orientation which the Lebanese Communist Party has displayed
toward them, especially on certain past and present political issues.

moreover. it is likely that these disagreements will have serious reper-
cussions on the regular meetings which the Arab communist parties organize
from time to time. There is a real fear that the Arab communist movement

will split into two wings, each with its own theories, positions. and prac-
tices.

8591
C50: 4802
ARAB BORROHING AND INVESTMENT POLICIES ANALYZED
London AL-IIAUADI'I'II in Arabic 12 Oct 79 pp 52-53
[Article by 'Adnan Karimah: "How Do the Arabs Borrow From Abroad?"]

[Text] when the United States--or to be exact, the American Comerte De-
partment--announced that direct Arab investments represent 0.5 percent of
total foreign investments, amounting to $200 million out of a total of $60
billion in 1978, it undoubtedly ignored numerous channels through which
Arab money flows in to support the American economy.

For in addition to the profits and gains of American oil conpanies and other
companies working in the Arab region, and the value of goods and services
imported from the United States and paid for by area countries, there is a
large influx of Arab funds into the various apparatuses which make up the
American capital market. The funds enter this market through several direct
and indirect channels.

Hithout entering into a discussion of just how correct the American Comerce
Departments's figure is, we will content ourselves with presenting estimates
of investments by OPEC countries. These estimates indicate that OPEC in-
vestments as of the end of last year totaled approximately $168 billion. of
which $150 billion belonged to the Arab oil-producing states.

These invest-ants appear in three channels, with the lion's share going to
the United States.

"Through the first channel. various financial and direct invest-eats to-
taling $42 billion flowed into the United States. But though this estimate
is confined by the American Treasury Department, the 0.5. General Accounting
Office's estimate is higher by more than $10 bil1ion. putting the figure

at $53 billion. This sum is distributed as follows: $3.9 billion in shares.
$12.1. billion in Treasury bonds, $3.6 billion in nontransferrable certificates
of deposit, $12.2 billion in deposits in American banks. and $19.8 billion

in deposits in foreign branches of American banks.
--Thc second channel consists ot tinanctai investments in intumauuuai
markets amounting to $60 billion. The American economy benefits from them.-
quda lhruugh American and non-American financial and banking institutions
which trade in the American capital market.

--The third channel carries financial and direct investments into other in-
dustrialized states. The American economy also benefits from these invest-
ments through its institutions which operate in these states and trade in
their markets.

Despite their small volume in relation to total foreign investments in the
United States, direct Arab investments in that country are considerably
higher. experts estimate. than Arab financial investments in the Arab states
themselves. This has been the basis for complaints about the failure of
Arab capital to flow into those states and the lack of participation of
these funds in Arab development as required, to the extent that countries
needing loans turn to institutions in the international market to obtain
them, in some cases borrowing the very funds they have on deposit in foreign
banks.

Statistics issued by the international Bank, which also appear in a publica-
tion by Morgan Guaranty Trust. indicate that total Arab borrowing in the
international market during the past 7 years amounted to 316.5 billion.
This falls into two categories:

The first category encompasses loans made in the international bond markets
by foreign institutions for the benefit of Arab borrowers, amounting to a
total of about $1.5 billion during the past 7 years. Algeria was the largest
borrower, alone accounting for about 80 percent of the total, or $1.187
billion. Next came Morocco with $136 million in loans. followed by Tunisia
with $83 million and the UAE with $1.2 million. Even Saudi Arabia had a
share in these loans, amounting to $10 million, and Lebanon obtained a

loan of $5 million.

The second category takes in public and private Arab loans in the inter-
national bank loan market, which were in the form of collective bank loans
with a variable interest rate. During the past 7 years, such loans amounted
to about lb billion dollars, which was allocated to finance specific projects
and to cow." deficits in balance of payments accounts, regular budgets, and
development budgets.

Arab experts are of the opinion that this figure includes only those lending
operations which are publicized, since the details of the conditions of
many loans granted in this market are surrounded by a certain amount of
secrecy on the part of Arab banks, and in the majority of cases at” not made
public at the request of the borrowers themselves. For this reason, these
experts estimate that the true total of Arab borrowing in the international
bank lending market was not less than $15 billion during the specified
period.
Algeria again occupied first place with regard to this type of loan, with
borrowings of about $6 billion, followed by the UAE with $2.5 billion,
Morocco with $2.2 billion. and Iraq with $680 million. Ranked fifth was
Egypt with $605 million, followed by Qatar with $450 million, Tunisia with
$325 million, Sudan with $302 million, Lebanon with $271 million, and,
finally, Saudi Arabia with $265 million.

Although Arab borrowing in international markets. whether through bonds or
bank loans. jumped from $215 million in 1972 to $1.65 billion at the end

of 1978, this increase was in keeping with the general trend in all Third
world states, whose borrowing in general on international markets rose
greatly--cspecially following the oil price increase in 1973. Tne volume

of these loans increased from $3 billion in 1972 to more than $41 billion in
I978. The total amount of Third World loans during the past 7 years was
about $116 billion. Thus Arab borrowing represented some 11a percent of total
borrowing by Third Horld states.

To indicate the role of the American financial and banking institutions
through which international bank loans are made to Arab borrowers, we can
make use of figures for 1978 which refer to 30 mixed foreign and Arab insti-
tutions from among the most important international financial institutions
which managed Arab loans. Three institutions had the lion's share, accounting
for approximately $1.1. billion out of the $3.8 billion which made up the

total of all lending operations by the 30 institutions. These three insti-
tutions were the Bank of America with $51.6 million, City Corporation with
$449 million, and Toronto-Dominion Bank with $392 million.

A positive point to the advantage of the Arabs, though in a negative form,
must be pointed out here. Statistics for 1978 indicate that Arab and joint
Arab-European institutions managed $1.2 billion, or 32 percent, of the total
funds on loan. This is an impressive percentage, and Arab experts see it
as the start of real participation by Arab financial institutions in securing
:1 portion of the reserves of Arab borrowers through their organizations and
at competitive rates. This does not mean, however, that these institutions
have taken this asount into their own individual lending portfolios; rather
they have sold a significant portion of the loans to other foreign insti-
tutions--a fact which arises from their restricted capacities to absorb
large volumes of Arab loans into their own portfolios, either presently or
in the future, due to their limited capital. tar, as is widely known, there
are specified ratios which must be maintained between a bank's capital and
its total portfolio of loans in accordance with the principles of sound
international banking operations.

All of these facts about channels of Arab capital, expressed with true
exactness by the figures, are closely heeded by Arab experts. Studies by

the ton have been produced on the necessity of adopting the required measures
to ensure that this capital is made to flow in Arab channels, so that it can
take part in developing the economy of the Arab homeland. The latest of
these studies ls a report prepared by a comittee of experts couissioned
by the Council of Directors of Arab Central Banks. This report. entitled
"Methods of Developing the Arab Financial Market," was discussed by the
directors at their last meeting, which took place on 2!. September of this
year in Tripoli West. Libya.

The report states in its introduction: "Visible trends incidate that the
coming decade will put Arab region up against a unique and unprecedented
challenge. 0n the one hand, we find that the main Arab oil-producing coun-
tries will amass vast and uninterrupted financial revenues, even after cover-
ing the financing requirements of their local development objectives, and
that these revenues must be invested to generate a permanent souce of in-
come. in view of the fact that the oil source is exhaustible. 0n the
other hand, we find that foreign financial revenues will continue to play
a primary role in spurring the development and inve..tment potential of the
other Arab states and in making a success of their efforts to improve the
living standard of their citizens.

"Therefore," the report continues, "The great challenge which the Arab
region will face in the coming decade has become possible thrOugh enlisting
a long—range investment strategy which will achieve in practical terms a
deep-rooted conformity among the interests of both the Arab oil-producing
states and the Arab states which need capital."

However. as the experts point out in their report: "This matter requires
concentrated efforts to overcome problems corrected with the aid, which limits
the capacity of the Arab region to absorb new investments generated by oil
assets. This means providing the capability to use financial aid obtained

on easy terms, as well as the capacity to attract financing offered on a com-
petitive comercial basis through Arab financial markets in a way that will
put existing investments policies in the Arab region in order--even though
they participate with or compete with similar policies outside the area in
attracting Arab oil revenues available for investment."

Such a concept. in the view of the experts. makes the role of the financial
markets a truly important one with regard to working to increase the volume
and effectiveness of private and public capital flows within the Arab re-
gion on a conercial basis.

Absorption capacity is one of four things which the experts described as
fundamental to the development of a financial market, the other three being:

1. Financial apparatus and institutions.
2. Freedom of movement of funds.
3. An investment climate.
me Last IKE! 18 FBIHBPS the DOS! llpol'taﬂt. at“! KICK "I CHI" IUEHCE I.“
the Arab climate is undoubtedly one of the main reasons that Arabs have re-
sorted to investing their assets abroad.

in view of the fact that the invest-ent issue has now begun to transcend

the limits of individual initiatives and reach the heart of the official
policy of the two parties to an investment--noting that the majority of
Arab assets are government assets-~the movement of Arab assets so that they
will end up in the various countries which make up the Arab economy requires.
as the experts state in their report, that the investment climate be charac-
terized by a certain level of confidence, clarity, and stability, making
possible the iaplenentation of integrated and large—scale investment pro-
grams. Since the majority of Arab assets belong to the government. this
lends a political character--to investment decisions--a fact which dictates
that a minimum level of coordination be created among the various financial
and investment policies of the different parties.

This means that what is required is. firstly, Arab political decisions at
the level of heads of state and kings in order to save Arab capital from
Suffering a decline in value abroad, and secondly, the utilization of this
capital to strengthen the Arab economy.

Adding to the need for making such decisions is the fact that the pressures
which surround Arab assets, and the blocs formed or remarks circulated on
account of then abroad. have turned an appropriate investment climate with-
in the Arab hoaeland into a pan-Arab and national responsibility which is
indispensable if Arabs are to maintain these assets and enable them to
escape the fate which may be planned for them.

In this connection, the Arab experts, in the report they made to the directors
of the Arab central banks. warned against any relaxation or carelessness, "for
with the passage of time and an increase in investment activities outside the
Arab homeland. we will reach a position where Arab investment comes closer

to being a weapon against the Arab investors themselves-«specially since
nationalization, seizure. and asset-freezing operations by various states
abroad are no longer unexpected events."

Do Arab politicians at the highest levels perceive the responsibility thrust
on their shoulders and the challenge awaiting th- in the 1980's as their ex-
perts perceive then? Hill they be able to settle their deep-seated and per-
sistent differences in order to unify their positions vis-a-vis their fateful
problems. including the problem of maintaining their countries' wealth?

Despite the fact that hope is slim. we must repeat the proverb which says:
"How narrow life would be, were it not for the amplenesa of hope!"

8591
cso: 6802 7
BRIEFS

JOINT PBTROCHEMICAL CMANY-—'Isa ibn Salman Al Khalifa, amir of the State
of Bahrain, met with [Kuwaiti] Oil Minister 'Ali al-Khalifa al-Sabah
yesterday. It has been learned from a responsible source in al-Manamah
that 'Ali Sabah had sent the amir of Bahrain a message feom his highness
the amir dealing with recent developments of cannon concern which have
occurred in the Gulf area. Meanwhile, Kuwait and Bahrain signed an agree-
ment yesterday for the establishment of a Kuwaiti-Bahraini petrochemicals
company. The agreement was signed on behalf of Kuwait by Oil Minister 'Ali
.11 -Khalifa al-Sabah, who arrived in al-Manamah 2 days ago. Signing for
Bahrain was Minister of Development and Industry Yusuf Aluad al-Shirswi.
The capital ization of the company was not inediately announced. However,
a Bahraini source said that the volume of investments for the establishment
of projects related to the company is 11.0 million Bahraini dinars (about
$1.20 million). After the signing of the agreement founding the canpany,
which will be called the Kuwaiti-Bahraini Petrochemicals Company, the two
ministers expressed their hope that the venture will be the start of other
joint projects which will help support the economic and industrial projects
which exist between the two countries. The president of the Kuwaiti Petro-
chemicals Company, 'Abd-al-Baqi al-Nuri, said that the new company will
produce basic inputs for subsequent phases of the petrochemicals industry
through exploitation of natural gas, which is found in Bahrain in large
quantities. [Text] [Kuwait AL-RA'Y AL-‘Am in Arabic 23 Sep 79 p 7]

8591

080: 10802
INFORMATION MINISTER. OFFICIALS COMMENT ON GULF SECURITY
London AL-HAHADITH in Arabic 19 Oct 79 pp 27-30

[Interview with the information minister and other officials in Bahrain by
Salim Al-Lawzi: "Is Ayatollah Ruhani an Agent of the Shah or of Shaykh
'Isa?"]

[Text] Early this week, the Bahraini ambassador presented his credentials to
the government in Tehran. Could that have been the happy ending of the
Iranian tempest which has struck Bahrain? He single out Bahrain, because

the Kuwaiti authorities do not believe that the Iranian threat included Ku-
wait. The action taken by Kuwait's Interior Ministry in which 17 members of
the Hahri family--in-laws of Ayatollah Khomeyni--have been stripped of their
Kuwaiti nationality is seen in Kuwait as nothing more than a legal action
dealing with an ordinary violation of local laws and putting a firm end to
it.

The attempt to minimize the significance of what has happened in Kuwait is
undoubtedly a clever policy. In Bahrain, this policy is paralleled by the
policy typified by the old saying "Put away a problem before it puts you
away" li.e. pre-emptive action]. The Bahraini authorities have success-
fully contained the tempest stirred up by Ayatollah Sadiq Ruhani, the self-
stylcd leader of the Bahraini revolution dedicated to the overthrow of the
regime of Shaykh 'lsa Ibn Salman. Indeed, the authorities in Bahrain have
even managed to utilize the tempest to their own benefit and to reap its
fruits on the domestic, pan-Arab and international levels.

Has the tempest contrived and sham or was it simply the result of impulsive
actions? And if it is sham, who is it that contrived it? And who has en-
larged it and magnified it into an event that has rocked the region and sent
ripples through the waters of the Gulf for the last 4 weeks?

The story had an ordinary beginning. A number of Shi'ite dignitaries in
Bahrain traveled to Iran to offer their congratulations on the triumph of

the Islamic revolution there. The group was led by Muhammad 'Ali al-Qa'ri,

a former Bahraini official-turned-imam who has been badgering the authorities
to prohibit alcohol. ban mixed employment of men and women, forbid the
employment of women in public service and abolish the teaching of music.
While in Tehran. the Bahraini dignitaries had a meeting with Ayatollah Sadiq
Ruhani who urged them to emulate what the Iranians had done against the
shah's regime. By sheer coincidence. the Egyptian Vice President ﬂusni
Mubarak was visiting the Sultanate of Oman at the time. where he read the
remarks made by Ayatollah Rouhani and the fierce Iraqi reply which warned
that Iran's fingers w0uld be chopped off it they meddled in any Arab part
of the Cult. Mubarak found it a propitious opportunity to declare that
Egypt was prepared to stand by any Arab country facing an external threat
and remark that "the Iranian threats against Bahrain imperil the security
of the Gulf and should be confronted firmly and strongly. and Egypt is
prepared to discuss Bahrain's self-defense needs."

The Egyptian official's statements roused the region and kept it simmering.
In successive actions, Saudi Arabia declared that it was prepared [to help
Bahrain]. the Kuwaiti prime minister and crown prince contacted Bahrain's
crown prince to tell him that Kuwait was prepared to send troops, and the
prime minister of Bahrain, Shaykh Khalifah Ibn Salman, took with him a
number of ministers and flew to Saudi Arabia for urgent talks with the Saudi
crown prince.

Amid this commotion, the AFP flashed a report which made the front pages of
newspapers in Europe. America, the Arab capitals and the Gulf. Briefly,

the AFP reported that Saudi forces had suddenly arrived in Bahrain and taken
up positions in strategic locations to deal with any emergency. The APP
attributed the report to Iranian opposition sources in Paris in what seems

to be an allusion to the Bakhtiar faction. 0n the same day. it was announced
that King Khalid of Saudi Arabia would be visiting Libya. at a time when the
deputy premier of Iran was accusing Col Mu'ammar al-Qadhdhafi of having
spirited away Imam Muss al-Sadr [Lebanese Shi'ite leader] and holding him
responsible for al-Sadr's disappearance.

As those and other events and developments continued to unfold in rapid
succession, it appeared as if the battle between the Sunnis and Shi'ites
and the Arabs and Persians has begun. This feeling was augmented by a
statement in which the new Iranian defense minister Dr Hostsfa Shamran an-
nounced that the Iranian fleet has begun naval maneuvers in the Gulf and
that land and aerial maneuvers will be conducted shortly because an Arab
state in the region is openly threatening Iran. he said that the government
in Iran wanted to demonstrate its ability to defend itself against any pos-
sible external military attack.

These reports continued to escalate for 4 days. After that came a torrent
of counter-statements which contained more confirmation than denial. The
AFP carried a statement by Bahrain'a information minister Dr Tariq al-
Hu'ayyid which was published in the English-language newspaper GULF MIRROR.
Dr al-Hu'ayyid said that military visits between Bahrain and Saudi Arabia

10
were continuing. Asked about the military support offered by Husni Mubarak.
President al-Sadat's deputy, Dr al-Hu'ayyid said that the Saudis, in their
capacity as the nearest and dearest. are more entitled to come to Bnhrain's
aid. it was then the turn of Shaykh hamad Ibn 'isn, Bahrain's crown prince
and defense minister. to announce that there were no Arab forces in Bahrain
"at present“ and that the prime minister of Bahrain had gone to Saudi
Arabia to discuss the security situation in the Gulf.

Interestingly enough. Amir Sultan lbn 'Abd al-‘Aziz, the Saudi defense minis-
ter, said at a private gathering in Geneva which included a number of jour-
nalists: "...The kingdom has not sent forces to Bahrain, but we stand

ready to send Bahrain anything that it needs. when we invited the Gulf

heads of state to Khamis Hushayt in July to watch the Saudi Army's military
maneuvers, the message behind our invitation was that the Saudi Army is their
army. too." However. news agencies have failed to carry Amir Sultan's
statement and no paper has published it.

was there an intention, a plan or an "imperialisc plot" behind the escalation
of tension in the Gulf area. or was this hullabaloo merely the result of a
competition among news agencies to score a scoop?

I went to see Bahraini Information Minister Tariq al-Mu'ayyid and put to
him the following question: Was the ambiguity in your press statements
intended? The minister was taken aback by the question. he adjusted his
glasses with his right hand, sat upright and said: "Intended? By whom?"
"By you.“ I said.

[Answer] If there is any intent, then the news agencies are to blame.

They have been recently carrying many statements which have been distorted

or slanted to serve certain purposes. Regrettably, our press in the Gulf

was carrying the statements and information reported by foreign news agencies
without first verifying them or contacting the source to check their vera-
city.

[Question] Hhat are those certain purposes which you impute to the foreign
news agencies?

[Answer] To create the impression that there is an atmosphere of tension
in the region, whereas all the statements concerned were emphasizing that
what has happened was nothing more than a summer cloud.

[Question] if it was merely a summer cloud, as you say, why then the mili-

tary preparations, statements, visits and affirmations of Arab solidarity,
and why was discussion of the Gulf security issue renewed?

ll
[Answer] By a summer cloud, I mean to describe the events which took place
in Bahrain. There were those who wanted to exaggerate the significance

of those events to create the impression that we have internal problems.

As for external issues. foreign ambitions are nothing new to us. "hat is
new, however, are the statements and counter—statements which are not re—
assuring with regard to foreign intentions. The states of the Gulf found
it propitious. therefore, to reaffirm their solidarity and re-emphasize
their determination to defend themselves against any attempt at sabotage
or aggression....

[Question] External aggression?
[Answer] Of course. He can handle internal aggression.

[Question] (I found it a good opportunity to present to the miniater--who
has lost 2 kilograms of weight in the past 2 months--some current press
information, so 1 said:) Is it true that Amir Fahd (Saudi Arabia's crown
prince and strongman) has asked the Bahraini delegation which visited him
under the leadership of Shaykh Khalifah. the prime minister. to pay a visit
to Baghdad?

[Answer] (The minister. who was now slouching in his seat, sat up again).
All that I can say on this subject is that Iraq has a role to play in this
region. Both the Saudi and Bahraini governments believe in the importance
of that role. He cannot exclude lraq from any moves made by the Gulf
states.

[Question] th then have you asked Syria to act as a mediator between you
and Khomeyni?

[Answer] We have received messages of support from a number of Arab states.
while other Arab states issued official and unofficial statements in which
they said that they stand with us against any threat. This indicates that
Arab solidarity is a basic fact and that all the Arab states would not allow
any foreign interference in Bahrain's affairs. The fact of the matter is
that there are no problems between us and Imam Khomeyni or the Iranian
government. All that there is is that some men of religion in Iran have
made provocative statements which were magnified by the media beyond their

real significance.

[Question] i asked you about the Syrian mediation....

[Answer] It was the media which described the good offices made by Presi-
dent Hafiz al-Asad as a mediation effort. Re are grateful for such efforts.

[Question] Don't you believe that the contrived dispute with Iran has drag-
ged you into the ring of the Syrian-Iraqi struggle over influence?

12
[Answer] (The minister stood up. lit up a Havana cigar and said:) I don't
wish to answer this question. In any case. I am not qualified to answer it.

The exaggeration of events, distortion of position and overstatements which
the Bahraini minister of information has blamed on foreign news agencies

are considered by Kuwaiti officials to be a symptom of the informational
cancer in the Kuwaiti press. Hhen I asked a senior Kuwaiti official about
the nature of the Syrian mediation, he immediately said: A Syrian mediation?
He are not a party to the dispute with Iran. The recent verbal onslaught
was directed against Bahrain. Iran has not advocated the annexation of
Kuwait, as some Iranian men of religion have done with regard to Bahrain.

nor has anyone in Kuwait offered to lead an Islamic revolution against the
regime, as Ruhani has offered to do in Bahrain.

I clutched a number of morning papers which were lying on the desk of the
senior Kuwaiti official and said: These are Kuwaiti papers. It is these
papers which labeled the Syrian endeavors a "mediation" effort. Here is a
frontpage headline which reads: "A Syrian Mediation Between Kuwait and Bah-
rain and Iran." Here is a headline in another paper: "Success of the Syrian
Mediation Between Kuwait and Bahrain and Iran." And here are similar head-
lines in the other papers. The entire Kuwaiti press agrees on calling it a
mediation effort. The senior Kuwaiti official was irked-~annoyance has
become quite commnn among officials and nonofficiala in the Gulf nowadays--
and said: You come from abroad where you sit in London and read the Kuwaiti
papers. and you imagine that things are‘as news agencies and some journalists
writing in these papers have painted them to be. Anyone who lives abroad

and reads Kuwaiti newspapers will imagine that the world has gone topsy-
turvy in our country. The newspapers here write all kinds of hodgepodge.

He ruffled through the heap of newspapers sitting on his desk and said:

Each newspaper weighs a kilogram, but most of what is written here is sheer
nonsense and gibberish. I told him: This is not unusual. Pardon my saying
so. but the oil press is indeed a sort of informational cancer, as you have
described it. When there is a competition among your papers. with each

paper trying to outstrip the others in number of pages. when the number of
professional journalists is far less than what is required and when this pheno-
menon spreads throughout the Gulf region, then don't expect the press here

to measure up to the standard which you desire.

A similar remark was made to me by Shaykh Hamad Ibn 'Isa, the Bahraini
crown prince and defense minister!

[Question] I have read a statement attributed to you by the GULF NEWS AGENCY
in which you comment on reports that two Saudi brigades have arrived in
Bahrain by saying that there are no Arab forces in Bahrain at present. The
words "at present" could mean that there were forces in the past. I per-
sonally heard in Kuwait that Saudi national guard forces were dispatched to
Bahrain on 'Id al-Pitr following a pro-Khomeyni demonstration.

13
[Answer] (Laughingiy) Cod forgive the press and members of the press.
They have mixed up my statements with those of brother Tariq (al-hu'ayyid.
the minister of information).

[Question] Ayatollah Ruhani has not yet corrected the press statements he
has made in Tehran and has not said that the statements were distorted.
Otherwise, the tempest which has struck the Gulf and kept it reeling was a
tempest in a thimble, not even in a teacup.

[Answer] 0n the contrary, he has confirmed his statements. This has prompted
the Iranian ambassador in Paris (Shams aI-Din Amiralai) to accuse him of

being an agent of the shah and to say that he has in his possession files

and documents to prove that.

[Question] Would you allow me to correct the Iranian ambassador in Paris?
[Answer] Please do.

[Question] I believe that Ayatollah Sadiq Ruhani is an agent of Bahrain.
and who knows he may be connected with Mr Henderson of the intelligence
department.

(Before Shaykh Ramad could snap out of the astonishment which showed on

his face, I went on:) I don't know to what extent this Iranian tempest which
has struck Bahrain has been engineered and orchestrated, and to what extent
it has been caused by impulsion, emotion and haphazardness. I also cannot
judge to what extent foreign news agencies have been responsible for exag-
gerating events, distorting statements and planting information. Those news
agencies are, in fact. steeped in the arts of psychological manipulation.
But I can tabulate for your highness the domestic. Arab and international
gains garnered by Bahrain as a result of the statements made by Ayatollah
Sadiq Rouhani. 0n the domestic front, all that was needed to turn the
issue in Bahrain into one of Arabian versus non-Arabian was a call by an
Iranian man of religion to lead an Islamic revolution in Bahrain to overthrow
the regime. Indeed. the Sunnis and Shi'ites banded together in a show of
solidarity and said in effect: He may have objections to and claims a—
gainst the regime, but the regime should remain an Arab one, and no non-
Bahraini should be allowed to interfere in our affairs. 0n the Arab front,
Bahrain has reaped endless gains. The Arab states. especially the Gulf
states. have all lined up on Bahrain'a side. Thanks to the tempest. what
al-Sadat called "an Iraqi-Saudi axis in the Gulf area" has come true. The
Iranian tempest has enabled Iraq to enter the Gulf states' club as a full-
fledged and accepted-indeed, sought after--member. 0n the global front.
one has only to scan foreign newspapers and news agency reports to realize
that Bahrain enjoyed an unlimited world sympathy.

16
(I went on tongue-in-cheek: Frankly, I considered the idea of using Shaykh
Ryuhani to threaten AL-HAHADITH and offer to lead an Islamic revolution
against it. in the hope of getting even a small part of the gains you.

in Behrain, have gotten.

Next morning, I was at the majlis [public council] of Shaykh 'lss Ibn Sal-
man, the ruler of Bahrain, at his palace in Al-Rifa'. It was natural that
the conversation at the gathering should revolve around the Khomeyni revo-
lution, the various ayatollahs and their statements and pronouncements and
the impact of all that on the Shi'ite Arabs in the Gulf. A Bahraini digni-
tary said quietly: Even in Iran. the other sects do not practice their
rites as they do here in Bahrain. The Shi'ites here have their own separate
waqfs [religious endowments] department as the Sunnis do. They have Js'-
farite courts separate from the Sunnis courts. In the realm of personal
statute, inheritance procedures follow the Ja'farite doctrine. In fact.
there are special educational centers which fall under the jurisdiction of
the Ja'farite guidance department.

It seems that the amir caught part of the talk which was whispered in my
ear. for his face suddenly darkened-«a rare occurrence—and he alas-ed the
table with his little hand. Then he said: I do not allow in my council
any talk about Sunnis or Shi'ites. The secret of Bahrain's progress is that
it is a society of coexistence based on equal sharing. Competition is,
therefore. creative and constructive rather than destructive. and the spirit
which prevails is that of a closely knit family. One's first loyalty is to
Bahrain. after that each person is free to practice his beliefs and rites.

Cal- returned to the amir's gentle face, and he went on: Allegiance to Bah-
rain is above allegiance to anything else. The question of a majority and a
minority is not a valid one. and anyone who raises this issue is a saboteur
working against the Shi'ites and the Sunnis alike.

I have known Shaykh 'Isa for more than 10 years, but I have never heard

his talk with the confidence and clarity with which he talked that day. As
I was leaving the anir's majlis, I told Shaykh 'Isa Ibn Rashid, undersecre-
tary of the Information Ministry: ﬂow nunificent are the noble deeds of
Ayatollah Sadie Ruhani: I don't know what interest you have in quelling the
tempest he has whipped up when it continues to lavish all those bounties on
you.

9256
C80: 6802

15
KURDISH REVOLT SEEN AS MAJOR CHALLENGE TO KHONEYNI

Kinshasa BLlHA in French 11 Oct 79 pp 1, 7
[Article by Kiekie H. Ngebay: “Who will Plead for the Kurds?"]

[Text] The smell of gunpowder continues to tickle the nostrils of the
inhabitants of Iran, which for some time now has been one of the hot spots
of our world.

A glance at the overall situation in Iran makes it apparent to any observer
that the unity and harmony that existed between the forces of the country which
had led the struggle against the shah's regime, no longer exist today. Indeed.
each faction or political movement is struggling to promote its own program.

It is difficult to have a precise idea of the divisions within the political
forces of Iran. The religious communities certainly form the strongest
political groups, although that does not prevent differing points of view
between them on the sociopolitical makeup of Iran.

National minorities have become the No 1 problem. which in turn has become
part of a broader problem: that of the rights to be given to a people which
had been deprived of its rights and, consequently. one of the central problems
of the Islamic Republic created by the Ayatollah Khomeyni.

The national minorities, which had been politicized during the struggle against
the shah's regime, just as all other Iranians, are acting together in order to
wage a more effective battle for their rights. This concerted action is, up

to a point. facilitated by the fact that unlike the other Iranians. the
minorities all belong to the Sunnite sect.

That. under the present conditions in Iran. is very important. Iran, in a
general way, seems to be a multinational state. There are said to be 10
million Azerbaijani (who are related to the Turks). 3 million Kurds, 2 million
Arabs (in Khuzestan), 1 million Baluchis, 700.000 Turkmens.

But present events in Iran are dominated by the problem of the Kurds, a
problem which is considered very delicate. The Kurds. living in compact groups
in countries bordering on Iran, are taking action to gain Kurdish autonomy.

l6
The demand for autonomy could develop into a demand for the formation of an
independent Kurdish state. That explains the renewal of guerrilla activity
and terrorism in Kurdestan. and that is taking place in spite of all the
measures taken by the Bazargan government to stem the tide of violence.

in Kurdestan then. the skirmishes between the Kurdish warriors and the
guardians of the revolution are increasing. The governor of the province in
question has explained that the "small degree of security in the region,
despite the presence of the army, is due to a lack of receptivity on the part

of the population;" the army is seen as a spearhead of the Ayatollah Khomeyni
and the population demands its withdrawal.

The problem of the minorities is. from all appearances, very delicate and
difficult to resolve. The present leaders of Iran are carefully trying to

decide what to do under the present circumstances under which rebellion is
growing in Rurdestan.

8956
C50: 4900

17
EXPANSION 0? am In JUDAEA, SAMARIA URGH)
Tel Aviv HAZOFER in Hebrew 5 Oct 79 p 2
[Editorialz "Land for Settlers in Judaea and Samariag

LTexﬂ The settlers in 'Ofra evacuated the hill near their settlenent as
demanded by the ID? comand. They said in advance that they would avoid

any clash with the soldiers. But a serious problea still exists. This
settlement, like the other settlenents in Judaea and Samaria, needs addi-
tional land like air for breathing. This deaand has been heard for a low
tine and the government promised to respond to their needs. Moreover, at

a meeting between the minister of defense and the representatives of the
IIRP, which was held several days ago, the minister promised to submit the
positive conclusion to the ninisterial cmittee for approval. In the mean-
time, he reneged on his praise, saying that the timixu was not right for
expropriation of private land, which could evoke serious repercussions in
the international political arena. Be transferred the matter to the govern-
ment for a debate and decision.

The governaent's fundamental policy on settlaent in Judaea and Samaria has
loyal executors and they daand that growth and developent in areas, which
aeet their needs, be nade possible for them. Since this concerns settlement
pioneers, who have been waiting for the fulfill-ant of the promises for a
long tine, they must not be disappointed with constant delays based on the
arguaent that the timing was inappropriate and that there was oppoaition to
the expropriation of private land. Those who nade the promises knew all
this in advance.

what are the real chances for expanding the areas of the Elqana, Bet nos-on,
Ofra, Giv'on, Bfrat, Qadum and Kin-vat Arba ssttluentsf The spokesmen of
the settlements demonstrate that subsistence areas. without w ich it is lit-
erally impossible to exist [second part of sentence illegibl . The Arabs
are closing on then with their buildings and farms on all sides, a planned

and deliberate closing. Time is against the settlers. hpanaion has becane
a very urgent need.

The choice is between expropriation. which involves a special law and may
lead to appeals, and the localization of certain sattlnents on areas whare
there is government land. This is a practical decision with political

l8
implications involving the future of settlement in Judaea and Samaria. It
should be noted that not only the Arabs are against this settlement, not
only the Americans object to it, but most of the opposition uses it to gore

the goverment. The left wages a campaign of slander and provocation against
it.

The settlers, stubborn pioneers, who planted their settlements on bald moun-
tains and stony ground in order to settle the land of Judaea and Samaria,
the first of the thousands that will follow them. will continue to fight for
their right to establish their homes here without the choking pressure of a
ghetto in the land of Israel. They stress that the autonoav is coming closer
and in a debate on the essence of the autonoaw between the sides the dozens
of Jewish settlements in the heart of the land of Judaea and Samaria will be
the decisive factor. They can disrupt the hasty steps to establish a Pales-
tinian entity in the areas. This argument is not unreasonable for the ma-
Jority of the gOVernment. But there is a difference between a political
stand and a political fact.

Ehrery public opportunity must be utilized in order to attain the objective
set by the settlers with the government's agreement, which is extensive
settlement on land needed for their subsistence. It is most advisable for
the government to be loyal to itself. to devote thought and time to clari-
fication and decision and to suhsit it to the settlers. There is no roan
for red tape. Promises must be kept.

The settlers are among the country's best people. They are believers and
observers of the col-sands, for when the Torah of Israel and the land of Is-
rael are one and total Jewishness is their consciousness, mission and way

of life. They and people like then, Zionist Jews in their essence, are the
best part of the Jewish population in the country and the hope of the future
of the state. In the face of foreign enemies and deceitful people in the
country, including those who cringe before the heads of the P10. we must
bless their presence and readiness to fight for the right to settle in all
land of Israel. Happy is the nation that has such sons and daughters.

It is right that the representatives of the religious and national movuent.
whose vision lights the path of the settlers. in the Knesset and government
be the Iain spokesmen for these pioneers, so that they may reach their goal
in a respected way and without difficult struggles for them and the state as
a whole.

The land of Judaea and Samaria will also remain within the borders of the
state of Israel during the period of autonm, when dozens of Jewish settle-
ments will shine on the slopes of its nountains and on their tops.

19
BSTABLW 0? NEW RIGHTIST PART! SCORE!)
Tel Aviv HA'ARETZ in Hebrew 12 Oct 79 p 13
[Krticle by 'Alnos Eylon: "Renaissance or Dyingf]

[feat :37 A young pop singer cried into the licrophone: "Guys, I an dying to
sing and fished out "We Will Get up Tomorrow Morning With a New Song in Our

Hearts" fran the hackneyed repertory. The songs that followed were also
old. Moshe Shanir, who since his departure from the Likud knows well who
spreads pareve margarine on his meager slice of bread, preferred to go back
to Bialik's very old school: ”If We wish To Know From "here He Derived

Strength," he said in a free quotation, "Let Us Go to the Roots" and so
forth.

The yamulka wearers in the hall were pleased. Mrs. Geula Cohen quoted Rabbi
Harman from Bratzlev. Hanan Porat quoted Rabbi Tsvi Yehuda_Cook from the
Merges harav Yeshiva, who is the ayatollah of Gush haunim (Block of the Faith-
ful]. Efrayin Ben liayim frm the Bet Oren Kibbuts quoted the doctrine of Is-
rael and the doctrine of the land of Israel of Yitzhaq Tabenkin sinultaneoualLv.
Thus, between one quotation and another a new political party to the right of
Herut was_ established with great fervor in Jerusalem this weeku‘l'enu'at Ha-
tehiya" LRenaissance Movanent].

Demonstrators congregated outside, shouting: "The Renaissance Movenent is_
the movement of death" and exchanged curses with the members of Kath LThu_s_/
of Rabbi Kahana, who screamed that the two bad eyes of the state of Israel,
that is, Arabs and poverty, must be eradicated. There was violence in the
hmnid air and a thick chain of policemen separated the camps. If not for the

policemen, a riot would have certainly broken out. Obscene insults flew from
side to side.

There was again sanething in the atmosphere fraught with physical and verbal
violence and great hatred, which against the background of rising inflation
could have reminded old people and those with good mry of the Helm Re-
public. The name of the new party also could have evoked a terrible echo.
It is clear that the founders did not intend to have a Hebrew version of the

Iraqi Baath novel-eat. Perhaps they thought about "Young People, Heralds of

20
Renaissance, Came Fron the Corners of the Country." But what is good in
one generation sounds differently in another generation. In this genera-
tion, in this nation and under these circusstances the name of the new move-
ment restores the ghost of Deutschland Erwache!

The editor of mom manor welcomed the new party and estimated that "oh-
Jectively. its chances for holding an important position are not bad. The
people are tired of our endless foldings. They are almost at the threshold
of despair." If this is a sign for the future, this is certainly a sign of
demoralization. lot long ago that newspaper published an article in favor
of limiting democracy.

Is it an accident that no fewer than 3,000 desperate people crowded the big
hall of Binyaney Hanna in Jerusalem in order to witness the birth of the new
political creature? It is doubtful whether Begin or Peres could now gather
such a big crowd without first making complicated and expensive arrangements
for transporting the public. The hall was full to capacity. The public was
varied, although it was almost purely Ashkenazi. It included seculars and
yarnulka wearers, respectable bourgeois people and youth.

Many came from the armed ghettos surrounded by wire fences and watch dogs

in Judaea and Samaria, where they slept at night and which, apparently. were
half empty during that evening. Elyaqim Hatsani, who threatens to establish
a private militia in Kiryat Arba,‘ and the famous "spitter" from the vege
table garden of leot Sinai were present.

It seems to me that of greater significance is the mixture, or the new coa-
lition that is being formed, between the fundamentalists of the Merkaz aarav
Yeshiva and the adventurous utremists who have emerged iron the ID? in the
last few years: the heads of Gush Emunin: and Prof YuvaJ. Neanan and such
people as had Gen (Res) Avraham Yafe. the famous paratrooper Aharon Davidi
and the hero of the 101 unit Meir liar-Tsion.

Cultural despair, which often has been diagnosed as one of the sources of
European fascism. and blind "patriotim," which they call love of Israel,

is their canon denominator. Characteristically, the meeting was described
as a "call to the colors." It was held under the slogan "all"--"the redemp-
tion of all the people of Israel in all of land of Israel.” The public
clapped hands when it heard selected passages from the Book of Genesis:

"And God said... I shall give the land to your seed." no one mentioned the
Prophets and Hagiographa.

The voice of the announcer exploded over the heads of the excited people with
the primordial and alluring strength of the good tidings. The main speakers
accompanied these good tidings with threats and warnings against dewiators,
deserters. proponents of concession. sowers of despair and those that stick
knives in the back and with ringing cries of congratulation and warm words of
encouragement for the healtw elements in the nation, first of all, the ID?
and, primarily, Chief of the General Staff Lieut Gen Rafael Bytsn, as well as
"those who break the choking fences” in 'Ofra, Qedumim and other settlements.

21
The chairman said about the chief of the general staff: "He are with him

and he is with us.‘ I would like to be more certain than I an that this is
not true.

Prof Yuval lleasan. who was introduced as a scientific genius and at least as
a wunderkind ("at the age of 15 he graduated frcax the Hersliyya Gyanasiun")
demanded that the peace agreement with Egypt be cancelled. that there be no
withdrawal frm the settlments and frm the oil wells and that Israeli cit-
izens be given the opportunity of taking a personal initiative against ter-
rorism. Knesset Haber Geula Cohen detersined resolutely that the people
wanted to fight, but the leadership was tired. "There is no more barbaric
a slogan," Oeula Cohen shouted, "than the slogan of the Likud (I) 'Peace Is
Better Than Undivided Land of Israel." Down with the "mtics of 'Psace
low" and "those crazy for normalisation."

Hanan Porat, one of the prophets of Gush Min, evoked a storm of applause
among those present when he announced a new alliance between secular and re-
ligious people and between nationalists and socialists for a war against the
false peace and for spreading "Justice, purity and light" throughout Undiwided
Land of Israel. Professor Keenan proposed that one-third of the residents in
the areas be evacuated to Saudi Arabia (applause). The rest, if they did not
identify thaselves with the goals of the Renaissance Movement, would be con-
sidered "alien residents."

lo one can now estiaate the electoral strexth of the new party. It is easier
to estimate its destructive effect on the existing political systas. Mr Begin
cannot easily get rid of those who try to realise the principles of his doc-
trine and who still have M allies in the coalition and at the goverment
table. There is hardly any doubt that it will cause additional confusion and
perhaps entrain both in the Mind and the 101?.

What will be the reaction of the Aligment‘l Hr shinon Peres cannot easily get
rid of the person that was his close adviser and confidant. Prof Yuvel Iceman.
The middle-en of strength in the coalition and opposition will try to aaneuver,
calm each other and conprcnise with half truths and improvised gestures. In
the aaantine. in the aost vital area the dictatorship of bit Sharon will con-
tinue behind the perforated screen of duocracy.

The bitter truth is that neither in the Likud and IRP, nor in the Labor Party.
for the tine being, no one offers a convincing ideological answer to the ti-

dings of despair and npty patriotisa emanating fras the Renaissance. What
was bornhere thisweek is nurtured on therotendhnocriay spreadinginall
existing parties.

22
U.S. PLOT SEEN BEHIND GULF SECURITY PROPOSAL
Kuwait AL-RA'Y AL-'AHH in Arabic 23 Sep 79 pp 1, 19
[Editorial: "Plan To Protect the Gulf or Set Off a Conflagration in lt?“1

[Text] Kuwait did well by promptly rejecting the Omani plan to give
foreign states (America, Britain, and West Germany) the right to take
part in the protection of the Gulf. We believe that it is incumbent on
all Gulf states to reject this plan, because fundamentally the Gulf does
not need foreign protection. 0n the contrary, by calling in guardians
such as these, it will enter a zone of certain danger. For, as a matter
of fact, the probleu lies with them. They constitute the real danger to
the people and states of the Gulf.

It is they who engage in intrigues in this area, sow discord in it, and

draw dangers down upon it by amassing fleets and establishing bases, thereby
wbetting the appetite of the Soviet Union to interfere and concentrate
forces in the area. This makes the Gulf a theater for war rather than a
setting for peace.

Practically. the accomplishment of this plan would mean the de facto
occupation of all the states which border on this Gulf. And it is in the
nature of every occupation to kindle resistance, national pride, and
rejection. This alone would throw the area into a state of disorder and
chaos.

If these powers do not interfere, under whatever emblem or mask, then the

Persian Gulf is not threatened by anyone...except by agents of the United
States and Zionism. And this is a matter which is the responsibility of

self-maintained security by, as well as true and sincere cooperation among
the Gulf states themselves.

The sight of one American soldier--or any foreign soldier--on the land or
waters of the Gulf would set off the blaze. Thus our hearts are filled
with bitterness by this bitter picture, and we can stand it no longer.

Perhaps the bitterness which is in us, and the pains and repressed feelings
within our memory, are enough.

23
Nrthermore, what kind of contempt does it show for our peoples if we
continue to bring in foreigners to protect the few under the pretext of
protecting the Gulf? For the few are not the Gulf, nor are they the land
or the nations. And of course they are not the oil. Therefore why, and

in what way, are we obliged to call in the Americans, with good cause, for
protection, while all their weapons are killing us in Labanon, stripping

us of our honor and sacred possessions, and leading us to the slaughter
represented in a settlement of the Palestinian problem by force, conspiracy,
and the sowing of factional discord, or in the incitement of the world
against us?

Have a little wisdoa, people! And a little intelligence, as well-mnless
this intelligence is employed for the sake of destroying this nation, or
for entering into the service of purposes which are inimical to it, or for
contradicting its welfare, its honor, and its aspirations for sovereignty
and independence.

whom do we fear with regard to the security of the Gulf? The Soviet Union?

The simplest person knows that the Soviet state, in spite of its aspirations
to maintain an extensive presence in this rich area, is neither likely not
able to risk entering into certain war with the Heat in case of any military
move against this area.

Thus, protection is directed at ilaginary forces within the area so that

the plan, and consequently the intervention, can be justified-mot to mention
the kindling of suspicions against the Palestinians themselves. That is,

in its policy of aggression against the Arabs, the United States wantd to
make the Palestinians a threat, and thus is working with all its night

to smash every Palestinian right and subdue every trace of Palestinian

and Arab honor. Then it wants them to because eunuchs, slaves, American
Indians.

Thus, through its assault on the Gulf-whether bv means of fleets and bases
or suspicious plansnthe United States continues its operation of provocation,
whereby it can set off a conflagration in the land of the Gulf and swallow

up this land completely.

These are the goals of the American plan which is circulated on behalf of
the govoement d macat. We believe that rejection, which has been
announced by Baghdad and Kuwait, will be complete for all the states of
the area. That is to say, not one rational person can even understand this
plan, so how much less can he accept it?!

859 l
080: 10802

24
BOYCOTT AGAIRST AMERICAN GOODS URGED
Kuwait AL-RA'Y AL-'AHM in Arabic 22 Sep 79 p 1
(Editorial: "Okay...Boycott Them!"]

[Text] Perhaps some people see in the verbal chicaneries which go on at
times between the United States and Israel--such as objections to the
establishment of settlements or rejection of the decision to purchase
land in the West Bank and the sector--somewhat of a change in the hostile
American position vis-a-vis the Arabs, or a possibility of wagering on
such a change.

however, in view of the mass of clear and proven data, we see only an
increase in American determination to subdue the Arab will, verbal
deceptions notwithstanding.

It is our belief that living nations--and even historical lesderships--can
discover the means to enable them to resist any aggressor who attacks them
or their causes. If, as a result of existing conditions, the Arabs'
circumstances do not permit them to embark on a military confrontation to
gain national rights, this does not imply that there are no means of
confrontation by other effective and successful methods.

Perhaps we may learn from others. In the 1940's, when he was leading the
passive struggle against British colonialism, and perhaps on the basis of
the doctrine of nonviolence in which be believed, Mahatma Gandhi found
that equality was impossible between an unarmed people, namely the Indian
people, and the heavily armed authorities of British colonialism.

Thus he decided on his special method of confrontation: peaceful demonstra-
tions. He also used other means of protest, the most important of which
was his call for a boycott on all British goods and action to prevent port
workers from loading or unloading British ships in any Indian port.

The army used every means of intimidation, but this boycott remained total
until the British Crown was forced, in the face of this passive resistance,
to give up its biggest pearl, India. And so British colonialism picked up
its cane and left, and India became an independent state.

25
At this time we are in an urnvnt struggle with the United States. It is the
Unitrd States which is undertaking to smash the Arab personality and is
aiding lsrael with all its might in continuing its occupation and plans for
expansion. So long as the Arab military position, because of grievous
runsidvrations, does not allow effective confrontation, then the least we
ran dn is employ the method of the Indian leader, Mahatma Gandhi. That is
to say, a comprehensive Arab movement to boycott everything American must
arise, and the Arab labor unions must move to make their workers jain in
this boycott, especially with regard to American ships or planes. When

such a boycott occurs, the United States will feel in earnest that its

vast interests with the Arabs have become endangered. It will find itself
compelled to make a move and formulate a new position which is commensurate,
if only to a certain extent, with the scale of American interests in the
Arab region. But if we do not fight with weapons, but remain an open

market for American goods and products while America continues to obtain

oil and funds--and even military bases--then how can we expect Washington

to change its position as long as it continues to acquire markets, funds,
and oil--and bases--as we see happening?

Statements do not help a thing, and verbal positions remain mere empty
frameworks without any meaning. Therefore, there must be a real position.
And we believe that the most elemental real position demanded of us is this
hoycott. We shall see, if we do this, how long the United States can stand

behind lsrael and continue to support it in its occupation of Arab lands
and of the Arab will.

But will we aCt? Or, as usual, do we possess, out of all the possible
means, only words alone?

859]
C80: 4802
SHIFTING ALLIANCES lN KUWAIT, GULF REGION AHALYZED

London AL-HAHADITH in Arabic 26 Oct 79 pp 20-21

[Article by Salim al-Lawzi, writing from Kuwait: "The Coup Hhich Surprised
the People But Not the Ruler"]

[Text] When the Shi'ite situation in the Gulf region was agitated by the
"revolutionary" pronouncements made by a number of Iranian clergymen. the
first flicker of concern which flashed through my mind was related to the
situation in Kuwait, although Bahrain was the primary target of those
pronouncements. In addition to the personal bond that I have with Kuwait
and its people. I have always considered it, and still do. the only light
bulb shining in the Gulf region. of all the Arab countries. there are two
countries which today have an analogy of sorts; one-Kuwait-~which has a
press but no parliament, the other--Lebanon--which has a parliament but no
longer has a free press.

During my visit to Kuwait this time, I heard the information minister,

Shaykh Jabir al-‘Ali. admiringly tell a group of Palestinian leaders about
the vitality of the Lebanese which he has seen and felt during his latest
visit to Lebanon. "Is it not amazing," he remarked, "that in a country whose
sovereignty is divided among several parties. including the Palestinian
revolution and Syrian deterrence forces. the Parliament continues to func-
tion on nothing more than moral strength, and the parliamentary committees
continue to operate despite the sniping, shelling and kidnaping?" I told

the shaykh that I was prepared to swap the Lebanese Parliament with him for
the Kuwaiti press despite all the remarks made about that press and its
members. I told him that he is welcome to have Kamil al-As'ad, Hunir Abu
Fadil and Hashim al-Husayni for 'Abd al-‘Aziz al-Hasa'id, Aha-d al-Jarallah
and Paysal al-Marzuq. To barter peanuts for steel is a profitable business.
even if done only in jest. while it is said that the occupation of "journal-
ism" is held in low esteem in the Arab world. I say that the occupation of
being a parliamentary representative is even more trivial than that of being
a journalist, because where there is no [free] press there is no [real]
parliamentary representation, and the reverse is not true.

27
It has been my custom to begin any trip to Kuwait with a visit to its amir,
Shaykh Jabir al-Ahmad. This custom goes back to more than 20 years-~a long
time before he reached the pinnacle of power--when Shaykh Jabir was controller
of oil affairs in the Al-Ahmadi area. My visits to him became customary

when he became controller of oil. By dint of his profession, a journalist

is always attracted to and fascinated by an official who possesses information
and can solve all kinds of riddles for him. If the Chinese proverb, "He who
knows talks not and he who talks knows not" ever applies to any Arab country.
it surely applies most to Kuwait, whose amir prefers to listen rather than
talk, and when he talks it is not for the record, or at least he would not
want to be identified.

In between the two meetings I had with the amir during my present visit to
Kuwait , I ran across a Harxist fellow journalist who said to me: The Gulf
region is not only rich in oil but also in local conflicts, and if I were
an American intelligence officer (perhaps this is a subliminal wish in his
subconscience) and wanted to blow up the situation in Kuwait, I would not
pay attention to the social or political fields, but concentrate on the
economic field. Security in Kuwait, he said, is not a social one, as it is
in Bahrain for example, but an economic security.

He pointed out that the Iranians who live here or who have become naturalized
Kuwaitis control the food market and play an important role in the foreign
exchange and the real-estate market. Hy Marxist colleague believes that
those Iranians can starve the people if they were to be backed by an or-
ganized force. The dislocation which the Iranian revolution has caused in
the economic makeup of Kuwait is due to the fact that for the past 10
years, the regime has been depending on the Iranians in Kuwait to achieve
an internal balance. This balance is now upset. According to my Marxist
colleague. Kuwait is presently divided into four segments. The first seg-
ment is made up of the native Kuwaitis whom he calls "the founders." The
second segment comprises the Iranians who are either residents of Kuwait or
naturalized citizens and who include such persons as Hujjat al- Islam 'Abbas
al-fiahri, an in-law of Ima- Khomeyni who was stripped of his nationality
together with 17 members of his family when they tried to form a political
and religious force dedicated to the overthrow of the regime. The third
segment in those Palestinians who are resident in Kuwait or who have become
naturalized citizens (the PUD which is allied with the Iranian revolution
exercises an influence on them). The last sement is made up of the other
Arab conunities living in Kuwait. Hy Marxist colleague concluded his analy-
sis by saying: The question is how will the regime re-establiah the ba-
lance that has been upset.

The flaw in my colleague's thinking is not in his analysis of the Kuwaiti
situation but in his approach of applying Marxist criteria to an oil-rich
society such as the Kuwaiti society. There is something called the special
or particularistic circumstances of an oil-rich country. Those who least

28
IIOIU\I-‘Il.‘lll\l mun nl-I.\ our yvuusyauua \u can u...- a. an," nvuunal use an. um-I\ -|'-\.--

of Marx or those political thinkers whose point of departure is the premise
of class struggle. 1f Karl Marx were alive today, he would have declared
at the top of his voice: My ideas and theories were not meant to analyze
societies which have been shoveling out wealth from the treasures of Solomon
the Hise.

Marx had analyzed wealth in industrial societies which were forged by the
expertise of the entrepreneur and the labor of the worker. But the wealth
in the oil-rich countries is one of God's blessings and the fruit of geolo-
gical accident. And since we are talking here of Kuwait, the rich Kuwaitis
have not bled the proletariat or set up plants and factories run by the coil
of the working class. Instead of admitting their mistaken concepts about.
the special conditions of the oil-rich countries, the disciples of Marx
occasionally find it expedient to sunnon folk sayings and maxim, such as
the saying that money obscures defects, and that when a ruler has a lot of
money he can buy everyone. When a crisis breaks out, the disciples of Man:
suddenly sweep aside their dialectical criteria and turn into seers, passing
out judgements in the name of the historical imperative.

There is a certain truth in what they [the Marxists] say, because the wealth
amassed by the oil ruler is so vast that it dazzles the eyes, ties up the
tongues of critics and restrains their hands from writing. But such opinions
and analyses, thOugh true in part, involve a great deal of deceptive oversim-
plification. There is no ruler in the world who does not need a policy,

a political horizon or political craftsmnship. Money can also be a double-
edged weapon in many cases. A ruler in the Arab countries does not rule merely
because he comands great wealth, but also because he has a good grasp oi

his society and an insight into its mechanics. To begin with, he is fully
acquainted with the divisions and sensitivities in his society and has ar-
ticulated a certain policy to deal with them. Secondly, he often has a su-
perior knowledge of the substance of the society in which he lives. A

ruler who says, "I know that the survival or demise of Kuwaitwindeed, the
survival or demise of the Kuwaiti syster-is determined by the economic
factor. not by the division of Kuwait into four segments of conunity. as
your Marxist friend says...," is in one sense an economist who knows that

any group which takes itself out of the financial circuit or cycle will

give another group waiting in the wings the opportunity to replace it,
because there can be no standstill or gap in the financial cycle.

In Kuwait, the ruler is quite aware of the contradictions and paradoxes in
his society, and knows more than anyone else that his ability to control
those contradictions and paradoxes and to rule through them is what makes
his the prisoner of the seat on which he sits. I asked him once: "th
don't you divide some of your powers among those who are around you and only
retain the power of decision-asking?" lie replied: Rule in a society such
as Kuwait cannot be served by mechanical, routine or organizational methods

29
and approaches such as those practiced in industrial societies. A ruler here
Is compelled to deal with the roots and substance of issues, and sometimes
with their details. Believe me when I say that I feel sometimes that I

will die sitting on this chair.

it is perhaps ironical that some of the Gulf rulers have a better grasp

and a more realistic awareness of the fissures in their societies than

others do. It is also ironical that modern nationalist thinkers have been
either unable or unwilling to see the oil society as it really is. In

the flurry of recent events, Dr Ahmad al-Khstib, one of the most prominent
nationalist thinkers not only in Kuwait but in the entire Gulf region too.
has fallen prey to the same errors made by the Marxists, who have failed to
recognize the contradictions and divisions and who do not want to see reality
as it is for fear that by admitting those contradictions. divisions and
reality they would be consecrating them. Dr Ahmad al-Khatib thus went along
with the movement led by Hujjat nl-Islam 'Abbas al-Hahri and his son, Ahmad,
on the premise that any opponent of the Kuwaiti regime is an ally, regardless
of his religious, social or political affinities. Addressing the supporters
of al-Hahri's Shi'ite movement at a rally in Al-Husayniyah, al-Khatib told
them: You are not the only victims of injustice.

The flaw in aI-Khatib's attitude is his inability to detect the real nature
of al-Hahri's movement. If that movement were a Kuwaiti or Arab movement.
there would be nothing wrong in supporting it. Al-Mahri and al-Khatib are
not the only people who have complaints about the regime in Kuwait. But

the inspiration behind al-Hahri's movement is an Iranian inspiration. The
Shi'ite gatherings which have recently taken place in Kuwait, Bahrain and
the United Arab Emirates (UAE) have hitched themselves to the Iranian revo-
lution and have taken the form of a shu'ubiyyah [a movement in the early
Islamic reign which rejected and challenged the predominance of Arabs]
trend. That movement has been arousing sectarian chauvinism under the pre-
tense that the rights of its members are denied and that the regime is not
inspired in its actions by the shari'ah [law of Islam], that is to say by
the Khomeyni revolution. This is the reason why the move made by Dr Ahmad
al-Khatib triggered a flurry of denunciations and caused his friends and
admirers to criticize him even before his opponents and detractors had done
so. To them, the Khomeyni revolution is still a national, Iranian revolu-
tion which should not be given precedence over [Arab] nationalist considera-
tions. The admit of Kuwait has been asked: Do you consider the deportation
of 17 members of the al-Hahri family an ordinary case? 'Abbas al-Hahri
carried the religious title of "hujjat al-Islam" in addition to being the
husband of Khomeyni's sister. In his response, the amir said: We did not
consider the religious aspect or family ties. To us it was a matter of a
Kuwaiti citizen who has violated the law. "hat has happened was not an
ordinary matter, otherwise we would not have revoked his naturalization.

A Kuwaiti citizen cannot have double allegiance., when a great power such

as the United States acquiesced in the dual allegiance of some of its Jewish

30
citizens, American interests--indeed, American security--had to pay the
price, as we know and can see. Kuwait had opened its doors to al-liahri.

He lived here, got married, became rich and obtained citizenship. Then sud-
denly he turns into an advocate of overthrowing the regime in favor of
another regime. Should we have accepted the principle of dual allegiance,
kept mum and buried our heads in the sand?

The amir was then asked: Do you believe that al-Hahri's movement is finished?
lie said confidently: It was not a movement. but an attempt, and we have
nipped it in the bud and it is now over.

Shaykh Sa'd al-‘Abdallah, the crown prince and prime minister, has told me:
If what has happened in Kuwait occurred in any other country, the army would
have intervened, martial law would have been declared and extraordinary
measures would have been taken. But we have tackled the problem calmly

but firmly. We have applied the law, and that's the long and short of it.

There is a conviction in Kuwait and Bahrain that the assurances received by
the two states that Iran has no ambition; in the Arab oil-producing countries
are no more than an adjournment of the problem. "hat is happening now is
that the officials in Tehran say something and the ayatollahs who claim to
represent the Islamic revolution say something else. The statements made

by Khomeyni himself are contradictory. At times, he wants to export the
revolution. at other times he wants to confine it to Iran. All this is due
either to a process of division of roles or to chaos. impulsiveuess, fool-
ishness or even to the fact that some elements are in the pay 0! certain
foreign powers. Both situations have consequences which should be assessed.
And if the Iranian revolution achieved permanence or degenerate-l into mini-
states. there will be consequences too. At any rate, Iran's oil resources
will be depleted in 10 years. An Arab-Iranian conflict, especially in the
small Gulf states where Iran has ambitions, followers and supporters, is
inevitable. When such a conflict breaks out, it would do Iran no good to
veil its national ambitions under the cloak of Islam, because ultimately Islam
is Arab before it is Iranian, Pakistani or Turkish.

within this frame of reference, a quiet debate is going on at the highest level
of authority in Kuwait--a debate that is divorced from Marxist and nationalist
thought alike. It proceeds from the fact cited by Dr 'Abdullah al-Nafisi

that Kuwait is a country where several minorities co-exist. None of the
groups living there--the Kuwaitis, the Palestinians, the Iranians and the
other communities--has a majority. The distinctions among those minorities
will continue to diminish. True, the Kuwaitis should retain certain privi-
leges because they are the founders and because they were the ones who had

to endure poverty and hardship in times past. Yet the privileges of the
founders in America over the newer migrants did not bar a Jewish inigrant
from Nazi Germany, who was not even born in the United States, namely,

Henry Kissinger, to become secretary of state and, in fact, to wield more
influence in foreign policy than his boss, President Nixon. To broaden the

31
base of the indigenous population is a policy pursued by all states that
wish to maintain their ability to develop and to anticipate problems before
they occur. Those Arabs, for example, who were born. brought up and
educated at government expense in Kuwait should not be considered imigrants.
As long as the country needs then, why then should it not keep them? Then
there is a rule observed by all the advanced countries of the world, namely,
to add the brightest and most outstanding members of any comunity or minority
to the domain of the founders. Educational excellence and intellectual au-
periority qualify those persons who have them to join the club of the pri-
vileged class in any system which desires to broaden its base and increase
the number of the beneficiaries from the system. This is the best way to
fortify Kuwait against the winds of change and conspiracy attempts.

Although the ruler in Kuwait is convinced of the correctness of this approach,
he wants to be certain of the possible consequences in the event of the
application of such approach. It is generally in the interest of any Arab
ruler-—be he good or bad--to take advantage of the contradictions in the
society. This would give him a greater leeway for maneuverability. Here

i would like to make an observation: It is not accidental that the Arab
rulers who have endured and stayed in power longer than others are those who
are descended from ruling dynasties and families which took up politics as

a profession. The reason should be clear. Those rulers are experts on

the particularities, sensitivities and contradictions in their societies.
whereas a ruler who came to power through elections or a military coup usually
lacks this kind of expertise, or may occasionally be a person driven by

a pan-Arab vision--a vision which has been historically lacking in its
awareness of the factionalism and divisions which underlie the Arab world.

The ruling dynasties and the families which have mastered the art of con-
trolling contradictions and paradoxes have greatly benefited from the methods
used by the international powers which study the demography and social systems
in our countries and act accordingly. The comunists were the first to catch
on to the presence of sectarian impulses and minority complexes. If the

Arab peoples continue to cling to their unrealistic View of their social,
sectarian and comunal composition, their fate will remain in the hands of

the foreign and local experts on divisions and fissures. At beat, their fate
will remain in the hands of the dynasties and those scions who have mastered
the art of holding the reins of power.

Upon the conclusion of my meetings with all those whom I sought to meet in
Kuwait, my Marxist colleague asked me: What was the outcome of your dis—
cussions. Instead of a direct answer, I thought it would be better to use
his style of using folk sayings. I said: There are a lot of people here who
believe that in the absence of sentries in many Arab countries, the chief
sentry in Kuwait is God Almighty, because oil is God's gift and protecting

it is one of God's blessings. As it was said of the Ka'bah that "the Ka'bah
has God for a protector," it can also be said that "oil has God for a

32
protector." The new problem in Kuwait which has taken the people by sur-
prise, but not the ruler. is the coup which altered the shape of alliances.
Had a fortune teller or a clairvoyant predicted 2 years ago that a day will
come when the Iranians and Palestinians will stand arm in arm as allies,
he would have been dismissed as a charlatan, an inposter or a scaremonger.
But this is exactly what the situation is today: the Palestinians and the
Iranians are allies.

My friend said: Do you belittle this coup and take it lightly? Not at
all, I said, but I an not worried about its consequences.

9256
C50: 4802

33
STATEMENT OF HARONITE PATRIARCH ICHURAYSH
Beirut AL-SAFIR in Arabic 6 Oct 79 p 1

[Article: "Khuraysh: 'Some Heads of Petty States Are More Important and
Stronger Than the President'"]

[Text] Haronite Patriarch Antonius Butrus Khuraysh has announced that he

does not hold a mandate from the Haronite sect to bring about national
reconciliation. and said that the partitioning of Lebanon is impossible without
bringing about the destruction of everyone. He added that there are petty
states in Lebanon, and the heads of some of these states are more important

and stronger than the president of the repbulic.

These comments were made in a press interview given by Patriarch Khuraysh
before his trip to the Vatican. The interview was published today in the
French-language magazine LA RIVE DE LIBAN.

Khuraysh reiterated what he said when he made his attempt to bring together
the "Lebanese Front" and leaders of the north. namely that "the tyranny of
a violent state is better than the justice of a party." He said: "I can
only speak the truth, because I am weak before two things: the law and the
truth."

He pointed out that the state is demolished and must be repaired from within
and without. and that this will not take place except through unity in the
Lebanese ranks.

With regard to the issue of the South. he said: "I believe that this pro-
hlem and the problem of Lebanon as a whole could be solved if the Lebanese
would return to their consciences and triumph over the personal and selfish
differences aanng them."

Concerning the new system for Lebanon, he said it must be based either on a
return to the semblance of agreement upon which Lebanon was built, or on
the replacement of this agreement with a better one.
He also said that there is no disagreement among the clergy: "For the war
which broke out in Lebanon is not a religious war. as is indicated by the
fact that members of the same religion have fought among themselves more
often than members of two different sects have fought each other." He
wished that the reconciliation that he began between Basharri and Zagharta
would extend over all of Lebanon. and he saw this reconciliation not as a
new alliance but "rather as a new attempt to spread peace among all Le-
banese." Ile stated that conflict exists among Haroni te leaders. "but this
conflict is not limited to the Haronite sect."

He added that if the purpose of the spiritual soul: is to issue statements
and take pictures. this is something that happens all the time. But if the
goal is to bring nembers of every sect together as a preliminary step toward
reconciliation, then this requires a mandate. "And in all frankness, I do
not possess a mandate from my sect; and furthermore, the spiritual leaders in
the rest of the sects are unable to bring their sewers together."

8591
CSO: (0802

3S
LIBYAN OPPOSITION ATTACKS QADHDHAPI DESPOTISH
London AL-JIHAD in Arabic Sep 79 pp 2-3

[Text] These days, Qadhdhafi and his demons are absorbed in the wedding
feast that he is holding in self-adulation over completing 10 years of
maltreating the Libyan people and destroying the nation. Qadhdhafi has

not spared any effort or money on those enormously expensive celebrations
costing hundreds of millions of dinars.

It suffices to point out that those invited from abroad number 10,000.
Just imagine the extent of the unreal expenditures for that purpose. plus
what the rapid improvements have cost to embellish the appearance of the
buildings and roads that the guests will be in the vicinity of. A fast
job of shining up the shabby regime's face and a quick makeup job for the
dirty regime's skin. If we add to that the huge sums that Qadhdhafi will
scatter on some of the insignificant. spendthrifty news-en, who will fall
on some of then to pick them up, and who have become used to asking their
pens available in the public sale to whoever pays more, it is clear to us
that tne treasury of the revolutionary Janahiriyah will be hit with bank-
ruptcy.

The Qadhdhafi regime forbade the granting of entry visas to Libya at the
present time to those not invited. If you are an Arab not planning to re-
quest an entry visa. you will not get one because Qadhdhafi is busy getting
ready for Arab unity. and after he achieves it we will travel about in the
Arab countries without any need for entry visas. All that is a matter of
short duration that will be achieved througl- the efforts of the champion of
unity, and nothing is expected to stand in his way. If you are a Pales-
tinian, you would not waste your time requesting an entry visa to the para-
dise of the revolutionary Jamahiriyah, for the savior leader is busy paving
the way for liberation. If you waited awhile. then through the eighty efforts
of the brother leader you would enter Palestine and there would be no need
to wait for an entry visa to the Janahiriyah. It is all a matter of just

a short while. and there is nothing to prevent you from expecting it.

36
Qadhdhuii is inviting 10,000 persons from abroad to attend the anniversary
ui his vicious military takeover, while tens of thousands of Libyans are
openly being expelled from the country. You would really like to understand
all ihlu. hul You xvi dizzy thinking of III

Do You Know

00 you know that a third of the revenue of Qadhdhafi's Jamahiriyah is now
being spent on the Chadian war and its requirements? This of course is

in addition to the Libyan and Chadian lives being consumed. If the Chadian
war continues in this way, Qadhdhafi will bring about complete financial

bankruptcy after having achieved complete intellectual and spiritual bank-
ruptcy.

Perhaps only now, 10 years after the seizure of power by Lt Hu'ammar (Abu-
Minyar). many Libyans and Arabs with good intentions have been able to grasp
his political leanings and are convinced that he is no more than an infamous
American tool fashioned out of earthly extremism and the cover that are
necessary to perfect the role that was assigned to him.

The story of Qadhdhafi (Abu-Hinyar's) commission for the American Ceztral
intelligence Agency is not something just conceived, but rather goes back
some years prior to 1969.

ClA representatives were all over Libya. in the army as military advisors
and in the schools and universities under the well-known Peace Corps units,
at that time. The search was made for a qualified person who would be pre-
pared to play a well-defined role, and they found that Lieutenant Mu'ammar
was the best, most capable person to undertake that role.

The preparatory operation began right after 1967, after they advised him to
send a telegram to the chief of staff requesting permission to go to Egypt

to fight against Israel--a bold stand that could serve as a means of polariz-
ing some of the officers who were very fervent over the issue of nationalism.

The preparatory operation involved the following steps, and here we cite
the mos: important of them:

1. Singling him out from among his associates as having a sort of halo,
making him appear to his associates as having revolutionary saintliness.

and as possessing a simplicity and self-sacrivice for the sake of general
national action and self-denial.

2. Protecting him from the eyes of the Libyan intelligence agents in the
army and police. providing him with certain publications to guide his con-
cern and shape his thinking in accordance with what they wanted of him, and
with certain information which is abundantly available only to those who

37
enjoy the full confidence of the regime, so that this information could be
used at an appropriate time as a means of attracting certain officers in
charge of most of the sensitive centers in Libya, the seizure of which was
necessary to ensure a successful takeover.

3. Including him in a special study group that met in the home of one of
the officers of the American military mission in Benghazi. Some of the
study meetings were attended from time to time by Captain al-Kharubi.

6. At the highest levels, the Americans were even certain that Lieutenant
Hu'emmar would be ready to take over power. They arranged a special visit
for U.$. Ambassador to Libya David Newsom and some of his aides in the em-
bassy to Fezzan. to visit the Jarmah ruins. During that visit, which lasted
about 2 weeks. there was a lengthy meeting between David Newsom. then U.S.
ambassador to Libya and now undersecretary of state for African affairs,

and Lt Hu'ammnr (Abu-Hinyar), with Captain (Jallud) attending. That took
place in the first half of 1969. At that meeting. the functions that the
Americans should undertake when everything was ready were defined.

5. The Americans persuaded King ldris al-Sanusi to take a long trip to
Greece and then convinced him to abdicate in favor of his heir apparent.
All of these matters were raised in the Libyan street, so as to till the
soil for the new seed that the Americans wanted to sow in the Libyan soil,
and to condition the general atmosphere.

6. In July 1969. one of the principal employees of the 0.5. Embassy gave

an evening farewell party for the U.S. ambassador to Libya, whose transfer

was decided. as usual. after the plot was hatched and before its execution.
The party was attended in civilian clothing by Lieutenant Hu'ammar and Captain
al-Kharubi although they knew that the attendance of two officers at a diplo-
matlc party was prohibited under military regulations. Secret talks were

held at that party.

7. Certain circles made it known that a military takeover was imminent

and that it would be led by Col 'Abd-al-‘Aziz al-Shahi, and that the king
favored the takeover in order to prevent the assumption of power by the
heir apparent—-the object of his anger. This would prepare for Qadhdhafi's
takeover and remove obstacles from his way. Most officers would not oppose
it. and it would have failed if it were known that Lieutenant Qadhdhafi was
behind it, because the officers considered Qadhdhafi to be an unbalanced.
stupid, unsteady person who was not taken seriously, but rather looked on
as an object of scorn and ridicule.

8. Throughout August 1969. the mobile forces in Tripoli under the command
of Ahmad (Jahim), now the Libyan consul in Palermo, Italy. were on standby
alert, as was the force under the command of the late Lieutenant General
(Bushah) defending Barqah.

38
9. Certain foreign quarters informed certain officials of the Libyan re-
gime that the Americans were ready to support the revolutionary movement
and that all preparations had been made. including the fact that the com-
mander of Hheelus air base had withdrawn all aircraft from the base to
Germany and had informed certain U.S. officers that some action would soon
be taken in Libya and that consequently they should take any necessary pre-
cautions.

10. At midnight of 31 August. 2 or 3 hours before the army units were to
get underway, the maximum standby alert was cancelled for all the mobile
forces in Tripoli and the defense force in Barqah, Benghazi.

11. At 3 a m on 1 September 1969, small forces of the army moved to seize
control and did not encounter any resistance. 0n the contrary. some senior
officers and police went to the aid of the insurrectionist forces with infor-
mation from the Americans, and there are those who believe that al-Shahi
undertook his promised insurrection.

12. A new meeting was held 10 years after that one. The first one took
place secretly in Jarnah, Fezzan, when Hu'ammar was still a lst Lieutenant
in the army. The second took place secretly in Tripoli. with Hu'ammar in
the post of dictator of Libya. And the main personage in each of the two
meetings was David Newsom, currently an American undersecretary of state,
who was his country's ambassador to Libya when the first meeting was held.

This second meeting took place after a speech delivered by Hu'ammar Qadhdhafi
on ll June 1979. In it, he tried to put into effect a policy outside the
scope designed for his. In order to prevent some of his childish actions.
and to give him a new role that would please his vanity, his old friend
Newsoa was sent to his. The upcoming days will be an excellent indication
for the exposure of this destructive role.

5366
050: 6802

39
QADHDHAFI SAID DBSTROYING SHALL TRADESHEN
London AL-JIHAD in Arabic Sep 79 p 2

[Text] Qadhdhafi has declared that the role of the small shops is at an

end and that they will be closed down. Actually, with this statment. a
campaign of measures to implement what the master leader had previously
announced began. These measures include that of not renewing the licenses
of the small shops and closing them down. In this way, Qadhdhafi will

have plenty of people to be conscripted into his military, which apparently
has decided to announce or participate in a universal war. Qadhdhafi may
have handed over these small shops to his relatives, to demons and to others
like them.

From a rational standpoint, these perverted rulers are a great offense and
degradation to the socialism with which they are anointed. If capitalism
had wished for a far-reaching offense against socialism, it would have been
duty bound to invent and create persons such as these idiotic, complicated
agents. Socialism coming from such persons as these is devoid of all inno-
ccnce .

These agents flex their muscles at the small shopowners and shut their eyes
to the greedy international oil companies like Exxon, Mobil and Occidental.
Citizen Muhammad Ahmad or Faraj Ibn Hasan, owner of a small shop, serves the
people, while Exxon. Mobile. Occidental and other oil companies do not.
Qadhdhafi doesn't touch these huge companies which plunder and drain the
wealth of the Jamahiriyah, rather they are provided with all sorts of care
and revolutionary concern and patient tacilitations. while the small citi-
zen is [considered to be] a vicious, greedy, blood-sucking exploiter!
Mentally, Qadhdhafi is like a topsy-turvy woman customer who wants to cover
the sun with a sieve.

5346
C50: 6802

40
INTERVIEH WITH LIBYAN PBTROLEIM SECRETARY

Paris AL-NAHAR ARAB REPORT 6 mo in English 15 Oct 79 pp 6, 7
[Interview with Ezzedin Habruk, Libyan Petroleum Secretary]

[Text] Libya has acquired a reputation as a maverick among oil producers;
it is a reputation which the following interview with Oil Minister Buedin
Habruk will do little to dispel. Talking to AN-NABAR ARAB REPORT 5 Hull's
Randa Takieddine during the OPEC seminar in Vienna last week, he called
for a new increase in oil prices because the US dollar was still sliding
despite a three-month price freeze.

Hr Hsbruk appears to make a glaring error when he asserts that the total
oil consumption of African countries is 200,000 b/d. In 1977, Africa (ex-
cluding Algeria, Libya and Egypt) imported 830,000 b/d of petroleum prod-
ucts alone. Hr Habruk was presubly referring to Africa's imports of
Libyan oil.

Q: Do you think that the continued weakness of the US dollar would jus-
tify a further increase in the price of oil at OPEC's next conference? If
so, by how much should the price rise?

A: It is certain that the situation justifies a new increase; as for the
percentage, we are now holding discussions with other 0PM medaers. We
had a price freeze for three months but the dollar is still sliding. It
is perfectly nor-a1 that we think of compensating for this.

Q: Is there any change in Libya's oil production and export policies?

A: Our current production is 2.1 million barrels a day. of which we ex-
port almost 2 million b/d. This level will he maintained next year; we
do not intend to increase production.

Q: Dr Abdulhady Bassan Taber, the head of Saudi Arabia's Petromin. has
forecast a glut of oil next year. Do you agree with him?

A: Inshallah; this would benefit the world as a whole; but I definetely
think he is an optimistic men. If producers maintain current levels of
output and if consumers put conservation policies into effect. supply and
demand may balance for a while, but I am not sure we shall see an excess
of supply. However, if we receive gifts from heaven we shall welcome them.

[.1
Q: Do you think the circumstances are now right for a dialogue between
producers and the western countries?

A: Our stand on this is quite clear. We have nothing against a dialogue,
far fron it. we should welcone one. But I do not share the View that some
people have expressed here, that a dialogue can begin next south. Organi-
sing a dialogue between different groups is a dangerous matter. The pro-
posed dialogue between the Gulf countries and‘the BBC is jut one exasple.
Questions like this should be examined very carefully.

Q: "hat is Libya doing to help the non-oil producing developing countries,

vhich were hit hardest of all by the latest increases in the price of
oil?

A: This is obviously a question we must face. But take some specific ex-

asples, India and Yugoslavia. India exports technology. Yugoslavia is
an advanced country.

we have no obligations towards developing countries as such, since we too
are a developing nation. The only difference between then and us is that
God gave oil to us and not to then. Re help those who deserve our help.
The mat inportant question is how we distribute our aid. We do not be
lieve in the efficiency of projects like Iraq's proposal for a long-tern
fund. “ten a country is in need, we are ready to give aid and to give
oil free of charge. This does not represent such. The total consuption
of the African countries is only 200,000 b/d, so we can easily afford to
help those who deserve it.

Tell: about long-tern funds involving the industrial countries is unrealis-
tic and irrelevant and should he dropped.

(:80: 6820

#2
AID T0 MALI FOR DEVELOPMENT, ISLAMIC ACTIVITIES REPORTED
Riyadh AL-RIYAD in Arabic 3 Oct 79 p 7

[Article by 'Abd-al-Huhsin al-Daud: "Kingdom Offers Mali $150 Million;
Kingdom Participates with $100 Million in Great Niger River Project"]

[Excerpts] The year 1975 was a turning point in Arab-African relations. for
it was in this year that the late King Faysal made a trip which included a
number of African states.

The King was able to alter relations and ties between the two blocs in favor
of the Arab cause. beginning with the severance of diplomatic relations
between the African states and Israel. As a result, these states attained
significant furtherance of their next phase toward a future which ensures
them of achieving international balance in their joint interests and support
for their development programs.

Saudi-Halls!) Aid

With regard to the material and economic aid which the kingdom provides to
the Malian Government, His Excellency [Ahmad Zaki Salih, Saudi minister
plenipotentiary and charge d'affaires in Mali] said that many aid programs
and agreements exist between the kingdom and Mali. One of the inner impor-
tant of these is the agreement which has been concluded by the Malian Govern-
ment. the Saudi Development Fund along with the other Arab funds in the Gulf,
and the Arab-African Bank for the purpose of financing a project for construc-
tion of the (Silanga) Dam. which will supply the capital, Bamako, with water
and ensure the electricity it needs for use in industrial projects. The

dam will also create a lake which will be utilized for irrigation and agri-
culture. The kingdom has provided 315 million as its share in this giant
project, as well as an additional $5 million to cover the coat of paving the
road lending to the dam.

In addition, the kingdom has provided 10 million riyals as its participa-
tion in certain health and social projects, which include construction of two
clincs in the suburbs of Bamako. These clinics will contain sections for
maternity and infant care as well as sections for general medicine and sur-
gery, and will be supplied with the latest in medical equipment. The clinics
are currently on the verge of completion and will be handed over in 3 months.

63
Anuthcr project involves construction of dental centers, including a pub-

llc center in the capital and branches in the form of dental clinics lo-
cated in various areas. A third project involves support for the importation
of equipment and action to supplement this equipment, especially the essen-
tial items. A fourth project is for the construction of two Islamic re-
ligious courts in the cities of Mopti and Akai. These two courts will be
completed in the near future. Mr Salih went on to say: "In addition, the
kingdom previously built the Great Bamako Mosque, considered one of the
biggest landmarks in the city, at a cost of $h.5 million some years ago.

The Saudi Development Fund is financing 50 percent of the costs of a cattle-
raising project in the area of Nsbujo in partnership with the Malian Govern-
ment and the U.S. AID organization. The project, which cost a total of
$13.5 million, is aimed at developing and improving cattle raising, protect-
ing the cattle from disease, and employing modern technology in raising them.
as well as at working toward exporting the cattle abroad."

Furthermore, the kindgom provided $2 million as its part for a popular hous-
ing project for state employees. The project is located on the airport road
and contains 64 villas. The kingdom also paid $2 million to ensure the
purchase of irrigation equipment for the Niger River Administation when that
administration wanted to modernize and recondition its equipment. Also. the
kingdom paid $1 million for study of a project involving irrigation stations
in the northern regions of Timbuktu.

Mr Salih added: "What 1 have mentioned thus far represents direct aid of-
fered by the kindgom over 3 years. The kingdom has also provided indirect
aid to the Malian Government, including the initial agreement on the part of
the Saudi Development Fund to participate in financing the construction of

a cement plant in the first region. The purpose of this project is to en-
sure the cement needs of the Senegal Basin project (Malinatali Dam), which
serves Mali, Senegal, and Mauritania. The Senegal Basin project is one of
the vital projects serving these three states. It is a joint venture in
which Saudi Arabia, Abu Dhabi, and Kuwait all participate. The kingdom
alone participates with over $100 million. This project will help improve
navigation on the Niger River and will create an area for industrialization.
in view of the availability of electric power produced by the dam water.

The kingdom previously provided $5 million in aid to the coastal states

and people suffering from the drought. The states which received this aid
included Mali, Senegal, Zambia, and Chad. The aid took the form of food

for the citiznes. Also included under indirect aid is the kingdom's parti-
cipation in various programs of UNESCO and the International Food and Agri-
culture Oraanization. Thus, the kingdom took part in financing the opening
of a center for the development of rice cultivation, among various other
programs."

46
lslamic Aid

Concerning Islamic aid offered to the state of Mali by Saudi Arabia, Ahmad
Zukl Salih. charge d'affaires of the Saudi Embassy in Mali. said: "There

is a large number of Islamic projects in which the Islamic World League
participates. one of which involves providing aid to the more than 45 Is-
lamic Arabic schools scattered throughout Mali. The league has also financed
a project involving a school for the Sunni and construction of the Mopti mos-
que, and has participated with 3 million riyals in the construction of an
lslamic vocational institute especially for graduates of Islamic Arabic
schools. as well as construction of the Djenne Mosque. construction of com-
mercial shops belonging to the Great Mosque in Bamako-—which are dependent

on the mosque and whose proceeds are to be used for the mosque's upkeep--

and construction of a larger lecture hall for the mosque in Bamako."

The kingdom has also provided intermittent aid at various times to the
Arabic and Islamic schools in order to assist them in fulfilling their mis-
sion. developing their instructional materials. and attracting the greatest
possible number of Malians to study in them. The kingdom hopes to present
academic scholarships for Saudi universities to Malian youths in order to
enable them to complete their university education.

lslamic Youth Camp and its Effect

Concerning the Islamic youth camp held in Bamako and the extent of its ef-
fect on the Malian people. Mr Salih said: "The idea of holding the camp
was a very profitable one. It serves Moslem youth and opens an avenue of
comunication among them. and it has received a good response--especially
from the Malian youth themselves, because the Malian people are known for
their Islamic attitude. Even the Malian minister of youth and culture was
continually in contact with the embassy to discuss the needs of the camp.
and so was the Malian ambassador to the kingdom. He are thankful that the
camp has been held, and we have felt great success which encourages us to
hold another camp. because this first experience has been very encouraging.

"There was direct contact among the embassy, the World Council for Islamic
Youth, and the Islamic Solidarity Fund for the purpose of participation and

assistance, and in fact we made some proposals which were accepted by the
council."

Speaking of Malian pilgrims, the ambassador said: "The embassy cooperates
with the Malian Government in this area, and some time ago we began arranging
pilgrimage affairs and granting the pertinent visas. The embassy does many
things to facilitate matters for Malian pilgrims and supplies them with the

necessary instructions. The embassy usually grants about 2.500 visas to
pilgrims each year."

55
Moalens make up more than 90 percent of Hall's population, and a good por-
tion of them speak Arabic--cspecislly those who have received their educa-
tion in Islamic or Arabic schools. Moreover, there is considerable interest
In learning the Arabic language. and thus the kingdom tries to publicize
the Islamic institutes, shcoola, and centers in order to spread the teach-
ings of the true Islamic religion and the Arabic language among the friendly

Malian people .

8591
CSO: 6802

66
PETROHIN ANNOUNCED AIRCRAFT FUEL PIPELINE
Riyadh AL-RIYAD in Arabic 11 Oct 79 p 2

[Articlcz "PETRGiIN Assume Hanagement of Pipeline To Transport Aircraft
Fuel in Dhahran; Hark Is in Progress To Establish Linea To Transport Oil

Products in al-Sharqiyah")

[Text] within the next 10 days. PBTROHIN will assume aanage-ent of a new
pipeline to carry aircraft fuel from the main storage tanks in Dhahran.
The capacity of the 8.5-kilometer pipeline is 100.000 barrels per day.

This was announced in a statenent by Mr Abu al-Jadayil, the executive mem-
ber assigned to marketing affairs for PBTROMIN. he said that this is one
of a large number of projects currently being implemented by the organiza-
tion. and that other projects will enter the implementation phase shortly.
he explained that the projects now being implemented include construction
of two pipelines to transport oil products from the Ra's Tannurah refinery
to PBTRmIN's storage tanks in Dhahran and the installation of pumps with a
capacity of 100,000 barrels [per day]. The pipelines will be 15 miles long.
the entire distance under water.

He also said that inland pipelines and 1] loading platforms are to be con-
structed to load trucks and railroad cars.

Hr Abu al-Jadayil mentioned that PETRG‘IIN is currently constructing eight
oil storage tanks with a combined capacity of 1.2 million barrels. The cost
of the tanks is 225 million riyals. The first stage of the project is
expected to be finished in the middle of next year, and the final stage
should be completed in 1981.

Also under construction are reserve storage tanks and loading platforms

in the al-Qatif area which will be supplied by a pipe from Ra's Tannurah.
These facilities will cost 25 million riyals.

67
l’E‘l‘ROMIN's marketing director also stated that projects soon to enter the
implementation phase in the al-Sharqiyah area at a cost of 120 million
riyals include construction of storage tanks and petroleum distribution fa-
cilities in the cities of al-Hufuf and al-Jubayl. and improvement and deve-
lopmcnt of distribution facilities in the city of al-Safaniyah.

Concerning PBTRmiIN projects in the areas of Riyadh, al-Qasim, al-Kharj
and Maj ran. Hr Abu al-Jadayil mentioned that two tanks for storage of air-
craft fuel in the central region have been handed over. These tanks have
a capacity of 100,000 barrels and cost 6 million riyals.

A contract has been awarded for construction of storage tanks and an installa-
tion to supply aircraft with fuel at Badanah airport at a cost of 15 million
rlyals. Also. work will begin soon on the development and improvmenet of
distribution facilities in the areas of Riyadh. al-Qasim. al-Kharj, and Raj-
ran.

The director added that projects still under study include a project to
link distribution facilities in al-Jubayl with pipelines from Ra's Tannurah;
construction of storage and distribution facilities in al-Qaysumah and con-
nection of these facilities with pipelines originating at Ra's Tannurah and
ul-Jubayl; a project to link distribution facilities in al-Kharj with pipe-
lines originating at the Riyadh oil refinery; and construction of an air-
craft fuel loading unit at the new Riyadh ariport and connection of this
unit with a pipeline from the Riyadh refinery.

with regard to PETROHIN's marketing activities, Abu al-Jadayil said that

the organization is presently distributing fuel to all areas of the kingdom.
and is performing the service of supplying aircraft with fuel at the airports
of Riyadh, Dhahran. al-Qaysumah. Badanah, and Tarif. In addition. it is
narketing lubricating oil and ship fuel at the port of al-Dallnam, petroleum
gas in Ra's Tannurah, and road asphalt in Riyadh.

he added that PBTROMIN now owns 19 distribution facilities in consumption
arena in the different parts of the kingdom. It also owns a fleet of 320
tankers to transport petroleum products, and uses 120 railroad cars to trans-
port oil into the central region. in addition to trucks from local contractors.

At the conclusion of his statement, PETROMIN's marketing director stated that

85 percent of the workers in the organization are Saudis, and distribution
facilities operate 2‘ hours a day.

8591
C50: 4802

48
BRIEFS

HELL, PIPELINE HAINTENANCE—-PETROHIN has begun implementing a project in-
volving conplete maintenance of oil pipelines in the al-Shnrqiyah stun and
replacement of large portions of the existing network. This was announced
in a statenent by a responsible source in the organization, who said that
PETROHIN has signed a contract worth over 300 nillion riyals with a ooummny
specializing in this field. The source added that this is part of an inte-
grated project to provide maintenance and fire protection for oil wells

as well as transport lines and large storage tanks. The source said that
rigorous and constant observation and nonitoring are carried out to obviate
any accidents which might occur. The source mentioned that the safety of
the oil wells and of the transportation and distribution network in the king-
doa is good, and that the systen is uncecedented in the world with respect
to its low incidence and degree of seriousness of accidents. [Text]
[Riyadh AL-RIYAD in Arabic 11 Oct 79 p 2] 8591

050: 10802

A9
KEARTOUH SEEKS BIG WESTERN LOAN

Paris AL-Nm ARAB REPORT 6 mm in English 15 Oct 79 p 4

[T813] Sudan is seeking some SL2 billion in loans to
reﬁnance its overdue cornmereral lore‘gn debts and has
aslted Western bankers l'or concessionary terms.
according to reports from London last week. The
banlters. who are holders of Sudanese debts. were
understood to be planning meetings in October to
decide how they wrll respond to the request. Sudan
asked for the loan at ameeting with its creditors in
London at the end of last month. Khartoum asked for
concessionary terms to help the country through what
it expects to be a difﬁcult period over the next few
years until bis new development projects begin to
boost its earnings from agricultural exports. Sudan's
current economic pliﬂtt is due in large measure to the
overheating caused by these dcvelopment projects and
the large volume of imports which they required.

Sudan is also due to men the Club of Paris in
November to discuss rescheduling the debts held by
the Club. which is a consort-urn of Western export
credit guarantee agencies. Commercial banks have been
asked in the meantime to find out how much of
Sudan's foreign debt has now tuned Into Club‘s hands
as the result of export guarantee qreernents.

According to the reports. Sudan is asking the
bankers tn strucure the reﬁnancing loan to take into
account its debt-servicing schedule and to include
repayments of interest on principal from now until
June 30. I982. when a three~year agreement on
emnornic reforms with the IMF comes to an end.
Sudan is also reported to be seeking additional cash to
help ﬁnance imports and development projects during
this period.

Western bankers are understood to be
sympathetic. if only because they do not want to see
Sudan declare a formal default on its debts. They are
expected however to balk over the terms Khartoum is
seeking. Meanwhile. they can draw! some comfort from
Illc lulu-mlmliun lill'l\|:|\‘\ which 5m" mumllaccd la!
nmnIll ( In .\-‘,'Iun .lml- Rulurrl & MIMI) ul' Scplcml‘h
10). whah luuuw Mun-mu lid-Ix 4H)": Sulcmuu up
.ur wmkmr chI. III: lm‘.l\lIII.‘ Intl-nle .I iwulm
rulmnw ml: and lq:ul.u:nu-\ \Vllk'll palm! KIulJm'w
In IIIK'II Jufuunh in lnul hunk. \lcnmuuulcd m
l'mc-pu nun-nun .nml an: Ila-gnu! In cluuncl

remittances from Sudanese expatriate work-
era into the domestic banking system. Mr
Suleiman, who was in London last week,
said that imports were now being financed
from remittances. "The aim of the new
system is to give our creditora the con-
fidence that we will be able to honour
any rescheduling," Mr Suleiman declared.

51
BRIEFS

ARAB mam-m FUND mAN-‘l'he Arab Monetary Fund has agreed to lend Sudan
$66 aillion to help offset ita aevera balance of pay-ante deficit. The
loan is the largeat nade by the AH? and bringa Sudan'a total borrowing fron
the Fund to $58.6 million. The new loan is in the fern of an extended
fund facility aindlar to the three-year facility provided to Sudan by the
DI? last May (AN-MAR ARAB REPORT 5 m, Hay 16). Reporta fro. Abu
Dhabi, where the AM! is baaed, said that the tough ueaeurea adopted by the
Sudaneae govaruent on the inaiatence of the III? have iaproved the coun-
try'a standing with international lenders. Aa thia navaletter reported
in its October 22 iaaue. the European Econouc (inﬁnity and the World
Bank are conaidering loana totalling about $50 Iillion to aubaidiae Su-
daneee inporta of peaticidea, fuel and apare parta for far-era. Sudan'a
chronic balance of paynenta illa nevertheleaa nade nacaaaary a further de-
valuation of the pound thia math, and Sudan la hoping for a maiva

$1.2 billion fron the "eat to help overcoae ita difficulties. The no haa
now paid out about $90 nillion in loana to Egypt. Sudan, Morocco. Heuri-
tania and Syria. ‘lha lateat Sudaneae loan vaa announced early thia Ionth.
{Text} [Darla mum ARAB REPORT 6 mo in Engliah 29 Oct 79 p 3]

080: 6820

52
DRIEPS

RESOLUTION OF DIFFERENCES-A number of people are using their good offices
to resolve the strained relations between Shaykh nashid Ibn Sa'id. the ruler
of Dubai and prine ninister of the UAE. and UAR Foreign Minister Ahnad al-
Suwaydi, who has been living in seclusion in Europe. The estrangenent be-
tween the two nen developed on the eve of the for-ation of the new cabinet,
when ai-Suwaydi learned through the grapevine that Shaykh Rashid has privately
berated hi. and criticized him for worsening the relations between Shaykh
Rashid and the DAB head of state, Shaykh Zayid. As a result. al-Suwsydi
decided that under the circumstances cooperation between him and Shaykh
Rashid would be difficult, so he flew to Europe and failed to participate

in the swearing in of the new cabinet. Shsykh Zsyid has worked hard to
sooth the feeling of the person who was his right hand nan, and he took him
along with hi. on his recent visit to Morocco. Al-Suwaydi, however. still
remains in seclusion in Europe while friends are trying to complete the en-
deavors which were begun by Shaykh Zayid. [Text] [London ALPHAHADITH in
Arabic 19 Oct 79 p 13] 9256

cso: 1.802 m

53