APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP02-00050R000200030032-1
Near East/North Africa Report

No. 2057

FBIS FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from Engl ugh-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[l are supplied by JPRs. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each iten, or following the

. last line of a brief, indicate how the original inforntion was
processed. “here no processing indicator is given, the infor-
nation was sumarised or extracted.

Unfaniliar naaes rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Horde or naaes preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. lines within‘ itens are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of th. 0.5. Government.

PROCUREMENT OF PUBLICATIOS

ms publications my be ordered fro- the National Technical
Infornation Service, Springfield, Virginia 22161. In order-
ing, it is recouended that the JPRS nunber, title, date and
author, if applicable, of publication be cited.

Current JPRS publications are announced in Governent hearts
Amouncenents issued semi-monthly by the National Technical
Infornation Service, and are listed in the lionthl Catalo of
11.3. Governannt Publications issued by the Superintendent of
Documents, 0.8. Govern-ant Printing Office, Hashington, 0.0.
20402.

Indexes to this report (by keyword, author, personal n-es,
title and series) are available fron Bell & llovell, Old
Hansfield Road, Wooster, (bio “691.

Correspondence pertaining to matters other than procurenent
nay be addressed to Joint Publications Research Service,
1000 North Globe Road, Arlington, Virginia 22201.
—-_—_-_—

l6. Matt “I!" m M)

This aerial report. contains infatuation on socioeconomic. govern-ent. political.
and technical developmnto in the countries of the Near last and North Africa.

‘ n. Dee-non! m e W
, P-nlirical Science _x_Inter-Arab Affairs xLibya _Sultanate

Sociology _North African __Hauritania of Gun
Economics Affairs _ﬂorocco _Syria
Culture (Social x_ Afghanistan _People's Deno- _x_ Tunisia
Sciences) _x__ Algeria cretic Republic J_United Arab

Ethnology _Bahrain of been Bait-ates
Geography x_Bgypt _Persian Gulf _Heetern Sahara
Techological x__ Iran Area __Yenen Arab
Military Sciences x_Iraq __Qatar Republic

.1. Israel __Saudi Arabia

_Jordan _8penieh North

_x_nuait Africa

x_ Lebanon __Sudln

b Mien/Oceania. 'Ma

r count-duo...» SD, SC. 5K. 15

. __.._._- . __-_ ____Tn:._._'7.;.__
“Unﬁt-Leo vailability lumuggigr- I 13—;

5°!" by "T15 -u.-~u:-muneu— 3.3.1. ' " "
Springfield. Virginia 22161 UNCLASSIFID

Much-unn- “Malena. mmrnu-m
NEAR EAST/NORTH AFRICA REPORT
No. 2057

CONTENTS

INTE? -ARAB AFFAIRS

Phlestinian Role in Iran Seen as Unclear by Arabs
(AL-DUSPIR, 8'1!‘ wt 79) cuss-sot...repossess-00....

PLO Relations Hith Iran Examined
(m ARAB woam my, 3 Nov 79)

Khomeyni's Grandson Speaks Out on Arab Issues
(Hasseyn loiomeyni Interview; AL-WS'I‘IR, 5-11 Nov 79)

South Korean Workers in Gulf Seen as Enigms
(AL-mm AL-‘ARABI HA AL-DWALI, h Nov 79)

Kuwait To Receive Drinking, Irrigation Water From Iraq
(Muhanmd ai-Hakim; AL-RA'Y AL-‘Am, 13 Sep 79)

Briefs
Antiresime Publications

AFGHANISI‘AN

Amin Comments on Brezhnev Proposal
(Kabul Radio, 11 Nov 79)

Constitutional Comittee Studying Citizens' Proposals
(Kabul Domestic Service, 10 Nov 79) ................

Briefs
Ministers Leave for Bulgaria
Economic Commission Meeting
Anti-Khomeyni Activities
Attacks on Japanese Tourist, Others
Return of Comrce Minister
CONTENTS (Continued)

AIGERIA

EXP?

IRAN

Algeria Under BendJedid Reported 0n
(DMD! L'AFRIQUE, 22 Oct 79)

Changes After First Nine Months, by Bechir Rezzoug
Profile of Chsdli BendJedid, by Roland Miler.

Government Reported To Be Rethinking Hydrocarbons Policy
(AR-1mm ARAB REPORT & MEMO, 12 Nov 19)

Briefs
Algerians Versus Romanians

Prosecution Case Against Commists Continues
(AL-Am, 23 Oct 79) 0O.COCO-0.00.0.0...-00.00....

Briefs
m Party Members Arrested

Attack on Dubassy Seen as Blow Against U.S. Imperialism
(mm, 6 Nov 79) oooooooases...success-cocoons...-

Shari'atmdari Reiterates Demand for Return of Shah
(Shari'atmdari Interview; W, 13 Nov 79) ......

Governor warns of Internal Counterrevolution
(mm, 16 0‘31; w) DID.00.00.000.00...IOOOOCOIOIOOO

IOmmeyni's Son States Views on Government
(mm, 15 0M? 79) OI0.0.000-000-0000.looooooloooon

Details of Afghan Plot To Kill Ayatollah Shari'atmdari Bared

(mm, 16 OCt 79) OIOOOOOOOIOOIIIOOIOIOIJOOOOOI...

Turkish Paper on Events in Islamic World
(Zafer Atay; menu, 26 Rev 79)

Military Men May Retire Afta‘ 20 Years
(mm, 15 Oct 79)

9589

2h

33

35

39

he

51

55
ISRAEL

KUIMI'I‘

Arabs Urged To Use Experts To Influence v.5. Presidential
Elections

(Editorial; AL-QUN, 6 Nov 79) .....................

Uproar Ove: al -Shak' ah Statements Said Intentionally
Fabrics .ed
(ﬂitor1313M5‘QUw, 8 NOV 79) ooooooueeaeeuooooooov

Salfit Mayor Visits Amn
(AL‘QUIS, 31 OCt 79) on000.0000000000000Ito-IOOOOO'O

Editorial Believes Ending Occupation Hill Bid Counl ry's
Economic Problems

(Editorial; AL-QUN, 5 NOV 79) 000.00.000.0000000000

'AL-TALI'AH' Deplores Iranian-Arab Misunderstanding
(Editorial; AL-TALI'AH, 10 Oct 79)

Kuwait Offers Proposals To End Gulf Financial Crisis
(mm AL-‘ARABI HA AL-quLI, 18 Nov 79)

Editorial Cements on Egyptian Amy Leadership
(Editorial, Fu'ad Matar; AL-HATAN, 10 Oct 79) ......

Property Allocations Expanded for 1979
(AL-RA'! AL-'Am, 10 Sep 19) .......................

Private Sector Necessary to Petrochemical Process
(AL-m, 30 Sep 79) onoooeoenosoooouoesoooaccuses.

Briefs
Deportation Cement

LEBANON

Lebanese Troop leader Interviewed
(Sand mam Interview; mum! WING, 19-25 Nov 79)
CONN-MS (Cont. i uwrd)

LIBYA
Libyan &-crctary of Foreign Affairs Conan has on World,
Arab Affairs
('All 'Abd-al-Salan al-Turaykl Interview;
ALI-SARAH, 16 NOV 79) .0009.-oaooouo-no-oopnnooo
TUNISIA

Envoys Reported To Ask Mapesns for Aid Against
nomyniism
(AL-m, 11 Rev 79)

UNITED ARAB EMIRATES

UAR-CONOCO Deal Yields Great. Profit: for Dubai Ruler
(AL’HAHADM, 2 NOV 79) OOIOIIOIIOOOOOOICODIOIO
PALESTINIAN ROLE IN IRAN SEEN AS UNCLEAR BY AkABS
London AL-DUSTUR in Arabic 8-16 Oct 79 pp 11-12

[Articlez "Hould Khomeyni Go to Mecca for Pilgrimage? lran's Gulf
Politics: Is Iran Strategically Right and Tactically Hrong? Does the PLO
Have Any Role in Iran and the Gulf Incidents?"]

[Text] If the Iranian revolution is petroleum related, then it must be
Arab and. particularly, Gulf related.

In the Gulf the battle began between the Iranian revolution and the Gulf
and island's regimes. Ayatollah Ruhani keeps demanding that Bahrain be
part of Iran; Kuwait and Bahrain arrest and deport lhomsyni'a representa-
tives; the Sultanate of Oman offers its "program" for the protection of
the Strait of Bormuz; and Saudi Arabia sends two of its army brigades to
Bahrain.

But what if Imam Khomeyni moves his battle inside the region and to its
strongest ring, Saudi Arabia, where it is said he will conduct his pilgrimage
to the holy lands; and what if he gave some of his tOuching speeches to

the pilgrims, speeches which are against the policies of Saudi Arabia and

the Gulf shaykhdoms?

What is the Iranian situation like as seen from within the Gulf; how do
the progressive people of the region View it; and what political and social
forces agree with it?

Many questions arise concerning the situation in the Gulf, which has become
shaky since the Iranian revolution's victory. Some of these questions
are answered by the following letter.

Our meeting in Beirut with a group of youths from the Gulf, mostly from
Kuwait. gave us a suitable opportunity to examine a group of issues and
problems discussed by some Arabic newspapers and nagazines. especially
concerning the nature of Gulf-Iranian relations with the Islamic revolution.

Discussion of the subject branched out so much that it sometises reached
back in history to the year 1776. "when the Persians took over Basrah,"
thus making "Kuwait" the main point of sea commerce between the Near and
Far East. At the time the "East Indian Company." with its imperialist
past. changed its sea mail route to Aleppo from Basrah to "Kuwait," thus
attracting many Arab and Persian merchants from Basrah to that area south
of Iraq.

Discussions grew wider. but the current political situation was always the
focal point that brought our conversation and us back to the starting
point: the Gulf and Iran after the revolution.

He had the opportunity to hear many different things about the Gulf in
general and Kuwait in particular. ranging from anlytical to informational,
but all conversations centered around the dangerous situation in the Gulf
and the Iranian revolution.

The story in Kuwait seems to begin with the incident involving Ahmad
aI-Hahri. After Ahmad al-Hahri, a relative of Khomeyni, gave a speech in
one of Kuwait's mosques and was put in jail by the ruling family. the
problems of Arab-Iranian relations and Sunni-Shi'ite relations began to
appear, especially since the Kuwaiti incidents paralleled those of Bahrain
and the Ayatollah Ruhani's statements.

During our sessions it seemed that some of the educated and progressive
Kuwaitis were constantly reaffirming that many issues are confused or
inflated. They said that there is a noticeable difference between Iranian
strategy in general and some of its current tactics in relations to the Gulf.

"hat is happening in the Gulf--according to the above analysis--is a
natural and inevitable outcome of the Iranian revolution. As the Arab
nations were subjected to inevitable changes due to the Egyptian political
situation and role, it is natural that the Gulf would be subjected to
inevitable changes as a result of the Iranian changes. The political
situation in the Gulf as originally established was based on the triangular
balance between Iraq, Saudi Arabia and Iran. This meant that any change

in any of these "central" Gulf countries would lead to changes involving
the entire Gulf region.

Iran's Strategic Limits

The problem goes beyond what happened or may happen in Bahrain and Kuwait.
Bahrain or Kuwait or other countries in the Gulf may become mere symbols

of a changing relationship. In the light of this change. it is said that
Iranian strategy balances two major matters in the Gulf.

The first matter is the replacement of the scattered Gulf situation with
enough power to allow Iranian connections with the Arab-Israeli conflict.
The repeated American threats after the Iranian revolution to take over
the oil wells, U.S. moves in Gulf waters and 0.5. hints at regional
projects show that the Gulf is one of the weakest links in the Iranian
chain. If we assumed that Khomeyni's leadership were to attempt more of
its basic steps on the political, petroleum or military levels, It would
no doubt have its eyes set on the Gulf, since the Gulf presents an ideal
situation for American penetration of Iran.

0n the other hand, Iranian ambition, which the revolution uncovered early,
to exercise a heavy central role in the conflict against Israel remains a
mere wish, with no actual tools to allow this conflict to reach the battle-
grounds. This will necessitate, according to the Iranians, transforming
the Gulf into a field for Iranian penetration of the Arab-Israeli scene

of conflict.

The second matter which Iranian strategy aims to materialize--according to
this anslyais--is to make an actual connection between petroleum and the
fight against Israel in the region. It is known, for example, that the
most prominent lesson learned by Henry Kissinger from the October War and
the petroleum price increases that followed was the necessity of persistent
work to separate petroleum from politics and to divert the centers of
conflict from the petroleum supply lines within the Gulf fields and between
Hestern European ports and the United States.

It is also known that Saudi politics, especially through Minister of
Petroleum Ahmad Zaki al-Yamani, have always insisted on the application
of the above principle by exercising extreme conservatism against raising
[petroleum] prices based on political justifications.

Negative Observations

The positive picture of Iranian strategy is paralleled by some negative
observations of Iranian tactics, particularly as revealed by Ayatollah
al-Ruhani's declarations.

In the context of negat've observations, attention is directed to the

fact that the Iranian Constitution specifies that the al-Ja'fari sect is

the state sect in Iran; this conflicts with the current Arab situation and
prevents the possibility of Iranian influence on the Arab situation. In
fact, it is basically in conflict with the general Islamic sentiments

toward the Iranian revolution as expressed in the overall declarations,
actions and writings of Ayatollah Khomeyni and his associates, as well as

by information sources, including the latest decree enforcing the obligatory
teaching of Arabic in Iran because it is the language of the Koran. Some
people focus on the following three tactical errors:

That the revolution presents a reason to depict the new Iranian situation
as if it were a natural continuation of what it was during the Shah's
regime (which, until recently, considered Bahrain as the 16th state in
Iran, and treats the Gulf as its vital extension).

That it offers arguments acceptable to many Emirates and shaykhdoms to
improve their relations with the other central Gulf countries (Saudi Arabia
and Iraq), thus forming a Gulf core of cores.
That it helps emphasize sectarianism (besides nationalism) among Gulf
Sunnis and Shi'ites. especially since some agencies benefit from support-
ing such sectsrianism and loyalties to the Imam in order to build a
barrier in the face of Islamic advancement of the Iranian revolution.

1w Phases Herged

There are thosc who explain what is called "Iranian tactical mistakes" as
one of the results of the mergers of two phases in Iran:

The phase of Iran crossing its borders in defense of its political
liberation against imperialism; and

The phase of the prolonged struggle for authority in Iran. which has not
yet ended. It can therefore be said that "chaos," which is natural
situation facing every revolution at the outset, is the main reason behind
disorganized Iranian tactics relative to foreign policy in general and the
Gulf area in particular.

The above co-entators add that "Palestine" is the major corrective element
in Iranian tactics. For exawle, when Khomeyni declared "Jerusalem Day,"
the whole Gulf became a big political celebration in which families, social
forces and all sects joined in an atmosphere overwhelmingly sympathetic to
the Iranian revolution, to the extent that no one mentioned the local
regulations and Gulf rulers.

1n commenting on the above or discussing the same subject, informational
sources in the Gulf say that Ayatollah Khomeyni might go to hcca for the
pilgrimage. If this report proves to be true and Khomeyni gave some of his
speeches in Saudi Arabia about Islamic unity on the issue of the Palestinian
fight and what this means, what effect would such an incident have in the
Gulf and Saudi areas?

It can be deduced from the above that minor adjustments in the Iranian
tactics will definitely settle many of the matters that may be taking a
negative and bad direction. Hithin the framework of "universal Islamic
unity" in the struggle against "imperialism and Zionism," one finds many
progressive Gulf people who demand better levels of relationship and
coordination between the Iranian revolution and the political forces
opposed to imperialism in the Gulf.

Sunnis--Arabs for the Revolution

It is said—particularly in the case of Kuwait--that there is a wide
margin encircling the game of contradiction between Arab and Persian
nationalism and the sectarian Sunni-Shi'ite contradiction. In Kuwait
there are three forces (of a Sun. and Arab nature) that support the
Iranian revolution. There is the "al-Teli'ah Group," named after the
leftist AL-TALI'AH magazine that formed a progressive parliamentary group
led by Dr Ahmad al-Khatib, who began his political career in the "Arab
Nationalist Hovement" and then declared his Marxism as part of the movement's
change to a Marxist-Leninist movement. Today Dr al-Khatib is one of the
mosque speakers on Fridays calling for support for the Iranian revolution.
There is also the "Social Reform Organization," which could almost be a
Kuwaiti version of the "Noslem Brotherhood Movement," and it represents

the Sunni religious situation in Kuwait. It has been clashing lately with
the government, with the rise of youthful and more rooted elements to its
leadership. In this context, it should be mentioned that the two magazines
of this organization. AL-DA'HAH and AL—ISLAH, were suspended for one month
after the incident at the Aleppo military college in Syria.

Talking about political Islamic awareness in Kuwait, we must mention that
5,000 copies of Khomeyni's book "The Islamic Government" were sold there,
an almost legendary number compared with book consumption in Iran.

The third group is the Palestinian colony in Kuwait, which has its politi-
cal and cultural impact on the country. Prior to Khomeyni's revolution.
it constituted the Arab enigrant group that equaled the Iranian group in
Kuwait. Today both colonies have a political coalition that finds its
cohesion in the Iranian revolutionary stand in support of the Palestinian
resistance. It is known that the Palestinian colony had been exposed to
some problem in Kuwait. especially with the Lebanese war and the
Palestinian resistance struggle with Syria.

in addition to all the above, the Kuwaiti regime, with the rise of infla-
tion, was exposed to sharp social pressures directly reflected in the youth
element of limited-income families. This crisis adds to the general
crisis, which is the overall Gulf situation after the Iranian revolution.
Ahmad al-Mahri's provoking was basically centered around social matters.
The social crisis also caused a new vocabulary to develop, such as
"al-Hawamir,“ which is the plural of Hamur, meaning the large fish that
swallows small fish. It is a term equivalent to "fat cats" in Egypt,
"high-class kids" in Lebanon, etc.

On the other hand, the big iranian merchants in Kuwait do not take any
political stands. Their stand is clearly conservative. They are caught
between the anvil of being Iranian and the hammer of their businesses that
make them membersof the Kuwaiti business organization. If more stands
were declared and these merchants finally declared their stand in support
of the Kuwaiti regime or, otherwise, of the Iranian revolution, this would
help dilute the nationalistic-sectarian character of what may become an
open battle.

Talks about some Gulf anticipation, "especially in Bahrain," related to
the role the PLO might have or be invited to take, being the sole organiza-
tion that could establish, with everybody else's approval, a joint Iranian
and Gulf conversational element, as one of the Gulf people puts it.

Cauld this role he performed? In what direction? This is what the future
days and incidents will tell, especially since the PLO is the Arab politi-
cal power most sensitive to the dangers of any unsafe political situation
in that petroleum and strategic area.

It seems that those waiting to hear Palestine's word are many.

9455
C50: 6802
PLO RELATIWS WITH IRAN EXAHIHED
Beirut THE ARAB WORLD WEEKLY in English 3 Nov 79 pp 17-18

['l‘extl Relations between the new regime in Iran and the Palestine Libe-
ration Organization (PLO) are not what they were expected to be, or even
what they were at the downfall of the Shah and the reason of this change
is the new turn that relations between the Arab states and the new Iran-
ian regime have taken over the past few months.

The PLO. and the Palestinian resistance as a whole, which had won a
powerful ally in the new Iranian regime, is now concerned over the turn
Arab-Iranian relations have been taking, especially the Gulf states. It
now fears that because of the change in relations the Iran-PLO alliance
will not bring about-the results it was expected to bring about in terms
of moral, political, economic. financial and military support.

The Gulf. There are two reasons for this concern. 0!! the one hand, the
FLO has recently found itself in an embarrassing position following the
threatening remarks made by certain religious leaders in Iran against
(5qu states. and especially Bahrain, which is in cloae relations of co-
operation with Saudi Arabia. The Palestinian resistance, which enjoys the
backing of both the Iranian regiae and Arab regimes found itself in the
difficult situation brought about by the fact that it was supporting a
regime which, in turn. was opposed to other regimes that support its
cause.

A particularly difficult situation which has been further aggravated by
the current state of relations between Saudi Arabia and Iran. These re-
lations are currently described by informed observers in Riyadh as being
"cold" and imaobile. 'l'he coldness resulted from the first Iranian state-
ments indicating an intention to expand Iran's influence beyond the bor-
ders of Iran and also from anti-monarchist statements nade by a number
of Iranian religious leaders and which were seen as particularly directed
against Arab nonarchies. The strain was increased also by the fact that
Saudi Arabia did not view with pleasure a competitive influence that might
challenge its own influence on politics and religion in the Gulf. Iran's
calls for the restoration of 'Jerussl- did not improve the situation, as
Saudi Arabia considers itself the sponsor of the Jerusala-retrieval
movement.

I
\
Divisions. As THE ARAB WORLD WEEKLY had pointed out in a recent issue
(see ANN No 535) that there were divisions within the Iranian leadership
on the situation in South Lebanon and especially on the support that Iran
should give to the population. on the one hand. and to the Palestinian re-
sistance in the South, on the other hand. The two Iranian officials who
visited the South lately represented two different trends within the Iran-
ian leadership. Foreign Minister Tabatabai came as the representative of
the government of Mr Hehdi Bazargsn which believes that Iranian support
should go to the Shiite population of the South rather than to the Pales—
tinian resistance at a time the two sides are at odds with one another.

It is interesting to note that this view is shared by the Iranian Defense
Minister, Mr Hustafa Shamran. The religious leaders of Iran have called
for achieving a compromise between the Shiite population and the Palestin-
ians so as not to envenom relations between one and the other. In the
government. there is also a trend which calls for all-out support for the
Palestinian resistance and yet a third trend whose position is that Iran

should not interfere at all with matters falling beyond the borders of
Iran.

The malaise which has been reported in Iran-PLO relations was apparent.
observers said. in the recent talks that a high level PLO delegation held
with Iranian officials in Tehran. The delegation sounded the Iranian
authorities on the reality of their position concerning South Lebanon and
submitted a request for military and financial assistance. Informed
observers said that Iran promised to help but the volume of this assis-
tance was not disclosed. not perhaps discussed yet.

The Kurds. In fact, one of the problems that the Palestinian resistance
faced was the charge that Iran made against the rejectionist Palestinian
organizations. which were accused of extending help and support for the
Kurdish rebellion and the Iranian leaders expressed their unwillingness to
extend support to movements that might hand over part of this assistance
to Iran's opponents. Action has reportedly been taken on this aspect of
question and informed sources said that during Mr Tabatabai's visit to
Damascus. Syrian President Hafez Assad promised to ask Dr George Habash,

the leader of the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine (PFLP)
to put an end to his support for the Kurds.

In fact. the Kurdish question is a thormy one in view of the fact that

no one can yet pinpoint for sure the side which is backing the Kurds and
informed sources even said that the very same side may be simultaneously
helping the Kurdish rebellion and encouraging the Iranian regime to crack
down on the Kurds.

One thing is sure at present, the Iranian regime supports the Palestinian
but what is yet to be determined is the extent, or rather the limits. of
this support.
KHOMEYNI'S GRANDSON SPEAKS OUT ON ARAB ISSUES
London AL-DUSTUR in Arabic 5-11 Nov 79 p 23

[Interview with Hasseyn Khomeyni by Valid Nuwayhad: "Rohani's Statements
Are Suspect and Commissioned; People of South Lebanon and Palestinians
Have Same Question; Chamran Made Error; Those Responsible for Error Must
Be Removed"]

[Text] It was in the context of the interest which Iran demonstrated in
the Lebanese situation, in the situation of South Lebanon and in Shi'ite
Palestinian relations in South Lebanon that Iranian Deputy Prime Minister
Sadeq Tabataba'i (on the official side) and then Imam Kyoaeyni's grandson.
an authority on Islam, Hasseyn Khomeyni (on the unofficial side) recently
visited Beirut.

AL-DUSTUR met with Hasseyn Khomeyni and interviewed him about the situation
in Iran and in the Arab homeland. The assertions made by the young man of
religion were quite reminiscent of the positions taken by the late Imam
Ayatollah Mahmud Taleqani.

[Question] "hat do you think of the visit that Tabataba'i, the Iranian
deputy prime minister made recently to Beirut and Damascus?

[Answer] There is a revolution and there is a government. The government
thinks and functions within the framework of Iran, but the Islamic Revolu-
tion goes beyond this framework to all the Islamic nations and also to all
the nations of the world. Therefore, we make a distinction between the
revolution and the government because the positions that Imam Khomeyni
takes call for assistance to the oppressed of the earth. In this sense
these positions are international. Hr Tabataba'i merely represents the
Iranian government. not the Iranian Revolution.

Bahrain Is Arab and Islamic

[Question] What about Rohani's statements?
[Answer] We in Iran cannot feel secure from Zionism. Zionism does exist
in Iran also. These words and statements that disturb Arab-Iranian rela-
tions arr suspvcl and commissioned even it they rome from on ayatollah.
This Is hvvuusc history has seen many nyutnlinhs who stood beside oppres-
sors. We want ayatollahs who stand with the people and who look first.
second. third and fourth to the masses. We want ayatollahs who believe in
the masses. These statements are basically retrogressive. We believe
that Bahrain is an Arab. Islamic state.

[Question] what are your impressions of Lebanon and South Lebanon which

you have visited? Does the revolution have a special role with regard to
Palestinian-South Lebanon relations?

[Answer] There is no doubt that Iran does have an effect on the Lebanese
situation. But the question of South Lebanon is not merely a Lebanese
question or an Arab question; it is rather an international question. All
regional and international forces can be found in the South, and the
presence of the resistance gives the problem a special nature. If the
Lebanese army were dispatched [to South Lebanon], three matters can happen:

First, there would be sharp struggles between the resistance and the army.
Second, some of the people of South Lebanon will support the army.

Third. the liberation organization may oppose the army without seeking a
clash with the people of South Lebanon because it does not harbor them any
hostility. This may lead the organization to withdraw from there and to
turn from a military organization to a political organization. and that
would mean major success for Israel.

The people of South Lebanon have endured many hardships; they have allied
themselves with the Palestinians, and they did protect them. But the
increase in [the number of] difficulties and the slow pace in which the
revolution finds itself have psychologically disturbed the people of South
Lebanon and made them ready to accept the army. However, the charges that
the people of South Lebanon are against the revolution are false charges,
and we must work to find a common solution for the Palestinians and the
people of South Lebanon. In my opinion, the solution lies outside Lebanon
and especially with the Arab oil countries and with Iran who can use oil
to exert pressure on Washington.

Our delegation is a preparatory delegation that wants to see the situation
as it is, not as it is conveyed by the conflicting views of the numerous
delegations that visit Iran.

The lranian people are loyal friends of the Palestinian Revolution.

The Islamic Revolution thinks that the positions others take on Palestine
are a standard for determining the position it takes on them.
[Question] What is the question of the al Ja'fari Doctrine in the new
Iranian Constitution?

[Ansucrl The revolution is Islamic and its leader said; he sees no dif-
(erenccs between the doctrines. The doctrinal questions are made up by
colonialism to weaken us. The Islamic Revolution cannot grant others
total freedom to apply any one of the doctrines in the areas of the law.
prayer and civil status in accordance with the numerical majority in any
one of the areas. Discussion about the al Ja'fari Doctrine is due to the

fact that most of the Iranians are [followers of] a1 Ja'fari. But this
does not mean any doctrinal coercion.

Relations With Egypt

Can the government--and government is one thing and the revolution another—-
re-establish relations with Egypt?

[Answer] This cannot take place as long as the Imam is alive. If he were
to go, his plan will survive.

[Question] What is the Islamic proposition for confronting separatist
movements in Iran?

[Answer] He bppose a military solution for Kordestan. Logic and a polit-
ical solution must be adopted. The military solution is the logic of the
weak. Political solutions must at least be exhausted before military
solutions are resorted to. Minister of Defense Hostafa Chamran made an
error by adopting a military solution. His action magnified the role of
the Kordestan Democratic Party, which is a weak party. The Iranian
Government. therefore. has to expel those officials who are responsible
for the error and isolate the leaders who are negligent.

[Question] Hhat about the fact that the intellectuals are accusing the
Revolution of being lacking in democracy?

[Answer] You can find out about that if you go to Iran. when Eric Roleau,
who works for the French Newspaper, LE HONDB, visited Iran. he said, "This
is not democracy; this is absolute freedom!" And even as far as music is
concerned, recorded tapes are sold everywhere, and the radio broadcasts
music to the public in spite of the fact that the time allotted to music

is less than the time that was allotted to it in the past. This is because

of the educational and cultural programs [that are broadcast now] on the
radio.

[Question] What has the revolution accomplished on the economic field?
What solutions do you envision?

,—
C.‘
[Ansuerl So far everything is being studied. and there are several indi-
vidual efforts that are interreacting with each other. There are disagree-
ments about the theories that cost be followed concerning economic
development. it is my belief that an Islamic economy will build the Iran
of the future in spite of the fact that Iran did inherit numerous diffi-
culties from the capitalist system.
SOUI'H KOREAN UOBKKIB IN GULF SEEN AS ENIGMS
Peri: AL-NAHAR AL-‘ARABI HA AL-DUIMLI in Arebic L‘ Nov 79 p 31;
[Article: "rho Koreene Are Conny]

[Text] There is e great deel of talk ebout the South Koreans working in the
Kingdoe of Semi Arebie. As of today there ere et least 100,000 of then. end
it ie expected thet by the early 1980's there will be e quarter or e Iillionl

It in con-only seid in the Gulf thet those Koreene ere nothing lore then eol-
diers brought to the region in the guise of workers. to don their nilitery uni-
{one end take up erns in ones of my ereed etteck threeteniru petroleue.

Other contrery eteteeents any thet the Cult": experience with the leboe- force
is behind this mart to yellow laborers.

llhenever eny peeeenger plene lenie et Bahrain Airport or one of the region's
other eirports. it is statue to see e amber of workers in clean white clothes
hurrying to enter the plene. cleening it up in less then 5 ninuteel

When I asked I. Kweiti officiel about the "Koran inmion.“ he hushed end
eeid. ”You know the such end euch hotel, where you molly etey?"

I eeid. “yes.”

He seid. "Hell. heven't you noticed the chenge which hee cone over this hotel?
The new 350-rooe wing etteched to it wee built by South Koreans in one yeer.
If it had been eseigned to Indian. Pekieteni, Innien or Beluchi (referring
to Beluchieten) workers. it would not heve been finished before 3 yeers et
least."

lhoever lives in the Gulf hes eeen those Koeeens. end nrvele et their vitelity
end ormieetion.

The South Koreen coepeny bids for e project et. eey. $500 nillion. e price et
lent $100 nillion below thoee o! internetionel (even inb) ooepeniee. In
other worde. the Koreene heve been coepetitive. end heve been eucoesetul.
This 60-13"! proaieee to coeplete the job 3 uonthe ahead of the deadline.

When the contract is signed. the inportetion of workers, engineers and super-
visors fro- Seoul begins. They get off the planes or ships in single file.
and head for the epocul any. which their colpeny has prepared for then.

They have their clothing and everyday items with then. even their food. In
tho all! they so to sleep at certain tilee and wake up at certain tiaee. They
don't mic : single working ainute duritu work hours. They each and drink

E“ 0" ““09 only during the rest period: set eeide for that. which are very
ew.

You don't hear thee shout or laugh. and there in never a eeile or ecowl on their
11113. You hear the eound of the needle are»; then. and you find that every Job
they COIPMO ie extraordimry and unqueetionable.

Before the SCheduled date. the project owner receives his project in silence.
not having learned a thing about the workers. Hho are they? How do they do
their work? How do they eat and sleep? Nothing, nothing.

The Kuwaiti official said that Kuwait was ani still is a country with hundreds

0‘ thoueande 0f Ante and tone od’ thousands of Italians, Pakistanis, Iranians
and Baluchie.

Km“ do“ not have the parable: of ”Arabia" m the labor force. but 0th":
Gulf states d0. because of political circumstances in the region.

Hith mm to these countries the Kuwaiti official adds. ”The Arab worker
cones and after a while the host country diacovere that he in an intelligence
IGOR“. or a saboteur, taking advantage of the country's circuutancee to die—
tribute 806m publicatione or hold meeting-oer attend demonstrations.”

Th“- was “10 Problem, and it was decided to atop Arab indexation.

There reading the Iniian-Pakietani-Baluchi-Innian problea.

They are very nuaeroue and not very productive. In addition. they are naturally
lazy, which causes cmphln‘ts along all who deal with their-in hotels. hospitals,
”Sum“. and official and non-official departments.

The question rel-nine; 1e it true that thoee workers are an "any?”

The Kuwaiti Official replies, "South Korea practicee compulsory conscription.
Every 370098 mn there goes through a period of eilitary service which "etupe
its ark" on him. we take advantage of this "stamp“ to conplete our projects
and save our honey and tile. which is wasted by workers of other nationalities."
[Queetiorﬂ Is there any surveillance of the Korean?

[Answeﬂ You should ask the concerned authorities about this.
[Questiotﬂ Could they possibly be nude use of to block a Soviet inmion of
the realm. for emple?

[Answer] I can't answer this question because I don't know. The higher euth-
oritiee in the region know note shout it. If anyone would know. they would.
And if not. then they ought to nab inquiriee so u to follow the come they
feel is euituble.

Uorkere? Soldiers? SplOI? The answer amine unknown. especially since the
United States hue disturbed. rather than renamed, the "disposition" of the
Gulf by mnemoing the eetebliehlent of the "110,000-nen American etrike force.”

8559
(30: 158%

1h
KUWAIT TO RECEIVE DRINKING. IRRIGATION HATER FROM IRAQ
Kuwait AL-EA'Y AL-‘Am in Arabic 13 Sep 79 p 3

[Article by Mahala-ad al-llakim: "Agreement To Supply Kuwait Hith 300 Million
Gallons of Hater and To Resume Study To Complete Electrical Link Project")

[Text] Kuwait and Iraq have agreed that Kuwait will obtain 200 silken
gallons of drinking water and 100 million gallons of water for agriculture.
The necessary documents will be signed next week stipulating that the
project to transfer water from Iraq to Kuwait be submitted to bidding and
calling on the international advisory offices to study it and draw up the
necessary plans.

This was revealed at a press conference held yesterday morning by the

under secretary of the Ministry of Electricity and Water and head of the
Kuwaiti delegation to the negotiations which took place 3 days ago in

Kwaiti, Zayd al-Pahd. after he had signed the protocol pertaining to
cooperation between Kuwait and Iraq in the field of electrical power and water.

At 11:30 the bursitis and Iraqis held the final session of the talks
for the signing of the protocol between the two sister states. Under
Secretary of the Ministry of Electricity and Hater Zayd al-Fahd signed for
the Kuwaitis, and Under Secretary of the Minsitry of Industry and Minerals
Suhhi Yasin signed for the Iraqis. After the heads of the two delegations
exchanged protocol documents, Zayd al-Fshd delivered the following speech:

"with the help of God. the signing took place at the third session of the
meetings of the Iraqis-Kuwaiti Cousittee for Water and Electricity.

"As you know. these meetings came as a supplement to the two previous
meetings held during the past year in [await and Baghdad, during which it
was agreed that Iraq would supply Kuwait with drinking water in stages:

the first stage, 200 million gallons, to increase in the future according
to studies conducted by the two parties during the period from 1985 to 1990.

"In the discussion by the two sides during this visit, the following points
were agreed upon:

15
"with regard to the first stage for drinking water, the Kuwaities have
completed a draft of an invitation to the consulting houses to study and
design the project, and it will be sent to the Iraqis next week for study
and approval.

"As for irrigation water, it was agreed that Kuwait would receive water
for agricultural purposes, with the provision that the first stage would
be 100 million gallons a day, to increase in the future subject to approval
by both parties."

"As for electricity, I want to clear up some confusion on the part of some
members of the press. Some have explained that the object of the talks
between Kuwait and Iraq on water and electricity is an exchange operation
to supply Kuwait with water in return for supplying Iraq with electricity.
This is a mistaken description or impression. The main purpose of the
electrical linkage project between the two countries is to increase the
operating flexibility of both networks and to make it possible to exchange
electricity power when necessary, according to the circumstances of each
country.

"Consequently, I would like to assure you that the subject of supplying
water from Iraq has no connection with the subject of the electrical link.
As an indication of that, agreement was reached on all of the first steps
to implement the water project when the subject of the electrical link was
still in the stage of technical studies. Finally, I would like to thank
Prof Subhi Yasin, head of the delegation, and the members of the delegation
for the postive spirit which prevailed during the talks of the last 2 days."

Subhi Yasin then replied with a speech in which he said: "This is indeed
a happy occasion as we conclude the meetings of the subcomittee of the
Supreme Ministerial Comittee for Iraqi-Kuwaiti Cooperation in the Fields
of Electricty and Water here in Kuwait. I want to praise the atmosphere
of true brotherhood and fruitful, constructive cooperation which prevailed
during the talks to complete all of the steps necessary to reach the protocol
which we signed a short time ago. In my opinion, this indicates the exis-
tence of a true desire for joint cooperation in the constructive steps we
are trying to achieve. It is ay hope that in the near future we will
proceed in earnest with ac tivitics to put the agreement into effect, so
that the citizen in Kuwait will feel the fruits of efforts exerted to
achieve Iraqi-Kuwaiti cooperation."

Yasin added: "I would like to thank the Kuwaiti Government and the officials
of the Ministry of Electricity and Water for their kind reception and the
welcome they extended us throughout our visit, which had made us feel that
we are at home with Our families.

"I would like to pursue what Zayd al-Pahd said about the electrical tie
between the two countries. It is a separate subject and has no direct
conneciton with the other subject, that is, supplying Kuwait with the
necessary water. The main purpose of cooperation in the field of electrical

16
power is to increase cooperation and coordination between the two countries
so that power can be exchanged between the two. The tie between Kuwait
and Iraq will lead to fewer of the customary difficulties and to the
possibility of economic savings for both sides, and it will facilitate
programs to establish generating stations to take advantage of seasonal
disparities and electrical loads. I will state that the proposed project

to link Kuwait and Iraq is part of a complete, ambitious program linking
all of the Arab countries.

Zayd al-l-‘ahd later held a press conference at which he discussed the
protocol. he said:

"At our last meeting we agreed on 200 million gallons of drinking water as
a first stage, and at our present meeting we agreed on 100 million gallons
of water for irrigation. for a total of 300 million gallons. From the cost
standpoint, Kuwait will benefit from the water drawn from Iraq, and
consequently we will bear the expense of this project. As for electricity,
both countries will benefit, and Kuwait and Iraq will share expenses. Next
week we will ask the consultants to conduct studies and prepare plans,
after sending them to Iraq for study and approval by the officials there.
They will participate with us in selecting the necessary consultants. who
will choose the source and method for drawing the water from Iraq to insure
the quality and continuity of the flow of water to Kuwait. The invitation
will be extended to the consultants by the Ministry of Planning, after we
have obtained Iraq's approval of the draft of the invitation.

"Actually, we feel that we are all set on the subject of water. and every-
thing is almost completed. As for the exchange of electrical power. we are
still at the stage of preliminary technical talks, and the comittees
responsible for that sector will meet in the first quarter of 1980. On
water, we will maintain constant contact between officials in the two
countries to complete the steps necessary and contact the consultants and
agree on the studies to be undertaken by the consulting companies. Note
that in our new talks in the past year and this year we have relied on

the previous agreement concluded between the two countries, in 1974, which
gave us 120 million gallons. In view of the development of consumption
since that time, we increased the quantity to 300 million gallons of water
as a first stage.
BRIEFS

AN’I‘IREISIHE PUBLICATIONS-4t has recently been noticed that secret publi-
cations which are being distributed against sone Arab regimes have been
increasing abroad and that the writings on the wall have also increased.
A special statement about the recent incidents in Aleppo was distributed
with the recent issue of AL-NADIIIR, [The Herald] which is published by a
group that calls itself al-Hujahidin fi Suriyah [The freedou fighters in
Syria]. Libyan dissidents saturated London with the recent issue of
AL-JIHAD [The Holy War]. AL—JIHAD is published by a group that calls it-
self al-Harakah al-Hataniyah al-Libiyyah [the National Libyan Movement].
This group has adopted as its motto the noble words of the prophet, "The
best holy war is a word of truth spoken in the presence of a tyrant."

The groups which oppose the Iraqi regime publish more than one bulletin;
those bulletins appear in different forms. It has also been noticed that
all these publications are similar in for- and in style so that it appears

that their source is one. [Text] [London AL-HAUADITH in Arabic 16 Nov 79
p 12] 8592

C80: 10802

18
AMI“ COtMDl‘l'S ON BREZHNEV PROPOSAL

LD120050 Kabul Radio in Biglish to Europe 0141‘ 11 Nov 79 LB

[Text] Comrade Hafizollah Amin, general secretary of the Central
Con-ittee of the People's Demcratic Party of Afghanistan, president of
the Revolutionary Council and prime minister, in an interview with
BAKHTAR correspondent said:

The capitalist countries of Hestern Europe, in particular members of NATO,
by accepting the peaceful proposals of the Soviet Union will safeguard
their soil as a target of the atomic weapons forever. [sentence as heard]

Comrade Amin received for an interview the BAKHTAR correspondent in the
people's house. In relation to the Soviet initiative about peace and
security in Europe, BAKHTAR correspondent asked: Comrade Amin. as you
know Comrade Brezhnev, the general secretary of the Central Committee
of the Communist Party and president of the Presidium of the Supreme
Soviet, in an interview with PRAVDA daily has made a new proposal about
the installation of atomic weapons in western Burope.‘ May we know your
views about the foreign policy of the Democratic Republic of Afghanistan
in this respect?

Answer: The creative initiative of Comrade Leonid Brezhnev, general
secretary of the Central Co-ittee of the Communist Party and president
of the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet, about the unilateral decision of
the Soviet Union pertaining to the evacuation of 20,000 soldiers, 1,000
tanks and a great number of other military equipment from the German
Democratic Republic is a hopeful step toward the establishment of peace
in Europe and is an important step toward world disarmament which not only
concerns Europe but also all the peace-loving and progressive people who
will warmly welcome it and evaluate it as the best example of the Soviet
desire for peace in the world.

Comrade Amin added: The statement of Comrade Brezhnev, made in his

interview, is also the evidence of the Soviet Union's interest in peace,
which provides the best possibility for the security of Hestern Europe.

19
It is a commitment of philanthropy that the cauntries with no u.s. and
Western European atomic weapons will never be the target of the Soviet
Union's atomic weapons. The great comander of the victorious sawr
revolution said: I am sure that the people of Hestern [new will

real Inc the good will of the Soviet L'nion in this respect and draw the
attention of their governments to take advantage of this great opportun-
ity and, with confidence in the assurance and commitment of the Soviet
Union in this regard, maintain the secure life of their countries against
the attack of atomic weapons. it is also quite understandable that the
(?greater) reduction of the weapons by the Soviet Union, provided that
the Western countries do not permit the installation of atomic weapons in
their countries, is a very important step and it confirms the Soviet
interest (?for) peace. Now it is for the Western Europe capitalist
countries. particularly members of NATO. to safeguard their countries
from the attacks by atomic weapons by refusing to allow the installation
of the atomic weapons in their countries (?en masse). If they are inter-
ested in the reduction (?of) nuclear and nonnuclear weapons in Europe
they will welcome this commitment and philanthropic assurance of the
Soviet Union. (?The NATO) should also [word indistinct] and show its
good will for peace. well being and reduce their atomic weapons in Europe.
CONSTITUTIONAL COMMITTEE STUDYING Cl‘I‘IZENS' PROPOSALS
L0102118 Kabul Domestic Service in Pashto 1530 GMT 10 Nov 79 L1)

[Text] The coamittee for the draft constitution of the Denocratic
Republic of Afghanistan IBM]. in its meeting today considered the views,
demands and proposals of our noble and toiling compatriots in light of
the slogan inunity, legality and justice. The views, demands and propos~
als of thousands of our sensitive and noble compatriots. which have been
edited by the secretariat, were distributed to the comittee's members and
were investigated, in accordance with the DRA's executive committee deci-
sion dated 3 November 1979.

Our noble and toiling compatriots emphasize in their letters and proposals
that the DRA comittee for the draft constitution--in view of the Khalqi
message of Conrade Amin dated 17 September 1979 and so that the Muslims
and workers of Afghanistan may acconplish the slogan imunity, legality
and justice—should draft a constitution which will prepare the grounds
for the building of a progressive society, lacking the exploitation of
man by man.

The letters of the compatriots, after being sorted and edited, were put

at the discretion of the work couittee so that the hundreds of proposals
contained in then could be utilized in drafting and compiling the chapters
of the DRA's constitution. Our noble compatriots' letters cover the follow-
ing topics: freedom of the observance of religious ceremonies; proposals
about equal rights of tribes and nationalities in Afghanistan; the accom-
plishment of the democratic rights of the citizens; equal rights for men
and women; the enhancing of the standard of living of workers, peasants,
officials and other toilers; the accomplishing of true training and edu-
cation; and proposals about our people's social, economic, political and
cultural aspects.

Our compatriots' letters and propositions are continuing to be sent to
the committee for the draft constitution and are being patiently and
carefully considered. In today's work co-ittee reeting the new parts of
the draft constitution, which were translated and distributed by the
committee's secretariat, were also discussed and investigated. In the
executive conittee's meeting today, discussions were held on those topics
and materials which were prepared by some members of the work comi:tee
concerning the compilation of various chapters of the draft const'tution.

CSO: 1.211 21
BRIEFS

MINISTERS LEAVE FOR BULGARIAnAt the invitation of the government of

the People's Republic of Bulgaria, Public Health Minister Dr Saleh
Mohamed Ziray and Continuation; Minister Zarif departed today for Sofia
for a friendly visit of that country. Some members of the council of
ministers, high-ranking officials from the ministries of public health
and communications, the chief of protocol of the Ministry of Foreign
Affairs, and the ambassadors of the Soviet Union and Bulgaria were at
Kabul International Airport to bid them farewell. [Text] [GPlOOSOlo
Kabul Domestic Service in Dari 1600 GMT 8 Nov 79 GF]

ECWOMC COMMISSION MEETING-The Democratic Republic of Afghanistan
Economic Commission met yesterday under the chairmanship of Dr Shah
Wall, deputy prime minister and foreign minister. The meeting lasted
from 1630-2200. The participants thoroughly discussed the trade activ-
ities of government trading organizations and private trading enterprises.
As a result. the Ministry of Comerce was instructed to further activate
and regularize the trading activities of the country. Utmost attention
should be paid so that the 1979 estimated plan can be put into action.
Specific proposals in this respect should be prepared and subnitted to
next Monday's meeting. [Text] [LD152219 Kabul Domestic Service in
Pashto 1530 GMT l5 Nov 79 1.0]

ANTI-KHOMEYNI ACTIVITIES-~In Iran anti-Khomeyni forces continue their
struggle in Khuzestan and Kordestan at a time when in Tehran itself
thousands of unemployed people have held demonstrations in front of the
offices of Iran's Labor Ministry. According to another report. those who
were demonstrating were fired on by the Khoaeyni supporters and as a
result several people were killed. In Khuzestan patriots have extended
anti-Khomeyni struggles and the situation is similarly confused in Kordes-
tan. The occupation of the American Embassy and holding of hostages which
include more than 40 Indian and Italian diplomats entered its 11th day
today. Observers believe that the Khomeyni governnent has completely lost
its standing in the international arena. [Text] [L0152113 Kabul Radio in
Pashto to Europe 1730 GMT 13 Nov 79 Lb]
ATTACKS ON JAPANESE TOURIST, 0THERS—-Tokyo Nov 14 KYODO--A young Japanese
tourist was attacked and robbed by antigovernment bandits in Afghanistan
earlier this month, the Foreign Ministry revealed Hednesday. A report re—
ceived from the Japanese consulate general in Karachi identified the
traveler as Takeshi Terajima, 21, a resident of the town of Ryuo, Shiga
Prefecture. Terajima entered Afghanistan by way of Iran on November 1.
and took one of the five buses going to Kabul, the capital of Afghanistan,
at Kandahar, near the Pakistani border, on November 3. 0n the way to
Kabul, the five buses were attacked by Islamic bandits, and all of the
some 300 passengers were captured. in spite of resistance offered by about
IO soldiers who were aboard the buses to guard the passengers. The Afghan
passengers were released next day, but about 40 Pakistani passengers, the
soldiers and Terajima were marched into Pakistani territory across a
desert region. According to the report, the bandits treated the captives
harshly, and two Pakistanis were shot for "walking too slowly." 0f the
captives who arrived in Pakistani territory, Terajima alone was released
on November a, deprived of a camera and other personal effects. He then
managed to arrive in Karachi, and reported the incident to the Japanese
consulate general. Terajima had resigned from a building company in Ibarski
Prefecture this spring. and went on a three-month overseas trip in the
middle of June. In Afghanistan, Islamic antigovernment bandits have been
increasingly active in the mountainous regions. [Text] [OWlblISl Tokyo
KYODO in English 1135 GMT lb Nov 79 OH]

RETURN OF COMERCE MINISTER—(Mohamed) Hakim Haliyar. the deputy minis-
ter of commerce, who had gone to participate at the head of an Afghan
delegation at the congress of the consumers' goods cooperatives in the
Soviet Union, returned home yesterday. The deputy minister of commerce
signed a protocol for technical, scientific and equipment assistance
between the Central Union of Cooperatives of the Soviet Union and the
Ministry of Commerce of the Democratic Republic of Afghanistan. [Text]
[Lmeoaas Kabul Radio in English to Bur-ope 1900 cm- 15 Nov 79 L97
ALGERIA UNDER BENDJEDID REPORTED 0N

Changes After First Nine Months
Paris DEMAIN L'AFRIQHE in French 22 Oct 79 pp 43, 45, 47-48
[Article by Bachir Rezzoug: "The Nine Months of Chadli"]

[Text] It is 1980, and Algeria is beginning a new change.
Nearly nine months ago Chadli mobilized political leaders
and economic experts to review past development experience
in detail. All records were open. A five-year plan sets
new priorities and gives the social a key position. All
in a new frame of hind.

Ten nonths; this was the modest and perilous period set by the Algerian leaders
for energing from an acute "social crisis," taking stock of a frenzied indus-
trialization, drawing up a new hydrocarbons strategy, putting agriculture back
in the saddle, and, finally, "reviving" a party that little by little is re-
gaining its own. A huge program. A change of course, too.

But, for all that, socialist Algeria is not repudiating what it has done. It
is a matter of rearranging, not of challenging. Chadli has therefore built
his theory on a political reality (the country's basic choices), economic re-
ality (two four-year plans and their effects) and social reality (greatly dis-
rupted). At the point of departure for his thinking is the drama of the land
and the "life sickness" of the great majority of the Algerians. One things
seems quite clear to the Algerian leaders: it is not easy to "bring along"
those who are ill housed, sometimes ill fed, and who above all are bored. To
"explore" Algeria, then, was to discover that it appeared to be an encoded enig-
aa: how could a country that was enjoying good econouic health overall, be
sinking into a "social swa-p?" This colossal vessel, then must be directed
outside the dangerous waters of discontent toward which it was drifting. The
cascade of events sweeping through the country in recent months gives leaning
to what can already be perceived as a "change of style."

First. it is being acknowledged--and this is new--that all was not for the best
in the best of Algerian socialist worlds. The tone has changed. "A solid

2h
revolution is one that is not afraid of self-criticism, silence is the source
of evil,“ the FLN coordinator, Mr Yahiaoui, stated recently. A Party that
seems to be having a rebirth from its ashes and from which a few miracles are
still expected. Mr Yahiaoui did not fail to state, "We are going through a
decisive phase." Another member of the Political Bureau, Affane Djillali, let
it be known that the next elections--party, communal assemblies and regional
assemblies--were to take place at a "decisive turning point." He said, "In
most cases the political authorities have not played their true role."

"Decisive phase," "historic turning point," "inadequacies" are words heavy

with meaning that speak volumes for the Algerian leaders' intentions. Is

this excessive language from those who are charged with "driving from the field"
a political apparatus which gets credit for existing, but which was showing
serious signs of fatigue? Or is it the resolutely offensive attitude of a po-
litical leadership that really intends to take the bull by the horns? He

must lean toward the second hypothesis, and there is no lack of signs attest-

There are really two Algerian miracles. The first, as will be seen, is allied
with a fine economic success. It is largely acknowledged. The second is
stranger, more troubling. Despite the deficiencies that have come to light,
the weariness, despite "disorders" of a different kind, despite the Algerians
themselves, who have sometimes ended up by despairing, Algeria, the country
of "social ills," is beginning to resurface.

Some have continued to be on the lookout for signs that might reveal the in-
tentions of the present team. To work with whom and for what? Every succes-
sion begins with this double question. All the more so in the case of Algeria
because after 17 years of independence it has become socially "complicated."
And the political unity necessary to any undertaking involving rearranging and
"restarting" requires that the most contradictory aspirations of different so-
cial strata (or classes) be satisfied: the modernist technocrats, carried
away by an accelerated industrialization; the peasants, manhandled between a
sky that is not very clement and a stifling bureaucracy; the bourgeois con-
sumers, afflicted by a curious desire to take all the credit; the middle
classes, afflicted with a frantic hunger; the freelance-religious in their
thinking, who are dangerous because they are above suspicion, while they want-
ed to go smoothly from moral doctrine to political activism; and finally, the
main body of the troops, the youth and the workers, attentive, organized,
their eye on all the indicators.

In the face of that scene, which was not well suited to reviving the old vir-
tues of "solidarity" or "unity," the Algerian leaders take credit for not
giving a false impression of "unanimity." The reality is what it is, forged
by 17 years of social changes. At one time one could stigmatize the sheeplike
behavior of the Algerians, the "aid recipients," they said, without getting to
the bottom of things, without denouncing its socio-economic origins. Some
people wanted to mark that rearrangement with the ineffable need for moralism,
fed, as was suspected, by the sources of religion. The temptation to take a
virtuous tough line, as it were. They exalted, with no attention to order,
the family, honor, hygiene, freedom, thinking ethics would be strengthened as

25
difficulties appeared. To let it be known, at last, perniciously, that those
difficulties sprang directly from the country‘s political choices. Moreover,
the difficulties often took on the appearance of a separate crisis that upset
habits and drove people crazy. Everyone worried, looked for a way, and many
obviously lent an ear to the slightest murmur. Talk consisted of well-being
or the solution to the problems. Then, some were sure to mount their favorite
battle horse, liberalization, which they said was "ineluctable, because this
is an impasse."

It is futile to speak a lot of hot air; liberalism, as it is spoken of in
Algiers or elsewhere, has never been deeply rooted in this country. But to-
day one hardly lingers over all these ups and downs. One does not believe
any longer in the hasty syntheses between religion and revolution, between
ethics and religion. Separation of types is desired. Lovers of clarity,

and they are many, will not complain. Everyone wants to get to the bottom of
the problem: an exact diagnosis before 1980.

in truth, the whole political edifice rests on an economic expansion that

must be maintained, but also controlled, and on as broad a consensus as possible.
The established program has the merit--in addition to existing--of dedramatiz-
ing relations, since all the political, technical and administrative author-
ities have been called upon to establish the diagnosis. "But it would be a
mistake," they say in Algiers, "to think this pause can last long, and to
think that the expansion of recent years can be maintained if nothing is done
to further that end." A member of the Political Bureau recently admitted,
"The situation we find ourselves in is entirely our own responsibility." A
discreet veil is then pulled over the past. And no one dreams any longer of
throwing former sins at anyone's head. It is suspected in Algiers that the
mechanics of the dissension would be in danger of fouling the enthusiasm so
necessary to this "revival“ undertaking.

Another phenomenon: there is no more competition for the economic or admin-
istrative "powers," no one has any illusions about that any more. Communal
and regional assemblies, the National Assembly, grassroots organizations of
the FLN, the Central Committee and the Political Bureau; the political edi-
fice covered by an ideologic text, the National Charter, is finally in place,
which really shows that the country's fate is in its people's hands. Or in
the hands of those who best represent its people.

However, certain observations reveal a party (basic texts give it a first-
rank position) much less monolithic than a certain political mythology claims.
If we really look at them we see, for example, that many Algerians, even
leaders, were manifesting a certain suspicion in this respect, a suspicion
that has been gradually eased, during weeks that saw meetings of the Political
Bureau or national commissions, true centers of reflection, opening the hot-
test files: economic, social, education, etc. That is the main thing, in the
eyes of the Algerian leaders. And the directing team was really counting on
using these nine months to inventory the needs, the means of satisfying them,-
to propose a schedule and objectives to be introduced gradually, to rough out
a new way of producing and consuming, to learn and to relax, to be housed and
to live. All this is a united effort to transform the economy and society.
Without. however, minimizing the social "bad humor" in certain cases, it

may be stated that the great majority of Algerians are cautious about this
policy of reordering affairs. Many of them, often in difficult straits, are
openly pleased with the soft pedal applied to an economic policy which they
found was beginning to cost them dearly. This attitude does not come from a
sharply felt progress or a sudden "detente." it is dictated by the feeling
that one is going to begin with the essentials. it is also in the name of
this realism that the country is going to begin a significant change: the
first Algerian Five Year Plan (1980-1984). after two Four Year Plans (1969-
1977) and two years of "pausez" 1978-1979.

For nine months balance sheets, reports, analyses and proposals have been ar-
riving in great numbers on the desk of the president of the Republic. They
are rough. But they are not embarrassing. They emanate from interministerial
committees put in place to study sector-based problems. from long meetings of
special committees of the Political Bureau. tours of the terrain by the gov-
ernment members most concerned. Thus they take the measure of the "social"
peril in overpopulated cities, they feel the pulse of rural areas deserted

by the peasants, they minutely examine the sometimes extravagant figures of
the industrialization, in short they are taking a bearing on everything and
for everything. To be divided up in 1980. When one observes the evolution of
the Algerian situation over the nine months just past, one sees above all that
the directing team has never stopped occupying the terrain. The economic com-
missions have mobilized their experts. With an expiration date: an overall
document is to be established between now and the end of the year, to be sub-

mitted at the third meeting of the Central Committee. It will also be discuss-
ed by the National Assembly.

its broad outlines are known. It will first propose cyclical remedies, while
offering a "global strategy." It aims at the long term, but in a different
spirit. it also adds that to revive the country's economy, economic agents
(everyone who works and produces) must believe in the ability of those who
lead the country to establish well-being permanently. Better still, they are
going to be partners in the most important discussions. The calendar is then

going to shed at a swift pace the reports and riders that are accumulating as
the debates go forward.

The reports advise a relaxation of the industrial investment policy. The de-
velopment is considerable: in 1973 Algieria' s imports amounted to
8,800,000,000 dinars and her exports to 7. 400, 000, 000 dinars. In 1977, at

the end of the second Four Year Plan, these figures were, respectively.
29.500.000.000 and 24.100.000.000 dinars. And the effort did not let up in
1978. even though it was a "planless" year: credits were increased 70 percent
in the budget and imports reached 34.000.000.000 dinars. If this effort

has not yielded all the expected results. it is because adjustments need to be
made and industrial development needs to be better organized. It is this re-
flection on the validity and the rate of investment that will determine the
new directions of the Five Year Plan. it will be necessary at the same time
to make up for time lost from realization and to review the earlier plans.
Here and there, too, are pointed out “phenomena that constitute genuine

'One Algerian dinar equals 1.12 French francs.
dangers to economic liberation and development: three or four years' time
lost froe realization of projects, if not more, cost overruns, disruptions of
all kinds." "The consequences are all the more serious," another document
points out, "because the development policy was conceived in such a way as to
form a link between sector-based activities and to assure the highest inte-
gration rate in each branch and sector.“ In fact, the Algerian development
pattern gives absolute priority to the heavy industrial sector. which was
supposed to have driving effects on the economy as a whole. That choice is
dictated by a guiding principle: economic independence. The investment pro-
cess was to lead to putting in place industries that would furnish agriculture
with the means to increase its production level. Which was not always the
case. At the same time the development of the aetallurgic and steel industries

was to create an industrial tissue capable of emerging into production of
consumer goods.

Another debate is often revived: the natural gas development program. The
cost of this program, beside the fact that it is going to lead to increased
indebtedness (a situation not at all alarming to Algeria, which continues to
enjoy the confidence of the international financiers), risks leading Algeria
to "structure" its economy on exportation of gas, to the disadvantage of the
other sectors.

Chadli wanted an open, lucid and calm debate on this question. His Energy
Minister, Nubi Belkacem, prepared a voluminous report in which he tries,
among Other things, to answer the question "Should we export more or apply a
strategy of reserve?" "This source of revenue," it was then indicated,
"should he developed according to the indicators most responsive to the nat-
ional interest." A formidable bone of contention.

The industrial apparatus has often pitted a heavy inertia against the various
stimulating measures recommended. The effects of that industrialization,
which generated distortions, inequities, frustrations and waste, were more-
over "poisoned" by one of the most detestable social environments. If the
last Four Year Plan experienced significant delays in realization

(1,800,000 dinars, 50 percent for industry and hydrocarbons), we are told we
need not blame those who inspired it, but the nature of the evil that is gnaw-
ing away at the productive apparatus—~disorder, complacency. Someone inter-
vened in the blow-by-blow when the pressure was such that it became impossible
to evade it, while making state aid a systematic means of bailing out firms

in trouble. And there was no lack of appeal. Often, too, one got the wrong
remedy. An economy is driven with two pedals, the brake and the accelerator.
The "managers" of Algerian industry are often blamed for having, by means of
facility and/or intoxicated by the overall success, briskly carried out pro-
jects that required greater moderation and greater calm.

All the reports are instructive in that regard. What comes out of them is
that investment growth has clearly been faster than production growth. The
nearly general use of sophisticated equipment has not always complied with ef-
ficiency criteria. Great size was often a goal in itself, for reasons of nat-
ional economic strategy. Also, Algerian leaders are seeking to set up new,
more modest, more competitive and more profitable entities, hence structural
reforms. This involves not only reviving the activity of the existing pro-
ductive apparatus, but also transforming it. It will also be necessary to
bring off a "skimming" of the industrial fabric and eliminate the "lame ducks."

The counterattack was swift and impressive. It was announced clearly: "To
allocate resources in accordance with a better investment-consumption equilib-
rium." And, as a priority, strengthening the housing and agriculture sectors.
The planner has foreseen for the next decade construction of 100,000 housing
units per year. A significant share of the national income will be devoted to
this. Also provided for is the "catching up" of the food industry by setting
a dual objective: self-sufficiency and full employment. But the fact remains
that agriculture is taking on a character of urgency. One is persuaded that
if nothing is done in that direction the most energetic and daring measures
taken otherwise will have little impact.

”We must make agriculture one of the essential priorities," President Chadli
indicated recently. He also stated that "it was of primary importance to

go ahead with a revaluation of the existing structures." "It is important

for us," Chadli added, "to better exploit oil and gas to protect the permanent
wealth on which Algeria must depend for the present and the future--the land
and its agricultural products." There, too, restructuring is in sight. The
minister of Agriculture, Salim Saadi, for his part has perfected short-term
measures to deal with those who are most squeezed, and also a long—term pro-
gram.

For the third consecutive year Algeria has recorded a bad grain harvest, but
it is acknowledged that this situation is imputable not only to weather con-
ditions, but also to "technical weaknesses." The peasants, who are unjustly
condemned for all the ills, have often called the heavens to witness, but
their resentment also says it all. When spare parts were supplied after the
agriculture seasons, the limited financial credits, the greedy marketing ser-
vices--"The peasant feels alone," one or two of them recently declared to the
minister who came to listen to them. More autonomy, then, for agricultural
developments? Dismemberment of the large developments into several small pro-
duction farms? If they were adopted these two measures would constitute the
essential axis of the agricultural restructuring in progress. For now, a
number of decisions have been taken: to set up regional nuclei that will re-
present the agricultural bodies as a whole; to support developments permanently
and effectively; to assign technical staff to the field with precise instruc-
tions; to establish a rigorous work schedule; to extend rural housing to solve
the problem of the distance and instability of the peasants.

"The peasants have deserted the land; the manpower is made up of women and
children...the peasants have left for remunerative jobs in industry:" this

was the cry of alarm, or at least the alert, sounded the other day by a "pres-
ident" of an Oranie agricultural development. Hill he be heard? This is one
of those natural and implacable laws that escape the stranglehold. A fright-
ening whirlwind, the size of which may be measured by some figures. Between
1958 and 1978 the Algerian population doubled, going from 9,000,000 to
18,000,000, and projections indicate that it will have doubled again in 25
years from now: 36,000,000 persons. However Algeria, with 2,389,741 square km,
has no lack of space. But althOugh the average density is 7.32 inhabitants
per square km, in the north, mainly around the cities, it reaches 300 and
sometimes more. Children from 0 to 17 years represent 52.8 percent. Three
aillion households have been counted, but Algeria is a "many family" country.
More than half have more than six persons. The urbanization rate exceeds

40 percent and 7,000,000 "city dwellers" are packed together; the average is
7.20 persons per housing unit. Although on the other hand the active popula-
tion is estimated at 4,000,000 "hands" (2,309,000 in the nonagricultural sec-
tors), this represents only 23.2 percent of the total population. Thus it

is very obvious that to contribute to the national production the country has
available only a quarter of its population.

"Would Algeria be too heavy for its own people to carry?" researchers wonder.
It is against this backdrop that pictures are very often superimposed. The
first of the: recall this surprising country's victories: recovery of the
national wealth, courageous agrarian reform among others. The second arise
in a muted and tenacious interrogation: for what effects on everyday life?
Everyday life--this is what is lost embarrassing to those who are attempting
a serious and overall approach to Algeria. Exigence has often given way to
impatience. Surprised and vaguely worried, Algerians have observed their co' -
try. And they saw their cities and their rural areas change over a period of
months into a parade ground for a revolution that went on forever stirring up
hopes and fears at the same time. And paradoxically, this "social crisis"
situation that no one today dreams of either concealing or denying has never

lit the powder keg. Because everyone felt the danger and no one had a miracle
solution.

To deal the final blow the Algerian leaders of course chose the social battle-
field. They could not Ianeuver on a better field. All the country's resent-
ments were accmulated there. A policy conducted with gusto and on the attack.
And now here again is Algeria in one of those feverish conditions, which is
exciting or worrying and which reveals the finality of all the "readjustments"
that are going to be perfomed--to lake everyday life sweeter and more support-
able. For although the tidying up is clearly perceived and appears to have
got off to a good start, it is being prepared on a social terrain in motion.
And the difficulties, because they have not been cooled, take weeks to resolve.
The slightest rumor made a racket that confused desires, illusions and reality.
The expected offensive is going to be supported by reality, and one never loses
sight of the fact that discontent over the crisis in "daily life" has increased.
One is on the one hand persuaded that the Algerians will not accept for very
long living in both austerity and inequality. An inequality that has itself
experienced a "growth." After 12 years of considerable investment that for
all that is not keeping Algeria from "food blackmail," if one takes into ac-

count the foreign exchange structure, has the time not come to begin to get
back on its feet again?

That is what is clearly emerging today. A new level is being reached. Not an
abrupt turn backwards, but a better equilibrium between several requirements:
to maintain development while correcting the firing. All while determining
whether months of "social tension" have not too seriously weakened Algerians'
energy. That tension, increased by the production deficit, has been at the
gates for several years. It has reached its culminating point in the last
few months. In an ambience of pleasant shambles everyone regained a keen
sense of scheming and swindling. In a decomposing social universe.

To guarantee effectiveness for everything that was going to be undertaken,
no one forgot to trigger the psychological mechanism necessary to any enter-
prise of this kind. The Algerian leaders made their choice: debate, where
it is possible and necessary to do so, all the questions that engage the
country for the coming decade; confront points of view, even the most di-
vergent; examine the arguments closely, even when they involve questions as

fundamental as hydrocarbons; and "unite" the workers in a genuine political
pact.

That is what the future will be made of. Chadli, who has been at the head
of the country for nine months, could--at the same time that he announced his
economic and social program-snatch from the void a whole epoch, trembling
with life, that one might have believed buried forever in the folds of his-
tory: November 1954. For all its meaning is still to be given back to the
most devalued--wrongly devalued--of words: political comitment.

Profile of Chadli Bendjedid
Paris DEMAIN L'AFRIQUE in French 22 Oct 79 p 44
[Article by Roland Malet: "Loyalty and Light"]

"To govern is to see clearly, in order to give oneself the means to direct
progress." That could be the motto of Chadli Bendjedid, the third president

of the Democratic and Popular Republic of Algeria. He was elected to that
office last 7 February. From that date to the 25th anniversary next I Novem-
ber of the start of the war of liberation, just 260 days, less than nine months,
have gone by. In this short time the new chief of state has already succeeded
in making his mark on Algerian policy. Careful as he is to be watchful of
continuity in taking over the legacy left by Houari Boumediene, he has never-
theless assumed a different image.

Manifestly, Chadli Bendjedid intends to do nothing uncertainly or equivocally.
First, no one will be in a position to reproach him one day for having sought
power because of personal ambition. At the end of last January the fourth
congress of the National Liberation Front (FIN) was on the lookout for the
candidate most likely to conduct the country's policy in the path drawn by
the revolution. even while protecting and consolidating national unity.

That is when the congress dared to turn to the comander of the second mili-
tary region, Oran. Chadli Bendjedid enjoys great esteem in the whole army
and among Party authorities. Born on 14 April 1929 in Bouteldja, he is near-
ing 50. Since his adolescence, in a confused political world where, under the
influence of the ideology and machinations of the colonial apparatus. parti-
sans of "assimilation" take pride of place. he shows no sign of doubt: to
take its fate in its own hands. his people has no other choice but to fight
for its independence. In any case, that is the objective he argues for.

31
Chadli does not decline the very high responsibility it is proposed that he
assume. He does not ask for them, but neither does he turn them down, But,
if the choice of the 3,290 people who attend the congress falls upon his per-
son, he intends that no ambiguity shall mar the mandate that will be entrusted
in him.

He has given constant proof that he is a man of his word, and a loyal man.
Since 19 June 1965 he has been a member of the Council of the Revolution. He
stood without flinching beside President Bomediene for 13 years. But he is
also regarded as an organizer. In the military region he comanded, he ran
public affairs with talent, he expressed valuable ideas on reconverting and
modernizing the army. He also, according to those who knew him then, knew
how to judge the competence and moral quality of men.

when on 31 January 1979 the congress elected him secretary general of the
FLN and made him the single candidate for the presidency of the Republic,
Chadli Bendjedid publicly laid his cards on the table. He will remain loyal
to socialism, his people's option; he will apply the National Charter in the
spirit and the letter; he will ensure independence without accepting "any
pressure or bargaining with regard to the principles we believe in," he will
see to it that we confirm "our authenticity,...our membership in the Arab

Mslim world and our openness to the world that surrounds us." So much for
continuity.

But Chadli Bendjedid also states that he is resolved to reorganize all the
political, economic and social structures. That is the only way the Algerian
revolution will be assured of accomplishing progress, of putting down deeper
roots in the country and of setting itself up as a solid citadel. He openly
exposes his intentions, so everyone will know where he stands. He spreads
everything out for everyone to see.

As for him, the "cornerstone" of the revolution fits into the "choice of men."
He has put this plan into operation: integrity, competence, devotion to the
people's cause are fro: now on the principal criteria for recruiting militants
and cadres for the Party, for recruiting leaders for policy and the economy.
Precisely, economic and financial independence is one of the principal founda-
tions of "an independence that is not devoid of meaning." A series of watch-
words follows from that: to draw up the inventory of the production apparatus;
to establish the balance sheet of financial management; to revise the struc-
tures and the direction of certain branches of the industrial sector in order
to provide better profitability; to improve the distribution channels and put
agricultural development at the top of the list of priorities. To reach these
objectives many measures have been taken that have disturbed routine and com-
fort. But it was also advisable to improve the cities, to preach to the citi-
zens concerning their conduct, to fight corruption, without faltering. In a
few weeks a thousand sentences were pronounced in the city of Algiers alone.

Thus, the Algerians are gathering their energies, developing new capacities,
deploying forced atrophied by an organization that left something to be de-
sired. Chadli Bendjedid is doing a good job at the helm at the risk of

setting against himself the united interests of a national bourgeoisie that

had really dug its hole in the revolution, and was busy for years f' riously
conducting economic development. A new stage has begun for Algeri: .

”(who 32

r‘sn- hhnn
GOVERNMENT REPORTED 10 as RBTHINKING maccumoss POLICY
Paris m—m am savour a new in English 12 Nov 79 pp 1., 5

[Text] A number of straws in the wind indicate that Algeria is rethinking
its policy of mortgaging a major portion of its oil revenues to develop
its natural gas resources. The policy, known as Valhyd (valorisation des
hydrocarbures--development of hydrocarbons) was drawn up in 1976 with the
assistance of American experts. It envisages expenditure of $33.10 billion
between now and the year 2005 to earn gross revenues of some $222 billion
at current prices. Uith oil exports likely to cease around 1995, Algeria
has been staking its future on gas, with strong emphasis on LNG.

One indication of a forthcoming switch in policy was given last week by the
Dutch Economics Ministry in a confidential report to Parliament which was
leaked to the press. It said Sonatrach, the Algerian state oil and gas
company, would prefer to make future deliveries of gas by pipeline across

the Mediterranean because of the high cost of building as liquefaction
plants. The Netherlands is currently building an 136 terninal at

Bemshaven and extending port facilities there to process 80 billion cubic
metres a year of Algerian LNG: Dutch and West German gas companies agreed
last March, to buy the gas and Gasunie, which distributes gas in the Netherlands,
said last week that it expected Sonatrach to honour its 20-year contract with
them. Deliveries are due to begin in 1983.

The Dutch report said delivery by pipeline was likely to be written into
future sales contracts and that Algeria was "reconsidering" its hydrocarbons
investment policy. Reports from Algeria indicate that Sonatrach's heavy
borrowing was acting as a brake upon the ability of other sectors of the
economy to negotiate development loans. Sonatrach, meanwhile, is undergoing
a reorganisation, which is expected to lead to the creation of a separate
oil refining and distribution comany.

These developments stem from the new look at Algeria being undertaken by
President Chsdli Bendjedid. The changes he is making are not revolutionary
in themselves, but the shift in emphasis is nonetheless clearly visible.
In his first official interview since he took over the Presidency following
the death of Houari Boumedienne in February, President Bendjedid listed

33
his priorities. "Must one deduce that we are going to slow down growth in
certain sectors or even neglect the- in fav0ur of other forts of activity?
Are we, to speak in specific terns, going to sacrifice industry? This
hypothesis does not conform with the truth," be told French correspondent
Daniel Junqua.

"Our strategy and our plans for industry remain unchanged. But greater means
will be allocated to other sectors. This is especially true for agriculture,
water resources and housing. Education and vocational training will also
continue to enjoy the priority that has been given to then for a long time."
President Bendjedid declared.

"We are going to concentrate on developing agriculture and water resources
because oil does not represent the future for Algeria. After a while, we
will not have it any longer. He nust learn to distinguish between permanent
riches and those which are not renewable. Oil, a tenporary resource, must
serve to develop productive equipment for industry and agriculture. That

is what we ought to bequeath to future generations. As far as this is
possible, they should be able to feed themselves from our own land. These
are the broad lines for debate at the next meeting of the Central Connittee."
the Algerian leader stated.

C80: 14420

3‘;
BRIEFS

ALGERIANS VERSUS Manger“ has just complained to Moscow about
what it calls ”Rmnian duplicity." According to Algeria, Romania is
secretly armirg those opposed to Algeria's policies in the Maghreb. They
are said to be supplying military materiel of Soviet origin to the Horoccans
in large quantities, including portable missiles and light weapons. This

materiel is said to be passing through Egypt. [Text] [Paris LB POINT in
French 26 Nov 79 p 59]

080: (0400

35
PROSECUTION CASE AGAINST COHHUNISTS COﬂTINUBS
Cairo AL-AKHBAR in Arabic 23 Oct 79 p 8
[Article: "The Government's Case Against the Conunists"l

[Text] The Supreme State Security Court yesterday continued to hear the
attorney general's case against 176 defendants implicated in the largest
communist conspiracy. Hr Yusif Darraz, chief attorney of the Supreme State
Security Office presented new evidence pointing to the defendants'

guilt. He said that the Egyptian people refuse to follow the political
system of any foreign government, and are opposed to any imported politi-
cal philosophy that is foreign to Egyptian thinking, such as the one
espoused by the defendants. He added that the defendants had attempted

to popularize communism and the communist system of government. He said
further that prosecution witnesses, internal security intelligence reports,
tape recordings, photographs and emblems found in the possession of the
defendants will confirm that the accused were well organized and united
under one leadership in the commission of their suspicious activities.

The chief prosecutor described the Egyptian people as proud of their
traditions and values. having been the first to believe in the existence
of a divine power. to accept the idea of a single God, to reject atheism,
and to be the recipients of a divine message which is the basis of their
faith to this day. He added that the communist philosophy espoused by the
defendants was an affront to Egypt's religious heritage. He described the
communist system as being socially and economically at odds with Egypt's
heritage, and castigated it as dictatorial government. Hr Darraz then
presented specific evidence against 86 of the defendants.

The crimes attributed to the defendants include: creating an Egyptian
communist organization, whose principal aim is the forceful overthrow of
Egypt's economic, political and social system, and popularizing communist
thought as evidenced by possession of pro-communist pamphlets and other
printed matter.

Some of the defendants were accused of encouraging, cooperating with,
offering financial support to, sheltering and aiding the communists to
evade the authorities.
There is much objective evidence to substantiate the charges. Egyptian
security agencies have been gathering information on the communist activ-
ity for 2 months prior to the actual incidents. The communists exploited
every opportunity to instigate the public against the government. One
example was the 25 November 1976 demonstration by university students.
which was led by some of the defendants to spread communist ideas. The
defendants were also responsible for spreading a variety of communist wall
posters and pamphlets directed mainly at the working class. The inflamma-
tory propaganda was intended to foment disorder and ultimately lead to a
violent overthrow of the government. The defendants were charged with
having instigated the January 1977 incidents. They reportedly encouraged
the crowds to demonstrate, resist authority, and create anarchy. Many
of the defendants were in possession of secret publications calling for
revolution. Information gathered by the security agencies was corrobo-
rated by eyewitnesses.

The incidents were similar in many respects: the manner in which the crowds
were aroused and directed against particular government policies, the
banners and signs carried by the demonstrators. the slogans employed to
fan anger. etc., suggest that the disturbances were centrally led and
organized. The prosecutor placed in evidence before the court a large
number of pamphlets calling for rebellion.

Prosecution witnesses also corroborated the charges. Their testimony left
no doubt that the defendants did belong to the secret organization, that
they were bent on fomenting revolution and that their ultimate goal was
the violent overthrow of the government.

The testimony shows that the communists had planned a series of demonstra-
tions and other disturbances to coincide with the government's announcement
of new economic policies in November 1976. The communists' aim was to
strike against the country's constitutional institutions and overthrow

the existing government. The court today will continue to hear the pro-
secutor's case.

The trial proceedings were presided over by Justice Hakim Hunir Salib with
Justices 'Ali 'Abd al—ﬂskam and Ahmad Bakkar serving as members. Present
at the proceedings were Chief Prosecutor Yusif Darraz, assisted by Ibrahim
al—uunaydi and Nohsin Habruk. Acting as secretaries were Ahmad Huhammad
Ramadan and Ramadan Nassar.
BRIEFS

NPUG PARTY MEMBERS ARRESTED--The al-Duqqi district attorney ordered the
arrest of four NPUG party members on a charge of distributing inflamma-
tory pamphlets. All four are candidates for election to the al-Duggi
municipal council. They are: Hubs-lad Sayyid 'Ali, 'Oaran Ahmad 'Omran,
Muhammad 'Abd al-Hun'in Khalil. and Nadir al—‘Annani. All four are
members of the NPUG party. They were arrested by internal security
officers. and charged with distributing inflmory publications.

Hr Yusif 'Abd al—Ralin. al-Duggi district attorney. ordered that they

be jailed without bail until their case is turned over to the Supreme

State Security .Court. [Text] [Cairo AL-AHRAH in Arabic 30 Oct 79 p 12]
9063
ATTACK 0N MASSY SEER A8 81.0! AGAINST U.S. IMPERIALISM
'l‘ehran KEYIMN in Persian 6 Nov 79 p 5

[Text] The clear and anti-iaperialist policy of Iran‘s revolution, is
once again sparked by occupying the United States' espionage nest. There-
fore. the policy which was about to weaken after the 21 and 22 Bahnsn

[10, 11 February] last year or at least was losing its color once again
bees-e a revolutionary topic and from the beginning, the revolution moved
by identifying the main ener. that is; the United States. Nothing could
have stopped the Iotor of motivating the revolution which derived its
power from several decades of the United States and imperialism in Iran.
It was for this reason that [the revolution] achieved victory sooner than
it had been expected. despite the conspiracies and plots made by imperial-
in which are still continued.

He owe all this to the Emu. He owe it to the hall's direct and clear
policy which fro. the years of his exile in Turkey, Iraq and then his
departure to Paris and his return to his nation and up to this day and
forever, everywhere and in any state-ant. he has introduced iaperialisn.
and especially the United States. as the min may of the Iranian nation
and our revolution. From the days that KhoIeyni directly addressed the
shah saying, "you have submitted the docuaentation of the nation's slavery
to the parliaaent and brought down the value of the highest position in

the country lower than an Alerican cook." To the state-ants that he made
in Tofel Chateau in presence of reporters in order that the world would
hear his words, the reporters broadcast that the "ayatollah has refused

the request of Ji-y Carter, the President of the United States for peace,"
pointing out that the superpowers should avoid interfering in Iran's inter-
nal affairs. Ayatollah noneyni said: It is not up to Carter to determine
if Bakhtiar's govern-eat is legal or illegal. In an interview held by
"Monday Morning" Khoaeyni said: "The President of the United States is
considered one of the eneaies of Iran for his continued unconditional
support for the shah of Iran and for insulting the Iranian nation."

After his return to his nation on the 12 Bahaan [1 February] last year. he
announced clearly in Behaht-e Zahra celetery to aillions of eager people:
"As long as we are alive, we will not allow America to swallow our
possessions." The Emam has repeatedly emphasized that the United States
is the head of the international world eaters. This statement which will
remain forever is now the slogan of the students--followers of the Emam's
policy--who have occupied the U.S. Embassy. "All the problems of the
East are caused by foreigners. from this West. from the United States.
All of the problems of the Hoslems are caused by the United States. It
is the United States that has strengthened Zionism in such a way that
they kill our brothers in groups."

And we see that the Emam's irreconcilable position toward imperialism.
especially the United States. has become tougher every day.

And then by looking deeply into the roots of Iran's revolution and the
people's movements we feel the presence of imperialism and 0.5. mercenaries
in the roots and veins of our life. He see that for several decades we
have been swallowed gradually by imperialism. We see that with the help

of the government it had set up and its domestic and foreign mercenaries.
and with the help of its greatest element in the Middle East, that is, the
deposed shah, the United States has made us so dependent on it and meta-
morphosed and destroyed everything so that we could not stand on our own
feet for even a few days. In order to cut off the tongue of the opposers
and fill the mouth of the truthful with lead and gunpowder, the damned SAVAK
was set up, with the help of the CIA, after the people's life. Suffocation
and killings reached a point that brought the nation's anger to an explo-
sive point. The flood of revolution crushed the shore and the strongest
and the best equipped military forces could not control it.

Iran's poor people have known their main enemy and have moved by knowing
who their enemy is. It is in repayment for years that it has struck a
blow on the arms of imperialism in Iran whenever it has been able to do
so and it has tried to cut off some parts of this cancerous tumor which

is growing rapidly. He see that during the first days of the revolution.
with the slogans of "Death to America," "Death to Imperialism“ and "Yankee
Co Home" written on the doors and walls of the city and villages. anti-
imperialism slogans. So many times the U.S. Embassy--the base of American
CIA conspiracies--was attacked and even a part of its building was set on
fire and there had been involvements with American guards at the embassy.
Host of the Americans who had seen the nation's anger and knew that there
was no place for them in this country packed and left. Some of them even
fled. The American employees of most organizations were discharged by
Iranian employees. The nation's complete unity blocked the way for any
conspiracy that America was preparing to deflect the course of the revolu-
tion. And, until victory the revolution moved in its main direction.

For this reason, when the shah left the country the people went to the
streets with slogans such as "The final victory is to send out the Ameri-
H

cans. "This American shah should be executed by the nation's court,"
"After the shah, it is America's turn," "American mercenaries should be

no
fired." After that, in every demonstration and parade, gathering, and in
short. at every opportunity, the conspiracies and plots of American mer-
connries were condemed and anti-imperialist slogans were given. me
:zlogans say: "The Revolution Is Victorious." "Death to Zionism,"
"Anerica and Israel are our bloodthirsty enemies," "Palestine, our brother
and our friend."

Finally, several nillion anti-American people marched in Tehran and through-
out the country. Because ilperialist conspiracies against Iran's Islamic
revolution still continues and Anerica who apparently talks of friendship
with Iran, has adnittcd the nation's biggest enemy, who for years had
sucked the nation's blood. to their soil. Therefore, the United States

has insulted the Iranian nation in the worst way. For this reason, anti-
Anerica demonstrations with the participation of millions of people will

be held throughout the country. In Tehran, demonstrations were supposed

to end in front of the 0.8. Massy where the resolution would be read.
However, Shush Circle will be the destination and anti-American slogans will
be exploded in the air like bows.

Finally with the Ellen's guidance and advice the U.S. Elbassy whose doors
were closed to Iranians for years—this nest of corruption, espionage.
imperialist conspiracies against the Iranian nation and their bloody revolu-
tion--was occupied by Mosle- students who follow the item's policy. The
American employees except the charge'd'affaires who was out of the embassy,
were held hostage by students. Many doctnents on conspiracy against Iran's
revolution were found. Host of these docusents were destroyed by ewassy
employees.

In this way the revolution once again returned to its Iain direction. The
big enely who was going to hide itself was pulled out of its nest. The
nation, united, supported this brave and revolutionary action. Because

if the strokes are not continuous and effective the enemy would not collapse.
However, ilperialisn should know that the lore it struggles in the nation's
whirlpool of anger, the closer it will get to death.

90“
C80: 6906
SHARI'ATHADARI REITﬁlATES DEMAND M RENEW 0F SHAH
Tehran "YEAH in Persian 13 Rev 79 p 2

/interview with Ayatollah Sheri'etmdgri: "Whenever America Gives in to
the Law, the Matter Will Be lesolvedﬂ/

[Etcerptg mic Rouleeu, LE VONDB's well knownreporter and politiclal comen-
tator, held an interview, along with the Usahington POST correspondent,
with Ayatollaholosna Shari'atmdari whose text is as follows:

Question: ’Jhat is your eminenca'a view on the occupation of the American
embassy in Tehran and the taking of workers and enployees in this embassy
hostage?

Answer: For any years, our people have sustained great pressure and nis-
cry from international iuperialism, and today they feel great edginess to-
ward imperialists. Our people's general belief is that America, throughout
the history of its relations with Iran, has always helped the governments
of iran and that it was among the obstinate defenders of the corrupt, tyran-
nical regime in Iran in the past 30 years. This extensive, unstinting
American support of the previous regime, and its support and reinforcenant
of his acts, occurred mostly at a time when Aeerica considered itself to
be the greatest protector of human rights protested on the surface about
any corner of the world where there were excesses and transgressions. How-
ever, in spite of the full knowledge and certitude it had of the innueer-
able transgressions and persecutions which occurred in this country in this
era, it still protected the first and second Pahlavi, and, what is even
stranger, Mr. Carter himself, at the time when he was engaged in the elec-
tions for the presidency, engaged in holding meetings and speeches in the
various states of America, one day protested to Ford, America's former
president, in a television interview or in fact television debate, "You are
protecting four corrupt, inhuman countries in the world. and one of then is
the corrupt, despotic government of Iran." Mr Carter did not accept any
response Ford gave in this regard, but we have seen that once he himself
was elected president, he protected the deposed Shah more than Pord did,
and this is why our people today are well aware what the international
imperialists have done and are well aware that America has never paid heed

to the oppressed, despotically ruled people of Iran but have always sup-
ported corrupt governments and backed corrupt regimes.

Question: 'Jhat you have said is conpletely correct, and there is no doubt
about it, but you have not answered the question on whether occupation of
the American embassy in Tehran is a proper act.

Answer: First, this action was not taken by the Iranian government. Rath-
er, a number of students carried it out and the government has supported
them. Second, four diplomats from the Syrian, Algerian, Swedish and French
embassies are to go to the American embassy, by the invitation of the stu-
dents, to see the condition of the hostages, to see that they have not been
harmed or bothered, and to see that their being hostages in their own em-
bassy, unharmed and undisturbed, has only a political meaning. Third, if
you say that this action is unlawful, this is nothing in conparison with
the illegal acts against our people in the course of the past 30 years
which the American government has considered lawful. ‘

Question: In your eminence's view, is this action proper from the religi-
ous standpoint?

Answer: This action has a political more than a religious aspect but from
the standpoint of Islam I must say that the provisions of Islam are linked
and connected to one another and that one cannot examine and judge an
Islamic act in isolation without taking its connection with other Islamic
provisions and coornands into consideration.

Islam is a complete system and structure and one must examine and respond
to this matter in connection with other Islamic provisions, commands and
laws, because the matter is interconnected. This act is a political pro-

cess and one must seek its manifestation in its causative elements and
factors.

Question: At the present time Iran is engaged in a test of strength with
the biggest world power. In your opinion how may this matter be resolved?

Answer: We are not making war with America but we have a series of demands
which are not only not outside the limits of the comands and laws of Islam
but also conform with international laws and rights. whenever America
yields in the face of logic and the law, the matter will be resolved. Fur-
thermore, to yield before right and to sanction reality never diminishes a
person and is not proof of failurs--rather, it is proof of humanity, great-
ness and magnanimity of spirit, and on the other hand inparts greater con-
fidence and character. After the resolution of this matter, America will
certainly be given consideration by Iran in the same measure as it respects
the independence of Iran and is disposed to establish good relations.

Question: The situation which has come shout at the present time has turned
the American people against Iran.
Answer: He heve no differences or querrels with the people of America--
rether, our criticisms end differences are with the Americen government
beceuse of its previous sets in Iren.

Question: Excellence, you heve often steted in your interviews thet lslem~
ic provisions heve not yet been put into prectice in Iren, wherees the
people outside Iren believe thet en Islamic system hes.

Answer: or course the governmentel system in Iren is en lslemic republic
end, in this system, cgnduct end ection dust be totelly Islemic. Unfor-
tunstely, so fer lgnly/ e smell percentage of Islem hes been implemented;
most of the com-ends end provisions of Islem heve not yet been inplemented.

Now our situetion is such thet e building hes been destroyed end s new
building hes not yet been built on top of it, end we ere situated on the
ruins of the pest, while there ere numerous problems end insdequecies end
power is in the hends of numerous groups. We do not heve e powerful,
strong government which cen dominste conditions end oversee the construc-
tion of Iren in the precise context of the lews of Islem. All right, ell
this is because of the trensitionel stege end God willing it will greduelly
be rectified. Horeover, when the French revolution occurred did the condi-

tion of the French netion quickly inprove end were sffeirs repidly set in
order?

Question: When do you think effeirs will be set in order?

Answer: When e powerful Islemic government comes to power reforms will be
possible end sffsirs will fell into order. The meening of reform is thet
ell sffsirs must fell into the chennel of sociel justice, but I do not
know when such e government will come to power--I just cen give en exemple
for you in this sphere, namely thet when Iren ceme under the occupetion of
three foreign governments, the question wes reised in e newspeper so to
when Iren's situetion would be rectified, end the enswer wes "Hhen the oc-
cupetion is over." The question wes then esked "when will the occupetion
be over" end the enswer wee "When Iren's situstion is rectified."

Question: In the course of the pest 18 months, I heve visited your emin-
ence severel tines end this is the first time I see you in despeir.

Answer: We ere not in despeir; with the grece of God, the problem will

be solved. of course, there heve been problems following the revolution
end I hope we will soon emerge from them.

Question: You know thet more then two thirds of the constitution hes been
rectified; in your eminence's view, ere there no contradictions or incon
sistencies in thet?

Answer: People ere still engeged in the investigetion end it hes not been
completely retified so thet one cen judge it; however, of course, if there
ere inconsistencies end contredictions, they must be corrected.

1:887
C80: 1905 Ml
GOVERIDR WARNS OF INTERNAL CWOLUTIOII
Tehran KAYBAN in Persian 16 Oct 79 p 11

[Text] Kernenshah--Hojjatolas1an Haj Sheykh Bosseyn Kernani, Elan Khoneyni's
representative in the west, acconpanied by Ahnad Sepehri-Pur, governor of
Kernanshah. regional chief of Qasr-e Shirin and other officials net with
thousands of people free Qasr-e Shirin in the Hehdieh nosque. At this
gathering Sheylth Hoha-ad Axis Bosseyn declared on behalf of the people of
Qasr-e Shirin the adherence of the people to the Islanic republic. Accord-
ing to the PARS NW5 mam, a group of youths entered the noqu and shouted
the slogan "show cerenonies nust go, announce the wages of the underprivi-
leged." One of then enunerated the needs of the people of Qasr-e Shirin.

The governor of Kernenshah said in this regard: "The problems you have
stated are out of hundreds that are not expressed. By forming a city coun-
cil and developnent staff we can, going hand-in-hand, renove these diffi-
culties. In counting on the Islamic revolution and the efforts of
counterrevolutionsries and foreign and donestic plotters he said: they
want to take the weapon of unity fron us and by sowing enmity and discord
lake differences between religious and political groups. We night think
that they threaten us fron over the border but I met any that this sowing
of discord is free within the country like ternites eating at the founda-
tions of our unity."

The governor asked that the people tell his their needs so that they could
be net.

Hojjatoleslan Kerneni, representative of ban Khoneyni in the west, remarked
on the need for unity and said, the revolution is a nodel hone which is

easy to spoil. Living in it is difficult and to live in it we nust have
plans and cooperation to nest our needs.

He added: "Our Islanic revolution astonished the world because we threw
out 50,000 Anerican workers and all other foreiyl workers. He asked for
liberty and we lust protect it because our revolution is a revolution of
the underprivileged of the world. ‘Ihe land grabbers who see us liberate
the underprivileged of the world are determined to smash our revolution.
You people, and especially the tribes, must not be deceived by this intrigue."

According to a report from PARS NW3 AGENCY the Enan's representative with
the governor, comnders of district gendarmerie units of Kemnshah, com-
mnders of gendaraerie regiments and border guards of Qasr-e Shirin, the
district governors of Sarpol Zahab in Bazmirabad located in the mountainous
area, and Suq al-Jayshi, assedaled in the presence of thousands of Qolkhani
tribesaen. The tribesmen proclaimed their adherence to the Islamic Republic.
Bahram Soltan Asperi, head of the Qolkhani. announced seven requests of the
tribe. These requests relate to tranquillity of the tribe. aid to agricul-
ture and animal husbandry, improving health facilities and the nuaber of
doetors, building schools, removal of weapons and compensation for those
taken from the tribe and building roads throughout rural areas. It was
said that these requests would be presented to Ellen Khoneyni by Seyyed
Naseldin Hosseyni leader of the Ahl-e-Haq mosque.

The governor of Remashah said to the tribe: "Re are in a state of war
and you must be patient until, God willing. security will be restored and
your requests can be met and some of the tribe who have left the border area
can return." The Brain's representative also said to the tribesmen: "The
Brian has assured that anyone who has repented his past sins and has taken
the road of defending the revolution and the land will be forgiven and will
have mercy. You aust also guard the Iranian border and be friends with
your brothers of the arny, gendarnerie and guards."

The Emam's representative with his companions then went by helicopter to
the area of Gardeh No. There Mohammad Khonsari, district governor of
Sarpol Zahab said that the tribesnen of the area had assembled to announce
their adherence to the Islamic revolution. clergyaen of the area also spoke.
The Eman's spokesaan praised their feelings and said: ”We expect you to
defend the western area of the country because officer Shirazi or guard
Isfahani cannot defend the area." The [man's representative, the governor
of Kermanshah and officials of the area went to the mosque at Sarpol Zahab.
The governor said in the mosque: "He have reached this conclusion in our
journey. that in spite of the suffering of the people and tribes of the
area. they must defend the area by their own efforts.

Hojjatoleslam Kemni commented in regard to the programs of the fallen
regime that they did not know the social maturity of our people and said:
"They made their plans behind closed doors and gave away oil and gas and
bought weapons and gave nothing to the people." He asked the people to
compare the unity of word and deed with neighboring countries.
Hojjatoleslam Kermani. the governor. and his comanions inspected the
Abuzar 3rd armored brigade of Sarpol Zahab.
KHOHEYNI'S SON STATES VIM 0N GOVBRWT

Tehran WA“ in Persian 15 Oct 79 p 2

[Text] Hojjatolealam Haj Seyyed Ahmad Khomeyni, son of the Emam, explained
his views at a radio television press conference on various problems, such
as the authority of Islamic jurists and the council of experts.

He recognized the importance to Islam and religion of the religious
jurists as they affect a nuﬁer of other problems, political, educational.
social, military, economic and so forth. He said: "If a person supposes
that he is an expert in political problems. that is. in the traffic of
judgments and orders, and on the subject of Islamic police and does not
have specialization in other studies, he has no right to interfere in
those affairs in which others have specialized. The opposite is also
true that 'analysis' in holy writ is by those people said to be 'analysts'
but they are only imitation 'analysts."'

Khomeyni said during an explanation of various specializations and degrees
of religious comentary: "An Islamic jurist can only say in regard to
military problems that if America or another pagan country attacks Iran

it would be necessary that in all confines of the Islamic nation that
noslems appear to be armed (it is possible there would be no arse). He
would give the enemy leave. come on. so that we could better get at them.
If there are weapons we would have to defend ourselves and those that are
killed would merit the title of martyr.

"But in choice of weapons and method of defense for the good of the people
the jurist is all one with a grocer. A military man or a politician would
want to look into this jurist or that problem. The jurist would say that
silitary men and politicians must not be traitors. is Nasseri a traitor or
not, is Boveyda a traitor or not. Experts know this. 'lhis is not related
to jurists. That the jurist himself my know still has no relation to the
interpretation itself. The jurist. based on the laws of God, must choose
the most expert people and religious people because they can better suffer
for other moslems. If other than this is done. guardianship will fail

and the people rebel. One of the best politicians is picked for political
problem. One of the best social scientists is picked for social problem
and so forth. The condition for leading this assembly, which has in its
hands the governing of the nation. would be a person who would cast aside
any member of the assembly who turned traitorous and American. This is
another problem that is not difficult. Being American and doing its
treachery is also not for the jurist but for those experts, specialists
and the millions of others who understand, to ask, is this treason or
not? The jurist only says treason must not be. Americanism must not

be. If the leader of this assembly would be a person who is a real

leader would it not be better if a condition pertained such as I will
explain. Would it be better for this person to run the nation or have it
done in the same old intolerant way? Has the shah only removed to have
his place taken by a president? The same prime minister's palace, the
same mechanism, the same show of operating ministries, the same old cliques
in the midst of the Islamic Republic and ruled by every American dollar?
We want a consultative nation and an Islamic jurist whose qualifications
God has determined to head it. What are American dollars? If this jurist
lies then his stewardship will be taken from him. When his stewardship

is taken away he will acknowledge his own deviation. We do not want a
jurist otherwise. Another jurist who is not a liar could come to replace
him but if he also lies he too would be put aside. If you do not do this,
then what fundamental difference have you made? Economic rule as before,
military government also as before, all the military as before so that

we are eternally under the shahinshab. Until yesterday the shah's chief
of police held sway, today the chief of police of the Islamic Republic holds
away. No other things should be said, one about the guards and the

other about the comittee. Father, p':;)1e have become sinful recently.
You must make a change.

"The best specialist from Islamic jurists must be appointed. The best
jurist is not for his own appointment but would accept it. The jurist
does no: put hi-elf in and does not elect himself because he is not an
expert. After appointing experts one of them will emerge as the jurist
and will accept it if he is the most expert.

And what should we do afterward to determine if this is the best expert
or not? This is also not the concern of the jurist either because we

must ask experts in all fields. I said this is not the job of the jurist,
but the job of the experts. A jurist says only that the most expert in
political affairs be found, not that he be Bosseyn or Hassan. This is
not the job of the jurist. The jurist is one among the rest of the people
in that situation and it is up to the experts. They must sit down and
select the best of them and give the- leadership in economic, social, edu-
cational and military problems and put the entire job in their hands. The
jurist has no right to select anyone else. A good jurist has no right to
select anyone but the best. most expert and responsible people in all
fields. This is better than an American lackey who is not responsible

to God. Now you want to hear the name of the president or the prime min-
ister. This does not matter. It is true that if we keep the same system
that now exists and do not change it, a division of power will emerge. That
is if we have no assenbly things will remain as at present. But in the

he
same way, the authority of the jurist will emerge and that of the prime
minister and president will be nullified. Why? Because a jurist cannot
be chosen except from the purest people. If he is not, his stewardship
will be taken away.

"Now the president. If the best people are to be selected it ~ in the
way that the jurist has. The jurist did not select himself, the experts
selected him. If they also do not choose the best man, he most expert
and responsible man, it is the right of the jurist to nullify it. Another
problem is the right of jurist in subjects that the people have not settled.
If I have settled that this subject about which the jurist speaks is an

of fense, for example, Mirzai Shirazi has forbidden tobacco, and I have
settled that this opinion is void, then the jurist has the right to settle
it. The authority of the jurist is in regard to subjects that common
people and experts have not settled. If the exterts in the leadership
decide that an opinion of the jurist is not correct then it is the right
of the jurist to decide his own qualifications in the matter."

Affairs not Connected to the Jurist

"Another problem is one that I have already mentioned. For example, a
religious authority gives his opinion in the political field regarding

the conditions of a treaty. he has no right to interfere in these matters.
The experts must sit down, look into the matter and decide. Recognizing
obstruction and intrigue and neutralizing them is also in the hands of the
experts. This again is not the affair of the jurist. A jurist has no
right to amend the right of selection. That is, if a person has more
expertise in a subject, for example, he is the greatest economist, or
another is the greatest in social problems, or another in military, then
the jurist has no right to select another with less qualifications and
stretch his own coupetence."

Hojjatole'slsm Khomeyni said at another point: "He. must arrange things

so that a president does not get involved. An assenbly should be created
to run the country. That asseldaly will be an Islamic one and a jurist
will be involved so that we can judge its qualifications. Its qualifica-
tions should be directed by the Emu Sadeq. "hat I mean is that we do not
want to carry the burden of a prime minister and president who are parti-
sans of America and are not of Islamic principles. Islas says that a
jurist must accept the most expert in all fields, not select them.

"After the experts have selected the best in all fields those that are
not "Americans," not thieves, are experts, the best, the jurist will
accept them. Should the jurist tell a single lie he must step aside. In
summary, brothers, do not carry the burden of a president, but come and
talk about the nation. The asseubly list rule. Gather an assenbly of
experts to lead, that is the best economist, the best social scientist,
the best politician, the best who know the educational problems of our
country, one that knows military problem, those who do not have America
on their backs. After that we will pick one to lead who will not lie.
America wants to create the same president. same prime minister, the same
old svlup in the Islamic Republic. He ennnot carry the burden. We choose
the assembly of experts with an [elastic jurist to lead who. I say again.
if he does not have the qualifications that Esau Sadeq ordered, is sin-
ful and will be put aside. The Assetly of Experts will correct the
deviations of the nation. We must all rise up and say that we do not
want a president or prime minister. We wanr an assetoly of experts. The
assewly must run the country. This is the only Islamic way of govern-
ment."

Khomeyni then described the qualifications of a jurist: "The Emam said
in one of his speeches that if a scholar does not tell the truth his
authority will be taken and will be told to leave. just for one lie. Such
attributes are not possessed by many. Not many ordinary people have then.
We must look for a man who is not corrupt, one who does not give one's
rights to another, a person who does not play politics, one who has many
good qualities and a sound foundation. He must imitate those that have
no unworthy traits."

Another part of Hojjatolesiam's press conference will be printed in sub-
sequent issues.
NAILS 0? mm m TO KILL animus SMRI'ATHADARI BAKED
rmmmrmmmmwppl, 2

[keen-pt] The Foreign Finietry, Gendarmerie, and police of the Islamic
Republic informed Ayatollah Shariatndari about the incident.

Several oftheAfghanagentsmohadoonetoIrantocan-youttheassassi-
nation plan have been arrested.

lbhamed Tax-ski drafted the plot to assassinate Ayatollah Shariatmdari one
month ago in Kabul, and his successor followed through with this plot.

Ayatollah axariatndari said: We. for Jmtioe and truth is the grad;-
est honor for all lbalus, and we do not fear this affair."

Those arrested confessed that they had a special assiment iron the leaders
or the Afghan regime to assassinate Ayatollah ans-launch“.

Oneoftheaesassinstionegentstellintoatrapseveraldaysagoinoon.

The Afghan Moalan people's support of Ayatollah aariatandsri's mifesto
was disclosed to be the motive for the agents or that oomtry's regine's
decision to assassinate his.

After the conspiracy was uncovered, strict security leasures were taken to
protect Ayatollah anariatnadari's lite.

Oneofthe biggest conspiraciesbyaforeignconnh'ytorcarryingonta
treacherous plot in the world of Islua, especially Iran, i.e., the assassi-
nation of His Rainenoe Ayatollah thdl‘ i, was uncovered.

misconspiracyuasplannedintheneighboringoomtryorughanistmand
vaeplannedbyits leaders.1'heoriy1al planar of that oonepiracyuae
lbha-ed Tea-ski, the first president of thenepublio of Afghanistan following
the establiehnent of the Marxist regime in that country. Last night, mm
correspondents succeeded in obtaining this new from very reliable sources,
and, in the contact that was made imdiately with Ayatollah Shariatnadari's
office, this news was confirmed by his whence.

His ﬁninence Ayatollah Shariatamdari's spokemn, who is also one of his close
relatives, reported the details of this unislamic and inhmlane conspiracy to
MIA" reporters as follows: 'i'hs conspiracy to assassinate His Mmce
Ayatollah Shariamadari had been planned since about one month ago in Kabul,
the capital of Afghanistan, and, later, it was learned that lbhamed Taraki,

a few days before his overthrow and the coming to power of Bafisollah Anin,
had planned the plot to assassinate His minence Ayatollah Shariatmadari,

and he despatched several Afgxan citizens to Iran to carry out his treacherous
aim.

Ayatollah Saariatnsdsri's spokesman added, 'Several of those people who had
beensenttolranbyleaders oftheAfghan regi-tocarryoutthisnnislamic
andinhunaneassignmsntwerearrestedonths Iran-Afghanborder, andoneof
thosewho,bysomemeans,hadbeenabletogetto@unalcngwithsevsralof
his cohorts in order to carry out his devilish plan at a suitable opportunity
was trapped hysecurityagentsafewdays ago. The-an, who hadbeax arrested
inQon, confesseddm-ingthsprelininaryinterrogations thathehadbeen
assigned by the Afgaan regime to assassinate Bis hinence Ayatollah
Siariatnadari.‘

Ayatollah Shariatmdari's spokesmen continued, "A little while ago, the Foreign
Dunistry, the National Police, and the National Gendarmeris of the Islamic
Republic of Iran had been infer-ed about the plan of this treacherous
conspiracy by the agents of the Afghan regime; therefore, they made Ayatollah
Shariatnadari completely an courant. In the report sublitted to Ayatollah
Simiatnadari by the Foreign Ministry of the Islamic Republic and the national
police and gendarmerie, it was stressed that several Afghans who had been
arrested in connection with this matter confessed to Iranian agents that they

had a special assignment from the leaders of the Afghan regins to assassinate
His aninence Ayatollah Shariatndari.‘

Ayatollah Shariatmdari's spokesman also said, “her since the question of a
conspiracy to assassinate His whence Ayatollah Shariatnadari was reported
to us by the Foreign Ministry, gendarmerie and police of the Islanic Republic,
the necessary precautionary and seem-ity measures have been taken to protect
the life of Ayatollah Shariatmdari although the Ayatollah Shariatmadari,
himself, believed that such a matter should not bring about am kind of change
in his situation and he is Well ready for martyrdom for the sake of Justice
and truth and does not fear this nutter at all."

Ayatollah Shariatnadari's spokesman added, 'The steps taken by the Afghan
regime to plan the conspiracy to assassinate His “hence the Ayatollah are
not unrelated to the manifestos he has issued and the interviews he has given
in support of the people of Afghanistan, especially since he has m followers
in the Moslen country of Afghanistan, and he also has representatives in that

country who are engaged in spreading and teaching the holy goals of the true
religion of Islan.‘

>2
Contact with Ayatollah Shariatmadari

Considering the importance of the matter, last night, mun reporters Inde
contact with Ayatollah Shariatmdari himelf and asked his opinion regarding
the cowardly, unislmic, and inhmune conspiracy of the agents of the Afghan
regine. His Bninence Ayatollah Shariatmdari confirmed what had been said
to KEIHAN reporters by his spokesuan, saying, “We completely endorse the
statements of mn- spokesnan on this natter.‘

After the Marxist regime of Mohamed Taraki cans to power in Afghanistan,
which encountered the strong opposition of the Moslea people of that country
and led to the nutynlon of thousands of then, his animnce Ayatollah
Shariatmdari frequently, by issuing nanifestos, condemod the slaughter of
the Hoslen people of Afghanistan and duanded of the leaders of that country
that they heed the legitimate, Islamic, and humane demands of our Moslem
brothers and sisters in that country.

The significant point in this latter is that, in spite of the removal of
Mohamed Tax-ski in Afghanistan and the coating to power of Hafisollah Anin,

no change occurred in the basic policy or that country, i.e., the conspiracy
to assassinate His minence Ayatollah Shariatnadari had been planned during
the tern of power of l-‘ohanned Teraki and, although Taraki was removed and
reportedly killed, the implementation of this plan was not halted and those
people who had been assigned to carry out this conspiracy continued their
work. A reliable report states that one of thoae people who had been assigaed
to can-youtthie conspiracywasarreeted a few days ago in com.
TURKISH PAPER 0“ EVENTS IN ISLAMIC WORLD
NC270959 Istanbul TERCUHAN in Turkish 26 Nov 79 p 5 NC
[Article by Zafer Atay: "Preposterous Happenings")

[Excerpts] The events in Tehran have proved that a handful of irresponsible,
ignorant and undignified people will not hesitate to set the whole world
aflame out of their own personal spite.

No one is obliged to love the United States. Millions of people hate the
ousted shah as well. It is even possible to declare war on imperialism.

No one would object to the expression of loMe or hatred in street demon-

strations. '

But detaining people and tying their hands in their own embassy-which.
according to international tradition and rule of law. is considered to be
their own property-asuch an act can only be terIed "barbaric." It is
unfortunate that Khomeyni has allowed the Iranians, who possess a
2.500-year-old state tradition and are one of the fundamental guardians
of eastern art and culture. to be branded as "barbarians."

Undoubtedly spying is an offense. Even in the lost primitive states a
diplomat accused of spying is deported within 2‘ hours. But attempting

to try a diplomat because he is a spy, and announcing this to the world as
if you were doing something clever, you will soon discover that no one
supports you. Khomeyni is now in this predicament. Even Syria and Libya,
known to be the most extreme in the Islanic world, want the hostages to
be released. When it was suggested during the preparations for the Arab
summit in Tunis to support Iran, even 'Arafat--Khoneyni's closest friend--
could not say "yes."

The release of the hostages who have been imprisoned within the four walls
of the impressive American Embassy and who are by now in s psychologically
terrible state can resolve the issue.

He still believe that neither Khomeyni nor Carter have lost their common
sense to the extent of hurling all of mankind into a disastrous war. For
the place of the warmongering leaders in history is the bottom of the
garbage heap. Both Hitler and Mussolini are still remembered with detest.

5“

-‘A 1 an-
MILITARY MEN MAY RETIRE AFTER 20 YEARS

Tehran KEYHAN in Persian 15 Oct 79 p 5

[Text] Sadeq Tabatabai, government spokesman and deputy prime minister,
announced that a new law was under consideration by the Council of Ministers
concerning the armed forces of the Islamic Republic, retirement of personnel,
compensation for service, hiring of 100 veterinarians. and 117 diplomaed
veterinary technicians. Also, the law would build houses for the martyrs

of the armed forces and revolutionary guards killed in the latest fighting.

0n the basis of a clause in the law about reorganization of the Islamic
Republic's armed forces and retirement and compensation of personnel, the
ministries of defense and interior can. with a view toward reorganizing
the armed forces, gendarmerie and police, study these organizations and
at their discretion can retire officers, technicians, NCOs, workers and
other personnel who have at least 20 years' service. Those with less than
20 years can be given severance pay.

Note 1--In computing retirement pay those responsible for the law will use
in each case 5-year periods without fractions and will add these up for
retirement pay based on total length of service. This will come from the
retire-en: fund and any amount needed to Inks the total will be paid into
the budgets of the Ministry of Defense, gendarmerie and police.

Note 2--‘l'hose responsible for administering the law will decide the amount
to be paid in lieu of length-of—service pay. In regard to every level of
personnel the amount will be fixed and paid based on prior approval.

Hiring in the Ministry of Agriculture

The Provisional Council of Ministers of the Islamic Republic have agreed
to a suggestion by the minister of agriculture and rural affairs that the
ministry be authorized to hire 100 doctors of veterinary medicine and 117
diplonaed technicians in veterinary medicine to meet the needs of the
ministry in rural areas. The hiring contract will take the form of
purchase of personal services of doctors to work in the provinces rather
than Tehran and for technicians in rural areas.
Based on a proposal from the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs the
Council of Ministers agreed to provide the necessary funds to plan con-
struction by the Ministry of Housing of a house for the family of every
member of the armed forces and revolutionary guards martyred in the recent
fighting. The houses will have four rooms and cost at most 2 million rials.

Fifty houses will be built in the provinces and given to the families free
of charge.

The Council of Ministers also accepted the proposal of the Ministry of
Agriculture and Rural Affairs and the Ministry of Commerce that the crop
protection agency of the Ministry of Agriculture be authorized to permit

importation of 603,847 apple, pear, nectarine and peach tree seedlings for
the cultivation and vegetable companies.

The government spokesman said the Council of Ministers accepted a proposal
of the Plan and Budget Organization that 2.6 billion rials be paid to the
organization to make up the balance of the account to conpensate for hard-
ship service in the armed forces and guarantee special expenses of opera-
tional units in the account of the organization so that hardship pay for
the armed forces can be made in the current year.
PRESIDENT IUSAYN, 'ARAPAT DISCUSS ARAB SITUATION, IRAQI AID
London AIrEAHADITB in Arabic 9 Nov 79 p 22

[Article: “Saddam Husayn Pro-lees Abu-‘Aner to Improve Relations with
Syria"]

[Text] Yasir 'Arafat's latest visit to Iraq was not an ordinary visit but
a proninent one. The Palestinian-Iraqi relations were conservative pre-
viously but are now her-onions. This is largely due to the flexibility
densnstrated by Iraqi President Saddan lhnsayn and to the psychological
enthusiasm displayed by the PLO chair-an. Previously, Abu-‘Amr opened
his nind to the Iraqi leadership. But this tine he has opened his heart to
the Iraqi President and has touched a sensitive vein in hin. thus opening
the doors wide for firs relations between the two sides and the two Inen.

After asauning power last July. President Saddn Husayn invited Yasir 'Arafat
to visit Iraq. At the end of last aonth. Abu-'A|-ar ['Arafat'e alias]
responded to the invitation and found the Iraqi President very friendly.
having postponed sone isportant official meetings, not having let his guest
go through preliminary nestings and having received him on the sane evening
of his arrival. They held a seating which lasted free 2000 until 0600 after
midnight.

At the outset of the neeting. 'Arafat reviewed that "political penetration
operation" which he had conducted in a under of West European countries.
including Austria, Spain and Turkey, and which constituted a guerrilla-type
siege of a maker of Europe's cities and parts of its rural areas. But it
was a political siege this tine. 'Arafat also reviewed the PLO aovenent in
the United States in the wake of the resignation of Andrew Young, the for-er
U.S. anbassador to the United Nations, and of the outcome of the visit of
Jessie Jackson, the black u.s. leader, to the area. In this regard. 'Arafat
said that the last President 'Abd-al-Rasir had tried to win the support of
the 0.8. blacks. 'Arafat also expressed the belief that the official 0.8.
position toward the [Palestinian] issue renains unchanged.

57
On his part, President Saddam Husayn reviewed Iraq‘s movements in Africa
and Latin America in the wake of the Havana nonalignment conference held
last month and in the light of their bilateral meeting during that conference-
a meeting in which Abu-‘Ammar urged Abu-‘Adi [Husayn] to reward the African
and Latin American countries which supported the Palestinian and Arab cause
during the conference. The Iraqi President said that in the wake of the
conference, Baghdad sent messages and invitations to the heads of state in
the two continents and that an econonic delegation led by Bikmat Ibrahim,
the Revolution Command Council member, toured the East African countries,
concluding a number of economic agreements and advancing aid to Mozambique,
Halagasi [sic], Tanzania and Zambia. The delegation concluded with these
countries loans at a symbolic interest rate of two percent, agreements to
implement a number of projects which entail providing Iraqi technicians and
trade exchange agreements. The Iraqi President said that his country will
continue to advance such aid to the third world countries that support the
Palestinian and Arab cause. adding that his country has also advanced aid
to the world's national liberation movements.

'Arafat expressed his satisfaction with this Iraqi role and noted that his
visit coincided with the visit of the Jamaican prime minister.

The two sides expressed the hope that the other Arab oil producing countries
will perform a role similar to Iraq's in this regard.

The two delegations, which included Na'im Haddad on the Iraqi side and
'Abd-al-Rahim Ahmad, the secretary general of the ALF [Arab Liberation Front],
and Muhammad Abu-Hayzar, the official in charge of Patah's foreign relations
department, [on the Palestinian side], then discussed the two following main
questions: what do we want from Europe and how do we employ our capabilities
to wrench better positions from it in the interest of our cause?

Here, Europe's position and stance were reviewed. It was noticed that the
West European countries are trying to achieve a formula that reduces the
damage they have incurred as a result of their support for the Camp David
accords and to serve their interests in the Arab countries by recognizing
the PLO. The degree to which the position of these countries is distinctive
from that of the United States was also discussed.

Speaking on the issue, the Iraqi President supported the Palestinian move-
ment in West Europe and underlined Iraq's readiness to employ its political
and oil capabilities to support the organization in getting the recognition
of the Western European states. He said that Baghdad is exerting its efforts
to bolster the Palestinian movement in France at present, as it has exerted
similar efforts in Spain in the recent past. He expressed the hope that in
return, the organization will familiarize Iraq step by step with its move-
ment in the "old world."
Even though Saddam Husayn supported the efforts to push the Western European
states toward positions more distinctly different from their conventional
ones, he did not attach hopes in this regard to regaining the Palestinian
rights. he considered the Palestinian movement in this sphere a part of the
movement required of the Palestinian action and required for keeping the

PLO under the spotlights.

In this regard, the Iraqi President embarked on an important step by agreeing
to the Palestinian leader's request to supply Spain with an oil shipment
valued at 18 million dollars, provided that Baghdad notify Hedrid that the
deal was approved in return for Madrid's position vis-a-vis recognition of
the PLO. The Iraqi President also approved a request by 'Arafat to supply
an oil shipment valued at nearly 10 million dollars to Mozambique and smaller
shipments to other African countries. The importance of this development
lies in underlining the Palestinian issue's connection with oil, something
to which 'Arafat refers when he points out that all the initials of the
liberation organization, namely P.L.0., are found in the Latin word petroleum
[printed Petroluim in the Arabic text] (oil).

The issue of southern Lebanon was also on the agenda and the two sides
agreed on the need to avoid division between the Lebanese and Palestinian
Arabs on this issue so that it may not turn into a loophole for penetration
by the two Camp David accords. They also agreed that this issue should be
discussed by the next Arab suit in Tunis as part of the Arab situation
generally and of the cowrehensive situation in the area and that no pre-
texts should be provided for this issue to move within other frameworks.

The two sides discussed the call for the convocation of an Arab emit in
Tunis on the 20th of this month. They noted that 6 days separate the con-
ference of the ministers of foreign affairs from the Arab kings and presidents
conference and expressed the fear that this time difference may torpedo the
smit conference if some forces fail to include what they want in the
conference agenda.

The two sides stressed the importance of entrenching the Baghdad sumit
resolutions which were adopted a year ago and the importance of vigilance

in the face of attempts that may be made by some Arab states to abandon the
minimal limit for the Arab position [set by the Baghdad emit]. It was
decided that the two sides will formulate a joint visualization to prevent
backing down on the Baghdad sulmnit resolutions and to encourage the Arab
states to rally behind the basis on which it [the minimal limit] was
established. It was therefore decided that the two sides will exert efforts
in the Arab states before convocation of the coming suit to prepare the
climate for this emit to secure its success and to guarantee preservation
of the Palestinian resistance and of its freedom of action. Contrary to the
expectations of some media circles, the Iraqi President affirmed that he is
ready to attend the meetings of the forthcoming Arab summit conference.
'Arafat called for the preservation of distinctive relations between Iraq
and Syria and said that the deterioration of their relations will lead to
the collapse of the Arab situation. Saddaa Husayn replied that Iraq will
take no step toward negative intensification vis—a—vis Syria and that it
will exert efforts to keep the relationship between the two countries under
control out of appreciation for the general Arab situation. he said that
the Iraqi-Syrian coordination was fruitful in the Havana conference and that
he is ready to establish coordination with the Syrian leadership on matters
that the PLO deems fit. He said that the cooler the issue of the latest
plot in Iraq becomes, the more opportune the time becomes for improving and
developing the relations with Syria.

0n the other hand, 'Arafat hinted critically at the firm relations between
Iraq and Jordan. Even though he supported the Iraqi aid for the Jordanian
army, he requested that this aid be employed to serve the Pw's demands
from the Jordanian authorities.

Insofar as aid is concerned, the Iraqi President agreed to supply a new
weapon shipment to the PLO, to receive Palestinian militarists for training
in Iraq and to provide additional aid to Fatah on top of the 5 million
dollars that ﬂayil 'Abd-al-Bamid, the meaber of Patah Central Comittee,
received during his latest visit to Baghdad last month in the wake of two
messages exchanged by the Iraqi President and the Palestinian leader. The
Iraqi President also said that Baghdad is prepared to meet all of 'Arafat's
military and financial aid requests without any conditions or restrictions
as long as the organization maintains its national and pan-Arab strategy.

this Iraqi position pleased Abu-‘Ammar who recently said in a moment of
serenity: The Palestinian revolution needs the compassion of the Arab states
before their financial and military aid.
ARABS URG- TO USE EXPERTS m INFLUUCE U.S. PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS
Jersalan AL-QUDS in Arabic 6 Nov 79 p l
[Bditorialz "He and 0.8. Elections"]

[Text] The message of support and conﬁdant to backing Israel and its
demands sent by Senator Edward Kennedy to Henahen Begin. the Israeli Prine
Minister. is nothing new in the 0.8. elections. This has rather become a
tradition followed by those aspiring for the presidency. as if the way to
the White House passes first by the Israeli prime minister's office.

Even though several U.S. presidents got to the White house despite the
Jewish opposition to their election, the strong position enjoyed by the
Zionist organizations in the United States sakes every presidential candidate
avoid confronting those organizations. Any candidate who cannot benefit

from the backing of these organizations (still wins sonething by not having
them oppose hin) at least. In both cases, the candidate feels that he has

to take the Jewish influence into consideration.

The Jewish organizations, which control the information centers and which
influence the nosination and the elections for the presidency, are aware of
their role and exploit it to the minus. They spare no means to reach their
goals, beginning with personal nessages and parties and ending with digging
up the past history of any candidate and trying to destroy a candidate [that
they do not like] with the information power that they posses and with the

psychological war that they launch "coast to coast," i.e. throughout the
United States.

What is new in the 0.8. election calpaign is that a seeker of the presidency,
such as Senator John Connolly. declares at the outset of his caupaign a
comprehensive plan to settle the Arab-Israeli conflict in which he calls for
Israel's withdrawal fro. the occupied territories. thus opposing and even
challenging the Israeli and Jewish positions. Connolly nay have to pay dearly
for this daring. However, this daring indicates that the 0.8. public opinion
has begun to change and has become more prepared to understand the Arab
positions.
So what have we done to exploit the situation and to employ our capabilities
and resources in the 11.5. election campaign in order to serve our interests

and rights and to support those who support our causes. such as Senator
Connolly?

The 0.5. election campaign is at its beginning and our capabilities to
exert influence are large. The only thing we lack is to for. a team of
“experts and specialists" to perform the Arab role in these elections. Let
us try to imagine how positive the results will be it the Saudi oil enters
the 0.5. campaign with the intelligence and finesse of the experts and the
specialists. Oil is only one of the Arab aspects of influence. He wonder,
will we be content with the role of spectator, as we have been so far?

8691.
C80: 4802

R;
UPROAR OVER AL-SIIAK'AH summs SAID INTENTIONALLY PABRICATED
Jerusalem AL-QUDS in Arabic 8 Nov 79 p 1

(Editorial: "Fabricated Uproar"]

[Text] The endeavor of some Israeli radicals to distort and to twist a
statement attributed to Basaan al-Shak'ah, the mayor of Nabulus, and to
evplctt this statement to incite against al-Shak'ah and to demand his
deportation or trial is something that makes us say that such action is
unacceptable, especially that it emanates from those who are filling the
occupied territories with provocations, law violations and aggressions with
words. deeds and intentions against the Arab rights and the Arab citizens.

The issue is a general issue of principle that affects every citizen in the
occupied territories and that reflects one aspect of the ceaseless radical
Israeli campaign against the citizens. The concerned statement attributed
to al-Shak'ah was not made secretly or stealthily. Al-Shak'ah addressed

it to the Israeli militarists and to Dani Hatt, the coordinator of the

occupied territories affairs who is the highest nilitary official in the
Bank and the Strip.

Therefore, the distortion, twisti-g. exaggeration and omission nade regarding
the statement and the attempt to exploit this statement do not really

reflect a reaction to the statement as much as they reflect radical provocative
intentions that have been hidden in the hearts of those who have created this
uproar and who have found in the distorted statements an outlet to express
their hatred rnd their intentions.

The inhabitants of the occupied territories have suffered for long years and
continue to suffer from the provocations of the Israeli radicals who legalize
confiscating Arab lands and settling in then, who consider the owners of
these lands strangers in their own homeland and who proceed to the Arab
cities, especially labulus. demanding that the Arab citizens be denied

their rights. deprived of their properti 3s and deported.
He have not heard throughout these long years anybody demanding that these
radicals be deterred or tried. The sole "hobby" of these radicals has
become that of harassing the Arab citizens and of fabricating incidents

to gain their ends. Therefore, the fabricated uproar concerning al-Shak'ah's
stateucnts must be brought to an end quickly because al-Shak'ah is first

and foremost a citizen in his own land and country and nobody is entitled

to threaten his right or to try to undermine this right.

8691.
C50: 1.802
SALFIT MAYOR VISITS m
Jerusalem AL-QUDS in Arabic 31 Oct 79 p 2
[Article: "Salfit Mayor Returns After Talks in Aman"]

[Text] Salfit—Hasen al-Zir. the town nayor, returned here yesterday fro.
Annan after a several-day visit during which he held talks with the Jordanian
officials on aiding the develop-eat of Selfit.

The [development] projects include the electricity and water project, the
construction of a water reservoir with a capacity of 500 cubic meters,
building additional classroom, aephalting the roads opened recently, dis-
carding the old cemetery and building a new one. beginning imple-entation of
the public sewers project and building housing units for civil servants with
a limited incone.

These projects will be studied in the light of the presented plans.

The Jordanian government has decided to disburse 29,000 diners to supply

the village of Parkhah with electric power fro- the Salfit Electricity Project.
This sun is designated to cover the expenses of extending the high-tension
powerline and of installing the transfer-era. The Jordanian government has
also decided to disburse 13.000 diners to pave the road leading from the
village of Qays to Salfit.
EDITORIAL BELIEVBS ENDING OCCUPATION HILL END COUNTRY'S ECONOMIC PROBLEMS
Jerusalem ALPQUDS in Arabic 5 Nov 79 p 1
[Editorial: "Economic Bankruptcy and Real Solution"]

[Text] When Simha Ehrlich, the Israeli minister of finance, assumed his post,
he promised the Israelis to improve the economic situation and to wipe out
inflation. He criticized the economic policy of the previous government,
promising good to all. In his time. he tried to float the [Israeli] pound
which was in the phase of (progressive) devaluation, thus sinking it. The
current value of the pound is equal to 10 Jordanian fils. Inflation inten-
sified and its indicator rose madly. The inflation rate exceeded 100 percent
and the interval separating one inflationary leap from another did not exceed
a few hours at times. Abnormal economic chaos dominated the markets and
further escalated the hardships of the middle and poor classes.

horowitz, Ehrlich's successor, has come reluctantly. He has before him a
legacy filled with problems. He has also made it a condition that painful
austerity be imposed to deal with the economic catastrophe. He has had
shat he wants and he has indirectly declared the government‘s bankruptcy.
acknowledging that this government does not have what the Israeli people
are asking it for, that all it possesses is several billion banknotes pro-
duced by the mints and that these notes have lost their value. He has also
underlined his resolution to reduce government spending and ministerial
budgets, to get rid of large numbers of civil servants and to levy more
taxes. The new minister of finance believes that these measures will con-
tribute toward improving the economic situation. But in fact, the measures
are no more than an artificial breather that will not help the Israeli
economy to get rid of its stifling crisis because the causes that have led
to this crisis are still extant. Military spending consumes most of the
production and of the foreign aid given to Israel. Moreover, Horowitz'
measures will multiple the number of domestic problems. Strikes will escalate
and spread at a larger scale as soon as the decision not to raise the wages
is implemented and this will lead to a tense confrontation between the
government, led by the Likud, and the Histadrut which supports the Labor
Party. Abolition of the system of subsidizing the essential commodities
will enrage the poor class. Raising the taxes, especially the added value
tax, will turn the stagnation in the market into total paralysis and. who
knows, the ailing economy may perhaps die on the hands of the new "surgeon.“

As for us the inhabitants of the occupied territories, our hardships and
suffering will double. Our economy is tied. despite our will, and doomed

to full subservience to Israel's economy and we have been forced to endure
this situation, its consequences and its ramifications.

The U.S. Department of State has told Israel frankly that the only solution
to all its problems lies in ending its military occupation of all the Arab
territories. A spokesman of the Department of State in Washington has
expressed his dissatisfaction with the U.S. participation in shouldering

the burden of the enormous military spending in Israel. Hill they understand
this fact in Israel and do they know what "fed up" means and what it entails?
'AL-TALI'AH' DEPLORBS IRANIAN-ARAB HISUNDBRSTANDING
Kuwait AL-TALI'AH in Arabic 10 Oct 79 p 3
[Editorial: "What should Relations with Iran Be Like?"]

[Text] An important and worthwhile observation is that the Iranian revolu-
tion, while building to its climax and later defeating the shah, created a
cheerful and relaxed atmosphere along the people of the Gulf region, and
their hearts were for the Iranian people's revolution against the oldest
pro-American regine in the region.

This cheerfulness was based on the new Iranian political trend, anticipated
by everybody, in Iran's relations with both the Arabs and the world in
general; a trend that would erase the picture of the shah, the protector of
American interests, the cause of racial conflicts and the most enthusiastic
pro-Israel petroleum producer, and replace it with the picture of the

Iranian revolution, whose policy is based on serving the peoples' interests,
especially in the Gulf region, where Iranian-Arab reltioans were characterized

by antagonism because of the ahah's greed.

However, after the defeat of the shah of Iran aone anti-Arab declarations
were nade in Iran, especially by Ruhani, declarations that reiterated the
Shah government's views. These declarations and their repercussions
created a psychologically disturbed ataosphere that overwhelasd our region
until recently. Iran's unclear official stand, dubious news agency reports,
and several antirevolution and anti-Gulf people and elements helped

aggravate this disturbed situation.

The situation thus required a firm reply and clear stands in the face of
this media and official muddle. The tour of the deputy prime minister of
Iran helped get things back to nornal. The mysterious and uneasy
atmosphere of the [Iranian] declarations was beginning to clear.

when the prime minister of Iran, Engineer Mahdi Bazarghsn, gave assurances
that Iran had no interest in lands of its neighbors, he also said that
there was a conspiracy aiaed at causing disputes between Iran and these
countries.
At the same time. Mr 'Abdul-Azi: Huaayn, minister of state for cabinet
affairs in Kuwait. praised the lranina Government and denied the existence
of any problems between Kuwait and Iran.

It could then be deduced from this Iranian gesture to remove the animosity
fabricated by unofficial declarations and some convulsive repercussions

that the foreign policy clarifications of all sides and continuous
communications at all levels are a positive and required step in a sensitive
region such as ours.

It is also necessary, however, that Iranian-Arab relations. both at the
Gulf level and at the level of the entire Arab region, should be taken
very seriously by the Iranian Government.
KWAIT owns PROPSMS TO END GULF FWCIAL CRISIS

Paris AL-NMMR AL-'ARABI HA AL-DUUALI in Mbic 18 NOV 79 p 37
[Article by J. 1).: "horny Herbet Chaos Threatens Economic Unity")

L‘l‘ext] In the past few weeks there has been an isportant clings in the policy
of financial cooperation ssoug Gulf states. which started with a Kuwaiti fin-
ancial crisis when fluidity in the banks dried up and the state intervened.
through the Central Bank. to finance then. The matter ended with Kuwaiti pro-
posals calling on the Gulf states to put a liait to the chaos in the Gulf soney
asrkets.

For the first tine. it has becose ispossible for any state to continue a policy
of econoaic liberalisa without there being a single governmental supervisory
agency for all the Gulf countries. regulating their soney aarkets.

The crisis began with the flight of large asounts of eeney abroad. to the an-
ount of 500 aillion Kuwaiti dinars over a period of 6 sonthe. It is said that
this figure was such less than the actml value of fugitive honey; din-in the
past 3 sontha. such aomy has asmmted to between 500 and 700 aillion diners.

The aoney se-ggling has taken two for-s. In the first one. two Kwaitia proceed
to take out a short-tern loan in diners and then convert it into dollars. en-
couraged to do so by the difference in interest rates between the diner and the
dollar. ’ihile the interest rate for the diner has trained at 8.5 percent. the
interest rate for the dollar has risen continually to 1'4 percent.

The second fora is for Gulf cospanies to circulate shares in the seceawiary
Kuwaiti eoney aarhetua mket which is outside the govern-ant control which
is ordinarily applied to the stock «ﬂange. and which absorbs the greater part
of Kuwaiti invest-ants. These exchmge operations were aiaed at withdrawing
the Kuwaiti dinar and converting it into dollars. for the purpose of investing
the- in short-ter- deposits.

-Kuwaiti officials have estimated the nuaber of Kuwaiti shareholders in Gulf
coapaniee to be 80.000 a figure which far eta-passes the nuaber of shareholders
in local cospaniee. which indicates the increasing seriomness of the voluae
of soney angled out for the purpose of speculation.
The first result of this situation is the dwindling of fluidity. which has
forced the Central Bank to step in to finance coseercial banks.

The second result is the weakening of dealings in Kuwaiti bonds valued in di-
hers: the value of such bolus. in 18 denoeinetions. is no sore than 15“ eillion
Kuwaiti diners.

The third result is that the drop in fluidity has led to major changes in in-
terest rates. while they rose 50 percent in January. after two months they
dropped, with respect to theeselves. and the rate stabilized at 8 percent.
This eade bonds valued in diners unprofitable for subscribers. who preferred
to invest their money by converting it to dollars. the interest rate for which
has risen rapidly.

Here the psychological eleeent has played its part in the Kuwaitis' conversion
of their money into dollars. for they are convinced that the Kuwaiti govern-
nent will not act to raise the dinar'e interest rate.

But the situation has begun to decline. and the Kuwaiti governsent has been
forced to prohibit the circulation of Gulf coapany shares on the Kuwaiti stock
exchange and in the secondary soney arket.

Government seasures have not stopped here, but are affecting Kmit's financial
position. and are causing a loss in its Gulf and international iaportance.
Therefore. Kuwait has gone to other Gulf countries and asked thee to take unan-
isom measures. including the establishsent of a Gulf co-on my market. Ac-
cording to the stateeents of its officials. Kuwait is not opposed in principle
to the Gulf psoples' exchanging Gulf company shares. but has stipulated that
this be done within the frasework of a general agree-ant aaong the states con-
CQMe

Kmit is proposing the principal of reciprocity. along with nintaining gov-
ernsent methods currently in effect in all the countries with respect to own-
ership. and which pertain to eeebership in corporate boards. Also. Kuwait has
proposed that the shareholders retain the richt to convert their capital and
profits into any currency they choose and invest thee in am! country they wish.

Kuwait has requested that e lisit be put to the excesses of the Gulf coepanies.
by applying the principle of negieterim Kuwaiti and Gulf companies on the
stock exchange if 3 years have passed since their establishment and if they
were established by decree of the head of state. and that their registration
be in accordance with the lane and regulations. and that the reasons for their
establishsent be made clear.

In addition. so that the companies may be pernitted to deal on the stock ex-
change. their capital must be at least 50 million Kuwaiti diners. and their
profits amt exceed 5 percent. The final new condition is that the min head-
quarters of the coepsny be in a Gulf country. and that they have a branch in
Kuwait licensed by the foreign einisters. so that they can be accredited by
the securities oosaission.
After these proposals were sclmowledged. and Gulf cospsny shares were prohib-
ited fro. circulsting in the Kuwaiti soney nrksts. a delegstion from the con-
psnies was for-ed which requested the Kuwaiti sinister of commerce end industry
to explsin the closim of their offices; these cospsnies were not licensed to
perform 6qu share conversion operstions. After consultation. these cospsniee
decided to sdhere to the new seesm'es.

Pncticsliv speekim. there is s strong test that these sesame will have neg-
ative repercussions on econosic unity snow the Gulf states. They will doubt-
less deny the establish-out of the 0qu when mrket.

So fer the other Gulf countries have not responded to the Kuwaiti sesorsndus
containing the proposals.

This in itself indiestee thst there is no loss of her-ow on the Gulf level.
Apperently the cospetition slang Gulf my nuts is the only low regulating

deslings anon; then.

8559
30: “8‘2
EDITORIAL CQMBNTS 0N EGYPTIAN ARMY LEADERSHIP
Kuwait AL-HA'I‘AN in Arabic 10 Oct 79 p 1

[Editorial by Pu'ad Hatar: "The Trial of the Egyptian Army"]

[Text] Had President Anwar Sadat allowed the broadcasting and publication
in Egypt of Sa'd al-Din al—Shadhili's speeches, the situation [in Egypt]
would have been different from what it is now. President Sadat withheld
from the Egyptians their right to read what their chief of general staff.
who achieved glittering victories during the October 1973 war, had to say.
In addition to this, the president decided to hold a trial of al-Shsdhili
in absentia, accusing him of disclosing secrets, and it all see-ed as
though President Sadat was dealing with a normal latter.

it is certain that President Sadat would not have held al-Shadhili's trial
in ahsentia had al-Shadhili's declarations and writings not influenced
public opinion in Egypt. These declaration and writings, reaching Egypt
via radio stations and through word of mouth, were beginning to affect
both ailitary and civilian groups in Egypt. Faced with this, President
Sadat had to either disprove al-Shadhili's argtnnents, a thing he was
unable to do because there was an operations room observing and recordings
confirming, as well as general staff surviving whose ailitary honor would
allow them to say nothing but the truth; or he had to divert attention
[from al-Shadhili's words] . He diverted attention by announcing that
aI-Shadhili's trial would be held in absentia, and he sought that through
legal authority and not rightfully and logically.

A question arises: Had al-Shadhili already said what he said before
President Sadat's treaty with Israel. or did that occur after the treaty?

Al—Shadhili exercised control to the last noment. It is certain that he
would not have written and made such atateaenta had President Sadat not
proceeded with his plan to sign a treaty with Israel. He preferred to keep
quiet after President Sadat sent hims away on the grounds that Egypt's
battle was not over and that it was his duty to accept any measures.

At the same time, he was preparing all Egyptian officers who visited
London while he was ambassador there. This was one of the reasons he was
assigned as ambassador to Lisbon, since there was no reason for Egyptian
officers to visit that area except for medical treatment and special
assignments. Ilia preparation of the army officers in the direction of
Egypt's nilitary honor was the solution for maintaining the arny's morale
and protecting Egypt's Arab and international roles.

After President Sadat signed the treaty with Israel. it was natural for
al-Shadhiii to bring out certain facts, the most important of which was
that President Sadat had forbidden Egyptian forces from attacking Israeli
fortifications and Rae al-liarbah. which was erected by the Israelis west
of the Suez Canal during the October liar, "and thus he spared the Iraelis
a definite defeat".

The above incident, which President Sadat cannot deny because his orders
are registered and known by several persons, is beconing a growing burden
to the Egyptian officers and a subject of discussion for a broad part of
the public sector.

The burden and the discussion will not be eased by President Sadat's
trial of al-Shadhili in absentia.

One more word remains to be said: Al-Shadhili's trial is, in fact, a
trial of the Egyptian army that achieved great victories during the 1973
October Usr. But these victories were directed toward a treaty that would
never be really implemented in the area.

9455
C80: 10802
PROPERTY ALWCATIONS EXPANDED FOR 1979
Kuwait AL-RA'Y AL-‘AHH in Arabic 10 Sep 79 p 3

[Article: "Property Allocations Raised to 73 Million Dinars, Covering
16b Transactions in al-Salimiyah, Khaytan and al-Firwaniyah"]

[Text] The Expropriation Cornittee in the municipality of Kuwait held its
meeting under the chairmanship of Payer 'Abd-al-‘Aziz al-'Adsani, with the
director of the Expropriation Administration, Turki al-'Ali, present. At
this meeting the committee discussed distributing the new acquisition budget
among the variOus areas of the country and set s group of new conditions
for expropriation in three particular areas.

.‘fter the end of the meeting, Turki al-‘Ali announced that he had agreed

to the phases in which the sums allocated for expropriation will be distrib-
bted. The formulas for expropriation and payment of the necessary am
will be determined on the principle of sequence. Also, several conditions
for this approval were set for three areas only: al-Salimiyah, al-‘Firwaniyah
and Khaytan. The most importance of these conditions is that the acreage

of expropriated real estate is not to exceed 2,500 square meters. The
Expropriation Comittee must approve if this acreage is exceeded slightly,

by no more than 100 square meters; that is, the area of the entire piece

of property may not exceed 2,600 square meters.

Turki al-‘Ali added: "The second important condition is that the appraisal
operation is not conducted more than once for one person or one organization
in these three areas. The reason is that the connittee will try this time
to cover the greatest possible number of forms of expropriation originating
in al-Saliaiyah, al-Pirwaniyah and Khaytan by appraising small properties
only. Thus, a person will obtain an appraisal of only one property, and

this time the appraisal operation will include as many citizens as possible.“

Turki a1-'Ali added: "Re have set aside about 30 million dinars for the
al-Salimiyah region to cover its allotment of expropriations. Al-Firwaniyah's
share is abOut 5 million dinars, and Khaytan has about 8 million."

He added: "The rest of the money in the expropriation budget is distributed
as follows: al-Balaj No 7 and al-Balaj No 8, which contain 9 pieces of
real estate, for which the sum of about 9.25 million dinars has been set aside.
"A group of developed properties of which the state had taken possession

withOut issuing expropriation forms. The Sull of 9.75 million dinars has
been allocated.

"A group of expropriated properties from the budget of the Public Housing
Authority located in two areas: first, the suburb of Sabah al-Salim
(al-l-iasilah), and second, part of a property vithin the city. About

5.5 million dinars have been allocated for these properties.

"A group Eran the organizational sectors distributed through four areas:
al-Manqif, the Seventh Commercial District. al-Jabariyah and Khaytan.

There are 266 properties in this group, for which about 5.25 million dinars
have been allocated."

The director of the Expropriations Administration said: "Thus, the sums
allocated for the expropriations budget this year amount to about 73 million
diners. It should be noted that it had been decided to spend only 45 mil-
lion dinars in this field. The increase occurred in order to have the
expropriations this year include the greatest possible number of citizens.
The number of expn-priaticn transactions which will be included in the
appraisal of real estate in the three areas we aentioned are as follows:

84 in al-Salimiyah. 45 in Khaytan and 35 in al-Firvaniyah."

He added: "the Appraisal Comittee will meet later after the Expropriations
Administration has made the necessary adjustments in the nanes of the owners
of the expropriated properties, because it will trace certificates of
ownership for all of these properties until it reaches the final document

and the financial owner for each property, in cooperation with the Land
Registry Administration."
PRIVATE SECTOR NECESSARY TO PBTROCHDHCAL PROCESS
Kuwait AL-QABAS in Arabic 30 Sep 79 p 15

[Article: "M Stages in Petrochemical Industry Require Private Sector
Participation"]

[Text] The assistant under secretary for industrial affairs of the
Ministry of Comerce and Industry, Hu'ayyid al-Rashid, told AL-QABAS
yesterday that the intermediate and final stage of the petrochemical
industry must let the private sector invest in it.

In an interview with AL-QABAS, al-Rashid stressed that a policy must be
established calling for lowering the price of fuel granted to the industries,
so that we may obtain the required balance between the negative factors
surrounding Kuwaiti industry. such as the labor shortage and the high cost
of importing technology. and the positive factors.

New Ideas

Al—Rashid discussed new trends in Kuwaiti industry and said that we are
willing to enter new industrial sectors. such as the plastics industry.
which is growing in nany semi-industrial states. He are considering
supporting the trend toward manufacturing a number of products which can
replace some ilports, in addition to encouraging the trend toward unconven-
tional products, such as the plastics and PVC industries, by importing the
raw materials from abroad, either in the form of sheets or plastics,
provided that we produce them according to our local needs.

Al-Rashid revealed that thought is being given to building a plant to
produce a specific quantity of PVC in keeping with our economy and the
needs of the country for semimanufactured materials. He said that this
project will be implemented in the future.

Development of Industries

Al-Rashid said that we are also studying the development of some industries
to produce some traditional products which do not require a great deal of
extradordinary experience and technology. These industries include the

77
manufacture of water meters, which is under development, the manufacture
of locks for doors, and development of the fiberglass industry to manufacture
the large industrial lockers which Kuwaiti industry requires.

Support of Industrial Exports

Al-Rashid mentioned that capital directed toward industry has recorded an
increase in the past few years; this has caused us to form a coumittee to
support industrial exports of Kuwaiti origin. The Ministry of Commerce is
now studying trends of capital and the role of local banks in strengthening it.

Industrial Bank

He said that during the past 5 years the industrial bank has loaned 100 mil-
lion Kuwaiti dinars for industrial projects, in addition to 300 million
dinars in capital burden which the holders of this capital invested.

Labor

Ai—Kashid discussed the subject of labor. he said that the percentage of
Kuwaiti labor in the public sector ranges from 30 to 50 percent. In the
petrochemical sector it is about 30 percent. He have submitted our proposals
concerning the labor required in Kuwaiti industry until the year 2000 as
part of the complete report which was submitted to the Council of Ministers.

He expressed his belief that Kuwaiti labor will fill the administrative,
technical and semitechnical positions in industrial projects, provided that
imported labor fills the remaining positions. The minimum for Kuwaiti
labor in the year 2000 is expected to be 25 percent.

Proposals

The assistant under secretary of the Ministry of Commerce reviewed the
report submitted to the Council of Ministers, which includes specific
proposals concerning the fields of industry available to the private,
common and public sectors. He said that we have defined the industries
which suit each group.

In this regard, he nentioned that the state will take over strategic
industries, such as the extraction and refining of petroleum and the manufac-
ture of petroleum products, but there are fields which the private sector

can enter, such as the manufacture of the plastic products and intermediate
products, and other similar products which the state must leave to the
private sector.

Common Projects
Al-Rashid confirmed the importance of the private sector in setting up

common projects on the Gulf level. He mentioned that there is an advanced
project which is being implemented on the Gulf 1eve., the "Darfilah
Aluminum" project to manufacture aluminum sheets. These sheets will be
used for roofs, for doors, to cover offices, and in the furniture industry.

Al-Rashid said that the Gulf Organization for Industrial Investment in
which all of the Arab Gulf states are participating has studied the project.
The organization's council approved the project last May. In accordance
with that, we called upon the Kuwaiti private sector to participate in

this project, and we found it ready and willing.

Development of Apparatus and Difficulties of Implementation

Ai-Rasnif discussed the difficulties of implementing projects and said
that they concern investors, since most of them are not familiar with

industry, in addition to the problem of a shortage of technicians and
industrial administrators. All of these factors play a role in delaying
implementation of the projects.

He added that local experience is limited, and apparatus concerned with
indsutry requires development. He said that he has submitted proposals

to develop apparatus on a strategic level in stages. He confirmed that
development of the apparatus alone will not solve the problem, and industry
will remain in need of some foreign expertise.

7587
C50: 4802

79
BRIEFS

DEPORTATION COMMENT-d responsible official source assured AL-QABAS that
"Kuwait will remain open to all brothers, friends and all who want a
respectable life on our land within the limits of the law." The source
said: "The recent steps taken against a number of people came after
conclusive proof that they were not loyal to the nation." The source
added: "The state will restrain anyone who lets himself be seduced into
destructive activities. kills the good spirit of security and tries to
fragrant the spirit of one family. because Kuwait since its founding has
lived and still lives in the spirit of unity of its people as one family

devoted to the interests of this beloved nation." [Text] [Kunit AL-QABAS
in Arabic 28 Sep 79 p 1] 7587
LEBANESE TROOP LEADER INTERVIEHED

Beirut MWDAY MORNING in English 19-25 Nov 79 pp 18-28

[Report on interview with Seed Haddad, no date or place given]

[Text]

"When Ldaenon returns to the Lebeneee," toys Seed lledded,
the Southern border strip will return to Lebenon.

When the Syrlem end the Pelestiniens leeve the country, he
eddr, "we won't think of lnel or enyone else" enyrnore.

And "when 'Lﬁenon beeornee independent epeln," he will be
ready to nend trlel on ehergee ol deeertlon end hostile ectlon
egelnrt the Lebeneee Army.

Seed Hedded ls themeiorlnwhotenernetheLduneeeArmy
he: hated enerreetwerrent.endwhotemen,becltedbylereel,ere
reluslne to ellow the UN. Interim Force ln Ldnnon (UNIFIL) to
deploy in e rtrip of when terrltory bordering the Jewish state.

He mede thoee statements to me when, efter months at trylng,
I succeeded in visiting hhn In Merieyoun, tho mejor town In the
border strip, which it eometirnu known ee "Heddedlend,"
eornetlrnu ee "llreelloooupled Lebenon" end eornetirnee es ”Free
Lebenon."

To lledded end his men, there's no doubt or to whet thet
territory should be celled.

“Vou een keep thet expression - 'border strip; " the lugltlvo
ollleer told rne. "Here we have only two expreedom: Preo
Ldlenon end Occupled Lebanon. Over here, it’s Free Lebenon:
where you come horn, lt’t Owupied Ldunon."

‘l’he lect thet "Free Lebenon" depends on Ineel for its defense
endpertolitelivelilood doun'tmekeltenyleulree,lledded
informed me.

0 Yes, eround 1,000 border rtrip residents work in lane!
regulerly.

0 Yes, the border ttrlp exports tome of its eprlculturel products
to lureel.

0 Yet, the border etrlp buyt whet it doesn‘t heve from Irreel.

0 Yet, the border strip gets “ellltindeot existence, rnllltery or
edvisory," lrorn lsreel. "Whetever we eslt lor we get. Cane
blanche, es they sey. There ere no more secrets. derling."

But:

0 "We depend on no one but God end the homelend."

0 ”We ere our own mesters."

e "We're cooperating with lsreel es equels."

0 "If we wented to. we could cut our reletions with lsreel in
live minutes."

0 "We're not tied to enything. We cen go with Chine."

As for his resistence to the return ol Lebenese government
euthority to "Free Ldienon." l-ledded pointed out thet only lest
month, he hed tellts with the Lebenese Army end e'eed to the
deployment of some of its units in end eround Merjeyoun on
November 5.

Army Commander Generel Victor Khoury denied the tellts end
the egreernent initielly, Hedded conceded. but he fell silent when
l-ledded produced e television film strip showing his meeting with
e Lebenese Army officer in the Merieyoun berreclts.

The lilm strip, which wes drown on lsreeli television, isbecked
by eseries ol photographswhich l-leddedseyshetookonthe
occesion - just es e preceution egeinst deniels from Beirut.

The Army officer who eppeered in the lilm strip, Hedded toid
me. hes been ieiled. "This is not liltely to enoourege other officers
end soldiers to obey olliciel orders in luture... Whet kind oi
superior is this who cen't protect his men, he's so lrightened of
this end thet? "

‘I’he Ldsenese Army chenged its mind ebout deploying in the
border strip beceuse it cerne under presume lrom the Pelestine
Liberetion Orgenbetion end the Lebenese leftists, lledded
cherged.

Still, whenever the Army decides to deploy in the border strip,

“l'm still reedy, despite everything. Whenever they went to come,
ehlen we sehlen. ”

0 On whet terms?

"Cemin things were egreed upon."

e Would he end his men ley dov n their errns when the Army
ceme in?

"The enmer to thet would heve come at the eppropriete
time, when the egreernent wes implemented... ll (my men) were
soldiers, they're still soldiers. No dischergo decision hes been telren
egeinst them... As lor me, there's no problem involved... When l
lind thet Ldsenon is ell right, Seed l-ledded will no longer be e
problem. He cen stey or leeve - it doesn't metter."

0 Would he close the "Good Fence" on the Lebenese-lsreeli
borders?
"1' het question is premeture."

As we talked, we were surrounded by e woup of Hedded's
militiesnen. who offered their views on the verious subjects
discussedwhentheyfelttheoccesiondemended it endoften
sppleuded their leeder‘ s men

Among their leeder' s enswers, I would mention the following:

l-ie hes hed meetings with Americen officiels - not in the
U. 8., "meybe in Cyprus."- "end they understood our point of
view. We end they ere moving elong the seine lines, thenk God. "
He supports eny Americen initietive in Lebenon, "beceuse the
Americens ere egeinst communism, end so ere we.”

- Western Europe is under the thumb of the me oilproducing
countries, end “no good cen come from them."

-- TheWestshouldhebthe Lebenesepeopleendnotworry
ebout Ara) oil. "Let them stop their wheet wpplies to the Arebs
end tell the Arebs to drink their oil."

.. The Areb summit conference, which is expected to deel with
the South Lebenese problem this week, ”is uselea." President
Elies Serltis Premier Selim l-loss end Foreign Minister Fued Butros
"will return from it es they went to it”

UNlFlL's informetion policy “is terrorist-oriented. " This
they be beceuse "the terrorists ere Wino (U N. Secretery Generel
Kurt) Weldieim."

So "terroristoriented" is UNlFlL, in feet, thet Hedded feels
thet if he gives it ”one more centimeter" of Lebeneee territory, he
will be ”giving it to the terrorists."

He edds, "Our confidence in UNlFlL is being reduced by the
pessege of time."

This, however, hes done nothing toyeduce the men' s speciel
brend of humor.

When he sew the Monday Morning photogrepher, he put on e
fierce fece end snepped: ”Nol There'se new lew in‘Free Lebenon
now. No photogrephs of me."

This wee followed by e belly leudi end the eseurence thet we
could teke es meny photogrephs es our little heerts desired.

"You went me to pose like e cowboy? " he esked, springing up
end holding his erms ewey from his body, fingers rigid, reedy for e
duicit drew.

The interview was conducted outside Hedded's home, in
somewhet rickety ermcheirs overlooking the roed, end it wes
frequently interrupted by the ioviel meetings Hedded threw et
pmby.

"Sorry to receive you in the street," he grinned. "but this is
where i receive ell my guests. l'm e simple men."

When he hed enewered the lest question, he grdibed his het end
drove off in his old Mercedes, expleining thet he hed to ettend the
funerel of one of his men.

The militiemen who hed driven us to Hedded's home from the
edge of the UNlFlL zone drove us beck to "Occupied Lebenon."

ht
0n the way, they geve us e tour oi Merjeyoun. As in the rest of
the border strip, tenks were visible everywhere -- ell with ceders
peinted on them.

We stopped et e smell house peeking out et us from behind e
mountein oi sendbegs. The iemiiy thet greeted us there told us
thet their “reel" house hed been destroyed.

As they served us coffee, I noticed thet every member oi the
tentin wes weting e cross Come to think of it, there were crosses
ell over the border strip, including the cers.

"Whet do they eey ebout us in Beirut? " the husbend esked me.
"Do they sey we're seveges, inhumen people? Believe me. it's not
eesy to live here. We're being shelled constentiy. My son end my
wife heve been injured. But we're with the Meier. i-ie's more then
e militery men; he's e men with leelings; he feels for his people;
he’s close to thorn. And et leest we're in e tree Lebenon here."

We elso dropped in on "The Voice of Hope," the redio stetion
which I U.s.-Cenedien mission hes started in Merieyoun, to the
delight oi Hedded, who hes been using it to meke his verious

pronouncements.

The two Cenediensend oneAmericen whorun thestetionere
in ‘i’el Aviv, we were told. it's their dey off.

As we drove by the lsreeli border, Hedded's men weved et the
drivers of the lsreeli trucks end jeeps coming into Lebenon end

leaving it.

"This one," one militiemen expleined. pointing et en lsreeli
truck, "is bringing in send to peve our roeds."

l sew the lemons "Good Fence" gee. it wes closed et the time.
but lsreeli soldiers were chetting with Lebenese viliegers.

"We cen teke you to Jeruselem it you went." seid one

militiemen. .
But we hedd north lnsteed.

Sunset wes e iew mintites ewey, end the countryside wee

ﬂushing e pretty pink.

A beeutitul sight, I thought. en exhilereting sight.

So why was i so dqsressed?

Never mind. My intl'view with Sid Hedda went like this:

You hue ennounced thet you here hed
telks with the Lebenese Army end
eweed to the dqsioyment of en Army
unit in end eround Merjeyoun. Generel
Victor Khoury hes denied thet eny of
this hes heppened. Who ere we to
believe?
You cen believe the television film strip
(about the meeting between Hedded end e
Lebenese Army otticer in Merjeyoun,

shown recently on lsreeli television). leiso
heve e lot oi photographs on the meeting in
the berrecks. l'll bring them out end show
them to you, it you went.

It's unfortunete to see the level they've
sunk to: they don't dere tell the truth.
First they reise e big fuss ebout Meior
Headed being the obstecle which is

blocking the deployment of the Army, end
then...
It wasn't out of love for them or out of
weakness on my part. I wanted to take a
step which might bring peace to Lebanon.
because my goal is peace in Lebanon and
people living in peace of mind. So I told
them to come.

If they had gone on talking (denying the
meetingi, I was going to reveal the names
of the officers who have come here. But
they stopped talking, so Ididn't expose
them. They know themselves - from
Victor Khoury down. They know who
talked to us and contacted us and
contacted Israel. We have documents
proving everything. They can’t play any
games with us.

You don‘t want to reveal any names?

No. As I said, if they had gone on that
way, I would have exposed them. But they
sensed that I was going to, and they
stopped talking. Then, of course, there was
irrefutable proof: I’m sorry i had tousethat
TV film strip, but I had learned my lesson
from past experience.

Everyone knows that Our forces were all
legitimate, and our dealings were with the
legitimate authorities. i came here on
official orders. Our relations with them
(the authorities) remained normal until the
Syrians came and grabbed them by the
throat. That’s when they started denying
everything. They started saying: "No, no,
we didn't tell Major Haddad to do this; we
didn’t send Major Haddad."

l'm sorry I took photographs, but I did
it to dot the i's and cross the t's. You will
notice that I didn’t use the TV film to
begin with. We just announced on the radio
that such and such had happened. But one
just can’t... lmean, a step that would have
changed the course of events — one
couldn’t have kept it a secret. The Army
was supposed to come here on November
5. We had to annoc noe it.

Then Abu lyad and Abu al-Walid and
Klailat and all that watermellon crowd ex-
erted pressure on them. We had nothing to
do with it. It's regrettable that we have
come to this - that a men can’t say what he
rants, or rather, what he's doing.

If the officials really want to rebuild

Lebanon, I wish they would be frank and
say what they want, what they're planning,
what they want to do: "We want to take
arch and such a step.” If I want to get to
that house, I should say I want to get to
that house. But no - everything has to be
done in hiding; we're afraid so and so will
do such and such. What is this? At any
rate, I believe this question is done with.
They all stopped talking when they saw the
television film. l'm sorry about Captain Bou
Hammin (who appeared in the film}. They
tell me they took him to Sarba and slapped
him in jail and so on. This is not likely to
encourage other officers and soldiers to
obey official orders in future, because
they know now that the authorities are so
sneak that they can't defend them. What
kind of authorities are these? What kind of
superior is this who can't protect his me".
it's so frightened of this and that?

At any rate, since we’re on the subject, I
would like to address an invitation to all
the officers who consider themselves free
men. I say to them: don't pin too many
hopes on that area; if you want to live in

dignity. come over here; you'll all be
welcome.

You say you agreed with the Army to

have the deployment take place in this

area on November 5?

That's what I said. It didn't happen.
Nevertheless, I made a statement on the
radio; I told them if they want to come in,

l'm still ready, despite everything. When
ever they want to come, ahlan wa sahlan,
even though the first attempt has failed.
You were once against the deployment
of the Army in the border strip: now
you say you’re all for it...

I answered that in my answer to your
first question. My aim is to bring peace
back to Lebanon - if this step will bring
peace, which it won't. Developments have
established that the terrorists are very
attached to the land which is under their
control now. and they're not going to let it
go. All the rest is blah blah. They're trying
to pull the wool over people's eyes. "We
want the Army," they say. ”We want to
strengthen the Lebanese authorities." No-
body wants to strengthen the Lebanese
authorities. They're all liars and sons of
liars.

So anyway, it’s only my love for
Lebanon that made me change my
position.

And does this change. man that you
have changed your attitude toward the
Lebanese Army - the Army which you
opened fire on on several occasions. to
block its deployment in the areas under
. your contml? If so, what's bdtitd this
change of attitude?

I told you what's behind the change.
Furthermore, we never pointed our guns at
the Army. We gave them a warning, and
when we fired - yes. we did fire — we fired
around them. We had warned them. They
knew ahead of time.

They sh0uld thank us for this, actually,
first because all the officers who were there
got medals and promotions - all because of
the shells we dropped around them. They
should send us a letter of thanks, all these
otlicers. Had it not been for us. they
wouldn’t have gotten anything

Secondly. we spared them a huge
massacre in that operation. Maybe on your
way here you saw the hills overlooking that
area (where the Lebanese battalion passed
when it was deployed in the zone of the

UN. Interim Force in Lebanon - UNIFIL

— arlier this year]. The militias could have
set up (untranslatable) ambushes for them.
They had them in a mortar and they could

have easily been the pestle; they could have
pounded them in that mortar and there
wouldn’t have been one man left to tell the
tale.

But we didn’t want a massacre. That's
why we warned them. We told them in
advance: "Listen guys, don't come." We
had talks with Adib Seed and others. We
held several meetings with Adib Seed and
an intelligence officer that followed him -
Ahmad ldon’bknowwhat. We told them:
"Listen guys. watch out." But they
w0uldn’t listen. The Army commander
insisted that "everyone must bear his
responsibilities." But we still have human-
itarian feelings which won't allow us to
undertake a massacre or to let anyone else
undertake one. That’s the only thing that
stopped us from... Otherwise, it would have
been the biggest blow ever. Not one of the
600 soldiers would have lived to tell the
tale. Nothing could have been easier.

You have been quoted as saying that it

was Israeli pressure that made you

change your position against your will.

What that newspaper published was a lie.
I'm disappointed in the reporter, who
tame here and interviewed me and then dis-
torted my statements. I‘m not accustomed
'.0 her distorting my statements. Why did
she do it? I don't know.

She wrote, quoting me, that America ex-
erted pasture on lsrael and Israel exerted
pressure on me. Let’s ammo l'n. : child;
even if I were, I wouldn't declare that. It
was so stupid of them to put out such a
thing in my name.

I'm really my she attributed that
statement to me, because I didn't make it.

She asked me just abOut the same
question you did. She put it this way: "The
people don't understand why you've
changed your position." I said to her:
"Why, since when have the people
understood anything? " I said to her: "Had
the Lebanese people been capable of
understanding, all this wouldn't have hap‘
pened to Lebanon. Unfortunately, the
Lebanese people. for all their learning and
Culture. lack a great deal otawareness, and
that is what has destroyed our country."

So Israel has nothing to do with this
matter. We are Our own masters. It is true
that we are cooperating with Israel —
there’s no dOubt about that — but we're
cooperating as equals. II we wanted to. we
could Cut our relations with Israel in live
minutes. No problem. The choice is ours.
We’re not tied to anything. We cango with
China.

Is it possible that the change in your
position means that the Army had
changed its attitude toward you and was
going to deploy in this area on your
terms? It so, what were those tenets?
Certain things were agreed upon, but
unlortunately, everything lell apart.

If they (the authorities} really wanted a
solution, they wouldn’t care about Yasar
Arafat or anyone else. Imagine the foreign
ministry iustilying itself to Yaser Arafat
and saying, "No we didn't send a cable, no
we didn't send a cable to Waldheim"l ( The
reference is to a statement issued by the
Lebanese Iorer'gn ministry two weeks ago
denying a statement attributed to Arafat to
the effect that the Lebanese authorities
presented a memorandum to U. N. Secretary
General Kurt Waldheim in 1978 recogniz-
mg the "legitimaCy" o! Haddad and his
Militias.)

So the deployment ol the Army in this
area has been called oll. What next?

It's going to be a long story, a long story
yet.
If the Army is deployed in the border

strip, are you and yourmen ready to
lay down your arms?

The answer to that would have come
at the appropriate time, when the agree
ment reached was implemented.

“You and your men"l Who are my
men? It they were soldiers. they're still
soldiers. No discharge decision has been
taken against them. They are still legiti-
macy, and no one can discharge them.

As for me, there’s no problem involved.
My only concern is Lebanon - nothing
else. When I find that Lebanon is all right,
Seed l-laddad will no longer be a problem.
He can stay or leave - it doesn’t matter.

It the Army were to come in, would you

and your man talte your orders item it?

It the Army comets its course. we will
be ready to take Orders from it. But as long
as it remains under the terrorists’ domina~
tion, let it handle its allairs with the
terrorists.

It the Army were to deploy in the
border strip, would you sever your
relations with Israel and close the "Good
Fence"?

That question is premature. Okay?

There is en arrest warrant out in your

name on charges of desenion and hostile

action against the Army. In what

circumstances, it any, would you be

ready to stand trial on those charges?

I've said it below, and I‘ll say it again:
When Lebanon becomes indepenth again,
when it returns to the Lebanese, I will be
ready to stand trial. We will then see who
was right and who wasn't.

The general impression is that since you
depend on Israel lor your weapons, your
salary and the salaries of your man. you I
are undc total Israeli control. 00 you ‘
challenge this view? It so, or- what
grounds?

As I told you, we are free men, and
we're dealing with Israel as equals. The
(Lebanese) authorities knew this a long
time ago. Why didn't they say anything
about this cooperation before we expanded
it
At one point, when we were in trouble,
in danger of annihilation, we asked them
to send us the Army. They said,"l-lava
pityl We can'tl We have no road to
usel " and so on. Is this the lirst time
they've noticed Israel? May they all be
gored!

We are under no one’s control. We are
free men, and we are fighting not only for
ourselves but also for Lebanon. You all
know it. Had it not been for this area here,
no one would havebeen left in Lebanon -
no Christians and no Moslems. The
Moslems would have still been there, it's
true, but they would have been there under
alien boots. And the Christians? They were
supposed to either emigrate or live here
like dogs. They would not have been entitl-
ed to the Presidency. There would have
been no Sarkis, no Victor Khoury, no
Selim Hoes, nobody.

We understand that ' a large number of
Lebanese in this area are earning their
livelihood in ltael. How may of the
border strip's residents are working in
Israel right now?

Around a thousand people are working
in Israel now. But the rest are all working
here - farming, construction. commerce.
There are a lot of work opportunities in
our area now. If you have anyone, send
him over. We need workers.

We also undustand that Israel is keeping
you supplied with your needs —- food
and other conme products — and
buying much of your production. Could
you give us any figures about whet
you're getting from Israel, end what

Israel is getting from you?

We have expenses like any other people.
We haven‘t changed. Our needs are
anyone's needs What we don't find here
webuy from Israel, and what we do have
here we don't need to buy from Israel: As
for Israel, it may get some of our

agricultural production if we don’t have
anywhere else to export it to. Whatever we
find difficulty exporting to other places we
sell to Israel, and our products are mostly
agricultural.

It has often been said that there are

luaeli military "advisors" in the border

strip. May we have your comments on
these reports?

To begin with, you can keep that
expression - "border strip.” We're neither
a border strip nor a watermellOn strip.
Leave those expressions for domestic
consumption in occupied Lebanon. Here,
we have only two expressions: Free
Lebanon and Occupied Lebanon. Over
here. it's Free Lebanon: where you come
from, it’s Occupied Lebanon.

As for the advisers. we get them when
weneed them. In times of need,wecanget
all kinds of assistance - military or
advisory. Whatever we ask for we get. Carts
bbnche, as they say. There are no more
secrets,darling. '

Many politicians, including Premier selim

Hose, believe that 'srael's ultimateaim is

tomnex theSouth if it can, and that you

, are making'that goal more accessible to
the lsaelis by cooperating with them.

Your comments?

What prevented Israel from occupying
South Lebanon in 1967? Was it the
artillery of Rashid Karami or the army of
Bashid Karami that prevented it? Had it
wanted to, it would have occupied the
Scuth a long time ago. it doesn't need Seed
Haddad or anyone else to help it. Let Selim
Hose save Lebanon from the Syrians, and he
will have our thanks. But what does he
control over there? He controls his mder-
pants.

You have been quoted as saying that
your goal is the unity, independence and
sovereinntv of Lebanon. How does your
total dependence on Israel serve the

independence and savceignty of Lobe

non? And how does your declaration of

"Free Lebanon" serve Ldranon's unity?

These questions are really shameful. l'm
really disappointed that you are asking
such questions. Or maybe you haven’t
understood the situation yet.

To begin with, Free Lebanon is not
secessionist, but unfortunately —— and you
know it, since you're living it — the rest of
Lebanon is under the occupation of the
Syrians or the terrorists. Did you see any
checkpoints in this area on your my here?
Not one. But wherever there are alien
forces. there are occupation forces. This is
the only part of Lebanon that remains free
- in the hope that we will liberate the rest
or see it liberated. When all of Lebanon is
liberated. that's it: we‘ll befinished; we'll
return to the one Lebanon. We have said
and we still say that our capital is Beirut;
we will not let our capital go.

Our dependence on Is'ael? We depend
on no one but God and the homeland.
We’re working for the independence and
sovereignty of Lebanon. No one else is.
Everyone else is working to sell Lebanon.
We're working to put Lebanon on its feet
again. In return for what? Money? There's
no money here. This is a poor area. and
none of us is after money: there's no theft,
no looting. We’re fighting the others
because we have faith in this country.

Unfortunately, few are willing to work for
nothing.

You have said that you want the
Palestinians out of Lebanon, and yet you
have allied yourselves with Israel. which
is blocking the Palestinins‘ efforts to
return to their own hornet. How do you
explain this?

If Lebanon alone must bear the burden
of the Palestinians, forget it. Why doesn't
bel0ved. fraternal Syria, which supports the
Palestinians, allow them to go to the Golan
and work from there. Why doesn‘t it allow

them to wear military uniforms in Syria,
when here they’re censidered sacred? Why
must Lebanon bear their burden?

We have allied ourselves with Israel to
drive out the Palestinians, the Syrians and
every other alien. ls that a sacrilege? Are
we married to them? Do we and the
Palestin’ens have a Maronite marriage? No
divorce possible? We want a divorce. Or do
you want them here forever?

You want the Syrians out. If they do go

out. are you ready to sever your

relations with Israel - keeping in mind
~ that those relations are one of the maior

obnacles blocking national accord?

First get the Syrians out of Lebanon.

Then you'll see Ibrahim Klailat come
to us - to Camille Chamoun and
Pierre Gamayel. The same goes for Walid
Junblatt. There'd be no problem then.
When Lebanon returns to the Lebanese,
there will be no problem. We won't think
of Israel or anyone else then. Let them get
out and the Lebanese will be fine; we’ll get
back together. There won't be any national
accord as long as the Syrians remain in the
country, because the others don't have
freedom of opinion. When they get that
freedom, we can start talking about
national accord and any other accord.

Could you tell us why you closed all
roads in this area so UNlFll. traffic last
week?

What happens between us and them —
we consider it cuisine intérieure; an internal
problem, in other words. We sometimes
have differences of view, and we settle
them immediately, internally. We had a
problem, and we settled it. In my last
meeting with them. they made a commit-
ment to fight with us in the event of an
attack on us by infiltrators inside the
UNIFIL lines. They promised to open fire
on the terrorists in the event of such an
attack. So far, they haven't been opening
fire; from now on, they will.

UNIFIL spokesmen have been talking
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/00: ClA-RDP82-00050R000200030032-1
about an escalation in your man's

military operations against UN. posi-

tions in your area and the UNIF IL zone.

Could you tell us why you’re attacking

those positions?

Two days ago. one Dutch soldier was
killed and another wounded in a mine
explosion. That mine was planted by the
terrorists south of Tyre. So far, 37
(UN/Flt. troops) have died - or maybe 33;
I don't know exactly. They were all killed
by the terrorists.

There‘s your answer as to who's
responsible tor the violations and who's
blocking the efforts. It's not enough for
Yaser Arafat to say, ’We’racooperating with
the UN. forces" for the world to believe
him.

Around 20 months have passed since the
deployment of UNIFIL in South Leba
non. Are you more prepared today to
consider the possibility oerNiFiL
takecve of the border strip, as a first
step toward the return of government
authority to the area?

There are now 40 terrorist bases inside
UNlFlL lines. If we give UiiiFlL one more
centimeter, we’ll be giving it to the
terrorists. So you see, our confidence in
UNIFIL is being reduced with the peaage
oi time. In other words, nothing can

scratch our itch like our own fingernails

What is your attitude tom the
U.N.-U.s. peaceplan, which is supported
by the tebenese government and which
calls,for the withdrawal of all Irma!
elements - including your man, the
Lebanese Arab Army, the National
Movement end the Palestinin guerillas -
from the area south of the Litanl end the

deployment of UNIFIL end the Lebe
nese Army in that area?

We have invited the Lebanese Army to
come in, but it hasn't come. Furthermore,
they must clear the area north of the
Litani, not tenth of it.When theygat them

out ol the area north of the Litani, those
who are south oi it will get out
immediately.

You have accused UNIFIL of cooperat.
ing with the Palestinians and the leftists.
The leftists are meanwhile accruing

UNIFIL of cooperating with you. Don’t

you see in thisevidence of UNIFIL's

neutrality?

No. Because whenever an incident
occurs, the first statement that is made by
the UNIFIL spokesrnan'over there blames
us for it. Later, when we protest. he
recognizes the facts and apologizes. But his
first reaction, his instinctive reaction. is to
bbme us

This may be because the terrorists are
paying Waldheim. The terrorists pay out a
lot ol money. They have it. They're paying
Waldheim. Here, they (UNIFILI tell us that
they're acting on orders from New York.

l'll give you a small example: I’ve
forbidden UNlFIL helicopter overflights.
Whenever they ask me, I tell them to fly
over the terrorists' positions They say they
don't trust the terrorists. "So why do you
want to fly over my territory? " i ask. and
they say, "Because we .‘ust you." So I tell
them: "Go tell that to Waldheim and have
him declare it before the Security Council.
Then I'll give you much more than
overflight permission." But they won't say
it. They have the facts, but they won't
reveal them. Their information policy is
terrorist-oriented.

A few weeks ago, you demmded talks

with the PLO and Syria. Does this mean

that you're ready to reach an under-
standing with them? If so, on what
terms?

I have the door open to negotiations
with anyone. I am ready, without prior
conditions, to enter into negotiations with
anyone who says: "i want to work for
peace in Lebanon and would like to see
peace restored in Lebanon." Because our
goal is clear: Lebanon for the Lebanese. On
that basis, we will talk to anyone.
Raymond Edda has muted the
deployment oi non-Syrian Arab troops
with UNIFIL in the South. Would you
accept that?

Arab troops were deployed with the
Syrians once, and what did they accom-
plish? ll it was going to rain, we would
have seen some clouds. Raymond Edde -
let him stay in Paris. He doesn't know
what’s going on anymore. Maybe he’s senile
now. I wonder how old he is. God help
him. There was a time when he had some
understanding. but now he’s lost it. We’re
trying to get rid of the Arabs' dirt; so he
wants to get us more Arabs?

The Arab summit conference which will
discuss the South Lebanese problem is
scheduled to be held on Navanba 20.
You’ve heard what the Lebanesegovem

ment hopes to achieve at that conier- ,

ence: support for the implementation or

Security Council resolutions in all parts

of the South end help in the mplation

of Palestinian armed presence and
military activities in and from this area.

Do you approve of these goals?

To begin with, the summit is useless:
they'll return lrornitas they went to it.
They’ve had a hundred thousand summits,
and they're not ever going to achieve
anything. Watch them disagree tomorrow.
It’s all a waste of time. They’re trying to
get people‘s minds off the real problem.
Every once in a while, they come up with
something like this.

And also, they (the Lebanese govern-
ment} say they want to go to the summit in
total aweement (with the PLO and Syria).
It the Lebanese, the Syrians and the
Palestinians reach an agreement, there
won’t be any problems left, so why should
they go to the summit?

How do you evaluate your present
attitude toward the United States? Do
you support the strcalled "American
initiative" in South Lebanon?

Yes, we’re with the American initiative.

Why?

Because the Americans are agaimt
communism, and so are we. America is not
going to give us a homeland mled by leftists.
and we are fighting those (leftist) currents.

Did you meet with Philip Habb when he

visited this region last month?

No.

We he. you've visited the United States.

lsittrue? ltso.whetwasthepurpoeeot

the visit. and oil you meet with any 0.8.

officials?

No, it isn't true. We have met with US.

officials, but not in the United States.

Wherethen?
What do you care? Not in the United
States. Maybe in Cyprus.

Met happened at the meeting?

They understood our point of view. We
and they are moving along the same line,
thank God.

How do you evaluate the'West European
position on the Lebanese problem in
gencal and the Southern problem in
ptticular?

The West European countries are under
the influence of Arab oil. No good can
come from them. They won‘t adopt
anything but the position or the terrorists
and the Arabs.

What do you want the 0.8. and Western
Europe to do to help Lebenonsolveits
problem?

They must help the people who are with
them and not be afraid of-p'etroleum. Let
them stop their wheat supplies to the Arabs
and tell the Arabs to drinlt their oil. Then
you'll see how all problems will be solved.
At any rate, I see this coming. The day will
come when this will happen, no doubt
about it.

Do you have any contacts with the
Phalangist Party and the National Liberal
Party in Beirut?
Yes.

Do you coordinate your actions with
them?
Not always, but the contacts are there.

Do you expect an early solution of the
Lebanese problem?
No.

What is the solution that you envieqe?

The withdrawal of all aliens from
Lebanon and the return of Lebanon to the
Lebanese.

There's one more thing I'd like to say:

I hear that eight (Lebanese Army)
officers have filed suit in protest against the
recent Army promotions — including Elias
Khalil and Hanna Jeara and Idon't know
who. They've filed suit — hear this -
because they weren't promoted. It's okay
to file suit withthe Advisory Council, but
they know that there are no courts and no
authorities. it would have been more
appropriate for them to complain to the
Zahranicourt, which recently sentenced
two people to death. That court can give
them their rights, maybe, but the Lebanese
State? ., Let them gotothe Zahrani court.
At any rate, they're all my friends and l
value them.

Another thing: I can tell Elias Khalil
why he wasn't promoted, althouoh he'san
excellent officer. He wasn't promoted
because he worked with the Phalangists at
Socomex (a building in Saiﬂ, East Beirut,
where the Phalengist Party had offices
during the two-year war) and there’s a
witness against him: (Arnr' Intelligence

0501 4820

Director) Johnny Abdo. But Johnny Ahdo
has forgotten himself. He was chief of the
Phelangist Deuxieme Bureau at the time.
Right? But he promoted himself and stood
against the others. The least he could have
done would have been to equate himself
with that guy.

)0 you have any messages to relay to

the Lebanese people?

There are no Lebanese people. but I will
send a message to the people of East
Beirut, the free people:

My advice to them is to agree among
each other and stop fighting over who's the
za'im (boas) while they’re sitting on the
shaft. The Lebanese loves to be the ta'im
even when he's sitting on the shaft. This is
not the time to fight over ta'imship. This is
the time for them all to agree so that we
can getoutolthis mess . Whenwegetout
of it. they can play :a'im all they went.
Whoever wants to can be a :a'im then, but
not now. I appeal to them to forget their
rivalries, put their ze'imships in the fridge
for now, and fish them out later. All the
infighting that's going on is over who’s the
:a’im.

Seond: I advise them to watch out for
the shafts which the Deuxieme Bureau and
the Wrians are preparing for them, because
these too are behind the differences that
are occurring between them. Certain ele-
ments are infiltrating their ranks to get
them fighting among each other and bring
their houses down over their heads.

Tell them that the Lebanese have no one
to depend on but the Lebanese. Tell them
not to run after money. because you can't
take it with you.
LIBYAN SECRETARY OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS W5 0“ HOILD, ARAB AFFAIRS
Tunis AL-SABAH in Arabic 16 Nov 79 pp 6, 7

[Interview with 'Ali 'Abd-al-Salan aI-Turayki by 'Abd al Hamid al Qasibi and
Huhasnad ibn Salih: "It is an Error to Say That Palestinian Presence in
Lebanon is Reason for Lebanese Crisis; There Are No Problens Between al
Janhiriyah and Tunisia; Question of Continental Shelf is Proceeding Normally;
Carter's Decision to Freeze all Iranian hands Sets Dangerous Precedent in
International Relations; Su-nit May Take ﬂew Measures to Strengthen Arab
Boycott Against Egyptian Regise"]

[Text] He met yesterday earning before the opening of the Conference of

Arab Ministers of Foreign Affairs with Dr 'Ali 'Abdoal-Salan al-‘l‘uraylti,

the secretary of foreign affairs of the Loyan Arab Janahiriyah. It was a
coincidence that 2 years ago to the day we had conducted a sinilar interview
with his, and he had indicated to us at that tine that it was necessary to
isolate the Egyptian regime fron the rest of the Arabs. (This cane about
less than half a year later).

At the outset of his interview with us Dr al-Turayki was careful to praise
and to conend the positions that AL-SABAH Newspaper had taken in the past
2 years vis a via different Arab questions. He offered special praise for
yesterday's editorial which dealt with the question of the Iranian funds
that were frozen by the 0.8. govern-eat.

Comenting on what is happening in Iran. Dr tl-‘I‘urayki said in this regard.
"The Islanic Revolution that has broken out in this country oust be considered
a historical event throughout the Islanic and the Arab world. Iran had been
a threat to the safety of the Arab nation, and the shah's regime had dealt
with the Israeli eneny and with South Africa; but the situation has changed
overnight. Iran has becone an inseparable part of the Arab and Islanic
struggle against Zion“. and inperialisn, and the Iranian Revolution has
turned into a genuine [source of] support for the Arab nation. It was
natural that Iran pay dearly for this change. There is nothing curious about
the hostilities we are experiencing these days. These hostilities are
directed against the Iranian people by isperialiat forces. These hostilities
include infamous atteapts to create problens for this revolution inside the
country and abroad in an effort to liquidate it."
Dr al-Turaykl added, "The fact that the United States has admitted the shah
into the United States as a guest is only one link in a series of conspiracies
against the Iranian Revolution. He must consider the measure that Carter

took in this regard a dangerous precedent in international relations. He

can still remember what the 0.8. government did against Dr Husaddaq in 1953
when he tried to nationalize [Iran's] oil. "hat the United States did then
postponed the Outbreak of the Iranian Revolution.

"The measure requiring that Iranian funds be frozen in 0.8. banks may fall
under the category of international terrorism that is carried out by a major
state against a fraternal nation whose only guilt is the fact that it got
rid of dictatorship and imperialist hegemony. He must draw the attention

of weak nations. and especially Arab nations. to this matter because the
subject in fact is not that of hostages, but it is rather an integrated plan
to starve the Iranian people and plunder their wealth. The Arabs have to
declare full solidarity with Iran. They must also not increase oil pro-
duction so as not to become victims of such terror, on the one hand, and

not to betray the Arab and the Islamic nation, on the other."

[Question] Do you expect the Arab Summit Conference to produce concrete
results that would be advantageous to the Arab cause?

[Answer] This is a regular meeting. The notion that the Arabs meet regularly
to study their concerns and their issues is in itself good. This meeting

is taking place at the end of a full year of integrated political activity
which followed the Baghdad Conference. The Arabs were able during this year
to achieve concrete results in foiling the alarming imperialist Zionist plot
which is exemplified specifically in the Camp David Treaty.

Throughout this year the Arabs did in fact rise to the level of responsibility,
and a serious change did take place [in their midst]. This change led to

the departure of the largest Arab state from the Arab line following its
alignment with the enemy. I believe that the expulsion of Egypt from the

Arab League and from the Islamic Conference; the condemnation of the outcome
of Camp David expressed at the Monrovia Meeting and a: the Ravens Meeting,
where a committee was formed to look into suspending Egypt's membership in

the Organization of Non-Aligned Countries; and the bilateral actions taken

by the Arab countries in this regard in particular constitute a firm response
to the positions of the Egyptian regime.

[Question] "111 the Tunis Summit confirm the penalties that were imposed
against Egypt by the Baghdad Summit Conference so that the penalties can
actually be carried Ott? Hill new measures to that effect be taken?

[Answer] I believe that the Tunis Summit will evaluate the penalties that

have so far been accomplished. It may devote itself to studying a new formula
for strengthening the Arab boycott against the Egyptian regime and for taking
new measures towards that boycott. such as, for example, blocking any Arab
investment in Egypt, even if it were an individual investment, and also
closing Arab air space to Egyptian aircraft.

9h
It is truly regrettable that Egypt should become a tool which Israel is
using to break the economic blockade that has been imposed on South Africa.
This is a very serious matter about which we cannot be silent. Re have
recently learned that Israel has persuaded Egypt to sell part of the Sinai
oil to South Africa which, it is also being said, will be able to sail its
conuercial ships through the Sues Canal.

[Question] The Egyptian regime has been saying for some time that the Arab
boycott has not and will not affect it regardless of the measures that are
to be taken to strengthen it. What do you think about this?

[Answer] This is not true. The Egyptian regime is assuming that Egyptian
and Arab public opinion is stupid. If this boycott continues, the Egyptian
regime will collapse. At any rate the vital historical point that we must
make a note of is that for the first time the Arab League is playing its
national role in the best way. In the past it had been a center for
bureaucracy and for impeding Arab action. Thank God that it is now performing
significant actions in its new position and situation. But we are noticing
that some Arab countries are not adhering fully to the boycott measures and
have not yet clarified their positions. not to mention the fact that they
sometimes attend [the meetings of] Nuha-ad Riyad's League and sometimes
those of the Arab League in Tunisia. I believe that the Tunis Su-it has
to settle this matter and to ask these countries to explain their positions
once and for all.

[Question] Hill the problem of South Lebanon be a basic item [on the agenda]
of the suit?

[Answer] The Lebanese problem is not actually, as is being said in some
circles, a Lebanese-Palestinian problem. He must not read into this matter
more than what does in fact exist. The basis of this problem lies in the
existing social struggle in Lebanon which began in 1958 when the Palestinians
were not there. The matter, then, does not go beyond being a dispute among
the Lebanese people themselves. Consequently, it is the Lebanese people
themselves who have to settle this dispute. The organized Palestinian
presence in Lebanon cannot be the subject of debate. Go the contrary, the
Palestinians must be everywhere and on all fronts. There is no doubt that
Lebanon is carrying a major responsibility in this regard, but it must nor.
carry this responsibility alone because the problem is ultimately an Arab-
lsraeli problem. If Lebanon were to submit any proposal to the suit
requesting material and military support. al-Jamahiriyah will be quite willing
to offer this support. I do not think that the remaining Arab countries will
lag behind in fulfilling this duty. To put it briefly at this point, the
problem is not that of the presence of Palestinians in South Lebanon; the
matter rather pertains to an alarming plot which resulted from the Camp David
Accords and is ultimately being manifested in the creation of problens for
Syria in view of the fact that it is a confrontation country. It has been

noticed that these problems have increased after Egypt and Israel signed the
recent Sinai Agreement.
[Question] Can you tell us something on this occasion about the latest in
Tunisian-Libyan relations and about the problem of the Continental Shelf?
(The actual time for opening the meeting had gone by, and we were still
with him).

[Answer] There is no problem pending with regard to the question of the
Continental Shelf because an agreement has been reached to turn the matter
over to the International Court. The matter has actually been turned over
to the International Court, and it is now proceeding nornally, and the
court will look into it in due course when it completes its measures.

In general, our relations with the fraternal country of Tunisia have also
been proceeding normally. We are always trying to develop these relations
because of the historical ties that bind us to the Tunisian people and in
spite of what is being done against us by hostile, outside forces. In my
opinion it is an exaggeration to say that these relations are now the best
that they can be. But we would like for them to improve fro. good to
better. I believe, therefore, that our relations must be ideal relations
that would be a model for others to follow.
EWOYS REPORTED TO ASK MOMS FDR AID AGAINST KBCMEYNIISM
London AL-DUSTIR in Arabic 11 Nov 79 p 6

ﬁexﬂ Informed sources have reported that some Tunisian government and
party officials have iecently made a number of visits to the countries

of Western Europe, the purpose of which was to persuade them to increase
their assistance to Tunisia.

These sources said that the tenor of what was said between the Tunisian
envoys and the representatives of the Western mropean countries can
be summarized as follows: "Help us to protect you frat a Khomyniite
Tunisia."

These sources point out that these words are inspired by the anxiety
felt by the regime in Tunisia towards the growth, in recent months, of
the politicized religious surge.
DAB-CONmO DEAL YIBIDS GM PROFITS m DUBAI Rum
Imdon AlpHAHADm-l in Arabic 2 ﬂow 79 p 11

[Article: "Fantastic Deel Concluled w mm el-‘I‘eJir for the Ruler of Dubei']

[Text] UAR nbeeudor to Inudou Huhnnd Midi el-Tejir. who still holds the
poet of special adviser to Ruler of Duhei Sheykh behid ibn Se'id. has succeed-
ed in akin e deel, considered the deel of the yeer. with the Anericeh Conti-
nentel Oil cot-m. Which is exploiting the offehore oil fields of Dubai. He
negotieted with the comm-4n the me of the ruler. naturals/«for the air-
ete of Dubei to obtein 100.000 hex-tell of oil 1 My. out of the “00,000 barrels
which the coepuu produces, in order to sell it to acne Third ﬂorid countriee
at reduced prices. After the negotietions were finished. el-fl‘ejir cold the
sue uount of oil to the coepeny ct the Rotterdn free market price. The
profits fro- the opentim were eetinted ct I381? per her-rel. end the oil
night be resold at e higher price. Thu Shukh Raehid hu increased his incoee
by $1.7 Iillion e «y. or about $650 Iillion each year.

Some person with long tonnes mm thnt ”header luau-d hehdi cl-‘l‘ejir
eight sell the mount: set aside for the “into directly on the free nrket
in Rotterdam If so. the profits eight double!

8559
60: “8‘? END