APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/00: ClA-RDP02-00060R000200020014-2
Near East/North Africa Report

No. 2042

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. "here no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Horde or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the U.S. Government.

PROCUREMENT 0? PUBLICATIONS

JPRS publications may be ordered from the National Technical
Information Service, Springfield, Virginia 22161. In order-
ing, it is reconmended that the JPRS number, title, date and
author, if applicable, of publication be cited.

Current JPRS publications are announced in Government Reports
Announcements issued semi-monthly by the National Technical
Information Service, and are listed in the Monthly Catalog of
U.S. Government Publications issued by the Superintendent of
Documents, U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington, 0.0.
20402.

Indexes to this report (by keyword, author, personal names,
title and series) are available from Bell & Howell, Old
Mansfield Road, Wooster, Ohio 44691.

Correspondence pertaining to matters other than procurement
may be addressed to Joint Publications Research Service,
1000 North Glebe Road, Arlington, Virginia 22201.
N
In. Amend (W: 200 mu

 

This serial report. contains intonation on socioeconomic. government,
and technical developments in the countries of the Near East and North

  

 

II. Occur-um Mum-1 -. DIM—lllﬁuv‘

“——

Political Science x_Inter-Arab Affairs __l.ibya __Sultn'
Sociology _North African Lﬁauritania of 0m
Econnml cs Af fai rs X_Morocco _Syria
Culture (Social x__Afghanistan _Peoplc's Demo- _Tunis
Sciences) _x__.\lgeria cratic Republic _Unite|

Ethnology _Bnhrain of Yemen Enlra
Geography __Bgypt _Persian Gulf _Uestc.'
Techologieel x_lran Area _Yelen
Military Sciences _Iraq _Qatar Repub?

_Israel _Saudi Arabia

_Jordan _Spenish North

_X__Kuwait Africa

__Lebanon 3:— Sudan
NEAR EAST/NORTH AFRICA REPORT

No. 2042

CONTENTS
INTER-ARAB AFFAIRS

Arab Funds' Lending Up 22 Percent in First Half of the Year
(AN-RAHAR ARAB REPORT & H340, 15 Oct 79) .............

Canary Islands Reintroduced as Factor in Maghreb Hosuilities
("ET mo‘, 15 Wt 79) IO....IIOUOOOOOIODOOOOOOOOOOO

AFGHANISTAN

'KABUL TIMES' Greets Amin Assumption to Party, State Chief
(Editorial; KABUI. TIMES, 17 Sep 79) ..................

Developnent Plan Aimed at Bridging Economic Gap
(Kabul Radio, 15 wt 79) OOOOOOCOOOICO0.0000IGOOOOOOOO

Briefs
Information Exchange with CSSR
East European Ambassadors Received
Bulgarian Env ,' Received
Telegram to Spanish King
Child Center Opens

AmERIA

Ben Bella's House Arrest Could Be Lifted
(Daniel Juno-“a; LE “mm, 3 Oct 79) OOO...'.OOCOOOI.OI

Bouteflika Returns to Algeria
(Daniel Junqua; LE MOﬁDE, S Dot 79) 000.000.000.000...

Clean-Up Campaign Reportedly Tainted by Brutality
(Daniel Junqua; LE “mm, 5 Get 79) oooooooooooooooooo
CWTENTS (Continued)
IRAN

Theologians Seen Consolidating Position
(THE IRANIAN, 19 sep 79) OIIOOOOOOOIOOOODOOD00......

Veteran Dissident Baraheni Slams PGOI's Policies
(m IRA-"IAN, 19 sep 79) OI...IOQICOGOOOOOOCOOOOOIOO

KUWAIT

Planning Minister Explains Construction Situation
(Ali-“Bus, 29 Al‘s 79) IOOIOOCOOCOOOOOOOOOIOICO......

Lloyds Accused of Attempts To Exploit Home Controversy
(Editorial, Jasim Armed Al-Nisf; AL-QABAS,

28 Aug 79) eeon.Io.Iooooenoooeeceeeeeeeuoooe00.0.0.0

Planning Minister Reports Findings on Female Population
AL-QABAS, 30 Aug 79) oea...eoooooloeeoeoooooooooooo

Number of Work Permit Cancellations Rises
(“Dam 531mb; AIPQ‘BAS, 28 Aug 79) e-oeleoooooeoo

MAURITANIA

Minister Discusses Sahara Policy, Israel, Economic Plans
(Ahmed Ould Abdallah Interview; 13 SOIEIL, 26 Sep 79)

Leaders Facing Urgent Financial Problems
(Mireille Detail; DMN L'AFRIQUE, 8 Oct 79) ......

MOROCCO

National Student Union Meets, Denounces Political Oppression
(uBmTION, Various ates) OOOOOIOOOOOOOOIOOOOOIOOO

SUDAN

Comunist Leader Foresees Decisive Developnents in Near
Future
(Ibrahim Zakariya Interview; AL-NIDA' AL-USBU',

16 SOP 79) .IOCOCOOOOOOIOODOUOOOOOOeotoeoooooooeeeol

Briefs
Saudi Aid to Khartmm
SPECIAL SURVEY

ARAB FUNDS' LENDING UP 22 PER CENT
IN FIRST HALF OF THE YEAR

The eidrt principal Arab development funds increased
the value of their lending to Third World countries by
22 per cent in the ﬁrst half of this year. to a total of
about $8l8 million. This was chieﬂy due to substantial
increases in loans by the Kuwait Fund for limb
Economic Development and the OPEC Special Fund.

According to ﬁgures released by the Coordination
Secretariat of the Arab Fund for Economic and Social
Development, the funds concluded 74 agreements with
43 developing countries. Compared to 83 agreements
with 73 countries in 1978 as a whole.

As in previous years. the biggest lender was the
Saudi Fund for Development. which paid $26l.35
million in nine loans to eight countries; this was
however 39 per cent lower than in the first half of last
year (throughout_this survey. dollar equivalents are
expressed in terms of the exchange rates prevailing at
the time).

The biggest increases in absolute terms were in
loans disbursed by the Kuwait Fund. $253.4 million.
and the OPEC Special Fund. Sl37.2 million. In the
case of the Kuwait Fund. this represents an increase 0!
I70 per cent over the ﬁrst half of last year; the OPEC
Special Fund made no loans in the ﬁrst half of I978
and paid a total of $93.9 million in the second half.
Borrower

Mauritania
Sudan

Comoro Islands
Pakistan
Bangladesh
Malaysia
Malaysia

Togo

Cameroon

Totd

' Tctmt not published

Uther tunds which raised their lending totals were
the Abu Dltabi Fund for Atab Economi. Development.
up l5! per cent to $65.52 million the Arab Fund. up
ftorn 5745.000 to $21.96 million. and the Iraqi Fund.
which lent $6.5 million compared with nothing in the
ﬁrst half of last year.

Lending by the Arab Bank for Economic
Development in Africa (BADEA) was down 67 per
cent on the ﬁrst half of last year. to $7.2 million. and
by the lslamlc Development Bank down 32 per cent to
$64.05 million.

Only the Kuwait Fund. the OPEC Special Fund
and the Atab Fund increased lending over the
half-yearly average for I978. however. The totals for
the last three six-month periods are tabulated below:

Loans extended by Saudi Fund to: Development. lint half I979
(it millions Saudi Riatsi

Amount Tenns‘ Project

l66.50 Kifla-Nema road (see Kuwait Fund)
I20. I 6 Kenana Sugar
48.00 Road building
306.70 'Pipri thermal generation
I06.00 Limestone mining
73.70 Oil palm and cocoa plantations and settlement
2|.20 Five ionior science colleges _
I660 irrigation. education and hair
l2.30 Road building
87l.l6
lending by Arab development funds

(in sus trillions)
tn half(l918) m m to half I979

Saudi Fund 429.6 200.7 26”
Kuwait Fund 93.7 l04.3 253.4
OPEC Special — 93.9 137-2
Abu Dhabi 26.0 189.3 65-5
IDB 94.8 66.9 6413
Arab Fund _ 0,75 2L9
BADEA 2L1 31.7 7-2
Iraqi Fund 39.5 6.5

Total 665.8 mo 818.0
The Kuwait Fund. lslamic Development Bank and
OPEC Special Fund also disbursed a total of $5.38
million in eight technical assistance loans. tabulated
on page Is.

More than onethird of all loans were granted by
the OPEC Special Fund. 28 loans to 27 countries. The
Kuwait Fund came next with l7 loans to I3 countries.
[01!on by the lDB. l0 loans to eight countries. the
Saudi Fund. 9 loans to 8 countries: the Abu Dhabr
Fund made three loans to three countries. the Arab
Fund and BADEA two each and the Iraqi Fund one
loan.

0f the total 43 borrowers. l2 were in the Arab
world. IS in Africa (they included one regional bank).
9 in Asia (this includes Turkey) and ﬁve in Latin
America and the Caribbean (all from the OPEC fund).

The ﬁgures contrast sharply however with the
total value of loans extended to countries in these
areas. The I2 Arab nations (which. for the purpose of
this survey. include the Comoro islands) received 58
per cent of the total: this compares with only I6 per
cent in the ﬁrst half of I978 but with 64 per cent for
I978 as a whole. The nine Asian countries received
28 per cent. compared with l7 per cent for I978.
while the l9 African countries and one bank received
only I2 per cent. compared with I8 per cent last year.
The Latin American and Caribbean borrowers received
2 per cent.

Lending by sector followed the pattern
established in I978. except that loans for agriculture
jumped from $83.56 million for I978 as a whole to
8116.9 for the last six-month period and accounted for
I4.5 per cent of the total instead of 6 per cent. The
bigyst sector by far was still infrastnrctural
development such as road. railway and airport buiiding.
education and power. which totalled $456.3 million. or
55.5 per cent of the total. Comparative ﬁgures for
1978 as a whole were $877.17 million and 68 per
cent; industrial projects received Sl84.5 million. 22.5
per cent of the total: comparative ﬁgures for I978:
$238.9 million and I9 per cent. Trade financing. which
includes balance of payments support loans. totalled
$60.6 million and represented 7.5 per cent of all loans:
in 1978 the figures were $90.5 million and 7 per cent.

Taking a six-month average from the ﬁgures for
l978 as a whole. this means that in absolute ternts
(and assuming constant values for the US dollar). loans
for agriculture jumped by ISO per cent. for industry
by 54 per cent and for trade ﬁnancing by 35 per cent:
in the same period. loans for infrastnicture
development increased by only 3 per cent.
barn extended by Kuwait Ftnd for Arab Economic Development. list Ital! 1979

Borrow

Jordan

Jordan

Syria

Morocco

Mauritania

Tunisia

Sudan

North Yemen

North Yemen

North Yemen

Comoro Islands

Pakistan

Turkey

Amount

7.60

2.70

71!)

6.00

6.00

6.00

3.60

3.50

0.50

LSD

5.00

4.00

new era

9?"

9??" 9??” 9??” 9??"

9?"

9?"

F???” F???”

9?"

oacoac

(in trillions Kuwaiti Dinars)
Terms Project
4% Dead Sea potash project witlt annual capacity of
20 yrs L: million tons. Project should create 700 jobs
6 yrs and bring in K0 3“ million tn foreign exchan’
4% Project to produce 740.000 tons of ammonium
16 yrs phosphate and 105.000 tons of phosphoric acid
4 yrs per year
4% Construction of highway between Aleppo and Gaza
20 yrs Kozalt in northeast Syria
4% Construction of road between Hours and Tattoos
:0 yrs near the northem border ol' Lebanon
4 yrs
3% Construction of Tamazaourt dam to develop
25 yrs l.200 hectares of agricultural land it
5 yrs Wadi Sous
free Constructionof 485 kms of bitumenous road
25 yrs between Kil‘l'a and Nema. part of project to link
5 yrs capital with live districts
4% Construction or open cast phosphate mine at
IS yrs Kal' Echraier
3 yrs
4% Preparation of 8| .000 feddans of land and
20 yrs associated works for Kenana Sugar project
4 Y“
2.5% Development of water resources in Wadi Mawr
36 yrs and associated works
6 yrs
2% Technical assistance for Wadi Rim- development
36 yrs
6 yrs
1.5% Financing 9 professional advisers and
25 yrs associated equipment for General Planning
3 yrs Organisation
l5 Commotion of 5.7 km road between
40 yrs Portioni and Moya plus two bridges. causeways.
l0 yrs drainage and tunnel
35% Extension of Tarbela power station to raise
25 yrs generating capacity to 1.050 MW
na
4.5% Construction of 3 Ian overhead transmission line
20 yrs across the Boaphorus linking 224 km network
Sagas:
:Eancie.

$53? 3E.

:55;

9.2.8 2. «5.32.: 83!:
Isa-8:6 sec... 562:
022332: PS.» £25
6158 c_. 2.3.2.3 228:
21?:

2:20.02}

$33383. 9.6::

69—53 2. 33:3: 3.6:...
ecto-

¢a_u=no c_. uni—=3: 8.6:...
loans extended by Islamic Developmt Bank. ﬁrst half I919)
(in 308 millions)

Borrower Amount Terms‘ -Proje¢t

Sudan l4.00 Financing refined petroleum products imports

Algeria l0.00 - Leash; operation to cstablrslt broiler parent
stock ocntrc

Mauritania l0.00 - Equity participation it iron ore production

Jordan 6.45 Equity participation in Industrial bank

Oman ' (1.20 Vocational training mines

Tunisia 5.08 - Equity participation in National Bank

Niger 4.35 - Financing ucrncnt imports

Mali 2.73 Financing urea fertiliser nnpurts

Mali 2.62 Financing mmnt imports

Mali 2.62 - Financing corrugated rtun imports

Total 64.05

° Terms nul ”UNI“

Unattended by other Arab hand. ﬁrst halt 1979
(is S US nilIions or $08 trillions equivalent)
Borrower Amour" Terms Project
MOI-2A

Development Bank 5.00 i 4.5% Help Marlee bank's participation in development of
R: 12 yrs small lid medium industries in Cameroon. Chad. Central
0: 3 yrs Africa, Congo and Gabon

Botswana 2.20 a g Twpltase treatment of foot amt mouth disease
: yrs .
G: 3 yrs
aw DIME! FUND
Tunisia 56.68 i: 6% Building two factories to produce 3,000 tons of
R: l2 yrs sulphuric acid a day and two to produce 1,000 tons
G: 4 yrs phosphoric acid a day
Morocco l0.40 i: 455 Comprehensive irrigation system for agriculture
R: 20 yrs in Chub nsion
G: 5 yrs
Comoros |.04 - Comoro Islands airport development
ARAB FUND
South Yemen I4.40 i: 4% Buildh; 4 X 4 MW power station to electrify
R: 20 yrs pumping operations in Wadi Hadramaut. plus
6: 5 yrs associated transmission and other services
Jordan 7.56 i: 6% Excavation and preparation of seven wells
R: 20 yrs plus two experimental wells and mairt pipe to serve
G: 4 yrs Aqaba and surrounding area
93... 03a: 0.. 2.29:... E.

9.8 08a: 2. 2933 5....
9:3 mamas: 25¢ ..c.. a
wed—.53 N8
552.3». Noe
Mun

> :3. 33:} age. 3:3. we...» ca :3 :53
9%: .o vac—E. gnaw.“ 0.. 3:3. :3.» :5 02.8
was! 35.. :38. 9.53 .22: u. :3 33a 3.3a.
9.3 :5 LE: 58.3 cm 32:3 3 u: E: can 0.. :8
092 :53. .5 «3.5.. 33318: 2: a. 33... .5...
23¢ axon! a. :3 28 o_, :3 x53: 1:2... .3.“
33.. 38310 283: . 3.33:2. 0.. .23..

.3 .39 :3 «can 3:253 C .33 (on:

0.29 '3.th >5.F1 ‘ . .-
CANARY ISLANDS REINTROWCED AS FAC‘I‘CR II MAGHREB HOSTILITIB
Ipztdon WEST AFRICA in English 15 Oct 79 pp 1882, 1883

ﬂag The merits of the case of the decolonisation of the Canary Islands have
seldom been clearly revrewed. Part of the problem has been the involvement
of the Islands in the much more immediate issue of the Western Sahara and
the canine! between Morocco and Algeria. A correspondent examines the

problem after some new developments in the region.

THE ANNOUNCEMENT. the week
before last. by Antonio Cubillo that his
Movement for the Liberation of the Canary
Islands. MPAIAC. would renew its
campaign of Violence in the islands would
have conic as something of a surprise to
most. l-‘iirtherrnore. it «as made in Algiers.
the city where he was almost lulled last year
under Circumstances that have never been
made clear. and where he was effectively
silenced followmg art agreement reached
between the Algerian authorities and the
Spanish goterntnent.

The announcement has therefore not
only renewed interest in the claims of
MPAIACto represent the Canary Islanders
— plting to life once again lhe‘dispute
about whether Canary Islanders are
Spanish or African. and whidi they would
prefer to he — but it has also reintroduced
the Canary Islands as another factor in the
hostilities that pervade north-west Africa
with their attendant international implia-
lions. and alignments.

Mr Cubillo‘s rte-emergence coincides
With the latest Moroccan di lornatic
initiative aimed at drawing away ire from
its precariousty held position in Western
Sahara. It involves a proposed conference
of all the states that border on the Sahara.
particularly those that are landlocked. Mali.
Chad and Niger. The object. as King
Hassan ll explained in a letter to President
Tolhcrt of Liberia. the current OAU

chairman. which was read out in part to the
UN General Assembly in New York. is to
discuss the possibility of awess to the sea
along a much more economical route than
most countries enjoy at present.

In other words. King Hassan is putting up
ElAiun. the Western Saharan Capital. uith
its already developed port facilities. as an
outlet to the Atlantic. The offer is also
extended to Algeria. as King Hassan
suggested in a news conference after the
OAU conference in.Monrovia. In exchange
there would be a tacit recognition of
Moroccan sovereignty — renegotiated. and
one presumes after a referendum of sorts -—
in the Western Sahara.

As things stand in the Western Sahara at
present. Morocco is finding that the
Polisario Front has stepped up its inwrsions
aI along the Moroccan frontier. destroying
nth alarming regularity most of the
resistance it meets from the Royal troops.
signifying something even ntore dangerous
for King Hassan: a certain demoralisation
among his troops.

The Polisar'io Front has just announced
that its guerrillas have killed l20 Moroccan
troops in an attack on the Moroccan
frontier garrison of Zak. They also claim to
have taken the town of Smara. the second
largest in the northern part of the Western
Sahara. Smara has been the target of
Poltsaito Front raids lot a long time. but this
is the lost time they claim to hase captured
the toun

King Hassan has had to acknowledge that
Morocco can no longer light ll\ ossri hattle
Since the King announced that Morocco
would occupy the southern half of the
Western Sahara from which the
Mauritanians Vlll’ld'l“ siti weeks ago. the
Polisario Front has intensilied its attacks on
Moroccan positions and Morocco has
responded by stepping up its own military
activtty. President Sadat has now conlrrrned
that Egypt is sending military supplies to
Morocco (he had pfﬂlousl) suggested that
he would he prepared to [its-e assistance)
while the US has now agreed to raise its
military credits to Morocco because the
Itingdom is the obieu or attach into its own
territory. PreViously. the US administration
had been reluctant to ettend aid to
Morocco on the grounds tht the weapons
sought were for ollenstve purposes beyond
Moroccan frontiers.

Pressure
on Hassan

Not only is the King likely to become
dependent on the US for military supplies.
but the present coniuncture of interests
between the US and Egypt oser President
Sadat's peace agreement with Israel
suggests — and President Sadat has said as
touch — that pressure is being put on
Morocco to reserse its condemnation of the
Egypt-Israel agreement.

Essentially. the war over the Western
Sahara is no longer localised. as the King
would have Wished. And as the variables in
the conﬂict grow Morocen‘s position
becomes less independent and weaker.

It is in this context. as well as that of the
OAU's unclear poution on decolonisation
of the Canary islands. that Mr. Cubillo‘s
recent announcement has to be seen.

MPAIAC. which seek independence for
the Canary Islands. represents the extreme
end of the lslandt' autonomists When
international criminstances hate been
lavourahle. they hate been able to cause
disruption. especially since two when
MPAIAC took to violent methods.
Antonio C uhillo's welcome in Algiers is.

however. dependent upon other more
important considerations in the Maghre-
hian and Mediterranean politin ot the
Algerian government. He nus effectively
silenced :tfter assurances from Spain that
the latter would alter its position on the

Madrid agreement. Susi the Spanish
relationship is undoubtedly being strained
by allowing MPAIAC to renew acttvtties
lrom Algerian Iemrots

From the strategic perspective. C ubitlo is
another irritant tor \lort-es'o: has re.
emergent adds pressure on Spiuii to come
out more t'orthriuloiy against \Inrucco.
The eventual target is the Spanish-
Moroccan fishing agreement. This he
already been brought into the limelight H
the Polisario attacks on Spanish fishing
vesselsin Saharan waters and the abduction
of a cresv based in the Canary Islands. The
problem will continue as a thotn until
territorial waters ol the Canary islands.
Morocco and the Sahara are clearly
demarcated.

The I911 Fishing agreement prayides

ﬁnance for Morocco to set up a processing
industry. to buy vessels and to establish a
training school. The Spanish. in particular
the major boat building and fishing
companies. will month the vessels. the
expertise and the industrial plants. it has
been estimated that up to 15.000 islanders
have been put out of work. and the Spanish
company owners have warned islanders
that if they arise any disruption by striking
the firms will move to Morocco.

It has been noted that Morocco has
increased investment considerably over the
last few years and that it has now reached an
important proportion in the islands'
economy. There has been a corresponding
rise in Moroccan immigration into the
Canary Islands

Under such circumstances MPAlAC
serves a very useful disruptive purpose. it
can partially mobilise a thoroughly
discontented working population. threaten
the tslands‘ massive taurrsi industry and
finally locus on the fact that the Canaries
are considered an important base lor US
activities. NASA has a telecommunications
centre there and a nuclearsubmarine base is
now under construction.

Whatever the eventual late ol MPAlAC.
its existence has already been the driving
force behind OAU consideration ol the
islands as part of Africa and therefore to be
decolonised. lo the l97lt OAU summit in
Khartoum it was decided that material
assistance shouiii be given to MPAIAL’.

Since then the subject has lain dormant. a
fact which reﬂects ignorance as much as
political manoeuvertng. At the heart of the
issue is the debate over whether the islands

and the islanders are Spanish or not.
Antonio Cubillo has maintained that there

is an indigenous culture. and tn his
broadcasts ltom Algiers he spoke very often
in Guanclie. the original language of the
islands but which has now been diluted to a

9
30

certain extent by both Spanish and Arabic
words. One recent aruele' by an authority
on the Canaries suggests that there is a link
that as cultural. between the Inhabitants
before the conquest $00 years ago and the
present population. Many ot the arttlaets
are local Ill inspiration and origin. The
economic conditions are such that there has

been a considerable identiﬁution by the
courier Wllh their past as distinguished
from the Spaniards. There has been a
degree of aetivityover the deades for home
rule — a measure of autonomy is being
granted by Spain under its present policy 0!
decentralisation. There has. however. never
been a sustained and popular support [or
MPAIAC. whidi is the only party to
support independence.

The Canaries have therelore been
introduced at late into Atnran politic as an
instrument of the Maghrebian power
struggle. Economically — one has the
fishing laetliues in mind - they operate.
and are used as a base of operations. as part
of the Alrican continent. Strategically they
are in danger nl becoming a lorergn base.
The local population has been exploited
economically in a manner that n colonialist
in the extreme. The relationship between

M20

Spain and the islands is a colonial one:
autonomy or representation in the Spanish
Cortes or representation by a political
group that is based abroad and which does
not seem to have wide popular support is no
substitute for sell determination. It is with
these (actors in mind that the OAU and its
members states should consider the lot or
the Canary Islanders.

10
'KABUL TIMES‘ GREETS AKIN ASSUMPTION T0 PARTY, STATE CHIEF
BK170629 KABUL TIMES in English 17 Sep 79 p Z BK
(Editorial: "New Leadership Will Bring New Victories"]

[Text] Change is the principle of life. It draws life toward completion.
It is on the basis of this principle that the economic, political and social
affairs are in a process of change.

The statements of the Plenum of the Central Committee of the PDPA and RC of

the DRA are based on this principle. 0n the basis of these statements Haf-

izollah Amin, first minister, has been appointed as the general secretary of
the PDPA CC and president of the RC of the DRA.

Hafizollah Amin as the heroic personality of our party gave the command of
our chain-breaking revolution, that is the Great Sawr Revolution. It has
been as a result of his courageous and valorous determination that the vic-
torious Sawr Revolution was successful and the tyranny of the treacherous
Nader-baud family ended forever.

The courage and bravery of Hafizollah Amin is best manifested in his command
for the start of the Great Sawr Revolution, and also in his work within the
army, to equip the young armymen with the epoch-making ideology of the work-
ing class. It has been as a result of this endeavor that our people accom-
plished their goal, that is establishment of a progressive and Khaiqi regime.

The role of Amin as secretary and member of the PDPA CC politburo, vice pre-
mier, first minister and in charge of the Ministry of Defense of the DRA

has been decisive and significant in the party and government affairs after
the victory of the Great Sawr Revolution. It was Amin who organised party
affairs taking care of the administrative organisations. It was Amin who has
been working untiringly toward popularisation of the working class ideology
in the country. His scholarly speeches and statements have been the best
guide to the followers of the PDPA and the epoch-making ideology of the work-
ing class. His personality had a deep impact in the international conferences
and meetings and he has played important roles in the domestic and foreign
affairs.
"is firmness against the enemies of the people of Afghanistan is of great
importance. Uhile talking to tribal elders recently, he said: "The main
objective of our revolution is building of our country and this has fright-
ened your enemies. They have been worried and surprised how workers. pea-
sants, labourers, and toilers have seized power in Afghanistan and how they
live in these palaces where Sardars used to live."

Raised in a lower-middle class, Hafizollah Amin has been closely associated
with the people. He says: "We learn from our people and use this knowledge
in their service." It has been as a result of this belief and link with the
people that he, once in the years before the Great Sawr Revolution. was
elected as deputy to Holesi Jirga and represented his prideful party there.

His appointment as the general secretary of the PDPA CC and president of the
RC of the Democratic Republic of Afghanistan is good news to our people. It
is certain that, at this moment while we are taking paramount steps in the
process of development of our revolution, his appointment to this task will
further enhance the progress and development of our society to the objectives
of our party and people. His energy. valour and wisdom give us this hope and
assurance that the classless society is the prime goal of our party and people,
which will be met soon.

As Hafizollah Amin enjoys the full support of the party leadership and the
revolutionary people of this country he will surely succeed in his objectives
to fulfill the desires of our people.

Long live our prideful party and long live our comrade the commander of the
victory of the Great Sawr Revolution.

CSO: 4920

12
DEVELOPMENT PLAN AIHED AT BRIDGING ECONOMIC GAP
LD152300 Kabul Radio in English to Europe 1900 GMT 15 Oct 79 L0

[Unattributed Commentary: "The Regional Development Program of the First
5-Year Development Plan of the Democratic Republic of Afghanistan")

[Text] With the victory of the Great Sawr Revolution, which toppled the class
oppression of the Yahya Dynasty, the political power was transferred to the
People's Democratic Party of Afghanistan and a great deal of social and
economic inequality inherited from the past regimes was wiped out with the
decisive support and the struggle of the toiling and patriotic classes and
strata of the country, and our oppressed peasants were especially released
from the exploitation of the feudal exploiters.

Undertaking the implementation of the First 5-Year Economic and Social Devel-
opment Plan will surely do away with economic and social backwardness after
implementation of two 5-year development plans and lay the foundation of a
new and blossoming economic order and will bridge the economic gap existing
between different parts and areas of the country.

As it is observed, the geographical structure and physical conditions of dif-
ferent provinces of the country are approximately similar. The main charac-
teristics of different provinces of the country are unfavorable topographical
features, mountainous areas, economic backwardness and scatteredness of pop-
ulation structure. These problems are felt in all provinces in the same forms.
As a result of these geographical and population characteristics there has
been imbalance between the social-economic standard of living of the people

of different regions and areas throughout the country. The result of this
imbalance, along with class and social oppression, is the fact that the econo-
mic development in different regions of the country has been in a primary
stage and the standard of living of the people is low.

With the removal of all these problems and shortcomings, there should come a
change in the ways of living of the people within the framework of the speci-
fic and long-term strategy. Within the framework of this strategy, the exis-
tence of a short cut and medium method is also possible and it is necessary
that on the basis of a study of basic conditions in social development, new

13
formulas and new initiatives should be worked out for strengthening the infra-
structure, development and the work of social-economic [2spheres]. betterment
of administrative affairs, coordination of development activities of various

organizations and development and democratization of planning for effectuating

this strategy in the long, medium and short terms at provincial and district
levels.

In our country, social-economic development did not receive necessary attention
in the far-flung areas of the country until the victory of the Great Sawr
Revolution due to the domination of antinational and antidemocratic regimes.

throughout the country in general and in the far-flung areas in particular

is envisaged in the First -Year Social and Economic Development Plan of the
Democratic Republic of Afghanistan. In this plan, for the purpose of removing
the problems of the people and raising their standard of living, the main
target is to raise the level of [?gross] productivity in agricultural and
cattle-raising activities with due consideration for the natural resources,
workpower and existing possibilities, and growth of all production processes
meeting the primary needs of the man.

areas in a short period of time and providing ground for greater development
of the backward regions of the country. It is for this reason that the
5-year social and economic development plan has included a number of devel-
opment programs for the central provinces of the county. Of course, with the
realization of these development programs. all-out importance will be given to
the standard of living of the people of all provinces of the country.

C80: 4920

lb
AFGHARISTAN

BRIEFS

INPORHATION EXCHANGE WITH CSSR--Tha agreement for the exchange of information
between the BAKHTAR NEWS AGENCY and ORBIS of Czechoslovakia was signed in
Kabul yesterday. According to this agreement, the BAKHTAR agency and ORBIS
will exchange commentaries, articles and information material concerning the
internal life of their countries, as well as material pertaining to interna-
tional political trends. [Text] [19142260 Kabul Radio in English to Europe
1900 GMT 14 Oct 79 LD]

EAST EUROPEAN AHEASSADORS RECEIVED-Prof Dr Abdorraahid Jalili, the minister

of agriculture and land reform, met in his office today His Excellency Stoyan
Radoslavov, the Bulgarian ambassador in Kabul, and discussed with him matters
related to agriculture and multilateral cooperation between the Democratic
Republic of Afghanistan and the Bulgarian Republic. Similarly, the minister
of agriculture and land reform received for an introductory meeting today

(Abu Hakim), the world Food and Agriculture Organizations's adviser in Kabul.
During the meeting discussions were held about the world food and agricultural
organization (?in) Afghanistan. The representative of the organization expres-
sed his readiness to render the assistance of the organization. Similarly,
Prof Dr Abdorrashid Jalili, the minister of agriculture and land reform,
received for an introductory meeting today His Excellency Dezsoe Kiss. ambas-
sador of the Hungarian People's Republic in Kabul. During the meeting, matters
related to the amount of wheat (?seeds) assisted by that country for the agri-
cultural (2research) were discussed. [Text] [LD142238 Kabul Radio in English
to Europe 1900 GMT 14 Oct 79 LD]

BULGARIAN ENVOY RECEIVED-~Abdolkarim Hisaq, the minister of finance, today met
for a courtesy call in his office His Excellency Stoyan Radoslavov, the Bul-
garian ambassador in Kabul. During the meeting matters related to the improve-
ment of the accounting system and the training of personnel in the financial
affairs with the cooperation of the Bulgarian Government and other matters of
mutual interest were discussed in a friendly atmosphere. [Text] [L0142239
Kabul Radio in English to Europe 1900 GMT 14 Oct 79 LD]
TELECRAH T0 SPANISH KING--The Information Office of the Ministry of Foreign
Affairs reports that Hafizoiiah Amin has sent a congratulatory telegram to
Madrid addressed to King Juan Carlos on Spain's national day anniversary.
[Text] [GF130905 Kabul Domestic Service in Dari 1600 GMT 11 Oct 79 GP]

CHILD CENTER OPENS-~1n compliance with instructions on revolutionary functions
of the Democratic Republic of Afghanistan regarding the fostering, development,
and guidance of children of our country, the revolution child center at Cozargah
section was officially opened this afternoon. Cutting the ribbon was Prof
Choiam Mohammad Sahebi. first deputy minister of education. There are pre-
sently 12 teachers and 65 children at the center, which has the capacity for

250 children. [Text] [CF150530 Kabul Domestic Service in Dari 1600 GMT

16 Oct 79 GP]

C50: 4906

16
BEN BELLA'S KOUSE ARREST COULD BB LIFTKD
Paris LB HONDE in French 3 Oct 79 p 6
[Article by Daniel Junqua: "Ben Bella's House Arrest Could Be Lifted"]

[Text] Algiers—The measures abridging the liberty of the former president,
Ben Bella. night soon be aitigated, if not completed lifted.

The chief of state, Mr Chadli Bendjedid, passed the word to the publishers
and editors-in chief of the organs of the national press with whom he talked
on Thursday, 27 September for more than 3 hours, in the presence of the prime
minister, Mr Abdelghani, and the minister of information, Mr Hehri. Colonel
Belhouched, inspector general of the any and member of the Politburo, made
s similar comnunication to the man himself in the course of a visit he paid
him at M'Sila. where he has been in assigned residence since lo July.

Do these conciliatory statements reflect a genuine political intention, or
are they simply meant to be just one more ploy to inspire patience in the
prisoner and in those who are interested in his fate? The situation of the
former chief of state grows all the more embarrassing as the anniversary
date approaches with celebrations on 1 November, marking 25 years since the
start of the national liberation struggle. Having Mr Ben Bella under
detention of sorts, one of the nine men who played a pivotal role at the

beginning of the fighting. is the sort of thing that would cast a troublesome
shadow over the festivities.

"Mr Ben Bella is a free Ian from now on. He can move about at will within
the limits of the H'Sila governorate. He may meet anyone he chooses," as
the authorities specified when they made their laconic announcement of the
"lifting of measures taken with regard to Mr Ben Bella." Very swiftly the

truth of the matter revealed itself to be quite different.

His former lady lawyer describes as follows the condition of his life in a
letter addressed to President Chadli requesting permission to call on her
"client." "Military security personnel guard the entrance to the villa,"
she writes. "Additional ones are posted in the cellars. Still sore walk
their posts around the house and through the town....lt still takes a lot
of courage to pay a call on the president. Inhabitants of M'Sila who took

the chance were rounded up by the police, his faniliars were questioned and
threatened . "

17
This information is confirmed by members of Mr Ben Bella's entourage. 11m
identity of visitors is noted. according to those close to him, his mail is
opened, telegrams intercepted. telephone messages filtered. the villa is
equipped with microphones, as is the car placed at his disposal. Government
officials who called on him were penalized. This is why the president of
the M'Sila Court of Appeals was removed after having taken this step.

Mr Ben Bella continues to do a lot of work, reading, writing, and he goes
out very little. His first excursion to the outside was a visit to the
mosque, where he went to pray. He has mentioned to friends twovushes he

cares about particularly: to visit his mother's grave at Maghnia and to
make the pilgrimage to Mecca.

Sometimes he comments on current political affairs to his visitors. On one
such occasion he passed qualified judgment on the "clean-up" operation
currently in progress throughout the country (LE HONDB, 12 September),
approving the principle but criticizing certain aspects of intervention on
the part of the police and the judiciary. For this he was attacked in the
daily newspaper EL MOUDJAHID. The paper deplored that "the Holy Man of
H'Sila" should be joining up with "the mob of exploiters and revanchists the
world over" who are gunning for the Algerian revolution and use every false

move it makes to make the point that Algeria 'has made a poor choice of the
path it follows."

2750
C50: 6600

18
BOUTEFLIKA RETURNS 1'0 ALGERIA

Paris LE MONDE in French 5 Oct p 42

[Article by Daniel Junqua: "Hr Bouteflika Has Made His Political Reappearance
After Over 6 Months' Absence"]

[Text] Algiers-~After lore than 6 nonths' absence, Hr Bouteflilta. foruer
foreign minister and minister counselor to the president of the republic,
has made his political reappearance in Algeria. On Wednesday, 3 October,
he attended a meeting of the Politburo concerned with preparation of the
Central Committee for next December. His friends, Messrs Drain and Tayebi
Larbi, were also present. Mr Bouteflika's picture is incidentally included
in a photograph published on the front page of the daily newspaper EL
MOUDJAHID. He appears on the right of President Chadli Bendjedid.

Mr Bouteflika, who figured anong the possible candidates to succeed
President Bounediene, had looked like the great loser in the turn of events
at the beginning of the year. In the governnent formed in March he had
even been coupelled to relinquish the office of foreign ninister which he
had occupied for 14 years. Since that tine he had been living abroad,

dividing his tine between France and Switzerland, where he received medical
treat-ent.

lie had attended no meeting of the Politburo nor of the governnent since

the formation of those two bodies. During these past weeks there were even
ruaore that he had been definitively due to be eliminated fro. the Politburo,
which could have happened at the next meeting of the Central Conittee. It
appears that here too, the chief of state has chosen the route of "cooling
it" and that his efforts to settle the differences that have unifested
thenselves recently have borne fruit.

2750
(280: 61000

19
CLEAN-UP CAMPAIGN REPORTEDLY TAINTED BY BRUTALITY
Paris LB HONDE in French 5 Oct 79 p 5

[Article by Daniel Junqua: "Cleanup Campaign in the CapitaluThe good
results achieved have been tarnished by acts of brutality and nisconduct."]

[Text] Algiers-Tbe campaign of "cleanup" and struggle against "the evils
and plagues of society" begun on Io September is now under way throughout
the entire country. Par-reaching activities have been undertaken in all
the big cities, particularly at Oran and Constantine. Even in the small
villages. retired police and members of the gendarnerie have been mobilized
to teach a sense of civic duty to their fellow-citizens.

In Algiers the results of efforts mounted without interruption for 3 weeks
are beginning to show. In the last few days paint-brushes taken over from
the brooms. The streets having by now real-ed for the nest part an aspect
long forgotten, the authorities have decided to address the problem of the
facades of buildings and shop-windows. All through the day professionals
and amateurs vie with one another in coating, plastering and sanding,
whitewashing and lscquering. The shops are thus getting a brand-new look'.
This all seems to be going on in an atmosphere of good humor. The famous
waterfront arcades, blackened and filthy, have not escaped this renovation
operation, neither have some particularly run-down buildings.

This action is due to continue. even to increase. The governorate of

Algiers has that decided to conit several hundred million dinars* in
renovating certain quarters in the capital. Maintenance crews can be seen
just about everywhere fixing street lamps that have long been dark, repainting
gates and railings. curbstones and pedestrian walks. boxes of flowers have
been placed at the main intersections.

The improvement is plain to see in the transportation sector too. The arrival
of 200 snall buses supplied by the Belgian company. Van H001, and the
reconditioning of 100 others that have lain idle for weeks for want of

spare parts and tires. have all had their good effect. Traffic moves with

 

*One dinar equals 1.20 franc at the official rate of exchange.
greater fluidity, with the police conducting a pitiless hunt for road-hogs
and parking violations, daily lifting dozens of driver's licenses and
gray cards.

All the government agencies are invited to join in the fight to improve
the quality of life. The Post Telegraph 5 Telephone Service have announced
that some 20 public phone booths will soon be in service. Previous expe-
riences with these were disastrous, as the booths were vandalized as soon
as they went into service.

A "Program of General Organization"

It would seem, then, that all the conditions were on hand for the capital

to present a worthy appearance for the festivities of 1 November to celebrate
the 25th anniversary of the outbreak of the insurrection so that none of

the thousands of personages invited for the occasion shall be disappointed.
Over and above this deadline date, the authorities plan on undertaking vast
reorganizations. The Council of Ministers, meeting on 30 September, gave
much time to studying a "General Organization Program for the Capital."

The good results accomplished in the last few days in hygiene, restoration
of the quality of life, security and municipal services have won favorable
content as a whole fron the population. There are those, however, who
wonder about the liaits of the notion of "cleanup" and fear that the clean-
ing up of the streets and building-fronts night move on to a cleanup of
minds. They wonder particularly about the leaning of an appeal published
on Tuesday, 2 October by the National Party Council of the governorate of
Algiers, which reads: "The cleanup operation is for a limited time and will
touch all areas of social life." What matters is knowing where "social
life" begins and ends.

The extraordinary powers that have obviously devolved upon the police and
custodians of public order are not of a character to calm these anxieties.
The brutality with which certain interventions have been carried out has
caused shock. This was especially the case at Ain Beninan, near Algiers,
where panels used to transform terraces into additional rooms were torn off
without notice and burned, exposing the family privacy of the dwellers to
the public eye, and where families were ordered to slaughter their chickens
innediately. The forces of public order had obviously received word to
enforce respect, by fear if need be. This undoubtedly gave rise to excesses.
intrusions on privacy, needless confiscations of ID cards, which have been
ill—received by the population.

Justice Caught in the Machinery

Justice, too, has been caught up in the machinery. Estimated in the
thousands are the individuals brought before the magistrates on charges of

21
"in flagrante dc»licto."* The accused, mostly youths, have their heads
systematically shaved and are put in irons. They are allowed to be
represented by a lawyer, but as one of then told us, in almost every case
the magistrate follows the ruling of the Attorney General. The habitual
offenders [once arrested] are automatically sentenced, even if they have
comitted no new crises. Host of the sentences include

to enter the governorate of Algiers. Several work areas for picking alfa
grass or reforestation have been opened on the high plateaus to receive the
prisoners for terms of sore than 6 months. Believing that rights of defense
cannot be noraally assured under these conditions. a certain nuaber of
lawyers refuse to accept the cases they are offered.

The authorities may claim that in a exceptional situation, exceptional
solutions are required. The lack of security in the big cities had indeed
reached a disturbing level. The National Party Council for the governorate
of Algiers says as much in its declaration: "However much it may annoy
certain detractors vainly trying to pinpoint the few inadequacies or
excesses noted here and there, the positive aspects of this operation far
exceed the rare negative aspects which have been carefully recorded and
studied and which shall be corrected without fail in the future."

Hill these correctives put an end to the affronts being inflicted-~ayaternatic
searches, being taken before the police conissariatuon "unmarried couples"
caught in police round-ups, especially at night? The management of a movie
theater in the center of town has even taken the step of separating the
couples who come to a show, girls on one side and boys on ther other. Some
detect here the stale smell of fundamentalism. and fear lest the cleanup
operation night begin to move in that direction.

2750
(250: 10600

:1—11- a press conference the Attorney General and the President of the Algiers
Court stated that 91.1 individuals had been prosecuted between 6 and

30 September in Algiers alone. Four hundred and fifty-two were sentenced

to penalties equal to or greater than 6 months, 53 of then to 2 years
imprisonment; only 9 were acquitted.
THEOImmNS SEEN CONSOLIDATING POSH'IN

Tehran THE IRANIAN in English 19 Sep 79 pp 3, 15

@er

ized for the ﬁrst time irt Iranian history. Should Ar-

ticle 5 of the Constitution which calls for the vein-
yale lqhilr (government by theologians) remain unaltered
and the document be approved by referendum. we will have
one or a group of clergymen as the highest authority of the
land, probably as head of state. and this. in spite of Ayatol-
lah Montaeeri's soothing assurances.

The existing situation. on the other hand. attests to the
fact that the clergy lack the expertise to efﬁciently adminis-
ter a 20th century society and tackle its intricate system. The
government's merger with the Revolutionary Council. the
gradual withdrawal of the Committee powers and functions.
the rising public discontent, etc.. reﬂect the wide recognition
of this.

Nevenheless. the clergy today have the strings of power
tightly in their hands and are moving fast towards institution-
aiizing their position. But while they hold the string, it is the
secular technocrats who actually operate the system. This is
precisely the patient that is most likely to persist even after
the elections.

Whether the velayare/qlrih will be the same as the presi-
dency will be clear only when the deputies start debating the
presidency. But since historically. under the 1906 Constitu-
tion. an overseeing clergymen's committee failed to survive
and protect the clergy’s interests, it may safely be concluded
the velayate feghilt will be in full control of all executive
authority, including the military.

Yet a clerical presidency would require several condi-
tions to maintain supremacy over the system. First. it would
require very wide powers rang'ng from appointment and dis-
missal of a prime minister and his cabinet, to calls for I refer-
endum and perhaps even the cancellation of elections and/or
dissolution of the Parliament.

Second, the president would need to lnstitutionalire
his power-base among the masses. who will remain for the

on September l2. 1979. clerical rule wasinstitutional-
foreseeable future strictly proclergy. Direct elections would
guarantee this. since any clerical presidential candidate can
comfortably outvote a secular opponent.

Third. the strengthening of clerical rule also necessitates
another change in tire draft Constitution. Article 14! pro-
vides for a Council to Protect tlte Constitution.which under
the draft. has a nonclerical majority. A change to establish a
clerical majority in the body would strengthen the political
position of the clergy and this change will probably be made
when article 142 comes up for review in the Assembly.

In general. the drive towards institutionali/ing and
strengthening the political position of the clergy will be
quicker and from now on more marked. The reason isclear.
Ayatollah Taleghani's death was a blow to all the clergytltcn.
Ayatollah Khomeini himself who is now more concerned
about their future. has begun to call once again for .r spmdy
passage of the Constitution. And even though KII-rrrrcitti may
appear to be above clerical partisarrdriere would hire to see
lrrs own followers in ofﬁce as soon as puwblc. With Talc-glu-
nt's death. and the consequent turn of attention lstwattls the
nondogrttattt: Ayatollah Shartat-Marlari. thrs rs srnnetlrrng

TllEOLOGIANS
Continued from page J

Khomeini has to consider even more
than before.

n any case changes in the Consti-
Itution are initiated more easily

now that a majority in the Assem-
bly has been established. The ease with
which velayate Iaght'h was incorpora-
ted in the Constitution is remarkable.
While the draft Constitution never
mentioned the idea in order to avoid
making it the focus of public attention
it was introduced behind the closed
doors of the first Review Committee.
The committee is empowered to deal
with “the General Principles and 0b-
jectives of the Constitution." The
Review Committee's chairman Dr.
Belreshti's close linlrs to Ayatollah
Khomeini. his leadership of the Islamic
Republican Party which is the major-
ity party in the Assembly. and his
presidency of the Asembly. all pro-
vided him with the means for speedy
ratification of the articles he supports.
And while the committee worked on
the wording ofthe article. the required

Asernbly majority to approve it was
also being created. And by the time
the proposed article reached the ﬂoor.
the deputies under Ayatollah Khomei-
ni‘s influence had made up their
minds.

The creation of this majority in
the Assembly, which is reportedly to
be kept alive throrrﬂr the normal par-
liamentarian practice of 'cultivating’
friends and letting them ltnow what
the boss prefers (perhaps even with a
mention of the fate of the outcasts
such as Ghasemloo). guarantees the
passage of other desired proposals.

This process has not escaped un-
noticed, and is even being challenged.
-Dr.Sahabi. for example. is said to have
boycotted some sessions in protest.
These developments have also led to
the formation of another public forum
for debating the Constitution. The
Muslim People's Republican Party now
holds regular Friday meetings at its
headquarters in Tehran. perhaps to
exert public pressure on the proceed-
ings. Rahnratollalt Moghaddarrr-Mara~
ghei. deputy front Aearbaijan with
close ties to SlrariatMadari and the
party (see story page 6) was the first
speaker at tin: tttcutings. “It: trucsliutt
of vt-lrryuh- [rrghilr was critrciml at the
last rim-ting. itt particular by hlaragltei
himself. who said Taleghani's views on
this sultjcct were totally iptorcd and
that tile article was (00 hastily ap-
proved.

And while rnstitutionaliratiun ot’

the clerical hold over the system is tak-
ing place in the Assembly with “Allah
Akbar" after every successful vote call.
government inﬂuence in administering
the country is yadually rising.

Only last week. responsibility for
the prisons was taloen away froth the
Comlttccs and handed over to the
Ministry of Justice. Moreover, arrests
of government ofllcials by the Corn-
mittees have also been prohibited.

And less exposed to public view,
the Gendannen‘e is hiring more person-
nel in order to eventually take over
law enforcement functions from the
Pasdaran. The military is gradually be-
ing reorpnized, with enoouraﬂng signs
of border control. And Foreign Minis-
ter lbrahlrn Yazdi has privately said he
has solved the problem of contradic-
tory pronouncements on foreiyt poli-
cy issues. especially those involving
Ayatollah Montazerl.

The continuation of these trends
should take us to a situation with
ciergymen heading the overall political
system (either through a presidency or
a powerful overseeing body). and a
secular head of pvemment running
the system.

Ayatollah Khomeini's recent call:
for unity between the university intel-
lectuals and the clergy can be ex-
plained it this context. it is time he
feels to blend science, technology and
modern management with islam. in
fact. as clergymen become more fami-
liar with the problems and intricacies
of administering society, they them-
selves will lcnd to reach this conclusion.
The government's mergr with the Re-
volutionary Council, which led to the
appointment of clerical deputies h the

cso: Ir92o

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02108: CIA-RDP82-00850R000200020014-2

ministries. has proved to
men that realistic solution:
tion's problems are neces:
inc welfare is to be achieved

80 as the Constitutl
moves ahead and the clergy
ly till the seats of power b0I
ment and the executive is
should become more aware
needs of our society and tor
of the secular technocrats
whornhm been called “cor

The more ambition
l'rptres will join the politics
once there. face the real i
with a demanding public. it
to imagine tltcrrt surviving or
matism. We can expect to
secular content to the so
l'crcd by lslarn. [I

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: zoomzros: CIA-RDPOZ-OOBSOROOOZMOZOON-Z
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007I02108: CIA-RDP82-00850R000200020014-2

VETERAN DISSIDENI' BARAHENI SINK-3 PGOI'S POLICIES

Tehran THE IRANIAN in English 19 Sep 79 pp 8, 10, 11

ﬁvxg Rt-:a liaruhmt' was one of the best
known critics of the ﬂtah's regime.
rs/n-t'r'allt- outside Iran. One of the
many Iranian intellectuals to have
been torturai, he is among the lucky
few who ms released bemrse of Inter-
national pressure brought against the
regime. An Azarbat‘iam' he is an inter-
nationally known Iranian poet. critic.
writer and thinker whose works have
been translated into many langums.
He returned to Iran during the Revolu-
tion after teaching English Literature
in the (1.5. for several years and has
just attharrd a new hook. The Iranian
Revolution: What Was and What Wlll
Be. Following are the excerpts of an
interview he ha] with Hamid Naun' of
The Iranian.

 

Q. Can our natiood uprising be
called a true revolution?
A. Yes. and it is a very deep revolu-
tion. It has touched not only Tehran
and 'l'abriz as the Constitutional Revo-
lution did or the second Revolution
after World War II. ie. the uprising for
selfdeterrninatlon that lasted all the
way up to I953. There has been a
recognizable pattern in all the revolu-
tions in Iran. The people who particl-
pated in the revolt in Qom were not
numerous. But in Tabril. hundreds of
. thousands of people came out. And
- who were they? They were the young
peopIeJhat is studentsjncluding those

26

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007mm: CIA-RDP82-00850R000200020014-2
from the mosques. and the newly-
migrated population of the city.‘l'here
were as ntany as 200.000 of them.
Then there were women and workers.
and ﬁnally the bands. Because this
happened in Azarbaijan it cannot be
seen as a purely religious movement.
if it was a religious movement. then
from Oom it would have gone toMash-
had. the larpst religious city in the
country. But it went to Tabriz. Those

people who look dialectically at histo-
ry, have got to ﬁnd a reason for this.
[.1th. panicularly after Black Friday.
the pattern in Tabriz was repeated all
over the country on a wider and deep-
er ban‘s. What is most interesting about
this whole movement is that the same
pattern existed during the Tobacco
Rebellion. And at that time. Azarbai-
janl soldiers didn't want to shoot the
people. so they got Persian soldiers to
do the killinan other words.the army
brealts up ﬁrst. because of people who
belong to regions other than Tehran.
So you see, the Revolution in Iran is a
combined revolution. Its not the revo-

lution of one nationality. but of seve-
ral nationalities.

if there had been a bourgeois re-
volution in this country. the autono-
my and the self-detemtination of all
the oppressed nationalities would have
been guaranteed. This is what happen-
ed in Europe. These people would
have created their own nationslate.
So. the bourgeois revolution in this
country has not been completed.

0. What is preventing this develop-
ment?

A. There can be no bourgeois revolu-
tion without an independent bour-
geoisie which we do not have. What
exists is a totally uneven situation.
You have both the richest and the
poorest person in the world liVing
here. There are no facilities for the
masses. but you have a minority living
in palaces that even the Europeans

cannot dream of. On top of this in-
equality there are several nationallues
striving together for a revolution. If
the bourgeoisie wants to an the peo-
ple democracy. this will take society
straight irtto socialism. Dernocraeyun
this semi-wlonial society means having
factory committees. army commit tees,
selfdetermination for the various na-
tionalities. nationwide elections. etc.
This is what the bourgeoisie should be
providing. llad we been in Europe. all
this would have been p'ven to us. But
in a semicolonial state.dernocracy and
socialism are completely intertwined.
bolt at Cuba before Castro. lie in fact
had a bourgeois programme for the
country before the revolution. but as

soon as the revolution succeeded
society demanded and moved towards
socialism. There is simply no other
way. If you want democracy you will
end up with socialism. If you want
socialism, you must have democracy.
This is very important in understand-
ing the position of the intellectuals in
this country. i know of no intellectual
in this country who is not a socialist.
No matter what government we
have - bourgeois. petty bourgeois or
clerical — and no matter what demo-
cratic steps it takes. it will be pushed
towards ncialism. Of course it can
adopt socialist programmes under the
name of lslam. which will be accepted
and understood.

0. But specifically what refottlta
mustbecart'iedout‘!

A. By solving the land problem in
this country you will automatically
solve the problems of the Kurds.Turit-
ontans. most of the Azarbaijanis. and
Baluehis. The nationalities in this
country have several problems. In

27
\. .- .;..:. _\al|l lusc the ori‘rew‘tl has
II--II.I|II) problem, as well as the work-
ing class problem. Go to Kurdeslan
and you have the rural and the reli-
yir-rts problems. In Klturcstan there
are ulll‘ and a half million Arabs.
generally at the bottom of the social
scale. and besides this there are reli-
gious and cultural problems. llow
is the government wing to solve all
these problems? The solution is to let
these nationalities solve their own
problems. by y‘ving them their demo-
cratic rights. We lteep tallting about
the Palestinians. What have the Pales-

tinians been deprived of? 1heir lands?
So have the Turkomans. Their lang-
uage? So have the Turlromans. Their
cultural identity? 50 have the Turlto-
mans. So the Shah's regime was Zio-
nist. The central government does not
have any responsibility to the Turko-
mans. Let them solve their own prob-
lems.

Q. Why is the government not doing
this?

A. It is wrong to say that all mem-
bers of the government are in favour
of this. I do not see a single person in-
side or around the government who
understands what selfdetermination
for oppressed nationalities means. The
least they could do is go artd read what
we have written about the nationali-
ties.l have volunteered to sit down and
discuss these problems with anyone in
the government. Today the govem-
ment can end the Kurdish revolt, but
it cannot solve the classical problem of
irart's history. So why not solve the
problem once and for all in the Consti-
tution? l cannot think of a constitu-
tion which would not acknowledp the
existence of several nationalities in this
country .and deny them their democra-
tic rights.

0. Does not the draft Constitution
acknowledge this?

A. The draft says there are egltvm.
(ilrrmt is an anthrapttlogical term. A

ghoul is part of a nation. But we are a
country of nationalities each of which
has a separate and identiﬁable cul-
ture. folklore. language, manners. cus-
toms. music etc. lf you want to solve
the nationalities problem. you will
have to move towards democracy.
which means going towards socialism.
Can the present government afford
this? This is why it is always looking
for alternative solutions. With several
nationalities living together. you must
have an independent bourgeoisie. But
you need ﬁnance capital for an inde-
pendent bourgeoisie and the mecha-
nistn to turn money into finance capi-
tal does not exist in this country. So
you always stay dependent and are
driven to exploiting your own working
and peasant classes. In fact you end up
exploiting everybody. Consequently.
whatever system you have. with what

ever name. it will still be a form of
monarchy. in fact it will be oriental
despotism. In other words you must
move towards democracy and social-
ism, irt which case imperialism cannot
touch you. But unfortunately the gov-
ernment is moving towards depen-
dence on yobal imperialism. The
greatest sin against the nation is that
these people have banned the free
newspapers, got rid of democracy and
dialogue. and deprived themselves of
the learning of intellectuals.

Q. What is the impact of the Hami-
ution of society on our masculine his-
tory and women's rights and liberties?

A. Masculine history is another name
for oriental despotism. This is intensi-
fylng in Iran and other lslamic coun-
tries. But you have to realize that the
exploitation of women began long be-
fore lslam. It was founded on the
patriarchal system of monarchy in this
country. And for 25 years we were
under the presure of Westomania.
with the mass media promoting fo-
reign values. In the case of women this
was even more pronounced. The fami-
ly itself is an exploitative institution
here and is dominated by the man.
Women have been deprived of thinking
independently. The monarchy itself
provided the best example of this ex-

ploitation. Mrile the Shah said he was
for equality. every time he walked out
of an airplane. his wife was a few steps
behind him. lie believed a two day old
boy should be crowned as king. but his
own wife could never become queen.
There is also an economic dimension
to this. Women suffer most because
they carry the burden of the family
and society on their shoulders. Islam
must find an economic system, which
can create economic equality. One
either solves these problems or sells
the country to imperialism. which is
what the Shah did. Obviously the
answer is socialism. But let people
keep reliy'on which is so important to
them.

0. Are we moving towards socialism?
A. I don‘t think so. i think most of
the religious leaders have an abstract
notion of an economic system in
which everybody is equal. But you
have to be objective. and to do that
you must maintain a dialogue with the
intellecuials.

Q. But if socialism B the solution and
the rep'me is not moving towards it.
what will happen?

A. If the regime does not rn0ve to-
wards socialism. it is doomed to
failure. They will have to go back to a
very repressive dictatorial regime and
if that happens. it is the end of Islamic
culture. If they don't give economic
equality and freedom lslarn will hear

the taint of injustice forever. (‘art they
take that risk? By simply holding on
to power. they may move in the direc-
tion of tyranny. For the ﬁrst time in
1,400 years they have created an isla-
mic state with the approval of 90 per
cent of the people and not just a mino-
rity. if they have the support of the
whole nation but don't provide for

equality, then it will be difﬁcult to
mobilize people with the same princi-
ples in the future. That will be the end
of lslarn. And where does one go from
there? One alternative is a dictatorial
regime of generals such as in Chile. but
that would not last for long. Or if we
imitate the socialism of the Soviet
Union we will end up with another
form of the Asiatic mode of produc-
tiort which is called Stalinisrn. We
don't want that either. It ishere that
the intellectuals become very impor-
tant. These 20th century intellectuals
are deeply rooted in Iranian and isla-
mic culture, and at the same time have
good knowledge of the West,the Sovi-
et Union and China. They are the ones
who should run the country. The
clergy could always invite them. but
they feel threatened by these intellec-
tuals. Fortunately Iran has created an
intellectual class. Out intellectuals are
much more intelligent than those in
Turkey and this is because of the
multinational structure of the country.
We have the biggest number of stu-
dents in the West. If there isdemocra-
cy they will come back. We can make
a heaven of this country.

0. "ll we ever have an independent
bourgeoisie which you say is essential
for democracy?

A. No i don't think so. But we don't
really need the Independent bour-
geoisie. What is the independent Ame-
rican bourgoisie doing for the 25 mil-
lion blacks. the lndians or the intellec-
tuals? What we have to do is change
the structure of government and ﬁve

29
.1l.1l .4! “1 11

8: 3.5 93.. 353.353... 2.8. 0..
So 58:02:...» 2.5 3:: .53 .53
moo; 03:25.33 yuan... >2. 22.0
«03E: 33:53:: .83 xx... .8
32.3. o: 55.3 .53 o.. 9: .33..
.35.». :5. 5:2: :33 32:: 0‘
£5. a no...“ on .53. >= :3 30:3.
«.8... o: «van—.5 .a 3.“ 3.55. W
we...“ cos: :5 Eu... 8 :5. .83.

o. 2.3. w «:5. REE—a 35am :3
13....

>. 0.: wean—v~ w 31......“ 9 E3. 3.?
8.3 3. coax—:2...“ a: 52 w (3.2:.
5.2... ua :53 £233 3....“ in 8:

”IL-3."? Em...— dv; 3:5...3 manna».
PLANNING MINISTER EXPLAINS CONSTRUCTION SITUATION
Kuwait AL-QABAS in Arabic 29 Aug 79 p 5

[Article: “Minister of Planning Huhammad Yusuf A1-'Adasani at a News
Conference: No Reduction in Government Spending and No Decline in Services
Projects; 1.9 Billion Dinars for Construction Projects Over the Next 5
Years; The Defects in Quality of Services Due to Population Growth at a
Record Rate of Up to 10 Percent; Population of Kuwait Hill Reach 1.6 Million
People Next Year"]

[Text] Minister of Planning Muhammad Yusuf a1-'Adasani has categorically
denied any decrease in government spending on the services sectors and

other sectors in the country. Speaking at a news conference yesterday,

the minister said that the funds allocated for Section Three, which pertains
to projects and construction over the nest 5 years. amount to 1.9 billion
dinars, of which 397 million dinars have been allocated in this year's budget.
He said that in addition to that there was an increase in uncategorized
expenses and costs in the housing sector to the tune of 117 million dinars,
bringing them to a total of 1.115 billion dinars.

At the instruction of his highness the amir, the minister added, projects
have been drawn up to complete the services needs of the 4th and 10th regions
and the Al-Jahra' region. The Ministry of Planning, on commission from the
Higher Commission for Projects and Structural Planning and in coordination
with the municipality and the other ministries concerned with services,

is now carrying out urgent services in the area. A sum of 205 million dinars
has been set aside for this particular phase which includes the completion

of major roads and sewage, electricity and telephone networks. Of this
total, the sum of 23 million dinars has been allocated in this year's general
budget.

Non-vacating of Occupied Houses

Minister a1-'Adasani said that the reason for the delay in implementing
services in those areas has been the non-vacating of occupied houses or
the non—occupation of others. He added that all occupied houses in a1-
Jahra' have been vacated. Thus, all impediments to the first phase have
been removed. In the 4th region, the construction of major roads is now
in the final phase while the construction of the other roads is proceeding
according to schedule.

He said that the unoccupied houses which form a hindrance cover an area

of 69,716 square meters, including an area of 11,759 square meters of unoccu-
pied houses and real estate in Abraq Khitan. In Julayb al-Shuyukh, 70

out of a total of 150 houses have been vacated. The area of unoccupied

real estate in that location comes to 66,571 square meters. There are as
well 61,632 meters of unoccupied spaces, in addition to 55 occupied houses,
in al-Hanqaf. In al-Fintas, the area of unoccupied real estate has reached
40,725 square meters, and in al-Hahbulah, it has reached 48,888 square
meters.

10 Percent Rate of Population Growth

In reply to statements that there is a deficiency in the quality and kind
of services provided by the state, the minister explained that the popula-
tion of Kuwait is growing at an annual rate of up to 10 percent, although
this rate has not exceeded 2.5 percent in Egypt and India, which are con-
sidered to be suffering a population explosion. he said that the increase
in the birth rate is up to 4.5 percent among Kuwaitis and 2.2 among resi-
dents. To this should be added 3.5 percent of newcomers per year. Such
a rate of growth in the population, he said, creates definite deficiencies
in the quality of services.

The minister of planning went on to say that every 3,349 working newcomer
supports 6,651 dependents; that is to say, the total comes to 10,000
persons serviced by 687 individuals, broken down as follows: 151 for edu-
cational services; 125 for medical services; 1&2 for security and judicial
services; 167 for personal, household and janitorial services; and 112

for maintenance and repair services.

This number of people requires 1,450 residences, 39 hospital beds, 35 ele-
mentary school classes, 31 preparatory school classes, 8 secondary school
classes and 3 mosques.

The minister went on to say that this number of people also requires 41
million kilowatt hours of electricity and 603,000 gallons of water daily,

in addition to 4,723 tons of food materials annually, not to mention durable
and semi-durable commodities such as cars, refrigerators and so on.

Vicious Circle

The minister said that his ministry is now in the process of setting forth
the framework and structure of a housing policy. Unless this policy is
carried out, he said, we will continue to be in a vicious circle. He said
that the education policy receives great attention from his highness the
emir and his highness the crown prince, and the prime minister, especially
with regard to the development of human resources. There is also a plan

to increase investment of such human resources on the medium and long term
in order to meet the future needs of the country. He added that the return
of good capabilities and efficiencies will be the best means of investment.
He also affirmed that the government is concerned with enabling its sons

to receive a good education in order to be able to utilize them in the event
of the depletion of other resources.

1.4 Million People

The minister of planning pointed out that the ministry is presently preparing
a general census which is scheduled to be conducted in April 1980, when the
population--both citizens and residents--is expected to reach 1.4 million
people. He said that the ministry over the past 3 years has laid down
medium- and long-range plans. He said that the ministry is coordinating

its efforts with other ministries with regard to several matters, including
the housing policy.

11.000 Vacant Housing Units

Turning to the real estate sector, the minister said that in January the
ministry conducted a field survey of that sector because it felt that a
setback might befall it as a result of the rush of construction following
the 1975 housing crisis. He said that the survey showed that there are
5,566 housing units for rent, that 4,441 units are being scrapped, and that
there are in addition 1,123 vacant units of private housing. of these units,
there are in the capital #68 units for rent and 743 units that are being
scrapped. In Hawla, there are 6,064 for rent and 3,079 units are being
scrapped. In al-Ahmadi. there are 1,034 units for rent and 619 units are
being scrapped. The total number of vacant housing units is 11,130.

Discontinuation of Government Construction

The minister went on to say that the number of housing units planned by

the General Housing Authority which are being scrapped is 2,886 units of
middle income and lower income housing and 3,9b8 units of Arab-style housing.
The houses built by the State Properties Administration of the Hinistry

of Finance or those built as part of the housing projects of other ministries
and governaent agencies total 123 family apartments, 336 efficiencies for
singles, 206 residence blocks for singles and 830 family apartments. He
said that the government, because of its concern for the private sector in
the real estate field, has decided to discontinue all government building
undertaken by the Ministry of Finance.

A Lower Increase in Rents

The minister turned to the question of rent increases for medium size houses.
saying that in 1975 rents increased by 69 percent over the 1974 rates and

increased by 15 percent in 1977 and 1976. But the rate of increase went
down in 1978, he said. He added that since 1975. the state spending on

housing increased 70 times against a 30-fold increase in income by the state.

9254
cso: 4802 33
LLOYDS ACCUSED 0P ATTEMPTS T0 EXPLOIT HOW CONTROVERSY
Kuwait AL-QABAS in Arabic 28 Aug 79 p 1
[Editorial by Jasim Ahmad Al-Nisf: "He Can Fight Robbery Hith Awareness"]

[Text] Random and chance events sometimes leave in their wake consequences
which affect the future of a person, a state or an area. Sometimes they
pass unnoticed. Over the past two days, Western news agencies and media
reported two ordinary incidents which carry, however, a special significance.

One incident concerned an explosion in an ewty tanker, the other was
about a fire in a second tanker in the Gulf. Since the eruption of the
oil boom in our region, fires and explosions in oil wells or tankers have
been common and have been routinely classified as incidents caused by
technical errors or weather and environmental conditions. The media,
both Arab and Western, did not bother to pursue such incidents and rele-
gated then to the section of miscellaneous news.

For a fairly long time now, ever since we freed ourselves from economic

and political domination and began to utilize our resources freely and
independently, the West has been mounting a severe blaclnnail campaign against
us, a campaign aimed at our political and economic independence, in which

it has tried to convince the world that the oil states are trying by their
oil and economic policies to strangulate the world through increasing oil
prices.

Apparently the West was not satisfied with a long series of threats of
military intervention in the area, but adopted other methods as well. The
latest such method was its attempts to raise the coat of living for the
peoples of our region by various means, including raising the prices of
the manufactured goods which we import in an attempt to regain our return
from oil exports and the successive series of major world currency devalua-
tions. The latest story is the attempts by the British Lloyds Group to
raise the shipping insurance fees in the Gulf region on the basis of the
dangers which threaten the region's security.
He can thus see that the West. which has not been satisfied with the
exploitation of our national resources for a long time, is trying by all

runs and step by step to rob us again. This we reject. Accordingly, we
need to take a well-considered step or steps and to maintain great aware-

ness in order to confth the attempts of Lloyds and others which might

try anew to exploit the tvo chance incidents in order to launch a new
rabid campaign.

9256
(:80: 6802

35
PLANNING MINISTER REPORTS FINDINGS 0N FEMALE POPULATION
Kuwait AL-QABAS in Arabic 30 Aug 79 p lo

[Article: "An Important Report About Kuwaiti "omen in the 15-29 Year Age
Bracket; 42 Percent Are Unmarried and 50 Percent Illiterates; Only 9 Per-
cent Are Working. 19 Percent Are Studying and 72 Percent Are Housewives"]

[Text] At his news conference the day before yesterday. Minister of Planning
Nuhamad Yusuf al-‘Adaeani reported on a nuﬂer of research studies conducted
by various competent authorities in his ministry on a number of economic,
social, agricultural and other affairs. The studies have been distributed
among various governaent agencies and they include an extremely iaportant
study, the results and recommendations of which should not be underestimated,
especially since it concerns the training and preparation of Kuwaiti women
between 15 and 29 years of age. -

According to the report, there are 65,108 women in this age bracket, that
is 27.6 percent of all females in Kuwait. according to the 1975 census.

Of these, 38,000, or 58 percent, are either married, divorced or widowed,
and 27,307, or 62 percent. have never been married. The non-marriage
phe:.omenon. it must be noted, has become a world—wide one and not a situ-
ation that is confined to Kuwait or the Third Horld alone. It is due to
the difficulties and complications as well as the increasing costs of
marriage in the present age. The study shows that 50 percent of the women
in the above-mentioned age bracket are illiterate and that about 72 percent
of them are not working-—this at a time when the Kuwaiti women in this
particular age bracket should be an important part of the human resources
but do not in fact enjoy a decent level of efficiency, in spite of the
state's need to utilize every single human resource which can be put to
work and participate in the process of development.

Planning the Future of Kuwait
The study says that the planning of Kuwait's future should address itself
to the question of how to prepare a generation capable of undertaking the

requirements and burdens of development and growth and capable of coping
with all its responsibilities in all the scientific, economic, agricultural

36
and social spheres. The study places the burden on the Kuwaiti family on
the grounds that the family has 1 basic role in bringing up the generations
of young Kuwaitis who will constitute the pillars of the future. The study
also defines the role of the state machinery in this up-bringing process

by means of the health, educational, social and other services that the
state can offer; but, it believes that the state's role is secondary to

the family's. The study affirms that to allow a family to shirk its responsi—
bilities in bringing up the children either because of ignorance or lack

of education, or to place the burden of the responsibility of up-bringing
on governesses or servants will inevitably lead in most cases to juvenile
delinquency and an increase in psychological and social problems among the
young.

The study emphasizes that if the state showed interest in the family and
provided the capabilities which would enable the family to carry out its
duties, the state would be saving itself a great deal of future expenses

and treatment of psychological and social problems which would beset children
and young people in the future.

The Mother's Responsibility

The study notes that if the family, that is the parents, bears the responsi-
bility of bringing up the child in the various stages of his age, then the
mother's responsibility in this aspect is greater and clearer in the early
stages of the child's growth, since the mother is closer to the child in

his early years. Therefore, any education and instruction given to mothers
will have a clear impact on the up-bringing of the child and therefore on
defining and forming his future personality.

Educating and Preparing Young Women

The study goes on to say that both the developing and advanced nations are
concerned with educating and preparing young women to face the requirements
of family life in its full dimensions. The means of preparing young women
differ from one state and one society to another in accordance with the
life styles, values and traditions which govern families in any one society.
in Spain, for example, the training of young women for family life is com-
pulsory. A young woman is required to spend a period of time at a training
institute before marriage, during which time she would be instructed in

the various aspects of housekeeping, in addition to training in bringing

up children. The young Spanish woman is not allowed to get married until
she has completed that training period successfully.

The training of young women is not confined to government efforts, for in
most countries of the world civil groups, especially feminist groups,
carried out considerable activities in this field. Some of these activities
might be jointly mounted by the government and such civil groups.
The Training of the Young Kuwaiti Woman

The study notes that there are, no doubt, experts which are active in the
field of training and preparing Kuwaiti women. although this is being done
In an incomplete manner. Some social organizations, especially feminist
groups, hold training courses with the aim of training young women in
certain activities, such as sewing and dressmaking. There are however,

no overall programs which would prepare young women to be successful house-
wives, wives, and educated mothers who will be able to run the affairs of
the family and bring the children up on the basis of education and scientific
knowledge, since such a task is part and parcel of the process of utilizing
our human resources and therefore is part of the plans and programs of

Iany advanced and developing nations.

Dimensions of the Problem in Kuwait

Some people wonder if Kuwait was indeed in need of this kind of utiliza-
tion of human resources, so we shall review certain facts about the Kuwaiti
woman. especially those women who are in their early years of marriage or
are about to get married or are mostly in the 15-29 age group. These facts
throw light on the dimensions of this problem in Kuwait.

AZ Percent Unmarried

The number of Kuwaiti females in this age bracket is 65,108 according to

the 1975 census, that is 27.6 percent of the total number of women in Kuwait.
The number of married women or women who are divorced or widowed, supposedly
with children, is 37,801. that is about 58 percent of that age group. The
number of women who have not been married is 27,307 or 62 percent of that
age group.

50 Percent Illiteracy

An analysis of the educational standards among Kuwaiti women in this age
bracket shows, according to the study, that more than 50 percent are illi-
terate, in addition to 19.6 percent who can barely read and write or who
have elementary education. This means that about 70 percent of all Kuwaiti
females in the 15-29 age group are in need of training, education and
instruction.

A Lower Percentage of Working Women

In terms of employment, we find that no more than 8.8 percent of women in
the above-mentioned age group are working. That is to say, 91.2 percent
are not working. If we take into consideration that among this group of
women there are 12,282 girls who are pursuing various levels of education--
secondary. technical and university--that is about 19 percent of the total,
we find that more than 70 percent of the women in this age group, that is
about 47,000 women, either married or about to be married are staying at
home, and the majority, that is about 32,000 women, are illiterate.

38
Social Statue of Kuwaiti women

 

 

Status
Age Groug Unmarried Married Divorced Widowed Unknown Total
15—19 18, 112 7 ,10b 125 16 - 25,257
20-26 6,902 ll. , 179 365 92 1 31,529
25-29 2,293 15,343 414 162 — 18,212
Total 27 I 307 36,626 9010 270 1 65,108

Percentage 102 S6 . 2 1 . b 0 . b 100

91 Percent Outside Work Force (Including 19 Percent Students)

 

Age Groug Working Not Working Other Total
15-19 603 210,952 2 25,357
20—26 2,811 18,717 21,528

25-29 2,506 15,708 - 18,212
CIA-RDP82-00850R000200020014-2

2007I02108:

APPROVED FOR RELEASE

 

 

o3
'1'lllllllnqll-IIIIIJIJI’HIIII
.332: S u go 3N o 23 2 SH 0 5. n «8 an :38.
83: n 9.... 3n; «8: can; 3n; 3%: 3-2
3%: n 8n 8“; :1» So; «2; 2%: «Tea
SQQ H . NB; 2; Sin ~84 So _ 2-2

 
 
 
 
 
 

H38. :30..an o 0.300 uncouum 39:55—35 3:0..on

 

39:5,: ouch—3:: :30 o <

l!!!

asuuum Hucozuuavu .«o act—am unoauaag

ho

 

ClA-RDP82-00850R000200020014-2

2007mm:

APPROVED FOR RELEASE
The Pressing Need for Guidance

The study points out that Kuwaiti women in this age group represent a sig-
nificant part of Kuwait's human resources and that they do not enjoy a
decent level of efficiency, in spite of the state's need to utilize every
single human resource that can be put to work and to participate in the
process of development. Since the family is the basis of society. as the
constitution provides, then taking care of the family and providing it with
all guarantees that would enable it to perfect its children should be a
basic goal of this society--a goal that should not be confined to raising
the material level of the family or providing it with more services, but
should also include the means of preparing all members of the family by
training and developing their capacities to undertake the functions of a
family in the best possible manner. Since the Kuwaiti woman is one of the
pillars of the family, then there is a pressing need to train, instruct

and guide her so that she may be able to undertake her duties and functions

as a mother and housewife and as the person most directly responsible for
the up-bringing of future generations.

The Responsibility for the Solution

The study notes that the solution of this problem is not only the responsi-
bility of the state. but it is also the responsibility of social organiza-
tions. especially civil feminist organizations, which are required to pro-
mote and provide this kind of service since they are best equipped to train

and prepare Kuwaiti women within the framework of well studied and overall
programs.

We hope that Kuwaiti women in the above-mentioned age group will be able to
reach this honorable standard in the near future thanks to the efforts of
all those who are concerned with probing the problems of women.
NUMBER OF WORK PERMIT CANCELLATIONS RISES
Kuwait AL-QABAS in Arabic 28 Aug 79 p 1.

[Article by Husayn Salamah: "The Final Cancellation of Work Permits Is
269 Percent More Than Last Year; 2.8 New Workers Enter the Country for
Each Worker That Leaves Permanently")

[Text] Muhammad al—Shadnan, assistant undersecretary for labor affairs at
the Ministry of Social Affairs, has stated that the rate of final cancella-
tion of work permits this year is 2109 percent more than last year. He said
that for each worker leaving the country finally there are 2.8 workers. He
pointed out that Arab workers in Kuwait are more permanently settled than
Asian workers. He expressed the belief that the decision number 37 for 1979
of the minister of social affairs, 'Abd al-Azia Mahmud, with regard to
organizing the issuance of work permits for the civilian sector is the
result of the experience acquired by the ministry and is in line with its
understanding of the conditions of the ewloyment market at this particular
time. He said that the administration for the organization of the working
force actually monitors the rapid, continuing, and overlapping changes which
accompany the ebb and flow of new numbers of workers arriving in Kuwait, as
well as in renewing the work permits of others and the transfer of workers
from one establishment or one sector to another.

Decrease in Number of Applications

Al-Shadnan noted that April, May and June saw a decrease of 2.6 percent in
the level of applications over the previous 3~month period. He said that
the decrease was most pronounced in the number of work permits, which dropped
by 27.5 percent from its level of last year. There is also a decrease of
65.2 percent over the same period last year of applications for transfer

to the government sector or for employment as a house servant or for applica-
tions to join the head of the family.

Increase in the Percentage of Departures

Al-Shadnan added that there was a noted increase of 19 percent during that
period in the number of applications for newcomers as well as a very high

[:2
increase of 249.5 percent in the number of final cancellations and depar-
tures of foreign workers.

An increase in Market Demand

The official also pointed out that for every worker leaving the country
finally, there are 2.8 new incoming workers. He explained that there is a
continuing increase in demand in the Kuwaiti employment market for production
workers, for ordinary workers, and for workers in the field of transporta-
tion. The increase in the number of workers who entered the country in the
3-month period mentioned before is 76 percent.

Women Workers

As to demand for women workers, al-Shadnan said that such demand does not
exceed 1.9 percent of workers who entered the country in the period men-
tioned. Further. he said that most of these female workers are engaged in
clerical or secretarial jobs.

He emphasized that Kuwait, as a full employment market, should pay attention
to the ages of the workers who enter the employment market, since the market
requires workers of a full-production age. that is young workers. He said
our studies, therefore, show that the highest percentage of newcomers to
Kuwait is in the 24 to less than 28 years age group. In this age group,

the percentage of newcomers is 25.8 percent, whereas 86.1 percent of the
total newcomers who come to Kuwait to work are under 40 years old.

Renewal of Permits for Arab Citizens

Al-Shadnan said that workers from Asia constitute the highest percentage of
workers arriving in Kuwait, but the highest number of work permit renewals
in April, Hay and June was for workers from the Arab countries. 0f new
workers arriving in the country. he said, Asians make up 61.3 percent. In
terms of work permit renewals, the percentage among Arab workers was 57.1
percent, whereas it was 41.2 percent among Asian workers.

Al-Shadnan ascribed this to the fact that workers from Asia leave the country
upon termination of their work contract or the completion of the project on
which they had been working, whereas the Arab worker settles in the country
for a longer period and some of them, in fact, reside in Kuwait for many

years.
The Higher Wage Level

The official said that the wage level of workers whose permits have been
renewed is higher than the wage level of workers who have just entered the
country. But the highest wage level, he said, is among that group of workers
who earn between 150 to 200 dinars a month.

9254
080: 4802

h}
MINISTER DISCUSSES SAHARA POLICY. ISRAEL, ECONOMIC PLANS
Dakar LB SOLBIL in French 26 Sep 79 p 11

[Interview with Foreign Minister Ahmed Ould Ahdallah of the Islamic Republic
of Mauritania by Sara Diouf and Ramadoun Toure; date and place not given]

[Text] [Question] Mauritania has decided to follow a policy of strict
neutrality from now on toward the conflict in the Western Sahara. a conflict
in which it was formerly involved.

We would like to hear your views on the political, diplomatic. and naturally.
the military consequences of this neutrality.

[Answer] In removing itself from the conflict in the western Sahara under
the terms of the 5 August agreements signed with the POLISARIO. Mauritania
renounced all territorial claims on the Sahara. By the statement of .

13 August 1979. Mauritania withdrew physically from that territory and con-
sequently entered into a status of strict neutrality. The Military Committee,
and foremost of all Prime Minister Haidalla. in taking this position of
neutrality, did so for the primary purpose of strengthening peace and then
attending to the country's domestic problems. On the diplomatic level. their
main concern is to remain aloof from the conflict and see to the country's
territorial integrity and independence.

0n the military level. this neutrality means an army so reorganized and
reinforced as to remain vigilant in defending our national territory. In
short. being neutral means doing everything possible not to become involved
in this conflict. This is what Prime Minister Haidalla understands by
neutrality, and I must add that there is broad national support for the posi-
tion taken by the CNS" [Military Committee for National Safety].

[Question] Despite what you have just said, the Islamic Republic of Mauritania's
borders do place it on the front lines of this conflict. This means it will

be difficult to maintain your neutral stand. For this reason. we should like

to know what you think of King ﬂassan II's statement calling for a summit
conference of all countries bordering on the Sahara for the purpose of settling
what he calls the "western Sahara problem."
.J I:

[Answer] As you say. this position of strict neutrality is indeed a political
position that may appear difficult. In actual fact. an effort is required in
this matter just as in all other matters.

Since we initially proclaimed our position of strict neutrality, we have
received the support of many countries. and foremost among them was France
which officially announced its support on 29 August 1979. Thus this position
of neutrality has already received the backing of many friendly countries,

in addition to the national consensus which, in our view, is the fundamental
factor.

As for the conference you mentioned, Mauritania is so preoccupied with its
domestic problems that it has yet made no decision. This is a matter within
the province of the Military Committee which is Mauritania's supreme political
and legislative authority.

I simply know that while being neutral, we still hope to see all parties
affected by this conflict meet in a way suitable to them in order to reach
a peaceful solution.

[Question] After these questions on Mauritania's political situation, I
should like to touch upon the subject of the recent Conference of Nonalined
Countries in Havana at which you represented your government. As you know,
this conference has been the subject of much controversy. Some persons
claim Castro wants to change the nonalined movement into one alined with
Moscow. Others, namely the moderates, believe it is more a question of
being oneself than of choosing between Washington and Moscow. 1 should like,
if I may, to ask you your general opinion of that conference from the stand-
point of its results as well as the way it was conducted.

[Answer] I must say that from an organizational standpoint the conference was
conducted under the best possible conditions. I believe we must objectively
acknowledge this. Obviously, in a conference of this type there were

several currents of thought and several currents of opinion. Being the con-
ference organizer, Cuba did have a key role, and unquestionably the Cubans

did play an essential role. In the View of some, the chairman sought from
the very outset to impart a style to the conference by the way he arranged

the order of debate. In the view of others, this was a rule that exists
everywhere.

"hat I can say is that the conference was dominated mainly by the Kammuchea
and Middle East issues. Unfortunately, commentators have paid no attention
to these two aspects and depicted the conference as a duel between progres-
sives and moderates.

115
But the main part of the conference was concerned with these two issues.

Basically, the majority of the delegates favored strict neutrality outside
of any alinencnt with western Europe, or America. or the Soviet Union. The
majority of the countries wanted true nonalinement. And I really believe
this view prevailed.

[Question] Excuse me for bringing up a sensitive subject, namely the expul-
sion of MoroCcan diplomats from Nouakchott. Hhat were the reasons for this
action and what is its significance?

[Answer] I thank you for giving me the opportunity to explain myself for

the first time in public on this point. Mauritania first asked for the
replacement of Moroccan citizens deemed, with irrefutable proof. to be per-
sona non grata because of their activity and inadmissible conduct. Mauri-
tania did not wish to aggravate this action. For that reason, in our note to
the Moroccan embassy. we stressed our desire to maintain friendly cooperation
and our desire to pursue towards one and all a policy of peace and strict
neutrality. I must add that the Military Committee, its chairman and our
prime minister, Lieutenant Colonel Maidalla, are very desirous of maintain-
ing a policy of neutrality in the region. Since the advent of peace, they
have committed themselves to rebuilding the country. They have remained

cool and collected at all times. I trust that our Moroccan friends will
continue to help us maintain this policy of strict neutrality.

[Question] A bombshell exploded last week on the African political scene.
It was detonated by Andrew Young who, while agreeing that Africa, within
the OAU, should support the PLO in its basic demands which he personally
considers justified and legitimate. suggested at the same time that Africa
initiate a dialog with Israel. what do you think of his suggestion?

[Answer] As far as Mauritania is concerned, the conditions that justified
the break in the Israeli-African dialog have not changed. The Palestinians
and their sole and legitimate representative. the PLO. are deprived of their
right of expression. All of the forcibly occupied Arab territories con-
tinue to be forcibly occupied and the holy city of Jerusalem is still not
under.Arab sovereignty. These three conditions combined warranted the break
in diplomatic relations between Israel and Africa, and all three remain
unchanged. Hence. in my opinion, and based on what we know at the present
time, Andrew Young's suggestion is not justified. I believe Africa has
already given him its answer.

[Question] Hhat are Mauritanis's current concerns?
[Answer] The prime minister has repeatedly set forth Mauritanis's main

concerns. The first is to strengthen peace and then attend to the country's
internal problems, first and foremost of all, the rebuilding of our economy.

L6
He are firmly determined not to deviate from this program.

Any attempt by anyone at all to disturb us will receive the response it
deserves. The Mauritanian temperament is a peaceful temperament. but the
Military Committee will defend the national interest by all possible means.
That committee's impetus and major courses of action have resolutely broken

with past practices, namely the practices of beating about the bush or sup-
porting one neighbor against the other.

As long as our neighbors fail to understand this fundamental change in our

diplomacy they will always be beside the point, if not one generation in
arrears.

Let me reiterate that I am convinced the Military Committee is committed
to strengthening peace and settling our internal problems in a good neighbor
spirit and in strict neutrality. The committee has called for understanding

by all countries of the region and is sure its call will be heeded. I am
convinced it will do its utmost to be heeded.

Our economicconcerns within the framework of national reconstruction include:

first. increased impetus to investment in the interior of the country,

mineral prospecting, reorganization and rehabilitation of our industry sapped

by a demagogic policy of nationalization, fisheries, and the revival of rural

projects, particularly agricultural projects. Beyond these national concerns.
Mauritania is engaged with Mali and Senegal in a vast program sponsored by

the OHVS [Senegal River Development Organization].

The subregion's future depends on this program. My country is determined to
move ahead in coping with both national and subregional problems.

8041
C50: 6400

h?
LEADERS FACING URGENT FINANCIAL PROBLMS
Paris DEHAIN L'APRIQUE in French 8 Oct 79 pp Mo, 45
[Article by Mireille Duteil: "A Peace Full of Ambushes"]

[Text] "Is it true that the start of the next school year might be
particularly lively at Nouakchott?" 0n hearing this abrupt question,
the Mauritanian minister frowned and took his time before answering
calmly but with a certain twist: "You know, people have been talking
about this for two months now. This subject is old hat now." One thing
is certain: I'or the time being, the political atmosphere is all hearts
and flowers in Mauritania. But there are few who believe that this will
continue.

Foreign threats are fading now and disquiet is no longer being sustained
by the noise of weapons at the borders. However, domestic policy issues
quickly took the limelight and keep people thinking.

There are two major concerns on the eve of the resumption of the school
year which had been postponed to mid-October: The economic mess and the
issue of national unity.

Last May, the government proposed to step up Arabization in the secondary
schools. This project was like an explosion: The black African high
school students went out in to the streets to demonstrate against the
spirit and adoption of this measure. By the end of September, the com-
mission, established according to the directives issued by the head of
government, Lt Col Mohamed nouns Ould Haidalla, charged by him with
drafting specific proposals for an education reform, had not yet filed
its report. And there was doubt at that time that it would be able to
do so before the school year was scheduled to start again.

However, energency measures were necessary if one wanted to avoid new
frictions between the Mauritanian and the black African co-unities
which are divided on the issue of the language to be used in teaching.
They detenine the atmosphere as the school year starts again and the
return to the schools in turn will act like a barometer for the
resumption of political activities in Mauritania. The people are not
fooling themselves: The language issue is only the tip of the iceberg.
It does not outline the full scope of the battle for power which the
various Mauritanian political clans are fighting by means of intrigues
and maneuvers.

If school starts again without any major disorders, the prime minister
will be able to rack up a point for himself. He will have proved that he
restored confidence and he will have won the game. He tried very hard to
demonstrate that the neutrality, proclaimed by Nouakchott in the conflict
in the Hestern Sahara, was received favorably both in Mauritania and
beyond the country's borders. During a press conference on 11 August,
King Hassan II declared in rather enigmatic terms that "within a month
or a month and a half" we will know whether peace has been definitely
restored in the region. In the light of that, certain people in Mauri-
tania deduced the idea that, by setting these deadlines, the Sherifian
sovereign was hinting at the threat of new tensions in Nouakchott on the
occasion of the resumption of the school year. There was further cause
for worry now: The Mauritanian authorities on 23 Septewer demanded that
Rabat recall three Moroccan diplomats stationed in Nouakchott who sup-
posedly established contact with "pro—Moroccan" opponents.

To put the instruments of their neutrality in place, the Mauritanians
had to run a real race. Starting on 13 September, Moroccan detachments,
with the exception of several hundred of men, left Mauritanian territory.
At the end of September, the exchange of ambassadors between Algiers and
Nouakchott was considered iminent. However, Mauritanians and Moroccans
reaffirmed their determination to continue their economic cooperation.
Thus Rabat was getting ready to receive close to 700 Mauritanian students
for the 1979-1980 college year.

"Morocco and the POLISARIO Front have an interest in helping us maintain
our neutrality in order not to push us into the arms of the adversary,"
it was explained to us by Mr Moulay Ould Boukreiss, minister of planning
and fishing, when we asked him whether his country really had the means
for assuring its neutrality. For Mauritania, the presence of Moroccan
armed forces in Tiris El-Gharbin, close to its northern border, did re-
present a certain danger. In case of a clash between Moroccan soldiers
and Saharan guerrillas, might not Rabat be tempted to pursue, into Mauri-
tanian territory,the guerrilla fighters who, in turn, might consider
Mauritanian soil as their rear base or at least as "transit" territory?
"I do not think that the fighting men of the POLISARIO Front would be
interested in crossing Mauritania in order to get to the Western Sahara,"
the minister assured us.

Fully aware of this vulnerability, Mauritania is firmly huddling under
the French "military umbrella." "We do not desire the physical presence
of French military personnel on our soil," the Mauritanians declared.
"That would be embarrassing for everybody. But we do need air protection

’49
for our territorv." Paris has given assurances that "the Mauritanian
borders of 1960" would be defended against any aggressor. As a matter

of fact, considering the position of "neutrality" assumed by Paris—
which now seems anxious to maintain good relations with all of the parties
to the conflict—it is quite improbable that France would intervene aili-
tarily. It is precisely France's diplomatic weight which is assurance

of peace for Nouakchott.

Is it not this rediscovered confidence in a peace guaranteed by Paris
which just persuaded the Saudis to release their share of $60 million

in financing for the Guelbs iron mineral exploitation project? Likewise,
Ugine-Kuhlmann and a Japanese company are supposed to start prospecting
for uranium in the northern part of the territory by the end of the year.
Besides, the recent visit of the Mauritanian prime minister to Paris made
it possible to release the funds promised several years ago by the French
for development projects in agriculture (F30 million), telecommunications,
and fishing. In particular, P15 million in financial aid will be made
available to the Mauritanian treasury. In recent months, financial aid
from the Arab countries has become quite rare. ‘

In particular, Colonel Qadhdhafi had his ears pulled last September. It
is true that he has several points on which he can reproach ﬂoualmhott.
Oblivious of the secret agreement entered into at Tripoli last May, be-
tween Libyan and Mauritanian representatives, Nouakchott and the Polisario
Front find their accord at Algiers on 5 August. But above all President
Qadhdhafi proposed to send his soldiers into Tiris El-Gharbia which was

to be returned to the Polisario Front in order to help the fighting men
defend it.

But, in spite of the small volume of expected aid and the urgency of
solving certain economic problems, the Mauritanian leaders do not want
to worry. They have decided to tighten their belts.
NATIONAL STUDENT UNION MEETS, DENOUNCES POLITICAL OPPRESSION
Casablanca LIBERATION in French 14-20, 21-27 Sep 79

[New Executive Committee Chosen]

[14-20 Sep 79, p 11]

[Text] The 16th Congress of the Moroccan National Student
Union (UNBM) elected the following members of its executive
committee:

President, Mohamed Boubekri; Vice President, Abdellah Bouchtaoui;
Vice President, Omar Ben Ayach; Vice President, Yahya Bouabdal-
laoui; Assistants to the Vice President: Mohamed Ismaili,
Messaoud Bouich,and Aissa Ben Attabou; Vice President, Larbi

Ben Abdellah; Vice President, Ayouch Mouhcine; Vice President,
Mustapha El Alaoui; Assistants to the Vice President: Hassan
Soussi and Mohamed Benceur.

[Excerpts from Final Resolution]

Representatives of the Moroccan Student Movement, meeting at

Rabat for the 16th Congress of the UNEM from 31 August to 6 Sep-
tember,

1. Reaffirm their determination to carry on with the struggle
on the basis of the principles which have always guided UNBM
during the 23 years of its existence as an integral part of the
people's liberation movement in our country.

2. Affirm their mobilization and declare themselves ready to
defend the integrity of the homeland (...) and ask the rulers

to give over their procrastination, hair-splitting, and the
narrow self-interest that has thus far marked their every ac-
tion in this field, and from which our country has reaped only
diplomatic defeats and a lengthening roll of human victims, all
of which clearly exposes the real inadequacy of the ruling clas-
ses to their task of achieving national unity on the scale

51
required by present-day historical circumstances. Similarly,
they affirm the need for opening military camps to train the
masses, including the students, so that they may prepare to go
to the front of the armed struggle against the mercenaries and
their paymasters. (...)

They further demand the implementation of a global strategy in
which all components of the organized masses of the people may
participate, both so as to consolidate positions and move to the
offensive at the military level, and to link action in the field
with diplomatic action. [They ask] that all this be done along
with all—out military preparation (including consolidation of
our defense potential) and reinforcement of the domestic front.
This can be done only as part of a global mobilization of every
potential our nation can offer, material and human, within the
structure of social justice and participation by the masses in
the decision-making process, in execution, and in control.

3. They remain convinced that the dialectic of events stem-
ming from the national liberation process and the process of
mass struggles to impose its will for true democracy, for social
progress, and for political sovereignty -- that that dialectic
is such as to push the whole of Moroccan society into forward
movement. On this basis, they totally support the struggles of
the working class to improve its living conditions and gain re-
spects for its rights and hard—won prerogatives, and demand

that the rulers rescind all measures taken against the working
class, including layoffs, suspensions, and trumped-up charges.

4. Issue a warm appeal to all the national and progressive par-
ties to join in a broad front to 'truggle against all manifes-
tations of political authoritarianism and the anti-democratic
and absolutist practices which unﬁfy the exercise of power by
the state, thereby forcing:

liberation of all political and labor prisoners, and promulga-
tion of a general amnesty covering all prisoners and exiles;

abrogation of all arbitrary laws and measures which interfere
with individual and collective public liberties;

establishment of true democracy based on respect for the will
of the people and the right of the masses to orient and super-
vise their rulers.

They hail the heroic struggles of liberation movements against

imperialism, Zionism, racism, and reaction throughout the world,
be it in the Arab Middle East where the Arab masses of Palestine
struggle under the leadership of the PLO , the sole legitimate

representative of the Palestinian people, in collaboration with
the Arab masses under the banner of the Lebanese National Move~
ment against American imperialism and its Zionist offspring, or

52
in Africa where the people of Zimbabwe are fighting the Rhode-
sian racists, or again in Namibia and South Africa.

They declare that they stand shoulder to shoulder with these
peoples and their liberation movemehts until they achieve their
goals of national sovereignty and liberation.

0. They consider themselves an integral part of the liberation
movement for democracy that reaches around the world and which
is beginning to overthrow reactionary and puppet regimes on many
continents, achieving initial victories in Iran, Nicaragua, and
Equatorial Guinea and in other countries struggling for demo-
cracy, liberation, and human dignity.

[21-27 Sep 79]
{Report on UNEM Executive Press Conference by Ahmed El Bergmi]

{Text} The executive committee of the Moroccan National Student
Union held its traditional press conference on Tuesday 18 Sep

at the organization's headquarters. Several representatives
from the national and international press and from chancellerics
and liberation movements, as well as a large number of students,
attended the conference, which was called to release a summary
of the work of UNEM's 16th Congress, which restored its struc—
tures to the Moroccan student movement after 6 years under a
ban.

The new UNEM president opened by underscoring the point that
merely holding this 16th Congress, after the arbitrary bah that
had lain upon the UNEM for 6 years, amounted to a crown of vic-
tory for the struggles of the student masses, who stood firm
beneath all the blows rained upon them by local reaction in an
attempt to turn them away from their natural role in the strug-
gle for the establishment of a people's democratic university
and in solidarity with the masses of people who aspire to build
a free and democratic society, banishing forever the exploita-
tion of man by man.

"The legal ban in no way dampened the determination of Moroccan
students to force compliance with their legitimate demands.

The student masses, through their union and through their asso-
ciations, mounted a coordinating action at the national level,
and through it fuelled unified struggles throughout Morocco's
university as a whole. The ban was lifted on 9 November 1978

as a consequence of the Moroccan student movement's struggle

at home and abroad, and of the support given the students by
national and progressive parties, as well as by the active soli-
darity of the international student movement." (...)

53
"The Congress, which brought together 330 delegates and some 160
observers, broke up into several committees including those on
instruction, on organization, on the final resolution, on union
ilrfairs, ate..."

Our serious, democratic discussions, said the UNBM president,
once more gave proof of Moroccan students' deep awareness of
their responsibilities. (...)

0n the matter of instruction, the Congress agreed that the sys-
tem of instruction in our country is a natural secretion of the
economic, social, political, and Cultural situation, which
channels the choices of the dominant class toward the exploita-
tion and alienation of the individual.

The Congress in other action unmasked the education policy in
our country, which is designed to distort reality and to keep
the student in subjection... It laid bare the bankruptcy of the
school system which has clung to the backwardcolonialcontent
it inherited from the protectorate.

Transforming the University

Scoring the repressive and unscientific nature of the curricula
and teaching methods used in the school system, the Congress
emphasized the need for transforming our university into a na-
tional university responsive to the nation's needs, an instru-
ment of liberation from economic, political, and cultural depen-
dence, a democratic, people's university that can welcome all
the children of the common people whom the present class policy
robs of their right to continue their educations. The only

way in which this can come to pass is through scrapping the
selection and elimination system at all levels of education.

Democracy in education will not come about solely with the'
scrapping of the classist school system quantitatively, said
the president; it will also take the establishment of quali-
tative democracy closely linked with the content of the educa-
tion dispensed and the degree of student participation in the
management of their schools and the setting of curricula.

Further, our struggles and that of the national and progressive
parties must be oriented along two main channels, said the UNEM
president:

1. liquidation of the classist school system;

2. building the national democratic university.

5h
Bringing Democracy into the School System

Liquidation of the classist school system can come about only

by bringing democracy into education, and that, in turn, can

be done only within the framework of political democracy for
the nation. And while the latter is necessary, it is not suffi-
cient, because it must be coupled with economic and social de-
mocraCy.

As for building the national democratic university, said the
UNEM president. its aim must be to make Morocco's university

a central beacon for liberating culture. And if the univer-
sity is to accomplish this vital mission, it is imperative that
it be brought out of its present isolation which the rulers
would deepen in any way they could. The university must become
a great forum for the propagation and expansion of education for
the people, the very opposite of the present design of the Moroc—
can university today, which is the private preserve of privilege.
When this is done, our educational system will have taken on its
true national democratic features. (...) This goal can be
achieved only through massive struggle by the people at every
level, in which the UNBM will participate side by side with all
who yearn for change.

Nevertheless, said the UNEM president, until such time as this
goal becomes reality, we must struggle to win the greatest pos—
sible number of material and moral victories for the student
masses, and work to open the road to the democratic national
university.

Concerning organizational problems, the UNEM president announced
that the 16th Congress had done a great deal of work on organi-
zation as a tool for mobilization and struggle, taking into con-
sideration the number of students (80,000) and the multiplica—
tion of campuses as well as the aftermath of 6 years under the
ban. (...) After reaffirming the organization's principles --
progressive, mass-oriented, democratic, and independent -- the
Congress adopted new patterns of organization tailored to the
quantitative reality of the student sector and aimed at con-
solidating participation among the rank and file, effectively
and efficaciously, in the management of the organization, in

the definition of its militant position, and in the mobiliza-
tion of every ounce of its energies to put its resolutions into
practice.

The UNEM president recalled, in conclusion, that the 16th Con—
grcss adopted a general resolution containing the positions of
the Moroccan student movement on a number of issues at the
national, Arab, and international levels. The Congress, he said,
expressed the conviction of Moroccan students that the dialectic
of the events stemming from the process of national libera-
tion, as well as from the struggle of the masses to make the
will of the people prevail in the achievement of social pro-
gress and democracy, is great enough to propel the overall
evolution of Moroccan society forward in the right direction.

"The Congress, with this as its foundation, affirmed the com-
mitment of Moroccan students to territorial unity, expressed
their constant determination to defend the nation's territo-
rial integrity, and called for the opening of training camps
for the masses, students among them, so that all may contri-
bute to the struggle against the mercenaries and their pay-
masters. It also dwelt on the need for abandoning the irre-
sponsible line and the line of narrow self-interest pursued by
those who rule us, and from which our country has reaped only
isolation and diplomatic defeat." The Congress also reaffirmed
its active solidarity with the Moroccan working class in its
struggle to improve its living conditions, respect for its
rights, and preservation of the prerogatives it has won. It
reiterated to those in power its demands for the nullification
of all arbitrary measures (layoffs, dismissals, and trumped-up
charges as a basis for illegal trials) taken against the work-
ers.

A Broad Fighting Front

"And considering that the delegates are aware of the fact that
our country is going through a critical phase in its history,"
said the UNEM president, I'the 16th Congress addressed a mili-
tant appeal to all national and progressive forces to Join in

a broad front to struggle against political oppression, against
the anti-democratic and absolutist practices typical of the be-
havior of the state in our country, and for the liberation of
all political and union prisoners, a general amnesty for all
under sentence, including exiles, and repeal of all the arbi-
trary laws and measures which limit public and individual li-
berties, as well as the establishment of a genuine democracy
based on respect for the sovereignty of the people and for the
right of citizens to direct and control governments...

"And in view of the fact that to Moroccan students the Pales-
tinian question is a national issue, the 16th Congress affirmed
its effective and absolute support for the PLO, the sole legi-
timate representative of the Palestinian revolution in its bit-
ter struggle against world imperialism, its by-product, Zion-
ism, and its ally, Arab reaction."

And inasmuch as the Moroccan student movement is an integral
part of the tidal wave of the democratic liberation movement

56
that is sweeping across the world and which has begun to carry
away before it some of the reactionary and puppet regimes on
all the continents, the UNEM president concluded, the Congress
reaffirmed its militant support for all national liberation
movements fighting for independence, liberation, democracy, and
social progress.

After this summary of the proceedings of the 16th UNEM Congress

in Rabat from 31 August to 6 September, the UNEM president ans-

wered several questions from representatives of the national and
international press.

Hestatedthat the 6 years under the ban had in no way altered
the mass nature of the UNEM, nor will it affect it in any way

in the future, because the Moroccan student movement has assured
its continuity in various forms and through the implacable strug-
gle of the student masses.

To a question from the PLO representative concerning the UNEM's
"Palestine Committees," the UNEM president replied that these
committees are still active and that, in any case, the Pales—
tinian cause is a national cause of the whole Moroccan people,
just as much as is the cause of territorial unity.

The representative from the Eritrean Liberation Front voiced his
surprise at the fact that there had been no mention of Eritrea
in the course of Congress deliberations. But the UNEM president
pointed out that the report on foreign relations deals with the
question, and considers the Eritrean revolution a national liber-
ation movement and therefore voices its total support for the
Eritrean people fighting for their freedom and independence.

The closing resolution of the Congress makes mention of UNEM's
unwavering support for all liberation movements struggling for
independence, democracy, and progress, of which the Eritrean
revolution is indubitably one.

6182
C80: 4400

57
COMMUNIST LEADER PORBSEES DECISIVE DEVELOPMENTS IN NEAR FUTURE
Beirut AL-NIDA' AL-USBU' in Arabic 16 Sep 79 p 12

ﬁnterview with Ibrahim Zakariya, member of the Central Committee of Sudanese
Cormunist Party, by Sulayman al-Dirani, date and place not. given?

[Text] Events in Sudan over the past year have elevated the struggle of

the masses there to the level of open, full-scale confrontation against

the regime in power. Until then, that struggle had been occurring in various
form either among the ranks of the army or in trade unions and in various
areas where the regime sought to stir up ethnic and co-mal strife.

Under the cover of "combatting cumin," the regime mounted campaigns
of mass arrest against compatriots in every area and street; in fact. it
went beyond that to strengthening religious and sectarian groups that pay
homage to it to create the illusion that the struggle that is taking place
is one between these religious and sectarian forces and the patriots and
democrats.

Last month's demonstrations and processions, which were one of the high
points of that confrontation, reaffirmed once again that any hope by the
regime to remain in power will be doomed by the political and economic
scene which engulfs it. Those demonstrations did not stop at demanding a
change in the economic policy of the regime, but they went further to demand
a political change. too. especially a change in the policy of being sub-
servient to the United States, the Horld Bank and the West, as Al-Sadat

has done in Egypt.

AL-NIDA' was able to interview Comrade Ibrahim Zakariya. member of the
Central Co-ittee of the Sudanese Conunist Party and assistant secretary
general of the World Trade Union Federation, to discuss the present situ-

ation in Sudan as follows:

[Question] Khartoum and other Sudanese areas have recently witnessed several
mass protests which added up to a threat to the regiae. How do you see the
development of such a protest movement in the future?

58
III...

[Answer] Before looking downstream to where the situation in Sudan might
lead. it is necessary to talk about the objective conditions which have
caused this situation. As you know, the present economic situation in Sudan
is very poor and has become intolerable. This condition, however, has a
political background which is fully understood by the recent protests which
were mounted by the workers, farmers. and all the professional organiza-
tions, such as intellectuals, doctors, lawyers, teachers and so forth. The
economic situation in Sudan is, of course, not isolated from other condi-
tions there. especially from the regime's political orientation. It is well
known that after the apostasy of 1971, the regime adopted as its basic
orientation a capitalist path with all that means in an underdeveloped
country such as Sudan. The regime opened the doors of Sudan to Arab and
world capital, and provided infinite guarantees for profit and the exploita-
tion of the working force at a time when there is no trade union movement

in Sudan. since that movement was stricken in 1971. This process has led

to the rise of a parasitic class in Sudan--a class that profiteered at the
expense of the popular masses. In addition, it created various social
problems, such as the disruption of educational services and the retarda-
tion of those services to the point where they were unable to cope with the
increase in population and the development of educational concepts and
methods in general. It also created disturbances and disruptions in the
transport services.

Briefly speaking, all those problems are related to the question of profit,
only a small part of which, however, goes to the parasitic Sudanese bour-
geoisie. There are also certain internal problems which have not been
controlled yet, such as the problem of the various nationalities and minor-
ities in Sudan, including the Negro nationalities in the south. All those
actions by the regime were naturally bound to create a resistance, but the
resistance began in a weak and fragmented fashion as a result of the blow
dealt to the national and progressive forces. However, the resistance
movement continued to grow and expand; and events, demonstrations and clashes
with the police and armed troops are a natural demonstration of the resis-
tance which has been building up over the past 6 years. The slogans raised
in most of these protest movements affirm the need for a radical change

in conditions in Sudan and this, of course. cannot be realized except through
the elimination of the present regime.

The Change That the Masses Want

{Question} Therefore, the matter has reached a point where one of the two
parties has to do away with the other. How would the regime face such a

situation?

[Answer] In trying to face the movement which we have talked about, the
regime sought the method of suppression. Prisons now teem with hundreds
of patriots, democrats and coanmnists, as well as members of the National
Unionist Party and leaders of mass organizations of students, workers,
women and farmers. In addition to those suppressive measures, the regime

59
also sought to bring about cosmetic changes in the government and the
Socialist Union, as well as in some official machinery, in the belief that
it can then claim that the government has responded to the demands and
wishes of the masses. But while those changes reflect the crisis besetting
the regime, they cannot dupe or deceive the organized masses because the
change these masses want is to get rid of this regime altogether, that is
to say, the change demanded by the masses is a radical change of the econ-
omic and social policies in Sudan. In this respect, the masses link those
legitimate demands with the foreign policy espoused by the regime, whiuh
is a policy of subordination and subservience to the al-Sadat regime and
imperialist forces.

The pressing problem now is the control Egyptian bourgeoisie and Hestern
domination exercise over a substantial part of Sudan's destinies. Our
regime is no longer able to lead the country, nor is it able to maintain
complete control through intimidation and suppression. This is why we
attach great importance to slogans demanding radical changes in all aspects
of life in Sudan.

[Question] How do you assess the participation of the Hoslem Brotherhood
in the government in the person of their leader Hasan al-Turabi, who is also
a member of the Political Bureau of the Socialist Union?

[Answer] The Hosiem Brotherhood has consistently sided with the regime.

It is well known that they are seeking certain interests and will put their
hands in the hand of any power that would enable them to attain those
interests. The collusion between Hasan al-Turabi and al-Numaryi is nothing
strange. as far as we are concerned. It is useful to mention here that

some members of the Hoslem Brotherhood do not support such cooperation
because they believe that al-Numayri will isolate them from their grassroots
and will cut down their scope of operations in the future.

[Question] Hasan al-Turabi said a short while ago that he is against the
Camp David accords. How do you explain that?

[Answer] The fact is that such statements are an attempt to circumvent
any effort to isolate the HosIem Brotherhood, and therefore they are no-
thing more than a tactical move. We can regard what al-Turabi has said as
part of the balancing role he is playing in the sense that he is a man
walking on two ropes.

[Question] And would the government changes that have taken place recently
apply also to Abu al-Qasim Huhammad Ibrahim?

[Answer] I believe that all these matters are part of the crisis of the
regime. Abu al-Qasim and a group of his associates have tried to pose

as people seeking reforms and an improvement in the people's living stan-
dard. But they are doing that within the general framework of the regime.
which of course would not allow this to happen. Abu al-Qasim and other
members of the Political Bureau of the Socialist Union were, therefore,
acapegoats.
The Army Is Not Isolated From the Protest Movement

[Question] where does the army stand today, especially after al-Numayri
has appointed his minister of defense, 'Abd al-Majid Khalil, as his first
deputy in place of Abu al-Qasim?

[Answer] The appointment of 'Abd al-Hajid Khalil is an attempt to seek
the army's support. But I don't believe that the army, and all its forces
and divisions, is isolated from the masses' protest movement in Sudan,
despite the fact that the regime has tried to tempt its senior officers
with extra allowances. It has also been noted that the army as a whole
will be affected by poor economic conditions in the country.

[Question] Recently, it was announced that the regime has uncovered revolu-
tionary cells inside the army, and it has been alleged that they are com-
munist cells. Previously it was announced that weapons taken from army
arsenals were discovered in certain areas. Do such incidents signal a
crisis within the army?

[Answer] The Sudanese Communist Party's position on the army is quite
clear, and that is that the army should be a support for the progressive
forces in their endeavor to reform and halt the present deterioration in
the country. The Sudanese Comunist Party primarily depends on the genera-
tion of a wide-scale and mass movement supported by the armed forces.

Any talk about the existence of cells within the army is an attempt to
distract attention from the main problem, as well as an attempt to intimi-
date some officers in the armed forces and to put them in line with the
destructive policy adopted by the regime. The party operates in the midst
of the masses and seeks to create a radical change in the country.

[Question] You have said that the regime has not solved the question of
nationalities in Sudan in accordance with the popular will but is using that
question as an instrument to control the country. What is the nationalities
problem and how does the regime handle it?

[Answer] The question of the south is quite complicated. To enter into
its details is equally difficult, but it can be said that the so-called
solution devised by al-Numayri in 1970 with Haile Selassi, the deposed
emperor of Ethiopia, which was called "the Addis Ababa agreement," was
nothing but an attempt to produce a superficial solution which does not

get to the roots of the problem. That is because this agreement had been
reached between the regime of al-Numayri, where all traces of democracy
have disappeared, and separatist elements who do not believe in the interests
of the southemers themselves as much as they believe in their own personal
interests and in serving certain imperialist and Zionist circles. The
southern leader who planned the agreement with al-Numayri is Joseph Lego.
who received his military training in Israel and has not severed his rela-
tions with it up till now. These elements have controlled events in the
south and disavowed the real demands and claims of the southerners--claims

61
for self-expression which would enable the area to develop and that would
maintain the traditions of the tribes as well as maintain the unity of the
Arab and African nationalities. After the signing of that agreement, the
elements which are now in control of the south began to face resistance,
and that resistance is now in full swing. There is another aspect to the
problem, namely that those who participate in the regime in the north and
"represent" the southerners refuse any real reform in the south. They have
exhausted the budget and turned the southern problem into a chronic one.
although in a different form.

[Question] What is the position of the authorities in the south with regard
to the political orientation of the regime?

[Answer] Those separatist elements have opposed the Arab orientation of

the Sudanese regime. In the early days of al-Sadat's treasonist course

and before al-Sadat was opposed publicly. those elements posed the question
of joint cooperation with Egypt with regard to the development of water
resources from the Nile. But after the conclusion of the Camp David accords,
those elements began to support al-Numayri's policies with regard to the
relationship with Egypt, and this has provided a new reason for indignation
in the progressive and democratic circles in the south.

[Question] Some news agencies have reported resignations among some members
of the regional Council of Deputies in the south. What is the relationship
between these resignations and the recent changes announced by al-Numayri
and the crisis in the south in general?

[Answer] It can be said that the crisis of the regime stretches from the
north to the south. The resignations in the southern Council of Deputies
and other suppressive measures taken by the regime are one other facet of
the crisis or the basic contradiction which is intrinsic in the regime and
which has not been solved by the Addis Ababa agreement. We anticipate
that those contradictions will continue to grow and to intensify, and in
fact they have reached the point of armed clashes among the southerners
themselves and among southerners and armed troops from the north.

A Subordinate Relationship With ai-Sadat

[Question] How do you see the relationship between the Sudanese regime
and the al-Sadat regime in recent times and the Sudanese regime's rela-
tionship with the other Arab states, especially after al-Numayri's visit
to Saudi Arabia?

[Answer] Although al-Numayri adopts a policy of complete subservience to
the al-Sadat regime, a subservience which is demonstrated in the inter—
dependence agreements, his relationship with the Gulf states, especially
Saudi Arabia. continues to be intact and has not been affected by his
relationship with Egypt. Up till now the Sudanese regime has depended on
oil supplies from Saudi Arabia, which is interested in maintaining the regime
in Sudan since that regime is looking after its vast investments in Sudan.
In addition, the Sudanese regime has been adopting positions in international
politics which are in keeping with the Saudi-American design. Saudi Arabia
does not want to see Sudan turn into another Ethiopia, and is therefore

providing al—Numayri with full support. The same is being done by Kuwait
and other Gulf states.

[Question] Are there any signs of a popular or official restlessness in
Sudan because of the presence of Egyptian forces?

[Answer] The presence of Egyptian forces in Sudan is seen by the Sudanese

Army as a presence of foreign forces. The presence of the Egyptian forces
is another phenomenon of the subservience of al-Numayri's Sudan to al-

Sadat, and falls within the provisions of the joint defense agreement signed
3 years ago, which allows Egypt to send troops to Sudan at any time and
without a prior request by the Sudanese Government. This occupation, which
is taking place under a pretext of legitilacy through the joint defense
agreement, is rejected by all Sudanese. even by those who support the

regime. Recent reports about clashes between Egyptian and Sudanese forces
in southern Sudan reflect this rejection.

9254
680: 4888
BRIEFS

SAUDI AID 'ro KHARTOUHnThe Sudanese Socialist Union, meeting under Presi-
dent Js'fsr al-Nunayri, has recently adopted resolutions designed to cor-
rect Sudan's economic course, relieving it of restrictions imposed over
10 years of experimentation with socialist solutions. The decisions were
taken shortly after a reappraisal of certain political positions and after
a visit by President al-Numayri to Saudi Arabia at the invitation of King
Khalid. The visit was one of those few visits which acquire special sig-
nificance and during which certain issues were discussed with great thor-
oughness. It has been noted that the first meeting was a plenary one,
whereas two later meetings were confined to President al-Numayri and Amir
Sultan Ibn Abd al-Aziz, minister of defense and aviation, and between the
president and Amir Fahd Ibn Abd al-Aziz. Following the president's return
to Khartoum, reports circulated that the Saudi royal palace had decided

to help the Numayri regime in dealing with Sudan‘s economic situation and
the continuous shortages in supplies as well as military assistance.
According to reports, the Saudi aid consists of a check for $300 million,
which President al-Numaryi illnediately deposited in the Bank of Sudan;

2 million tons of oil, which will begin to arrive shortly; and $150 million

in military aid. [Excerpts] [Paris AL-KUSTAQBAL in Arabic 22 Sep 79 p 16]
9254

cso: 1.802 END

6h