FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10405

22 March 1982

Near East/North Africa Report

[FOUO 11/82)

FBIS FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. "here no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names precede; by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.8. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAMS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP 0?
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTEI FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
NT‘R EAST/NORTH AFRICA REPORT

(POUO 11/82)

CONTENTS
INTER-ARAB AFFAIRS

Arab Aid to Hauritania Outlined
(“ARMS TROPICAUX ET HKDITEWS, 29 Jan 82) .... .. . . .

IRAN
Rhoneyni Seen Influencing Ialaa Internationally
(Jacques Boob; l.‘ EXPRESS, 29 Jan-lo Feb 82).... ...........
Sovieta Said To Be 'Aining at Iran'
(PARIS "Am. 12 yeb 82) 00.0.0000........OODOIOOOOOOCOOOO
IRAQ
Deputy Oil Hiniater' a View on Iranian lie-hing
(Rose: mtthe‘ll; m FINANCIAL TIES. 5 “It 82) e a a e a e a e a a
JORDAN
“rm: OBSERVER' Interviews King Huaayn
(nuuyn Interview; m 033nm. 28 P» 82) . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
MAURITANIA
Increaae in French Aid Planned for 1982
(HARCHES TROPICAUX ET MEDITERRANEBNB, 29 Jan 32) . . . . . . . . .
SYRIA

Diacuaaion on Interview With Preaident Rafi: al-Aaad
(Patrick Sea1e3‘l'll! OBSERVER, 7 Mar 82) ..................
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

INTER-ARAB AFFAIRS

ARAB AID T0 MAURITANIA OUTLIQIED
Paris MARCHES TROPICAUX F113 HEDITERRANBENS in French No 1890, 29 Jan 82 p 256

[Text] The Arab Organization for Industrial Developmnt (OADI), together with
UNIDO and the Hauritsnian Government, has organized the first solidarity meeting
in order to cooperate with the industrial development of the Islamic Republic

of Mauritania, held in Nouakchott from 18 to 20 January 1982. The purpose of the
meeting was to find means enabling countries and Arab development Institutions
participating in it to cooperate so as to promote industrial development in
Mauritania. The meeting examined in detail all proposed projects and modes of
bilateral and multilateral cooperation within the framework of Arab economic
cooperation.

Seven countries attended: Algeria, Tunisia, Iraq, Qatar, Kuwait, Libya and
Mauritania, along with six Arab development institutions: the Arab Investment
Guarantee Company, the Arab Industrial Development Fund, the Arab Organization
for Industrial Development, the Arab Libyan Foreign Investment Company, the Saudi
Development hand and the Islamic Development Bank (103). Finally, two interna-
tional organizations were also present: UNIDO and the W.

The chairman of the meeting introduced the projects proposed in order to promote
industrial, economic and social development in Mauritania: 1) establishment

of a phosphate fertilizer plant; 2). date processing and packing plant;

3) establishment of a foundry in Nouakchott; lo) an agroindustrial sugar com-
plex in Boghe; 5) a sugar refinery in Nouakchott; modernization of the Nouak-
chott slaughterhouse; 7) a handicraft village in Nouakchott; 8) establishment
of a tannery in Nouakchott; 9) a brickworks in Boghe; 10) proposed restruc-
turing of the Ministry of Industry and Con-arcs; ll) establishment of a National
Professional Training Center in Nouakchott; 12) an electric powerplant in Nouak-
chott; l3) s livestock feed production plant in Nouakchott; 14) proposed
construction, repair and maintenance of boats (naval repair yard), at Nouadhibou:
15) development of cottage fishing; l6) establishment of a dairy at Rosso;

l7) establishment of a livestock vaccine manufacturing plant; and 18) purchase
of a Boeing 737.

Mauritania's representative gave a brief report on the nature of the projects and
the objectives of the economic and social development plans, which can be summed

”OFFICIALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

up as follows: optimal utilization of natural resources; substitution of na-
tional products for main products now inported; development of handicrafts and
the establisment of small and median-size industrial units; and the completion
of certain najor projects, such as the sugar and oil refineries.

Discussions and deliberations took place within the four comittees. Host of the
delegations aanifsstsd great interest in the projects submitted to then and pro-

aised to finance either the feasibility study or to contribute to their financing
directly. '

Finally, the nesting reconended that the CAM, UNIDO and the UNDP grant financial
and technical aid to the projects requiring additional financial resources, to
the aaxinun extent they are able to do so.

COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux st Cie Paris 1982

11,464
cso: 4519/119

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

WWI seen mm 181.”! WTIMY
Paris L'EXPRESS in French 29 Jan-4 reb 82 pp 74-77
[Article by Jacques Buob)

[Text] "The world.” said Abdelkrin. "is doainated by two imperialism: capitalism
and communism. why in the world should we submit to those systeas? We have Islam.
Islam is our culture and our roots. It is also a political philosophy. Why should
we give up something that once made us powerful?"

We were walking on the campus with our hands in our pockets because the winter sun
is cool in Tunisia. Abdelkrin is a liberal arts student. He wears jeans and a
windbreaker. Also a heard. but it is a shaggy heard. not like the well-trimmed
ones adorning the faces of those km here as the noel-a Brothers. Abdelkrin is
more of an anarchist.

“or course." I answered, "but if you are taking the Iranian regime as a model tor
developuent. the situation doesn't look very encouraging."

"Don't go so fast. momeyni can be criticized. But his arrival on the scene proved
that Islam could take power-that Western ideologies are not inevitable. He de-
feated the United States! Do you realise that? that a shock in people's minds!“

what is certain in any case is that since lthooeyni. the movement generally known as
Moeleu fundamentalism has won millions of followers. And the cry “God is great.‘I

chanted by nusuins from the tops of minarets. is no longer simply the call to pray-
er that European tourists see as “local color.." It has become a revolutionary call.

It is to the cry of 'God is great“ that the Afghan majahedin attack Moscow's tanks.
that near al-Sadat's assassins fire on the rais. that Syria's Hoslen Brothers em-
plode deadly boobs. that Algerian tundalentalists clash with the police. and that
“fanatics“ occupy the mosque in Mecca.

All the register-progressive or conservative. Marxist or dictatorial-wow tear run-
dalaentalist outbursts. This includer-especiallr-Saudi Arabia. keeper of the holy
places. even though it is the guardian of orthodoxy.

In the space of a few years. the sociopolitical climate in the Islasic world has
changed spectacularly. One can sense it just by wandering around the streets.

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In Algiers, for euaaple. In educated Algeria, which has been pressed into the au-
stere sold of Houari Bo‘nediene's progressive Third lorldism. Bver since independ-
ence, the influence of the omnipresent National Liberation rront (PIN) and its mass
organizations has far exceeded that of the mosques. Per that matter. the only
ones who preached i n then were old fogeys whose sermons were censored in advance.

In Algiers on Pridays, the sidewalks and streets are full of the faithful. The
inams speak. And they are no longer afraid to denounce goverment policy and the
corruption of men or morals. The universities are restless. In the streets. one
can no longer count the nusber of girls wearing the 'hijeb"--the scarf covering
their hair-and the voluminous robe concealing their shape. It is the uniform of
the Islam of reconguest.

This is the second generation of independence. The rm, colonisation, and the war
of national liberation? This generation knows nothing about it, and what is nore,
it is not the least interested.

"You fought the war and won independence? What independence? All you think about
is cars, refrigerators, and Western comfort. You don't even speak Arabic. All
you think about is Franck-the West and in turpitude. You still expect salvation
to cone frat there. You have denied your culture, and you are not even independ-
entl“

That is how one young man talks to his father, who was a nujahed and shed his blood.
In the universities, the fundamentalists have set up places of prayer that may be
transformed into political rostrum-wan easy shift, since in Islam, whatever is
religious is political and vice versa. In the smer, it happens that women at
the beach are set upon. and gangs break into private parties on the pretext that
cassettes by an "obscene" singer are being played. A woman judge (according to
the Koran. a wcuan cannot dispense justice) is the target of vitriol in the street.
Knives for fighting have been found on university premises. And last September,
there were bloody incidents at the Lsghouat oasis, where police had to use force
to evict a group of armed fundamentalists who had taken over a mosque and ejected
its official imam.

I'Playing with a Live Grenade"

mt President Chadli Bendjedid has attempted to win the believers over. He played
on the fundamentalist theme to eliminate the last supporters of Boumediene and the
pro-Marxists surrounding Mohamed Salah Yahiaoui. He has made the pilgrimage to
Mecca twice. He has lifted the censorship of Friday sermons. He has allowed cer-
tain prominent people close to the fundamentalists to enter the government, where
they hold such isportant portfolios as religious affairs, justice. and interior.
The 5-year plan calls for the construction of 160 nosques. an equal nmber of
Koranic schools, 3 institutes of Islamic science, 26 centers of Islamic culture,
and 2 national-and, naturally, Islanicuacademies. 'me Arabization of education,

often anarchic, is finally taking big steps forward.

Will all those concessions to God's side be enough to shield the regime from a
fundamentalist outburst? It is not so certain.

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

For the moment, the Algerian fundamentalist movement lacks a leader. Ahmed Ben
Bella, released after long years in prison and converted to Islamic theses close to
Khomeyni's, might be the man. His wife already wears the hijeb. In any case. he
has understood the enormous political strength represented by the new faithful in
the mosques.

”Chadli has tried to use their support to establish his power, which is still frag-
ile. He has encouraged their progress. But he is playing with a live grenade.
Someday it may very well blow up in his hands.“

Omar poured us another swig of scotch. Below the building on the sidewalks of
Didouche-Hourad Street, there was the crush of people that one sees every evening
in Algiers-all those innumerable Travoltas who still dream of big cars, girls, and
money. Meanwhile, the fundamentalists are becoming structured in the lycees, uni-
versities, factories, and government offices (especially in the sectors of informa-
tion and culture). They are opening judo clubs where they learn to fight. The au-
thorities have orderod them closed. Meanwhile, private individuals bring in some
famous mufti at their own expense to preach in private on the glories of Islam.

"now about you, Omar? You like the bottle and you live it up. In those people's
eyes, you are totally decadent."

"Yes, and totally French-speaking, too--in language and culture. Instinctively.
If they ever come to power, I will be considered one of the real 'depraved of the
earth.’ So anyway, how about another scotch?"

What are the reasons for this return to sources by the young people? They are the
same everywhere. A generation crisis and a mystical crisis, and also a search, in
the face of imported and maladapted ideologies, for an authenticity which coloniza-
tion killed and which decolonisation has not been able to revive. There is also a
crisis with the regimes in power.

Those postcolonial regimes are dictatorships, harsh or mild, and as single-party
regimes or something very close to it, they have stifled all discontent. As a re-
sult, the only place left for free expression has been the mosques, where God's
screen allows everything. One can let fly at President Habib Bourguiba, that agi-
tator who drinks orange juice in public during Ramadan. Or at al-Sadat, who al-
lowed his wife Jihane to be kissed by the abhorred American, Jimmy Carter, in front
of all the world's television cameras.

The lawyer for Lieutenant Istambouly, al-Sadat's assassin, exclaimed: "They are not
assassins! They are angels from heaven!" Behind their zoo grating, the 24 con-
spirators, who are all said to be menbers of the Tekfir Hal Hijra (Excomunication
and Hegira) group, yell and shriek with laughter as they wave their pocket Korans.
No, they are not guilty, because the divine word justifies the murder of tyrants
who do not follow the precepts of the prophet. All they have done is apply God's
word. They have killed the corrupt man who made a pact with Israel, abandoned his
people to poverty, and isprisoned good Moslems. Glory to them! They are certain
of dying. Glory to them! They will go to paradise.

5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"Gave the Hoslems' Hearts Back to Then"

Egypt is the cradle of the authentic Koslen Brothers. The brotherhood sprang up
here in Dhu a1 Qi'da 1347 of the Hegira-that is. in May 1929. It was founded by
a school teacher named aassan el-Banna.

”When I heard his voice for the first tine, I dreaded the lament when he would fin-
ish his speech. In 100 minutes. he took the hearts of the noel-ms into the palms
of his hands and stirred than as he willed. when he stopped talking, he gave the
Mosluas' hearts back to then, but not lune, which remained in his hands.’

Those words. spoken by one of Hassan el-Banna's first disciples, are reported by
Gilles Keppel, a French university student who is currently cospleting a thesis on
the uoslem Brotherhood. They could just as well as have come fro. the lips of those
who not so long ago used to invade an entire neighborhood in Cairo around a poor
mosque to hear the bewitching voice of a blind inan. Friday after Friday. sheikh
Kichk would justify in advance the fall of al-Sadat’s regime. Hassan el-Banna died
on 12 February 1949 at the hands of Gamal 'Abd—al-Nasir's seoret police. Rich): is
in prisom-silenced by al-Sadat, who realised too late that Kichk's monotonous chant
carried a fatal message for him. But Kichk's voice still speaks to millions of
Moslems beyond the borders of the state of Greater Islam. his voice. recorded on
innumerable cassettes whose extraordinary proselytising power was first recognized
by Khomeyni, continues to preach in the deserts and cities on behalf of a strictly
Islamic society in which the Sharir-Hoslem lawuwill be the foundation for every-
thing.

Diploua -Carrying Assassins

Hosni Houbarek. Egypt's new rais, is taking a moderate approach and freeing some of
the Hoelem Brothers interned by al-Sadat, among the: the brotherhood's enir. Sheikh
Telnesani. But the old enir has long been considered a moderate in terns of the
fanaticism displayed by the small groups springing up in Egypt and throughout the
Moslen world. To a certain extent, these 'extremists" are to the Moslem Brothers
what the Baader Gang was to Alain Krivine's Columnist League.

The masters of those groups are not poor illiterates who have been swayed by reac-
tionary theses. No. Al-Sadat's assassins are university graduates who have known
modern schools and studied "Western" subjects. Incidentally, the famous Islanic
Al-Ashar University in Cairo is not the refuge of the fundamentalists. They prefer
the schools of science and medicine.

As they do elsewhere. Listen to this 24-year-old ‘mnisian wonan. She teaches
French. she wears the hijeb. She is engaged. Her future husband does not want
her to work, and she agrees.

“A woman's chief mission is to insure her husband's peace, tranquillity, and happi-
ness and to take care of his household. There are colleagues who can always re-
place me as a teacher. but not as a wife and mother.”

He asked her: "be you feel that there is a biological difference between men and
women?”

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

“Yes. A woman's role. first of all. is to bear children. But also to propagate a
good understanding of Islam: the spark needs only a breath to break into flame. It
must be revived to save this people. Have not the faith and its influence been at
the root of Islamic civilization. which transformed a nomadic people into a con-
quering people?" There passes a picture of the Iranian Guardians of the Revolution.
men in cmbat uniform and wanen in chador, defending Islam's gains with Kalashnikovs
by their sides.

Now to Iondon. In a comfortable hotel room at the Swiss Cottage, Dr Said Ramadan
serves tea and small cakes that a Pakistani brother has brought to him from over
there. Imprisoned and exiled by Nasir and married to Hassan el-Banna's daughter;
he is considered one of the Moslem Brotherhood's most brilliant thinkers.

"Hell, Doctor, what do you think of al-Sadat'a assassins? Were they right to kill
the dictator?”

Ramadan hesitated.

"First of all, you should understand that the grow's nane-w'rekfir Wal Hijra—-is a
pure invention on the government's part. That in itself shows how inf )rmation can
be invented. Those poor guys acted with their heart and their faith. But who can
tell us that the entire affair was not manipulated from the start?"

There was another moment of silence, and then he added: ”The situation is very CwI'
pleat.”

In mid-December, a highly secret meeting of all the Islamic parties throughout the
world was held right here in London. It was attended by representatives of the
Philippine groups engaged in a bloody guerrilla war against the regime of President
Ferdinand Marcos. as well as by Afghans, Syrians. Tunisians, Egyptians, and Saudis.
Iran and Libya sent observers. From Algeria, Ahmed Ben Bella himself kept up with
the progress of the "sunnit meeting" by telephone.

During that strange meeting, there was considerable discussion of relations between
the Islamic movements and the Soviet Union. We had already discussed that question
with Abdelkrim on the campus in Tunis. He had said: ”Listen, we cannot look at
things the same way you do. The enemy here in our regions is capitalism. The
colonisers--the ones who rubbed our noses in the mud—were not the Soviets. They
are not the ones supporting Israel and humiliating the Arabs. Of course, the So-
viets are atheists. We don't trust them. But they are not hereditary enemies.

Not yet. "

At the London meeting. the talk was more or less along the same lines. Except from
the Afghan representatives. obviously.

what was that secret meeting? The embryo of an Islamic terrorist international?

Said Ramadan said: “Do you want me to answer frankly? wen! At the beginning, we
did not know exactly why we were meeting. And when it was over, we still didn't

know why we had met."

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

He repeated: ”The situation is very comics.” And indeed it is for the (authentic)
Moslem Brothers, who, while they have retained definite moral authority and have
considerable financial resources, are being increasingly left behind by small groups
which, like the European terrorists (the ETA [Basque Fatherland and Liberty Group]
or the Red Brigades. for example) are subject to manipulation because of their Very
fanaticism. '

There is no taboo agaimt terrorism in the name of God, and (progressive) Algeria
and Egypt are not exth from it. Neither is secular 'lunisia, which has imprisoned
90 fundamentalist leaders and thinks it has found the answer in reestablishing a
multiparty system that does not exclude the columnist Party. Neither is Morocco
and its extremely wealthy king. In Morocco the phenomenon is latent but already
perceptible. Neither is Syria and its regime with its links to Moscow. In Syria a
real religious war is underway between the Hoslem Brothers, who are being savagely
repressed but who continue to reappear. and the minority Alawite sect to which the
government belongs. neither is Iraq, where theBa'thists are on the defensive. And
neither is Saudi Arabia, whose degenerate princes "spend millions of dollars in the
casinos” and are the 'playthings of 0.8. policy in the region." Those regimes are
all targets for fundamentalists seeking an ideal Islamic society that remains to be
invented.

In an attemt to simplify things, we can identify four major sources of inspiration
and financing for the Hosiem fundamentalist movements.

1. Iran: Imam Khomeyni has never concealed his desire to see the revolution ex-
ported in the name of the Islamic world's recovered pride. Incidentally, his atti-
tude is in total agreement with the Koran. '

2. Libya: Hu'almar Qadhdhafi has never made a mystery of his syspathies for all de-
stabilizing groups, especially those which, lacking his ”Little Green Book," bran-
dish the Koran.

3. The Moslem Brothers: They have now chosen to take power by democratic means and
condemn unjustified violence. But their organisation, dating back a long way and
well accustomed to operating underground, as well as their pan-Islamic ideology and
moral authority, make them a basic element in Islam's fight.

4. And lastly, there is Saudi Arabia, which finances many movements, notably those
that night open a breach in the ”progressive" regimes. In Syria, for example,
where it sends the Moslem Brothers aid by way of Jordan, and in Afghanistan, where
it supports the extremist fundamentalist group known as Hezb—i-Islami.

As Ramadan says, the matter is complex when one realizes that while Qadhdhafi may
well be playing the 1068's game, Saudi Arabia may well be playing that of the CIA.

“Mr Ramadan, in the case of the takeover of the mosque in Mecca, is it not true that
you naturally support those who seized the xaaba and denounced the corrupt power of
the rulers in Riyadh?“

"Sense very good people were involved in that. But there were also agitators. All
of it, incidentally-~as was true of the attupted coup d'etat in Bahrain (see

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

L'mazss No 1591)--served only to bring about a buildup of Saudi Arabia's army and
police. “how does the crime benefit? In the final analysis, the Americans.“

"He's Crazy, But He Pays”

Unless, of course, the Soviets are behind all that. Who is to blow? Very couplex,
Hr Ramadan. All the more since out of all the manipulation and countemnipulation,
one thing is certain. meryone has something to gain from playing with the forni-
dable desert wind that is sweeping the noelem world. It is a very real wind.

hbdelkrim had said: "After all. in all of this, mcueyni was the only one to elude
all the traps set by the superpowers. He threw the. all out."

“Yes, but at what cost? What about Qadhdhafi?"

"Qadhdhafi? He's crazy. But he pays. He was almost successful in January 1980.
when he threw his commandos against Gafsa. But he is not really reliable. of
course, Khomyni is going a bit far. But perhaps that is the price we must pay to
get out of the capitalist-commist pincers.‘

The sun was going down, and it was cool. Abdelkrin got on the bus that would take
him downtown.

“Hell. goodby. See you soon," we said.
"Inch Allah!"

COPYRIGHT: 1982 s.a. Groupe Express

11798
CSO: 4619/51

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
IIIICHNHC1A1.USE(MVLY

IRAN

SOVIBTS SAID TO BE 'AIHING AT IRAN'
Pairs PARIS HATCH in French 12 Feb 82 pp 70, 72

[Text] In Iran, the war is in full swing on all fronts. Against
Iraq, the Army is waging slow and deadly trench warfare. Deprived
of most of its monarchist generals and short of spare parts, it is
all the less capable of wreating a semblance of victory because
revolts are breaking out everywhere in the interior. Kurds, Turko-
mans and Baluchis are openly rejecting the Tehran regime. In Teh-
ran too, a real battle is being fought in the corridors. The fact
is that everyone is preparing for the post-Khomeini era. And the
Tudeh party, csssunist and pro-Soviet, is tirelessly infiltrating
the Islamic state. In effect, the Soviet Union is preparing to
take possession of the old ayatollab's heritage. Bivouacking on
the northern border, it is awaiting the favorable opportunity.

An exceptional occurrence: no executions are planned for next Thursday in Iran.

The turbaned fanatics who surround Khomeini are getting ready to celebrate the
third anniversary of the establishment of the Islamic Republic. But behind the
public show planned for 11 February, an underground battle is in full swing in pre-
paration for the post-Khomeini era. The equilibrium of an entire region of the
world depends on the Outcome of this struggle: either Iran will fall into the Sovi-
et orbit, or else this country will restore friendly ties with the Heat. The es-
sential element of the situation is that the popular support for the regine of the
mullahs is in the process of crumbling, which was entirely foreseeable. Anyone who
knew Iran in the 1960's and at the beginning of the 1970's can testify that this
country was at the opposite pole from religious fanaticism. It was in reaction to
the frantic modernism imposed by the shah that the mosques became the center of re-
sistance. An abrupt return to the traditions of the Shi'ite sect was the only way
of asserting its differentness and of rejecting an American-style culture--that is.
a culture imported from outside. But in 3 years, the Islamic Republic has betrayed
its ideal. Ignorant and intolerant mullahs have monopolired all powers, and today
the hope is no longer what it was. Enthusiasm is now limited to the lowest strata
of the population, the ones that always applaud when gallows are raised.

It has to be said that with regard to executions, the machinery is running at full
steam. Opponents of the regime and representatives of ethnic or religious minori-
ties are being shot peIl-mell every day. Those called smugglers and those accused
of isnoral conduct--drug addicts, pederasts and adulterous women-~are executed al-
so. The local newspapers report these events with the greateat care, and it seems
that one can have confidence in the macabre statistics they present: during hot

10
FOR'OFIICIAL.USE¢XULY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

spells, there may be up to 100 executions per day; in the cooler periods, the fig-
ure may drop to 10. The manner of killing is left to the initiative of the local
committees, who generally find rifles most expeditious. Reliable sources state
that out of every 100 executions, there are at least 10 hangings. As for the tra-
ditional stonings, they are rare, and sometimes an entire week passes without
stones flying and breaking heads. Meanwhile, the war with Iraq continues--a small-
scale war resembling an endless boxing match between two punchy boxers. This con-
flict is exhausting the little that remains of the Iranian economy. Oil is flowing
in driblets. The factories are working in slow motion. Imports are limited to
food products and a few rare spares for military materiel.

All this is sad, but it does not keep Iran from being a great country that today is
in quest of its future. To simplify matters, one may say that there are two camps
that are working behind the scenes. In one of the camps are the petite bourgeosie,
who are called the bazaar, and a certain number of officers seeking their Bona-
parte. There are also tribes who, in the Iranian context, remain importantz-the
Gashgai and the Boyer-Ahmadi of the Shiraz region, the Baktiari of the lspahan re-
gion, the Kurds of the Kermanshah region, the Baluchis of the Pakistan-border re-
gion have had their fill of the terror imposed by Tehran and are opposed at any
cost to the pro-Soviets' pulling the chestnuts out of the Islamic fire.

In the other camp, there is the communist party, which in Iran is called the Tudeh
party and which is infiltrating with all its might, into the religious circles too.
The current president, Ali Khamenei (not to be confused with Khomeini), as well as
the president of the Supreme Court, Mr Ardabili, and the first vice president of
the National Assembly, Hr Khoiniha, are considered religious personalities who sym-
pathize with the Tudeh party. If, at the end of a long haul, the Tudeh succeeded
in getting a sort of national union started, Iran would not take long in becoming a
disguised satellite of the USSR. A number of cogwheels are already in position.
First of all, experts from the Eastern countries appear whenever the surrounding
disorder makes it necessary to call on outside help. Thus, Soviets are found in
the steel industry and the secret police, Bulgarians in the petrochemical industry,
and East Germans in antiaircraft defense. Secondly, the Tudeh party is strengthen-
ing its hold on the civil administration by taking all the deputy-minister and per-
sonnel-chief positions it can get. Thirdly, centralization of the economy is pro-
ceeding at a good clip, and trade relations with foreign countries are now in the
hands of the state offices. Finally, the “Guardians of the Revolution" corps is
growing stronger at the expense of the Army. The number of militiamen is to reach
70,000 by the end of 1982 and 120,000 by the end of 1983. There is even talk of
creating an armored division whose mission would be domestic intimidation more than
combat at the borders.

The most probable scenario is that the communists will not attempt anything while
Khomeini is alive. Rather, they are making ready to take possession of the inheri-
tance once the obstinate old man, already very weakened, has given up his soul to
the God of the believers. If they achieve their ends, the face of the world will
be changed. Nothing more or less than that. Iran has the material capacity to be
the world's second-ranking exporter of oil. In particular, it occupies an un-
equalled strategic position on the Gulf that used to be called, and rightly so, the
Persian Gulf. 0n the other side of this anm of the sea, within reach of a launch,
lise Saudi Arabia, Kuwait and the Emirates.

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOI:0IWW€1AI.[ENE(N§£Y

All this is so clear that the moment has some to pose a question. This question
has nothing to do with human rights; rather, it is inspired by traditional power-
relstionships policy. Here it is: is it proper, from a strategic point of view, to
get so upset about the fate of Poland, which before all these events was already
part of the Soviet bloc, and to be so totally disinterested in Iran, which for it!
part is on the verge of toppling into either one caap or another? Isn't it an ur-
gent natter to aid-~secretly but strongly-those Iranians who would prefer to be
our friends rather than the vassals of their very powerful neighbor who is bivou-
acting to the north of their border? In the current confrontation, to ask the
question is to answer it.

COPYRIGHT: 1982 par Cogedipresse S.A.

11267
680: 4619/55

12
FOR*0FEKJAI.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

IRAQ

DEPUTY 01L MINISTER'S VIEW 0“ IRANIAN BONDING
PH051307 London THE FINANCIAL TIMES in English 5 Mar 82 p 3

[Dispatch by Roger Matthews: "Iraq Admits Serious Bombing Damage to Oil
Pacilities"]

[Text] Baghdad--Iraq has suffered "serious and extensive" damage to its
oil facilities during the war with Iran, now in its'eighteenth month,
which will cost billions of dollars to repair or replace Mr 'Abd al-Mun'im
al-Samarra'i, deputy oil minister, said in an interview here yesterday.

His account was in sharp contrast to earlier Iraqi assessments which had
tended to play down the amount of damage caused by Iranian bombing.

Mr al-Samarra'i said, however, that Iraq's oil exports were running at
about 900,000 barrels a day (b/d). The Syrian, Lebanese and Turkish
terminals had an effective capacity of 1.rm b/d.

The deputy minister said damage had been particularly severe in Kirkuk and
Basra. A wide range of facilities had been bombed in Kirkuk, the main oil
producing area, including degasification plants, processing plants and a
pumping station. Refineries, especially in Basra, had been critically
damaged.

Officials had not yet been able to carry out a detailed assessment, but
Hr al-Samarra'i believed that several facilities were beyond repair. He
was pessimistic about the prospects for the deep-water terminal at al-Paw
which had been struck several times by the Iranians.

More ambitious repair work on facilities in the north may be able to start
soon because of improvements in Iraq's air defence system. However, three
Iranian aircraft which last week attempted the first air raid on Kirkuk since
August 1981 were driven off. The lead aircraft was brought down by a surface-
to-air missile and exploded in mid-air over Kirkuk golf course.

Iraq has received approval from Riyadh for the construction of a pipeline
running across Saudi Arabia to the Red Sea. The pipeline will have a capa-
city of h0m to 50m tonnes a year, and a new terminal will be built to handle
the crude on a site still to be decided.

13
FOR OFFIGAL USE ONLY
' POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Officials in Baghdad want to start detailed design work inediately, but
the project is being delayed by difficulties in reaching agreement with
Saudi Arabia over financing. Hr al~Sesarra'i said the Saudis had not yet
agreed to help with the finance.

Meanwhile, Iraq will continue to press Saudi Arabia for a change in its oil
production policy. "He are in a good position to persuade our Saudi brothers
of the negative effects of what they are doing," he said. Iraq was being
forced to review its own pricing policy as a result of what was happening

on international oil urkets. which was short-sighted and self-defeating

for the producers.

"Saudi Arabia is a sovereign countrv and has the right to produce oil at the
level it wishes. but we must reuind the Saudis as Arabs and ate-hers of the
Organisation of Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) that their policy cannot
be in either their own short-ten or long-tern interests." Hr al-Sanarra'i
said.

COPYRIGHT: The Financial Times Ltd, 1982

080: “00/156

110
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JORDAN

'ruz onsnzvsn' mmvmvs ch uusmm
pmnszs London ma onsénm in English 28 Feb 82 p 10

[Patrick Seale report of interview with Jordanian King Husayn; date and
place not given: "Husayn Offers To Defend Gulf Fran Iranian Subversion"]

[Excerpts] Aman--In an enclusive and wide-ranging interview with THE
OBSERVE, the King [Husayn] who in August celebrates 30 years of rule,
declared that Jordan was ready to participate in the defence of the Gulf.

'He Arabs, alone, can help each other if there is trouble,’ he said. 'At
stake is not only our security but our identity. A super-power,‘ he

added in a dismissive reference to American nilitsry moves in the area, 'can
only intervene if another has already done so, and then it is too late.‘

With the Iran-Iraq war still raging, and a dangerous Iran-backed shia
underground beginning to show its hand as in last December's abortive coup
in Bahrain. problems of security in Arabia loom large in the king's mind.

Last week Saudi Arabia concluded a security agreement with Osan, one of a
network of such agreuents it has been stitching together with its other
fellow members of the Gulf Cooperation Comeilnbahrain. Qatar, the
United Arab hirstea and, before too long. Kuwait.

But the Jordanian view is that such arrangaents between weak states would
be more credible if underpinned by Jordanian military power.

In other words, Jordan is making a bid for 'aaaociate' or 'honorary'
membership of the Gulf Cooperation Council, offering its own rapid deploy-
ment force to douse any future revolutionary fires.

The comander-in-chief of Jordan's armed forces, Sharif Zayd Ibn Shakir,
told me that paratroops in battalion, or if necessary brigade, strength
could be airlifted at speed to any Gulf trouble-spot.

On a visit here two weeks ago. the United States Defence Secretary

Caspar Heinberger hinted the United States might consider selling Jordan
F16 fighters and mobile Hawk ground-to-air missiles.

15
POI OMCIAI. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

This announcement raised such a storm of Israeli protest that President Reagan,

ducking for cover, declared that his defence secretary had brought him no
such Jordanian requests.

Has that the way the King saw it? 'Although we didn't present specific
requests to secretary Heinberger we did, of course, discuss our needs and
requirements. Hhat else does one talk about with a defence secretary?

'He do have a problem. We have a role in this area which we will not
hesitate to play. Israel has access to the best -in the American arsenal.

Some other neighbours have access to the best in the Soviet arsenal. Mean-
while,our own capability is compromised.‘

He added with great firmness: 'He have a legitimate right to seek new
equipment and will pursue the matter and see what the responses are.

Last year, the King bought about 275 British Chieftain tanks with which to
counter Syria's heavy Soviet-built T-72s. lie will also shortly be taking

delivery of advanced, mobile Soviet SAM-8s, effective against low-flying
aircraft.

The King held out the prospect of further purchases from Britain, not only
by Jordan alone but by 'a wider circle of Arab countries'--no doubt a
reference to the possibility that Jordan, Iraq and some Gulf Cooperation
Council matters might buy the Tornado, built by the Anglo-German-Italian
consortium, Panavia.

The Kim's active, even passionate, support for Iraq reflects his strategic
vision of an Arab world gravely threatened by Khomeyni's Iran, in his

view an expansionist, intractable and famtically shia power.

"rhis is not a war between Iraq and Iran alone. Iraq holds the front line
of a conflict effecting the entire Gulf and much of the Arab world beyond it.
Our entire future is at stake.

'An Iranian victory would make the Arabs of no consequence, it would set
Shia against Sunni throughout the area with devastating effect. Fortunately.
Iraq (which has a large Shia population) has not split under the strain

and remains united as a nation.

We have no alternative but to support Iraq to the utmost of our ability.‘

The King's most biting criticism is directed against President al-Asad of
Svria whom he accuses of breaking Arab ranks by ioining Israel in support
of the enemy in Tehran.

So. to shore up the Arabs against revolutionarv Iran. the King would dearly
like to break the Tehran-Damascus axis, and its extension to the Shia
militias of Lebanon.

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

There is little doubt that he would like to see a change of regime in
Damscus. He described the recent fighting in Hamah as 'a popular uprising.‘

But he categorically rejects Syria's charge that he gives help to its
enemies. 'He have never interfered in the affairs of others nor do we
tolerate their interference in our own.’ Last week Jordan expelled the
Syrian military attache and his staff.

On his other flank, the King watches with lounting frustration as Israel
tightens its grip on the occupied west Bank across the Jordan.

For all its international reknown, the PLO has patently lost the battle
on the ground. In despair, activists along the local Arab population are
turning either to the Muslin brothers or back to the secular violence
preached by the popular front leader George Babash. A few collaborators
have rallied to the Israelis.

Moderates such as the King cannot give a lead so long as the United States
turns a blind [eye] to Mr Begin's expansionism.

'Hhat is American policy in relation to their very clear and explicit
constituent? the King asks in real anger.

'If America has torn up security council resolution 242, if it has given up
the struggle to effect an Israeli withdrawal. it would be the biggest
disaster imaginable. '

COPYRIGHT: The Observer Ltd 1982

C80: [MOO/156

17
FOR OFFIOAI. USE ONLY
FOR OHIO“. USE ONLY

HAURITANIA

INCRBASB IN FRENCH AID PLANNED FOR 1982
Paris WES IROPICAUX ET MEDITERRANBENS in French No 1890, 29 Jan 82 p 256

[Text] Prom 1981 to 1982, French aid to Mauritania will increase from 20 to 36
million French francs, according to an announcement made by French Minister of
Cooperation Jean-Pierre Cot, who, along with Maj Ahead Ould Minnith. Mauritanian
minister of foreign affairs and cooperation. presided over the first meeting of
the French-Mauritanian joint commission on cooperation held since the army's
overthrow of President Ould Daddah's civilian regime in July 1978. The meeting
took place from 21 to 23 January in Rouakchott.

Several Mauritanian projects will be financed by France. Got added. particularly
a proposed international co-unications earth station and a transit center in
Nouakchott. These projects are the first phase of a plan to modernize canoni-
cations infrastructures in which Rance intends to participated, he said.

Scientific and technical cooperation between France and Mauritania was also exam-
ined, particularly in the field of fishing. and a couaittee will meet in March

to set up a research unit in the sector._ In the meantime. the fruework agree-
ment is to be signed with the BBC. Cot said he had received assurances from Mauri-

tanian authorities concerning the continuation of the activities of French fisher-
men in Mauritanian territorial waters. _

Lt Col Mohamed Khouna Ould liaidalla, Mauritanian chief of state. met with Jean-
Pierre Cot on 22 January. The letter said after the meeting that he had "noted
agreement between France and Mauritania on almost all problems discussed, mainly
the matter of the western Sahara."

Cot also visited the Nouakchott Lycee, a technical institution financed by
France.

COPYRIGHT: Rene Morena et Cie Paris 1982

11,464
050: (619/119

18
maomauustontv
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SYRIA

DISCUSSION ON INTERVIEW WITH PRESIDENT HAFIZ AL-ASAD
LDO70848 London THE OBSERVER in English 7 Her 82 p 15
["Secure al-Asad Blames 0.8. for the Bitter Battle of Hans" by Patrick Seale]

[Text] Fresh from the carnage of the Hams uprising-the great internal
threat to him in almost 12 years of rule--President Hafiz al-Asad of Syria
is a relaxed, confident, even jovial men.

For good reason: He has won. In an exclusive, 2-hour interview with
THE OBSERVER last week, he said: 'Tell my enemies that my health is robust
and my will is firi.‘

Dr Henry Kissinger, in the latest volume of his memoirs, describes sl-Asad
as 'proud, tough, shrewd, cordial.' Apart from good health and determina-
tion, these are the qualities which have kept al-Asad at the top in Syria
since November 1970-and near the top since 1963, when the Ba'th Party
seized power. He is likely to stay in the saddle for some time.

Far from overthrowing al-Ased by sparking off a popular revolution, the

Muslim brotherhood has suffered a grave defeat. Its stronghold has been
flattened and hundreds-if not thousands--of its best fighters have been
killed or captured. Like losers everywhere, it has forfeited public

support.

Doubtless it is still capable of sporadic acts of terror, but the lesson of
Hams is that the strategy of urban insurrection does not work in Syria.
Only if a substantial part of the army, of his own 'Alawite community,
turns against him will al-Asad be overthrown.

For the moment, he maintains control, firstly, by his grip on the Ba'th
Party's military wing. the reel center of power; secondly, through a country-
side, well-oiled network of patronage, jobs, perks, handouts and favours;

and thirdly by means of a powerful security and antiputsch apparatus.

The strength of his Muslim opponents lay in the real grievances of the
population which they managed to mobilize: disgruntlenent at widespread

l9
FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE(MNLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

profiteering by government agents; brutal repression of dissent by
Rifaat al-Asad, the president's brother, who heads the regime's special
forces; and the daily vacation of roadblocks and security checks.

The weakness of the Muslim brotherhood is that few Syrians would like to
live under an ayatollah-style goverment. In the past 30 years Svria has
been largely renshaped on secular lines. The rising generation has known
no other society than that of the Ba'th. which tomorrow celebrates

19 years of power in Syria.

In the fighting at Hana. the readiness to die of the Muslim brothers was
met with an equal readiness to die by defenders of the regime.

In the interview, the president laid the blame for llama squarely at the
door of the United States. Making his clearest accusations yet, he said:
"I have no doubt that this was an American intelligence operation. I have
proof of U.S. involvement. It is three sorts.

'Some of the criminals have confessed their contacts with 0.5. agents.
Secondly, at llama we confiscated advanced col-unications equipment. and
other equipment of Anerican origin, which could only have reached the
criminals with U.S. approval and through the channel of 0.8. agents.

V'Thirdly, it was the State Department-An obvious collusion with Muslim
brotherhood groups abroad-which first broke the news of the Hana fighting.‘

(Although the insurrection started en 2 February, news of it reached the
outside world on 10 February when, simultaneously a State Department
official in Washington and a spokesman for the Muslim brotherhood in Bonn
revealed it.)

with heavy irony. the president speculated: 'Perhaps the United States does
not consider that its terrorist acts in Syria come under the heading of
international terrorism, which it seems keen to combat in other parts of

the world."

For his part. he promised tOugh treatment for those he sees as agents of
the United States. "American lackeys have to be crushed."

Al-Asad believes the United States wants him overthrown because of his
opposition to Camp David and to open the way for a peace settlement leaving
Israel in possession of occupied Arab territory. "The United States and its
agents in the area thought they could make Syria knee]. to Israel's will."

Syrian relations with America have generally been edged with mistrust. The
nearest the two countries got to friendship was in May 1977 when

President Jimmy Carter met al-Asad in Geneva—a meeting which left al-Asad
with the 'good and positive' impression that America would take Syrian
interests into consideration and help bring about an 'honourable' peace.

- 20
' FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Deter iora t ion

Then disillusion set in. 'anat has happened since has made us increasingly
certain that the United States has no policy in this area; rather there is
only an Israeli policy which the United States is carrying out.’

While it is true that al-Asad continues to make himself available to American
visitors--he saw Philip liabib, President Reagan's special envoy in Damascus
last week—there is no doubt that llama has resulted in a further sharp
deterioration of relations with the United States.

he farther al-Asad moves from Uaahington, the closer he gets to Moscow.
'Our relations with the Soviet Union, already good and friendly, are
strengthening steadily,"he said.

The Soviet presence in Syria is apparent but, it seem, not resented--
although about a dozen Soviet technicians have been murdered by al-Asad'a
Muslim opponents. The Soviet Embassy is the biggest embassy by far, and
the awassador, a long-serving diplomat, has the greatest access to the
president of any foreign envoy.

western diplomats estimated there are about 2,500 Soviet military advisers in
Syria, under the comand of a lieutenant-general and concentrated in air
defence and electronic warfare. The Russians are supplying Syria with as
many tanks as it can absorb, and it is generally agreed that its armed
forces are stronger today than at the time of the 1973 war.

Soviet-Syrian closeness found expression in a treaty of friendship signed in
October 1980. Al-Asad agreed to the treaty. after a decade of hesitation.
in reluctant recognitionthat. faced with an American-backed Israel. he
needed a big brother.

But al-Asad remains his own man. and there is no evidence the Russians dictate
his regional moves. He did not comult them when, in a cool show of nerve,
he moved ground-to-air missiles into Lebanon's Beqaa Valley last spring,
restricting Israel's freedom in Lebanese skies. Menachem Begin has vowed

to destroy the missiles, but they are still there.

'He are where weare," the president saidﬂie are present on Arab soil, in a
fraternal Arab comtry. Neither Israel nor anyone else has a right to
intervene. But if we are attacked, we will fight back. '

On the wider Arab-Israeli issue, al-Asad sees no future for a negotiated
settlement so long as Begin remains in office. 'Since Begin refuses to give
any territory back, on what can we negotiate'I'

Al-Asad seems to put his faith in an Egypt restored to anti-Israel belligerence
and a revival of a two-front strategy. 'Bgypt is part of the Arab nation. It
will return to the Arab fold-without strings. Its cause is the cause of

the Arabs, its stand is the stand of the Arabs.‘

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

He added: '1 have known President Mubarak very well for a long ti-e'nboth
are forner air force comanders and both trained in Russia-c'but there has
been no contact between us since he tool: over the preaidency.‘ (Sous other
Arab countries have made furtive contacts with Egypt, still officially beyond

the pale.)
Three constants determine Syria's relations with its neighbours.

One is that Syria feels it alone stands in the way of an Israeli walk-over, that
it is the only active champion of Arab rights, the guarantee that Arab dignity
will one day be vindicated. Many an Arab would echo the president's

assertion: 'I have no doubt, even for a sinute, that we will regain our
rights, no matter how long it takes.’

A second constant is the conviction that Lebanon, Jordan, and what is left

of Arab Palestine, belong historically to Syria and fall within its natural
sphere of influence.

The third is that Syria is the geopolitical heart of the region, that nothing
can be done without it, that it is the maker of peace and war.

Al-Asad has been notably stubborn in affirming Syria's importance. The
visitor leaves his presence convinced that no diplonstic initiative which
onits Syria fron the equation can succeed.

COPYRIGHI: The Observer Ltd 1982

(280: “00/156 END

22
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY