APPROVED FOR RELEABE: 2007/02/00: CIA-RDPOZ-OOOO0R0O01000800004
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R0001000300584

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/8355

37 March 1979

TRANSLATIONS 0N NEAR EAST AND NORTH AFRICA
(FOUO 10/79)

U. S. JOINT PUBLICATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-OO850R0001000300684
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books. but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief. indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
nation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.8. Government.

COPYRIGIT MRS AND REGULATIONS GWERNING WRSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED REREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED MOFFICIAL USE ONLY.
W w e 5
open an
27 March 1979
__
No.
L

. Peeler-Bu Omanirmoa Name and Addteaa I0 Prekel/Tulz/"ollu can he

Joint Publications Research Service

1000 North Globe Road
Arlington. Virginia 22201
”- TV” 0‘ “'99“ ll Pen“
Coveted

 

       
        
   

l2. Span-«in. Organization Nana and Menu

      
    
   
     

Aa above
'3. Supplementary Nona

“II“.

he aerial report contains information on aotio-economic, government, political,
and technical developments in the countries of the Near East and North Africa.

. Kay Condo and ore-eat Aaalyaia. e. Deactipton

Political Science __Inter-Arab Affairs _Libya __Sultanate
Sociology Lﬂorth African ___Nauritania of Oman
Economics Affairs _X__Horocco _Syria
Culture (Secial Sciences) _Afghaniatan ___People'a Demo- __‘runiaia-
Ethnology Lingerie cratic Republic __Unitcd Arab
Geography ___Bahrain of Yemen Emirates
Technological __£gypt __Peraian Gulf Lweetern
Military Sciencea _§_ Iran Area Sahara

___lr'aq ___Qatar ___Yemen Arab

m Umilﬁm/Oun-l-dtd Tm" ___larael __Saudi Arabia Republic

___Jordan ___Spanish North

_l(uvait Africa

_l.ebanon ___Sudan

m. comm Vicki/Creep 50, 5c, SK, 15
I.Avai|aboluy Statement I . Serumy Clan (lhu 2|. .\o. 04 int"
For Official Use Only. "'91.” . A , 24
Limited Number of Copies Available From JPRS. -. PYYMLW‘ m m
'N H F .

oom- unavaa 10'7- a-m w... ...” “u. ...... .. ...... uocnvu-nt non-en
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/8355
27 March 1979

TRANSLATIONS 0N NEAR EAST AND NORTH AFRICA
(FOUO 10/79)

CONTENTS

NM AFRICAN AFFAIRS

Saharan Var Causing Deteriorating Conditions in Morocco .
(Said Oald mum AFRIQUE-ABIB, l9 Feb-14 Mar 79)..'.

MOI-31A

Press Charged with Slanting News
(APRIQUE-ASIB, 5-18 Feb 79)

Eris mgazine Interviews Iranian Leader Ayatollah smri'at
Mndari

(Ayatollah Shari'at mdari Interview; AL-Hm
m'm1,9mn) COOOOQOOOQOOOIOOOCIOOI.....0....

Iran Called Hope of Contemporary Islam
(Bichem DJait; mm: AFRIQUB, 7 Feb 79)

“(110000

Treatment of Moroccan Political Prisoners Criticized
(Christine Jouvin; ammun-Asm, 5-18 ht 79)

Moroccan Trade-{him Problems Discussed
(Our Nasser; AFRIQUE-ASIE, 5-18 Feb 79).............

1979 Budget Reflects Selective Austerity Policy
(moans momcmx 3r mum, 2 Feb 79)

upended Cooperation Hith Rance in Tourism, Sports
(mac- 'raoncmx 81' mum, 9 rbb 79)

Briefs
Expansion of hroc-Phosphore

-a- [III-NeaA-izl
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100030058-4

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

COMENTB (Continued)
Hm SAHARA

Briefs
Khomeyni Supporting Poliaario

- b -
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-ROP02-00850R000100030058-4
FOR OFFICDUaUBB 033!

NORTH AFRICAN AFFAIRS

SAHARAN WAR CAUSING DETERIORATING CONDITIONS IN MOROCCO
ﬁaris AFRIQUE-ASIB in French 19 Feb - h Mar 79 p 18

[Article by Said Ould Khelifaa "The Polisario in the Square"]

[Text] At a time when, within the framework of the ”Operation
houari-Boumediene," the Liberation Army of the Saharan People
is carrying the war into southern Morocco, the social situation
continues to deteriorate in the Cherifian Kingdom.

The series of strikes which have successively affected urban
and rail transportation, the mining sector and the communal
civil service, have Just won over various sectors of the teach-
ing profession as well.

The permanent confrontation for which the University and the
secondary schools have been serving as the theater of operations
has come to an end, in fact, oecause of the mobilization of most
of the professors. The latter have decided to Join the struggle
being waged by the working masses, and this in spite of the en-
deavors of the USFP [expansion unknown] administrators to mini-
mize the effect of such an action.

The efforts of Attorney Bouabid to dampen the confrontation,
which is winning over ever increasing segments of the Moroccan
people, could not help but fail, moreover.

The most capable demagoc, even if he were a member of the "oppo-
sitien," could not indefinitely cover up a social reality that
has in fact become untenable for the maJority of the Moroccan
people.

When the Cherifian monarch entered into secret compacts with
Madrid and Nouakchott for the division of western Sahara, the
multinationals had made a run for this windfall. Hessan II had
had the Saharan phosphates flaunted before them, a "goldmine’
which the Atkins and Partners Corporations (of Great Britain)

1

FOR OFFICUUJUSE ONE!
FUR OFFICUUaUBE ONLY

and SONASID [expansion unknown] (of France), among others had
proposed to convert into alaouite ore. Ryad, a financial back-
er of the Chorifian Monarchy, was to make a large contribution.

Today the desert adventure has turned out badly, and the taste
for Saharan phosphates has suddenly become too bitter for for-
eign investors. What is more, the repressive regime established
in the Saharan territories has not given the king the least guar-
antee of control in that area.

The Moroccan soldiers have never been able to venture out of
their camps in western Sahara without running the risk of fall-
ing into an ambush set by these whom Rabat calls the ”hordes of
a certain Polisario I-‘ront.’I The oflicial circles, of course,
refuse as usual to recognize that the latter is a structured
force in its own right, and that it constitutes the spearhead of

a people whom secret diplomatic bargaining had tried to dispos-
sese from their territory.

But this stubborn refusal has itself become ridiculous. Every
day it is sanctioned by the large numbers of leaded caskets be-
ing returned to the families of the deceased with the single no-
tation: "Accidental death.“ All these "accidents" have one de-
tail in common: the impact of a bullet.

The Moroccan people are not feels; the Palace is multiplying its
visits to Mobutu, Sadat, ﬂange and their associates to try to
find as soon as possible the most advantageous solution to the
impasse into which the king has maneuvered himself, especially
since Nouakchott has been showing evident signs of hesitation on
the subject of pursuing the Saharan affair any further.

When the Mauritanian president, Ould Saleck, let it be known that
he wanted to negotiate directly with Saharan leaders, the Court
tried, by all the means in its power, to make Nouakchott toe the
line.

Quite recently once again, the Mauritanian "Numero Uno" declared
in the columns of an Algerian weekly, for the benefit of the Sa-
harans: "Have confidence in us, for we feel your sufferings as

deeply as if they were our own." (Interview granted to ALGERIE
Ac'ruau'rs) .

For their part, the Saharans, by carrying out the most bloody
raid ever suffered by the soldiers of the PAR [Royal Armed For»
ccs], on the Moroccan town of Tan-Tan, have just struck a heavy
blow at the abusive propaganda constantly used by the Rabat Gov-
ernment. And the progressivist circles confirm that the shock
even shook the Throne seriously. The underhanded royal intrigues
directed against Algeria (the setting of bombs in Haghnia and

2

ﬁllCﬂ?ICDU.USB ONLY
RXiOFFTCDu1088 ONLY

Oran, the parachute drops of arms at Cape 51311), from this point
of view only confirmed the disorder reigning in Rabat.

Today the fact of the Saharan people can be neither denied nor
passed over in silence. At a time when dautitution and war are
accelerating the deterioration of the social climate, will ﬂas-
een 11 still be able to hush up much longer a truth which will
henceforth assert itself by the force of name?

COPYRIGHT: 1979 Afrique-Asie

8117
050: hhoo

3
HR OHHCUU.UBECWLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ALGERIA

PRESS CHARGED WITH SLANTING NEWS
Paris AFRIQUE-ASIB in French 5-18 Feb 79
[Unattributed article: "French-Algerian Relations"]

[Text] Tendentious campaign seeks to twist facts to give
political coloration to commercial transaction.

The slanted interpretation-—on the part of a certain segment of the French
press-of the recent accord concluded between SONATRACH [National Company
for the Transport and Marketing of hydrocarbons] and a French-Italian
consortium, made up of Technip [expansion unknown] and 2M [National hydro-
carbon Agency] for the equipment to be used in the natural gas liquefaction
installations at the third plant in Arrow, with an annual capacity of

15.75 billion cubic meters. was condemned in strong terms by Algerian
government circles in a commentary from APS [Algerian Press Service]. The
first contract involves F356 million and the second one involves P2.5 billion
in the form of a purchaser loan as well as SAOO million in the form of

an open loan.

Addressing itself directly to the article by the Algiers correspondent of

the daily LE HONDB, APS declared that. if one were to believe that newspaper,
the conclusion of the recent accords between SONATRACH. Technip. and EN!

is nothing but the result of two factors: on the one hand, the rejection,

by the American administration, of two Algerian gas sales contracts; on the

other hand. the impossibility of getting the financing for the Gut-3 [expansion
unknown] complex which Algeria now faces.

"In other words." APS noted, "LE HONDE intends to hint to its readers that
SONATRACH was made to deal with a French enterprise after the doors had

been closed to it everywhere else." Now. Algeria, many months ago, definitely
sold, on American and European markets, all of the volumes of natural gas
indicated in the program which it had drawn up and which it launches 5 years
ago.

As a result of this situation, which was known to all experts in the field
and all obserVers, "except of course those at L: HONDB," the decisions of

h

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
F01! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the American administration last month. the moment they were officially
announced, had already been outdated a long time ago and could not
influence the progress of a gas program of Algeria. a program which taken
its course in a normal manner and in its entirety."

'v the mean time, the construction contract for the Gut-3 complex, which

it involved here, was signed 2 years ago with the Foster Hhtelcr enterprise
and the selection of Technip was made within the context of this contract
03 which it is only a part since its purpose concerns only the choice of
the liquefaction method. "In second plac-," APS added. "LE HONDE itself
admitted, just a few weeks ago, the moment SONATRACH got a commitment from
several banking consortiums, for financing loans coming to $2.5 billion
American dollars,that Algeria had no difficulty in getting the financing
necessary for the implementation of its development program."

The fact is that SONATRACH only had to choose between firm offers coming
from Japanese, western, especially French, American. and Canadian, banking
organizations: "If it is the French offer which was definitely picked."

APS notes, "this is simply because this offer provided the best grouping

of technical, commercial, and financial renditions, apart fron any political
consideration of any kind whatsoever." Besides, it is significant to recall
that, for the past 3 weeks. SONATRACH, one by one. signed four contracts

all of which pertain to the sale and processing of gas, with Japanese and
American enterprises, which won the orders as part of an international
competition in which French enterprises were also involved. including
Technip. The four contracts, completely financed by Japanese and American
banks and loan institutions, amount to $1.2 billion.

"Why, then. try to twist the facts," APS asks itself, "in order to give any
kind of political coloration to a transaction whose processing never went
beyond the bounds of the economic and commercial field? We have learned to
hear French commentators attribute any trade agreement between Algeria and
non-French enterprises to hostility on the part of Algeria. He have also
increasingly heard them interpret any success by a French enterprise on the
Algerian market as a kind of commercial surrender by Algeria.

"Do these commentators have so little confidence in the commercial aptitude
of French enterprises to try to make us believe that they are incapable of
winning orders solely on the basis of the interplay of economic and commer-
cial factors? Or did they yield once again to that mania which dominates
them in their vision of Algerian-french relations. a mania which handicaps
them to the point of rendering them incapable of envisaging the development
of trade between France and Algeria other than according to the scheme of
their unfulfilled dream, the dream of an Algeria on its knees. at the feet
of a triuaphant France?"

cormcar: 1979 Afrique-Asie

5058
C80: 6600

5
son orncm. use ONLY
I'OR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

IRAN

PARIS MAGAZINE INTERVIENS IRANIAN LEADER AYATOLLAH SHARI'AT HADARI
Paris AL-HATAN AL-‘ARABI in Arabic 9 Mar 79 pp 38, 39 JN

[Interview with Iranian religious leader Ayatollah Shari'at Hadari by Paris
Bazzi, correspondent of AL-HATAN AL-‘ARABI, in QumP-date not given] '

[Excerpts] [Question] You eminence, what is your opinion of the current
circumstances in Iran?

[Answer] The first thing the revolution did was to get rid of the monarchy
for good. This is one of the revolution's major achievements. The corrupt
edifice has been demolished. The revolution is new setting up a new edi-
fice to replace the old one.

[Question] As you know, it has often been said that there are differences
between you and Aytollah Khomeyni. It is said that you agree on objectives
but differ on tactics.

[Answer] Khomeyni was abroad while we were here. Therefore. he had the
freedom to make statements while we did not. We faced the tanks and fire.
Also, due to the lLLk of contact, we could not coordinate our stands;
hence, the difference in tactics. The differences, of course, are on sec-
ondary matters. We have agreed on the objective right from the beginning,
as for press interpretations, this is another matter.

[Question] Iran is facing great challenges not only in building the new
state but also in the continuous attempts to destroy the institutions of the
previous government. How do you view the outside dangers that are continu-
ously threatening the state?

[Answer] Outside challenges are not that ﬂaportant, although we are aware
of their danger. The Iranians who succeeded in facingtheshah's regime.
which was backed by outside forces, have achieved a big victory. They will
certainly be able to face such challenges and triumph over them. what con-
cerns us most are the internal changes; in other words, the economic prob-
lems left by the previous government. Economically, we are almost bankrupt.

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
[Question] There are accusations that the United States has links with cer-
tain departments and forces inside Iran and that it is lying in wait for the
new regime. What do you say to that?

[Answer] Such accusations could be true of both Heaters and Eastern powers.
But we do not have any official evidence proving thattheUnited States con-
tinues to interfere in Iran's internal affairs. At any rate, the Iranians
are always alert to the danger of outside interference.

[Question] It is understood that certain internal forces, both leftist and
nonleftist, have opposed new appointments in the army. These forces have
demanded that they be included in the Revolutionary Council and the govern-
ment. Hhat is your opinion on that?

[Answer] The revolution is living its first days and going through its first
phase. Therefore, it needs a long time to strengthen and stabilize. If
there are demands to participate in the government. these will have to be
considered at a later stage, not now, but after the revolution has become
relatively stable. Furthermore. there is bound to be opposition to recent
appointments. As you know. leaders do not descend from heaven. The cause
for this opposition and hue and cry is that the government is not yet strong
enough to take things under control. This gives others the opportunity to
declare their opposition, whether it is justified or not. He admit that
this opposition is one of the main problems facing the government, but it
doesnotconstitute a big danger. It is a problem which can be solved.

[Question] "hat bases doyouconsider essential for building a strong and
independent Iranian army. and is there a possibility of diversifying the
sources of armaments for the new army such as obtaining arms from the
Soviet Union?

[Answer] As you know, almost half of the army men have returned to their
barracks. The new army will be built qualitatively and quantitatively. In
the past, the people and the Ulema did not consider the army and armed for-
ces as part of then. The army was alien to the people. In the past also,
citizens did not join the army out of desire or conviction. They were driven
to the army by special circumstances as is the case in many developing coun-

tries.

Now that the army belongs to the people, citizens will join it out of a

true and complete desire and conviction and also out of their faith in the
defense of the homeland. This time. the army will be of the people and for
the people.

Regarding the second part of your question, the arms now available in Iran
are more than we need. Our differences with the United States. for in-
stance, do not mean that we refuse to use U.S. arms. If it becomes neces-
sary in the future to purchase other types of weapons which we would need,
the government would purchase them from any source which the government
believes would serve the interest of the people.

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Question] Some of the news media believe that Iran is heading toward an
Islamic dictatorship.

[Answer] If an Islamic republic is established in accordance with the teach-
ings of lslam--and this is shut we are striving for. God willing--euch a
republic will not be a dictatorship. but will be ruled by the people.

The institutions of such a republic will be established through free elec-
tions. Democracy in this republic will not be like Western democracies. but
will be similar to then. In Islam. the people are the source of power. They
will freely elect their representatives who, in turn. will appointthe govern-
ment. Thus it will be a popular government. If we are naming it the Islamic
republic. it is because the basic law of this republic will be derived from
the teachings of Islam. Islamic justice is against dictatorship.

[Question] Allow me to ask your opinion on certain matters related to Iran-
ian foreign policy. "hat kind of support will the Iranian revolution give to
the Palestinian revolution, for instance; how do you view the current talks
to solve the Palestine question peacefully?

[Answer] Iran is currently going through difficult and cx.tical circum-
stances. It may need assistance itself. Therefore. our assistance to the
Palestinian revolution will be within the limits of our circumstances and
,reaources. Regarding the second part of your question. we only understand
’peace to mean the removal of aggression. There was no state on the map
called Israel that negotiations would be held with it for everyone to
achieve his own rights. In our opinion. peace will be achieved when the
usurper ends the usurpation.

[Question] How will the new Iranian regime deal with the question of Dhofar.
where Iran had forces stationed?

[Answer] The revolution has announced that Iran will not henceforth play
the roie of policeman which it undertook under the shah. Iranian forces have
been withdrawn from Dhofar. and this demonstrates the revolution's position.

[Question] A final question. your eminence. what will be the fate of the
agreements which the shah concluded with neighboring states. especially the
agreement to supply gas to the USSR in return for the development of the

Iranian iron and steel industry?
[Answer] Re adhere to international law and will not go against it. He will

consider these agreements in light of the Iranian people's interests and
then decide their final fate.

COPYRIGﬂT: Al-Hatan al-‘Arabi. I979
650: 6802

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

IRAN CALLED ROPE 0P CONTEMPORARY ISLAM
Paris JBUNE Al’RIQUE in French 7 Feb 79 pp 77, 73

[Article by ilichen Djait, Tunisian historian: "Iran. the hope of Contenporary
Iain")

(Textj I as neither Iranian. nor an I an Iranian affairs expert. hut I an
an intellectual of Muslin origin. having retained a profound Islsnic
sensitivity; I spent 15 years of ny life studying the civilization of Islam.
studying it. thinking about it. Reflecting on the future of Islam. nodern
Iran, Turkey. and Islamic India were at the focus of Iy concern because

this is where the dilems of the old world first were confronted with

Restern nodernity. This in why the Iranian tragedy is so profoundly interesting
to It. This is one of the gigantic historic events which. noreover. was
absolutely unexpected. If this action should succeed in founding an Islamic
govern-ant. this will be proof that it is possible to reconcile the spiritual
aspect and history (contrary to the case of Russia. Japan. and Chine), rather
than going beyond the western model. If it fails in feet then this will be '
magnificent evidence. valid for all humanity. Neither Nasserisn. nor pseudo-
liharalisa, nor Marxis- ever seened to ac to be operative for the world of
Islam I always thought that Islsn should find in itself the principles

for its renewal and it should also thus constitute a universal exaeple. Now.
Sunnite Islaa and Arab Islan proved incapable because they are ritualist and
nationalist but without any intellectual content and the Arab world after all.
since the Onayyads never sssued responsibility and sovereignty. This is

a world that is too old and too new at the sane time. a world whose cultural
aspiration has been extinct for a long time.

Europeanirat ion

As for turkey, there is nothing to hope for there. The Otto-an hpire never
developed a culture. It was doninant. scattered military. bureaucratic.

too close to luropc. Turkey succunhe-. to the tceptation of narrow nationalis-
and the temptation of Europeanisation.

Because the shah blindly «barked upon the road of depersonaliring nodes-nits-
tion, be cut the Iranian nation off from the rest of the thali- world and

9
roe onicm. use om
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

from its most authentically assumed essence. He must be happy that this
return of Iran to its own Islamic identity is not being accomplist according
to an unbridled road of religiosity but rather as a revolution issuing from
the depths and nevertheless a well-thought-out. slow and synthetic revolution.

Iran was the second element of a bipolar civilization. the Arab-Islamic
civilisation which one should actually cell Arab-Persian civilisation. when
that civilization. in the process of its development. reached clessiciss
(9th-llth centuries). this was due to the combined action of the Arab
element end the Persian element.

Islamic Desocrecy

Through conquest. the Arabs founded a vest unified domain; they introduced
their language end their religion. The Persians. on the other hand. fertilized
this civilization through their techniques. their experience in government.
their intellectual and artistic output. It is also wrong to say that grand
Islam was above all Arabic or above all Persian. Both of them were needed

at the ease time-because Iran was a central nucleus of grand Islam. because
it was never colonised. because it is Shiite. because it experienced its
Islam in isolation end said lack of contort-due to linguistic distance and
the modernist iaecinetionubecaueo. finally. it is a structured country. a
real country. a rich country. because of all that it in tact represents the
primordial test of contemporary Islam. Finally. the real problem is posed
here specifically, the problem of relations between tradition and modern tines.
between history and values. and. finally. the possibility of a Muslim state
to emerge from childhood by seeing itself as such. After all. there is a
Christian democracy in Europe (Italy. Germany. postwar France). who can
deny that the principles of the French Revolution are not the transposition
of the principles in the Gospel? why not dress of a democracy of the Islamic
type in our case? Nothing cospsrable to it exists in Saudi Arabia end in

the. Arab countries in general. where they are satisfied with reactiveting s
narrowly interpreted thcocrecy or. quite simply. bringing back good old
oriental despotism. But something that would assure fundamental liberties
and alternation of the teams in power with the necessary-momenipuleted
approval of the majority (the prime elements in any democracy). all of that
guided along an Islamic direction: values of solidarity. brotherhood.

links with the past. a blueprint for social justice. the ethics of austerity.
a passion is: culture. Just look at Christianity: through its metamorphoees
it produced the early Church. with its simplicity. as well as Byzantium. with
its pomp and its cruelty. as well as the medieval systes and. in the end.

the cur-gent of Christian democracy which itself is diverse and varied.

In the current situation in Iran. Islam is pulled by a powerful popular
current but it is also inspired by a desire for unanimity. by the spirit of
reform. by a positive vision of the government. The entire world is conspiring
against this movement which I do not believe. for the moment. will be
retrograde. The United States to begin with. but also the Soviet Union and
China. the Hestern intellectuals are silent. with a few exceptions. because
the problem is beyond their usual mental patterns. The Arabs also [are

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

eilent] either because they think they cen mopolite Inla- or beceuee.
on the left. they exiet. vitbout knowing it, in the nerreveat intellectual
dependence on a certain ﬂeet.

The world cannot do anything againet the indoaiteble will of a people. but
only thoee revolutione succeed which the old etructuree help in conic;
about by egreein; to fade avey theeeelvee. The blunt eervice which

Reta Pahlevi and the aupportere of the ineriel order could render would be
detinitely to fade away. leaving Iran to ie furore, to ite hopee. and to
in new destiny.

COPYRIGHT: Jeune Mrique GRUPJIA 1979

5058
680: 6400

1.].
FOR OWICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONIJ

MOROCCO

TREATHEﬂT OP HOROCCAN POLITICAL PRISONERS CRITICIZBD
Paris AIRIQUB-ASIS in French 5-18 Feb 79 p 36
[Article by Christine Jouwin: "Hho Remembers7"]

[Text] Many are the ignored martyrs of the popular
struggle. Returning fros Morocco. a French woman
silitant talks--so that they will not be forgotten.

Because he was unable to get the proper care. Brahia Zaidi hes just died of
sickness. held in a cell. The doctor and the male nurses remained deaf to

his appeals. as did the warden of Lahlou prison at Rabat to whoa. 6 days

before his death, Zaidi had addressed a letter beginning with this traditional
Arab phrase: "It is a pleasure for me to address myself to your benevolence..."
(letter reproduced in Bulletin No 9 of the file "Died in Prison" of the
Committee for the Fight Against Repression in Morocco).

He died after spending 6 months in the Rabat civilian prison and after
being held secretly for b years "within the earth." as he himself put it.
frequently tortured. blindfolded. in handcuffs.

Brohim Zaidi end his comrades are an old story: the story of the armed
uprising of 3 March 1973 in the Middle Atlas at Dar Bou Azrs. and in the
high Atlas. at Goulmise. The repression which the insurgents of 3 Harch
underwent and continue to undergo was ferocious. The victims. it is true.
were recruited not so much among the college students and intellectuals but
rather among the little people--all of these specifically "unclassifiables"
in the rural areas and the slums of the Third Uorld who in the and rise

up in revolt.

The struggle against repression apparently does not escape class prejudices.
Did we really worry u lot about the fate of the hundreds of peasant families
who during that year of 1973 were forcibly removed from the Kenifra region
in order to be kept for many years in hangers at the airports of Anfs.
Casablanca. where many died and wany were born. uprooted and in the most
complete desolation?

12
FOR OFFKCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Did we nehe it sufficiently clear that we aetinete the nunber of 1973
prisoners at 3,000? Did we tslk enough about the "hot" executions during
the nonths following the uprising end the "cold" executions following
thereafter. in the sunner of l97h? Like that young history professor.
Maliani. ny colleague at a high school in Houley lsneil. who was executed
after the governesnt had taken 2 years to think about that.

Did we talk enough shout the incredible Kenitrn trial in 1973 at the end

of which the "acquitted"--joy£ully and with relief awaited by their teniliee
end their lswyers--were taken away the nonent they left the court end were
put into canvas-topped trucks. only to return several nonthe leter. end
without explanation. for s new trial?

Torture Houses

Scores of persons. perheps hundreds. are fighting, disappearing, or dying

in Morocco-sone of then after the 1965 nntiniee at Casablanca. others
following the ettenpted coupe d‘etet in 1971 and l972-i£ they are not still
held "in the interior of the land." in the basements of torture mansions.
in the convict prisons in the South. until death relieves then.

urchin Zaidi is deed. Many other political prisoners in Moroccan prisons-
both official and eecret--are fecing the risk of meeting the one end. Hhet
are we doing in the West and in all of the countries that unconditionally
support the regine of Heston It so that human dignity any no longer be
trenpled under foot in Morocco?

COPYRIGHT: 1979 Afrique-Asie

$058
050: “00

13
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MOROCCO

MOROCCAN TRADE-"RIO" PROBLEMS DISCNSSED
Paris AFRIQUE-ASIB in French 5-18 Feb 79 pp 36. 37
[Article by Omar Nasser: "Crisis in the Unions"!

[Text] In the context of n political, economic. and
social conflict, who will benefit from rivalry between
the UHT [Moroccan Labor Federation] and the CDT
[Democratic Labor Confederation]?

After having been stifled in the name of "national unity" for several years.
popular struggles resumed in horocco carried forward by entirely new
dynamics. The absence of any program capable of bringing the crisis under
control. slowing inflation-whosa repercussions are enormous for low-incose
people incapable of coping with the constant rise in prices on daily
necessities-and putting an end to the increase in unemployment. which now
involves 1.3 million persona-all of these factors have placed the Moroccan
political parties in one of the most critical positions. Faced with the
difficulty of defending their own interests against the dissffection of the
masses, they tried to establish new types of relationships with their

militant rank and file. necessarily going through a revival of the demand
movements.

As far as political strikes are concerned. the leadership groups had to

reckon with a rsdicalist current, aimed at a refusal of compromises and

a rejection of any attempt at a justification of the current situation.

This certainly emerged very clearly during the congress of the USP? [expansion
unknown] that all elements of this political crisis were expressed most
clearly. The CDT thus blamed responsibility for the decline of labor union
congresses upon the "bureaucracy" of Hshjoub len Seddick (UHT) which,
according to it. is incapable of elevating the worker struggle to the level
of concerns aroused by the widespread and seriOus economic and social crisis.

' The CDT went even further in underscoring the crumbling of the political and
labor union base of the USP? which it blames on the reformist line of
Abderrahim Bouabid.

11.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In line with its positions. the cor has been an element of by no nsans
neglible pressure upon the other political and labor union organisations
which were accused of losing the confidence of the leases. ‘lhe particularly
severe tone of the political resolution of the USP? congress. as well as

the wave of strikes sweeping over the Sherifian kingdo- beer witness to this
new labor union awareness.

work stoppages began last Rove-bar at Casablanca with the strike oi the
urban transit drivers. This love-eat extended over wore than a week end
paralysed the transportation network. The authorities tried to break it up
by calling in the intercity buses but that only created other probleee.

As a letter or tact. the lack of experience of drivers not used to driving
in the city caused uunerous collisions. in particular causing fatalities
among a group of school students. An agreement was finally signed with the
strikers on 15 December but the authorities did not abide by that agrees-ant
end the strike novenent resuned shortly afterwards.

Sahara Proble-

llowever. the nest important strike in the history of Horocco undoubtedly was
the strike of the railroad workers which began on 4 January and which ex-
tended over 16 days. Triggered in response to an appeal fro: the redicsl
current of workers at the National Railroad Company, this strike was eiesd at
winning a lS-percent wage hike. The authorities decided to give in, on the
condition however that this wage hike be node in two increeents of 7.5 per-
cent, each. Parallel to that. other work stoppages were recorded in the
national education institutions throughout the territory.

Osrtain observers were afraid however that the rivalry between the two
labor union headquarters would only play into the hands of the governeent.
lndesd, the latter might be tempted. in one way or another. to turn this
competition to its own advantage in order to get a breathing spell for
itself.

Although it is seriously influenced by the econoeic and social crisis. the
doeeetic situation nevertheless is affected by the problem of the Western
Sahara whose solution could help lead to a "new democratic way." contrary

to what Abderrahie bouabid said in his report to the administrative co-ieeion
of the US”.

Finally. the events in Iran undeniably have a direct effect on the regine
in Rabat which currently, it scene, 1': looking for a new policy better
adapted to the situation.

It is certainly not the shah (when liaison I! recently received at harrskech)
who can otter good advice because he had to flee his own kingdo- after the
revolt or his people.

COPYRIGHT: 1979 Mrique-Asie

5058

080: “00 15

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

HDROCCD

1979 BUDGET REFLECTS SELECTIVE AUSTBRITY POLICY
Paris HARCHBS TROPICAUX ET HEDITBRRANEENS in French 2 Feb 79 p 257
[Article: "Morocco's 1979 Budget"]

[Text] Faced with e difficult econolic situation. the Moroccan authorities
were prospted to adopt for the budget of fiscal 1979. the subject of the
finance law of 30 December 1978. a policy of selective austerity applying
both to operating expenses and capital outlays.

Public expenditures which repreeented an ieportant element of the expansionary
program of the 1973-77 period with an everage growth of 35 percent a year were
thus reduced for the current year to a level that is sore coepatible with the

possibilities of financing. Sieilarly. capital outlays have been lisited to
cowering projects initiated before 1978.

Such financial austerityahouldhelp reduce the deficit in the external current
account. The downward revision of the general ieport program has already had
as its effect to reduce by 25 percent the negative balance of foreign trade:
6.2 nillion [sic] Moroccan dirhams in 1978 coepared to 8.5 billion [sic] in
1977. Repatriation of the savings of migrant Moroccan workers nsde it pos-
siblc to reduce the deficit of the external current account to 5 million [sic]
dirhaes in 1978 coapared to 8.2 billion [sic] in 1977 (down about 60 percent).

The government continues to be the principal investor end the programs are
for the seat part conditioned on the securing of outside assistance. an

alternative which in the years to cone will add to the size of the public
debt.

Comparison of the two general budgets for 1978 and 1979 is thus as follows
(in sillione of dirhane with one dirhem equal to 1.10 Prench francs.
approximstely):

1978 1979
Revenues (estimates) 19.078 19.566
Expenditures 19,477 21,558
Estieeted deficit - 399 - 1.99‘
16

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The various supplementary budgets (Port of Casablanca. other ports, the
radio-television network, and the Government Printing Office) total. in
terms of revenues and expenditures. 1.1 billion dirhams (1 billion in 1978).

The anticipated tax revenues in 1979 are represented by direct taxes-3.5
billion dirhams (up 0.3 billion); customs dutiea-2.6 billion dirhems

(down 0.3 billion); domestic consumption taxes and sales taxes--6.8 billion
(up 0.8 billion): profits from the Moroccan Phosphates Office--0.6 billion
(down 0.5 billion); the yield from domestic loans and capital equipment
bouds--0.8 billion: inflows Eros foreign borrowings-5.5 billion dirhama
(these two revenues being identical to those in the 1978 budget).

As for us expenditures are concerned a comparison of the two budgets for
1978 and 1979 is as follows (in nillions of dirhams):

1978 1979
Operating expenditures 9.669 10.622
Investment credits 8.128 8.736
Servicing of the public debt 1,880 2.200
Total 19.477 21.558

The increase in operating expenditures was restricted over-all to 13 percent
compared to 1978. The major allocations are earmarked to the Ministry of
Education and Training--3.l billion dirhems (up 0.0 billion); the Ministry
of Defense-~2.l billion (up 0.2 billion): the Ministry of lnterior--l.6
billion (up 0.2 billion); the Ministry of Pinance--1.1 billion (unchanged);
the Ministry of Agriculture and Agrarian Reform-0.6 billion; and the
Ministry of health--0.5 billion.

As regardscspital outlays--8.7 billion dirhams for fiscal 1979 divided
principally among the ministries of Finance, Defense, Equipment and
National Revival, and Education and Training--aupp1ementary credit authori-
zations were made for 1980 (7.3 billion dirhams) and 1981 (2.7 billion).

Special Treasury accounts--3.b billion dirhams in revenues and 3.8 billion
in expensea--include an allocation of 0.8 billion dirhams for capital
participation in several companies (1.2 billion in 1978).

The finance law for fiscal 1979 introduced several modifications of a fiscal
nature tending to increase budgetary revenues and encourage real estate
construction. These changes bear essentially on the points listed below:

1. Levying of a 10 percent tax on the interest on foreign loans effected
for the financing of Moroccan road transportation enterprises.

2. Granting a uniform 50 percent rebate to holding companies. the rebate

henceforth being applied on the net profit pertinent to the return on capital
and no longer on gross income.

17
son OFFICIAL use ONLY
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

3. Increase fron 3.000 to 6.000 dirhans a year of the tax exsnption on
salaries and wages and amendment of the range of the tax schedule free 12
to 65 percent divided into brackets (instead of iron 6 to 36 percent).

6. Increase of the steep dues from 4 to 10 percent on the paysent of duties
levied by the custols adninistration and doubling of the special tax on
autonobile vehicles with diesel engines (with the exception of pick-up type
vehicles used in the agricultural sector).

5. Exception for 5 years (instead of 3 years) free the municipal tax on
housing built after 31 December 1978. This period is extended by 5 additional

years at the rate of 50 percent of the said tax for buildings slated for
rental.

6. Reduction of registration dues on the acquisition of vacant lots slated
for the construction of personal dvellings.

7. Refund of interest to enterprises contracting loans free the National
Housing Center for the construction of housing for profit in the franevork
of approved programs.

COPYRIGHT: Rene Horsux et Cie., Paris. 1979

2662
050: £600

18
ton orncm. use 0qu
FOR OFFICIAL 083 ONLY

nonocoo

EXPANDED COOPERATION HIT" FRANCE IN TOURISM, SPORTS
Paris MARCMES TROPICAUX ET MEDITERRANEENS in French 9 Feb 79 pp 310.311
[Article: "Cooperation with France for Tourism and Sports"!

[Text] Morocco and France concluded on 1 February 1979 in Rabat an agreement
calling for the development of bilateral cooperation in all fields connected
with tourism. It was signed on the French side by Jean-Pierre Soisson.
minister of youth. sports. and leisure. and on the Moroccan side by Azzeddine
Guessous, minister of tourism.

Under the terms of this agreement applicable for 5 years. the two sides set
up a joint comittee of experts slated to meet annually, alternatively in
Paris and Rabat. for the solution of all problems susceptible to hinder a
harmonious development of this cooperation.

Jean-Pierre Soisson. who during his visit met several Moroccan officials
including the prime minister. Ahmed Osman. and the minister of foreign
affairs. M'llsmed Boucetta, also held on 1 February 1979 in Rabat a working
meeting with Abdelhafid Knriri. Moroccan minister of youth and sports. with
whom he studied measures likely to extend the cooperation between the two
countries in the field of sports and sports medicine. During this meeting
Minister Soisson promised to send to ibrocco shortly teams of doctors with
various specialties as well as technical and pedagogical advisors regarding
the youth.

Minister Kadiri outlined the needs of his country in the fields of sports
medicine. the training of Moroccan sports cadres and trainers, and develop-
ment motivation workers for youth. To meet this need Jean-Pierre Soisson
proposed notably the following measures:

1. Establishment: of institutional cooperation between the [French] National
Institute of Sports and Physical Training and the [Morrocan] Royal Institute
of Sports.

2. Involvennt of Moroccan physicians in the promtion of a new sports
medicine field in the context of the recent agreements signed between the
ministry and Paris V university.

19
son orncm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

3. Increase of the funde earmarked to technical assistance in the field of
training of development motivation workers for youth.

5. Joint study of the problem of extracurricular sporta developaent activa-
tion workers. especially in the countryside.

Presiding with Jean-Pierre Soiaaon at the inaugural seating of the joint
Moroccan-French couittee. Atzeddine Gueasoue recalled the effective con-
tribution of the Moroccan tourist industry to balancing the balance of
payments account (1.5 billion dirhaae in 1977). to the creation of direct
and indirect jobs (5 percent of the aconoaically active population. that is
about 250,000 jobs). and to the groan formation of fixed capital (1.3
billion dirhans during the last S~year plan for 1973-77).

(1)“lesz Rene Moreux at Cie.. Paris. 1979

2662
(:80: M00

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MOROCCO

BRIEFS

EXPANSIOR 0F HAROC-PHOSPHORE--liaroc-Phosphore [Moroccan Phosphorus Colpany]
has just signed major agreements for the realization of so-cslled "fourth
line" projects. These projects have the following goals: To increase the
production capacity of the Haroc-Phosphorc I plant from 659,000 tons of

P 205-grade phosphorus to 660,000 tons of same year; to rebuild the fusion.
filtration, and storage facilities {or solid and liquid sulfur of the whole
of Haroc-Chinie, Marco-Phosphate I. and Haroc-Phosphorc II so as to centralize
the output and fusion for all the three plants. For this purpose Morocco
secured loans from the World Bank and from Poland. [Text] [Paris HARCHBS
TIDPICAUX ET MEDITERRANEBNS in ?rench 9 Feb 79 p 311] 2662

cso: 4400

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
M OFFICIAL USE ONLY

WESTERN SAHARA

BRIEFS

KHONHYNI SUPPORTING POLISARIO--Befere leaving France for Tehe-
ran, the Ayatollah Khomeyni held a lengthy interview with a
large delegation from the Polisario Front. He allegedly geVe
than “concrete" assurances en the subject or support from the
government which he would subsequently appoint, support for the
Saharan conbattaats in their struggle to regain their rights to
independence. All the attempts made by King Reason 11 to try
te negotiate with the Ayatollah were in vain: “For we," the
Iranian religious leader confided, “the two kince are alike:
they oppress, exploit and massacre their people.“ It is gone-
rally expected that once the new Government in Teheran is sta-
bilized, it will recognize the Polisario Front and later the
Saharan Republic. This will mean one more success, and a con-
siderable one, for the Polisario leaders. [Text] [Paris
AFRIQUE-ASIE in French 19 Feb - 1: Har 79 p 7] 8117

080: huoo END

22
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY