FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10331
18 February 1982

Near East/North Africa Report

(FOUO 7/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[J are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the U.S. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/l
18 Pebru
NEAR EAST/NORTH AFRICA REPORT
(POUO 7/82)
CONTENTS
EGYPT
Excerpts From Book of Prominent Leftist Lutfi al-Khuli
(AL-"ATM AL-‘ARABI, various dates) .......... ...............
IRAQ

Iran's Novenber Offensive Discussed
(Renal Hasan Bukhayt; AL-HATAN AL-‘ARABI, 18-24 Dec 81).....
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

EGYPT

EXCERPTS FROM BOOK OF PROHINENT LEPTIST LUTFI AL-KHULI
Paris AL—HATAN AL-‘ARABI in Arabic 16-22, 23—29 Oct, 5, 6-12, 13-19 Nov 8i

[Article: "Chapter Prom Lutﬂ.a1-Khuli's New Book: 'Al-Sadat Political School and
Egyptian Left'; Al-Sadat: Those with Him and Those Against ﬂim"]

[16-22 Oct 81, pp 48-50, 55-56]

[Text] AL—HATAN ALP'ARABI will, as of this issue, publish in series a chapter of
Lutfi al-Khuli's new book which will be published shortly under the title of "A1-
Sadat Political School And The Egyptian Left." In this chapter, the author answers
a large number of perplexing questions that continued to accompany al-Sadat from
the time he assumed power in Egypt after President Jamal 'Abd al-Nasir's death to
the time when all political forces with their various inclinations, united against
his domestic, Arab and international policies and the time when he finally fell
with the bullets of a fedayeen [commando] group of the Egyptian army.

The series deal in succession with al-Sadat's tactics in insuring his assumption of
power with the unanimous consent of all the national and progressive forces in 1970,
with his managing to gain exclusive control of power in the face of the early
opposition forces which preferred to confront him from within their positions in

the regime's bureaucratic agencies, without the participation of the masses. This
is what became known as the so-called "centers of power" which were headed at the
time by 'Ali Sabri, the vice president of the republic, in his capacity as the
"head of the ruling Hasirist group." The series also deal with the causes and
motives for al-Sadat's manipulation of Egypt's policy from the July 1952 revolution,
from the Nasirist line, from pan-Arabian, from the Palestinian issue and from the

position of nonalignment to what became known as the May or al—Sadat revolution.
to the open-door'economic policy, to alignment with the United States, to antagoniz—

ing the Arab national movement and to concluding peace with the Israeli enemy.

Lutfi al-Khuli--by observing and analyzing a number of events to which he himself
was a witness or in which he was a participant, events most of which are revealed
for the first time--follows carefully the movement of events in Egypt from the
early 1970's to answer the big question concerning the emergence of the new,
harmonious and fundamental national opposition force from its positions in the
socio-political street against al-Sadat regine. This emergence led to intensifying
the comprehensive confrontation between the two sides in a manner which made the
political observers record the confrontation very carefully, especially in the wake
of the large-scale campaign of arrests launched at the beginning of last September.

FOR1OFFNJA1.USE(NNLY
rUh Urrabatu- v0... Una-L

This is the "extraordinary" event which led to the astrangement between the regime
and all the vital forces in the Egyptian society. This is also the event which
opened the door to numerous expectations, the most prominent being the comparison
between al-Sadat regime in Egypt and the shah's regime in Iran.

Lutfi al-Khull, who is known for his national and progressive political activity
throughout the past quarter century, had concentrated, with the aid of the editorial
staff of AL-TALI'AH magazine whose chief editor he was from 1965 to 1977, on
studying al-Sadat's political steps with all their details and dimensions and
studying what al-Sadat had told him confidentially in the numerous meetings be-
tween the two men which continued until 1975. In dealing with "al-Sadat
phenomenon,” al-Khuli has employed the instruments of objective analysis as a
researcher in a political laboratory and has ended up crystallizing the concepts,
goals, and technology of what he calls "al-Sadat political school" and its move-
ment which constitutes a retrogression from the march of Egypt's national and pan-
Arab history. In this study, al-Khuli had expected al-Sadat to embark after the
October war on concluding a separate peace with Israel under the auspices and
support of the United States. This expectation came a full 5 years before the
peace was concluded.

In the same method and inside the political laboratory, al—Khuli has also dealt
with the phenomenon of the comprehensive opposition to al-Sadat regime-—opposition
launched at the outset by the leftist forces with their various intellectual
sources.

Lutfi al-Khuli was the chief editor of the Egyptian AL-TALI'AH magazine which al-
Sadat shut down in 1977 in the wake of the well-known popular uprising which
covered all of Egypt on 18-19 January of that year. He is a member of the Central
Secretariat of the National Progressive Unionist Grouping Party and a member of
the lOObman committee of the National Coalition Front. Last March, he was elected
a member of the Journalists Union Council and headed the committee to defend the
press and unionist liberties. He was banned from writing and publising in ALP
AHEAM as of 1976 even though he is a member of the Editorial Council, a political
commentator and the man who founded the paper's Opinion Page in 1962. President
al-Sadat ordered his arrest as part of the campaign which he had launched against
his opponents a month before his assassination. But al-Khuli escaped arrest be-
cause he happened to be abroad at the time for heart treatment. Al-Khuli has been
arrested more than once and he has written numerous political and literary books.

When President Jamal 'Abd al-Nasir died in September 1970, the part of the regime
floating on the surface of the Egyptian arena consisted of a number of "legitimate
institutions" in which the main positions were held by personalities that had been
always eager to declare their full abidance by the July 1952 revolution with its

Nasirlst concept and course that were embodied in the 1962 National Action Charter

and the 30 March 1968 program.

None of those personalities had been known to hold an opinion or a position,
stated or implied, conflicting with the position or opinion of Jamal 'Abd al-Nasir
until the time of his death. If it so happened that one of them declared a posi-
tion on an issue before 'Abd al-Nasir had made his decision on the issue (and this
rarely happened), then the individual involved quickly changed that position to
make it compatible with the opinion on which the "chief" had decided.

2

FOR OFFICIAI.USI§CH'LY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

It so happened that when Washington declared in 1970 the so-called "Rogers initia-
tive" to solve the Middle East crisis, 'Abd al-Nasir had been preparing to visit
the Soviet Union. Re preferred at the time to delay declaring his position toward
the initiative until after the end of the visit. But Anwar al—Sadat, the then vice
president, hastened--in the face of urgent questions raised during meetings of the
Socialist Union--?o declare Egypt's rejection of the initiative, replying on the
general line followed by 'Abd al-Nasir in his relationship with the United States.
But as soon as 'Abd al-Nasir decided to approve the initiative, Anwar al-Sadat
changed his position, continuing the performance of his duties as vice president.

At the top of the institutions left by 'Abd al-Nssir's regime emerged the "presiden-
tial institution, which, upon the death of the "chief," belonged temporarily to
al-Sadat in accordance with Article 110 of the constitution in his capacity as the
sole vice president. Since his sudden appointment to the position on 20 December
1969 until a new president was to be elected within a period of no more than 60 days.

Under the canopy of the presidential institution lied the leadership of the Arab
Socialist Union, the sole political organization ruling the country. This leader—
ship was embodied in the Supreme Executive Committee formed of Husayn sl-Shafi'i,
'Ali Sabri, 'Abd al-Muhsin Abu al-Nur, Dr Mahmud Pawzi, Dr Labib Shuqayr, Diya'
Dawud and Kamal Ramzi Istaynu, in addition to Anwar al-Sadat who succeeded 'Abd
al-Nasir to the chairmanship of the committee and the chairmanship of the Council of
Ministers (the executive authority) after 'Abd aIJNasir's death.

within the framework of the Arab Socialist Union leadership, the union's organiza-
tions in each of the two governorates of Cairo and al-Cizah in particular occupied
a special place because of their "massive popular membership" which was relatively.
active and effective on the Egyptian political arena in comparison to the Socialist
Union organizations in the other governorates. 'Abd al-Majid Farid, the secretary
general of the presidency, was in charge of the Cairo organization while Parid

'Abd al-Karim was in charge of al-Cizah organization.

The People's Assembly (the legislative authority) emerged within these institutions.
All its members belonged to the Arab Socialist Union and its speaker was Dr Labib
Shuqayr.

The "armed forces institution," if we may use the phrase, came under the direct con-
trol of the late President Jamal 'Abd al-Nasir after it had been purged of the
elements produced by the conditions and complications of its defeat on the hands

of Israel while under the command of Field Marshal 'Abd al-Hakim 'Amir who pre-
ferred to commit suicide after his abortive coup attempt. 'Abd al-Nasir had

focused the greater part of his time and his efforts on rebuilding the armed forces
and preparing them, with massive aid from the Soviet Union. to "restore what

Israel had usurped by force." assisted by Lt Gen Muhammad Fawzi, the minister of
war and the general commander, and by Lt Gen Muhammad Sadiq, the chief of staff.

Heirs of Decision

in addition to all this, a number of personalities that had gained an influential
position in making and implementing the political decision held important posi-
tions in the structure of the regime as a result of their presence within the
narrow circle of trust surrounding the late President Jamal 'Abd al-Nasir. Foremost

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

among those personalities were: Dr 'Aziz Sidqi, the deputy prime minister and
minister of industry; Mahmud Riyad, the deputy prime minister and minister of
foreign affairs; Muhammad nasanayn Haykal who held the position of minister of
information in addition to that of chief editor of AL-AHBAH: Amin Huwaydi, the
minister of state; Muhammad Pa'iq, the minister of state for foreign affairs;

Sami Sharaf. the minister of state for presidential affairs who also held the
position of director of the late president's office for long years; Muhammad Hafiz
isma'il, the chief of intelligence who replaced Salah Near who had held the posi-
tion for long years and who had been relieved from this position after participating
with Field Marshal 'Amir and Shams Badran, the minister of war during the 1967
war, in the coup attempt in the armed forces; and Maj Gen al-Laythi Naaif1 the
commander of the republican guard which had turned into a military force, with
resources exceeding its traditional function as a mere guard force, and into a
force trained to confront and fight any coup attempt.

The "judiciary authority" retreated to a corner of the society after the ferocious
battle which had taken place between itself and the leadership of the Arab Socialist
Union over the so-called politicization of the judiciary and its transformation
from an "authority" to a popular "utility" as a result of the statements made and
position taken in the wake of the defeat by the Executive Council of the Judges
Club, headed at the time by Counselor Humtaz Nassar who was also the deputy chair-
man of the Appellate Court, on the need to amend or abolish the laws restricting
the liberties. The statements and positions also condemned a number of measures
and actions taken by the security authorities which undermined the rights and
liberties of the citizens. The battle was managed on the side of the Socialist
Union by 'Ali Sabri, the then union's secretary general, the Huhammad Abu Nasir, the
[minister] of justice at the time. Because the battle intensified to the degree of
an actual strike by the judiciary--sonething which threatened the regime's stability
and prestige in the wake of a terrible national defeat--the late President 'Abd
al-Nasir formed a committee under the chairmanship of Anwar al—Sadat to examine

the tense situation and to propose decisive solutions for it. The committee ended
by recommending the dismissal of nearly 200 judges in the general prosecution on
the grounds of their disloyalty to the regime, according to the regime's general
political and social criteria. President Jamal 'Abd al-Nasir approved the recom-
mendation and issued s law implementing them on 31 August 1969. This is the law
which the majority of the country's intellectuals called the "judiciary

massacre" to reflect the dark shadows which it cast over the "regime's democracy."

It seemed from observing the movement of the visible events in the period following
'Abd al-Nasir's death and until May 1971 that the "regime's heirs" had clung to
unity and solidarity and had overcome the differences within their ranks on the one
hand and had fought, on the other hand, any endeavor to expand the "inheritance
circle" including them by adding to it other outside elements. They declared their
firm resolution to enact the rules of the regime's legitimacy, as stated by the
existing constitution, in the transfer of power to a new president and a new govern-
ment within the frsnework of the "Nasirist regime" without any change and through

a collective leadership that continues the march "on the path of the immortal

leader Jamal 'Abd al-Nasir, relying on the Arab Socialist Union organization and

the People's Assembly and adhering to the slogan of "no voice above the voice of

the battle until all the traces of the 1967 aggression are eliminated." They all
condemned, in one form or another, all the voices that had risen at home and abroad
to speak about either the presence of conflicts among the "legitimate heirs" or

4

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

about the presence of a terrible vacuum in the wake of the absence of 'Abd al-
Nasir with his leadership and his historical weight--a vacuum which the "legitimate"
heirs could not fill by themselves.

As soon as 'Abd ai-Nasir was laid to rest in his grave, the Socialist Union hastened
to declare the organizational steps for the transfer of power from Anwsr al-Sadst,
the interim president, to a constitutionally elected president. It was decided

to bring up the issue of nomination of the new president before the Supreme
Executive Committee on 3 October 1970, to summon the People's Assembly to an
extraordinary session on 7 October to ratify the nomination and to conduct a
referendum on the president of the republic on 15 October so that the People's
Assembly may, if the result of the referendum is positive, meet on 17 October 1970
in order that the president may take the oath of office before it.

This is why a general impression was left in the country that the "collective"
leadership which had inherited 'Abd al-Nasir's regime was united.“ This impression
was helped by the considerably quick tempo of the transfer of power and by the
unanimous consent on a single candidate for the presidency, namely Anwar al-Sadat
who was projected to the masses as the only man among the Revolution Command
Council members selected by Jamal 'Abd al-Nasir as his sole vice president under
the terrible conditions prevailing after the 1967 defeat. The Socialist Union
agencies, especially the organizations of the Cairo and Alexandria Governorates,
organized dozens of "popular processions" to the residence of the sole candidate in
al-Tahirah Palace to declare their absolute support for him as the successor of
Jamal 'Abd al-Nasir, as leader of the procession and as head of the state.

Image and Reality

Before the sun of 1970 had set, the new regime established itself atop the society
in the form of a "Masirist regime" not different in form, in slogans or in persons
from the regime existing until 28 September 1970, except for the absence of the
person of Jamal 'Abd al-Nasir by reason of death.

At the presidential office and in the Socialist Union leadership, Anwar sl—Sadat
settled down as president and declared that his program is the same program which
'Abd al-Nasir included in his proclamation of 30 March 1968. 'Ali Sabri and
Husayn al-Shafi'i became his vice presidents and the Socialist Union Supreme
Executive Committee remained as it had been previously without any change even
though one of its members, namely, 'Abd sl-Muhsin Abu al-N;r, became secretary
general instead of 'A11 Sabri. The People‘s Assemﬂg'maintained its previous
condition under the speakership of Dr Labib Shuqayr. Dr Hshmud Pawzi, President
Jamal 'Abd al-Nasir's assistant until the president's death, became prime minis-
ter and selected his cabinet members from among the personalities which held the
main positions in the regime after the 1967 defeat, excluding Muhammad Hasanayn
ﬂaykai, who by his own choice, preferred to leave the Hinistry_of Information to
devote his time to his original work as chief editor of AL-AHRAH.

Thus, the image floating on the surface of society seemed calm and stable, com-
bining in harmony all the so-called "legitimate heirs" of Jamal 'Abd al—Nasir.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Int deep inside, the conditions were the complete reverse of the outwardly image.
Latent conflicts stirred in various forms among numerous axes, entangled by
intrinsic and objective complications, within the circle of the so-called
legitimate heirs. These are the conflicts which Jamal 'Abd al-Nasir used to
settle or suppress with deterrant and restraining measures which reached the
point of punishment at times. With the disappearance of 'Abd al-Nasir, the con-
flicts revived but with caution dictated by the sudden death of the "chief" which
took all concerned by surprise and without their being prepared on the one hand
and without the heirs having the experience. on the other hand. to exercise power
directly and not through or under the shadow of the "teacher." Each axis, and at
times one part of the axis acting against the other parts, tried to gain time and
supporters in an effort to gain sole control of power.

The phrase "the others" was not confined at the time to the numerous axes within

the circle of the legitimate heirs hut extended to include the historical leaders
of the July revolution who, in the name of national unity and of filling the vacuum
left by the absence of the revolution leader, tried to'participate in power. The
phrase also extended to the movements of the rightist and leftist forces in

society with their various currents and their efforts to push the post-'Abd al-Nasir
regime in their direction.

Foremost among the axes involved in deep conflict was the so-called Presidential
Advisory Committee which the president had formed after the 1967 defeat and after
failing the coup attempt led by Marshal 'Abd al-Hakim 'Amir. 'Abd al-Nasir relied
on this camaittee in running the country's internal affairs and in supervising

the activities of the Council of Ministers, which the president himself headed, in
accordance with the instructions he issued. The president thus began to relieve
himself gradually from the burdens of internal executive action and its daily
details and to devote the major part of his efforts and time to rebuild the armed
forces and to manage the international diplomatic battle against Israel and the
United States of America. This committee, shrouded in secrecy, consisted of
Sha'rawi Jum'ah, the minister of interior; Amin Huwaydi. who held the position of
minister of war, of chairman of the general intelligence and of minister of state;
Muhammad Fa'iq, the minister of state for foreign affairs; and Sami Sharaf, the
president's information secretary and the minister of state. 'Abd al-Nasir used to
surpise the cmmmittee every now and then by including Muhammad Basanayn Haykal.
the minister of information and chief editor of AL-AﬂRAH, in its activities.

Another axis was developing within the leadership of the Socialist Union (6
million registered members) and of its main and assisting organizations, such as
the People's Assembly, the trade unions, the press and the information media.
This axis was developing under the leadership of 'Ali Sabri and was gaining its
weight from its actual ruling power in each of the Supreme Committee and the
Central Committee. Prominent members of this axis included Sha'rewi Jum'ah (who
used to take part in the meetings of the Supreme Executive Committee in a special
capacity even though he was not a member of this committee), 'Abd al-Muhsin Ahu
al-Nur, Dr Labib Shuqayr, Diya' al-Din Dawud. 'Abd al-Hajid Farid and Hafiz
Badawi. This axis exercised its power by organizing popular demonstrations under
slogans which it determined for those demonstrations and by having the "required
decisions" issued without much difficulty hy the various leadership bodies of the
political organization.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
F0!t0FFﬂJAl.USE<ONLY

Parallel to this axis, another axis, induding the leadership of the so-called
Vanguard Organization, was formed. This axis was closest in structure to the
formula of a socialist party with secret cells entrusted to exert efforts to guide
and lead the Socialist Union from within by way of a "trained socialist cadre," on
the grounds that the Union--a vast and broad alliance comprised of the people's
working forces, including the national capitalism, was a slow-moving body. This is
how the idea emerged on the need to form the Vanguard Organization so that it may
lead the Socialist Union slowly but surely through the complex phase of transforma-
tion into socialism. 'Abd aleNaair had called secretly for formation of the Van-
guard Organization in the mid-1960's so that it may include the socialist elements
from the various currents which accepted the National Action Charter as a course
and as a central starting point in the phase of transformation which 'Abd al—Nasir
had estimated in 1962 would require 10 years, ending in 1971-72. Thus, membership
of the Vanguard Organization was opened to the leftist Nasiriats and the cosmmnists
who had dissolved their independent and underground organizations in the mid-1960's
and joined membership of the Socialist Union individually.

'Abd al-Nasir himself continued to supervise with enthusiasm the formation and
management of the Vanguard Organization, assisted by 'Ali Sabri, Ahmad Fu'ad and
Muhammad Hasanayn Haykal. But 'Abd al-Nasir's enthusiasm turned quickly lukewarm
as a reSult of domestic and external conditions, especially because of the efforts
demanded by the process of rebuilding the armed forces in the wake of the 1967
defeat. However, 'Abd al—Nasir continued to maintain the Vanguard Organization as
a source of information on the tendencies and movements of society's socialist
forces ad as an agency entrusted with "revolutionary" tasks in confronting the
"conservative forces" in the regime and in society whenever the need arose to deter
those forces. This was done in such a manner to make it seem as if it emanated
from the popular base below and not as mere administrative measures imposed "from
above." Upon 'Abd al-Nasir's death, ‘Ali Sabri, Ahmad Pu'ad and Muhammad hasanayn
Haykal had been removed or had set themselves apart from the Vanguard Organization
leadership which was concentrated in a central secretariat controlled fundamentally
by Shar'rawi Jum'ah, Sami Sharaf, Muhammad Fa'iq and hilmi al-Sa'id, the economic
advisor to the president, assisted by two or three Marxist elements, such as Ahmad
Hamrush and Mahmud Amin al-'Alim.

But the most dangerous axis was embodied in the Military Committee to rebuild the
armed forces and to prepare them in the relatively long range to launch a compre-
hensive war of reprisal against Israel and prepare them in the short run, not
exceeding 1972, to implement the "Granite" plan calling for crossing canal,
storming the Bar-lev line and proceeding forward in the Sinai to control the passes.
‘Abd ul-Nasir focused his energies in this committee, assisted by Gen Muhammad

Fa zi, the minister of war, and Lt Gen Muhammad Sadiq who succeeded Gen ‘Abd al-
Mun'im Riyad to the post of chief of staff after the latter's martyrdom, in addi—
tion to a limited number of commanders of the armed forces.

In addition to this axis, there rose the Republican Guard axis whose forces had
been strengthened to the point of being able to launch offensive warfare. thus
exceeding the lines of a conventional guard force. 'Abd al-Nasir supervised this
axis through Sami Sharaf, the presidential secretary for information and the minis-
ter of state, and Maj Gen al-Laythi Nasif, the guard commander.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

it can be said that there were two other axes, each of them revolving fundamentally
around a distinguished personality which had gained special weight as a result of
special talents which it employed intelligently or as a result of holding important
positions within the narrow circle of trust surrounding Jamal 'Abd al-Nasir, thus
becoming able to know the regime's secrets and to participate partially or com-
pletely in making the political decisions.

The first personality was embodied in Anwar al-Sadat who had been selected by Jamal
'Abd al-Nasir from among all members of the July Revolution Command Council as his
sole vice president on 20 December 1969 on a sudden decision which had the impact
of lightning on everybody. This decision continued to be hard to understand or
accept by the other axes. However, those axes agreed on assessing this decision

as one which led to forcing an "intruding" element on the relations of each of
them with the president who had started experiencing severe physical, psychological
and nurvuus pains as a result of a degenerating heart disease and of diabetes in
his exhausted body and as a result of the interaction of these ailments with the
pressures of the defeat and of the abortive coup attempt led by 'Abd al-Hakim 'Amir.
'Abd al-Naair's lifelong friend and comrade in struggle. The coup culminated with
'Amir's suicide and with the trial of his partners who had occupied sensitive posi—
tions and had enjoyed the "chief's" trust, such as Shams Badran, the minister of
war, and Salah Near, the director of intelligence.

Thus, al-Sadat moved suddenly, and in less than one year before 'Abd al-Nasir's
death, from the rear and dark positions in the regime to the spotlights of the for-
ward positions and he came to be trusted by the "chief" with official or popular
positions which, by their nature, had been previously the monopoly of this or that
axis. He came to have a hand or a finger in every place and replaced the "chief"
in running the country's affairs whenever the latter was on work or treatment

trips abroad, including the duties of heading the state, the Socialist Union and
the Military Committee. The Vanguard Organization's leadership committee was the
only axis which al-Sadat could not penetrate. Al-Sadat had participated in the
Vanguard Organization at the outset but he soon found himself excluded from it when
he and other prominent figures of the regime were wousted silently from the organ-
ization upon its reorganization in the wake of the defeat.

Al-Sadat wasted no time or effort from the moment he entered the circle of power
when he was appointed vice president. Quietly and silently, he began to form a
"socio-polftical" base upon which to rely inside and outside the regime in con-
fronting all the other axes which considered him an intruding element to be rid of
or reduced to minimum size as soon as possible.

In the Socialist Union, al-Sadat took charge of the Political and Foreign Relations
Committee. In this capacity, he proceeded actively to hold periodic organizational
meetings in the various governorates of the republic and formed the so-called
"political club at the central headquarters of the Socialist Union in Cairo" where
he met weekly with members of the Socialist Union and with its committee officers
to answer, in the name of 'Abd al-Nasir, whatever questions he raised, after
reaching agreement with 'Abd al-Nasir on the broad lines of the answers. In this
regard, al—Sadat was able, without clamor, to rally behind him leadership elements
of the political organization tied by interests to the bourgeoisie despite the
socialist slogans they were raising. This is in addition to rallying some liberal
elements which had become upset with the sequestration measures and with the re-
strictions imposed by the "regime's leftist axes."

8

FOR OFF1C1A[.lEﬂE(HVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In the government agencies, al-Sadat was able to win over to his side the elements
hostile to the "regime's leftist axes" which held important positions in the power
structure, such as Maj Gen Ahmad Isma'il who had been the field commander of the
Suez front and who reaped 'Abd al—Nasir's wrath in the wake of the Israeli raid

on the front's modern radar at the end of 1968 (Isma'il later became the minister
of war and the general commander of the armed forces during the October 1973 war);
Maj Gen Muhammad Sadiq, who was occupying the position of chief of staff of the
armed forces (later became minister of war before being dismissed by al-Sadat prior
to the October war); and Maj Gen Kamal Hasan 'Ali who later became minister of

war and minister of foreign affairs.

Al-Sadat infiltrated the People's Assembly also and was able to form secretly
within it groups loyal to him, led by Hafiz Badawi and Mahmud Abu Wafiyah in
Lower Egypt and by Ahmad 'Abd al-Akhir and Yusuf Makkawi in Upper Egypt. Al-Sadab
also proceeded to strengthen his relations with and to spread his protection over
groups of the new class engaged in the Sphere of contracting, wholesale trade and
agricultural investment, such as 'Uthman and Ahmad 'Uthman, Muhammad Shahin and
others.

Thus. when 'Abd al-Nasir disappeared and the wheel of the struggle for power turned,
al—Sadat's personality seemed to appear lonely and with no supporter on the national
political arena. But behind the scenes, the arena was crowded with groups, eager to
conceal their identity to the last moment, which supported him strongly.

The second personality was Muhammad Hasanayn Haykal, the journalist, as he likes to
describe himself always. But all the Egyptian, Arab and foreign observers and
politicians who had close contact with 'Abd al-Nasir’s regime were unanimous in
describing him as the "regime's number two man" who holds no official positions and
who doesn't seek them so that he may not become a party to the ongoing struggle

and may not reducelds weight to the size of the position he holds. There are con-
flicting opinions and positions on Muhammad Hasanayn Haykal's rise [background].
But his opponents agree with his friends :hat he is "the most capable and brilliant'
in the sphere of the Egyptian and Arab press and that if Haykal has benefited
from his closeness to 'Abd al-Nasir, then 'Abd al-Nasir benefited in return from
Haykal's journalistic professionalism and intelligence.

Haykal had started his journalistic life in Muhammad al-Tahi'i school in AKHIR
SA'AH and then moved to the rightist school of AKHBAR AL-YAHM (Mustafa and 'Ali
Amie) before rebelling against it in the wake of the July revolution and becoming--
with visible and invisible support from ’Abd al-Nasir with whom Haykal's pen and
experience were intrinsically and objectively tied--chief editor of AL-AHRAM in
1956. ﬂaykal developed this paper from a distinctively local newspaper with a
daily circulation of 60,000 copies to a paper with a weighty influence at the local,
Arab and international levels and with a daily circulation of more than one-half
million copies.

Haykal became not only 'Abd al-Nasir‘s closest adviser and confidant but also the
"daily dehator" accepted by ‘Abd al-Nasir without any formality or sensitivity.

With his famous weekly article which he used to write under the title of "Frankly
Speaking," which was quoted profusely by all the international wire serivea and
in which he revealed and analyzed the direction of the wind in the movement and

9

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

thought of the regime led by Jamal 'Abd al-Nasir with his Arab and international
weight, and with his rebuilding of AL-AHRAM Establishment to make it the most
advanced and serious information agency in Egypt, the Arab homeland and the Middle
East area--an establishent that includes political, economic, cultural and
journalistic research centers and specialized magazines and an establishment crowded
with professional, intellectual and political capabilities from the various inclin-
ations, beginning with the liberal right and ending with the Marxist left-with

all this, Haykal, as an individual and as an institution, was able to attain an
independent and strong position inside the regime and in society vis-a-vis the
other axes, with when his relations ranged from the relations of a truce to the
relations of secret and open conflicts.

The formula which governed Haykal's movement, and which was accepted by 'Abd
al—Nasir, was that of abidance by absolute support for 'Abd al—Nasir with relative
freedom in criticizing the regime, its institutions and its leaderships. The
implementation of this formula left all the local, Arab and international political
sources with the impression that Huhamad Hasanayn ﬁaykal did actually represent
the position of the "number two man" in the regime without being involved in
assuming an Open official responsibility. Perhaps this is what activated 'Abd al-
Nasir at the beginning of 1970, according to what many observers find most likely,
to appoint Haykal as the minister in charge of information, despite Haykal's
objection, while retaining his position as chief editor of AL-AHRAH.

mtwardly, all these axes stood united and shoulder to shoulder under the banner
of "completing 'Abd al-Nasir's procession with its political, social and economic
dimensions, especially in whatever pertains to continuing the process of the
socialist transformation of society while purging the process of the negative
aspects caused by the 1967 defeat, waging the battle against Israel to erace the
traces of the 1967 aggression and realizing the Palestinian people’s legitimate
rights through building the unity of Arab action and through alliance with the
Soviet Union."

But under the surface, conflicts were raging by varying degrees among the

various axes and even within each axis, as revealed at the end of 1971 by the
investigations in the case known as "the plot of the centers of power" against
"al-Sadat's legitimate authority." It was proven then that there had been no
trust and no unity of thought or of action, not even at the tactical levels, among
the axes which had been in agreement on not enabling al-Sadat to attain permanent
power, or at least not to attain sole control of power. The crisis of trust among
those axes reached the point where they were watching each other's movements,
spying on each other and recording the telephone calls exchanged by members of the
same axes to use them as future incriminating evidence when one axies, or a part
of an axis, gains the power. These are the recordings which fell in al-Sadat's
hands and which he used against those who had recorded them.

Initially, the struggle crystallized between two main figures: 'Ali Sabri

and Anwar al-Sadat. 'Ali Sabri considered himself, objectively and subjectively,
the person more strongly entitled and the fitter to succeed Jamal 'Abd al-Nasir to
power and viewed al-Sadat as an intruding element on the revolution and the
Naririst experience--an element belonging to the counterrevolution which seeks
ultimately to liquidate Nasirism. Sabri also believed that if "misfortune" had

led s.‘-Sadat to the position of vice president which he occupied until the death

10

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of 'Abd al-Nasir, this did not require the Naairists to submit to the outwardly
formalities of legitimacy without its essence, else such submission would mean the
end of all the Nasirists. But the other axes. excluding Haykal's axis which pre-
ferred to take the position of outwardly neutrality while harboring in fact
hostility to 'Ali Sabri, agreed that it was impossible to practically separate the
formalities of legitimacy from its content, else rightist or leftist figures more
dangerous than al-Sadat would be able to exploit the separation gap and sneak
through it to seize power. Moreover, those axes had never at any time truly wel-
comed the transfer of power to 'Ali Sabri because they were filled with doubts re-
garding his intentions and position toward them. They preferred Anwar al-Sadat
who seemed to them to be weak and to be courting their friendship and their
participation in the power. Consequently, they were confident that the foreseeable
future would ultimately move in the direction of their gaining the sole control

of power, especially since they were in full control of all of the regime's main
political, information and security agencies, in addition to their success in
establishing an alliance with Lt Gen Muhammad Fawzi, the minister of war and the
general commander of the armed forces, who seemed to be the strongman oi the mili-
tary axis.

As for al-Sadat, he used the tactic of the "weak and isolated chief" who would
have no power and no authority without the support and participation of all the
axes, excluding the axis of 'Ali Sabri. Al-Sadat had shown his personal dissatis-
faction with dealing with 'Ali Sabri because of the latter's personal ambitions
and of his dictatorial tendency which destroys the spirit of collective action
which he, al-Sadat, wanted to prevail in the relations among the officers of the
new regime as a single family. Despite this, al-Sadat did not object to meeting the
demand of those axes for the appointment of 'Ali Sabri as vice president, just as
a gesture of honoring him and without giving him any powers, exactly like Husayn
al-Sahfi'i. Al-Sadat was thus able from the first moments to isolate 'Ali Sabri,
the thinking and planning Mind behind the opposing axes, and to paralyze Sabri's
ability to move and maneuver.

In his movement on the stage of the events, al-Sadat was careful to appear as if
he was an individual by himself and a limb cut from a tree, without sUpporters and
without any force behind him. He was able to conceal his real relations with
many of the regime's pockets and forces, such as Mamduh Salim who was at the time
the Governor of Alexandria and one of the most outstanding political security men
serving under Sha'rawi Jum'ah, the minister of interior; Maj Gen Muhammad Sadiq.
the chief of staff of the armed forces and the most prominent member of the
Military Committee; and Maj Gen al-Laythi Nasif, the republican guard commander.
Sami Sharaf, the director of the president's office, the minister of state and

the man with influence in more than one axis, had continued to be confident of
his sole control over the republican guard until he was shocked by the reality when
he was arrested by Maj Gen al-Laythi Nasif personally on the night of 14 May 1971.

Al-Sadat was not content with this but proceeded to create the first of his

political electric shocks, which have become one of the characteristics of his
political movement, when he arranged, with the support of the other axis, an almost

public confrontation between "Haykal's axis" and "'Ali Sabri's axis," at a meeting
of the Socialist Union's Supreme Executive Committee.

11

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Dr Labib Shuqayr, the People's Assembly speaker and member of the Executive
Committee, had reviewed at one of the committee's meetings an article which hayhal
had written in ALPAHRAH under the title of "'Abd al-Nasir Is No Hyth" and in-which
he had criticized some people (meaning 'Ali Sabri and the other axes allied with
him) for defying fAbd al-Nasir as if he were a god and for inatating themselves
as priests in his temple who are solely entitled to decide who is Nasirist and who
is not. Haykal stressed in his article that 'Abd al—Nasir is a historical leader
produced by the popular struggle which'had realized accomplishmts under his
leadership and that, consequently, 'Abd al-Nasir, with his intellectual thought
and his heroic struggle, is the public property of all the people, without any
need for distinguished middlemen. Dr Shuqayr concluded his review by charging
Haykal with demeaning and debasing the status of the immortal leader and of the
Socialist Union and by demanding that Haykal be tried politically.

The trial demand was one of the links in the chain of the ferocious struggle
among the axes for power. Through this demand, the Socialist Union leadership axis
sought to realize more than one goal. The first goal was to entrench its position
vis-a-vis the other axes. even the axes allied with it. as a major force in the
regime and in society with the right to level charges, to try and to convict. The
second goal was to release a test balloon in order to find out the dimensions of
the strength of each axis, especially of sl-Sadat axis, in comparison with the
strength of the Socialist Union leadership axis. The third goal was to intimidate
whoever contemplates, be he an individual or an axis, adopting a vacillating,
neutral or opposing position toward the "legitimate heirs of 'Abd al-Nasir."

The fourth goal was to destroy the Haykal axis and to gain control over the
sophisticated information outfit (AL-ARRAM) with its effective influence.

Al-Sadat hastened to respond to the demand without any discussion. In the
Executive Committee's subsequent session which was set for the trial and in which
the members were scheduled to discuss among themselves in detail the charges made
against Haykal and to issue their verdict, al—Sadat surprised all those present
by inviting Haykal to attend the session and to defend himself on the grounds that
it is illegal to try a defendant in his absence, especially since the defendant
was one of the closest people to 'Abd al-Nasir and since the charge was that of
debasing the status of 'Abd al-Nasir himself.

Haykal defended his views of and his position toward 'Abd al-Nasir, living and
dead and man and leader, with a strong logic supported by documents and proven
events witnessed by some of the committee members themselves. One of the proofs
cited was a personal wish by 'Abd a1-Nasir--a wish reflecting his confidence in
the defendant--that haykal write his biography if he was to be assassinated or when
he died. Haykal was able to win over to his side significant number of the mem-
bers, led by Dr Mahmud Fawzi whohad always enjoyed the respect of the overwhelming
majority of the regime's "legitimate heirs." Al-Sadat took the position of a
neutral judge and recommended, with the approval of the majority of the committee
and the silence of its minority, that the trial dossier he closed without a sen-
tence and that the case be considered as if it had never existed.

Thus, al-Sadat realized more than one goal from his first electric shock within
the framework of this trial. The first goal was that of aborting all the objectives

planned by the axis of the Socialist Union leadership, and by 'Ali Sabri in par-
ticular, through conducting this trial. The second goal was that of appearing as

12

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the fair and neutral judge who is eager to investigate objectively and in the
presence of the defedant the charges made by the parties to the regime against

each other. all on the basis of the principle of the single family and of collective
leadership. The third goal was that of creating a split between 'Ali Sabri's

axis and the other axes allied with it and of sewing the seeds of doubt among their
ranks regarding the soundness of the tactics of 'Ali Sabri's axis and of its

hasty decisions in leading the struggle for power. The fourth goal was that of
driving Haykal's axis from the position of neutrality to the position of actual
alliance with al-Sadat axis and of encouraging the other elements and forces in the
regime vacillating because of their fear of the might and influence of the axes
controlling the regime's main political, information and security agencies to move

to the positions of supporting al-Sadat axis after having proven its ability to give
Haykal's axis actual protection.

Thus, the struggle among the axes went on in the form of attack and retreat and of
below-the-belt blows exchanged within the closed walls at the top of the regime's
structure. But upon the disappearance of 'Abd al-Nasir and because of it, the
Egyptian arena was broader and more complex than the ability of any of those axes.
whether individually or in partial alliance with others, to absorb and control

the various and conflicting socio-political forces surging on the arena and pene-
trating, by varying degrees, the walls of power through the movement of the struggle
of the axes and the calculations of each of them.

Each of those forces proceeded from the various positions it occupied in the
society's and the state's class structure after 18 years of the revolution's
victories and defeats to try, with relative independence, to assert its positions,
to secure its interests and to exert pressure in order to exercise its right to
participate in power, presenting directly or indirectly its conditions for allying
itself with this or that axis. The common denominator in those conditions, what-
ever the nature of the political or social forces presenting them, was that of
democracy and of putting an end to the security agencies' violations of human
rights.

The first movement by those forces came from the group of surviving leaders of the
July revolution who had disagreed with 'Abd al-Nasir for various reasons and who
had been ousted from the regime's pOwer circle. But contacts had been resumed
between those leaders and 'Abd al-Nasir in the wake of the 1967 war and of the
terrible defeat it produced. The contacts were intensified during the last months
of 'Abd al-Nasir's life with 'Abd al-Latif Baghdadi who, along with his colleagues
Kamal al-Din Husayn and Zakariya Huhyi al-Din, presented a memorandum to Anwar
al—Sadat, in his capacity as the interim president, proposing re-formation of the
Revolution Command Council under al-Sadat's chairmanship and suggesting that the
council assume the task of calling on the people to elect a constituent assembly
to draw up for the country a constitution defining the quality and course of the
new regime on a democratic basis and in accordance with the principles of the July
revolution. Ultimately, the new president of the republic was to be elected on
the basis of this constitution to take power over from the Revolution Command
Council.

Of the surviving members of the Revolution Command Council, Hussyn al-Shafi'i, who
was a participant in the regime, Hasan Ibrahim. who had abandoned political life

13

FOR OFFHJAI.USEGDNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

for commercial business. and Khalid Huhyi al-Din, who had rejected the idea al-

together as constituting a deviation from the legitimacy of the existing regime
which he respects. declined to sign the memorandum.

This movement caused strong confusion to the calculations of all the axes. This
confusion was further intensified by what was known about the dialogue between
Jamal 'Abd al-Nsair and 'Ahd al-Latif Baghdadi-—a dialogue which had almost
achieved specific results. 'Abd al-Nasir himself had made references to this
dialogue at the meetings of the Socialist Union Executive Comittee in the wake of
the defeat. To deal with the regime's shortcomings and gaps--shortcamings and

gaps revealed by the 1967 war--'Abd al-Nasir brought up the idea of the formation
of an opposition party from the sons of the July revolution inside and outside the
Socialist Union to represent the "other opinion." 'Abd al-Nasir nominated for the
purpose 'Abd al-Lstif Baghdsdi and Kamal al-Din Husayn for being always frank in
their opposition without abandoning the principles of the July revolution or
involving themselves in any coup attempt against the revolution. when the Executive
Committee opposed 'Abd al-Nasir's proposal almost unanimously on the grounds that
the country was not yet ready to_put it into implementation, not to mention its
perils to national unity in confronting the defeat and preparing the army and the
society for the war of revenge against Israel, 'Abd al-Nasir shelved his

proposal. But he continued his contacts and dialogue with Baghdadi on the possi-
bilities of cooperation between them. Reliable information. confirmed by Muhammad
Husanayn Baykal, had asserted that 'Abd al-Nasir was about to appoint 'Abd al-Latif
Baghdadi to the position of vice president in charge of managing the domestic front
and preparing it for the war while the president devoted his efforts to the process
of rebuilding the armed forces as quickly as possible. But death snatched 'Abd
al-Nasir before he could issue his decision.

The axes of the Advisory Presidential Committee, or the Socialist Union leadership
and of the Vanguard Organisation leadership hastened to stage a counter-movement
under the "banner of legitimacy" to foil the endeavor of "those who disagreed with
'Abd sl-Nasir when alive and who want to usurp power from the revolution's legi-
timate institutions after his death." The members of those axes rallied behind
Anwar al—Sadat as interim president and as sole candidate for the presidency in
enactment of the constitution. They shelved their doubts about one another and
their hidden conflicts with one another. considering that restoration of the
Revolution Command Council represented the ﬂmminent and urgent danger that would

deny the "weak al-Sadat who is isolated from the regime's main agencies" the
position of president of the republic.

As for al-Sadst axis, it exploited the movement of the Revolution Command Council
group to whip the other axes into speeding up the steps for nominating and elect-
ing him a constitutional president of the republic. Hhile declaring his rejection
of the proposals of Baghdadi and his colleagues. al-Sadat did not sever his con-
tacts with them but proceeded to manage the dialogue with 'Abd al-Latif Baghdadi
for future cooperation between them after election of al-Sadat to the presidency.

There was another force with weight in the regime and in society. This force was

embodied in the group of nationalist technocrats and managers who grew up and
developed in the process of the large—scale industrialization of the country and

of building the public sector as leader of the development plan and as the base
of Egypt's economic independence in the Nasirist experiment. Leading this group,

14

FOR OFTWCIAI.USE{JNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

which Owed its expertise and its distinguished positions to the July revolution,
was Dr 'Aziz Sidqi who had been entrusted by Jamal 'Abd al-Nasir with setting up
and managing the Ministry of Economy and with building the public sector from

1956 until 'Abd al-Nasir's death in 1970, except for one year during which

Sidqi held the position of the president's adviser for industry. Dr 'Aaiz Sidqi
expressed the strength of this force when he underlined his support for the
legitimacy represented by Anwar al-Sadat on the grounds of al-Sadat's declaration
of his abidance by the July revolution and by the 30 March program. especially its
democratic dimensions, which 'Abd al-Nasir had proclaimed in order to deal with
the negative practices of the regime and to put an end to the violations committed
against the citizens' rights and liberties. This constituted a direct reference
by 'Aziz Sidqi against the axis of 'Ali Sabri with whom he had been in constant
disagreement from the days of 'Abd al-Nasir. Sidqi also stated his opposition to
the attempts of those “who rebelled against 'Abd al-Nasir while alive to return to
power after his death." This was a reference against the movement of 'Abd al-Latif
Baghdadi and his colleagues. 'Aziz Sidqi concentrated on protecting the gains of
the engineers, managers and workers who built the public sector and referred to
their right to share the power in order to guarantee the continuity of the path

chosen by 'Abd al-Nasir for planned development under the leadership of the public
sector.

At that decisive moment, this force elected to stand in the midst of the struggle
with al-Sadat axis against the other axes because it doubted its own ability to
act individually and independently on the one hand and because, on the other hand,
if doubted that it could perform its econo-political role if power were con-
trolled by 'Ali Sabri and the axes allied with him in view of what it had suffered
from the bureaucratic and punitive security practices of these axes--practices
from which this force had been saved by nothing other than the direct intervention
of ‘Abd al-Nasir. All this at a time when this force viewed al-Sadat as a solitary
and powerless personality which needed ties with partners to share the power with
him without the complexes of past experiences and without the fear of any of the
partners pouncing, after lurking silently, on the presidency or on the public
sector's leadership of the national economy--the mainstay of the political power
in society.

But all these struggles, with their varying degrees and levels and with their
various faces, continued to be governed essentially by the relations and conflicts
of the forces with which society was throbbing and by the degree of each force's
qualitative and quantiuzive capabilities, its organizational resources and its
means of movement unidst the masses.

[23-29 Oct 81, p" 50-53]

[Text] The true dimensions of the events being witnessed by Egypt at present
cannot be understood without a calm reading of the recent history. Lutfi al-Khuli,
who has been known for his progressive national political activity as well as

for his journalistic activity in the past quarter century, has written a book
which will be published under the title of "Al-Sadat Political SchooL And The
Egyptian Left." Before al-Khuli presented his book for printing. AL-UATAN AL-‘ARABI
acquired from him the copyright to a chapter of the book which is tantamount to

an observation from within of the circumstances which carried Anwar al-Sadat to

15

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE OPILY

power from the time of Jamal 'Abd al-Nasir's death and until all the political
forces with their various inclinations united against al-Sadat's domestic, Arab
and international policies and until he fell finally with the bullets of a
fedayeen [commando] group of the Egyptian army.

In the first part (previous edition), sl~Khuli dealt with what he called "the war
of the axes" which carried al-Sadat from the shadows to the top of the Advisory
Presidential Committee, the Socialist Union leadership, the Vanguard Organization
leadership, the Military Committee and the republican guard. Al-Khuli also dealt
with how the struggle crystallized between Anwsr al-Sadat and 'Ali Sabri through
the trial of Huhsmad Basanayn Haykal, all within the framework of the political
forces ruling Egypt and the framework of their capabilities and conflicts.

In this part of the series, Lutfi al-Khuli defines what he calls the "rightist
lines" and the "leftist lines," the eruption of struggle between the "centers of
power" after 'Abd al-Nasir's absence and al-Sadat calculations in that phase.

It can be said that upon 'Abd al-Nasir's death, the social struggle movement
crystallized at the popular level between two main axes: An axis to the right of
the regime and another to its left.

Each axis consisted of a number of forces with varying social and intellectual
roots. But upon the death of the historical personality which had played the
decisive role in defining society's course throughout 18 years, those forces agreed
upon a minimum limit of "general political concord" which governed their movement
vis-a-vis the other axis.

The rightist axis combined the wholesale merchants, the contractors, the rich
farmers and the upper segment of the bureaucrats which were called at the end of
'Abd al-Naair's era "the new class" at times and the "reactionary party" at others.
Those forces had, especially in the wake of the 1967 defeat and through exploiting
their positions in the state and in some public sector organizations and through
their mostly parasitic practices, accumulated a capital exceeding the needs of

their luxurious lifestyles and one which they wanted to exploit in private and
independent investment free of nationalization and sequestration, of the restric-

tions of the state laws and of the domination of the public sector. The right
was strengthened when it was joined by the prominent military bureaucrats who had

been ousted from their distinguished positions in the large-scale purging opera-
tions necessitated by the need to liquidate the elements loyal to the abortive
coup attempt led by Marshal 'Abd al-Hakim 'Amir and the elements which formed an
obstacle in the face of the steps to rebuild the armed forces technically and
socially in the wake of the 1967 defeat. It was natural that the rightist axis
would be also joined by the old capitalist elements which had been harmed by the
nationalization and sequestration decisions and which had been lurking in active
exploitative pockets in society which they had concealed under such perfectly
camouflaged masks that they had been raising the slogan of socialism and "had been
joining the Socialist Union membership enthusiastically." This is in addition to
the "protection shields" which those capitalists had created through marriage
relationships with many elements of the first and second ranks of the July revolu-
tion. This rightist axis with its numerous forces was able to attract various
groups of intellectuals with liberal inclinations who had continued to undermine
all the positive accomplishments of the Nasirist experiment by exploiting the

16

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

intelligence and security agencies' restrictions on and violations of some human
rights. The 1967 defeat, which had created in all the classes a deep wound
bleeding sweeping anger at and comprehensive criticism of the negative practices
of the regime, gave those liberal intellectuals the opportunity to speak with a
loud voice which had its tangible impact in society.

The right, with its growing parasitic nucleus, had a finger in political formula-
tions of various kinds and at various levels. In addition to the underground
organizations of the Muslim Brotherhood, there was-a number of political islands
lying hidden under the skin of the government, infornation, People's Assembly,
Socialist Union and even the Vanguard Organization agencies, especially in the
rural areas and in the small towns (such as the information groups, led by Russ
Sabri, Ania Mansur, Huhamad 'Abd al-Jawad, Safiyah al-Huhandis and Himat
Mustafa, and the political groups, most prominent of which were 'Abd al—Qadir
Hatim group, the Upper Egypt deputies group led by Ahmed 'Abd al-Akhir and

Yusuf Hakkawi and the delta [Lower Egypt] deputies group, led by Ahmad al-Qasabi,
Huhamad shahin, Hamid Mahmud and Mahmud Abu Hafiyah). This is in addition to the
contracting and land speculation sector ('Uthman Ahmad 'Uthman), the chambers of
commerce, the social and athletic clubs, the writers and women's federations and
a number of professional unions.

The "general political concord" of the rightist forces crystallized in five funda-
mental lines:

First, to block the path practically in the face of continuation of 'Abd al-Nasir's
march after his death while raising, at the same tine, the slogan of "continuing
on 'Abd al-Nasir's path" so that all the forces resisting the att-pts for the
seizure of power by those who consider themselves the heirs of 'Abd al-Nasir or
leaders of the July revolution, whether individually, allied with each other or

in alliance with the leftist forces, may join ranks safely under the canopy of this
slogan.

Second, to exploit religion in instigating a campaign against bhe Nasirist experi-
ment on the pretext that it is an "atheist Marxist socialist" experiment which
has plundered the people's property under th: name of nationalization and seques-
tration and which has violated the people's dignity and liberties and the sources
of livelih cod that God has given them and under the pretext that correcting those
conditions was not dictated by religion alone but also by the spirit of belief

in the July revolution--a Spirit completely lacking since the early 1960's and
since proclamation of the National Action Charter.

Third, to act under the banner of democracy and of guaranteeing liberties and the
supremacy of the law to enable the rightist forces to gather and organize their
scattered lines and to infiltrate into the main positions of power, exploiting
in this the masses' urgent demands for democracy--demands which had not yet
crystallized in specific formulas even though they had been vacillating between
developing the Socialist Union to become a progressive national alliance compris-
ing certain political forces and currents, and not just a mere vessel for the
quantitative gathering of citizens, and abolishing the oneness of the Socialist
Union as a political organization and replacing it by the multi-party system.
The rightist forces were inclined, with some reservation, toward the latter

1']

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

option so that they may act compatibly with their pressures for releasing the
freedom of the private sector to independent investment and to unlimited growth
and for putting an end to the public sector's leadership role in developing the
national economy.

Fourth, to open the door before foreign and Arab capital to invest in the country
without restrictions and to give this capital incentives to participate with the
private Egyptian capital on the grounds that this is likely to make it possible
for the country to overcome its economic crisis and its technological backwardness
emanating from the so-called period of economic and political isolation to which
the Nasirist experiment, with its atheist comunist dimension, had led, especially
with its comprehensive development plans and the inevitability of the socialist
solution. This is in addition to exploiting the fundamental changes occurring in
the Arab world as a result of the accumulation of oil revenues in the regimes
described by the Nasirists as reactionary at times and as conservative at
others-~regimes with which Egypt's relations had ranged from open hostility to
silent alienation.

Fifth, to make the political and intellectual preparations to put an end to the
continuation of the Arab-Israeli conflict, the main economic, military and human
burden of which falls on the shoulders of Egypt when Egypt has no direct interest
in this conflict and when it is pushed to contribute the major share under the
pressure of the Arab countries generally and of the Palestinians in particular
just for the sake of helping. This burden turned Egypt from the richest Arab
country at the outset of the conflict to the poorest one in the wake of the

1967 defeat. Now that the attempts to settle the conflict with the force of arms,
whose source has been the atheist Soviet Union, have failed, reason dictates

the need to look for a non-military solution with Israel by way of the United
States which supplied Israel with all the neans of strength and protection that
made Israel always the stronger party in the conflict with the Arabs. This is
something which necessitated reconsidering Egypt's international relations to
reduce the ties with the Soviet Union as much as possible and to resune building
strong bridges with the United States, especially with the disappearance of 'Abd
al-Nasir who had poisoned the walls of friendship with the United States.

This is insofar as the rightist axis, which gathered its old and new remnants in
a minimal degree of organ.zation over a specific program and which started to move
rapidly and flexibly, wagering all its strength on deciding the power struggle

in favor of al-Sadat, is concerned.

As for the leftist axis, it comprised the largest number of the productive working
forces. The Nasirist experinent had destroyed many of the shackles of exploita-
tion and repression from which these forces had been suffering in the pre-July

1962 society-~a society described as the "one-half percent society." As a conse-
quence, millions of citizens converged on the political and social action arena
for the first time. In addition to the right of work and of safety from the
tyranny and exploitation of capitalism, the Nssirist legislation had guaranteed
these forces positions with influential quantitative weight in the political
organization (Socialist Union), the People's Assembly (legislative authority) and

in other popular councils. The fundamental options of the Nasirist experiment,
especially in the 1960's. brought about the birth of new qualitative groups with

a revolutionary spirit on the political and social action arena which was filled

18

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

by the production forces with their enormous numbers of millions. These new
qualitative groups were embodied in the small farmers who benefited from the
agrarian reform, the public sector workers and nationalist technocrats whose fate
was tied to the sector and the intellectuals who rose from poor labor and peasant
roots, who benefited from free college education on the one hand and from the
spread of the socialist thought platforms on the other, in the wake of proclama-
tion of the National Action Charter and who started to spread in the various
spheres, beginning with the village school and ending in the nuclear reactors,
the state's civil service apparatus and the armed forces.

The leftist forces had emerged in numerous positions of control in society and
had been concentrated mainly in the cooperative associations, the rural youth
centers, the information and culture agency, the labor unions, the Socialist
Union's bases and some of its central or leadership structures, such as the
Central Committee, the Youth Organization and the Socialist Studies Center, and
in the secret Vanguard Organization. Those forces had also stormed the army bases
when many university graduates fron among the sons of peasants and workers were
conscripted in the army both as soldiers and as officers.

It can be said that upon 'Abd al-Nasir's death, the phrase "leftist forces" was
embodied generally in two distinctive currents, even though one of them had
always moved under the banner of 'Abd al-Nasir and acted under his leadership.

The first current was the Nasirist left which was formed amidst the Nasirist
experiment and its successive phases, beginning with the phase of "cooperative
socialism" in the 1950's, to scientific socialism with its own Arab quality and
as defined by the National Action Charter in the 1960's and ending with "Arab
socialism." The Nasirist left proceeded, out of necessity at the outset, from
positions hostile to the Marxist thought and the Egyptian comnist movement. But
in the mid-1960's, this left reached the point of co-existing with the Marxist
thought and the communists by defining the points of agreement on the'issues of
the inevitability of the socialist solution, of class struggle, of planned
economic and social development. of liquidating the remnants of capitalism and

of parasitism, of bolstering the political and economic independence, of Arab
nationalism and the issue of liberating the Arab homeland from imperialism, neo-
colonialism and Zionism and rebuilding its unity. The points of disagreement
continued to revolve over the issue of democracy and of formulating it in a class
alliance of the people's working forces consisting of the workers and the farmers
instead of the superficial quantitative alliance between individiaul citizens

in a flabby bureaucratic political organization dominated by the thought and
interests of the petit bourgeoisie under false slogans of socialism. The points of
disagreement also involved theissue of the need for the alliance to be led by a
vanguard socialist party that is public [legal] and that has set features and a
set program to offer the masses and a party whose movement is subject to the
control of the organized masses. This is in addition to the independence of the
unionist and student movement and of the popular organizations and their initia-
tives and to releasing the freedom of expression and of dialogue for all the
national and progressive forces.

The second current is the Marxist leftist current which is older than the Nasirist
left and whose history dates back to the second decade of the 20th century. This
current adhered to the Leninist—Marxist philosophy in its ideas and in its

19

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ON!)l

movement "to change the conditions in Egypt in favor of the working class and its
allies, the farmers and the revolutionary intellectuals." The Marxist-Leninist
philosophy, with its international strength, especially in the wake of the Soviet
revolution's victory in 1917, had begun to invade the minds of the "intellectuals
rebelling against the shackles of colonialism, backwardness, social oppression

and political repression in the Arab countries" and had begun to transform them
from "utopians" to "scientific people" and from "adventurers" into ”revolution-
aries." But the predominant characteristic of those intellectuals continued, for
a long time and until just before the inception of the July revolution, to be
governed on the one hand by their petit bourgeois roots and by the weighty posi-
tions which the intellectual elements--some of them Egyptianized foreigners of'Jew-
ish origins-~held in leading the Marxist movement. Historically, those elements
contributed the major effort in transmitting and translating the Marxist-Leninist
thought into Arabic. 0n the other hand, the participation of the urban and

rural working class in this current's organizations was weak. Thirdly, this current
did not have the ability necessary to develop a formula of Leninist Marxism
acceptable to the Egyptian reality and a formula to which the masses could respond,
whether in terms of the language of address or in terms of the movement's tactics
and strategy. Fourthly, the constant campaign of violent repression launched
against the underground marxist organizations by colonialism and by the secular
and religious resctionaries had been intensified on the grounds that the organiza-
tions were illegal and constituted a form of atheism. Finally, there were the
widespread and blind accusations of lackeyhood among the members of the Marxist
movement and organizations whenever disagreement of opinion among them intensified.
They resorted to these accusations instead of solving their disagreement through
dialogue within the organizational principle known as the principle of democratic
centraliam.

All these factors combined with the difficult circumstances of underground action
and with the complex and backward economic, political and social conditions to
obstruct crystallization of the class struggle in a healthy manner and to cause
the phenomenon of fragmentation and of division to dominate the Marxist left at
the outset of the 1950's and to turn this left into a mere "force of expression"
instigating, inciting and encouraging the crushed masses to bring about change
with the ideas which this left was offering instead of being a "political force"
with quantitative and qualitative influence and with weight in the process of
change itself.

As a result of these conditions and even though one of the numerous Marxist organ—
izations with which the movement abounded, namely the organization known by the
name of the Democratic National Liberation Movement [DNLM], had firm relations
witn the leadership of the Free Officers Organization before it set off the July
1952 revolution, this organization was not able to maintain and develop those
relations and to take an actual part in power. On the contrary, that relation-
ship was quickly destroyed before the end of the first year of the Free Officers'
assumption of power. The Free Officers sent the leaders of the DNLM and many of
its cadres, along with the leaders and cadres of the other organizations, to jail,
excluding a number of personalities who were tied to 'Abd al-Nasir by personal
friendship or who had come to occupy positions in the structure of the new
authority and who had come to put their loyalty to the authority over their
loyalty to the DNLM which had embarked on a struggle against the authority.

20

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The tragic dimensions of this situation become evident when we know that the Free
Officers Organization's relationship with the DNLH before the revolution was
supervised by Jamal 'Abd al—Nasir personally on the one hand and, on the other
hand, by Ahmad Fu'ad al-Qadi who became chairman of the Board of Directors

of the Bank of Egypt throughout 'Abd al-Nasir's era and who continued to hold
the position during al-Sadat's era, and by Ahmad Hamrush, the officer who became
the chief editor of the first magazine issued by the Free Officers and known by
the name of ALPTAMRIR and then of ROSE AL-YUSUP in which he continued to write
during al-Sadat's era. Al—Qadi and Hamrush supervised that relationship by virtue
of their being in charge of the army section of the DNIM. This is in addition to
the presence of two original members in the Revolution Ommmand Council who were
close to the DNLM, namely Yusuf Siddiq who commanded the first confrontation force
which seized the headquarters of the royalist regime's chief of staff, and Khalid
Muhyi al-Din. The first was relieved before the end of the first year of the
revolution and the second was conpelled to resign because of the events of March
1954 concerning the nature of the democratic national authority which the revolu-
tion was to set up in place of the defunct regime.

The truth is that the 1952 revolution, which took the form of a "military

coup" and on the strength of an armed national political organization which had
entrenched itself among the armed forces' ranks under the name of the Free
Officers, came as a surprise to all the political forces and parties at the time
even though everybody had known before 23 July 1952 of the presence of the Free
Officers Organization, had read the secret pamphlets which the organization had
been issuing and had supported strongly the organization's inclinations which
were hostile to "colonialism, the royal palace, feudalism and the exploitative
capitalism" and even though relations of varying degrees had been established
before the eve of the revolution between a number of the political forces extending
from the extreme right (the Muslim Brotherhood) to the extreme left (the DNIM

of the communist movement) [and the Free Officers].

The Marxist left's view of the event was "generally" based on its being a military
coup. In the Marxist literature accumulated in light of the international exper-
iences in Europe and Latin America, a military coup is always a coup in the
interest of society's most reactionary forces. The Egyptian Marxist left in its
entirety was not able to deal with the "phenomenon of the military coup" in light
of the conditions and of the given facts of the Egyptian reality and was unable to
consider this phenomenon was a new formula of the national revolution--a formula
unprecedented in history and a formula which could be used as a measuring stick,
with the exception, to some minds, of the Peronist experiment in Argentina, but
only to a degree.

But within a period not exceeding the first year of the revolution, the predominant
opinion in the DNLM was inclined toward supporting the "military coup" in order to
preserve the movement's relations with the Free Officers Organization and on the
basis of analyzing the coup as one that carries limited nationalist and progres-
sive ideas and tendencies which must be supported in order to overcome the other
vacillating elements in the revolution command who are influenced by their ties

to society's reactionary forces.

But the other organizations of the Egyptian communist movement, led by the
Egyptian Communist Party. took a stance of fundamental opposition to the "1952

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

military coup" as a coup which aborts the popular capabilities escalating toward
a revolution in the interest of all the reactionary forces and of the u.s. neo-
colonialism. To prove this, the Egyptian Communist Party offered as evidence a
number of indications «bodied in the establishment of good relations at the out-
set between the Revolution Conand Council on the one hand and the Muslim
Brotherhood and the U.S. Embassy in Cairo on the other in contrast to the
Council's hostility toward al-Uafd Party with its national influence and its
broad popularity, in the strict regressive Ins-sures with which the Council con-
fronted the strike of the workers of Kafr a] ~Dawwar textile plants and in the
imediate military trial which the Council held for party leaders—a trial which

concluded with the execution of two of those leaders, namely workers Khamis and
al-Baqari, in September 1952.

Thus, the atmosphere between the revolution command and the Marxist left, including
the DNLM, became extrasely hostile and the two sides exchanged accusations of
lackeyhood to the United States on the one hand and to the Soviet Union on the

other and the revolution launched large-scale campaigns of arrest against the
Marxist left.

The situation between the two sides continued to be tense until Jamal 'Abd al-Nasir
attended, in the name of the Revolution Comand Council, in the Bandong conference
in Indonesia in 1955 where he participated positively with Jawaharlal Nehru and
Chou En-lai in building a united force for the Third World against the 0.5.
imperialism, the colonialist countries and economic and social bacloaardness. This
is the force which later became the basis for laying down the foundations of the
nonaligned movement.

This was followed by 'Abd al-Nasir's step of "breaking the weapon" monopoly and
of concluding the weapon deal, mich came to be konwn as the Czech weapons deal,
with the Soviet Union to confront the Israeli aggression and then by the step of
nationalizing the Suez Canal and of waging the Suez war, in which Britain, France
and Israel colluded against Egypt and which was followed by nationalizat ion of the
British, French and Belgian companies and nationalization of the other interests
of the old colonialism in the country.

Those fundamental changes in the Revolution Command Council's policies motivated
the bases of the Marxist left with its various organizations to reconsider their
analysis and evaluation of the "July revolution" as a mere fascist military coup
serving the interests of reaction and colonialism and to deal with the new regime
as an advanced phase of the democratic revolution which must be supported posi-
tively with the purpose of pushing it toward further political, social and economic
steps in this direction, without letting this support abolish the right to
criticize the regime's negative practices, but from a background of alliance and
not one of hostility.

It can be said that this phase which extended from the middle of 1955 to the end
of 1958 was characterized by the quality of crucial relations between the "revolu-
tion's regime" and the Marxist left--relations which were interspersed every now

and then by small crises which were absorbed and solved with the direct inter-
vention of Jamal 'Abd al-Nasir. But on the other hand, the relations were charac-

terized by the revival of critical thought within and around the Marxist movement.

22

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

This revival led to the emergence of the so-called "phenomenon of the Marxists
who are independent of the organizations," thus resulting in further serious
divisions within the organizations which soon turned into an element of pressure
by the bases for unity. This unity imposed itself on the leaderships and produced
a united organization under the name of the United Egyptian Communist Party at
the end of that phase.

But the relations between the revolution's regime and the Marxist movement declined
rapidly to a state of full crisis and of violent confrontation with the end cf
1958 as a result of the circumstances and conditions of the rise of the Egyptian-

Syrian unity and of the deteriorating relations between the revolution's regime
and the Soviet Union with whom the relations had been established to confront the
Zionist-imperialist aggression on the one hand and to realize economic development
(constructing the High Dam and participating in the industrial development plan)
on the other. The relations between the regime and the Marxist movement also
declined as a result of the position taken toward the Iraqi revolution of July
1959, which also took the form of a military coup led by 'Abd al-Karim Qasim. The
Iraqi communists and the Arab communist parties supported Qasim in his confronta-
tion with Jamal 'Abd al-Nasir.

From the dawn of 1959 till the third month of that year, the revolution's regime
launched the broadest—scale campaign of arrests in the ctuntry's history against
the Marxist left, both as a united party and as independent personalities, and
against those sympathizing with the democratic intellectuals.

During the period of arrests, which included more than 3,000 detainees. the
Egyptian-Syrian unity broke down and 'Abd al-Karim Qasim's regime in Baghdad was
toppled. 'Abd al-Nasir raised the slogan of scientific socialism with its dis-
tinctive Arab quality and called for unity of the goal as substitute for the
unity of the ranks of the Arab national liberation movement's forces. A succes-
sion of progressive social laws were issued on nationalization and on building
the public sector as the leader of the development plan. Those laws ended with a
national congress and at that congress the National Union, the sole political
organization, turned into the Socialist Union which approved the draft National
Charter which 'Abd al-Nasir had submitted in 1962 as a guideline for revolutionary
action during the phase of transformation into socialism which he had set at 10
years ending in 1972.

The wings of the United Communist Party were shaken by these fundamental changes
and contrasting theoretical analyses emerged on the social and political depth and
effectiveness of the changes, thus touching off splits anew in two main organiza-
tions [of the communists], in addition to other subsidiary organizations and groups
of independent Marxists.

At the same time, Arab and international campaigns of pressure were initiated
against the revolution regime to release the detainees. Foremost among those who

exerted such pressure out of a position of alliance and friendship were the
Algerian revolution leaders (especially Ben Bcﬂa and the Marxist wing cooperating
with him), the leaders of the Guinea revolution (Sekou Tours and the Marxist wing
cooperating with him) and Yugoslav President Tito. The pivot of the pressure
exerted on and of the dialogue conducted with President Jamal 'Abd al-Nasir re-
volved around the view that having taken the socialist option as a must for

23
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

development, he could not continue to be hostile to the scientific socialists and
should, instead, employ their capabilities in building and developing socialism.

'Abd al-Nasir ended up being convinced of this pivotal idea and began to discuss

it with his sides who were divided into two factions: A faction which opposed the
idea on the basis that the socialism of the July revolution is an Arab non-lbrxist
socialism which had emanated without the participation of the Marxist current and
that to guarantee the continuity of this socialism without Marxist influmce
required continued isolation of the Marxists from this socialism and another fac-
tion which supported Jamal 'Abd al-Nasir's view that the revolution's socialism,
like the Marxist socialism, emanates from a unified historical scientific source
and from the same laws but that the two forms of socialism differ, theoretically,
on two fundamental issues: The first is the position toward religion and the
second iis the position toward the dictatorship of the proletariat and the peaceful-
ness of the class stmggle~-differences which lead. practically, to differences

in application, not only because of the theoretical differences but also because

of the particularities of the Egyptian reality. It was 'Abd sl-Nasir‘s view that
this new situation dictated that the revolution'a regime modify its positiontoward
the Marxist left, replacing the measures of repression and isolation by opening the
doors of dialogue and cooperation.

'Abd al-Nasir had actually begun as of the latter part of 1960 releasing gradually
a number of the Marxist personalities. Within the framework of the experiment of
"dialogue and cooperation. the Cooperation Page was established in AL-AHRAM. The
chief editor of AL-AHRAM was Muhamad Hasanayn Haykal who played a role in extend-
ing the bridges between 'Abd sl—Nasir and the Marxist left. Lutfi al-Khuli took
charge of this page of the paper, assisted by a number of Marxist intellectuals
who had already been released. The Cooperation Page started its first days by pub-
lishing a series of articles on the "crisis of the intellectuals" with its social
and political dimensions in the Egyptian reality in particular and the Arab

reality generally.

The Cooperation Page played an important role in creating a healthy climate for
the broadest and most profound dialogue between the left with its various factions
on the one hand and the revolution regime with its various wings generally and the
person of 'Abd sl-Nasir in particular, with his major influence and decisive role
in the country's development movement.

The dialogue was not only conducted publicly but also took at times invisible
courses through a number of personalities close to 'Abd al-Nasir, led by Muhamad
Hasanayn Hsykal, 'Ali Sabri, Sha'rawi Jum'ah and Ahead Pu'ad. Each of these
personalities, despite the intellectual, objective and subjective differences
among them, had personal relations with some leaders of the Marxist left from
various positions.

In this dialogue, 'Abd al-Nasir proceeded to project the idea of building a unified
force for the Egyptian left, with its varying intellectual roots, in the form of

a vanguard organization based on the principle of democratic centraliam to lead the
Socialist Union in accordance with the National Charter and the concept of
scientific socialism with its special Egyptian-Arab quality. 'Abd al-Nasir ex-
pressed his readiness to release all the detainees, to abolish whatever criminal

sentences had been issued against them and to consider such sentences null and

24. -.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

void and to open the doors of work before than in all the spheres of society with
all its agencies and without any restrictions in return for their comitment to
dissolve their independent organizations and to join as individuals the active
membership of the Socialist Union and to accept its leadership.

After sharp debates among the Marxists, the two main organizations, namely the

ONLM and the Egyptian (Io-mist Party (al-Rayah), reached the conclusion, in the
face of opposition from small factions, that the objective conditions of Egypt

made it a must "to terminate the independent organization of each of then" and to
accept 'Abd al-Nasir's conditions for the sake of united action to enable socialism
to triumph against its enmies at home and abroad, especially since all the '
contradictions between the revolution's regime, embodied in the leadership of

Jamal 'Abd al-Nasir, and the Marxist left are being settled in the interest of the
working masses, except for the difference over the issue of the formula and
exercise of democracy.

By 1964, all the detainees had been released and the criminal sentences issued
against them had been drOpped. The Marxist organizations dissolved themselves in
succession after special congresses held for the purpose. This was an unprecedented
act in the history of the Marxist movement, whether at the Arab or the international
level and it has been considered one of the characteristics of the Egyptian
experiment, with its distinctive weight in the Third World experiments.

As of that time, the Marxist left was supposed to have become, both in terms of
movement and of thought, a part of the fabric of the July revolution, led by
'Abd al—Nasir.

But practically, the Marxist left faced from the outset strong resistance, both
direct and indirect, from a number of the regime's leadershipe, especially from
Marshal 'Abd al-Hakim 'Amir, the armed forces general commander at the time, and
from the security agencies (the general intelligence). The appointment of Marxists
to positions compatible with their skills and education and equal to the positions
of their non-Marxist colleagues was obstructed. The weapon of starving and of

arm twisting was used against some of then. Many of the Marxists' applications

to join the Socialist Union were disregarded and the membership of most of those
who were accepted as members was frozen under security pretexts.

Despite this, some well-known personalities from the Marxist left got the oppor-
tunity, upon the personal intervention of 'Abd al-Nasir, to occupy sensitive
positions in the press, culture, public sector, and the Socialist Union and Vanguard
Organization agencies (Mahmud Amin al—‘Alim, Ahmad Hamrush, 'Abd al-‘Azim Anis,
".bd al-Razzaq Hasan, Sa'd Kamil, Mahmud Tawfiq, Sclah Hafiz and others). Other
personalities were able to run entire instruments and platforms of intellectual
political education, such as AL-TALI'AH magazine (Abu Sayf Yusuf Abu Sayf, N'ad
Mursi, Isma'il Sahri 'Abdallah, Michel Kamil, 'Abd sl—Mun'im al—Ghazali, Lutfi
avihuli and others) and the Socialist Studies Carter (Ibrahim Sa'd al-Din, Fawzi
Mansur, Muhatmnad al-Khafif and others). This prepared a common and fertile ground
for dialogue between the Marxist left and the Nasirist left (the Youth Organiza-
tion and a number of the members of the Socialist Union's Central Secretariat and
of units of the Vanguard Organization). This is the dialogue that was proceeding
constantly toward crystallizing the unity of view, of analysis and of movement

on the political action arena. This progress caused the regime's agencies and some

25
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of its leaderships to fear the rise of a new and growing revolutionary political
force whose projections [views] receive broad and deep response in the Egyptian
society, especially in the wake ofthe 1967 defeat for which the people held the
regime and its leaderships, with the exception of Jamal 'Abd al-Nasir, responsible.
This was confirmed clearly by the sweeping popular uprising of 9 and 10 June 1967
which urged 'Abd al-Nasir to continue shouldering the leadership responsibilities
and to fight the defeat and overcome it and, at the same time, to punish those
responsible for the defeat and to rebuild the regime, in terms of both persons

and agencies, so as to purge it of the negative practices and to make it qualified
to mobilize the people's capabilities for continuing the march of freedom,
socialism and unity and for waging the battle to eliminate the traces of the defeat
at the Egyptian and Arab levels.

Therefore, the majority of the regime's leaderships united and focused their
efforts on liquidating this new revolutionary political force which reflected its
effecthenem more than once after the 9 and 10 June uprising in the form of
worker and student demonstrations against what became known as the sentences in
the cases of those responsible for the catastrophe of air force in the 1967 war.
The blows were focused on the Socialist Union's Youth Organisation, the Socialist
Studies Center and ALPTALI'AH magazine which constituted the backbone of the
instruments and platforms of the new revolutionary political force which continued
u: sulgglc without wavering and with the minimal degree of the required self-
independence to preserve the vitality of the ground of the dialogue and dealing
between the Marxist left and the Nasirist left. This force did actually manage to
survive under the canopy and the protection of Jamal 'Ahd al-Nasir and continued
to fight the pressures of the regime's leaderships and the intimidation of the
regime's agencies to dissolve and crush it. It also continued to fight against
drowning in the subsidiary and unprincipled conflict flaring up openly and secretly
between the numerous parties to the regime.

The more the solidarity of the Marxist left and Nasirist left was strengthened
and the more direct bridges the Marxist left extended with Jamal 'Abd al-Nasir,
the more fiercely the regime's agencies, with their various conflicting parties.
used uhatever powers they had and whatever security. administrative and political
agencies they controlled to destroy those bridges and to arouse 'Abd al-Nasir's
doubts over this new revolutionary political force. For this purpose, those
agencies innovated the method of distinguishing between what they called the
"constructive and trustworthy left" and the "destructive and sabotaging left."
Each party to the regime, even those parties classified as being to the left of
the regime, proceeded to absorb a number of the Marxist personalities by using
this method of distinction and discrimination and exploiting at the same time
whatever ideological and political differences continued to exist among the Marx-
ists themselves or the so-called diseases of cliquishness and of narrow-minded

organizational jingoism.

Under the impact of the successive blows from the numerous sources, the path was
blocked in the face of the new revolutionary political force which had been pro-
duced by the interaction between the Nasiriat left and the Marxist left in the
melting pot of society from fighting the 1967 defeat and its political, economic
and social dimensions at home and abroad. The elements of fragmentation and
frustration were finally able to destroy that force. The instruments and plat-
forms which had continued to cling to their self-independev*e, to the unity of all

26

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the leftist forces with their different intellectual and social roots and to re-
gaining the revolution's vitality through more fundamental organizations, methods
and goals, determined in the light of the exorbitantly costly 1967 defeat, bees-e
isolated islands in society receiving blows from all the parties to the regime,
the most painful being the blows dealt by the Socialist Union leadership, repre-

sented by 'Ali Sabri, and by the agency of Sami Sharaf, the minister of state and
the head of Jamal 'Abd al-Nasir's office in the Vanguard Organization [sic].

'Abd al-Nasir discovered the truth of this tragedy too late and acknowledged it in
an interview which AL—TALI'AH conducted with him throughout 2 hours at the end of
1969, i.e., one year before his death. 'Abd al-Nasir acknowledged the blows

dealt to the new revolutionary political force by all the parties to the regime,
especially when this force called for the formation of popular committees called
the 30 March committees, in reference to the program submitted by 'Abd al-Nasir to
confront the defeat under thl name of the 30 March declaration, so that those
committees may form the new base of the democratic organizational structure of the
alliance of the people's working forces instead of the bureaucratic formula of the
Socialist Union. 'Abd al-Nasir admitted that they (he did not give any specific
names) continued to pursue him with piles of reports against the AL-TALI'AH group
which they considered a "destructive party seeking to seize power." The reports
presented to 'Abd al-Nasir did not stop even while he was being treated at
(Tskhaltubo) spas in the Soviet Union. 'Abd al-Nasir also said that he discovered
the untruthfulness of those reports when he himself studied carefully, despite his
sickness, the ideas and solutions projected by AL-TALI'AH and found himself in
agreement with most of them. Concluding his interview with AL-TALI'AH, 'Abd al-
anir said in the presence of his Vice President Anwar al-Sadat and of Muhammad
Hasanayn Hayksl. the chief editor of ALPAHRAM: "Frankly, people, the group control-
ling the Socialist Union is completely against you and will not allow you to engage
in any political action. They consider you more like Masons. To correct these
conditions, I have one of two options: Dismiss the people in charge of the
Socialist Union, and I am not ready to do this because who will I be able to put

to the work? Dr respond to their request and close AL-TALI'AH, and I reject this.
The second option is to devote a large part of my time to follow up this struggle
minute by minute and confront it with personal intervention. But for 2 or 3

years to come, i have to devote my time and efforts for one issue that is above all
considerations. namely the issue of rebuilding the armed forces so that they may
wage the comprehensive fateful battle against Israel. This is the topmost priority
at present. Anything else takes second place, degardless of how important it is

to you. i advise you to steer clear off the spheres of direct political action
and of the endeavors to hold positions in this action and to embark on struggles
and to be content with Saint Peter's role insofar as revolutionary preaching and
education are concerned until we end our battle with Israel. Then we will start
taking stock anew with persons, institutions and positions..."

It is axiomatic that the reactions of the majority of the Socialist Union and
Vanguard Organization leadership and of the security agencies tied to them was

a violently angry reaction to the ideas, analyses and to the criticism of the
conditions projected by AL—TALI'AH and toward Jamal 'Abd al-Nasir's assessment of
the situation and of its future dimensions. These reactions were embodied in the
adoption of measures to suppress and restrict the freedom of some members of
AL-TALI'AH group and in the endeavors to sour relations between this group and
Jamal 'Abd al-Nasir on the one hand and between the group and a number of the
Marxist and Nasirist leftist personalities on the other hand.

27

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

It is my assessment that ail-Sadat, having attended the interview and followed it
carefully and silently, drew some improtant conclusions which he took into account
when the struggle for power erupted after 'Abd al-Nasir' s absence. Perhaps the
most important conclusion was that there was a gap or a struggle between the
"regime' s left," comprised of the political figures which were in control of the
regime' a political and executive institutions and which al-Sadat later named the
"centers of power," and the.- newborn revolutionary political power which had been
created independently through the interaction between the factions of the Nasirist
left and the Marxist left. Al-Sadat also understood from the interview, as he
later indicated in a private conversation (conversation with Lutfi al-Khuli in
January 1972) that even though 'Abd al-Nasir had supported the "centers of power"
in the interview because it contained his aides, his position toward them was at
the time critical and "their being brought to account was postponed till after the
battle." Al-Sadat also sensed Jamal 'Abd al-Nssir' s appreciation for the role of
AL-TALI' AH group, even though he continued to confine it to the "framework of
preaching."

Thus, the position of the left at the moment of 'Ahd al-Nasir's sudden disappearance
from the arena seemed, outwardly, as the position of an enormous and cohesive

force with united slogans, goals and language and with control of the leadership
positions in the political organizations, in the executive agencies and in the
instruments forming the public opinion and a force behind which the popular masses
rally spontaneously and with their emotions.

But the reality was in fundamental contrast with this apparent image.

This is because the left was actually divided into factions and cliques engaged in
a fierce struggle in which the intellectual and political struggle mingled with the
struggle of cliquishness and with the residues of the old annularism. Perhaps the
secret behind the contrast between the apparent image and the latent reality is
that the leadership of Jamal 'Abd al-Nasir, the personality with the historical
weight, represented the backbone for the moveaent of all the leftist factions with
their various schools and cliques in a current with numerous sources but with a
single direction. With the loss of this support upon the death of 'Abd al—Nasir,
every faction or clique was freed of the couitment to the unity of the movement.
This is natural because the personal role of 'Abd al-Nasir in the history of the
political and social movement could not possibly continue after his death.

[30 Oct-S Nov 81 pp 51-53]

[Text] In this part, the third of the series. Lutfi al-Khuli deals with the phase

which witnessed the open confrontation between 'Ali Sabri and Anwar al-Sadat and
in which the leader of the "regime's left" fell and the arena became free for

Sha'rawi Jum'ah who will face al-Sadat in another round (next part of the series).

Even though all the leftist factions raised the slogan of continuing 'Ahd al-Nasir's
procession in accordance with the National Charter and the 30 March proclamation

and of preparing the armed forces and the people to wage the battle of liberation
against Israel, those factions disagreed on the principles and starting points of
the movement to implement those slogans after 'Abd al-Nasir's absence, on the
methods and the socio-political criteria necessary to separate the revolution
forces and allies from their enemies at the local, Arab and international levels

28
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

and on the priorities of the issue of democracy and of organizing the masses'
effective and direct presence in society's movement.

Though the right had prepared its forces after 'Abd al-Nasir's death for the process
of gradual retreat from the Nasirist experiment, hiding behind the slogans of
socialism, there were two main inclinations within the leftist ranks: The first
demanded continuation of the conditions, institutions and development limits as
they had been without any further step forward whereas the second inclination in-
sisted on the need to immediately take socio-political steps to liquidate the
retrogression forces which had revived immediately upon 'Abd al-Nasir's death and
had begun the counter-movement from their positions in the wholesale trade, the
contracting business and the investments of the richest landowners. This inclina-
tion also insisted on the need to mobilize the masses democratically so that they
may be armed with the ability to protect their gains, to confront the imminent
danger of the retrogression appearing on the horizon and to i-unize the people

to withstand any sacrifices and losses demanded by the liberation battle.

The first inclination was expressed by the so-called "regime's left," which al-
Sadat later called the "centers of power," which was comprised of a group of axes
dominating the Socialist Union, the Vanguard Organization and the state institutions,
such as the People's Assembly and the executive information, local government,

police and intelligence agencies, in addition to the military axis. The movement

of these axes was dominated by the bureaucratic system of action from above. Des-
pite the unity of their tactical position vis-a-vis al-Sadat axis, those axes were
actually divided among themselves, disunited and harbored doubts toward each other
insofar as the strategic position after settling the struggle for power with al-
Sadat was concerned.

The second inclination was expressed by the new revolutionary political forces
which crystallized as a result of the interaction between the Marxist left and the
radical elements in the Nasirist left. The dominant characteristic among those
for: s was the unity of their movement and of the issues and action lines which
they projected. But at the same time, those forces were no more than c scwer of
expression and of political pressure in the Socialist Union and the Vanguard Organ—
ization because the real power lied in the hands of the ”regime's left." Those
new revolutionary political forces were not able to jump with their movement over
the Socialist Union and the Vanguard Organization to the masses md their unionist
and democratic organizations, either due to the lack of at least a minimally
independent organization capable of such action or for fear of direct confrontation
with the "regime's left”--a confrontation which would have widened the gaps in the
general leftist front in contrast to the tendency of the rightist forces to unite

their ranks.

Between the two inclinations, the Nasirist left-~worried by critical observations
concerning both the regime's left and the Harnist left--continued to vacillate

and to be unable to decide its position while facing for the first time a fateful
option in the absence of 'Abd al—Nasir, the leader who had polarized its boundless
confidence and the one from whom it had become accustomed to expect the "option
decision" every time and to implement this decision with the loyalty of "loyal
troops."

29
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFK‘ML USE ONLY

Nearly 2 weeks after 'Abd al-Nasir's death, the first political contact was made
between the regime's left and the other leftist factions with the aim of coordinat-
ing the movement. The main preparation for that contact was made by the Sudanese
Marxist left which had been participating at the time in the regime led by Ja'far
Numayri. The preparation was done especially by Paruq Abu 'Isa, the then

Sudanese minister of foreign affairs, with the help of an Egyptian friend who was
one of the leaders of the Marxist left, namely 'Abd al-Hun'im al- Ghazali, the
secretarial editor of AL~TALI'AH. This was not the only channel of contact. There
were numerous other channels in which a number of the Marxist leaderships working
with the regime's left in the Socialist Union and in the Vanguard Organization
participated, such as Mahmud Amin al-‘Alim, Ahmad Hamrush, Ibrahim Sa'd al-Din and
Fawzi Hansur. Other independent leaders also participated in those channels, such
as Khalid Huhyi al-Din, Dr Pu'ad Hursi, Dr Isma'il 'Abdallah and Abu Sayf Yusuf

Abu Sayf who was in charge of the responsibility of chief editor of ALPTALI'AB
because the magazine's chief editor had been in jail since May 1970, i.e., 6 months
after conducting the interview between AL~TALI'AH group and Jamal 'Abd al-Nasir.
The chief editor had been jailed under the case known as the voice recordings made
by the security agency controlled by Sami Sharaf in which the chief editor was
charged with making critical remarks at a3private meeting in his home against the
measures violating the democracy and against the [regime's] bureaucratic dealings
with the masses, thus undermining the cause of liberation and of socialism.

In this contact, the "regime's left" asserted that it was in full control of the
situation and that it possessed all the resources for confronting and defeating
any rightist endeavor to retrogress from Jamal 'Abd al-Nasir's path. It seemed at
the time that the danger lay, in the estimate of the "regime's left," in the move-
ment of the surviving members of the Revolution Command Council and in their
attempt to contain Anwar al-Sadat so as to turn against the regime's continuity
and against its legitimate institutions.

The "regime's left" asked all the leftist factions with their various inclinations
to unite their efforts to protect the “legitimacy of the regime" from those
calling for a turnabout and for reforming the Revolution Council. The regime's
left also urged the leftist factions in society to participate with all their
strength with the Socialist Union and Vanguard Organization agencies for the con-
tinuity of the regime through the popular and unanimous nomination of Anwar a1-
Sadat, who had become an interim president after 'Abd al-Nasir's death, to the
position of original and constitutional president and, consequently, to rescue
al-Sadat from being contained in the bosom of the "reactionary forces" led by the
veteran members of the Revolution Command Council. The regime's left underlined
its agreement with Anwar al-Sadat to continue the regime's situation and the
responsibilities of the main figures in the regime as they had been before 'Abd
al-Nasir’s death.

The regime‘s left turned down all the proposals made by the leftist factions

on the need to exploit that opportunity to build the unity of all the leftist
forces through reorganizing the masses on a democratic basis and around a definite
program emanating from the positive aspects and accomplishments of the experiment
and from reading the future with socio-political clarity--a program to be dis-
cussed in organizational meetings and broad popular meetings and to which the

the new president and his assisting crew will commit themselvees before the

30
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

people who, with their organized presence, will make up for the loss of the
historical leadership of 'Abd al-Nasir. Thus, the objective and subjective
guarantees for continuation of the march would be insured. But the regime's

left viewed those proposals as an unsafe adventure and as a gamble on the unknown
and believed that the objective and subjective guarantees were present through

its almost full control of the regime's agencies, especially the internal security
forces, the armed forces and the republican guard, on the one hand and through

the undeclared agreement with President al-Sadat on the other hand.

The events came in succession and in accordance with the agreement between the
regime's left and President al-Sadat who had been elected constitutional presi—
dent of the republic in October 1970 with the unanimous consent of the Socialist
Union, the Vanguard Organization and the People's Assembly.

But hardly a few months had passed when al-Sadat began to put an end to the
honeymoon between himself and the regime's left by resorting, step by step, to
drugging this left with the comfortable seats of power and to isolating it from

the other axes struggling within closed walls and far from the masses. Moreover,
al-Sadat aroused division and doubts between 'Ali Sabri's axis and the other

axis of the regime's left and proceeded to raise on his own the slogan of democracy
and of the supremacy of the law, h_nting that the regime's left was misusing its
power and violating the law and the citizens' liberties and rights. He used a
number of sequestration cases, imposed as a result of personal or of vengeful
motives on the part of some figures in the regime's left and without the knowledge
of 'Abd al-Nasir, as flagrant examples of such violations. The campaign against the
sequestrations was the real preparations for al-Sadat's exercise of his method,
later known as the "electric shocks" method. Al-Sadat declared, with popular sup-
port, abolition of the scquestrations and refrainment from imposing any new
sequestrations illegally and without a legal trial before the judiciary so as to
safeguard against the repeated misuse of power.

Al-Sadat followed this with another shock. namely his separate and closed talks
with William Rogers, the then 0.5. secretary of State, who had come to Cairo on a
reconnaissance visit after 'Abd al—Nasir's absence. Al—Sadat held the talks

without the participation of the group of the regime's left. Al-Sadat didn't give
this group a breather but hastened to surprise it with another shock, embodied in
imposing the Egyptian-Syrian-Libyan unity plan within the framework of the so-called
Confederation of Arab Republics. This motivated 'Ali Sabri to stage an open
counter-movement.

'Ali Sabri proceeded in his calculations on the basis that there were rules
governing the game of the delicate balance in the regime after 'Abd al-Nasir's
absence and that upsetting or disregarding those rules exposed the regime to
cracking and collapsing. Foremost of those rules, of which al-Sadat had to be
reminded constantly, was the rule that the acknowledgement by 'Ali Sabri and by

his colleagues in the axes allied with him of al—Sadat's succession to 'Abd n1-
Nasir and their acceptance to work under him does not mean that al-Sadat has

turned into a new 'Abd al-Nasir but means that he has become a partner in the power
with 'Abd al-Nasir's aides and legitimate heirs and, consequently, it is extremely
dangerous for al-Sadat to resort to "concocting" secretly such a serious decision
as the decision of unity with Syria and Libya, with all its subsequent effects on
the relations of the forces within the regime and the government agencies and among

31

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
EVA vtrauanu vuu v"...

the regime's leaders. and to surprising his partners in the power with the
decision. thus compelling them to submit to and accept the fait accompli. Permit-
ting al-Sadat to pass this "concoction" without a minimum degree of discussion .“d
accounting is likely to give him the permit to repeat it. With time, the regime's
“legitimate heirs" will be transformed, with all the political organizations and
main institutions of the state which they control, from "strong partners" into
"weak hostages" which have but one option in the near future: Either resign or be
relieved.

Even though the other axes allied with 'Ali Sabri shared the same concerns, they
expressed their fears of having the first open confrontation between them and al-
Sadat erupt over an issue connected with Arab unity, considering that this unity
constitutes one of the distinctive features of Naairism and especially if it is
projected as a guarantee of the pan-Arabian of the battle against Israel. In such
a case, it is inevitable that the leaders of these axes would appear as if they
resisted unity and the pan-Arabian of the battle whereas al-Sadat would emerge as

the genuine Nasirist knight struggling for unity and for the pan-Arabian of the
battle.

Therefore, those axes urged 'Ali Sabri to avoid touching off the confrontation
because of this issue and to wait for another opportunity in which the circumstances
and the issue of the confrontation are more opportune.

But 'Ali Sabri, who had concluded from the indications of the events which were
moving at an ever-faster tempo, that time was against him and his allies and in
favor of al-Sadat and that he had to move very energetically and without any delay
to break the blockade which al-Sadat was about to seal around him and around his
supporters to paralyze their movement. So 'Ali Sabri made it clear that he was
not convinced by his allies' fears and insisted on waging the open confrontation,
accusing those who exaggerated those fears of justifying in fact a "subjective
fear" which leads to a "subjective escape" from the inevitable confrontation because
they prefer deep in their hearts the path of bargaining with al-Sadat--a path
which, in Ssbri's assessment, would only lead to the full liquidation of the July
revolution and of all those who had worked with 'Abd al-Nasir, one after the other
and regardless of their current positions or relations with al-Sadat. when 'Ali
Sabri became certain that he had persuaded some of the leaders of the axes allied
with him ('Abd al—Huhsin Abu al-Nur, Dr Labib Shuqayr and Sa'd Zayid) of his
viewpoint and when the other leaders ended their opposition and took a neutral
position, he decided to lure nl-Sadat to a public confrontation over the political
ground on which he, 'Ali Sabri, enjoyed the greatest degree of influence, namely
the Arab Socialist Union with its various organizational and leadership levels.
Sabri called for an emergency meeting of the Supreme Executive Committee to dis-
cuss the issue of unity and to determine the degree of the constitutionality of
the decision which al-Sadat had adopted independently.

Under those delicate circumstances, contact was again resumed between the axes of
the "regime's left," which had entered the open confrontation with al-Sadat axis
without prior agreement among them, and the leftist factions in an attempt to
build the broadest front possible inside and outside the political organizations
to confront al-Sadat axis.

32

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE 0N1!

During the contacts, all inclinations and positions were discussed. The pre-
dominant view of the leftist factions insisted on the need to examine carefully the
dual character of the plan for unity with Syria and Libya and the many possibili-
ties this plan reflects, meaning that the unity plan could continue to be confined
to its framework of being one of the maneuvering tactics in the struggle for power.
It could also be a strategic nucleus for a unionist Arab action for the comprehen-
sive Arab confrontation against Israel, imperialism and backwardness. It was also
the view of the leftist factions that under the circumstances, it was the duty of
all the national forces, including the Marxist and Nasirist left, to struggle in
order to enable the strategic side to predominate the tactical side in the unity
plan and that this required bringing the issue of unity, with its contents, goals

manner that insures the regime's political, economic and social directions against
any possible setbacks. But the "regime's left" with all its axes rejected this view
and even rejected to extend the battle going on inside the Socialist Union to the
general congress. Those axes insisted that the battle be confined within the
limits of the Supreme Executive Committee and the Central Committee, if necessary.

regime's left" in this regard was the
argument that popularization of the battle and of the struggle under the circum-
stances carried the dangers of creating a state of chaos among unorganized masses
which did not have enough information on the real backgrounds of the struggle-~
dangers from which al-Sadat would benefit in his capacity as the legitimate ruler
who masters the game of manipulating the slogans of democracy, freedom and the
supremacy of the law—~whereas it the struggle and management of the battle con-
tinued to be confined to the institutions, where the axes of the "regime's left"
have control over the regime's striking agencies, the fate of al-Sadat would
actually continue to be under their mercy. Those axes revealed a plan which they
formulated against al-Sadat axis--a plan beginning with escalating warning measures
and ending, should the warnings fail to realize their purpose, with containing.
blockading and dismissing al-Sadat constitutionally. All that was required of the
leftist factions at the time was to support the positions of the "regime's left"
and to propagate them in their circles.

Thus, the second endeavor to establish coordination between the axes of the
"regime's left" and the leftist factions failed, even though succeeding partially
in persuading some leftist elements in the Socialist Union to abide by the line
projected by the axes of the "regime's left" for the battle inside the political
organization.

in the emergency meeting of the Socialist Union's Supreme Executive Committee,
held in April 1971, 'Ali Sabri launched an open attack against al-Sadat for the
latter's disregard of the political organization's and the state’s leaderships
and for adopting independently the decision on unity with Syria and Libya without
a profound study taking into consideration the lessons of the previous experience
of unity with Syria, the ideological and political differences among the

regimes involved in the unity or the refrainment of Sudan, which had become the
regime closest to the Egyptian regime, from taking part in the unity despite the
persistent appeals made to it on the grounds that the unity decision is a "hasty
and an unstudied" decision. 'Ali Sabri then revealed the discussions that took

33
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
A'Vn Vaaavanu wus- v"...

place between him and Libyan Chairman Mu'ammar al-Qadhdhafi at Cairo Airport
when he went to receive him there at the request of the presidency. Sabri also
revealed that al-Qadhdhafi was not reassured by the bases on which the unity was
founded. Sabri did not stop wondering what was behind al-Sadat's extraordinary
insistence on establishing the unity and proclaiming it quickly.

Defending his position, a1-Sadat said that he was only completing a fundamental
plan which the late President Jamal 'Abd al-Nasir himself had started and in which
the regime's leaderships, including 'Ali Sabri personally, had participated. Al-
Sadat proceeded to add that he could explain ’Ali Sabri's position in only one

of two things: Either that Sabri did not want to complete 'Abd al-Nasir's pan-
Arab procession or that he opposed the unity because it was not being realised
under his leadership. Al-Sadat then said that this was a subjective position
governed by narrow-minded personal calculations that sacrifice the urgent objective
motives for thc unity as an essential starting point for the pan-Arabism of the
battle against Israel.

The debate was not settled at the Supreme Executive Coamﬁttee meeting which lasted
7 hours. The two poles to the conflict (al-Sadat and Sabri) continued to cling

to their conflicting positions. Meanwhile, a minority led by Dr Mahmud Fawzi
supported al-Sadat's position and another minority consisting of the axes of the
"regime's left" proposed the formation of a committee "to study all aspects of the
issue" whereas the majority of the committee remained silent.

Al-Sadat rejected the proposal and it became evident that the committee was unable
to make a decision. It was agreed to refer the issue to an emergency meeting of
the Socialist Union's Central Committee before the end of April 1971.

Prior to the convocation of the Central Committee, al-Ssdat met with the axes of
the “regime's left," with the exception of 'Ali Sabri's axis, to notify them

that he did not intend to back down on the unity decision, that he was going to
go ahead with its implementation, regardless of its ramifications inside the
regime, that he considers 'Ali Sabri's attack against unity an attack against him
personally and that 'Ali Sabri defies him intentionally, imagining that he [Sabri]
is a "center of power" with a special weight.

This was the first time in which al-Sadat used the phrase "centers of power,"
threatening that if the Central Committee let him down on the instigation of the
"centers of power,“ then he would go over its head and address the people
directly from the radio and television and call for a general referendum on the
establishment of the Confederation of Arab Republics which represents the correct
realistic step toward building the Arab unity and confronting Israel. Should this
happen, al-Sadat said, he would have no alternative but to dissolve the Socialist
Union and rebuild it from top to bottom in new elections.

The Central Committee, to which the arena of the struggle had been extended,
convened in a tense atmosphere. Al-Sadat and Sabri again reviewed their positions
and it was noticed that each of them resorted to the late President Jamal 'Abd

al-Nasir's views and opinions to support his position. This [use of 'Abd a1—
Nasir's views and opinions] was especially evident in quoting the speech which he
made in May 1970 on the first anniversary of the Sudanese revolution and when

34

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

al-Sadat quoted 'Abd al-Nasir's words: "we are fighting for a single nation, for a
single homeland and for a single people against a single enemy assailing all of
us." 'Ali Sabri answered him by saying that this was a partial and distorted quota-
tion of the late President 'Abd al-Nasir's views and opinions who had said in the
same speech: "Our struggle for inity must be armed with a strong weapon, namely
the weapon of the masses' awareness and the masses' knowledge of every step they
take. Before embarking upon any step, we must present it to the people and their
political organizations so that the people may not be misled. This is the lesson
we learned after the breakdown of the pioneer unity of 1958. If the masses approve
such a step, we will put it into implementation and if the masses find that they

went further clarification or further study, then let them have further clarifica-
tion and further study."

The meeting flared up with heated debates and some political elements in the com-
mittee resorted to underlining a "fundamental dimension" on which 'Abd al-Nasir

had focused in the same speech and which both al-Sadat and Sabri disregarded, namely
the dimension embodied specifically in 'Abd al-Nasir's words: "The revolutionary
nationalist forces are required before anything else to build their fundamental
bases, and I don't mean here the bases of power. The masses are the real force and
power without the masses is a mere domination hostile to the essence of the truth.
All this serves realization of the meeting of the revolutionary forces. with this,
the unity of the revolutionary forces will be able to shoulder the responsibility

of the serious confrontation currently imposed on the Arab nation. Insofar as

this confrontation is concerned, the nation will ultimately withstand [accept] noth-
ing other than complete victory."

Thus, all the allied and conflicting forces were resorting in their offense and
defense, and even in their maneuvers, to selecting from 'Abd al-Nasir's legacy
that which supported their positions.

After 5 hours of heated argument, interspersed with the manifestations of ridicul-
ing al-Sadat and denouncing his views, it was evident that the overwhelming majority
of the Central Committee members were sympathetic to 'Ali Sabri in a strong and
organized manner whereas a small minority, no more than a handful, supported a1-
Sadat. This tempted 'Ali Sabri to continue the pressure for translating this

support through the issuance of a decisive resolution which would push al-Sadat to

a "serious dilemma“ he couldn't overcome without approving new conditions imposed

by 'Ali Sabri to guarantee his actual participation with al-Sadat in the exercise

of power.

But the axes of the "regime's left" led by Sha'rawi Jum'ah who, in addition to

his organizational responsibilities in the Socialist Union and the Vanguard Organ-
ization, held the position of minister of interior rushed to contact the Central
Committee members to resist 'Ali Sabri's plan to push al-Sadat to the "dilemma"
because, through their analysis of the given facts of the real situation, those
aces believed that if it was possible to push al-Sadat to the dilemma, then al-Sadat
could drag the entire regime along with him, being left with no alternative other
than to carry out his threat to leap over the political organization and the

state institutions and address the people directly, thus preferring to “pull down
the temple on his head and the heads of his enemies." This is why those axes
resorted to concerted movement in two parallel directions:

35

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I VII VA ---------------

First, to prevent the conflict which had erupted over the issue of the Confedera-
tion of Arab Republics from taking the form of a violent confrontation between
al-Sadat and 'Ali Sabri during the Central Committee's voting and to make a col-
lective endeavor to overcome the dilemma with a compromise satisfactory to all
the parties involved, even if at the expense of 'Ali Sabri, the ally.

The second direction was to take all the precautions necessary to prevent al—Sadat,

at any cost, from using, in his capacity as the president of the republic, the
radio and television to address the people directly.

Those axes did actually achieve success in both directions and were able to bring
the Central Committee's meeting to conclusion without any voting, being content
with announcing an official statement saying: "Due to the large number of those
who requested to speak on the issue and due to the importance of the issue, it has
been decided to form a technical committee under the chairmanship of 'Abd al-Huhsin
Abu al-Nur, the Socialist Union secretary general, to receive all the Opinions

and to present a report on them to the Central Committee which will meet again on a
date which will be set this week." Those axes were thus able to defuse the "timed
bomb" which 'Ali Sabri had planted in the Central Committee under all the parties
fighting under the regime's roof.

At the same time, the axes of the "regime's left" led by Sha'rawi Jum'ah took
security precautions in anticipation of what al-Sadat may do to transfer the
struggle for power to the street with a general and direct speech to the people.
They imposed a strict blockade around the radio and television building which
would be impossible for al~3adat and his supporters to penetrate. They also re-
sorted to staging a show of force by holding a series of conferences for the vital
and influential sectors of society under their leadership at the headquarters of
the Central Comittee and the Socialist Union's centers, such as the conference
of the labor leaderships, the conference of the press leaderships and the con-
ference of the teachers of national subjects and of philosophy in the secondary
schools and of equal schools in Cairo Governorate. The aim of those conferences
which preceded or followed the Central (knmmittee's tempestuous meeting was to con-
vey an indirect, but clear, message to al—Sadat on the extent of those axes'
capabilities for confrontation in case they are attacked.

By the end of April 1971, the struggle for power, despite the calm prevailing on
the surface in the wake of the tempest created by 'Ali Sabri and ending practical-
ly with his defeat and isolation from the leadership of the axes of the "regime's
left," was heading rapidly toward the "bone-breaking" confrontation between the
axes of the "regime's left" with their new leadership, embodied in Sha'rawi Jun'ah,
and aI-Sadat axis. Each side started to prepare and organize for waging the battle
under the mask of the mutual camouflage and warning operations.

0n the one hand, the axes of the "regime's left" showed and spread their disagree-
ment with 'Ali Sabri's axis in pushing al-Sadat toward the dilemma, played the role
of the fireman putting out the fire which had flared up politically in the Central
Committee and turned the direction from voting on a resolution "incriminating"
al-Sadat politically to bestowing a kind of legitimacy on his independent decision
to establish the Confederation of Arab Republics and to considering the issue a
mere technical, and not political, issue.

36

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
0n the other hand. al-Sadat axis was eager to declare that it made a distinction
between the irresponsible axis of 'Ali Sabri which is motivated by personal
rancor and the other axes of the "regime's left" which had been characterized

by wisdom, objectivity and do appreciation of responsibility in their exercise
of power.

Yet, there were difﬁerences connected with the goals and means of managing the
struggle between the two sides fighting silently.

[6-12 Nov 81 pp 47-49]

[Text] In the first part, Lutfi al-Khuli dealt with what he has called "the war
of the axes" which moved al-Sadat from the shadow to the top.

In the second part, al-Khuli dealt with what he calls the "rightist lines" and
the "leftist lines" and with the eruption of the struggle among the "centers of
power" in the wake of 'Abd al-Nasir's absence.

In the third part. the author dealt with the phase which witnessed the open con-
frontation between 'Ali Sabri and Anwar al-Sadat.

This part of the series, the one before last, recounts the events of the "Hulwan
battle" and of the fall of 'Ali Sabri and paints the climate of the decisive
battle between al-Sadat and the Egyptian 1eft--a battle leading to the "May
Movement“ which settled the "palace coup."

Al-Sadat axis relied on the method of lurking and of surprise pouncing and attack

in its efforts to liquidate the axes of the "regime's left" from all their positions
in the regﬂme in the shortest time possible. As for the axes of the "regime's
left,“ they took the stance of fortified defense inside their positions in the
regime. venturing every now and then to twist al-Sadat's arm as a warning and con-
fining their goal to only insuring their "participation with al-Sadat in power"
through a long—drawn and patient approach.

Only a few days had passed on the "Central Committee battle" from which no party
to the struggle emerged vanquished or victorious--with the exception of 'Ali
Sabri, the only loser--when the Hulwan battle erupted in the open and before the
masses for the first time. It had been decided to celebrate Mayday on the morning
of l Hay 1971 within the square of the enormous industrial bastion built by 'Ahd
al-Nasir in Hulwan where al-Sadat was to make, in his capacity as the president
of the republic and the Socialist Union chairman, a political speech--as was the
custom in 'Abd al-Nasir‘s era-~before thousands of workers and representatives of
the Arab and foreign labor unions and in the presence of the leaderships of the
state and of the political organization.

Each side had prepared itself to wage the new battle with the aim of modifying the
upset balance of forces resulting from the Central Committee battle. The news
of that battle had spread inside and outside Egypt.

Each side had drawn its plan for the "open Hulwan battle" on the basis of inflict—
ing on the other side a tangible and calculated degree of defeat which would have
its direct returns insofar as the positions of the vacillating or neutral axes

37

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
run Ul‘l‘LhLﬂl-a use mud

in the state agencies and in society are concerned on the one hand and, on the
other hand. insofar as the movement of the unorganized popular masses and the
calculations of both the friendly and the hostile Arab and foreign forces are
concerned.

The fundamental weapon in the hands of the axes of the "regime's left," which had
entered this battle with unified forces and directions, was their ability. with
which al-Sadat axis could not compete, to mobilize the enormous pass of the
Socialist Union and Vanguard Organization mulbers in the set place and at the set
tinr, with the movgaent of this mass being led by trained elements and professional
cadres with such discipline as to be close to military discipline. This mass

would fill the meeting or celebration square on the occasion specified and for the
length of time required, thus leaving in the minds of others the general impression
that it is the victorious force that cannot be defeated.

As for al-Sadat, his weapon was the "legitimacy" which he derived from being the
sole vice president appointed by Jamal 'Abd al-Nasir in the last year of his life
and from being elected unanimously the president of the republic after 'Abd al-
Nasir's death. In Egypt, "legitimacy" gives whoever holds it a big asset of
traditional respect in the general conscience of the masses. This respect remains
constant, at least during the first years of the holder's tear-years constituting
the time for experimenting and the period for testing. In addition to this "con-
ventional weapon," sl-Sadat used a "new weapon," namely that of advocating, from
his position at the top of the regime. dalocracy. freedom and supremacy of the

law for all the citizens without exception.

In the arena of the "open Hulwan battle," the weapons of the two sides clashed be-
fore the eyes of the masses.

The masses of the Socialist Union mubers which had occupied strategic positions

on the geographic map of the celebration site, exercised their power to interrupt
al-Sadat while he was delivering his speech by raising thousands of pictures of
Jamal 'Abd al-Nasir in his face and by shouting implicit slogans warning al-Sadat
not to swerve from 'Abd al-Nasir's path or to undermine the Socialist Union and its
leadership. This almost prevented al-Sadat from finishing the delivery of his
speech, had it not been for the visible and international intervention of the cadres
of the axes of the "regime's left."

Meanwhile, al—Sadat hastened to raise the banner of continuing on 'Abd al-Nasir's
path, along with the banner of democracy, freedom and the supremacy of the law.
asserting that after 'Abd al-Nssir's death the revolution "has become the property
of all the people and not of one group to the exclusion of others" and promising,
as a responsible legitimate ruler, not to permit under any circumstances the pre-
sence in the regime of "centers of power" which monopolize the revolution and

impose their custodianship over the people.

Al-Sadat's statements on what he called the "centers of power" was a surprise which
caught unawared the axes of the "regime's left" that had read the text of the
written speech in advance and had found no close or remote reference in it to the
"ccnters of power."

38

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Explaining this issue afterwards, al-Sadat said that he had aksed Muhammad Hasanayn
Haykal, the chief editor of AL-AHRAM who had written the speech. to write on a
separate page a paragraph on the "centers of power." But Haykal had declined for
two reasons: The first was that he did not want to become a party to the struggle
between al-Sadat and the axes of the "regime's left." Considering that those axes
knew that he was the one who wrote the official speech, they would consider the
slander accusing them of being "centers of power" as a slander coming originally
from Haykal and would think that Haykal had convinced al-Sadat of this. On the
other hand, Haykal believed that any open talk of the "centers of power" would be
tantamount to a "declaration of war" against the group in control of the state
agencies and of the political organization, thus blocking the path in the face of
any dialogue and any possible reconciliation between the parties to the struggle,
and would pose a threat to the country's stability and unity in confronting the
enormous dangers accumulating in the wake of 'Abd al-Nasir's sudden absence.

But al-Sadat, who had adopted the system of blitzkrieg, insisted on declaring an
open war before the masses, considering that it is the only solution to liquidating
the crisis of power before it gets more complicated and, consequently, rocks the
country's stability and unity. On this basis, he decided to write personally the
paragraph on the centers of power on a separate page which he put away in his
pocket. Just before completing the delivery of his speech, he took the bomb out

of his breast [pocket] and exploded it among the ranks of the axes of the "regime's
left" which were stunned.

Al-Sadat departed from the celebration, leaving behind him serious question marks
over the future and the destiny [of the 1eadership]--questions needing an urgent
answer.

The wait didlnt last long. The answer, exceeding all expectations, came on the
evening of the same day in a two-line decision issued by al-Sadat. in his capacity
as the president of the republic and the Socialist Union chairman, "relieving

'Ali Sabri from all his positions." Sami Sharaf. the minister of state for presi-
dential affairs and one of the leaders of the axes of the "regime's left," was
summoned and asked to convey the decision officially to 'Ali Sabri and to notify
the Egyptian and foreign information media to publish and announce it immediately.

All the efforts exerted by the axes of the "regime's left" did not succeed in
making the president postpone implementation and announcement of the decision

just for 24 hours to prepare 'Ali Sabri psychologically for the shock and to take
precautions in anticipation of the reactions in the country generally and inside
the political organization in particular. Al-Sadat rejected all those endeavors
and even refused to relieve Sami Sharaf from the task of implementing the decision.

Thus, al-Sadat moved with a sudden speed which his adversaries had not expected,
declaring war on them in the morning and destroying with his artillery in the
evening one of the strategic strongholds of the axes of the regime's left, after
having isolated him from his colleagues. With one blow, al-Sadat realized three
goals: First, appearing as a strong president who fulfills what he promises. He
had threatened to strike the so-called "centers of power" and he did actually
liquidate a "center of power” who had defied him as an equal. The second goal
[was to show] that the legitimacy he possessed was more effective in its movement
and influence than the Socialist Union cadres which had displayed their force
against him openly at the Hulwan meeting. The third goal was [to show] that all

39

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFLULAL USI‘. UNL!

the "positions of power" in the regime controlled by the axes of the "regime's
left" not only failed to protect the head of their major ally from falling but also
that one of their leaders was the executor. thus weakening extremely the status

and credibility of those axes' strength and unity.

The events then moved in rapid succession toward the decisive battle in the strug-
gle for power which everybody expected to erupt any day, even though 8 months
hadn't yet passed on 'Abd al-Nasir's death.

The stunningly simple and easy fall of 'Ali Sabri in the ﬂulwan battle, without
any of the expected violent and large-scale organizational and popular reactions,
led to extremely significant ramifications in the ranks of the two fighting camps.

In al-Sadat camp, the outcome of the Hulwan battle contributed to creating the
right conditions which encouraged the dormant political and social pockets
supporting al-Sadat in the regime and in society to organize and prepare their
forces for the battle and to come out of their hiding places under the surface
to occupy positions of confrontation above the surface. That outcome also
encouraged the majority of the axes and forces which had continued to vacillste or
to take refuge in neutrality throughout the 8 months of the struggle to decide
their position and to align themselves with al-Sadat axis, considering that al-
Sadat had shown with the 'Ali Sabri blow that he was not a weak and powerless
individual but a leader who clings to legitimacy strongly in comparison with the
axes of the "regime's left“ which seemed to assume an inflated, but incapable,
bureaucratic image.

As for the camp of the axes of the "regime's left," chaos spread in its ranks and
its opinions on what was to be done varied. After the Hulwan battle. a sense of
guilt prevailed among this camp's men because of what had happened to 'Ali Sabri,
considering that their failure to support him fully through their positions in the
Central Committee is what encouraged al-Sadat to topple him. 'Ali Sabri, from the
moment a weeping Sami Sharaf notified him of al-Sadat's decision until the out-
break of the decisive battle 13 days after his fall, continued to pull strongly

the cord of remorse among his allies, urging them to move with utter speed and
with all the resources available to topple al-Sadat and get rid of him before he
could get rid of them one after the other.

At the same time, there were increasing pressures from a number of the Socialist
Union organizations, especially in Cairo under the leadership of 'Abd al-Hajid
Farid and in al-Jizah under the leadership of Farid 'Abd al-Karim, urging the
leaders of the axes of the "regime's left" to enter into an alliance with the
leftist factions in society and to include the masses in the struggle, instead of
confining the struggle to the cells of the regime, by mobilizing the masses to
"protect 'Abd al-Nasir's regime and the accomplishments it has realized for the
workers, farmers and intellectuals from the danger of al-Sadat coup against them."

But the leaders of the axes of the "regime's left" continued to cling to their
positions of rejecting the masses' participation in the struggle, considering such
participation an (unethical) act with uncertain consequences. Those leaders did
actually confront a number of initiatives launched by some units of the Socialist
Union and clung to managing the struggle with al—Sadat from their positions within

60

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the regime and through the mutual acts of plotting. After the military axis had
aligned itself with them, those leaders estimated that they were able to deal a
fatal blow to al-Sadat. They waited for Lt Gen Muhammad Fawzi. the minister of
war, to notify them that he had completed his preparations to move within days
so that they may support him with an assisting movement by the republican guard
axis under the command of Maj Gen al-Laythi ﬂasif. Sami Sharaf thought that this
axis was totally loyal to him, as revealed by the confessions of the leaders in
the investigations in the case knwon as the "case of the plot of the centers of
power in 1971."

This was not the only thing revealed by the investigations in the case. It also
became evident that al-Sadst axis had attracted to its ranks three executive
elements with leadership tasks in the plan of the axes of the "regime's left"

to deal the fatal blow to its opponents. Those elements were: Lt Gen Muhammad
Sadiq, the armed forces chief of staff and one of the leaders of the military
axis; Maj Gen al-Laythi Nasif, the republican guard commander; and Hamduh Salim.
the grvernor of Alexandria and one of the prominent officials in the internal
security agency and in the Vanguard Organization. what is more, the investigations
exposed the deep crisis of confidence existing among the leadership of the axes
of the "regime's left"--a crisis which motivated each leadership to monitor the
telephone conversations of the other leaderships dealing with the anti-Sadat plans
and to record those conversations on tape in its offices. These are the tapes
which ultimately fell in the hands of al-Sadat axis and which this axis used in
incriminating evidence against those who had recorded them.

This was the position of the two fighting sides while approaching the moment of the
decisive battle. It seemed from the movement of both sides as if they were com-
mitted to a "gentleman's agreement" to keep the masses completely isolated from
the battle and to wrestle each other for power within the bounds of the well-known
game of the "palace coup."

Considering the relations of the forces after the Hulwan battle. al-Sadat axis
was in stronger offensive positions than the axes of the "regime's left" whose
positions were defensive positions predominantly.

Suddenly, the distinctive incident which touched off the battle occurred. Accord-
ing to the story of al-Sadat axis the incident was spontaneous and was summed up
in that one of the officers of the monitoring and recording security unit operating
in the office of Sha'rawi Jum'ah, the minister of interior, knocked on the presi-
dent's door at night. insisting on seeing the president to present something
important to him. It later became evident that that thing was a number of
secretly and illegally recorded tapes containing conversations monitored from the
president's house. in addition to other tapes on telephone conversations between
Sha‘rawi Jum'ah and other leaders of the axes of the "regime's left“ on the plans
to confront al-Sadat. Al-Sadat continued to listen to the tapes from midnight
until dawn on 12 Hay l971. In the morning. he ﬂmaediately summoned Sami Sharaf and
assigned him to go to Sha'rawi Jum'ah, who had taken command of the struggle from
his position in the Central Committee, to either resign or be relieved unmediately.

But a careful reading of the movement and documents of the events makes it more
likely that this incident was not spontaneous and that it had been planned care-
fully by al-Sadat axis which had gained the support of key figures of high degree

41

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
EUK Uttlblﬂb use on».

of importance in the axes of the “regime's left" and in the agencies they con-
trolled. The motive of that plan was to impose the battle on the other side while
in a state of fragmentation and before it could succumb to the increasing
pressures to bring the struggle down to the masses and to mobilize them and before
the military axis could complete its preparations to deal a fatal counter-blow.
It was not incidental that Taha Zaki, the officer who carried the tapes to the
president' s residence, was the cousin of Pawzi 'Ahd al-Hafiz, the president' s
private secretary, and it is not customary for the president to be awakened from
his sleep to listen to some recorded tapes when hearing those tapes could have
been delayed, without any noteworthy danger, until the president had awakened in
the morning. It is most likely that Taha Zaki had been recruited to work for
al-Sedat axis from his sensitive position in the Ministry of Interior.

Once again, a weeping Sami Sharaf carried out the mission entrusted to him by
President al-Sadat to give Sha'rawi Jum'ah the option of either resigning or of
being relieved. The axes of the "regime' 3 left" were shocked by the second surprise
attack which al- Sadat launched when no more than 13 days had passed on relieving
Ali Sabri.

An urgent conference was held for the leaderships of the axes of the "regime's
left" to study the situation and to confront sl-Sadat attack with a rapid counter-
attack. It became evident from assessing the situation that the military axis

was not yet able to move due to the fact that Lt Gen Muhammad Fawzi had dis-
covered that Lt Gen Muhammad Sadiq and a large number of high-ranking officers on
whom he relied had aligned themselves with al-8adst axis on the grounds that al-
Sadat represented legitimacy. it was also found out that Haj Gen al-Laythi Nasif,
the republican guard commander, had shifted his loyalty from Sami Sharaf to the
president of the republic.

The conferees also received reports that Maj Gen Mamduh Salim. whom al-Sadat had
appointed minister of interior in the place of Sha'rawi Jum'ah, had gained firm
control over the security agency and that a survey of the People's Assembly
members. all of whom were members of the Socialist Union also, showed that no more
than 18 out of 350 members were still loyal to the axes of the "regime's left."
Moreover, most of the leadership of the public sector workers and of its managers
had aligned themsleves with al-Sadat axis under the leadership of 'Aziz Sidqi.

It thus became evident that the plan of the axes of the "regime's left" to manage
the struggle for power according to the "palace coup game" was a futile plan in
view of the successive attacks launched by al-Sadat under the slogan of "legitimacy,
democracy and liquidation of the Centers of power." The only option left for those
axes was to either capitulate and succumb or fight on the basis of "collective
resignations from the regime's main positions," thus causing, in thier estimate,

a constitutional collapse in the country motivating the masses to move and rebel

in response to the weight which those leaderships represented-in their own

estimates-—in 'Abd al-Nasir's struggle experience.
On the evening of 13 May, the leaderships of the axes of the "regime's left" did in
fact surprise al-Sadat axis, the people and their cadres in the Socialist Union and

the Vanguard Organization by tendering their resignations, in solidarity with
Sha'rawi Jum'ah, from all the positions they held in the Supreme Executive

42

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONEY

Committee and the General Secretariat of the Socialist Union, in the cabinet,
in the People's Assembly speakership and in the command of the armed forces and
of the general intelligence.

The last action carried cut by Huhax-ad Pa'iq, the minister of information, before
leaving his office for his house was to issue his instructions, like all the other
resignees, that news of the resignations be broadcast on the radio without waiting
for the official documents to be presented to the president of the republic.

Bvenlhough this stance taken by the axes of the “regime's left" was essentially
within the bounds of a reaction, the collective quality of the stance and the way it
was announced were characterized by the qualities of offense and of defiance,
considering that it took the form of "throwing the glove openly in the face of
al-Sadat" with the aim of holding him accountable before the people for the
responsibility of the collapse in the state institutions as a result of "his
endeavors to gain the sole control of power and to liquidate the sides of the late
President Jamal 'Abd sl—Nasir and the protectors of his principles."

The axes of the regime's left thus gambled by tendering their resignations to the
people before the president in the hope that the masses would respond to the mes-
sage and would rise to help them, to besiege al-Sadat and to return them to their
positions with greater power.

In fact, several limited movements were observed in some parts of Cairo, al-Jizah
and Alexandria. The vanguards of those movements proceeded from units of the
Socialist Union under the leadership of a number of the second—line commands.
What was surprising was that most of those commands had always suffered by varying
degrees from the bureaucracy of some leaders of the axes of the "regime's left"
whereas the first-line leaderships and the cadres closest to the axes of the
"regime's left" and the ones most vociferous and clamorous when those axes con-
trolled the reigns of power--those first-line leaderships and those cadres lay
low and refrained from engaging in any movement. The explanation offered by this
kind of cadres, which later transferred their full loyalty to al-Sadat with ease,
was that they could no longer struggle by themselves when their leaderships had
abandoned their responsibilities, had left for their homes and had closed the
doors behind them.

But a reading of the movement of the events reveals that there actually was an
objective opportunity to transform the limited popular movements which had emerged
spontaneously into an effective broad-scale popular action had the axes of the
"regime's left," instead of resigning from the Supreme Executive connuttee and the
General Secretariat of the Socialist Union, been content with resigning from their
positions in the government agency only and had they, instead of taking refuge

in their homes, fortified themselves in the Socialist Union and the Vanguard
Organization and proceeded from them to unite with the masses.

The gamble of the axes of the "regime's left" failed not only because this was done
at the last moment but also because resorting to the masses was done bureaucrati-
cally by government ministers and officials who had lost all bureaucratic influence
and official prestige after having resigned from their positions and having lost
their legitimacy.

43
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFLLLAL use Unbl

Even though for the first time in the struggle al-Sadat axis was surprised by

this collective stance on the part of the axes of the "regime's left--a stance
which had left serious vacuum in the state institutions--that axis recovered
quickly from the shock, taking advantage of the fact that its opponents had frozen
their movement at the point of resigning and of watching and waiting at their
homes. This axis moved with all its forces to fill the vacuum created by the resig-
nations from the state's political and executive agencies. At the same time, al-
Sadat entrusted the offensive operations to three persons who had been working

for him within the fortifications of the axes of the regime's left and whom he
described as the "true heroes" of the movement to correct the July revolution on
15 Hay 1971. This is the name which al-Sadat continued to give his victory in

the struggle for power over the axes of the region's left until 1975 when he re-
placed it by the term of the "correction revolution" at times and the "Hay
revolution" at others.

The three heroes were Lt Gen Muhammad Sadiq. the armed forces chief of staff whom
al-Sadat hastened to appoint minister of defense and general commander of the
armed forces ismwdiately upon the resignation of Lt Gen Muhammad Pawzi. Lt Gen
Muhammad Sadiq was also entrusted with the task of securing the armed forces'
loyalty to al-Sadat, of purging them of the elements loyal to the vanquished
"centers of power and of imposing a security blockade on Cairo, Alexandria and

a number of other major cities so that the armed forces may be prepared to inter-

vene quickly in case hostile popular movements are staged with such force as to
exceed the capability of the local police to deal with them deicisively.

The second hero was Maj Gen al-Laythi Nasif, the national guard commander, who took
charge of the task of arresting and Jailing all the resigning and non-resigning
leaderships of the axes of the "regime's left" on the night of 14 Hay 1971.

The third hero was Maj Gen Hamduh Salim who was appointed minister of interior on
the day Sha'rawi Jum'ah resigned the position and who took charge of confronting
the limited popular movements and of purging the Socialist Union and the other
political and state agencies of the dangerous cadres and of the elements known to
be sympathetic to the vanquished "centers of power" and the task of arresting those
cadres and elements, using the security forces.

The rightist forces comprised of the delta deputies and the Upper Egypt deputies
allied with al-Sadat axis hastened to call for an urgent meeting of the People's
Assembly on 14 Hay 1971 and attended that meeting loaded with arms. Emerging
prominently in the Assembly's discussions to condemn the "rightist forces plot"
and to "delcare loyalty to President al-Sadat" was deputy Rafi: Badswi, the
minister of social affairs in 'Abd al-Nasir’s last cabinet and one of the leaders
closest to the axes of the "regime's left." During the meeting, the membership
of Assembly Speaker Labib Shuqayr. of the two deputy speakers and of 15 other
members who refused to approve the condemnation of the “centers of power," a con-
demnation which was then issued unanimously, was dropped. Hafiz Badawi was
elected speaker. He was later appointed chairman of the Supreme People's Court
which tried his former leaders and friends in the axes of the "regime's left“ who
had become the main defendants in the case of the "plot of the centers of power."

Al-Sadat. in his capacity as the Socialist Union chairman. issued a decision form-
ing a provisional secretariat for the Socialist Union of nine members under the

chairmanship of Dr 'Aziz Sidqi.

44

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

At the same time, al-Sadat announced for the second time re-formation of the
cabient under the chairmanship of Dr Mahmud Pawzi. One of the leaders of the

Marxist left, Dr lsma'il Sabri 'Abdallah, entered the cabinet for the first time
as deputy minister of planning.

Thus, before 3 days had passed (13-15 May 1971), al-Sadat settled the struggle for
power following 'Abd al-Nasir's absence in accordance with the rules and criteria
of the "palace coup." Consequently, al-Sadat took sole control of power and threw
the axes of the "regime's left" in jail as "leaders of the plotting centers of
power." Soon, sentences were issued against them ranging from death (mitigated to
life-imprisonment at hard labor) to imprisonment.

On 15 Hay 1971, the term "the Hay movement" stormed into the political dictionary
in Egypt. This term reflects al-Sadat political school which began to crystallize
when a1~Sadat managed to settle the struggle for power emerging after 'Abd a1-
Nasir's absence in his favor. The roots of this movement are founded on the
identicalness of al-Sadat's class position in society with his political position
in the July revolution within the framework of the interests, concepts. values,
aspirations and alliances of the rural petit-bourgeoisie.

[13-19 Nov 81 pp 51—53]

[Text] In the part before last, Lutfi al-Khuli recounted the events of the Hulwan
battle, the fall of 'Ali Sabri and the atmosphere of the decisive battle between
al-Sadat and the Egyptian left, leading to the Hay movement which settled the
"palace coup."

The Hay movement began its first humble beginnings in 1971 as a corrective movement
vis-a-vis the plotting of the centers of power against the July revolution and
ended in May 1975, on the eve of reopening the Suez Canal for navigation since its
closure in the 1967 war, by declaring itself "the revolution to correct the

July revolution itself."

The transformation from correction movement to correction revolution did not come
in one leap. Rather, it passed through three phases:

First phase: From the time of 'Abd al-Nasir's death in September 1970 until the
struggle for power was settled and the so-called centers of power liquidated in
May 1971.

In this phase, al-Sadat sought, under the banner of the July revolution and of
continuing on 'Abd al-Nasir's path, to appear intentionally as a humble successor
loyal to the leader of the July revolution--a successor who had been entrusted with
"the family of the July revolution and of Jamal 'Abd al-Nasir."

In his speech before the parliamentary body of the Socialist Union on 10 Hay 1971
(only 5 days before toppling the axes of the regime's left), al-Sadat said:

"Let our guiding principle always be that we are the family of the July revolution
and of Jamal 'Abd al-Nasir and that the members of a family may disagree and may
argue, but under the canopy of the family and not of the canopy of struggle, be-
cause the goal must always be the interest of the entire family. The people having

45

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I'UK UI‘I'LLIAL. our. maul

honored me with being the expression of this family, I will not permit the
struggle. But all this will be within the bounds of the supremacy of the law."

With this approach, in which al-Sadat mingled the idea of a debating, but not con-
flicting, family dominated by the rule of the law with the idea of continuity of
the spirit of the July revolution and of Jamal 'Abd al-Nasir, he was able, on the
one hand, to attract to his axis the forces of the liberal right and to reassure
the old and new rightist forces of being accepted in his family which is dominated
by the law and by the freedom of discussion whereas the interests of those

forces had been constantly threatened by the measures of the revolutionary
legitimacy in 'Abd al-Nasir'a era.

0n the other hand, al-Sadat was able to drug the axes of the "regime's left"
opposing him--axes which had begun to reunite their ranks after the fall of 'Ali
Sabri in the Hulwan battle--by inviting them to unite with him within the family
of the July revolution and of 'Abd al-Nasir and by acknowledging the "right of
debate and disagreement within the bounds of the supremacy of the law" as long as
those axes steered clear off alliance with the leftist factions. Al—Sadat was
aware of the ongoing contacts between those axes and the leftist factions which
were calling for "igniting the social and political struggle in the country" by
organizing and rallying the masses behind their interests and by having them
participate in filling the vacuum created by the absence of 'Abd al-Nasir's leader-
ship as an inevitable must for enabling the July revolution to continue the
economic, social and political development and to confront Israel and inperialism.

With the forces he won over to his side and with the drugging he induced, al-Sadat
was able to deal his final blow in the struggle for power and to settle this
struggle in his favor under the name of the correction movement.

The second phase extends from the date of the so-called correction movement in May
1971 to the outbreak of the October 1973 war. This is a phase characterized by
extreme complexity due to the strong ebb and flow in the activity of the popular
movement and to the intricate alliance and struggle operations between al-Sadat
and the leftist groups after liquidation of the so-called centers of power.

Al-Sadat, in sole control of powarand having attracted the support of all the axes
and forces ﬂat had been vacillating, launched this phase by taking a stance via-a-
vis the struggle for power and by appealing to all the popular masses with all
their inclinations, including the leftist gruops--both Nasirist and Harxist--to
participate in the national action. He coupled the appeal with measures trans-
lating it into a tangible reality for the first time.

In his speech to the People's Assembly on 20 Hay l97l--a speech in which al-Sadat
presented his report on the decisive battle for power and on his assessment of the
battlc--a1—Sadat said: "We have been exposed, for only a few hours, to deviation
from 'Abd al-Nasir's path. I say for the record that the correction operation
staged by the people on 15 Hay 1971 does not make a new leadership for Anwar al~
Sadat. Its value and its genuineness lie in its giving the command and the leader-
ship to the alliance of the people's working forces."

After urging the peeple to put what had happened behind them and not to stop at
that point "because the future is worthier of our attention," al-Sadat proceeded

46
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

to assert that the direction of the work and of the future is tied to focusing

on two issues: "First. the issue of the battle with Israel for liberation of the
land and, second, building the new state by continuing Jamal 'Abd al—Nasir's
procession because it is the road we want to open for the march of the alliance

of the people's working forces, the makers of freedom and of socialism and the
pioneers of unity."

In the course of speaking about the battle with Israel, al-Sadat asserted that
Egypt's position was the position of "no relinquishing of the land and no bargain—
ing over the Palestinian people's rights." He further asserted that opening the
Suez Canal "is not an independent goal but one of the phases of full withdrawal.
We accept no discussion of our armed forces [right to] cross the east bank of the

Suez Canal. we will not agree to extend the cease-fire endlessly as long as there

is a single soldier on our land--and our land is the re-é June 1967 1 d
as we and the entire Arab nation are concerned." P an insofar

Defining the position toward the Soviet Union, al-Sadat said that it is "the
honorable friend who has given us weapons without saying: Come sign a contract
with me and pay me. He gave us to enable us to stand on our feet politically,
militarily and economically. He has given us honorably, sincerely and without
restrictions or conditions."

As for the United States, al-Sadat described it as "a fundamental element in the
problem because it supplies Israel with everything from 'a loaf of bread to

Phantoms.‘ Without the backing, support and assistance of the United States,
Israel will not be able to do what it has been doing." He also declared that he
had asked Rogers, the 0.8. secretary of state. during their talks in Cairo that

the United States define its position "because I am now facing historical positions
which must be completely defined, considering that it is an issue of peace or war."

As for building the new state and the future directions, al-Sadat projected a
number of ideas on what the new constitution--which he had entrusted the People's
Assembly to draft so that it may put to a public referendum-~should contain so
that it may be the basis of movement in all spheres. Those ideas included:

Realizing and underlining the Egyptian affiliation with the Arab nation.

Protecting and bolstering all the socialist gains and creating the right condi-
tions for expanding their sphere, including the percentages set for the workers
and farmers in the People's Assembly and in the elected popular councils at the
various levels (50 percent at least).

No decision and no measure without judiciary control.
Including the people in the administration of justice through jurors.

Underlining and protecting the role of the public, cooperative and private
property.

Putting a time limit on the term of service in high—ranking political and execu-
tive offices so as to insure renewal and rejuvenation. He declared that he would
start with himself and would not renew his nomination for the presidency.

67

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
AV“ Van‘sahet-a vu— mime—-

At the outset of his speech to the national congress of the Socialist Union--after
the Union had been re-formed from top to bottom by e1ection--on 23 July 1971,
al-Sadat said: "Though we face this day without the presence of the hero of

23 July among us, Jamal 'Abd al-Nasir, with his principles, is always with us and
with all the generations as the supreme ideal of the honorable struggler who car—
ries his flag on his shoulder and his heart on his palm and confronts, struggles,
dreams and accomplishes."

Defining his position toward the battle with Israel, al-Sadat said: "We must make
the decision on war and peace while fully aware of our responsiblities." He also
declared that he "will not permit 1971 to pass without settling the issue of the
aggression politically or militarily."

Al-Sadat presented to the comress a "national action program" to act as the basis
for political action in the Socialist lhion. The program had been formulated by
a group of Nasirist and Marxist leftists under the chairmanship of Dr 'Aziz

Sidqi, with Muhammad 'Abd al-Salam al-Zayyat (who later became the Socialist Union
secretary), Dr Fu'ad Hursi (who was afterwards appointed minister of supply),

Dr Isma'il Sabri 'Abdallah (who became minister of planning after having served

as deputy minister of planning) and R'Huhannad al-Khafif (who became a member of
the Socialist Union Central Committee and the official in charge of the Strategic
Studies Institute) as members. Lutfi al-Khuli, al-Khafif's colleague, served
with him as member of the Central Committee in charge of the Foreign Relations
Committee.

The program sought to realize three main goals, namely: Realizing the victory.
establishing a modern state and defining a clear role for the Socialist Union's
political organizatixm and for the unions.

The program also pledged to double the national income in 10 years, to rebuild

the Egyptian villages within 20 years at a cost of one billion Egyptian pounds and
to develop fundamental industrial complexes so that they may employ 3 million
citizens of working age in the subsequent 10 years.

The program also pledged to involve workers of the public sector units in dis-
cussing the plan of their units, to secure the guarantees necessary for the
private sector to perform its defined role in the development plan under effective
popular supervision, to exert efforts to raise industrial production during the
program's phases from 2,123,000,000 pounds to 0,663,000,000 pounds. to increase
agricultural production from 1,075,000,000 pounds to 1.6 billion pounds, to re—
organize the government administration and define the responsibilities so that
they may not clash and to give the citizens the right to resort to the attorney
general when they become aware of deviation from the law or of the misuse of power

The program further pledged efforts for the establishment of a vanguard organiza-
tion, as stipulated by the Socialist Union charter, including the leadership
elements emerging during action among the masses and acting as an open agency,
"because socialism is not built secretly and freedom is not realized behind cur-
tains."

All this was coupled with measures for the release of the political detainees
from the various inclinations. The hitist groups, represented by Dr Fu'ad Hursi,

68

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Dr Muhammad al-Kbafif and Ahmad Nabil al-Hilali, participated in the loo-member
committee which supervised the elections for rebuilding the Socialist Union. The
friendship and cooperation treaty between Egypt and the Soviet Union was also
concluded in June 1971.

In this climate, the objective factors became available for the establishment of
an alliance between the regime and the majority of the leftist groups over the
national action program, on the ground of the July revolution and for the goal of
uniting the national forces to wage the battle of liberation against Israel in
the year of decision, 1971.

While the year of decision was moving fast toward its end, al-Sadat's political
directions-~projected through his representatives in the agencies of the various
levels of the Socialist Union, the cabinet, the press and the information media--
were moving very close to the positions of the left concerning the national and
pan-Arab battle.

Al-Sadat translated this closeness clearly in the speech which he delivered in
November 1971 to the Opening session of the newly-elected People's Assembly when
he stressed: "The United States is primarily responsible for Israel, its instru-
ment in implementing interests which the United States imagines it has in the
area. Israel is the biggest means of coercion, intimidation and of obstructing
the inevitable development on the Arab land..."

Defining the 0.8. interests in the area and the extent of their danger to Egypt
and the Arabs, al-Sadat said: "America wants to oust the Soviet Union from the
area and we view the Soviet Union as a friend in war and a friend in peace.
American wants to isolate Egypt from the Arab nation. Historically, and fatefully
we cannot accept such isolation because Egypt is a part of the Arab nation. both
in terms of destiny and of the future. America wants to strike the socialist
experience in Egypt and we believe in our method of development and insist on it
to the utmost."

But al-Sadat quickly backed down on deciding in the year of decision and began
to adopt measures against the leftist and democratic elements in the Socialist
Union. From their positions in the political organization, those elements ex-
posed and criticized the shrinking democratic guarantees in the Socialist Union
and the press, the infiltration of parasitic and opportunistic elements to some
leadership positions, through their personal loyalty to al-Sadat, to realize
their ends and ambitions at the expense of the interest of the masses, the
concealment of the facts from the people and from the organization's leaderships,
the strong contrast between the declared goals and the available resources and

capabilities and the viewing of the political organisation as a mere agency for
explaining and justifying the executive authority's actions.

The gap between al-Sadat and all factions of the Egyptian left began to widen
and sl-Sadat, in his own way of bringing the opponents together when attacking the
left, denounced at a plenary emergency meeting of the Central Comittee in April
1972~-a meeting in which the ministers, governors and the Socialist Union secre-
taries participated—~rightist elements responding to leftist elements in the cam-
paign of casting doubts on the regime "with the former hiding behind the mask of

49

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

national independence in confronting what they call the Soviet influence while the
latter claim that we are reluctant to embark on the battle even though the Soviet
Union has supplied us with all that is needed for this battle. Both sides are
wrong."

0n 8 July 1972, al—Sadat suddenly made a decision "to terminate the mission of
the Soviet military advisers and experts" at a time when the rightist and para-
sitic forces were infiltrating the authority's agencies more strongly and when
they were engaging in campaigns of slander against the July revolution, socialism
and Jamal 'Abd al-Nasir in the hearing sessions which the People's Assembly was
holding under the chairmanship of Hahmud Abu Wafiyah. The signs of the fabrics-
tion of a sectarian sedition between the Egyptian Muslims and Christians

also started to erupt in a noticeable manner.

The struggle erupted in the street between the national and progressive forces

on the one hand and, on the other hand, the retrogression forces which were
gaining an ever-increasing influence in determining the regime's political,
economic and social line. Successive demonstrations were held by the students

and the workers with the support and backing of the various factions of the
leftist forces, of the professional unions and of the masses of the national
intellectuals. The regime confronted this movement with repressive measures which
led to the imprisonment of many of the leftist and national elements, to dropping
their membership in the Socialist Union, including the Central Committee, and to
their expulsion from their jobs in the press and the information media. This was
done through rigged political trials which came to be known as "the massacre
perpetrated by the regime's committee in the Socialist Union." That committee

was headed by one of the knights of the new right, namely Muhammad 'Uthman Isma'il.

The struggle continued to intensify until the eruption of the October 1973 war.

The alliance was then reestablished between the regime and the national and leftist
forces. But that alliance broke down rapidly and the struggle erupted anew over

the issue of continuing the October war and exﬁoddng its outcome when al-Sadat
decided to freeze the war and to accept a cease-fire on 22 October 1973 and when
the Kilometer 101 negotiations--which threatened the unity of the combat line be-
tweeen Egypt, Syria and the Palestinian revolution-—were started.

The third phase covers the period between the end of the October 1973 war and the
end of 1975 in which started the planned movement for the retrogression from the
July revolution and for proclamation of the "May revolution" as an actual con-
temporary alternative to the July revolution under new slogans totally remote
from the July revolution's slogans of freedom, socialism and unity. The May
revolution coined general, unenlightening and indeterminate slogans speaking of
"the state of science and faith, the modern state with an open society and the
state of institutions and of the supremacy of the law."

Within this framework, the policy of planned comprehensive development was replaced
by the open-door economic policy which opened the door for the investment of
foreign capital in the private and public sectors. for creating free zones and
cities, for reducing the public sector's role in the national economy in the
interest of the pansnic growth of a limited number of elements of the private
sector, for diversifying the sources of military armament by not relying on a

50

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

single source, namely the Soviet Union, and for opening the door of relations of
freindship and cooperation with the United States of America through responding

to the "dear Kissinger diplomacy" which produced the disengagement agreements
between Egypt and Syria, thus posing the threat of isolating Egypt from Syria and
the Arab homeland on the one hand and, on the other hand, paving the way for
imposing a separate peace between Egypt and Israel in one form or another. On

top of all this, the "Hay revolution" dropped all the documents of the July revolu-
tion, especially the National Action Charter and the 30 March Proclamation, abiding
only by the six general principles of the July revolution which, by their very
nature, are subject to more than one political and social interpretation, depend-
ing on the character of the social force doing the interpretation in its interest.

The matter did not stop at dropping the July revolution documents but were beyond
to dropping even the National Action Program which al-Sedat himself had approved
and issued in 1971 after settling the struggle of power with the axes of the
"regime's left" in his favor.

Al-Sadat presented a complete alternative, known as the October Paper which re-
flects the "correction revolution's" visualization of the map of the Egyptian
political, social and economic movement until the end of the 20th century, to a
public referendum in May 1974. The paper got the approval of 99.95 percent of the
voters--the figure characterizing all of the regime's referendums,without any
increase or reduction.

In an interview with the Lebanese AL-BAXRAQ on 10 December 1975, al-Sadat, expres-
sing the positions reached by the “Hay revolution,“ said: "I want to say that
there are the 23 July principles. There is no Nasirism. However, some want to
call it so. As long as the revolution exists and as long as we cling to the revolu-
tion's (meaning the May revolution) charters, then let anybody call it whatever

he mants--Nasirist revolution or whatever they wish. But I reject the name of
Sadatism..."

Thus for the first time in long years, a process of natural and deep sifting
took pics in the modern Egyptian society for all the visible and hidden forces in
this society in such aaopen manner that tore the masks of concealment, falsifica-
tion and patching when the sores of the parasitic right broke on society's skin.

The movement for the unity of the various factions of the leftist forces, especially
of the Nasirist and Marxist forces, began to emerge anew-~after it had been inter-
rupted in the critical period extending from the end of 'Abd al-Nasir’s era and
the beginning of al-Sadat's era and the struggle for power--with the aim of
besieging the parasitic right and its alliances at home and abroad, especially
with the U.S. imperialism, and of exerting efforts to foil the alliances before
they manage to implement their scheme to liquidate the July revolution's accom—
plishments, to obstruct continued progress, with a new breath, on the path of
freedom, socialism and unity and to squander the political and economic inde-
pendence, and perhaps even push the regime toward concluding peace with Zionism
through the shuttle policy practiced by the "dear Kissinger."

Herein lie both the danger and the issue.
COPYRIGHT: 1981 AL-HATAN AL'ARABI

8694

C80: 6504/102 51

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

IRAQ

IRAN'S NOVEMBER OFFENSIVE DISCUSSED
Paris AL-WATAN AL-‘ARABI in Arabic No 253, 18-21: Dec 81 pp 24, 25
[Article by Kamal Hasan Bukhayt: "Iraqi Vigilance Aborts Blind 'Attack of Millions"']

[Text] It is a policy of hopeless attacks which the Iranians are pursuing against the
confrontation lines with Iraq, using more men and equipment, with failure after failure.
The latest one is what the Iranians call "the attack of millions." Iraq called it the
"third Susangerd massacre." The attacks continue, the Iraqi army is in its positions,
and the Iranian regime is incapable of making peace.

For months the Iranians have been preparing a widespread attack against Iraqi positions
in the Susangerd area. Calls went out to all Iranians of various ages to take part in
this campaign. In view of the dreams held by the leaders of Iran regarding what this
campaign would achieve, the leadership was able to round up huge numbers of soldiers
and thrust them into battle. The Iranian attack, which began on 29 Novuber, and which
continued for a full week, ended in a devastating failure before the countering

Iraqi military plan. The attack began on two main axes, supported by large numbers

of soldiers backed by tanks and armor, and various types of weapons. A diversionary
attack was made against a third axis, aimed at deceiving the Iraqi forces.

The first Iranian military mistake occurred when large groups of soldiers charged
into nine fields planted by the Iraqi army. This resulted in hundreds of deaths with-

out any military result worth mentioning.

The second Iranian error was an error in judgnent. The Iraqi military comand was in
the highest state of alert and had prior knowledge of the Iranian movements. The
Iranian attack was robbed of its strongest element, that of surprise, in terms of tin-
ing and direction.

Despite that, the various military reports issued discussed damaging battles between
the Iranian and Iraqi forces. This resulted from the blind charges launched by the
Iranian troops, as well as the huge numbers of attackers in comparison with the oppos-
ing Iraqi forces.

The battle rapidly turned to the advantage of the Iraqi forces, before ending in a new
military defeat for the Khomeyni regime's forces. The new Iraqi victory was caused by
a number of factors, including:

52

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
* The specific superiority of the Iraqi soldier's ability and in the Iraqi military

leadership over the Iranian soldier and leadership, which contains elalents of anarchy,
favoritism and purge campaigns.

* The effective role played by the Iraqi Air Force. The recent battles demon-
strated a change in the balance of air power between the two sides. After Iranian

air superiority in the beginning of the war, it is obvious that the Iraqi army has
gained control, to a large extent, over the skies over the battlefields. In the recent
battle, Iraqi fighter planes were able to destroy large numbers of attacking armor, as
well as impeding the forward movanent of other groups.

* The effective role played by "special forces," which are distinguished by super-
ior nobility, military effectiveness and suicidal tactics. These forces were able to
plug some of the gaps and to encircle numerous Iranian groups.

In Baghdad, a military spokesman announced that the losses inflicted on the Iranian
army in last week's battles totaled 6,500 dead, "in addition to 262 tanks, 51 troop
transports, 61 artillery pieces, 26 vehicles, 12 (shaglan), and 11 fighter planes
destroyed. There were also a large number of Iranians taken prisoner. Large
quantities of equipment and ammunition were seized along with medium and light srps."

If the Iranian attacks have indeed been thwarted on the battlefield, the question re-
mains: Uhy does the Khomeyni regime persist in continuing these hopeless attacks,
since all of them are ending in failure?

We shall find the answer through a quick look at the domestic political and economic
situation inside Iran. The highlight of this situation is the internecine struggles
between contending movements and power centers, and the struggle between the regime
and the opposition forces, in addition to the Kurdestan war. These struggles con-
tinue viciously, which has led and will lead to the weakening of the Iranian soldier's
morale, as well as destroying careful military leadership.

It is obvious that the continued Iranian escalation at the front is aimed at achiev-
ing two goals:

1. Attempt to reduce the intensity of the domestic struggle by directing attention
to the front ,

2. To distract the Iranian army and remove it from any effective role in the struggle
against the authorities.

As for the goal of shifting the war inside Iraqi territory, so far the possibility is
remote and unrealistic.

0n the other hand, it is clear that the war has not as yet exhausted the Iraqi army,
despite its continuing and the numerical disparity. The Iraqi military positions

have been changed into a fait accompli. The Iraqi soldier has found in his leaders

all the support and expertise required to look after his needs and security. More

than that, the people and regime in Iraq are putting all their resources into the:hattle
at the front. One of the prominent factors during the recent battles was the pre-

sence of President Saddam Husayn once more at the scene of combat. He personally
directed the campaign and drew up the defensive and offensive battle plans. He did

not return to Baghdad until after he was reassured about the results of the fighting.

53

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The Iraqi presldent went from the front to some villages, where he met the people

and talked to then about their problens. He personally reported to then the latest
news from the front.

Copyright: 1981 AL-HATAN AL-‘ARABI

7005
C50: Nook/188 END

54

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY