APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00880R000200020050-0
Near East/North Africa Report

No. 2050

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
I] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the U.S. Government.

PROCUREMENT 0? PUBLICATIONS

JPRS publications may be ordered from the National Technical
Information Service, Springfield, Virginia 22161. In order-
ing, it is recommended that the JPRs number, title, date and
author, if applicable, of publication be cited.

Current JPRS publications are announced in Government Reports
Announcements issued semi-monthly by the National Technical
Information Service, and are listed in the Monthly Catalog of
0.8. Government Publications issued by the Superintendent of
Documents, 0.8. Government Printing Office, Washington, n.c.
20402.

Indexes to this report (by keyword, author, personal names,
title and series) are available from Bell G Howell, Old
Mansfield Road, Wooster, Ohio 44691.

Correspondence pertaining to matters other than procurement
may be addressed to Joint Publications Research Service,
1000 North Glebe Road, Arlington, Virginia 22201.
IO. Aimee! lllmn' 200 we!)

       
 

This serial report contains intonation on socioeconomic, government, political.
and technical developments in the countries of the Near East and North Africa.

 

 

——

ll. Datum Mind! 0. Manuals

 

Political Science Llnter-Arab Affairs __Libya __Su1tanate
Sociology _North African _x_}iauritani.n of Oman
Economics Affai ra Aﬂorocco JSyris
Culture (Social LAfghanietan _People's Demo- _x_Tunisia
Sciences) _Algeria cratic Republic __United Arab

Ethnology _Bnhrain of Yemen Emirates
Geography Lﬁgypt _Persian Gulf _xHestern Sahara
Techological _x_Iran Area _£_Yelen Arab
Military Sciences __lraq Aqua" Republic

_x_lsrae1 _Saudi Arabia

_Jordan __Spanish North

_3_t_ Kuwait Africa

___l.ebanon Sudan
NEAR EAST/NORTH AFRICA REPCRI

No. 2050

CONTENTS
INTER-ARAB AFFAIRS

Palestinian Front at Home Criticizes Jordanian-Pm Coumittee
(suhwl “3111; All-Wm, 8 wt 79) .OIIOOIOICOII...

AFGHANISTAN

Amin Message on UN Anniversary
(Kabul Mastic semce, 23 mt 79) CICOOOOOIOIIIIIOOOI

Part I, by Hafizollah Amin
Part II

EGYPT

Trial of Syrian Saboteur in Cairo
('Ala' Rif'at; AL-AKHBAR, 2 NOV 79) oooeoeo-eooeooooooo

Proposed Constitutional Amendments Discussed
(5818b al-Hafnaui; AL-JUHHURIYAH, 27 Wt 79) 0000......

Elections for University Student Unions Postponed
("83.ud d-mm‘i; WA", 2'] wt 79) 0000000..

Prosecution of Defendants in 1977 Riots Completed
('Alﬂ' Rizqg AL-AKHBAR, 211 wt 79) eeeooeeeeoeooooea-eo

Short Biographies of Expected Future Leaders of Journalist:
Provided
(mum, 25 wt 79) 00.00.0000000000IIOICOOOIOI-

Alexandria Local Council Opposes Proposed Iocation for

Nuclear Power Station
('Abd al'mhab Hard; m “PIA”, 3 NOV 79) see...

-a- [III-NECA-l:
IRAN

Slah's

Trip to U.S. Believed Medically Unnecessary
(EXCELSIm, 28 Oct! 79) 00......IOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOI.

Chronicle of Organized Political Activity

(WM'AT, 16, 19 Aug 79) OIOIOIOOOODOIIOOCOOOOOOI...

Hojahedin Khalq's Statement

Five Political Organizations

Statement by Hoslem Party

Statement by Halek Ashtar Group
Islamic Revolutionary Mojaheds
Anniversary of Fatemeh Allini's Death
Open Letter to Prime Minister
Nationalization of Industries
Establishment of Homafar lbjahed Organization
National Democratic Front marges
Proposed Islamic Front for Poor
Doctors, Nurses Support Hojahedin Khalq
Tehran Teachers' Statement

Moslen Teachers Hovement

Tehran Industrial University Demands

Kordestan Situation Viewed by Leaders

Briefs

(m, 12 sep 79) O0.0.COOOOOOOCOOCOOOOOIOOOOI0.0...

Mihandustan Party Letter

Political Organizations Not To Demonstrate
National Front Regret

Supporting Gods Day

Wouen's Democratic Establisknent

Hardom Party on Elections

Movement of Hoslem Fighters

Iranian Society of Cooperation With Palestine
Tohidi Party Naming

Massive Participation

Fedayee Khalq Statanent

Honoring Samad Behrangi

Political Prisoners' Society
CQI'I'BNTS (Continued)
ISRAEL

Autononw Plan a Year After Camp David Assessed
(M'mz, 21 sep 79) IOOOOOOOOOOIIOOOOODOOOOII.0.IO...

Egyptian Assessment of the Middle East Situation Reviewed
(HA'WZ, 12 sep 79) I0.00......OCOCOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO.

Heizman Appoints Jurists To Examine Shamgar Comittee
Recomendations
(Jerusalem Domestic Service, 9 Nov 79) ................

Defense Ministry Denies Reports on Abolition of

Coordinator's Post
(Jerusalem Domestic Television Service, 15 Nov 79) ....

Briefs
October Inmigration Figures
Trade Deficit Rises
Bedouins Compensated withdrawal
011 Imports Statistics
Press Readership Figures

KUWAIT

U.S. Arms to Israel Belie Desire for Peace
(Editorial; All-RAY AIP'M, 16 sep 79) oeeeoeeeeeeeeaeo

Threat To Export Iranian Revolution Deplored
(Editorial; AIL-RAY AIF'“, 17 sep 79) 0000000000000...

Dangers Facing Arab World Noted on Camp David Anniversary
(Editorial; All-m AL'-AHH, 18 sep 79) aaoooeeoeeeeeeee

HAURITAN I A

Develoment of Eastern Hodh Depends on Exploitation
of Underground Hells
(cm, 17 wt 79) COCOOOOOOCOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOIOO

Briefs
Iron Ore Exports
Port Construction
Federal Front of South

P lge

58

68
68
68
68

70

71

73

75

79
79
CONTENTS (Continued)
MOROCCO

Libyan Good Will Called For in Implementing Agreements
(Editorial; L'OPINION, 2? Sﬁp 79) eeoeeooooeeeeeeoeese

Manpower, Social Security Agreements Signed With Libya
(L'OPININ, 27 sep 79) OOOOOIII.OOOOOOOIOOIIOOOOOOIOOI

Health Agreement Signed Hith China
(L'OPINIm, 27 sep 79) 0.0.0....IOOIIODOOOOOOOOIOIOIOI

QATAR

Briefs
July Oil Production

SYRIA

um Military Aid Discussed
(Jorg Stocklin; LB FIGARO, 17 001’. 79) ooeeeoeeoeoeeeoe

Briefs
Treatment of Political Prisoners
Syria-68m Energy Cooperation
TUNISIA

Foreign Minister Fitouri Discusses Maghreb Situation
(Mohamed Fitouri Interview; L'OP‘D‘IG, 26 Sep 79) ....

WESTERN SAHARA

POLISARIO Presents Saharans Captured wring Snare Operation
(I3 “mm, 16 wt 79) 0.......00....OOOCOOOOOOCIOI..0.

rm ARAB REPUBLIC

Opposition Elements Said To Be Organising Against Regime
(AL‘W‘H, 22 wt 79) 0.0...ICQOIIOOOQOOOOUCOOOOOOI

Information Minister on Dsmcratic Process, National Unity
(mm al-‘Arshi Interview; meow, 20 Oct 79) .
PMSTINIAN FRONT AT HOE CRITICIZES JORDANlAN-PID CMTTEE
Beirut. AL-HURRIYAH in Arabic 8 Oct 79 pp 22-21!

[Article by mayl Khalil: "Is Joint Jordanian-Palestinian Committee a
Comttec to Bolster or to Fragment Steadfastness; Jordanian Regime, Instead
of P10, Strengthens Its Positions Hith Steadfastness Monies; Pm Leadership
Required to Take Serious Critical Pause Toward Positions of Palestinian Side
and to Correct Cmittee's Course; National ﬁtnt's Observations on Joint

Occupied Territories; It Is Required That Relations With Opportunists Hell-
Known for Their Suspect Connections Hith Palestinian People's Enemies Be
Cut Off; Verbatim Text of Memorandum of National Front at Home to Pm"!

[Text] In its latest meeting, the P10 Executive Committee rejected a
Jordanian proposal to unite the universities and higher institutes of the
West Bank and Gaza Strip under the banner of a new university to be set
up in Jerusalem under the direct control of the Jordanian Ministry of
Education. The Jordanian side to the Joint Jordanian-mlestinian Commit-

Sources close to the PID Executive Counittee have pointed out that the
refusal is due to two major factors:

That this sly proposal, which was submitted on the pretext of developinr.
the educational conditions in the occupied territories, canes within the
context of the feverish attempts beim made by the regime to find inlets

to the occupied territories and to create institutions operating under

its control, thus bolstering its political influence which has been con-
tained and reduced by the national and progressive, forces in these areas,
led by the National Front. These forces have also isolated the regime's
men advocating locally the spread of this influence, such as Amer Nuseybah,
Anvar al-Khatib, Hikmat al-Misri, Ilyas hire,” and others.
M:r-‘:ov-:r, this proposal practically oversteps the authority supervising the
educational and teaching conditions in the occupied Palestinian territories,
namely the Higher Educational Council which includes within its framework
ll:e bunt cadres and experts in Palestinian national education, as well as
r--m°v-::('u|uIJVI-z: of all the universities and higher and middle-low] insti-
Iuten un-l represents-then of the various national and progressive political
inclinations and currents. The said sources have also pointed out that the
PID Executive Contittee has again stressed that the Higher Educational
Council in the occupied territories is the sole channel through which and
with which the PID actually coordinates approval of all educational affairs
in these territories.

Penetration Attempt and Containment Attempt

The attempt to contain the universities and institutes of the Heat Bank and
Gaza Strip and to place them under the wings of the Jordanian ministries and
government agencies is not the first attempt through which Amman's Govern-
ment has tried to penetrate the occupied territories and to enhance its
influence there. The Jerusalem Electricity Company--part of whose concession
some lackey elements (ilyas Purayj) tried to sell to the Israelis with
Jordanian approval but the national forces were able at the tile to foil the
dea1--is another example and there are numerous other examples.

An observer of the Joint Jordanian-Palestinian Comittee which was formed
several mnths ago by a resolution taken at the Baghdad sumit to distribute
the steadfastness funds to the occupied territories discovers quickly that
there is a big flaw in this committee's course of action and its directives.
'lhis flaw reaches at times serious limits that cause the gravest harm to the
people's cause and to the steadfastness oi‘ the part of the people living
under occupation and limits that strongly undermine their morale and dignity.
This comes from the fact that the directives and resolutions undermining the
Palestinian struggle are adopted with the approval of the Palestinian side
which is headed by a member of the PID Executive Comnittee.

The talk about "serious limits" does not emanate from the "exposure" of the
Jordanian regime‘s annexation intentions, from its constant desire to create
a foothold for itself in the occupied Palestinian territories and from its
engaging in sabotage against the national forces and institutions. 'lhese
are old and completely known intentions and aspirations that constitute
fundamentally the Justification for the regime's existence and the essence
of its historical task. The danger lies in the fact that this regime's
representativas are always able to persuade (i) the Palestinian side in the
Joint committee of the proposals that the regime presents on "how" to spend
the funds allocated by the Baghdad [sun-sit] for the occupied territories,
not to mention the quantitative issues.

Observers inside the occupied territories, including the national institu-
tions, the municipal councils and the national and progressive forces and
personalities, are unanimus that the institutions and the individuals
following the Jordanian regime in one way or another get the lion's share
0." these monies. ‘ihere are numerous national institutions around which
there is an imn siege through which no form of aid penetrates to these
institutions as a result of the Jordanian side's determination and the
Palestinian side's indulgence.

0n the other hand, protests of various forms and tones are still coming it:
succession from the occupied Palestinian territories over the comittee's
work, the' outcome of its efforts and the Palestinian side's unJustit‘iach
relinquishment of the demands of the national institutions supporting the
PM. Actually, the national institutions well-known for their loyalty '.o
the P10 and for resisting and fighting the Occupation daily are denied all
forms of aid. Lbreover, major mnicipal councils, such as the Nabulus
Municipal Council, are denied aid despite the enormity of their economic
problems for no reason other than the national position they adopt toward
the Jordanian regime--a position about which the least that can be said is
that it is one of abiding by the PID program and by the Palestinian National
Council's resolutions. Hal‘nul Mmicipality is still awaiting aid even
though it presented months ago its plans and projects to the Joint comittec
that has even refused to receive them. The reason is the same [as above].
Big charitable societies and popular and social organizations have been
given no aid whereas small organizations and closed clubs following the
Jordanian regime, in the person of the individuals supervising them, receive
endless aid from this "Joint" comittee. This is happening at a time when
the national institutions are experiencing conditions that make them in the
direst need of this aid which was fundamentally allocated for them at the
Baghdad sumit--both the aid received and the aid not received.

given to it "free of charge" by the Palestinian side in the Joint couittee
and tries to blackmail and subjugate the national institutions, the social
councils and the popular organizations. The regime is working openly and
flagrantly on the basis of the rule "lessen your loyalty to the mo and you
will get financial aid for your institutions." me regime is enabled to
play this role by the complete silence of the Palestinian side in this con-
mittee--a silence for nothing in return.

It is truly an astonishing surprise that this committee is turned, as a
result of the domination of the Jordanian side over it [sic], into a motor
for besieging and containing the national forces and institutions in the
occupied territories in an attempt to subjugate then and make them swerve
from their struggle goals, instead of the opposite.
i:.'. LquiIu: ol‘ it." work without prior dctvmination of its tasks by the PU.)
uu tl- hint]: of vicar political directions, the Jordanian side is able to
impnw- nI:-.i ly its plan: and goals (gradually and with the open approval oi‘
Lin: l‘ull::tti.l:iah 31th:.

in this context, it is not surprising that the Palestinian Rational Front

hm: come out vi 1.?! a sharply~wordcd message warning the PLO leadership of
continuation of the Joint committee's work in its present form and calling
for abolition of all the resolutions adopted by this couittee and for re-
forming the Palestinian side in the comittee to include all the resistance
factions so as to guarantee that the comittee's work will proceed in accord-
ance with the Palestinian people’s true interests as ewodied by the national
forces, institutions and councils at home, led by the National Front.

ﬂow that the National Front has urged the P10 leadership to take a serious
critical pause toward the concessions nude by the Palestinian side to the
Joint counittee and to put an end to these concessions, the democratic,
progressive and national forces inside the P10 are required to play a mdor
and important role in this regard--a role based on the need for serious
intervention and for pressure with all the means to expose the intentions,
actions and annexation ambitions of the Jordanian regime. 'ihis role should
also he based on designing the Joint connittee's work in such a manner as

to trwsi'orm it truly into a comittcc for bolstering the national steadfast-
ness in the occupied territories and not a ccnunittee for fragmenting or
wasting this steadfastness and on recomitting Jordan to the role set for it
at the Baghdad summitunamely the role of coordinator and not of a partner
and of a decision-maker in the issue of distributing these monies to the
institutions, councils and popular organizations in the occupied territories.
This should be done so that the Palestinian side my turn into the sole
decision-raking side that directs this steadfastness operation in accordance
with the Palestinian people's national interests and goals.

National Pront's Observations Concerning Joint Comittee

l. The Palestinian National Front rejects completely the Jordanian role in
the Joint comittee and demands that this role be reduced to its size in
accordance with the Baghdad sunsnit resolutions that have defined Jordan's
role as that of a coordinator and not of a partner.

2. The Palestinian side's ceding of the Baghdad sunnnit resolution to the
Jordanian side has given the latter a bigger role than that of the Palestinian
side. ibreover, the daily actions within the framework of the Joint counittee
intensify the Jordanian side's domination of the comittee and weaken the
Palestinian side's role in it.

3. The Palestinian National Front desands the abolition of the present
structure or the Joint cmittee and calls for toning the Palestinian
side of all the Palestinian organisations and forces, provided that each
ornunization it: represented by an individual with sufficient knowledge of
Mn: cmulitions of the occupied territories so that the position of the
Injectininn side may become the stronger.

’I. 'I1n-- I“:lu:‘.l.‘n:inn rintim-tt] i-‘n-nul. r.-,g.-.-1.:: thv ugrvmm-nLr. thul imw brun-
r-ruclmd by the Joint conmittee and that act, with the blessings of the
Palestinian side, to tie all our national institutions in the occupied
territories with the Jordanian gOVemmental departments because these
agreements sabotage the Palestinian National Pront's accomplishments of
keeping these institutions out of the reach of the Jordanian regime and
its annexation policies throughout all these years of struggle.

5. The Jordanian regime is spending, with a Palestinian cover, the stead-
mstness monies freely on its lackeys and men in the occupied territories
so as to build bridges of trust and to establish relations with the inhab-
itants of the occupied territories and to harass, in return, our national
institutions, to obstruct their enhancement and to deny them any aid.

6. When the Joint comittee is changed, the Palestinian National Front
can offer the Palestinian side help and assistance through its responsi-
bility to present a complete plan capable of strengthening the economic
resources and the national institutions in a manner that bolsters the

resistance, struggle and steadfastness of our people and that prevents
the containment of our people and the distortion of their march.

7. The National Front supplies the Palestinian side with detailed informa-
tion on the municipal and village councils and the other authorities and

on their inclinations and needs and makes proposals in this regard. [as
published]

Palestinian National Front at Home Demands Correction of It's Relations
with P10:

Sources close to the PID beecutive Cosmittee have revealed that the leader-
ship of the Palestinian National Front in the Occupied Territories, which
is the organization's [Flo‘s] political arm in these areas, addressed in
the last third of last September a message to the P10 Executive Camittee
containing critical observations on the "indeterminate relationship the

P10 and the Palestinian National Front at line," according to these
sources which also pointed out that the message contained observations to
the same effect concerning the work and course of the Joint Jordanian-
Palestinian Comadttee which was famed by a Baghdad sumit resolution to
distribute the steadi‘astness monies allocated by that emit.

Or. the first issue, the observations expressed by the front on the relation-
ship with the PIO demanded that this relationship be corrected and that the
observations be discussed officially on the basis of taking a serious crit-
ical pause toward themua pause reflected minly in the need that the "National
‘r‘mnl. I.-- uonrlduerm! Lll" ;:olc.- political instrument ol' the P10 in ”w occu-
piuu territories." ln the contcxt 01‘ this observation, the National Front
Mm-rtcd that it abides by the PID's sole representation of the Palestinian
p-nplt- wlu:r«.»v«.-r they exist through its political program and struggle tasks.
'1'lu~ ('roul. aim annvrtmi that it exerts efforts to block the path of and to
confront. dirvaLly all the advocate: of an altvrnativc or a parallel leader-
shin.

On the other hand, the message stressed that the front exerts efforts to
spread and bolster the PLO's political and struggle program so as to reject
and foil all the imperialist, liquidationist and annexation plans, such as
the self-rule plan and the united kingdom plan, and to realize our people's
goals of repatriation, the right to self-determination and the establishment
of their independent national state.

The aforementioned informed sources add that the i‘ront's message also included
within the context of its observations the emphasis that it is the organiza-
tional hamework and the sole channel for political dealings between the Pm
and the occupied territories so as to guarantee, as the message said, a
united position toward all the local, Arab and international issues. The
I‘ront's message also stressed that this requires the PM) to sever all its
contacts with the opportunists who are well —Imown for their suspect connec-
tions with our people's enemies. It seems that the message refers to indi-
viduals such as Rashad al-Shawwa, Hilmat al-Misri and Ilyas mrayd who have
intensified their harmful and flagrant actions under the PID's cover, as the
message says.

To guarantee a sound relationship with the no leadership, the front's
message underlined the front's comitment to supply the PU) with all the
political news, reports and analyses on the general situation in the occu-
pied territories in return for the PID's supplying the front with all the
political programs and positions and with the Arab and international con-
tacts gradually.

Concluding its observations on its relationship with the PM, the front
points out that it is necessary that its relationship be directly with the
P10 leadership, i.e. with the kecutive Committee, so as to minuin the
secrecy of the relationship and preserve the well-known security aspects,
as the message says.

Protests Course and Work of Joint Jordanian -Palestinian Co-ittee

Within the context or the observations made by the National boot on the
work and course of the Joint Jordanian-Palestinian Comittee, the same
sources that are known to be close to the P10 Executive Conittoe, have
said that the front's message also included the following asst important
observations: The front's absolute rejection of the Jordanian role in
the joint comittee and the demand that this role be reduced to its size

in accordance with the Baghdad omit resolutions which defined Jordan's
role as that of a coordinator and not of a partner.
'i'lu- message also warm-d of the free concessions made by the i'ulestinitu:
side and said that the::e coneessions give the Jordanian side u bigger rule
than the Palestinian role and that this escalates the Jordanian niaie'n nom-
ination of the Joint. enmittee and weakens the Palestinian side’s role.

The front also desanded in its message abolition of the joint front in its
current structure, calling for fomtion of the Palestinian side of all the
Palestinian organizations and forces, provided that each organization is
represented by an individual with sufficient knowledge of the conditions
of the occupied territories so that the position of the Palestinian side
«Ay become the stronger, according to the message.

The front also rejected all the agreements reached by the committee--
agreements described by the i‘ront's message as attempts to tie the national
institutions in the occupied territories to the Jordanian govermxental de-
partments with the blessings of the Palestinian side. The message said the
agreements sabotage the front's accomplishments of keeping these institutions
out of the reach of the Jordanian regime and of its annexation policies
throughout the years of struggle.

The message warned that the regime is spending the steadfastness monies on
its agents and men in the occupied territories and that it uses these men
to build bridges of trust and establish relations with the inhabitants of
these areas. In return, this regime harasses our naticnal institutions,
obstructs strengthening them and denies them any aid.

The front promised in its message that it will offer help and assistance to
the Palestinian side in the Joint counittee, when it is changed, through its
responsibility to present a complete plan capable of strengthening the eco-
nomic resources and the national institutions in a manner that bolsters the
resistance, steadfastness and struggle of our people and institutions and
that prevents the containment of our people and the distortion of their
procession. The front also promised that it will supply the Palestinian
side with detailed information on the municipal and village councils and
the other authorities and on their inclinations and needs and will make
proposals in this regard.

Verbatim Text of itmorandum of National Front at Home to PLO

Dear brother chairman and members of the PID Executive Comittee, a greeting
of struggle and revolution:

He in the Palestinian National bent look with pride at the struggle efforts
that you exert with a sincere revolutionary spirit in the various spheres of
struggle to end the occupation and to achieve our people's hopes and aspira-
tions for the right to self-determination and for their independent national
state. We appreciate your leadership of our people's struggle against the
capitulationist imperialist plans embodied in the Camp David accords, the
Egyptian-Israeli treaty, the self-rule plan and the Hashimite annexation
plan. i.c:. the uni ted Arab Kingdom p1an--thesc plans tnat sren w an.“
and liquidate our people's national cause and to abolish the vanguard role
of the Palestinian national leadership embodied in the PM) as the sole
Inuitimate representative of our people.

The present and future stages in which the threads of the U.S.-israe1i-
Egyptian plot against our Palestinian people and national leadership will

be completely tied together through the repeated attacks against southern
lobanon and the Palestinian camps and through revival of the Jordanian
annexation plan, embodied in the uni ted kingdom plan, with the aim of weak-
ening the P10, subJugating our people in the occupied territories, weakening
their loyalty to the national leadership and pushing them toward capitulntion
to the White House liquidationist plans--these stages require the cohesion of
all the Palestinian national forces and require doubling their efforts for a
fundamental national unity and firm democratic relations so that P10 and all
its forces may be able to repel and foil the imperialist onslaught.

Dear brothers, the serious nature of this stage, the national duty and the
common responsibility require a serious critical pause toward the indeterm-
inate relationship between the P10 and the Palestinian National Front in the
Occupied Territories because this relationship suffered from a flaw in the
past stage. Out of our awareness of the gave consequences of the continu-
ation of the existing flaw that will only serve the enemies of our people
and those plotting against their cause, we are all required to exert efforts
to correct it. The National Front presents to you here its viewpoint on a
number of issues, underlining its opinion regarding the bases on which the
relationship between the P10 and the front should be established and request-
ing that this viewpoint be discussed by the hecutive Committee with all its
members and that it be answered officially:

A. Concerning Internal Relations:

First, the Palestinian National Front is the sole political instrument of
the P10 in the occupied territories. Consequently, the front acts upon and
abides by the Flo‘s sole representation of the Palestinian people wherever
they exist through its political program and its struggle tasks. The front
exerts efforts to block the path of and to directly confront the advocates
of the alternative or parallel leadership and abides by the ceaseless strug-
gle to paralyze any attempt to outflank the P10.

Second, the front exerts efforts to spread and bolster the PID's political
and struggle program so as to reject and foil the imperialist, liquidationist
and annexation plans, such as the self-rule plan and the united Arab kingdom
plan, and to realise our Palestinian people's goals of repatriation, the
right to self-determination and the right to establish their independent
national state.

Third, the Palestinian National Front is the organizational framework and
the only channel for political dealings between the mo and the occupied
territories so as to guarantee a united position on all the loual, Arab and
international issues. This requires the PLO to sever all its contacts with
the opportunists who are well-known for their suspect connections with our
people's enemies because these contacts harm the PLO's reputation among our
msses and the deluge is further intensified by the flagrant actions can-
mittcd by these individuals under the PLO's cover.

Fourth, the Palestinian National Front supplies the P110 with all the news
reports and political analyses on the general situation in the occupied
territories and the P10 supplies the front with all the political positions
and program and Arab and international contacts gradually [sentence as
published}.

Fifth, the Palestinian National Front finds it more convenient for its
relationship to be directly with the mo leadership--the Becutive
Comitteeuso as to maintain the security aspect on the one hand and to
insure safe and speedy direct contact without any restrictions on the
other hand.

sash
050: 1.802
AHIN MESSAGE 0“ UN ANNIVERSARY
Part I
GFZLO744 Kabul Domestic Service in Dari 1630 GMT 23 Oct 79 CF

[Message from Hafizollah Amin. secretary general of the People's Democratic
Party of Afghanistan. president of the Revolutionary Council and prime
minister of the Democratic Republic of Afghanistan. on the occasion of

the 34th anniversary of the United Nations-read live by Khaynl Mohammad
Katawazi, minister of information and culture]

[Text] Brave compatriots: On this auspicious occasion, when the 34th
anniversary of the United Nations is being celebratedthroughuut the world.
I as honored and pleased to express my congratulations to all toiling

and noble people. all toilers of the world, and all peace-loving and
progressive forces in the world on behalf of myself and all my struggling
colleagues in the Central Committee of the People's Democratic Party

of Afghanistan [PDPA]. in the Revolutionary Council and in the Council of
Ministers. I sincerely wish for the success ofpeace,democracy and social
progress throughout the world.

The United Nations, following the decisive victory of the forces of peace
over fascism and its affiliated circles of warmongers, has continued its
[word indistinct] to save future generations from the miseries of war that
have twice burdened the world‘s masses.

While great changes and evolutions have come about since the founding days
of the United Nations. nevertheless creating a peaceful world and providing
better standards of living for all people of the world without regard to
nationality, race or sex have remained the major and important objectives

of this world organization. The antipeace efforts by imperialist and
colonialist circles worldwide continue to bely the principles of the UN
Charter. Not only do they endanger international peace and security, but
they are also great obstacles on the road to victory by this world organiza-
tion in the realization of the principles and aspirations of the UN Charter.

10
“v contrast. the unrulvnting role of the progressive and peace-loving forces
of (hr world cannot be denied. nor can be their importance in the victory

and success of this world organization in establishing and securing peace
and international security.

The Democratic Republic of Afghanistan [ORA]. inspired by the sincere wishes
of Afghanistan's toiling masses and in light of lofty and exalted values of
the great April Revolution, has always defended and will defend the UN
Charter and peace in the region. as well as in the world. The great

April Revolution. as a victorious proletarian revolution and on the basis

nr its nature and character, is a defender of peace. Through peace it

can bring to reality its goal of creating a prosperous society devoid of
exploitation of man by man.

By taking advantage of this opportunity when peace-loving governments
throughout the world are affirming and confirming their loyalty to and
support for the principles of the UN Charter. I wish to reaffirm the views
of the people of Afghanistan and those of the government of the DRA
regarding the objectives and aims of the UN Charter in the creation of a
peaceful world-~a world in which all human rights and dignities are respect—
ed without discrimination or exploitation.

Part II

CF240854 Kabul Domestic Service in Dari 1630 GMT 23 Oct 79 CF

[Text] with the victory of the great April Revolution under the leadership
of the PDPA, the forerunner of the country's working class. and through the
transfer of political power from exploiters to the exploited. vast
opportunities have been provided for the people of Afghanistan to enjoy
democratic rights and liberties.

Taking into consideration the historic 16 September resolution of the extra-
ordinary plenun of the PDRA Central Committee, the DRA sincerely and
seriously decided to practice the slogan of "immunity. legality and justice"
and to provide the necessary means for its implementation for the benefit

of people of Afghanistan. Acceptance of such a sincere and clearcut
commitment before the people of Afghanistan and the constructive steps and
revolutionary actions launched since the dawn of the victory of the great
April Revolution by the Khalqi government to wipe'out and completely
eliminate feudalistic relations. as well as all the great possibilities
created for active and many-sided participation by workers. peasants and
other toilets of Afghanistan in their country's political arena. are in
accordance with the [word indistinct] of the member nations based on the

UN Charter in providing equal rights and all economic and social opportuni-
ties for their people.

It is a cause of concern that. 36 years after the founding of this world

organization, there are still certain people and territories under foreign
domination and influence that have not gained their lawful right to

11
determine their own destiny and freedom. Imperialism. colonialism. neo-
colonialism, apartheid and racism. including Zionism, through their antipcace
efforts continue to increase world tension. which in itself is the major
factor in the arms race. The arms race. especially the nuclear arms race.
whusc flames are being fanned by imperialism and affiliated circles. is
endangering international peace and security.

I hope that an honest and sincere agreement on SALT II. which is considered
a diplomatic victory for peace. and the peace initiatives by peace-loving
countries for a voluntary reduction in military forces will receive an
affirmative response and reciprocal action by other superpowers with
nuclear arms. Thus. we can all take positive steps toward development and
[word indistinct] projects to attain total and general disarmament and
realize the goals of the UN Charter.

Contrary to the principles of the UN Charter, imperialism. international
reaction and expansionist forces are actively and shamelessly continuing

to meddle in the internal affairs of certain countries whose peoples have
determined their own political and economic systems. The goals and aims

of these circles are to block liberation- and independence-seeking movements
of these peoples and to stop the victory of the democratic and progressive
forces in the world.

In celebrating the anniversary of the United Nations, we are indeed cele-
brating international peace as well. I hope that the world community. by
adopting comprehensive resolutions and effective programs. will take
effective steps to protect the rights of children, who are the future
architects of our world. and by providing the necessary means of education
can bring about peace and tranquillity for the children of this world.

Once again. on this important day, I express my congratulations to all
peace-loving and progressive peoples and forces in the world and convey

the sincere wishes of the people and government of the DRA for the victory
of peace, democracy and social progress in the world.

CSO: 4906

12
TRIAL OF SYRIAN SABOTEUR IN CAIRO
Cairo AL-AKHBAR in Arabic 2 Nov 79 p 1
[Article by 'Ala' Rif‘at]

[Text] This coming Wednesday [i.e., 7 Novenberl the trial of Capt Salim
Joseph, agent of Syrian intelligence, begins before the Supreme State
Security Court in Cairo. The Syrian intelligence agent admitted that he
blew up the office of HISRAIR in Nicosia and came to Cairo in an attempt

to blow up tourist locales, places of popular gatherings and government
buildings. Ibrahim al-Dsyah will not come before the court but stand before
the court as the train witness for the preaecution.

Salim Joseph had come to Cairo this past April with a quantity of Soviet-
made T.N.1'. with the intention of blowing up several places of popular
gatherings or one of the police posts or an important and crowded government
building for the purpose of frightening the people. The confessions and
investigations reports indicate that the agent of the Syrian terroristic
organization set up an explosive charge at the headquarters of HISRAIR in
Nicosia. Moreover, it appears that the organization is responsible for the
explosion of the explosive package at the al-‘Atabah post office [lo~ated at
the crowded al-‘Atabsh Square in Cairo], the explosion of a bomb parcel at the
Sheraton Hotel [very close to Pres Sadat's residence in Giza] and a bomb

at the Hens House Hotel [near the Pyramids] which was discovered before going
off.

State security investigation had learned that a terroristic Syrian organization,
the Syrian al-Sa'iqah organization which is subordinate to the Ba'th Party.

was sending several of its agents to Cairo to set off explosions. The

security authorities and Supreme State Security Investigations at the Cairo
International Airport became suspicious of a Syrian, one Sanih Najn, coning
from Beirut this past 15 April. On searching his luggage they found in a
secret pocket in one of his suitcases a quantity of Soviet-made T.N.T. along
with detonators, likewise Soviet-made. 0n confronting hi: with this incrimi-
nating evidence, he admitted that his one was Capt Salim Joseph Sulayman;

13
that he was a member of the Syrian al-Sa'iqsh organization; and that the
organization had tasked him with setting off a bomb in the Sheraton or an
Egyptian police post or any sensitive government utility. he also admitted
setting off a bomb or the headquarters of HISRAIR in Nicosia. Cyprus.

The Supreme State Security prosecution conducted the investigation and

accused the agent of the terrorist organization of participation in a

criminal agreement whose purpose was to commit the crime, by his agreement
with the Syrian al-Sa'iqah organization which is subordinate to the Syrian

Arab Republic. of destroying buildings and public property owned by the
government with the intention of frightening the people and of using explosives
for the purposes of political murder. In implementation of this agreement.

he exploded a bomb at the headquarters of HISRAIR in Nicosia. Then he came

to Cairo carrying a load of explosives which he received from the command

of the Syrian organization. Moreover, he is accused of: corresponding with
those who are working for the interest of a foreign power with the intention

of injuring Egypt's political and economic position; corresponding and agreeing
with the leadership of the Syrian terroristic organization to carry out a
number of explosions in public buildings and tourist places to cause fear
among the people and spread unrest among them, thus affecting the country's
economic revenues from tourism and foreign investment. Horeover, he is

accused of receiving money from the Syrian organization, as compensation

for criminal acts in Nicosia and Cairo, with the intention of committing

an act injurious to Egyptian national interests.

Moreover. the Egyptian authorities submitted, in his capacity as a foreigner,
papers coun:erfeited with his knowledge so as to conceal his original
identity, thus facilitating his entry into Egypt and residence there.

Hednesday. 7 November, has been set for trying him before the Supreme State
Security Court under the chairmanship of justice Hakim Hunir Salib and
composed of Justices 'Ali 'Abd-al-Bukm and Ahmad Bakkar. Attending will
be Huhsin Habruk, deputy Supreme State Security prosecution in the
secretariat, [along with] Ahmad Muhammad Ramadan and Ramadan Nasser.

[The Cairo daily Al-Jumhuriyah on 7 November reported the beginning of the
trial that day.]

C80: 6802
PROPOSED CONSTI'IUTIONAL AMENNIE’NTS DIxUSSED
Cairo AL-JUIHURIYAH in Arabic 2? Oct 79 p 6

[Article by Salah al-Hafnavi: "Initial Proposals on Amendment of Constitu-
tion; mltiplicity of Parties Is Basis of System; Consultative Council
Consisting of 132 Members, With One-'lhird Appointed by President of Republic")

[Text] The committee formed of the People's Assembly speaker and 17 assembly
members to examine the principle of amending the constitution has prepared
its report and distributed it to the assembly members so that they may pre-
sent it to the masses for public debates before the final report is prepared
and submitted to the People's Assembly in its first session after 'Id
al-Adha holiday.

‘Ihe comittee, headed by Dr Sufi Abu-Talib, the People's Assembly speaker,
states in its report that it has approved the principle of amending Articles
1, 2, h, 5 and 77 of the constitution which pertain to the state system and
the Islamic shari'a principles as a min source of legislation, to the state's
economic basis, to the Arab Socialist Union and to the duration of the pres~
idential term.

The comittee also approved addition of the proposed provisions concerning
the press authority and the creation and organization of a consultative
council.

The comittee rejected the principle of adding the provision concerning the
consultatiVe council's power to try the ministers for offenses they emit
vhi 1e performing their duty.

'lhe initial draft of Article 2 approved by the comittee states that Islam

is the religion of the state, Arabic is its official language and the Islamic
shari'a the min source of its legislation.

Multiplicity of Parties

Article 5 states that the political system of the Arab Republic of Egypt is
based on the smltiplicity of parties within the framarork of the fundamental
commnents and principles of the Egyptian society as stated by the consti-
tution and that the law snall regulate the parties.

Article 77 states that the duration of the presidential terms is 6 years
beginning as 01‘ the date of the announcement of the referendum results.
The president of the republic may be re-elected for other terms.

Consultative Council

'11": articles proposed to be included in the constitution provide for the
manner in which the consultative council is to be formed and define this
council's powers.

In accordance with Article 1, the consultative council is empowered to study
and propose what it deems capable of preserving the principles of the 23 July
and 15 thy revolutions, of supporting national unity and social Justice, of
safeguarding the alliance of the people's working forces, the socialist
gains, society's fundamental components and supreme values and the public
rights, liberties and duties and of entrenching the democratic socialist
system and expanding its spheres.

The law will define the council's other powers and the means that this
council will use to preserve these principles.

The third article states that the consultative council is to be formed of

a number of members determined by the law, provided that this number is no
less than 132 members. Two-thirds of the members will be elected by general
and direct secret ballot and the president of the republit will appoint the
remaining one- third. The law will define the election districts for the
consultative council, the number of the council members and the qualifica-
tions required to be possessed by both the elected and appointed members.

By-elections

The duration of the consultative council membership is 6 years. By-elections
will be held every 3 years for one-half the number of the elected members.
One-half the appointed members will also be renewed every 3 years. It is
always permissible to reelect and reappoint a member whose term has ended.

In accordance with Article 7, it is not permissible to combine membership
of both the People's Assembly and of the consultative council.

In accordance with Article 8, the prime minister, the ministers and other
government officials are not accountable to the consultative council.

In accordance with Article 9, the president of the republic may sake his
statement on the state's general policy or any other statement before a
Joint session of the People's Assembly and the consultative council.
'i1.-- prmzhh-nt of 1.1m rnpululiv may also main: (my other at-u month he dvcnuz
fit before the connulLuLiVu council.

In accordance with Article 10, the prime minister and other cabinet members
may make statements pertaining to the consultative council '5 Jurisdiction
before either the council or one of its committees.

Whenever the prime minister or the ministers request to speak before the
consultative council or one of its connittees, they shall be permitted to
a: so. The minister shall have no counted vote in the balloting, unless
he is a council member.

Press Authori ty

Article 1 states that the people shall exercise their sovereignty in the
sphere of the press in the manner demonstrated by the constitution and the
law.

Article 2 states that the freedom of the press shall be guaranteed, that
press censorship shall be banned and that it shall be prohibited to issue
ultitnatums to the press, to sue d it or to abolish it by administrative
means. All this (shall be done in accordance with the constitution and
the law.

Article 3 states that the press shall carry out its message in serving
society freely and independently through writing, publication and the
other means of expression reflecting the tendencies of [the public] opin~
ion and contributing toward forming and directing this opinion within the
framework of the ﬂmdamental components of society, of preserving the pub-
lic liberties, rights and duties and of respecting the sanctity of the
citizen's private life. All this shall be done in accordance with the
constitution and the law.

Article 16 states that the freedom of paper publication and ownership by
public and private legal status persons and by political parties is
guaranteed by the law.

People's Control

The ownership, financing and properties of the press shall. be subject to
the people's control in the manner demonstrated by the law and the con-
stitution and in accordance with the conditions set by the law.

Article 5 states that Journalists shall have the right to acquire reports
and information.

Article 6 states that the press affairs shall be under the charge of a
supreme council whose method of formation, powers and relations with the
state authorities shall be defined by the law.

17
lurL'iulc '( states that the Supreme Press Council shall carry out its duties
to strengthen the freedom of the press, to guarantee its independence, to
assure preservation of society's fundamental components and to guarantee
the safety of the national unity and the social peace in the mnner denun-
stmted by the constitution and the law.

811%
030: I680.?

18
MONS NR UNIVERSITY STUDH‘T UNIONS POSTPONED
Cairo AL-JIMiURIYAH in Arabic 216 Oct 79 p 6

[Article by ms'ud al-Hinnawi: "Student Elections at 'Ayn Shams Postponed;
Discussions on Role of Student Unions"]

[Text] It has been decided to postpone the student unions elections at 'Ayn
Shams University until the 17th of the coming month of November instead of
the beginning of the month and to introduce the open-day system at the uni-
versity colleges to familiarize the students with the goal and role of the
new unions according to the circumstances of each college.

This was stated by Dr Nasr al-Sayyid Nasr, the 'Ayn Shams University Vice
President for Educational and Student Amirs, during his meeting yesterday
with the counselors [ruwwad] of the unions and the comittees and with the

educational counselors of 'Ayn Sham University.

Dr Nasr said that postponement of the elections date will give the students
a bigger opportunity to get acquainted with each other and elect the fittest.

Engineering Counselors

Dr Nasr also announced that Dr mhsin 'Abd-al-Hamid Tawfiq oi' the Engineering
College has been selected to be the general counselor of student activity at
the university town and that the following have been selected counselors in
the Engineering College:

Dr 'Abd-al-Hadi Husayn Husn’. as general counselor, Dr Ahmad Jad til-hula as
counselor for the Family Connittee, Dr Muhsin Sadiq Qindil as counselor of
the Athletic Activity Committee, Dr Muhsin 'Abd-al-Hamid waiq as counselor
of the Cultural and Art Activity Comittee, Dr 'Uthman Bad: as counselor of
the rover scouts [al-Jawwalah] 1nd public services and Dr 'Abd-alHehhab Abu-
al-‘Aynayn as counselor for souial activities and trips.

Decree 265

The university vice president then explained presidential decreee No 265
concerning the bylaws of the student unions and their executive bylaw,

19
:aying that in accordance with this decree the student bylaws are considere:
:1. part of the general executive bylaws of the university lav.

Some amendments have also been made on the articles of the executive bylaws
concerning the structure of the student unions. me unions have thus been
confined to the college union and the University Activity Coordination
Council instead of‘ the university union. The amendments also provide for
organizing the general and periodic activities through the Higher Council
of Universities instead of the republic's union.

Dr Nasr also said that there are amendments concerning financial spending,
considering that the right to signing checks is now confined to a union
counselor, to a council treasurer and to chairman of the youth welfare
[committee] only. Some counittees have been merged, such as the Cultural
Activity Committee which has been merged with the Art Activity Comittee
and the Social Activity Cosnittee which has been merged with the Trips
Committee. Committees not existing before, such as the Family Committee,
have been introduced.

3‘9“
C30: 1£02

20
PROSECUTION OF DEMDANTS IN 1977 RIOTS COMPLETED
Cairo [\L-AKHBAR in Arabic 2‘; Oct 79 p 1

[Article by 'Ala' Rizq: "Prosecution Completes Proceedings at Law in Major
Communist Case; Defendants Formed Secret Organization to Topple Regime"!

[Text] The prosecution completed its proceedings at law in the major com-
munist case yesterday. The Supreme State Security Court in Cairo decided
to postpone the case until the fourth of next November for the defense to
present its case. The prosecution asserted in its proceedings that the
defendants formed an underground organization to overthrow the regime.

Ibrahim al-Hunaydi and Muhsin thbruk, the supreme state security prosecution
attorneys, presented the prosecution case, explaining charges brought against
defendants addressed No 85 to No 176, the legal provisions penalizing these
crimes and the evidence available to the interrogation against all the
defendants.

Ibrahim al-Hunaydi, the prosecution attorney, dealt with the charges against
defendants No 85 to No 122. These are the charges concerning the formation
of an underground organization to overthrow the fundamental economic, social
and political systems in Egypt. He said that the use of force and of illegal
means was noticeable in this action and that the components of article 198 of
the penal code are thus applicable against them. They have also committed
the charges [sic] of calling for changing the fundamental principles of the
constitution and that this is punishable by article 17h of the penal code.

Some of the defendants also camitted the crime of overthrowing the regime
by force [sic] by Joining others in the incidents of the 1977 riots which
are punishable by article 87 of the penal code. The prosecution dwelt on
explaining in detail the legal bases of these crimes in its preceding
presentation.

interial ma mce

The prosecution also dealt with the objective evidence available on these
crimes, demonstrating the responsibility of each of the defendants separately.
Defendants No 85 to No 122 formed tne Egyptian Communist Party as a party
seeking to topple the fundamental systems in the country thrOugh opposing
the legitimate authority, calling for the formation of Alliances hostile

to the government and instigating the masses against the government through
secret pamphlets and other means of propaganda, including the mobilization
of parties and demonstrations aimed at changing the government and imposing
a comunist system on the country. Numerous pamphlets calling for this end
have been seized in the homes of some defendant-s. 'ihe investigations of
the security men has also demonstrated these facts and the security men have
attested to them in the investigations and before the court. 'Ihese testi-
monies have shown the role performed by each of the defendants separately
and his role in the underground organization. Some pamphlets bearing the
names of AL-INTISAR [victory], KIFAH AL-SiA'B [people's struggle] AL-ARD
WA AL-FAIJAH [land and the peasant] and AL-HA'Y [Vigilance] and containing
the secret party's principles, methods, means of action, goals and phased
stratey were also seized. Moreover, printing machinery and equipment was
seized in the homes of some of the defendants.

Mihsin Phbruk, the prosecution attorney, then took the floor and explained
the crimes committed by defendants No 123 and No 176. He said evidence was
gathered against some of the defendants when they were seen leading demon-
strations and chanting slogans against the government. bbreover, handwritte
and printed documents attacking the state's social, economic and political
policies were also seized in the homes of some of the defendants, as well as
some of the slogans that were raised in the demonstrations. Some of the
defendants also instigated their colleagues at work to strike, stage demon-
strations and raise slogans against the government. It has been proven that
these defendants are well-known Ihrxist elements. Moreover, the investiga-
tions of the intelligence men have been in full agreement with the testimony
of the prosecution witnesses in the case, thus confirming the crime of the
defendants. Some of the defendants also instigated the demonstrators to
burn and destroy a number of government installations and properties. One
of the defendants has admitted writing a poem praising the riots and the
demonstrations. A number of the defendants took part in symposium attack~
ing the government. Wall posters attacking the government and accusing it
of following a policy of oppression and banishment have been seized in the
homes of a number of the defendants

The session was held under the chairmanship of Counselor Hakim Mmir and
with the membership of counselors 'Ali 'Abd-al-Hakam and Ahmad Bakkar. The
session was also held in the presence of Yusuf Darraz, chairman of the

supreme state security prosecution. Ahmad Ramdan and Ramadan Nassar were
present as secretaries.

8&9"
C3): h8<2

22
SHORT BIOGRAPHIES or mmrsn rum LEADERS or Jouamxum PROVIDED
Cairo AL~JUMHURIYAH in Arabic 25 Oct 79 p 8

[Article: "Future Ieaderships of Egyptian Press; They Write and You Applaud
Others 1

[Text] AL-JIMiURIYAH presents today the future leaderships of the Egyptian
press. We may call them the second line but they play in fact the primary
role behind the curtains in every paper whereas the spotlights are focused
on one bright star, namely the chief editor.

You may be reading the names of some of them for the first time. However,
they are unknown soldiers whose fingerprints are evident in every line of
a paper. 'lhey write thousands of articles that are published under the
names of others.

In their pens lies the secret of the success of numerous brilliant Journal-
ists. They teach such a Journalist his role, they apply to him the final
touches and they hear the applause going for him alone.

At times they write editorials and they present big stories without divulg-
ing their names. They represent the dynamo that moves every paper. 'lhey
also represent the ladder up and down whose steps many climb and descend.

Like movie stars, some of them may await the opportunity to shine like a
leading star. Others may be content with the stable and unchanging assist-
ing role of the number two star. Others may stay anonymous and unattracted
by the light, regardless of how bright.

The future leaderships, contrary to the past leaderships, are all young
elements that have stormed with field with both talent and education.

Let us allow the following lines to present all of them and my the dear
reader permit us to include AL—JIMURIYAH stars with them.

23
Zukuriyu Nil: AL-AHRAM's deputy chief editor and head of the Arab affairs.

He established contacts with the field of Journalism whil-- still n. student.
at the Higher Teachers Institute and worked as AL-HISRI's civil status cascs
reporter in 191:9.

Ir. 1951s, he moved to AL-AHRAM as its reporter at the Ministry of Trade and
Industry.

In 1962, he was appointed head of the Arab affairs section and attended all
the Arab summit conferences.

He scored an international Journalistic scoop when he reported exclusively
the news of the Suez Canal nationalisation and when he conducted an exclu-
sive interview with Khrushchev in front of Khrushchev's car and when
Khrushchev's guard almost shot him.

He is married and has five children.

Mikram mhanmsd Almad: AL-AHRAM's assistant chief editor. He was born in
al-Minufiyah in 1935.

He Joined AL-AHRAM as an editor after graduating from the philosophy depart-
ment of the School of Arts in 1958.

He has worked in various editorial sections: Events, press reports, Arab
affairs, central editorial secretary and then supervisor of the central
editorial section.

He almost lost his life three times in the Yemen war and the 1%? war.

He is mrried and has three children: Ihab in the Police College, Anal in
the School of Arts and Aminah in Junior high school.

He believes that press coverage of local news is still lagging behind and
says that AL-JUMHURHAH has been in the lead in tens of interest in local
news and terms of giving this news frontpage coverage.

Ra'id al-'Attar: AL-AHRAM assistant chief editor. He is 1&9. He graduated
from the Journalism department of the American University in 1953 and worked
for the foreign wire services while still a student.

Upon graduation, he continued his work as reporter for the wire services at
the presidency and the Revolution Council.

He also worked as general editorial secretary of WYAH and as deputy

chief editor. He was a partner with Manned Subayh in founding Dar
al-Ta'awun [Cooperation House] in which he stayed for 8 months.

21;
He has won several press awards, including the Columbia University Inter-
national Award.

He is married to a colleague in the profcnnion and has a 7-year-old son,
Manned, and two daughters, 'Izzah and Nelly.

Hamdi m'ad: AL-AHRAM assistant chief editor and head of the diplomatic
section.

He was born in 1926 and graduated from the philosophy section of the School
of Arts in 191W. He Joined AL-ASAS [The Foundation] imediately upon his
graduation. In the first day of his Journalistic life, he changed his name
from Uzuris Fu'ad to Hamdi Pu'ad.

At the end of 19h9, he Joined AL—AHRAM as a diplomatic editor. When AL-
AKIEBAR was published in 1952, Kamil al-Shinnawi selected him to work as
a. diplomatic editor of AL-AKHBAR and later of AKHBAR AL-YAHM and AKHIR SA'AH.

He again moved to AL-AHRAM in 1958. When he was promoted to assistant chief
editor last year, he continued his work as (diplomatic editor).

His most important Journalistic scoop was the report of the marriage of the
former president of Ghana, Dwami Nkmma, to Pathiyah.

He has written three books: "he Diplomatic War Between Egypt and Israel,"
"Tne Diplomatic Editor" and "Romnia' Ceausescu and the Arabs." He has
also written "Hith 'Abd-al-Nasir Outside the Borders" which is still under
printing.

He is married to Huda Tawi’iq, a diplomatic editor in AL-AHRAM, and they
have two sons.

whamad meters al-Baradi'i: Chairman of AIo-AHRAM's news section.
He was born in Minuf and is ‘9 years old.

He graduated from the School of Arts in 1950 and inediately started his
Journalistic career in the evening AL-MASA' [The Evening] newspaper whose
chief editor was Jalal al-l'hmmisi.

He moved to AL-KISRI [The Egyptian] and covered the armed struggle battles
in the aiez in 1951. He then left AL-KISRI and Joined ROSE AL-YUSUP.

In 1955, he Joined AL-AHRAM as an editor in the events section and then
became its reporter at the Ministry of Education where he gets an exclu-
sive report of the news of free education.

He remained reporter at the Ministry of Education until 1963 when he was

appointed deputy chief of the news section. In 1978, he became the section
head.

25
lic- has four children and he has refused to have any of them work in the
fit-1d 01‘ Journalism.

Smun' aI-Bisl: Head of women's [armirs] section of Air-NM.

She does not hesitate to mention her birthdate which is August 1937. She
got her M.A. in arts, journalism section, in 1958. She learned on the
hands of Mustafa and 'Ali Amin.

Mistafa Amin selected her to work in AKHBAR AL-YAHM when he discovered her
early talents while she was still a student in the Journalism section.

She remained in mum AL-mm until 1961». During this period, she held
thc position of chief of the women's section, the editor of Chitchat sec-
tion and editor of the Sweet Half section in MEIR SA'AH.

When she Joined AL-AHRAN, she headed the women's section, the daily column
and the weekly page.

Her book "In the Open Air: has been published and she has another book "Him
and Her," under printing.

She is married to Munir Kan'an, the technical adviser of AKHBAR AL-YAHH
House, and they have one son.

AL-AKHBAR
Jalal Duwaydar: Deputy chief editor of AL-AKHBAR. He is 1&2 years old.
He graduated from the Journalism section of the School of Arts in 1959.

His experience with Journalism started when he was still a student in the
Samalut secondary school. He was on a trip to Aswan and another train had
a collision on the line. He photographed the accident, wrote an article
on it and handed the material to the late Intfi Hassumh. His report was
published on the front page and AL-AKHBAR selected him as its reporter in
Sanalut.

1V0 years before graduating, he was appointed as AL-AKHBAR's university
reporter and then as its reporter in the Ministry of Education. He was
then appointed as the first aviation [could also mean air force] reporter
in the Egyptian press. He was then reporter at the presidency and at the
Ministry of Pbreign Affairs.

He worked as a correspondent in Bonn for 18 months and was at the time the
deputy chief of the news section. He was later promoted to section chief.

In 1971;, he became deputy chief editor.
He is proud of the series of articles that he wrote in 1963 from a hospital
in Hiroshima, Japan, about the victims of the Hiroshima bomb 20 years after
the bomb was dropped.

Ht: 1:: married and has Hatim, a 9-year-old son, and Hanan, a 6-year-old
daughter.

Samir 'Abd-al-Qadir: AL-AIG‘EBAR deputy chief editor, 1&5 years.
He acquired his M.A. in law in 1957.

He entered the field of journalism from al-Sa'idiyah School when he was
editor of RA'Y AL-TALIB [Student Opinion], the school magazine. He con-
tinued his hobby at college when he published a semi-monthly magazine
called ASRAR AL-JAMI'AH [university secrets] and then [XL-'AHD AL-JADID
[new era], also while at the university.

He was appointed in AKHBAR AL-YAHM while still a student at law school and
worked as a reporter in the State Council. The reason for the appointment
was an election campaign to spread election awareness among women.

Mustafa Amin asked him to write a press report on the first woman register-
ing her name in the election lists. On this subject, he wrote his first

(frontpage) article. The woman was a peasant from Bulaq. He then became
the economic affairs editor and editor of Friday News column.

Ahmad al-Jundi: AL-AKHBAR assistant editor. He is kl years.

He graduated from the Journalism section of the School of Arts in 1961. He
started his Journalistic career in 1963 as editor in the press reports
section of AL-AKHBAR. He then became the section deputy chief and later
its chief.

He was appointed assistant chief editor in 1975. He heads the ”To The
Editor" section and the "Weekend" section of the Thursday edition.

He is proud of the series of articles he wrote on tax evasion.

He is married to Sakinah Pu'ad, an art critic in AL-IDHA'AH HA AL-TILIVISION
[radio and television] magazine. They have three children: Halah, 'Amr and
mum.

Jalal 'Isa: Ala-Am deputy chief editor.

He is '62 years old and was born in $113 Minufiyah.

He Joined AL-AKHBAR in 1959 as editor in the Judiciary section while still
a student in law school and then became editor in the news section and the
section chief when he was not 30 years old yet.
He then became deputy chief editor. He is also a member of the Journalists
Union Council. a member in the Press Codification Committee and member of
the National Demcratic Party's Information Committee.

He was the first Journalist to storm [enter] one of the rejectionist capi-
tals--Baghdad--after the peace initiative. lie attended the Arab lawyers
conference there.

He is married and has two sons: Hussm-al-Din, h years, and Ahmad, 2 years.
AKHBAR AL-YAWM

'Ahd-al-Fatteh al-Dib: AKHBAR AL-YAHM deputy chief editor.

He is 145 years old and acquired his ILA. degree in law in 1951!.

He started his journalistic career in 1962 as editor of the events section

of AL—JIL [Generation] magazine, even though his income from his law profes-
sion had been mnyfold the income he made at AKBAR AL-YAHH.

He has specialized since 1961s in the People's Assembly affairs. It is his
opinion that larger space in the press should be devoted to the people's
opinions and problems.

He has published a book entitled: "me Confessions of an Israeli Intelli-
gence Officer."

He is married and his oldest daughter is in engineering school.
Ibrahim Sa'dah: AKHBAR AL-YAHM deputy chief editor.
He is 1+1 years old and has a B.A. in political and economic sciences.

He started his Journalistic career in 1958 as correspondent of AKHBAR AL-YAHK
in Switzerland. 'Ali Amin appointed him in AKHBAR Ala-W in 1962 after he
had written an article on the officers who staged the secessionist movement

in Syria.

He worked in the press reports section of AL-AKHBAR and started at the same
time to write the "last Column" in Am mum.

'Ali Amin then selected him to be chief editor of AKHIR LAMAR [last lbment],
which had not been published yet and whose goal was to address the youth.

he Journalistic campaigns of which he is proud include his [articles]: "The
Higher Islamic Affairs Council, Al-Awqaf and The Gentlem's Complex."

He has published three books: "Years of Humiliation," ”The Russians Are
Coming" and "The last Colum."

28
He is married and has a 6-year-old daughter.

HOUR SA'I‘R:

Najd: Qindil: Editorial manager of AKHIR SA'AH.

He is to years old and was born in al-Shuhada‘, al-Minufiyah.
lle acquired his M.o\. degree in law in 1958.

He joined [\L-JIL magazine at the outset of his Journalistic career in 1952
and then moved to AKHIR SA'AH in 1953. He was its first militau'y editor
and then became editor of the Israeli political affairs [section] and then
of the Arab affairs section. In 1958, he was appointed deputy chief editor
of AKJIIR SA'AH and then its editorial manager in 1977.

He conducted the first interview with the late President 'Abd-a1.-Nasir in
1952 and the interview was published in AL-JIL in December of that year.

He is the first Journalist who entered Algeria during the liberation war

from the area of (Oquah) on the bbroccan borders with the nelp of Houari
Boumedienc who was comacder of the Algerian arm in that area. He con-

ducted the first interview with President 'Abd-al-Salam 'Arif.

He is currently writing a book on the causes of the June 1967 defeat through
the secrets reVealed by the main comanders who participated in that war. He
has also taken part in preparing Sayyid hr'i's memoirs. He also acquired
segments of Husni Mubarak's memoirs on the October war and published them in
AKHIR SA'AH.

He is married and has one son, 'Umar, who is a student at the Cairo University
School of Commerce.

Dr Rif'at Kamal: AKHIR SA'AH deputy chief editor. He is M; years old and
was born in Heliopolis.

He got his 1m. in dentistry in (1960).

In 1956, he Joined MCI-[BAR AL-YAWM Establishment as a science editor. In 1959,
he was selected to be editorial manager of TABIBAK AL-KHASS [your private
doctor] and then became its chief editor.

He later returned to the position of deputy chief editor of AL-AKHBAR and
chief of the science section of the establishment's papers and magazines.

He was also entrusted with supervising and producing AKHIR SA'AH.

He is married and has two children: Ihaal and Nirit [could also be Merit].

29
Mm] UMIUH l YAII:

Muhammad Hasur. al-Hayawan: AL-JUIHURIYAH assistant chief editor. He is
In! years old and was born in Paqus a1 Sharqiyah.

He got his MA. degree in law in 1955.

He started his Journalistic career as editor in the Middle East News Agency
[HEM] and then moved to AIFJ'UWURIYAH in 1959 where he became editor in its
news section. He achieved prominence as industrial affairs editor.

In 1967, he was appointed deputy editorial manager and in 1970 he became
deputy chief editor.

In Varch 1976, he was appointed assistant chief editor.

In 197'], he became member of the Board of Directors of Al-Tahrir Printing
and Publishing House (AL-manna).

'Adli Barsum: AL-JUMHURIYAH deputy chief editor.
He is 52 years old and was born in lhlawi.
He acquired an M.S. degree in arts (social studies branch) in 1951.

He started his journalistic career in AL-MASA' newspaper. He Joined AL-
JUMIIURIYAH in 1961: and worked in its foreign section and press reports
section. He then became chief of the African Affairs section and visited
most of the African countries.

He also worked as correspondent of AL-J'UIINRIYAH in Germny for 3 years and
was appointed deputy editorial mnager in 1971.

He became deputy chief editor in 1976.

He was the first Journalist in the world to enter the eastern front of the
Angolan revolutionaries in 1967 and several European papers quoted his
reports.

He has published a book entitled "Where To, Africa?"

NaJi annhah: AL-JUIHURIYAH deputy chief editor. He is 39 years old and was
born in al-Qalyubiyah.

He got his ILA. in Arabic in 1%1 and his education and psychology diploma
in 1962.

He Joined AL-mumm imediately upon graduation and worked as editor in
the review section and then as secretary of the news section and as chairman
of the review section.
”(r em: loaned to work in the Libyan papers but he terminated the loan after
a more while.

llv mu: appointed deputy chief cd'i tor In 1910.

tinny of his religious and love short stories have been published and he is
now preparing to publish his first collection of stories.

He is married and has a 10-year-old son, Ahmad.
Ism'il al-Shafi'i: AL-JUMIURIYAH deputy chief editor. He is 52 years old.

He started his Journalistic career as editor in AKHBAR AL-YAHM in 1952 and
then worked as reporter in the Revolution Command Council. He Joined AL-
JUMHURIYAH in 1956 as its reporter at the presidential office. He partici-
pated in covering most of the significant Arab events in that period and
attended numerous international and Arab conferences. In 1955, he was a
member of the first Egyptian press delegation to visit the PRC before the
exchange of diplomatic relations with that country.

In 1975, he was appointed chairman of the news section and the following
year he became deputy chief editor, in addition to his supervision of this
section.

He is married.

Samir Rajah: Deputy chief editor of AL-JUHHURIYAH's weekly issue. He is
140 years old.

He started his Journalistic career as editor in the youth page of AL-
JUMIURIYAH after getting his ILA. in arts from Cairo University in 1959.

He was appointed AL-J‘UﬂiURIYAH airport reporter in 1961 and there he made
his most important Journalistic scoops, including the news of 'Abd-al—Hamid
al-Sarrad's arrival from Syria after the secession and the news of the
arrival of Fathiyah Nkruma, the wife of the late president Nhrtma, after
the Ghana coup.

In 1968, he went on a scholarship to the GDR for a period of 6 months but he
returned after 3 months to write several reports on the shortcomings of the
communist system, despite the firm relations existing between Egypt and the
communist countries at that time.

He is married and has two sons and a daughter.

Ra'fat al-Khayyat: AL-JIMiURIYAH deputy chief editor in charge of the arts
and literature section. He is 5': years old and was born in Port Said.
ll-- I-ennn 311;: life in Journalism in 1990 as editorial secretary 0:. un-
HUSAWWAR. He :hen worked in AL—TAHRIR [Liberation] magazine, AL~IDHA'AH
magazine and wrotc in AL-JAKI' [Everybody] and AL-KATIB [the Writer] and
then worked as unaging editor of KARAWAN.

He has written several literary works, including a collection of short

stories entitled "The Harem." He also wrote the book: "Our Socialism

in the Sphere of Application." He has also translated Agatha Christie's

"A Witness for the Prosecution" and Alberto Moravia's ("The Adolescent Girls").

He produced mnerous radio programs in the 1950's and then devoted his time
to write for radio and television. His best-known works include the Imortal
Nile programs. A Writer and A Story and Where Is The Mistake?

He is married and has two sons: Hishan in medical school and 'Amr in the
School of Theatrical Arts.

Mihannad Abu-al-Hadid: Deputy chief editor and the supervisor in charge of
Free Opinions and With the People page.

He is 35 years old and was born in al-Jizah Governorate.

He has his B.A. in political science from Cairo University. He started his
journalistic activity while still a student when he sent a message to With
the People section--a section which he came to head after his appointment
in AL-JUMURIYAH.

Imediately upon graduating, he worked as an editor in the General Informa-
tion Authority and then Joined AL-JUMMIIYAH. He was appointed deputy chief
editor in 1977 while only 33 years old. He thus became the youngest deputy
chief editor in all three papers [AL-Aim, AL-AKHBAR and AL-JIMURIYAH].

He is married and has two children: Walid (6 years) and mm (3 years).
AL-MASA' [The Evening]:

Zayd Maud Starif: Executive chief Editor of AL-MASA'. He got his (8.0.0.)
from Iondon University in 1918 and worked as first officer in the maritime
fleet for 5 years.

He abandoned the sea and Joined the American University in Cairo and could
not complete his studies in it for political reasons.

He started his Journalistic career in 1951 as diplomtic editor in AL-BALACH
[Eloquence] newspaper and also worked as reporter of Reuters, the United
Press and the AP.

He Joined AL-JmlHURIYAH in 1953 and then moved to AL-SIA'B [The People]

newspaper andfrom there to AL-IIASA' as editor of its Arab affairs section
and later as head of. the news section.

32
lie is married and has seven children.
Rashid al-Iaythi: mneging editor of AL-NASA' .
He is 3+5 years old and was born in Alexandria.

He got his B.A. in Arabic from al-Azhar University in 1957 and his M.A
in education and psychology in 1958.

He started his career in Journalism in 1955 in AL-IDHA'AH HA AL-TILIV'ISION
magazine as an examiner [waii'] end then worked in the press reports
section end later became editorial secretary.

He Joined AL-JUIHURIYAH in 196% and became editorial secretary of its uezkly
edition. He was then appointed managing director.

In 1965, he moved to AL-MASA' as heed or the [court] cases and incidents
section and was then appointed deputy managing editor.

AIPMISAWAR:
Ibrahim al-Ba'thi: hneging editor of AL-WSAHHAR.
He is 53 years old.

He got his diploma in Journalism from the Sorbonne University in Paris in
1952.

He started his Journalistic career in AL-BA'TH magazine which was issued by
Dr Manned lhndur. He then worked in AL-BALMH, AL-HAFD AL-MISRI and
MUSAMARAT AL-JAYB. He also worked as editorial secretary of AL-MU'ARAIMH
[Opposition] which was issued by hthi al-Renli. He then worked as editor
in AICHBAR AL-YAHM and as chief editor of the weekly AL-NIDA' newspaper.

’He has worked in al-Hilal House since 1958.

He has published several books, including: "Contemporary Arab Figures" and
"Contemporary Islamic li‘igm-es'l and a novel entitled "Tears of Blood."

He is mried and has six children: Three sons and three daughters. no of
his sons work in the press: Ahmed 'Ismat in AIPAHRAH and unharmed Thar-wet
in ROSE AL-YUSUF.

Pumil Iahib: hanging editor of AL-HUSAHHAR.

He started his Journalistic career in 19‘? in ROSE AL-YUNP where he worked
for 20 months when he was only 17 years old and a student in law school.

33
In 1939, he worked as editor in al-Hilal House when he was a trainee in law.
'Zc abandoned the law practice after only 21 days and devoted his full time
to Journalism.

llv mu: :qqmlnlnd All'M”“Ah""l‘” v-Uluriul :=-~crcl.ury In 1911'; and Inn ”In young-
est person to ever occupy this position. He left his post after one year
to work as AL-MJSAWAR's reporter at the presidential office and in the
armed forces in 1956.

He was appointed AL-MUSAWAR managing editor in 1970.

He is married to Janet Farsi, the television announcer. They have two
children: Dina, 11 years, and hymn, 8 years.

Ahmad Sayyid Abu-Kaff: Editorial secretary of AL-WSAHHAR.

He is 1&5 years old.

He got his ILA. in arts, history section, in 1957 and ranked first in the
batch that graduated with him. He turned to Journalisa and worked as
editorial secretary of AL-HILAL from 1958 until 1967 when he was transferred
to AL-WSAHHAR in which he has been working since then.

He has mnerous writings, including "The Jews and the Zionist lbvement in
Egypt," "The Prophet's Family in Egypt," ”Bninent Figures of Islamic Sufism"
and "The Pioneers of Journalism in the United States."

He is married and has two children: Dalya, 7 years, and mhsmd, h years.
AL-KAUAIGB [The Stars]:

Talia Qabil: imaging editor of AL-KAHAKIB magazine.

He is h5 years old and was born in eastern u—‘nziziyah.

He got his as. in sciences fro- Cairo University in 1957 and worked as a
teacher for 20 days only and then turned to Journalism.

He worked as editor in AL-KAHAKIB until 1971 when he became editorial sec-
retary. Six maths later he was promoted to managing editor.

He is mrried to his colleague 'A'ishah Salih, an editor in AL-KAHAICIB, and
they have one son, 10-year-old 'Inr.

Yusuf Fikiri: AL—KAWMCIB mnaing editor.

He started his Journalistic career in mm newspaper in 1908 when he
was still a student taking a special Journalism course at the British
Institute.
in 1950, he Joined the magazine KALIMNI WA NUSS which was issued by Ma'mun
al-Shinnawi .

"1:: first regular Job in Journalism was in AL-JIMHUR AL-MlSRl magazine.
After the 23 July revolution, he worked in the evening AL-QAHIRNI news-
paper until 1959 when he moved to al-Hilal House and took the position

of deputy chief editor of AL-I'I'HNAYN WA AL-DUNYA and then the position

or deputy managing editor of AL-WSAHHAR. He was appointed managing
editor of AL-KAHAICIB in 1971.

His most important Journalistic scoop was a report on four old ships sold
to the naval forces in 1951 by an Egyptianized foreigner called Albert Sa'b.

Deputy 'Aziz Fermi questioned the government on the ships.
Mmtaf‘a Husrat Pasha, the minister of war, denied the press report.

Yusui‘ Fikri was charged and the only thing that saved him was the Pact that
the four ships sank in the Suez Canal.

ROSE AL-TJSUI":

'Adli Fahim: Deputy chief editor and the technical supervisor of ROSE
AL-YUSUP. He is 52 years old.

He has a ILA. in fine arts--photography division--and a B.A. from the
Theatrical Arts Institute--art critic section.

He started his Journalistic career in 1968 as an amateur (caricaturist) in
AL—NIDA' magazine, SAHT AL-UIOMH newspaper and AL-QISSAH magazine.

After graduation, he taught for 3 years. His wish was to become an artist
or a stage producer but turned instead toward Journalism strongly.

Through his work as a Journalist, he started writing novels and his works
include: "The Bill, Miss," "A Father's Papers" and "A Widow in White Clothes."

He is currently writing a novel on Kmnil al-Shinnawi's life.
HAWA' [Eve]:

Rabi' Ghayth:

Managing editor of HAWA' magazine.

He is 61+ years old and was born in al-Daqahliyah.

He got his M.A. in arts from Cairo University in 1937, his French language
diploma from the Sorbonne in 1938, his education and psychology diploma

35
from :he Sorhonnc in 1939 and his editing, translation and Journalism
diploma from the Cairo School of Arts in 19h3.

Sic started his journalistic career in AL-KISRI newspaper. He then left
for Sudan where he worked in SAHT AL-MAH newspaper and later returned
to Egypt and Joined al-Hilal House. He was appointed managing editor of
the monthly HAWA' AL-JADIDAH and was also supervisor of SAMIR magazine.
He then devoted mn time to the weekly HAWA' .

He is married and has five daughters and one son.
AL-IDHA'AH:

Semi Manned: Deputy chief editor of AL-IDHA'AH HA AL-TILIVISION magazine.
He holds a diploma in Journalism iron (Sheaven) University in England.

At the age of 16, he worked in HAJALIAI'I nugazine which was issued by Atmd
al-Sawi Mihanrnad. His monthly salary was 2 pounds.

he then worked in AL-LATA'IF, MF'AMJFAH and AL-FANN AL-SINAMA'I magazine.
He later Joined al-Hilal House where he was promoted from editor, to edi-
torial secretary and then to managing editor of AL-MJSAWAR.

He was delegated to work in BINA' MATH! magazine and MENA [Middle East
News Agency]. He also worked as adviser to Yusuf al-Siba'i, the urtyred
minister of culture and information.

He also became chief editor of the newspaper MISR which was the first parti-
san party issued by Eypt'a Party after [legalization of] the multiplicity
of parties.

His publisned works include: "Traces of 23 July Revolution," "The 198
Battles of Palestine" and "Ten Glorious Days."

He is married and has no children.
AL—TA'AWUN AL-ﬂYASI [Political Cooperation]:
'Abbas al-Shahawi: Deputy chief editor.

He is 141: years old and was born in Disuq.

He got his NJ. in arts in 1960.

He was appointed in AL-JUMHURIYAH upon graduation and stayed in it until 1972.
He was loaned to Libya until 1977. In the same year, he moved to AL-SIYASI.

He is married and has four daughters.
I‘L-FALLUIIN [Peasants] :

Ahmad Musaylihi: Managing editor of AL-TA'AHUN (AL-FAIJAHIN) [as published]
paper.

He is 3'! years old and was born in eastern Kafr Sagr.

He got his M.A. degree in law in 1966, the higher diploma. 01' the School of
Commerce in 1970 and his information diploma in 1972.

lie started his Journalistic career in 1965 as editor in AL-FALIAHIN news-
paper. He became editorial secretary in 1972 and naming editor in 1976.

He has published seVeral books dealing with cooperative issues.
He is married and has Mahmud, 1+ years, and Iran, one year.
AL-TALABAH [Students]:

Khayriyah Darwish: Deputy chief editor of AL-TAMBAH, published by
al-Ta'awun ibuse.

She got her ILA. in arts in 1959.

She started her Journalistic career in 1960 in AL-PALLAHIN newspaper and
then in AL-‘UMMAL [workers] newspaper.

She was appointed managing editor of AL-SIYASI in 1971 and deputy chief
editor of AL-TALABAH in 1975.

She believes that the new generation of Journalists mat be given an oppor-
tunity.

She is mrried and has two daughters.

MENA [Middle East News Agency]:

Najib al-Badri: HENA's managing editor of news.

He graduated from the School of Arts, archeology section, in 1958. For a
whole year, he continued to refuse to work in archeology [department] and

was then able to Join HIM as news editor. He managed the agency's various
offices in the Arab are...

He is carried and has four children: Ines in the School of Arts, Khalid in

the School of Comerce, Hazim in the secondary school and Aminah in the ele-
mentary school.
lluzuiyn uI-muun-l: Mi-ZNA's managing editor and planninr. director.

in: graduated from the School of Arts, Arabic language section, in I998 and
then got a diploma in Islamic studies, a diploma from the Information
Institute and a professor's degree [sic] in Journalism from Boston Uni-
versity in the United States.

He took part in the international conference held in New York to discuss
the creation of a multi-national news agency for the Arab world and the
developing countries.

He demands that one-half the disciplines given at the Information College
be taught in either Ehglish or French.

He is married and has Sahar, a daughter studying in the School of Commerce,
and Mihaunad, a son in the secondary school.

whamad mnir mshur: W's manager of illustrated press reports and
research.

He is b5 years old.

He started his career as trainee editor upon graduating from the School of
Arts in 1955.

He asserts that m covers all international markets with news and reports
and that it is competing with the international agencies, even though it is
young in age compared to these agencies.

8'9"
cs0: ham
ALEXANDRIA LOCAL COUNCIL OPPOSES PROPOSED IDCATION FOR NmLEAR POHER STATION
LDllol359 Ceiro MAR AL-YAHH in Arabic 3 Nov 79 p 4 LD

['Abd sl-Hehhab Hursi inquiry: "th Did the Alexandria Governor Say 'No'
to the Sidi Karir Nuclear Station?"]

[Excerpts] The Alexandria Local Commil has unanimously adopted a decision
recon-lending that the first nuclear power station not be built at the
proposed site in Sidi Karir area, some 30 In: west of Alexandria. The de-
cision has drawn strong reaction from the Electricity Ministry, the nuclear
power stations authority and the atomic energy authority.

These quarters have amounted that failure to build the nuclear station in
Sidi Karir would obstruct the whole Egyptian nuclear progran for 3 years
and this could trigger an energy crisis and entail an annual loss of $100
million for Egypt.

Moreover, the minister of petroleum has stated that the cancelation of

the nuclear program would cost Egypt $3 billion annually, [as published]
being the coat of the nasut we shall have to inert to operate conventional
thermal stations for generating electricity instead of the nuclear stations.

The Alexandria Local Council, however, persisted in its stand, Alexandria
Governor Dr ha'ad nilni net with President Anwar al-Sadat and presented
the council's decision to him.

I asked the governor of Alexandria: "hat is the reason which nade the
local council make this decision, now that the Electricity Ministry has
cowleted the preparation of the national program for nuclear power ata-
tions, designating Sidi Karir for the first nuclear station in the progran?

The governor said: The people of Alexandria were not happy about the es-
tablishment of a nuclear station in Sidi Karir area although they had no

opportunity to express their feelings. However, when the incident involv-
ing the nuclear power station at Three Mile Island in the American state of
Pennsylvania occurred the situation changed and the people could not keep

quiet any longer. An extensive calpaign was launched to collect the sins-
tures of the inhabitants on a petition calling for the selection of another

39
site for the station instead of Sidi Karir. The campaign was led by the
Alexandria women organization.

The governorates local council, in its capacity as the representative of
the Alexandria people, unanimously issued a decision to submit a recom-
mendation to President Anwar al-Sadat that the selection of Sidi Karir
as a site for the nuclear station be reconsidered.

The wish of the inhabitants and the local council's decision were con-ami-
cated to the president during the meeting which was held for this purpose.
I explained to the president that I was not against Egypt entering the
nuclear power age. 0n the contrary, my being a scientist and a fomr
university professor, I support the use of nuclear energy for generating
electricity in Egypt, but such a major step should be based on an elaborate
and meticulous study in order to avert the dangers that night arise one
day as has happened in the United States recently.

I asked the governor: The proposed station to be established in Sidi
Karir will have an output of 600 megawatts which, cod>ined with the power
generated by the other nuclear, thermal and hydroelectric power stations,
is necessary to meet Egypt's electric power requirements up to year 2000.
Failure to establish the first nuclear power station in Sidi Karir would
deprive us of big percentage of the energy required for agricultural,
social and industrial development projects.

The governor said: We were not satisfied by objecting to the establith
of a nuclear station in Sidi Ksrir but we also presented an alternative
solution. We are now building a thermoelectric generating plant in Abu Qir,
which will work on the natural gas discovered there and which will have an
output of 600 negawatts--the same output as that of the nuclear station.
Furthermore, we are now negotiating with a friendly state which has promised
to give us a loan for the establishment of a second electricity generating
plant which will operate on natural gas and which is expected to be set up
in Ad-Dakhilah area. The output of this plant will also be 600 megawatts.

In other words, Alexandria will have two thermoelectric plants that will
operate on natural gas and generate 1,200 megawatts. We in Alexandria
will not consuls more than 300 megawatts and the surplus megawatts will
be fed into the republic's electricity grid together with the electricity
generated at the high dam.

All this will take place without exposing ourselves to the dangers of pol-
lution and other her-s that arise from the establisl-ent of a nuclear station
in Sidi Karir.

0n the other hand, do you know how much the establistaaant of a nuclear sta-
tion will cost? It will cost $1.2 billion and will take 7 years at least

to build whereas the gas-operated station will not cost more than $300 mil-
lion and will take about 2 years to build and will give us the same electri-
city output.

CSO: (0802 ho
BRIEFS

MINISTER FOR RADIO, TELEVISION-~Presidrnt Amer al-Sadat has issued a
decision assigning Minister of State for Presidential Affsirs Msnsur
Hasnn as minister in charge of radio and television sffsiro. [Text]
[L01309l9 Cairo AL-AKHBAR in Arabic 28 Oct 79 p 1 LD]

C50: (0802
SHAH'S TRIP TO U.S. BELIEVED MEDICALLY UNNECESSARY
Mexico City EXCELSIOR in Spanish 28 Oct 79 p 32-A

'ext7 Doctor Victor Manuel Santander, who is attending
ohamed Reza Pahlevi here, declared yesterday that the former
shah of Iran never was in danger and he is not now either.
The surgical operation he underwent was to remove his gall-
bladder and has nothing to do with his cancerous condition,
zhich was discovered and has been treated the last 6 years
sig7. There is no clinical reason why his stay in the United
States should last more than 3 weeks.

The endocrinologist emphasized that US doctors' attacks of
Hexican medicine "only have political purposes," since the
overthrown shah's current problem has no connection with the
lymphoma which he is suffering from.

He observed that the statements that, if Reza Pahlevi had not
been transferred to New York for treatment, he would have

died, are unethical and racist and besides have political over-
tones.

He added Mexico has excellent surgeons specializing in the
gallbladder and his hospitalization in New York was only for
security reasons.

Regarding the former Iranian ruler's controlled cancer, he
assured that it was diagnosed 6 months ago and has been treated
since then with chemotherapy, substances which operate in the
blood to destroy tumors; among others, he explained, nitro-
genous mustards.

Santander maintained that this type of cancer can be controlled
by chemotherapy and does not require surgical operation or
hospitalization, but only periodic treatment.

He pointed out that his present illness was diagnosed in
Mexico and he was not hospitalized here, because there is no
hospital in Mexico which could guarantee him complete security
against Hoslem terrorist attacks.

8490 h2

"\UIe AA!“
CHRONICLE OF ORGANIZED POLITICAL ACTIVITY
Hojahedin Khalq's Statement
Tehran B‘I‘TEIA'AT in Persian 16 Aug 79 p 12

[Excerpts] In a statement, the National Diovenent of Hojshedin has announced
the end of protecting its headquarters by supporters. The statenent indicates
that the support of synpathisera of the organization is considered an effort
in defending the goals, doctrines and values of revolutionary aonotheisn and
not defending a building.

Another part of the statement indicates: "how that after 5 days and nights
you have created interesting scenes of unity and sacrifice with revolutionary
patience and difficulties. this gives us power and energy. In the end it
has been nentioned that experience has shown that the true dxfenders and

the most genuine supporters of Hojahedin and, in reality, any revolution-
ary force are the students. workers and other fighting forces free the
people."

Five Political Organisations
Tehran mm'ar in Persian 16 Aug 79 p 12

[Excerpts] Pive political nowenent organizations have issued a statenent
on the occasion of Qods Day narking their unity with the Palestinian nation
and announcing their participation in the ceremonies. These organizations
are the Revolutionary Hovesent of Iran's Mosle- People. The Islaeic Council
Organisation, The Hove-eat of Fighting Hoslens. and Iran's Hojehedin lhalq
Organisation.

Statenent by Hoelen Party
Tehran ETIZLA'A'I in Persian 16 Aug 79 p 12
[Excerpt] 0n the occasion of Qsds Day (Jerosalen). the Ielanic Republic

Party of Iran's Hoslen People issued a statenent announcing its participation
on this holy day.

113
A part or the statement indicates tnat celebrating was uay is not only
for considering Jerusalen. the first Kibleh (direction to which Hohanadans
turn in praying), a holy land which has come under the anger of Zionisa.
but also for defending the rights of the oppressed. It is s duty fro. the
viewpoint of unity and coordination of all of the risen deprived in the
world against the domination of Zionisl. This is s hopeful step.

Statement by Halek Ashtar Group
Tehran BTTELA'AT in Persian 16 Aug 79 p 12

[Excerpt] In a statement. the Halek Ashtar Honotheisl Organization has
announced that it will participate in the parade on Qods Day. The atateunt
is as follows:

"In the name of God, like other Hoslen fighters throughout the world. by
the order of the revolutionary leader, Inan Khomyni, the Halek Ashtar
Monotheisn Organization honors Qods Day and participates in the parade on
Friday. We ask all the Hoalem revolutionary forces and the honorable
people of Iran to help us in this public novenent by the order of the
revolutionary leader to once again announce our unity and support of the
poor nations especially the people of Palestine.

Islamic Revolutionary Hojaheds
Tehran BTTELA'AI‘ in Persian 16 Aug 79 p 12

[Excerpt] In state-ant No 30 issued by the organization of Islamic
Revolutionary Hojaheds, all of the fellow citizens have been warned not to
allow inperialist and Zionist agents to make conspiracies by provoking
then. In their statenent. they have asked the Iranian people to allow the
main elenents selected by Inan moneyni; that is, the government, revolu-
tionary court, Pasdaran Corps (The Guards) and the co—ittees to take care
of various problens. The people have been asked to rennin cool and have
revolutionary patience.

Anniversary of Pateneh Anini's Death
Tehran ETTELA'AT in Persian 16 Aug 79 p 12

[Excerpt] 0n the anniversary of Pate-eh Anini's death. a cerenony will be
held at Mashhad University Mosque tonight. Pate-eh Anini who was a Isobar
of the Mojahedin Khalq Organization (People's Hojahedin Organisation) died
on 25 Hordad 1356 (15 August 1975) under the torture of SAVAK executioners.
Fateneh Anini resisted the most severe tortures fro- the ﬁddle of Isfand.
1353 to Hordad, 1351. (20 February-20 March 1975 to 23 July-31 August 1975)

and finally she sacrificed her life for her belief and had the honor of
suffering aartyrdon in God's way.
Open Letter to Prise Minister
Tehran E‘I‘TELA'AT in Persian 19 Aug 79 p 12

[Excerpts] The executive conittee of the Iranian Society of Husan Rights
and Freedom has written a letter to Prime Minister, Basargan on the events
which took place in the recent week. The letter indicates:

"About 2 years ago. together with acne other supporters of human rights-«one
of whom are now participating in the governsent--you established the Iranian
Society of Defending Freedom and Bunan Rights.

"The efforts of this society was based on providing individual and social
rights and freedoms for the people of Iran according to world Declaration
of Husan Rights and international agree-ants on political and civil rights.
as well as fighting against any threat aggression to human rights. The
continuous struggles and revealinga of this society in the former regise
played an important role in the revolution's victory.

"Unfortunately, recent events in the country indicate aggressions against
individual and social rights and the continuous violation of human rights
by the governnent and irresponsible groups and individuals."

The letter refers to the sanner in which the elections of the Khebregsn
Assesbly (Assesbly of Experts) was held, the closing of publications and
attacks on denonstrations.

Nationalization of Industries
Tehran E‘I'I‘ELA'A'I‘ in Persian 19 Aug 79 p 12

[Excerpt] In a letter to Engineer Bazargan, the Organisation of University
Graduates has announced its readiness to cooperate by presenting studied
plans that can he inlesented.

The letter also gives a warning to the govern-ant on the actions that it
has so far taken, especially on the nationalization of industries. The
letter indicates: "Although the Hinistry of Industries has announced that
the purpose of nationaliaing the industries is not state ownership and that
after precise studies. the govern-ant will offer the nationalized industries
to the public as shares. this looks to be inpracticable, because offering
of the shares to the public will be faced with failure and the govern-ant
will be bound to operate and provide the costs of such industries.

Other parts of the letter refers to the desperate need of the industries
for experienced managers. the weakening of activation for progress and
expansion and the reduction of production in the future. The letter also
warns about inflation in the near fntnre.

1:5
Establishment of Homafar Mojahed Organization
Tehran E'l'Tl-ILA'AT in Persian 19 Aug 79 p 12

[Excerpt] In a statement, the Organization of Hojahed Hoasiars (Air Force
Technicians) has announced its establishment.

The statement refers to the responsibility and mission of every individual

in this organization in protecting and achieving the sacred goals of the
revolution. It has been indicated that the organization has been established
for the following goals:

1. Uniting the Homafars (air force officer-technicians) in protecting the
achievements of the Islamic revolution in our country under the leadership
of the grand Ayatollah Imam Khomeyni.

2. To help in the establishment of an Islamic army to assist and support
the honorable nation of Iran and protect the borders, lives, reputation
and properties.

3. Continuous fighting with antirevolutionaries and the enemies of Iran
and Islam and eastern and western colonialists who always try to paralyze
the splendid revolution of our nation.

a. To help in the reconstruction and imrovement of affairs in the country
by overall participation in the "construction Jehad" and to help and support
the poor in the society.

National Democratic Front Charges
Tehran ETTBLA'AT in Persian 19 Aug 79 p 12

[Excerpt] In a letter to the public prosecutor of Tehran, the executive
board of Iran's National Democratic Front has filed charges against the
government and all of the responsible authorities by explaining the events
which took place on Sunday 12 August (21 Hordad) in Tehran which resulted
in the death and injury of 1000 men and women. It has been indicated that
the government and the authorities were informed of the demonstrations
from days in advance.

Proposed Islamic Front for Poor
Tehran ETTELA'AT in Persian 19 Aug 79 p 12
[Excerpt] In a statement. the Islamic Republic Party has invited all of

the brother groups and parties to participate in the establishment of an
Islamic Front for the Poor.
The statement is as follows:
In the name of God.

Following negotiations held with brother groups and in giving an isneidste
response upon the Boss's invitation to the events. we hereby propose to all
Islanic groups with whom we had participated in public programs to partic-
ipate in the establishment of an Islanic Front for the Poor. He also invite
all Hoslen fighting groups and individuals to cooperate in the establish-ant
of this general Islamic Front and sake a fire line in the victorious Islamic
revolution under the leadership of Imam Khossyni. Seeking God's guidance
and success.

(Signed by the Islamic Republic Party; Telephone nulber 313355)
Doctors, Nurses Support Hojahedin Khalq
Tehran BTTBLA'AT in Persian 19 Aug 79 p 12

[Excerpt] The doctors, nurses, employees, workers, and students of
Firuzgar Medical Center have issued a state-ant asking for abate-ent of
nuisance for the People's Hojahedin Organization of Iran. The statement
indicates:

"In the was of freedom and in supporting the goals of the hero Hojaheds
(fighters of holy war), we hereby condemn any nuisance node to the People's
Hojahedin and ask the government to take action in abatesent of nuisance

for these revolutionary children of the Mosle- people decisively and

prosptly.

Tehran Teachers' State-ant

Tehran ET‘I'BIA'AT in Persian 19 Aug 79 p 12

[Excerpt] In a state-eat, the Organization of Tehran's Vanguard Teachers
has issued a statement referring to the attacks sade on the headquarters
of the political groups and their syIpathizers and other organizations.
They have raised the following question and asked the struggling fellow
citizens:

"Who are those behind the scene who are organising groups for bringing
pressure and attacking the revolutionary forces? "ho are those who confin
the chaos, monopolies, and all the pressures by pretending to be inertial
and under the excuse of not having power or sufficient authority?"

The statenent refers to the circustences of occupying the vanguard
teachers' office and asks: "that had the vsngard teachers done that
their offices were occupied? "ho had filed charges against then?" Pros
thousands of readers "students and teachers," who had cosplsined against
than.

’4?
In the end. the vanguard teachers emphasized that despite such pressures
they would continue their struggles against the world-eater imperialism
and its reactionary agents.

Hoslem Teachers Movement
Tehran ETTELA'AT in Persian 19 Aug 79 p 12

[Excerpts] In a statement. the Mosle- Teachers' Movement has announced its
sympathy with the oppressed nation of Palestine on the universal Qods Day
and its support from their continuous struggle (with shedding tears of
blood) against u.s. Imperialism and Zionism and have demanded the necessity
for the unity of the poor Hoslem nations in the world.

In the statement. the Hoslem Teachers Movement has demanded the neutraliza-
tion of all reactionary conspiracies which cause conflicts in the people's
united lines and weaken the revolution. The statement indicates that Iran's
revolution should continue in an anti-imperialist and anti-Zionist direction.

Tehran Industrial University Demands
Tehran ETTBLA'AT in Persian 19 Aug 79 p 12

[Excerpt] The Coordination Council of the Industrial University has issued
a statement objecting for the failure :2 show decisiveness toward anti-
revolutionaries in the past 6 month. The members of the Scientific Board.
the employees and students of the university have announced their readiness
for the achievement of the goals of Iran's Islamic revolution.

9156
C50: 10906
KOKDESTAN SITUATION VIEWED BY LEADERS
Tehran KEYHAN in Persian 12 Sep 79 p 5

[Text] Mohamed Rashid Shakiba, governor of Kordestan, announced in an
interview with a KEYHAN reporter that Kordsstan was 99 percent pacified and
construction of the Sanandaj den and a 120 km road had started a few days

before and is going forward quickly.

He also said in regard to health and medicine that the city of Sanandaj
had been paralyzed and the people of Sanandaj were very concerned over the
Operation of two Red Lion and Sun hospitals there.

Hoha-nad Rashid Shakiba added in connection with medical services that the
director general of health for Kordestan had announced that they had no
doctors or specialists in pediatrics, gynecology, internal medicine, nervous
disorders, lungs, mental probleus, radiology, heart, eye, ear. nose and
throat, or technicians and nurses.

The governor of Kordestan told our reporter that when he came to Kordestan
there were government programs in health and welfare which had started work
but which were stopped after the outbreak of violence in the area. lie said,
“I occupied myself coapletely with trying to bring peace to the area so that
I could carry out the government's projects that had stopped. A long period
passed before security was restored as a result of the actions of the array
and revolutionary guards. It is now about 8 days since work has started."
lie said in regard to the kinds of reconstruction projects that existed that
they consisted of building roads between cities, rural deveIOpaent, home
building, health services and efforts to prepare the Sanandaj dam and other
projects to create eaployeent offices for workers and educated youth. "We
hope," he said, "to be successful with the help of God and the cooperation
of friends from all classes." lie added that building the Sanandaj-Harivan
road had started and predicted that it would be finished in 2 years at the
lost. The road will be 120 km long. The problea of the Sanandaj daa has
precedence because the people of Sanandaj have no water. Those responsible
for the dam have proaised that it be finished in less than a year and water
will be available to people of the city.

119
l‘rnh h-m of Health

"I hullovv the government must not undertake projects without planning.

'l'lnr pmhlu-m nl' lu-nllh In -'I pJ't-nl burden (0 m- mul l hml ln-llm c-xplnln

it. For the entire population of Sanandaj we have three hospitals of which
two are operated by the Red Lion and Sun and the other by Health. If people
have problems with health or complaints about hospitals at least they can be
happy to have the Lion and Sun hospitals. However, a short time ago two

Lion and Sun hospitals of 160 beds were taken over by the Health Department
and from that time they have deteriorated. Hy cries to improve the
conditions of the hospitals have also not gotten anywhere. Hy surprise at
this is because the ministry itself says that it is concerned with the
situation and cannot meet the needs of the people. who gave them permission
to take over two operating health units and paralyze the city's health
capacities?" He added, “Yesterday I talked with Dr Falah, director general
of health, about this. He showed me a list which said that they were short
40 doctors. I was surprised to see this and wondered what the Health
Department in this province had. It would be better if they accounted for
what they do have and we could then be a little happier. During the 2

months of violence, and I could say during the worst periods, the government
tried to meet the needs of the area. However, unfortunately I must say

that the Lion and Sun had more responsibility to the people of the area.
During the trouble if we asked for a surgeon they immediately sent one. He
asked for medicine and they sent it. Anything we asked for from that
organization we got. On behalf of the people I thank the officials of the
Lion and Sun." Mohammad Rashid shakiba alluded to the problems of employment
in Sanandaj and other cities of the province and said. "At the moment we
have nearly 400 workers and about 1,200 graduates and engi wers unemployed.
Every day about 2,000 workers came to the province office and shout-d their
complaints that they were out of work. I began to investigate and round that
there were political groups paralyzing us. They had intentionally sent these
people, a group of about 1,600, to the province office. They wanted to trap
us in problems so that we could do nothing else and raise a wave of discontent.
Subsequent investigation showed that only about 500 of these people out of
the 2,000 were out of work and the others were agitators. It is said that

at present count 1,200 educated youth are out of work. During the next few
days 1 will talk with them and find out if they are out of work or whether
some of them want to cause trouble. However, certainly if there are not
1,000 educated youths unemployed, there are certainly no fewer than 800.”

A question was asked as to what programs there are to employ these people and
other workers.

The governor said, "Unfortunately, except in education, we haveno place for
them, but in the near future I think this problem will be solved because we
have plans."
He added in connection with employment offices and jobs that in Sanandaj
there are no factories except the tobacco plant connected with the Tobacco
Association. "A thread spinning plant was built in Sanandaj with the
cooperation of the previous regime but it has been closed for nearly 6

y nrs. This factory could use 200 workers. A few days ago the officials
of this factory said in the course of stating their problems that they
would need a loan of 10 million tomans. I discussed the subject with the
minister of industry and mines and asked him to study the situation and
help the officials get the plant going."

In regard to agriculture and its encouragement, Shakabi said that the
condition of agriculture in the area was also very bad. "For example," he
said. "we have no means to repair agricultural machinery. No type of training
is available for farmers to teach them to use tractors and other machines.

we have no technicians and fertilizer has not gotten to the farmers. The
Ministry of Agriculture has announced that in order to encourage agriculture
it would buy farmers produce at good prices. Agricultural officials in
charge of harvesting will buy wheat from farmers and store it in silos, but
getting money to buy the wheat and other commodities requires the aid of the
Ministry of Agriculture and is the same headache it was in the fallen regime.
For example, a silo is 15 farhangs away from where the wheat is bought and
the farmer must execute a sales order. These are sent to another ministry
and it is nearly a month before a check is issued and in the farmer's hands.
After 1 month's wait the farmer must give up his work and normal life and

go to the city to get his money. The farmer spends the money he has gotten
for his crop and has nothing left."

After describing the situation, the governor commented on the commissions
from Tehran and Qom. He said that in addition to the prisoners we have
other problems. "Every day a commission comes to this province. These
commissions are supposed to know the situation here, but instead of making
things better they create unhappiness and lake things worse. I ask that
the government make a detailed. reasonable plan for the province."

Relief Caravan

He had a brief opportunity to talk with Dr Haqgu. governor of west Azarbaijan.
he said he was happy that the army had restored peace and security to the
cities. He said, "in my opinion operations must begin in the secondary

areas as soon as possible and clear the mountain places of the invaders

and the whole area up to the border where they are still not willing to lay
down their arms and accept the Imam's amnesty so that we can do our duty

to our Kordesh brothers who are looking for reconstruction of the area. We
understand this and are preparing practical plans for reconstruction. some

of which have been putintooperation already.”

51
Dr Mquu. in commenting on the subject of relief caravans to Piranshahr,
said that because of propaganda from opponents of the revolution and the
banned Democratic Party and the people have confused the Democratic Party
with the Kordesh people. For this reason a few days ago we organized a
relief caravan and informed the people over the radio that they could
participate in this caravan for help and friendship for the people of
Piranshahr. Unfortunately, some did not accept this and the aim we sought
was not achieved.

"It would not have been this way except that the majority still did not want
to differentiate between the Kordesh people and the Democratic Party. This
feeling must be removed."

Dr Haqgu added after his talk, "in my opinion after the army's occupation of
the cities other solutions will emerge and the compassion and blessedness
of Islam will go forward. The people must be encouraged in giving help,
friendship and brotherhood."

Dr Haqgu commented further on the caravan of friendship that, "we will not
set up another caravan without more facilities and provisions than the last
one. We h0pe that the people are aware that the hand of friendship and

brotherhood must be extended to our countrymen and cooperate with us more
fully."

Commander of 28th Sanandaj Division

Col Sepehr, commander of the 28th Division at Sanandaj,hasa command post

at Sanandaj and another where reports are centralized about the revolutionaries.
The commander of the Kordestan area said that now the army's 26th Division at
Sanandaj is master of the situation. "During the last 26 haurs there had been
some small incidents in Bistam, Marivan and other places but all of these
were localized. In the vicinity of Bistam and Harivan 150 to 200 people

of the Democratic Party were reported gathered. We went to the area
immediately but they had fled. Tanks have come into the counterrevolutionary
area and the well-known words of the rebels have not been realized. They

are able to take significant actions only in slaughter and despair, taken
only as a result of necessity and desperation."

Continuing, the commander said, "In my opinion the police and gendarmerie
should occupy their posts as soon as possible and stay with the people.

For example, in the past where we had a post of 10 people the number should
now be increased to 30 to 50. The posts should have heavy weapons, some of
which should be counterfire weapons. A strike force should be on alert so
that in case of trouble it could attack by land and air. According to the
information that l have, the posts are rapidly being put into a state of
mobilization and between Saqez and Sanandej and at Saqez posts are being
mobilized with the help of the army and revolutionary guards and are capable

52
of facing any opposition. Only in the posts at Mirabad, Sarah, Cardanehkhaneh
and Baneh can the gendarmerie carry out operations without help. Col Sepehr
said that the police at Saqez and Baneh are also 100 percent on the job but

in Sanandah they have not reached that state and the guards are controlling
order and security for our police brothers."

He also said that the gendarmerie will be in control of the border areas in
perhaps 20 or 30 days. "The counterrevolutionaries have destroyed everything.
For example, in Baneh and Sardasht they destroyed gendarmerie units and even
their posts. Not one untouched room remains. Even doors were smashed up.
They destroyed everything. They also cut water and electricity in the area
and to the posts. They burned and smashed power control centers. This is
why we say 20 or 30 days."

Reason for Democratic Party Sympathy

Abu Sharif, operational commander of the revolutionary guards, commented on
the reason for Kordesh sympathy for the dissolved Democratic Party. He said,
"We all know that in previous times the residents of this area got no assistance
and the tyrant regime tried to prevent trouble in the area by handing

tribute to a limited number of people. As a result, most of the workers

of the region had a pitiful life and were in the power of a limited group.
During the revolution, counterrevolutionary activities took place and the
supporters of Zionism and imperialism used this pitiful majority and forced
them to cooperate by using empty, lying people and even threats. Some of
these deCeived people were killed. In my opinion, and I have come to know
the difficulties and problems of the Kords, we must join hands with all
organizations and bureaus who have contacts with the troublemakers in order
to settle the problems of the Kordesh area. Our Kordesh and other brotherly
countrymen must be assured and not deceived by the enemies of Islau. For
centuries imperialism and Zionism have tried to spread differences in the
ranks of Hoslems and weaken us. They use the talk of differences between
Shia and Sunni, Kord and Turk. so they were able to incite Moslema and thus
profit from the enormous resources of the Hoslem countries. I think that
everyone. even in the farthest part of the country and other Moslem countries,

understands the tricks and land grabbing of international imperialism and
exploitation. He must strengthen our ranks by joining hands and build relations
with all levels of the country."

Abu sharif said in connection with the revolutionary guards and their bases

on the border that according to national leaders the responsibility for
protecting the border is the gendarmerie's, but in areas where the gendarmerie
havenotcompleted their bases the responsibility will remain with the
revolutionary guards until our brothers of the gender-aria have set up their
posts. ”I think that there are nearly 650 bases on the Iraq border. some of
which are in a state of readiness. We have ourselves tried to close off

entry and exit routes for counterrevolutionariss, transportation of smuggled
goods. weapons and merchandise into our lands."

9648
CSO: 4906
BRIEFS

HIHANDUSTAN PARTY LETTER-~In an open letter to the government and the
Revolutionary Council. the Hihandustan Party (Patriots Party) has asked
that a group not be allowed to he anti-revolutionaries unwittingly. The
party warns the government and the Revolutionary Council that there is a
group which puts eillions of farmers under pressure by making advance
purchases and profiteering; the existence of such siddleaen thus contri-
butes to public dissatisfaction. In order to prevent such antirevolutionary
actions, and thus eventually benefit the consumer, the party suggests:

1) Banning advance purchasing in the future and announcing the current
purchases as void. The governsent should buy the agricultural products at
a reasonable price; 2) All services and goods offered in the cities and
villages should have price tags in order to facilitate identifying the
profiteers. [Text] [Tehran KEYHAN in Persian 8 Aug 79 p 12] 9156

POLITICAL ORGANIZATIONS NOT TO DEMONSTRATB--Yesterday the five united groups
of JONBBSH (Moveaent). the Struggling Hosleas. JAHA, SASB and the People's
Hojahedin Organisation. announced through their spokes-an that they will

not participate in the demonstrations that will be held today upon the
invitation of the Deaocratic Front to protest suffocation. [Excerpt]
[Tehran KEYHAN in Persian 12 Aug 79 p 12] 9156

NATIONAL FRONT RBGRBT-The National Front of Iran expressed its deep
regret over the event which took place in Baluchestan which resulted in the
death of a university teacher and some struggling youths. The spokes-an

of the National Front said: "The most important issue which is necessary
today for the construction projects is providing security for the lives of
officials and the devoted children of the revolution. Ne expect the
government to take necessary decisions as soon as possible in prosecuting
the guilty, so that the blood of the revolutionary aartyrs would not be
wasted. [Excerpt] [Tehran KEYEAN in Persian 12 Aug 79 p 12] 9156

SUPPORTING QODs DAY-The Palestine Cooperation Society has asked all of
the parties and struggling groups to use all of their capabilities to pro-
test the aggressions of Israel and her support by 0.8. imperialiss and to
participate in the ceremonies held on Qods Day. [Excerpt] [Tehran KIYNAN
in Persian 12 Aug 79 p 12] 9156

5h
WHEN'S DEMOCRATIC ESTABLISHMENT-4M Organization of women's Democratic
Establishment in Iran has issued a statement announcing that i: is starting
its activities again. The woun have been asked to participate in getting
their rights along with the development of revolutionary achievements.
[Excerpt] [Tehran KEYHAN in Persian 12 Aug 79 p 12] 9156

MARDON PARTY ON ELECTIONS--In talks held with the party, Iran's Mardom
Party confirmed the elections held for the constitutional assembly and
indicated that under existing conditions the revolution'a final victory
depends on the devotion and sacrifice of comitted and Hoslem Hojaheds
(Fighters of Holy War). The party points out that the success of the
Islamic Republic Party has been merely due to religious relations and that
if there has been some violations it was the result of individual prejudice
and not party prejudice. The party has cemented that the constitution
should be taken into consideration out of the party framework at the
Khebregan Assembly [Assembly of Experts] and the goal should be in the
direction of unity, as continuously advised by the revolutionary leader.
[Text] [Tehran KEYHAN in Persian 13 Aug 79 p 12] 9156

MOVEMENT OP MOSLD‘I FIGHTERS—1n a statement. the Movement of Hoslem Fighters
has indicated that the death of the martyrs of the Construction Jehad help
the continuation of the revolution. The statement is as follows: "In the
name of God, with the conspiracies of antirevolutionaries. the Hojahed
(Fighters of Holy War) youth who had gone to the villages to help their
brothers and sisters in response to the call of the revolutionary leader,
shed their blood. The Hojahed brother, Eng Vali Allah Nik Bakht, who was
a university teacher and meaber of the scientific board of Baluchestan
University and one of the supporters of the Movement of Mosle- Fighters
strengthened the seed of our bloody revolution with his death. Vali Allah
Nikbaltht suffered msrtrydoa with humane and revolutionary couitmsnt and
by following the guidances of the revolutionary leader. Imam [Ora-eyni. He
congratulate the revolutionary leader. the Hoslem nation and the families
of the martyrs on his death. He will always honor his memory with the
continuation of the revolution in the direction of a monotheistic society.
[Text] [Tehran KEY'HAN in Persian 16 Aug 79 p 12] 9156

IRANIAN SOCIETY OF COOPERATION HIT]! PALESTINE-~Yesterday on the occasion

of Qods Day (Jerusalea Day) the Iranian Society for Cooperation with Pales-
tine issued a statement and invited all the struggling groups. societies

and parties to use all of their capabilities in protesting to the aggressions
of Zionist Israel. their supporters. imperialisa and especially u.s.
imperialism. The statement invites them to mobilize their capabilities in
publishing, protesting and revealing Zionist plots and announce their
cooperation with the hero nation of Palestine. [Text] [Tehran mum in
Persian 110 Aug 79 p 12] 9156

TOHIDI PARTY HARNINGnTehran-PARS ms AGENCY-~In a statement, the Tohidi

Party (Monotheism Party) has referred to the events which took place in the
university yesterday and has condamed provocations made by Zionism and

55
imperialism. The statement points out that Iran's Moslem nation will not
allow the opportunists to make plots against the revolution. The Tohidi
Party has warned the antirevolutionaries to repent and return to the arms
of the Iranian nations. [Text] [Tehran KEYHAN in Persian 14 Aug 79 p 12]
9156

MASSIVE PARTICIPATION--Following Imam Khomeyni's invitation to all Moslems
to allocate 23 Ramazan (Friday, lIAugust) for fighting against Zionism.
the aggression of Israel in southern Lebanon and defending Jerusalem. the
Moslem people are preparing themselves to participate in the ceremonies
held on this day throughout the Islamic countries. The following groups
and organizations have so far announced that they will participate by
parading: the Joint Staff of Iran's Islamic Republic Army, the Central
Council of NCOs and Personnel of Iran's Islamic Republic Police Department.
the Islamic Society of Drivers, Municipality of District Five, the Islamic
Society of Tehran's Municipality, the Joint Staff of Iran‘s Islamic
Republic Army. the employees' Society of Iran's Central Bank, the lslamic
Society of the Oil Industry Personnel, Vali 'Asr Pedsyees, the Islamic
Society of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, the Organization of Monotheist
Defenders. the Islamic Society of the Agricultural Development Bank. the
Deprived Movement, the Movement of Vanguard Moslems, the Islamic Society
of (para) Medical School, the Islamic Society of Leyla Al Qadr Mosque.

the Islamic Society of Finance Personnel, the Islamic Society of Employees
of Regional Power, the Islamic Society of Employees of the Civil Service
and Administrative Organization. Afghan workers residing in Iran, the
Islamic Society of Employees of the Insurance Industry. the Islamic Society
of National Defense Industries Organization. the Pedayees of Islam, Air
Force Personnel of Iran's Islamic Republic, and the Islamic Society of

the Personnel of KEYHAN, the Society of Production and Distribution of
Cloths, the Students‘ Society. the Air Force Personnel and the Islamic
Society of the Ministry of Justice. [Tehran KEYHAN in Persian 16 Aug 79

p 12] 9156

FEDAYEE KHALQ STATEMENT--In the statement to the mass media on Tuesday,

the Organization of Pedayee Khalq Guerrillas has referred to the attack
made on the organization on 22—5-1358 (13 August 1979) and pointed out

that the attack was made by instigated and unaware groups. The statement
indicates that the attackers enjoyed the support of some of the conmittee
members. The Pedayee Rhalq Guerrillas believe that such actions are efforts
to prepare the ground for civil war. The Pedayee Khalq Guerrillas have
clearly announced that they had not participated in last Sunday's denonstra-
tions, because they had already issued a statement on the closing of
AYANDBGAN, and that there was no need for them to demonstrate. However,
unfortunately. some of the press in the country find this organization
responsible for the recent demonstrations and chaos. [Excerpts] [Tehran
KEYHAN in Persian 19 Aug 79 p 12] 9156

HONORIRG SAMAD BEHRANGI-The independent center of teachers has prepared

some programs honoring the anniversary of Ssaad Behrangi'a death. Samad
Behrangi was a true teacher, an honest writer. and teacher of children's

56
literature. The teachers in the capital city and all those interested

in participating in the cercuonies have been invited to contact ”Nashr"
group in the afternoons from Hednesdey 31st of Horded to 1th of Shahrivar
(22-29 August 1979) at the Teachers' Club (located at ugh-e Shah, Ahmad
Reza'yi Ave, foruerly Kashan Ave) [Excerpt] [Tehran KEYHAN in Persian

19 Aug 79 p 12] 9156

POLITICAL PRISONERS' SOCIETY-An a statement addressed to all progressive
forcesuanti-inperialist and antidictatorship, the Political Prisoners
Society (anti-imperialist and sntidonestic reactionaries) have pointed
out: "At present, there is a neurotic and provoking condition per-eating
the political atuosphere in our country to the benefit of inerialisl.
The current neurotic atnoaphere is due to the offensive nature of the
prejudiced and antidetaocrstic forces which may lead to chaos and prepare
the grounds further for suffocation. Here, the religious clergy and
leaders who are trusted by the people have an inortant duty--to put an
end to this unfavorable situation with their guidance and intervention."
[Excerpt ] [Tehran KEYBAN in Persian 19 Aug 79 p 12] 9156

CSO: 10906

S7
AUTGIMY PLAN A YEAR AFTER CAMP DAVID ASSESS.
Tel Aviv HA'ARETZ in Hebrew 21 Sep 79 pp 13, 20
[Article: "Bleak Future for Inpleuentaticn of Autonomy Plan"!

[Text] A year has elapsed since the signing d the Cap David Agreement
at the "bite House. In Israel the festivity of a birthday celebratim has
been very restrained. It is not difficult to guess why. The public has
granted its blesssing to the Israeli-Egyptian peace treaty which was
achieved about a year ago and which was one of the important results of
the agreanents of a year ago. As far as me can judge the public is not
overly cancerned about the withdrawal fro the Sinai Peninsula. But the
satisfactim felt over the peace with Egypt is but one side of the coin.
It is in the nature of things for the public to accept as their proper
due the good protim. 0n the other hand, that part of the Camp David
Agreenents which has not as yet reached a practical stage is a matter of
deep cmcern to the majority and naturally to those who were critical of
the Agreements fro: the very beginning.

The autonony plan for the Arabs of Judea, Samaria and Gaza as formulated
by the prime minister originally as a pernanent solution to the Palestinian
question was not acceptable to the Arab side. It is no wonder that the
Egyptian president rejected it at the meeting in Islailia. Even now it

is difficult to understand Mr Begin's statement that he left that meeting
in a very happy frale of aind.

In Decanber of 1977 Henehen Begin's vereim of the autonaay plan was an
obstacle in the advancement of peace between us and the Egyptians for

three quarters of a year. This changed ally after Mr.3egin agreed to change
the character of the plan from a per-meat solution to a teaporary solution
of 5 years' duration. Host of the Arabs ruled out the latter form as well.
The Egyptian president f and reascns to justify it and proceeded to press
for it sung the Egyptian and Arab public.

However, that agreenent was to a large extent a: agree-ant not to agree.
The Israeli prise sinister claims that the Camp David Agree-ant leaves an
avmue (pen for the enforcement of Israeli sovereignty over Judea, Salaria

58
and the Gaza Strip. The Egyptian president using the sun: logic could' claim
Hm: the Agreement prepares the way for a permanent solutim d the
Palestinian questim in the directim of a greater measure of independence
than they have enjoyed heretofore.

From the moment the Camp David Agreement was confirmed a struggle has been
going on between Egypt (with the tacit support of the United States) and
ourselves as to how to translate the legal language of the Agreement into
practical steps; into the determination of methods of electing the adminis-
trative council to implement autonomy and what will be the range of its
authority? The problematic nature of the autmmy plan is exposed. The
brief dramatic hopes for its viability were dashed by the attendant acute
complexities.

It is only natural that the Egyptians are trying to perceive the autonomy
.‘ir Begin promised them as "full and canplete." lie prides himself on

having invented the. specific concept "full" in order to contradict the
claims of American journalists that the autonomy would be "limited" and

be of a narrow territorial nature. Is it for nothing that the Camp David
Agreement specifically states that the autonomous body shall be called "an
independent governing wthority?" 0n the basis of their on constitutional
experience the Americans believe that autonomy should include constitutional
authority. Isn't that the norm for states like Illinois. Missouri and
Connecticut?

Mr Begin never considered that his plan would be interpreted in this light.
'Irue he succeeded in effecting the inclusion of administrative council in
quotes after the phrase 'independent govern-ennui authority'. It was also
stated in the Agreement and in a joint letter that the autonany would be
determined for the residents of Judea, Samaria and Gaza. There is no
mention for whatever reason that in every municipality even in the State of
Israel authority is retained by the residents within definite boundaries
on the map and delineated by proper signs on the highways in the territory.

The Egyptians demand that voting rights for the election of the administra-
tive cwncil be accorded to the Arabs of Bast Jerusalem. Mr Begin fears
that granting them this franchise would strike at the very basis of the
annexation of Bast Jerusalem by the State of Israel. but he has no answer
to the questim. The Arabs of Bast Jerusalem are not Israeli citizens and
as a result they cannot vote in our Knesset elections. Is it possible to
leave them without any representatim? Or should he agree to pernit these
Arabs to vote for the Jordanian Parliaent when Rabat Anon will announce
such electicns?

Problems mount on top of problems. And as the negotiations are prolonged

it beccnas painfully clear that the autonomy concept is not a viable
projection for the Palestinians. The Egyptian concept is as flared as

the ”statehood authority" fornulated by Bans-Dietrich Gmcher. The
"haaelsnd" envisaged by Carter in his speech at Clinton in 1977 is equally
nebulous. King Hussein's proposal to have the Heat Bank becae a Palestinian
province of the United Jordanian Kingdaa is viewed by any with grave ais-
givings.

59
The concept of autonomy can be realized only if Israeli cuntrol o‘.‘ the West
Bank and the Gaza Strip is assured with no time limitations. This option
was excluded by the Camp Davis Agreements. The inducements were many to
continue the negotiations in the hope that this creature called 'autonomy'
would disappear. Perhaps we hoped we would succeed in persuading Egypt and
the Americans to agree to a situation whereby a decisive choice by the
Arabs in the territories could be indefinitely postponed. This of course
would entail a continued Israeli military rule in the area. It would also
incur heated oppositiai from Egypt and the United States.

I must confess, the idea of autonomy continues to strike me as an unfortunate
concept. If only we could extricate ourselves from this morass I would be
highly gratified. But how? Every one of our regimes starting with the

one of July 1967 rejected the Jordanian option either on principle or with
the argument that King Hussein is not ready to accept the well-known plan

of Yigial Alan. The possibility of radically changing the situation is very
meager. The plan to leap-frog over the PLO and the Palestinians and reach

a direct understanding with the Jordanian king is more problematical than

it ever was in the past.

it is not beyond the realm of the possible that Hussein will agree to
represent the P10 at the UN meeting with the hope that he will be able to
circumvent Yasir Arafat in the final stages of the cmtest. In much the
same manner Arafat is confident of tq>pling Hussein. Judging iron the
situation today it is difficult to predict who will be the victor in this
duplicitous competition. No matter what the outcome, Mr Henahem Begin is
certain to direct his polemical arrows against the Hashemite dynasty with
the sane vigor with which he is aiming them at the PLO at present.

it should not be forgotten that it was our foreign minister who agreed in
an lsraeli-Anerican working paper in October of 1977 that the Palestinians
(residents of the occupied territories) would be a party at the Geneva
cmference when it would be reconvened. He are doing Hr Daym no injustice
if we assume that it was not merely an accmodatiai to Hashingtm's views.
He was motivated also by a wish to block the road to the Jordanian option.
Hr Begin's autonony plan and the Camp David Agreement simply expmded
Moshe Dayan's thinking. Even in the days of the Alinement regime he was
convinced of the necessity of the continued and effective Israeli control
of the Heat Bank and the Gaza Strip.

This is the fundamental basis of the conscience of viewpoint existing between
the prime minister and the minister for foreign affairs: they are firmly
cmvinced that Western Israel should not be partitioned. Hr Begin was

very anxious to have Moshe Dayan included in the regime and welcomed him.
The latter agreed with Mr Begin not to impose an Israeli legal and justice
administraticm m Judea, Samaria and Gaza. Hr Dayan had argued for years
that annexation was not necessary to achieve the objective both he and the
head of the Herut movement were striving to obtain. He believed it would

be possible to retain Israeli rule over the occupied territories through
more delicate and refined methods rather than outright annexation. He

60
believed it possible to establish Israeli settlements in the occupied
territories without unnecessarily provoking the Arabs in the territories
and without arousing vigorous opposition from the United States.

The debate between the two leaders is confined to differences in the methods
of implementation and not to questions of principle. Regarding the question
of implementation the foreign minister has often felt that Cush Emunim and
the minister for agriculture are causing harm which can be prevented. 0n
the other hand it is difficult for the prime minister to divest himself of
his connection with the 'Creater lsrael' group who are in fact his
supporters and disciples. Hr Begin still refuses to admit even to himself
that he was bested at Camp David and that he opened the door to the paci-
bility of a Palestinian state. Mr Dayan on the other hand is prepared to
steer the negotiations in a directim which would prevent an image of Israel
as a state which is seeking to renege a. its promises. He believes it is
possible to create a concept of autonomy that would serve to retain the
Nest Bank as a territory not to be annexed by Israel and not to be returned
to the llashemite Kingdcm.

In general Dayan does not believe in the necessity of precisely defined
boundaries. In his opinion westerners in their thinking are accustaled to
rigid and definitive concepts. However, in the East it is possible to
arrive at solutims to national and political problems that are quite
viable though not defined with that high degree of exactitude. he is not
pleased with the manner in which the negotiations with Egypt and the
United States are progressing m the subject of autonomy. Even this
difference of opinion between him and the prime minister is still expressed
against a background of unanimity as to the final goal.

From a practical viewpoint it seems that the foreign minister's position
is more flexible and acco-Iodating than the prime minister's. he is fully
aware of the fact that we cannot 'escape' from autonauy. I would like to
add that David Ben Gurion could disengage himself at a definite point in
time fro: the Biltmore Plan. But after all it was no more than an internal
docriment that the Zionists were debating among themselves. In contrast
the autonomy plan is mchored in an international agreement. It has added
validity stealing from the joint letter of ﬂessrs Begin and Sadat of

26 March 1979 to the President of the United States. This letter is no!
part of the peace treaty between the two states.

what remains as a matter of concern now is to make certain that the form
given to autonay will contain nothing that may block progress toward a
permanent solution. He must bear in mind however that our efforts to
exclude frm the autmay plan any provisions we feel will facilitate the

f ormatim of an independent Palestinian State will evoke a counter-action
from the opposing side. Their efforts will be pointed toward the prevention
of having the autoncmy plan becmne a transiticnal stage for the absorption
of the territories within the boundaries of the State of Israel.

61
The prospect is for a long and difficult negotiation, even if at present
there will he a few months' pause. 'l'he Begin-Burg line is certain to deepen
the differences between us and Egypt and the United States. The approach
of Dayan and Ezer Heizman praises a calmer climate for the negotiations.
but it is doubtful whether even this will prevent a split. It will still

be possible to block a return to the 1967 borders and the establishment

of a sovereign Palestinian State. The desperate struggle to nullify our
historic acceptance of the partititn of Western Israel and the projections
of the Day of Atonement Her do not bode well for us in the future. when

the hour of decision arrives there is no certainty that the pact between

the prime minister and the minister for foreign affairs will weather the
storm.
EGYPTIAN ASSESSHENT OF THE MIDDLE EAST SITUATION REVIEWED
Tel Aviv llA'ARi-ITZ in Hebrew 12 Sep 79 pp 9-10

lArticle: "Analysis of Political Forces and Trends From an Egyptian
Perspective"!

[Text] Ssdat's statement that he is convinced that Jordan would join the
peace talks raised the question: On what does the Egyptian president base
his optimistic predictim? It became nore curious since it brought forth
an unequivocal. denial from King Hussein. It became clear that Sadat is
not the only one who perceives the trend in this light. It is not the
Heartfelt wish of a solitary individual. This assessment is the view of
the entire Egyptian nation. The intelligence people as well as senior
army officers are voicing the same opinion. This assessment is no doubt
based on intelligence data culled fron various nrab states. It is an
interesting evaluation, though in essence it is erroneous and fails to
interpret the facts correctly.

Actually what is the basis for this Egyptian evaluation of the situation?
It is apparent that events in Jordan are not the g:ounds for Sadst's
deductions regarding Hussein. His conclusions are based on the occurrences
in the neighboring Arab states. Conditims there will in the end dictate
that Jordan and Israel enter into negotiations. The Egyptians claia that
the rejectionist frmt is declining and disintegrating. 01d and acrimonious
differences of opinion and deep fears that have always divided a number of
the rejectionist states have again cane to the surface. The true picture
is becoming clearer. Many of the states who have joined in this artificial
coalition have becone convinced that internal Egyptian opposition to the
peace process has failed to topple Sadat. They know that without Egypt
they would in the course of time find themselves in a perilous situation.

The assessment regarding Syria is that within a year Assad’s regila will
fall. The sands in his clock are running out. His political strength is
decreasing. According to Cairo's analysis Assad cannot continue in this
present situation of no war and no peace. In this present state of affairs
his weakness is accentuated and his internal problems are increasing. The
coalitim with Iraq is not realistic. It failed to gloss over the ancient
rivalries and it stimulated internal oppositia: within Syria.
.‘Illlll lall ly "85"“ Wllh LalltllﬂllllLEU IIILU u "ll-WI" BLLUULLMI Ill l-UUOHUII.
Domination of certain portions of Lebanon gave rise to more problems than
compensations. Added to all these troubles the sectarian problems are
becoming more aggravated and the internal ferment against his rule is
surfacing. Assad will not consider activating his army against the Sun!
arr! for four of wholesale desertlons and mutiny within the army.

The Egyptians are highly pleased with the complicated situation in which
Assad finds himself. Against this background it is easy to understand
why they are so placid and unconcerned about the ID? actions in Lebanon.
It has been given assurances that Israel does not covet any territory
there. It knows that Israel is not interested in the disintegration and
partition of Lebanon. Cairo does not regard it as calamitous when the
Syrian Air Force is defeated in combat or that Damascus cannot provide
adequate protection for the PLO from IDE attacks.

in Cairo they estimate that is is merely a matter of tine till Assad's
regime will be toppled. Those who will succeed him will be persuaded
that the natural position of Syria should be on the Egyptian side and not
the Iraqi. Perhaps then Damascus will join the peace process and adopt
the Egyptian political stance whose objective is to rescue the West Bank
from Israeli control and establish a Palestinian entity in that territory.

According to the perception in Cairo there are encouraging signs even in
Saudi Arabia. This despite the fact that Riyad has joined the circle of
Egyptian detractors. Saudi Arabia is prepared to make 'under the table'
arrangements with Egypt. Within Saudi Arabia itself there are signals
that portend tremble. He hear news of pipelines being exploded. The
authorities fear the formation of an underground movement and the expansion
of radicalism. Saudi Arabia is not similar to Iran, but internal changes
may occur there as well. The royal family is as well aware as is the king
of Morocco that should the need arise to seek assistance in the struggle
against radicals in the Arab world there is but one address to turn to and
that is Egypt.

This is the realistic situation. It is a mistaken policy for Saudi Arabia
to lean on Iraq and other radical Arab states. If Riyad will seek help

in a time of distress it is reasonable to assume that it will turn to Egypt
even before it comes to the United States. This despite the fact that it
is fearful of the extremist elements in the Arab world. In the final
analysis it must come to terms with Egypt.

in Cairo's opinion this is the trend. This is the inevitable direction.
It may take time for it to show the desired results but at the finals
approval will be accorded to the political process Egypt has begun.

In such a situation Hussein will not feel apprehensive about joining the
negotiations. He will do so with alacrity in order to preempt the PLO.
In the Egyptians' opinion Hussein does not require persuasion. He will
find his way as soon as Syria and Saudi Arabia remove their opposition.

6h
Israel however will have to be persuaded alter the lapse of 5 years that
the permanent solution of the West Bank problem lies with the Jordanian-
Palcstlnian axis and not with the concept of an independent autonomy.

AunluFl lhv hacknruund nf lhla Egyptian analysis of the situation It hecrmwa
easy to understand why Cairo reacts so calmly to the time factor: why it
feels no urgency in the negotiations on autonomy. This inference could be
deduced from the conduct of the negotiators at the autonomy conference

and from the conduct and words of President Sadat. If the process taking
place in the Arab world is as described above. then it must be permitted

to ripen. Time is essential to this process. Hence there is no need to

be precipitate in the negotiations. It is far better that the basic
arrangements of the negotiations be determined when Israel is being faced

by Jordanians as well as Palestinians.

If this is the trend it explains why Egypt is not overly enthusiastic at
this point in time to resolve the details of the negotiations and to reach
a compromise with Israel. Cairo assumes and perhaps rightly that any
compromise with Israel would trigger an indictment by the Palestinians
and other Arabs that it abandoned and betrayed the Palestinian cause. It
is preferable that the Palestinians themselves effect that compromise.
This is the reason for the lack of urgency. At present Egypt's objective
is to guard the basic principles and to assure that the negotiations are
progressing in the proper direction. Sadat states explicitly that Egypt
will take the first step; will open the way, but the Palestinians in
concert with the Jordanians lust do the negotiating. They will have to
determine their destiny.

There is no doubt an added Egyptian calculation regarding the time factor.
It clarifies why the Egyptians are not pressing Israel for a speedy con-
clusion to the negotiations. The approaching elections in Israel and

the imperiled state of the Likud regime constitute an influential factor
in the claculations. The approaching elections in the United States are
evoking expectations in Israel as well as in Egypt. The sane is true of
our domestic elections.

The Egyptians as well as the Americans follow with great interest the
internal political events in Israel. They are certainly considering the
possibility that the political picture in Israel may change-becauae of
Prime Minister Henahem Begin's health or because of the possible defeat
of the Likud in the elections. Even if Likud is not decisively defeated
there is a distinct possibility that a new political leadership will
assume the helm. This will result in a new approach to the continuation
of the negotiations. This latter as well as the inter-Arab problem is
yet to come to fruition.

8995
CSO: 4805

65
HEIZMAN APPOINTS JURISTS T0 EXAMINE SHAHGAR COMMITTEE RECOMMENDATIONS
TA09l757 Jerusalem Domestic Service in Hebrew 1700 GMT 9 Nov 79 TA

[Text] Defense Minister 'Bzer Heisman has appointed three private jurists
to examine the Shamgar committee's recommendations and to submit their opinion
on the issue to him.

As is known, the Shamgar connittee headed by Justice He'ir Shsmgar examined
the legal processes within the IDF. Among other things, the comittee
recommended that the right of the chief of staff and ID? generals to mitigate
sentences be curtailed. It also recomended that a jurist be appointed
instead of an 10]" officer as president of the Supreme Military Court of
Appeals. The comittee recommended that the IDF legal echelon be detached
from the IDF commanding echelon so that the appointment of judges is not
dependent on the military staff. Another recomendation was to appoint
military judges for lengthy terms and to cancel the training period in
order to prevent the possibility that a judge may have to issue a sentence
bearing in mind his future career.

These reco-nendations were not accepted by the heads of the security estab-
lishment and the IDP. In their opinion, the recommendations contained
several anomalies and did not suit the army's needs. Thus, the Defense
Ministry has to date not carried out the recomendations.

The defense minister today appointed a co-ittee which would submit its
opinion on the legal, legislative and public controversies which would be
created by the implementation of the shamgar committee's reconnendations.
The committee is comosed of three lawyers: Yehoshu'a Rotenstreich.
Amnon Goldenberg and Yitzhaq Tunik.

The Defense Ministry has said that this time private jurists were appointed
since the Shamgar comittee was formed of jurists of the public sector.

It went on to say that the Shamgsr committee's taco-endations caused
controversies reaching beyond the army boundaries. Therefore. the committee
members were requested to examine the Shamgar cos-ittee's reconsndations

in their broader sense and to submit their reco-endations by the end of
December 1979.

080: 10805
DEFENSE MINISTRY DENIES REPORTS ON ABOLITION 0F COORDINATOR'S POST

1A152035 Jerusalem Domestic Television Service in Hebrew 1900 GET 15 Nov 79
TA

[Text] The decision of maintaining or abolishing the post of the coordina-
tor of activities in the territories will be taken in l or 2 months, at

the earliest. This has been reported by senior defense sources to our
military correspondent 'Amiram Nir. The sources noted that as early as

a few weeks ago the IDF planning branch was ordered to examine the possi-
bility of an organizational change in the nechanism which deals with the
territories. This change included the possibility of abolishing the post
of coordinator of activities in the territories.

Major General Dani Hat had been briefed about the proposal even before the
Bassmmal-Shak’ahaffair. Our correspondent reports that the general Staff
work on this issue is still embryonic and that the issue was not raised

at any binding forum. At any rate. the Defense Ministry and the IDF re-
ceived with utter surprise the report which said that it was decided to
abolish the post of coordinator. Defense and military elements emphasize
that this is still an unripe idea. which has no connection with the
Bassam al-Shak'ah affair.

Our correspondent Rafiq Halabi reports that in the past criticism was
leveled at the work of Maj Gen Dani Hat. when he was party to the organiza-
tion of the meeting between Moshe Dayan-~then foreign minister—~and

Dr Ahmad Haadi Annatshah from Hebron.

C50: 4805
BRIEFS

OCTOBER iHHICRATION PIGURES--0ctober was a peak month for immigration from
the Soviet Union. The Ministry of Absorption data published today shows
that 1.627 immigrants arrived in Israel from the Soviet Union. This is the
largest number in 4 years. During that month 4.7h4 Jews left the USSR.

of whom 66 percent dropped out in Vienna. The total number of immigrants
arriving in October was 3.535. Over the first 10 months of this year
22,000 immigrants came to israel. [Tel Aviv 10? Radio in Hebrew 1510 GMT

5 Nov 79 TA]

TRADE DEFICIT RISES--Israe1's trade deficit in January-July 1979 amounted
to $1.59 billion as opposed to $1.13 billion during the same period last
year. The rise stems from a net increase of $769 million (hZ percent)

in imports and a new increase of $300 million (16 percent) in exports.

0n the average. the trade deficit was 39 percent higher on the first

7 months of 1979 than the deficit during the second half of 1978. The
rise stems from a 2-percent increase in net imports whereas exports during
the same period only increased 13 percent. [Tel Aviv DAVAR in Hebrew

30 Oct 79 p 3 TA]

BEDOUINS COMPENSATED HTTHDRAHAL-About 5.000 Bedouine living in central
Sinai near the interim line of a1-'Arish-re's Huhalmad--to which the ID?
will withdraw by January l980-were recently evacuated from that area

and will be away for 2 years--snd have received coapensatitn accordingly.
The reference is to Bedouins who lived east of the new interim line. a
site where the IDF intends to erect military camps. some of which have
already been completed. The Bedouins were told that the evacuation was
temporary until the ID? evacuates the entire Sinai. The Bedouine were
transferred to another area in the Sinai and they were assured that they
would be able to return to their previous location when the entire
withdrawal is completed. Some of the Bedouins farm. but most of them are
shepherds. They received compensation from the Israeli Government
according to their occupation. [Text] [TA151218 Tel Aviv EA'ARBTZ in Hebrew
15 Nov 79 p 1 TA]

01L IMPORTS STATISTICS-The price of the oil Israel has been importing has
gone up 65 percent compared with the average price paid for it last year.
This raised the price of imports by 22 percent. Data published by the
Central Bureau for Statistics shows that Israel's commercial relations have
hardly changed compared to last year. Trade has declined 3 percent. except
for diamonds. The prices of imports increased 3 percent more than the prices
of exports. [TA12004 Jerusalem Domestig8 Service innebrew llOOGHT 12 Nov 79 TA]
PRFSS READERSMTP PtGURES--Frou research carried out by the Jerusalem
Institute for Applied Social Research. at the request of the Publishers'
Asuuclsrlon. deallng wlth the reading habits of daily neuspnper readers
In Israel. it emerges that out of the total adult population 89 percent
rend at least one daily paper. of these. 58 percent read YEDI'OT
ANARONOT on weekdays. 29 percent rend HA'ARIV, 9 percent rend “A'ARETZ.
a pen-em rend DAVAR. 2 percent read 'I'lll‘. .TERUSALBl POST and the rest
nun lhv other papers. lnclndlng foreign-language press, econonlc and
other papers. As for the weekend editions, it emerges from the survey.
which will shortly be published in full. that 50 percent of the reading
public read YFDI'O‘I‘ AllARONOT. whilc the data on the weekend readership
of other papers is the some as that for weekdays. [Text] [levi Morav]
lTAlBO9OI Tel Aviv 'AL-HAMISHHAR in Hebrew 18 Nov 79 p 8 TA]

C50: 4805
U.S. ARMS T0 ISRAEL BBLIB DESIRE FOR PEACE
Kuwait AL-RAY AL—‘AHK in Arabic 16 Sep 79 p 1
[Editorial: "American Arms To Israel“)

[Text] while the United States claims to be seeking a "comprehensive settle-
ment" in the region, it continues to buttress Israel's military position.

The arming of Israel's military establishment, however. is done in various
ways and includes permission for Israel to manufacture American fighter
aircraft. what all this signifies is that the United States is not only
seeking or working for peace, but that it is paving the way for Israel to
continue its occupation and domination of the region. Having succeeded in
getting Egypt to join the American-Zionist alliance, the United States per-
haps believes that the status quo is the ultimate goal of its comprehensive
settlement efforts.

More specifically, the United States appears satisfied that the current
situation in the [Near] East does not pose a real danger to Israel, despite
the fact that a state of war continues to exist-—a situation that neither

the Americans nor, for that matter, the Soviets wish to change. This is
amply demonstrated by the u.s. eagerness to get rid of the large stockpile

of weapons in its factories and surplus storage facilities. Juding by this
attitude alone, the United States is obviously not taking into account either
Arab oil or other oil. We note that while the Arabs continue to concede,
compromise or seek new approaches, the United States does not budge from its
Camp David position. Every compromise the Arabs make is a concession. It

is becoming clear that when our position stabilizes, if it ever does. we will
be far weaker than we were before the June [1967] war. Prior to that war,

we were at least in control of the entire West Bank. Today. the best we can
expect is the return of a miniacule part of the Heat Bank, and that is con-
tingent on whether a Palestinian state is allowed to come into existence.

The unadorned truth is that all these developments are the outcome of our
amazing willingness to concede. Those who deal with us, be they Americans,
Zionists or Sadatists, know this well and have no reason to rush or to respond
favorably. They take one step and wait, than they take another step. He
simply complain and retreat. It is a dreadful situation that goes back to
1968. as the Americana know well. Thus, they go on arming Israel in order to
perpetuate the present situation.

9063
C80: 6802 70
THREAT 1'0 EXPORT IRANIAN REVOLUTION DBPMRKD
Kuwait AL-RAY AL-‘AMM in Arabic 1? Sep 79 p l

[Bditorialz "Exploration of Revolution"]

[Text] Alnost on the sane day that Ayatollah al-Hontazeri threatened from
Tehran to carry the revolution to neighboring Hoslem countries, Cairo re-
sponded by threatening to resist Ayatollah Khoneyni's ambitions in the
Arabian Gulf region. This nearly incredible scenario, or, lore precisely,
this dreadful progression of events, only 1 year after the signing of the
Caap David accords, appears to be the result of an unfolding master plan. .
The plan appears to have correctly envisaged that a course such as the one
being pursued by Ayatollah al-Huntaziri will ultinately plunge the pre-
cariously balanced countries of the Hiddle Bast into religious turnoil and
subsequently push Cairo into asstnaing the position of regional policeman.
There is no doubt that those who drafted the Camp David accords were fully
aware not only of what was to follow. but that they also knew the back door
through which Cairo was to be rethruat on the Arab scene. laden with all

the evils of the Cap David accords. Perhaps this is the best place for us
to begin the search for an explanation to the Egyptian ruler's haughty
behavior. He obviously believes that the Arabs will cone back to him on
their knees. The irony of all this is that al-Hontsseri, as well as others,
continues to declare support for the Palestinian cause and to reject the
course taken by al-Sadat, even to the point of breaking relations with him.
It is evident, however, that all declarations by al-liuntaseri and others are
producing precisely the opposite effect. liot only do these declarations
serve the purposes of the Cup David accords, but they are calculated to
drown the Arab world in a religious bloodbsth. The Gulf region in partic-
ular is likely to be the first victin. Foreign powers, as they have repeat-
edly threatened, in all probability will aiese the opportunity of religious
and sectarian strife as a pretext for a nilitary occupation of the area. In
all likelihood, these foreign powers are anxiously waiting for such an
opportunity. Even the Egyptian ruler can hardly believe that the opportunity
is presenting itself with such rapidity.

The truth is that for a long tine we have worried about threats to the Iranian
revolution froa its friends. we could see indications all along that certain

71
DANCERS FACING ARAB WORLD NOTED 0N CAMP DAVID ANNIVERSARY
Kuwait AL-RAY AL'—AMH in Arabic 18 Sep 79 p 1
“Editorial: "Camp David: First Anniversary"]

[Text] First anniversary-wasp (begging Professor Hustafa Amin's permission).
Oh Lord, how bitter this has been. It has been the longest year in our
history, for nothing moves slower or is more burdensome to shoulder than a
time of shame. The first anniversary of Camp David, celebrated yesterday in
the Camp David signatories' capital cities, sarks, in our unsophisticated
national view, the second tragedy, the second defeat and the unraveling of
our Arab world at the seams. We do not, of course, claim that we were
healthy and of one will before. that: we were, however, a little closer to
hope. And although we have witnessed during the Camp [David] year a few
glimrs of hope here and there, such as the Baghdad sunnit meeting, a
budding rapprocheeent between Syria and Iraq, and a growing positive Pales-
tinian image on the international scene. the hopes soon vanished and we
quickly plunged back into darkness. Just as we appeared to be heading in

the right direction and to think that some of our dreams may be realizable,
it became evident that we were chasing a will-o-the wisp, a bit of hope given
to us to make our death a site easier.

When one examines the map of the Arab world free end to end, one is struck
by the aftermath of the hurricane released at Casp David. It is far more
destructive than "Hurricane David" that [recently] terrorized the United
States. He do not mean this as an exaggeration. Having succeeded in 1 year
to nearly destroy any possibility of collective Arab action, the Camp David
group is now intent on decisively destroying the Arabs fron within. The
travesty continues as walls collapse everywhere. nothing remains standing.
we shout: "Hhat is yet to cone?" The Camp David people have declared an
unresltting war, one that has not ceased. The mat tragic aspect of this
war is that they are using as to destroy ourselves, much as though we were
children with whom they freely toy. Like expert players, they take turns

at this game, heaping ridicule and contempt on our heads. In turn. we have
becoae experts in the roles they have assigned to us. We let them carry out
their gale and then per-it then to destroy us by our own hands. Their tools:
a little religious strife here, a few sectarian adventurists there, a few
sercenaries, and the list goes on and on.

73
powers or elements were waiting for an opportunity to plunge Islam, and the
Arab world in particular. in turloil. Our anziety increased when Ayatollah
nl-Montazeri announced his threat to export the revolution. specifically in
the form of religious and sectarian strife. We could forsee the result: a
massacre pitting people of the same religion against one another.

He still hope that this will not he the future course of the Iranian revolu-
tion. He also hope that the irrational move in this direction will be halted
before it is too late. He nust admit. however, that these moves. even when
purported to represent the thinking of only a few. will not fail to create
skepticism and war the image of the Iranian revolution. In particular, they
will cast doubt on the revolution's sincerity to defend the Arab cause and
to be a partner in prayer at a liberated al-Aqsa Mosque.

9063
030: 4802

72
They are playing the same old game. In the mid-fifties, following our first
tragedy, and in response to our rising national anger against the creation

of the State of Israel, they encouraged comunist organizations to take the

lead in directing the national current. The goal of that ploy, which succeeded.
was to engulf the Arab world in class struggles and socialist slogans in order
to divert our attention from the Palestinian problem. Our people actually

fell into the trap, believing that the new currents sweeping across the Arab
world, as well as Africa, Asia and Latin America, would carry the: to Palestine.
They became obsessed with bloody coups; and, just as predicted in the book

"The Cause of Nations." their brains sank to their bellies. Then came to real
tragedy. the ignouinoua defeat of the June 1967 war.

The game is now being repeated. It has already brought about the second
tragedy--the Camp David accords, which serve to sanction and make the first
rout permanent. And just as they have prepared to guarantee the Arabs' defeat
in June [1967], they are now foraenting religious and sectarian strife to

tear the nation irretrievably apart. But even to this hour, the Arab leaders.
without exception, continue to be blind to the realization that their regional
security hinges upon their national security, and that their own thrones rest
upon that security. And these are the fruits of only 1 year of the Camp
David accords.

9063
C50: 4802

7h
DEVELOPMENT OF EASTERN HODH DEPENDS ON meTATION 0F UNDERGROUND HELLS
Noualtchott CHM]! in French 17 Oct 79 p 3

[Article: "Eastern Hodh: All Economic and Social Development of the Region
Depends On Exploitation of the Subterranean Haters"]

[Text] Eastern Hodh is the region of the country where livestock is most
important. the grazing is the best and subterranean pools are abundant.

But unfortunately this region has not been able to take advantage of these
favorable conditions because of the policy of negligence which was prac-
ticed by the prerevolutiunary regime.

17 Billion Cubic Meters of Water

In fact, any policy which aims at the economic and social development of
the citizens of the region of Eastern Hodh nus: of necessity depend on the
elaboration of a serious plan making it possible to benefit in an efficient
manner f tom the subterranean hydraulic resources which are abundant in cer-
tain zones of the region.

In fact, the shortage of drinkable water is the essential problem from which
the citizens of this region, which includes large quantities of subterranean
waters, suffer. These quantities are located in three basic zones, which
are:

--Dhar. which extends from north of Oualata to northeast of the city of
Name.

The Oualata-Nena subterranean pool is found chiefly in this region; its re-
serves are estimated at 17 billion cubic meters of water.

--Sa1sa1 Irahl or the continental sandstone tone is located in the north and
northeast of the region.

75
I, 100,000 Mauritanian Ouguiyas for Sinking a Well

Thil El llodh is the region which includes the south and southwest of the
My, inn .

The Dhar zone 1:.- MW om: which includes the largest reserves and, conse-
quent‘.y, where the oastures are the best.

Concerning the number of existing wells in the region, the head of the
Hydraulics Service at Nana reveals that they number 500, of which about
four-fifths are located in the zone of Thil El Hodh where there is less
water. The reason, he continues, is that sinking a well in Dhar costs a
minimum of 1,600,000 Mauritanian ouguiya, a sum which is enough for the
realization of two to three wells in the zone of Tilit El llodh.

"Wells are numerous in Tilit El Ilodh," he said, "because the subterranean
waters are there in small quantities and are located at shallow depths,"
stressing that one well suffices for only a limited number of people.

He added that the fact that the cities of Nema, Amourg, Adel Begrou and
Timbedra are located in this zone exposes the citizens to permanent dan-
gers of thirst, especially since the continuity of the waters of this
zone depends on the amount of rain which has fallen there.

In Order to Prevent Catastrophe

In times of drought, this obliges the citizens to emigrate collectively
toward the. cities, where concentration ensues to the point that they are
not able to satisfy the inhabitants' needs for water.

And in crust to prevent catastrophe there must be a well for at least every
10 km of this zone and in order to restore them, a search for points of
water buried in the zone known as Agharet; the economic and social develop-
ment of the citizens of the region of necessity depends on the immediate
set-up of a plan aimed at serious exploitation of subterranean hydraulic
resources.

A: the same time he stressed that this plan should be based on encouraging
the citizens to increase the number of well-sinking operations, particularly
in Tilit Bl Hodh by helping them with the necessary implaents and tech-
niques and the exploitation of the pools located in the zones of Dhar and
Salsal Ramli, on the other hand.

This requires large sums of money, since well-sinking operations are very

expensive (up to 30,000 Mauritanian ouguiyas per meter), not counting
maintenance costs.

76
’l'hree Trucks and an Old Land Rover

Nonetheless, the results could be quite interesting; a well realized in one
of these two zones (Dhar and Salsal Ramli) could start at about 60 cubic
meters of water per hour.

In response to a question relating to the activity of his service the
Hydraulics official specified that this service is contributing in an
efficient manner to continued efforts carried out at the regional level
to find a solution to the shortage of drinkable water each tine that the
problem is serious, and this despite the precariouaness of the material
and human resources at its disposal. These resources in fact amount to
three machine drills, three trucks (two of then broken down), an old
land rover and two drilling tools (one of which is unfit for use).

Despite all these difficulties, to which are added a shortage of motor-fuel
and of single parts, the Hydraulics Service has sunk 55 wells in the region
of Tilit El Hodh and undertaken the restoration of 36 others.

The European Development Fund [301’] has financed 3!: wells and restored 17
others, while the regional budget has financed the sinking of 21 wells
and the restoration of 19 others.

Three Machine Drills, Cement and Workers

The 1979 program includes the sinking of 12 wells and the restorationd 17
others.

The EDP will engage in sinking four wells and restoring seven others, the
rest being in the charge of the regional budget.

The head of the Hydraulics Service in the Eastern Hodh region specified
that this year priority has been given to sinking wells financed by the-
EDF work on which was terminated at the beginning of last September.

The remaining wells for which financing has been granted by the region will
be realized shortly.

He indicated that he does not foresee the realization of more than 30 per-
cent of this part in view of the low amount granted by the region, that is
to say 2,100,000 Mauritanian ouguiya, a sun which suffices to pay for the
workers' salaries (860,000 Mauritanian ouguiya) and for the purchase of an
insufficient amount of canent, which is presently undergoing an unpreced-
ented rise in price (the price of one ton has reached 14,000 Mauritanian
ouguiya).

The difficulties which the service faces also include a shortage of imple-
ments and single pieces, explosives and the rise in the price of motor-fuel.

77
Th..- Ewad of the Hydraulics Service in the Eastern Hodh region also stressed
that in order to overcome the problem of the shortage of drinkable water it
is necessary to strengthen the facilities of the service, to have the citi-
zens participate in the realization of subterranean projects in the zones

of Dhar and Snisal Ramli and to increase the number of wells in the zone of

Tilit El ilodh.
The head of the Hydraulics Service made an urgent appeal to the citizens to

close ranks and work in order to take advantage of the equipment which his
service has available in order to overcome the water problem.

9380
C80: 6400

78
BRIEFS

IRON ORE EXPORTS-—A resumption of significant iron ore exports from
Mauritania has been noted in the first 6 months of the current year:

4.7 million tons, in comparison to the 3.2 million of the same semester
in 1978, or an increase of £8 percent volume and h2.4 percent value.
During the same period production of iron ore has increased some 51.9
percent, in comparison to the first 6 months of last year, or from 3.1
million to 4.4 million tons. Thus Nouakchott has profited from the uni-
lateral cease-fire decreed by POLISARIO on 12 July 1978. This advance
will not be lost by a resumption of hostilities. With the agreement con-
cluded 5 April in Algiers, the Hauritanians renounced expansionism and
chose development. A little more than one-fourth of the exports, or 1.3
million tons have been sent to France. [Text] [Paris DEMAIN L'AFRIQUE
in French Oct 79 p 58] 9161

PORT CONSTRUCTION--Late yesterday afternoon, Bennahy Ould Ahmed Taleb,
secretary general of the Ministry of Supplies and Transportation, re-
ceived a Chinese delegation which had come to confer with local author-
ities on the progress of the work on Friendship Port which is being

built by the PRC. The delegation has already unleaded some 20,000 tons

of material and 500 machines at Nouakchott. A BOO-person team of Chinese
technicians has already begun work on the 2,000 square meters cite and had
transported some 20,000 cubic meters of stone. The next phase of the work
will take place at sea. According to the technicians this will not pose a
problem because our coast line is irregular, the tides are high and espe-
cially because this is the first of this type of project to be undertaken
by the PRC. The delegation will remain in our country for two months and
will strive to find answers for the technical problems which the building
of the port poses. At the end of the meeting, the secretary general of
Supplies and Transportation wished the delegation a pleasant stay in our
country and indicated that we would support them in whatever way possible
to overcome any difficulties which might arise. He praised the technicians
already on the job who have demonstrated devotion and competence in the
task given to them. [Text] [Nouakchott CRAAB in French 6-7 Oct 79 pp 1, 8]
9161

79
Him-MM. l-‘ROM‘ 0F SOUTll--'i'hc "Federal Front of Mauritanian South" is calling
for the organization of "free and democratic elections in Mauritania. and a
federation in which the blacks of the south would have the same advantages
ms the North Africans. Fadlga Moussa, who presents himself as the secretary
gent-ml of the Federal Front "is inviting the OM], the UN and the conference
of noualined nations to call upon the Mauritanian Government to publish new
population statistics nn Mauritania within the next year. He believes that
the new census will demonstrate the real importance of the black population
in the south. and wants the elections organized in the light of this new
information. According to Mousse, the Federal Front was established 3
months ago in Mauritania. lts president is now in the country and belongs
to the Nouakchott government. Moussa stated that "a military group was
currently being organized." [Text] [Paris AFRIQUB DEFENSE in French

Or: 79 p 11) 9161 '

050: £400
LIBYAN 6000 HILL CALLED FOR IN IMPLEMENTING AGREEMENTS
Rabat L'OPINION in French 27 Sep 79 p 1
[Editorial]

[Text] The recent signing at Rabat of the Moroccan-Libyan agreement on
manpower and of an agreement on social security opens up a new outlook for
cooperation between the two countries and constitutes a step on the way to
its strengthening and its expansion.

The presence of a substantial Moroccan cosmunity on the Jamahirya terri-

tory (over 7,000) makes such agreements necessary in order to guarantee

the rights of our nationals working in Libya, who by their unremitting

labor contribute to the development of this Arab country and to its prosperity.

For this reason this agreement on manpower touched on various points such
as the regulation of immigration. social rights, conditions for residence
permits. remittance of savings. housing. equality with other workers in the
matter of rights. etc. This new step taken in the direction of protecting
the rights of our countrymen who nmst enjoy the same social advantages as
Libyan citizens will no doubt par-it the solidification of fraternal bonds
between the Moroccan and Libyan peoples and to lay the foundation for a
mutually advantageous bilateral cooperation.

Thanks to the combining of our efforts, in fact. Arab resources will be
exploited for the benefit of the Arab nation. and given the conplementary
character of the economies of the various Arab countries, the forward
thrust and progress of the Arab world will be assured and achieved thanks
to the Arabs themselves. The hunan potentialities of the Arab world and
its gigantic resources constitute a major asset in the development and
emancipation of our nation.

Unfortunately the differences between the Arab rulers and the dispersion

of their ranks cause the Arab people to miss out not only on the opportunity
to achieve political unity-which unfortunately remains only a pious
wish--but also the opportunity to create an Arab common market. to strike
down the customs barriers and to mobilize Arab energies in the fight

against underdevelopment. neocolonialism and Zionism.

81
Moreover, it is regrettable to see a country like Libya, whose rulers

chr since the Great Revolution of 1 September have unceasingly proclaimed
their devotion to the unionist ideal and urged the Arab countries to merge.
take positions militating against this objective. This is precisely the
case with the Libyan attitude towards the right of Morocco to complete its
territorial integrity.

The fact is that after the public support it gave to our country in its
struggle for the decolonisation of the Sahara and its return to the mother
country. Libya switched sides and forcefully supported a band of mercenaries
it generously supplied with money and sophisticated weapons.

This attitude on Tripoli's part is incomprehensible, the more so as the
Libyan regime declares itself opposed to dismemberment of the Arab nation
and the creation of puppet political entities.

Though we applaud everything that is of a character to bring our two
peoples closer together and solidify their cooperation to blaze a trail
along the road to Arab economic integration and the unity of the Arab
world from the Gulf to the Atlantic, we can only deplore the aid given by
Libya to the mercenaries of the “POLISARIO,” spearhead of imperialism and
colonialism.

The Moroccan people while working to achieve Arab unity and the development
of cooperation between the countries of the Arab Hachrek and Maghreb,
insists as a fundamental condition on respect for its territorial integrity
and the recognition of its national rights.

To be sure we have always advocated the erasure of the factitious frontiers
inherited from the colonial era that artificially separate the Arab nation;
however, while waiting for the attainment of such a goal one cannot accept
having part of our territory amputated. '

Besides. we would have liked to have President Qadhdhaii examine attentively
the royal proposal to call a summit conference of heads of state of African
and Arab countries bordering on the Sahara to make of it a zone of peace,
cooperation and understanding. and that Libya might support this initiative
which will open new horizons to the joint exploitation of the wealth of

the Sahara. from the Atlantic to the Red Sea.

The areas for cooperation are very vast and diversified; all that is needed
is a minimum of good will.

2750
C50: 6400

82
MANPOWER, SOCIAL SECURITY AGREEMENTS SIGNED WITH LIBYA
Rabat L'OPINION in French 27 Sep 79 p 1

[Text] Rabat, (MAP)--A Moroccan-Libyan agreement on manpower as well as
one on social security were signed Tuesday evening at the offices of the
Ministry of Labor and Vocational Training in Rabat. The signing ceremony
took place in the presence of Mr Arsalane Bl Jadifi. minister of labor and
vocational training, and Mr Abdallah Soulasi, Libyan ambassador at Rabat.
The two documents were signed on the Libyan side by Mr Fara] Alouani,
director of labor at the Libyan Ministry of Labor, and for Morocco the
signer was Mr Jaafar Ouajjou. secretary general of labor and vocational
training.

The agreement on manpower between Morocco and Libya was signed in 1965.

It was completely revised, to take into account the evolution of relations
between the two countries in this field, and the situation of our compatriots
working in Libya.

The new document provides a certain number of advantages favoring Our
workers. specifically the organization of emigration, the conditions for
residence in Libya, social rights. housing, and remittance of savings as
well as equality of rights with theother Libyan and Arab workers generally.

As for the agreement on social security, it is considered an important gain
for our workers in Jamahirya. It will be followed by an administrative
agreement which will define the conditions for its application. In another
connection the Libyan government intends to appoint an attache soon who
will concern himself with manpower problems at the La Jaaaneirye embassy in
Rabat. At the signing ceremony Mr Alouani, who heads a Libyan delegation of
nine persons, was very pleased with this important step in the strengthening
of cooperation between Morocco and Libya, and expressed a wish to see it
sill further strengthened, specifically by an exchange of tourists.

It will be recalled that the Moroccan colony in Libya currently numbers
some 7,000 individuals.

2750
650: 6600
HEALTH AGREEMENT SIGNED HIIH CHINA
Rabat L'OPINION in French 27 Sep 79 p 1

l1hxtl Rabat (MAP)--Dr Rahal Rahhali, minister of public health, and the
ambassador of the Chinese Peoples' Republic at Rabat, Mr Mi Yong, signed a
medical cooperation agreement Tuesday afternoon at the offices of the
Ministry of State for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation.

By the terms of this agreement. the Chinese Peoples' Republic will soon
send a medical team of ten doctors, specialists in traditional medicine
(arupuncture), relieving the present Chinese medical mission established
at Settst.

In an address delivered during the signing ceremony, the sinister of public
health emphasized the policy of openness followed by his majesty the king's
government in the matter of cooperation with different countries. He also
paid homage to the Chinese medical mission for the beneficial and human-
itarian action it has undertaken in Morocco. underscoring the importance of
the role of medicine generally. The minister indicated that Moroccan
physicians, given their competence and advanced training, could have their
own contribution to make to the development of medicine in other countries.
including China.

Taking his turn at the floor, the Chinese diplomat thanked the Moroccan
officials who spared no effort in assisting the Settat medical mission in
the successful performance of its task in its humanitarian endeavor.

He added that this mission's stay in Morocco made it possible for its
members to make contacts with the population. which encouraged understanding
and the development of bonds of friendship between the two countries. It

is noteworthy that considering the iaportance of traditional medicine,

which the world health Organization decided at its last meeting to give
priority. an area will soon be reserved for this type of medicine at
Avicenna Hospital. Our country possesses great resources in medicinal
plants in the Talsint region, from which it could develop a traditional
medicine.

Finally we note that the signing cermony of the Moroccan-Chinese medical
agreement took place in presence of the Secretary General of the Ministry of
Public Health. Dr Och-one Jennane. the secretary general of the Ministry of
State for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation. Mr Abdslasia Bennant, the office
director of the minister of publtc health. Dr Joushri. and several members
of the Chinese Embassy at Rabat, besides other personsges.

2750

cso: #400

8b
BRI EPS

JULY OIL PRODUCTION--Qatar's oil production from land and offshore wells
last July was 16,088,251 u.s. barrels. The monthly magazine AL-HASH'AL
published by Qatar's Oil Authority reported in its most recent issue that
the average daily production was 217,792 barrels from land wells and 301.186
burn-ls from offshore wells. Total exports during the same month from both
sources through the ports of Um Sa'id and Hasab llalul were 15,910,350
barrels, the equivalent of 2,076. Olol long tons. [Text] [Kuwait Ala-RAY
AL-‘Am in Arabic 1’» Sep 79 p 7] 9063

C50: 4802

as_
USSR MiLlTARY All) DlSCUSSl-LD
Paris Ll: FlGARO in French 17 Oct 79 p 5
[Article by Jorg Stocklin: "The Ambiguity of Soviet Aid tn Syria"]

[Text] Damascus--The friendly official visit that.
Syrian President Hafez el Assad has been making in
Moscow since Monday is being regarded with very spec-
ial interest in Damascus. in fact, the trip was post-
poned several times: the first tine because of a diff-
erence of opinion over the delivery of sophisticated
Soviet weapons to Syria, then because of the state of
health of Leonid Brezhnev, with when Mr Assad was unable
to meet during his visit, and finally because of the
troubles that have marked Syrian political life for the
last three months.

The two preceding visits by President Assad abroad. to Baghdad in June and to
the Hague in September, coincided with a recrudescence of terrorist assassina-
tion attempts (notably at Aleppo and Latakia). That is to say that one per-
ceives here a certain nervousness about the future being prepared by those
agsterious Muslin brothers to whoa the Syrian press attributes responsibility
{or the wave of assassirations sweeping the country.

Did llafez el Assad put forward the destabilization attempt:- of which his re-
gime is the object, to press the Soviets to do sonething in the Near East?

in any case, the final con-unique froa Moscow did not allude to it. But it is
a fact, they are noting in Damascus. that the aasters of the Kremlin hardly
showed their faces in the region following the Israeli-Egyptian peace treaty,
for which Syria, one of the last Arab countries to aaintain cordial relations
with Moscow, is now paying the heaviest tribute: terrorist in the interior.

a sinking in Lebanon and the threat of isolation on the dipleuatic scene. The
Syrian chief of state on his own has ruled out any recourse to a new Geneva
Conference (of which the USSR is cochainan with the Uniteu States). However,
although they are affirming in Danascus that they want hurope, and France in
particular, to take the initiative for a new negotiating process in the region.
one goes back alternately to the two great powers to prevent any danger of nil-
itary escalation.
I-- Hut perspective the Syrian. leaders eontmuc to plead tirelessly for the
ru- -l.lhil‘~ll||.L'llt ul‘ .l air-'Ilt'tut' equilibrzim, which seems to them to be compro-
|.ll‘~\\l by the signifitaoi d-.lu'eries of Autumn weapons to lsrael. "How can
In Leg-st I-‘IlC from a position of weakness," asks a highly-placed leader from
lens, ":md wimt are we to think of the United States' attitude. when they not
only ;‘l"|‘t-:‘u' :: shameful peace, but let lsrael spread terror in South Lebanon?"
One of the arguments developed in this C(HIi‘cl‘LiOll leads one to suppose that if
tlwie is an impasse in the application: of the Czunp David accords and a grave
crisis between haslnngtuu and Jerusalem, the lsraeli administration might be
tempted to fight. if not put' an end to, the Syrian only. which is still, to
this day. the main pillar of the regime in power in Damascus.

i;.\actly where does this army stand‘l. Although its advonture.in Lebanon hardly
affected troop morale (discipline is something else), it is really difficult.
sis years after the last Israeli-Aral) conflict, to gauge its capacity. Last
month four MIG Zl's were brought down south of Beirut by lsraeli li-lS's. Five
planes of that type had suffered the same fate in June over Saida (South Leb-
anon). Syria, says a Western source. has some 300 Mm 21's in a position, if
it were not for their weak Soviet nissiles, to hold their own against Israel
RI

h‘hen these planes are brought down they are systematically replaced. on Libya's
initiative, with MIG 21's of a more recent model. In addition to the M16 ”'5
and 19's (about 60 all told) and the ground-attack Sukkoi (50), the Syrian air
force has about 60 MG 23's. A formation of these aircraft. the Israelis re-
vealed, recently engaged in combat in South Lebanon against F-lS's. The Israeli
pilots evaded the combat. About 20 MIG 25's, finally, are buried in their
bases north of Syria. Is this enough to reassure Syrian flight commanders?
President Assad, an aviator in this case, knows very well that he cannot allow
himself to send his army to he wrecked without ultimately risking some backfire.

lszorts have been made to satisfy the military. Thirty-six percent of the
total of the budget is reserved for army expenditures and security services.
la the space of five years Syria has acquired 1,000 Soviet tanks (2,700 today),
one third of which are of the 'l‘ 62 type. Between last May and last July,
Moscow delivered to the Syrians 100 1' 72's. a model that no other member of
the Warsaw Pact countries yet possesses. According to a retired officer.
quoted by the daily TECllRlNE, the Syrian also has l,700 armored vehicles (there
were 1,000 in 1973) and "a large number of missiles. " anti-tank, Soviet,
French (the Milan) and Franco-Gonna (the ﬂout). western experts are in agree-
ment in acknowledging, however, that the country‘s anti-aircraft defense is
too weak at the electronic level, that this involves the missiles with which
the H16 interceptors are endowed, the SAM 2. 3 or 6 ground batteries that pro-
tect Damascus, or the radar system with which the air force is equiped.

One wonders, in that regard, about the circumstances that led last week to
intercepting an lsraeli spy plane. That Fire Bee, which was circling at 1,000
km at the time, was brought down north of Damascus, probably by Mle. In uk-
ing the affair public, the Jerusalem administration accused the Soviets of
having reinforced considerably the Syrian territory's anti-aircraft surveillance.

8946
C50: 4800
BRIEFS

'I'REA'I'ML‘M' 0F POLITICAL PRISONERS-—0n Wednesday 24 October Amnesty Internat-
iunnl published a report in which it denounced the treatment in Syria of po-
litical prisoners, nine of whom died under torture between 1975 and 1977.
"Nut of the political prisoners," it indicated, "are being held without due
process by virtue of the emergency law in effect for over ten years. Amnesty
international believes that the number of political prisoners who have not
been tried is constantly over 350 and sometimes reaches 1.000. However. it :5
hard to give precise figures because political arrests are performed by dif-
ferent branches of the security forces, acting independently, and many ar-
rests arc not officially recognized. Among the political prisoners are mem-
bers of the Mslim brotherhood, dissident members of the Baas Party in power,
Nusserinns, Marxists, Kurds and Palestinians. The tortures inflicted on the
prisoners during interrogation are increasingly severe. The methods most of-
ten denounced are blows, floggings, burning with cigarette lighters, gasoline
poured on the body and set afire, enactments of executions. imersion of the
victims to the point of suffocation and applications of electroshock to the
genitals. During the last two years about 30 executions have taken place,

l2 of them public." [Text] [Paris LE KINDE in French 26 Oct 79 p S] 8946

SYRIA-CSSR ENERGY COOPERATION-dons time CSSR-Syrian coOperation in the

field of energy resulted in construction of the largest Syrian thermoelectric
power station. Another electric power unit with a capacity of 6!. usawatta
is currently under construction. 'nm the installation of power engineering
facilities from CSSR will come to tens of thousands of dollars. The total
installed thermoelectric power capacity is about 600 megawatts. That means
that about one-third of [Syrian] electric power generation is obtained from
installations built in CSSR, primarily by Skoda Sectoral Enterprise. [Text]

[Plzen PRAVDA in Gsech 26 Oct 79 p 1]

650: 11800

86
FOREIGN MINISTER FITOURI DISCUSSES HAGHREB SITUATION
Rabat L'OPINIOh‘ in French 26 Sep 79 pp 1, 10

[Interview with Tunisian Foreign Minister Mohamed Fitouri by Fatima
Belarbi--date and place not given]

[Text] The foreign minister of Tunisia, Mr Fitouri, has just paid a
3-day visit to Morocco. during which he spoke with several Moroccan
officials. The Tunisian minister. who was also received by H. M. King
llassan 11 Monday morning at Ifrane, gave the sovereign a message from

President Habib Bourguiba.

The conversation. which took place in the presence of the prime minister
and minister of justice, Haati Bouabid the minister of state for foreign
affairs and cooperation. H'hamed Boucetta. and counselors to H. H. the king,
Ahmed Guedira and Aimed Ben-souda particularly addressed bilateral rela-
tions and the situation in our region.

It will be recalled that Mr Fitouri came to Algeria a few days ago, and was
received by the Algerian President chadli Benjedid. Tunisia. which under-
took to mediate between Horocco and Algeria to try to find a solution to
the northwest African conflict. hopes that reason, dialog and reflection
will carry the day over everything else. in the interests of peace and of
the development of the countries and peoples in the area.

The Tunisian foreign minister, who counmicated to us his grief over the
frotricidsl war setting Morocco against Algeria, nonetheless makes no
secret of his optimism for the future. He told us it was just a question
of time.

Here follow some questions which the iunisian minister was kind enough to
answer for us.

[Question] Hr Minister. how do you see the future of the Maghreb, of
that area?

[Answer] My vision is directed towards the future; and in Tunisia we are
optimistic. We hope that the region's future can only develop in peace and

89
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/00: CIARDP02-00050R000200020058-6
:‘m: "m- sake of peace, and especially so for our regions and for the various
Cum-tries; in our regime, which need that much more than anything else.

m. isia has always wished that the virtues of the dialog might keep the
region clear of situations that would impede the building of a better future
for all the 54:1: of new region.

lQuestinnI .‘ir Minister . yen have ft”! with President Chadli. you have just
had an audivm-o with it. M. the king. what are your impressions?

[Answer] I an optimistic.

lzz-wstimnl The Demouriau SocioliSt Party has just held its tenth congress;
what were the results?

[Answer] The Des:our‘tan Socialist Party held its tenth congress a little
over 2 weeks ago. And as you know, it is a congress held once every

5 years. We lat-lo it under the watchword "Fidelity and Progress;" first
of all. fidelity to the principle of our party, which is one of the oldest
in the Third world, and progress because this session was to sum up the
balance—sheet of 10 years of work in the social and economic sector in
which a constant progress has been achieved, not only as recorded in the
official reports issued by the Tunisian authorities, but above all from
the reports of the international institutions biased in no one's favor; l
have in mind particularly the World Bank.

It is therefore a dynamics of progress begun in 1970 to be sumed up in
1979, dating back not to 1970 but rather to the last Congress held in
September 1971. at Monastir. tracing its path for the next 5 years. As for
the proceedings, they went forward in a positive and well organized fashion.
and everyone who had something to say had the opportunity to speak. I

was rapporteur tor a meeting of friendly parties from other countries, a
very important one. We received no less than 105 delegations; from Morocco
there were three delegations representing the three principal parties, and
each one spoke, encouraging words truly addressing the effort accomplished
by the Tunisian Government and the Destourian Socialist Party, that greatly
touched the hearts of the congress participants and the Tunisian people.
Everyone appreciated the. high quality of the remarks made by our Moroccan
friends, The work was naturally done in plenary session. where the congress
members expressed themselves freely and broadly, then in comittees,
chiefly economic and social ones. which proceeded to a minute examination
of the country's economic and social evolution, government actions, and

the results achieved in the various domains, especially eduation, where
over one-third of the national budget is committed to the educational func-
tion, the public health function which also receives a large part of the
state finan:ia1 effort; the socioeconomic sector considered one of the
priorities of government action; also placed in exergue was what we call
social transferences. which constitute the best application of the idea of
social justice and for which Tunisia is held up as an example for the
equality of opportunity for young people and for all expenditures of a
social character, such as youth and sports, culture, social affairs. All
this effort was :rluill'iml and evaluated at its true worth for theS years
past. The government's action in social matters. the rise in wage-levels
and the role of the General Compensation Fund [Caisse generale de compensa-
tion] in protection and preservation of purchasing power, problems I
mum-ion to indicate the topics of discussions that took place either in
plenary session or at comittee level.

The general policy comittee, which dealt with the evolution of our
republican institutions. and the action of the PSD [Destourian Socialist
Party] which always labored to bring about the consolidation of the
republican institutions that are the best guarantee of citizens' rights,
development. and the perenniality of the Tunisian regime.

The third comittee is concerned with foreign affairs. or more properly
geopolitics, in which we evaluated the quality of our work in this domain
in the past 5 years. and the appreciation occasioned by the foreign policy
conducted by Tunisia. President Bourguibs, and his government. All this
was summed up in resolutions that were published, and the Horoccan press
ran lengthy extracts.

These resolutions not only gave a political audit to domestic stewardship.
but also laid out the path to be followed for the next 5 years. This path
is nothing but an encouragement to continue in the way we have taken up to
now, which has shown itself to be a busy thoroughfare.

Finally there were the elections of the Central Comittee of the party, in
which regional representation was respected and a remarkable fact was the
appearance of young university students.

All social categories were represented within the Central Comittee, from
which President Bourguiba selected the members of the Politburo.

[Question] where did you get with the problem of the continental plateau
which has Tunisia and Libya in opposition to one another?

[Answer] The problem of the continental plateau is one that goes back to
1962. In 1977 it got to the point of an agreement between Libya and Tunisia
to take the case to the International Court of Justice at The Hague for

some sort of arbitration, or at least for a ruling on the law governing

this affair, in this territory claimed by Tunisia as an integral part of

its territorial plateau. Naturally, Libya was of a different opinion. He
went forward with livery of seisin at the International Court of The Hague

on 1 December of last year. and Libya did the same. It followed this procedure.

The president of the court determined that the dispute is bound between the
two parties and set the legal notice for each party to submit its case. So
this is a procedure now pending.

2750
C80: 4400

91
POLISARIO PRESENTS SAHARANS CAPTURED DURING SHARA OPERATION

Paris LE HONDE in French 16 Oct 79 p 4

[Article by special correspondent: "The Conflict in Hestern thara--The
POLlSARIO Front Presented to the Press About 700 Saharans Picked up During

the Operation Against Snara"--passages enclosed in slantlines published in
italics]

[Text] [The POLISARIO Front announced in Algiers. on
Sunday night 16 October, that its troops had attacked
Hahbes, which, it said, is the only town still controlled
by Moroccan troops in the north-eastern part of Hestern
Sahara. It claims to have inflicted heavy losses on the
enemy, in both men and equipment.

While visiting Rabat at the head of a delegation from
parliament, former Prime Minister Pierre Messmer declared/:
"The conflict is getting worse. However, in spite of an
increase in the fighting, there can be no solution on

the battlefield, since the men of the 'OLISARIO can retreat
into Algeria and recover their strength. Therefore. a
political solution is inevitable."

/Besides, our special correspondent in Tindouf tells the
story of the battle of Smara as seen by Moroccan prisoners./

Tindouf--In the middle of the desert, on a barren and stony plateau, swept
by a cold wind, on Saturday 3 October, the POLISARIO Front presented to a
group of journalists about 700 people - lastly children - whom they say
they picked up during their operation in Smara (LE HONDE of 9, 10, and 11
October). Still wearing the traditional black veil, about 200 women are
meekly following the instructions given by the militants who are in charge

of taking them in and initiating them to the new rules which will govern
their lives from now on.

/"The revolutionary world, which will be theirs."/ they explain, /"excludes

all tribalisa, all feudalism, and all past values."/ One must learn its
new rules and vocabulary, and becone a part of other social hierarchies.

92
are not as long-winded as the women, but some of their testimony is damning.
1hns Mr Ali Onld hamn, 7H yvars old, asserts that he spent 5 years in
detention where he lost his eyesight hvrunsc his sons had joined the
resistance fighters.

1hts camp is a temporary one. The refugees are cared for, vaccinated, and
counted before becoming an integral part of the camps, the schools, or the
liberation army. depending on their age and sex. in an esnecially carpeted
tent, n somewhat singtlur “follower" sits majestically: Sheyk Mohammad Ali
Ould Sid hi unshir, the most prominent person in Smara, thr son of an
important religious leader. He chose to cooperate with Morocco, to the point
of becoming an istiqlal representative of Smara and mayor of the ghost town
of Amgaln. in his case, the POLISARIO raid on Smarn seems to have been an
inspiriation: he suddenly discovered that the Saharan cause was a i"ﬁl one
and insists on convincing the international press of this, no doubt with the
same tone of sincereity with which, a month earlier, he had preached the
“legitimacy" of Moroccan sovereignty in Western Sahara.

According to him, Colonel Dilmi, with whom he claims to have had friendly
relations, asked to be relieved of his duties after the defeat of Lebouirate,
because of the army's "bad behavior." The sovereign supposedly refused.
Taking into account the conversations with military chiefs, the sheyk
"revealed" that recently the authorities decided to call in missions of
foreign experts to reorganize the Moroccan forces. A hotel is SUPPOSEd to
have been prepared in Coulimlne to receive Egyptian officers. On 27 and 28
September, two missions, one consisting of 25 Egyptian and American service-
men, another one of about 15 French officers in civilian clothes, were supposed
to have stayed in El Aioun, the captial of Western Sahara. The French mission
was then supposed to have visited Smara, accompanied by Col Mohammed Abrouk,
commander in chief of the Moroccan forces in the Sahara. Fainally, still
according to him, four MIG-10 fighter planes had arrived in El Aioun at the
end of September.

A few kilometers away, squatting on their heels. sometimes shivering in the
cold, sharp wind, other "witnesses" were waiting for us. They look like

lost children, as all prisoners of war in the world look.... They explain:
the POLISARIO attacked Smara from two sides at once, broke through the center
of the formation, took the town, destroyed the installations, notably the
airport that had been put into service at the end of 1978 in order to receive
Mirage F—l planes. However, no aircraft of that type was there at the time of
the attack.

How then can one explain what happened in this town guarded by 6,000 men?
I"! was commander of a 'shock' troop of 40 men,"/ said Abdelmalek Mandar,
23-year—old officer cadet, careeer soldier, in the Sahara for the past 6
months. /"Twenty-five of them abandoned their positions before the fighting
cvcn began. My superior himself, Captain Kassadi. fled. We barely had
time to empty some cartridges. Ten of my men fell. we were surrounded,
it was ovor...."/

Next to the prisoners are the arms captured at Snare. There are not many:

2 Unimog trucks, some American mortars. French machine-guns, Belgian rifles.
a canon, and about a dozen landrovers. Some boxes with 23 um shells with
lnscriptions in Arabic on them seem to have come from Egypt.

9465
C50: 4400

9h
OPPOSITION ELEMENTS SAID TO BE ORGANIZING AGAINST REGIME
Beirut AL-HURRIYAB in Arabic 22 Oct 79 p 36-37

[Articlez Two Coup Attempts in San'd, Saudia Arabia and America Are Looking
for Qualified and Efficient YOung 0fficer§7

[Text7 San'a, a special dispatch: San'a has witnessed a series of political
activities and movements which indicate that the situation in Northern Yemen
is shaky and unstable. An atmosphere created by two coup attempts has dom-
inated San'a in the past few days. The first attempt was Led by a group of
ambitious officers who are connected with Saudia Arabia and the Americans.

The group is led by Haj Huhmmmad al-Sanabani (commander of an armored brigade).
by Maj Muhammad al-Ansi, the officer who led the attack against the positions
of the National Democratic Front in the central region and who came out on

the losing side, and by Lt Col 'Ali al-Shaybah, the former chief of staff

and candidate for the presidency.

There are also reports connecting Haj 'Ali Salah, the military commander of
Ta'izz Province and commander of the forces stationed at al-Mafraq. near Bab
al—Handib. to the coup attempt.

All of these officers have been arrested with the exception of 'Ali Salah,
who barricaded himself with his own forces, and a few who obey the regime's
orders. Recently, the Salah problem was partly solved when he was stripped
of his command of the al-Hafraq forces while kept on as military commander

of Ta'izz Province--which means that he has been stripped of actual military
command as a prelude to his eventual liquidation. Among the officers who
were also arrested in the coup attempt was Capt Abd al-Aziz al-Ghashmi,
brother of former president 'Abdullah al-Ghashmi. who was assassinated in his
office in June 1978.

The attempt shows that Saudi Arabia and the Americans are looking for young
officers who are better qualified than the present leadership and are not
popularly disgraced since they have played no political role. In other words,
the goal is to create in San'a a situation that is more cohesive and capable
of withstanding the growing influence of the National Front and the growing

popular indignation over official inaction toward Saudis Arabia’s continuous

95
,3}: - lt'l' -II l"--.-' .Irl-Jz. III Iwuwu, In 4IU|IIL|UII -\ u... ...... .....

rvn.p nnJ Ihr prlluu of assentlnl connndirlvs as well as lhv increase In

lnl '...' fun.

Thu second .oup 1ttempl, which was reported by polititol circles in Sun's.
was still in lhr plnnnluL and (uﬂtﬂcllnu stage. It was detected in the bra
3 weeks oi September; it was led by Lt Cu] Yahya al-Hutnwnkhil. the Trmrnl

ambassador to Rushingtun, who recently returned to Yemen [rum the Un.ted
States. He is supported by a group of officers who include Ll Col ﬁulnhhnr
41-dnzir and Lt Col "usuyn Sharaf. Those orficers have been arrested, but
Lt Col Ynhya alnnutuwakkil was sent back to Hashington and was not allowed
to stay in the auuntry for even l day.

Hu-lslmﬂc houtvyumdmbis'

0n the other hand. a front called the islamic Front has been formed under the
direct hospices of the Saudi embassy in San'a. Yemenis call that front the
"thhubis." The front is being led by the following:

I. Shayakh 'Abdullah ihn Husayn al-Ahmar

2. Qudi'Abdullah ol-Ghasil (a traditional imam and a lender ur the Hoslem
Brotherhood), who officially holds the post of chief of the Cuidanre
Burea. the bureau which is considered to be a Saudi ministry within the
Yemeni Government.

3. 'Abd al-Hajid al-Zandani, leader of the Moslem Brotherhood party and
son of a feudal chieftain in the central region, where feudalism has
been battered as a result of popular uprisings.

A. Qadi 'Abd al—Halik al-Tayyib, a member of the Ta'lf agreement of 1965.
which used to be known as "the third force" and which opposed the support
of Egypt under 'Abd al-Nasir for the Yemeni revolution. Although that
group raised the slogan "No republicanism and no monarchy,but an Islamic
state," it has actually assumed the same positions of the royalists by its
submission to Saudi directives. Al-Tayyib previously served as minister
of education during the era of republican—royalist reconciliation, or act-
ually the royalist invasion of the republic from within, in his capacity
as an indirect representative of the royalists and a man who enjoys Saudi
support, in addition to being a Moslem Brotherhood leader. This group is
supported by a member of tribal Chieftains and former monarchists who had
been pushed into oblivion and can no longer reenter political life in
Yemen except through new means and methods which might dupe the public.

The islamic Front receives military and material aid from Saudi Arabia blatant-
ly, and it distributes weapons in mosques . d lavishes Saudi money on support-
ers and collaborators. The Yemeni citizens, however, view them as Saudi pup-
pets and therefore have paid them no regard. Several attempts and moves are
taking place inside and outside San'a in an attempt to find a cohesive alter-
native in which San'a can stand its ground in the face of the growing influ-

ence of the National Front, on the one hand, and can absorb growing popular
indignation and resentment caused by the state's failure to protect national

96
sovereignty—-in other words, its total capitalation to American-Saudi influ-
enre. to the point of coordinating military plans and operations with Saudi
Arabia against the Yemeni Ha'ila tribes which have heroically confronted
Saudis Arabia's attempt to take over Yemeni territory.

A Secret Conference

The aforementioned moves included the holding of a secret conference in
August 1979, attended by representatives of a nationalist party associated
with an oil—producing country in the Arab east, led by Qasim Salam. member

of the ﬁationalist counnnd. One of the persons closely associated with this
group is Huhsin al-Ayul. The tribal Chieftains were represented by aayt Abu
Luhum. Mujahid Abu Shawarib, and Shaykh Amin 'Abd al-hasi' Nu'man. Merchants
were represented 1; 'Abd al-Rahman Ha'il Sa'id, Sufan. and al-Ha'ttari. The
conference was dcminated by the spirit of "rapprochement" which, according

to AFP. now exists between Saudi Arabia and Iraq.

The main results of the conference were the following [goal§7:

1. Establishment of a regime that would serve the interests and objectives

of the forces represented at the conference, who were seeking to abolish the
unity accords between North and Seuth Yemen.

2. Replacement of 'Ali 'Abdullah Salih. either through a coup or by assassi-
nation.

3. The conferees agreed that Hujahid Abu Shawarib (presently the deputy prime
minister) should become president, while Qasim Salem should become prime
minister (note the sectarian distribution here).

To support that line, the oil-producing states in the Arab east presented
Northern Yemen with about 100 tanks bought from Poland-the deal which Hestern
news agencies had interpreted as a Soviet decision to arm Northern Yemen.

That state has been reassuring Saudia Arabia for some time now. so that they
might coordinate their efforts in Yemen. The most significant sign in this
connection is the statement by a major personality to the effect that his
country is prepared to defend Saudi Arabia against any Soviet attack (7!).

The presentation of 100 tanks and $300 million to Northern Yemen was a ges-
ture of good will to demonstrate that they stand together in support of San'a

against its southern neighbor and against internal opposition, especially the
National Front.

0n the other hand, Shaykh Hammud al-Sabri, member of the North Yemen Peace
and Solidarity Committee, was assassinated this past month in his home in
San'a because of his obvious activities in support of the Ha'ilah tribes in
their interception of Saudi attacks against Yemeni territories in the north-
eastern border area. As Saudi Arabia and San'a coordinated their military
actions to attack the Ha'ilah tribe. they also coordinated efforts to murder
Shaykh Hammad al-Sabri. The assassination was planned by Saudi intelligence
and carried out by the San'a intelligence service under the supervision of Lt
Col Muhammad Khamis, the interior minister and chief of the intelligence ser-
vice in North Yemen. The assassination was carried out by two persons. one

97
nl whom entered the murdered man's house, went to the room where the victim
was sitting with some of his friends chewing qat, and pumped 12 bullets into
him. while the other man stood guard at the entrance to the house. when a
cousin of the murdered man heard the shooting, he pulled out his gun and
quickly climbed the stairs, but he was killed before he could take any action.
The murderers fled, and the security agencies have taken no action whatsoever.
The crime has aroused a wave of protest and denunciation in the public circles.
because the murdered man was one of the enlightened tribal chieftains who
fought in defense of the September revolution and remained loyal to that re-
vulution. He had refused to acknowledge or accept any interference in Yemen's
internal affairs or any infringement of its national sovereignty or independ-
ence. He was also a member of the Peace and Solidarity Committee and had
attended a number of Horld Peace and Solidarity conferences. He was also
known for collecting contributions from the people of his area for the estab-
lishment of schools, a hOSpital, and a water project. He was one of the first
to encourage the establishment of education in his area, al-Khaymah, by pro-
viding material incentives to attract doctors and teachers. The citizens have
refused to bury him and have demanded that the murderers be apprehended. The
problem is still rankling,with no solution in sight.

Around that same period, [Saudi foreign minister7 Sa'ud al-Paysa arrived in
San'a to put things in order. This visit resulted in the reinstitution of the
budget paid to the government in San'a by Saudi Arabia, which had been delayed
following the signing of the Kuwait declaration by the presidents of the two
Yemens.

When the 17th anniversary of the September 1962 revolution occurred, the peo-
ple expected that political detainees would be released and that an amnesty
would be declared for all those who either had fled the country or are being
sought by the authorities. This, however, did not materialize. Each time

the government in San'a announces that it has released "all“ detainees, it
actually releases a number of persons who were imprisoned for reasons related
to the so-cslled "trade in detainees"--a new type of trade which is now thriv-
ing in Northern Yemen. "Trading in detainees" works as follows: a number of
people are arrested for no particular offense; those of them who are able to
pay certain amounts of money to line the pockets of certain intelligence offi-
cers are later released. This practice has become a normal feature of politi-
cal life in Northern Yemen. intelligence officers like Lt Col Muhammad
Khamis. Lt Col 'Ali al-‘Atmi, and others have become "millionaires from trading
in detainees." This, in addition to the connections those Yemeni intelligence
officers have established with the Saudi and American intelligence establish-
ments, which lavish enormous amounts of money on them.

9254
C50: 6802
INFORMATION MINISTER ON DEMOCRATIC PROCESS, NATIONAL UNITY
Paris AL-MUSTAQBAL in Arabic 20 Oct 79 p 37

[interview with YAR Information and Culture Minister Yahya al-‘Arshi by As'ad
Haydar: "Northern Yemen's Information and Culture Minister Tells AL-MUSTAQBAL:
He Hill Not Expose the waterways to Foreign Interference" date of interview
not given7

[Tex57 San'a--Candor marks dialogue with any Yemeni official. when an official
wants to answer a question, he answers it directly. When he finds that it is
not in his or his governments's interests to answer a question, he will frankly
say, "No Comment." Yahya al-'Arshi, the minister of Information and Culture

in San'a, is one of this breed of officials and one of the most prominent and
active young ministers. He does not conceal his view at all that the Yemeni
information media are not doing enough in the Arab arena and that "most of our
Arab brethren are unknowledgeable about Yemen and its circumstances." The
following interview with the minister focused primarily on Yemeni affairs at
his own request, in an attempt to acquaint Arab public opinion with the situa-
tion in Yemen.

£6uestiog7 In all his speeches, President 'Abdullah Salih focuses on the fact
that Yemen has chosen the path of democracy. A constituent assembly will be
elected in the next few months. Will all Yemeni political forces be allowed
to participate in the elections?

[Answer7 Yes. Democracy is a daily practice, and the democratic spirit is
quite clear in the dealings between officials and citizens, on the one hand,
and among the citizens themselves, on the other. Democracy in Yemen is neces-
sitated by the environment and by the goals of the September revolution. There-
fore the leadership has concentrated on laying down a sound basis for democncy
by assigning to the constituent assembly the task of preparing for and holding
free elections. The elections will be held at all levels and will include all
political groups. It is everybody's right within democratic institutions to
explain his own points of view in various forms and manners. Our media allow
all Yemeni views to be expressed on how best to reform the situation and
society and the most suitable means of accomplishing the objectives of the
September revolution. The only condition for participation is that the parti-
cipant should be a revolutionary and a "Septemb-rist"--that is, a person who
believes in the goals of the September revolution. Otherwise, there are no
barriers.

99
[Question7 But what about the opposition political parties and forces in and
outside Yemen?

Innswor7 There is no ban on any political group, for we are now engaged in
the task of drawing up a national charter. The charter is being drafted by

a committee representing all social groups on all levels and of all politi-
cal persuasions. The draft of the charter will also be presented at people's
conferences throughout [northern] Yemen. He believe that all expatriate
political groups should return home. Democracy can be achieved and applied
through discussion among all groups.

[ﬁuestiog7 Although you have received 'Ali Nasir Huhanmwd, the Prime Minister
of Southern Yemen, it is evident that the application and accomplishment of
unity have been delayed. What are the reasons barring this unity?

£Answer7 There is no faltering in the efforts for unity. But the two parts
of Yemen, or rather Yemen as a whole, wants the reunification process to be
established on sound bases which do not permit improvisation or retraction.
The unity talks are proceeding in the context of the Cairo agreement, the
Tripoli Declaration and. recently, the Kuwait Declaration. As to the visit
of 'Ali Nasir Muhammad, its purpose is to review the results of activities
of the unity committees--primarily the constitutional committee--and to draw
up of a work plan for the committees to follow. His visit is also concerned
with coordinating attitudes toward various practical aspects of life. The
draft constitution will contain the outlines of the form of unity. When the
draft is completed, it will be presented to the presidents of the two parts
of Yemen, Col al-Salih and brother President 'Abd al-Pattah lsma'il, after
which it will be submitted to the People's Assembly in each part of Yemen.
The final phase comes when the draft constitution is submitted to a popular
referendum and the result is announced. This shows that the safeguards re-
garding the establishment of unity are proceeding as scheduled. By their
very work, the committees are making sure that there is a consensus of views
on all aspects, especially the economic aspect.

[5oestiog7 With regard to the economic issue, how will the distinct variance
between the two present regimes be resolved, especially since the economic
system in the southern part of Yemen is socialist while that in the northern
part is based on free enterprises?

[Answer7 The joint economic committee has arrived at a common concept which
will be disclosed in due course.

£6uestion7 Can we know the period within which such disclosure will be made?
[Answer7 This is subject to the work of the coemdttees. A new meeting will
be scheduled between officials from the two parts of Yemen. The necessary

period of time depends on the completion of studies.

£6uestion7 The five-year plan is about to expire. To what extent has this
plan been successful? '

100
is now-undergoing a process of development and change according to calciully
studied plans and programs beginning with the three-year plan, which was a
prelude to the five-year plan now in its fourth year. I can affirm that the
rate of success achieved by the plan has exceeded previous expectatinns. ecs-
pitc all the circumstances and events through which the country has gone.
This can be vertified by the Arab Institutions which play a part in the fund-
ing of projects. as well as by the international and Arab banks which also
participate in the implementation of our projects.

[Question7 And what about the future?

[xnswe57 We have already begun to put together our ideas concerning the next
five-year plan. The plan will focus on the establishment of the infrastruc—
ture, such as roads and health and educational services. which is alnnst non—
existent now because of the state of backwardness which had been imposed on
our country. In addition, the plan will deal with the productive and agri-
cultural sectors.

[6uestiog7 Uhile touring San'a and Ta'izz. I noticed the widespread practice
of storing qat openly. Various sectors of the people agree that this habit

has grown in the past few years. Have you devised an approach to deal with

this problem?

£3nswer7 The chewing of qat poses a social dilemma which affects all of us.
Qat is a local agricultural product. The addiction of the Yemeni society is
due to the fact that the Yemenis do not consider qat a narcotic plant. But
regardless of how Yemenis View qat, we feel that the widespread growing of
qat has begun to affect other basic agricultural products such as coffee
beans. Therefore, we are now trying to find agricultural alternatives to out
which would bring in returns that would presuade the Yemeni farmer to dis—
continue raising qat. He see in the Lebanese experience before the civil war
when Lebanon substituted the growing of sunflowers for hashish growing. as
an example which can be applied in Yemen whenever Yemen can secure support
from international institutions.

£6uestion7 There has been growing talk recently about attempts to prospect
for oil in Yemen. How true is this. and where do your efforts in that con-
nection stand now?

£3nswer7 Prospecting for oil continues, and the results which we have achieved
so far are encouraging. Oil exploration is taking place along the coastal
area stretching from Al-Hudaydah to Al-Makha. There are enormous primary
mineral resources in Yemen which have yet to be discovered. We know for sure
that there are aluminum and copper in addition to other minerals.

£5uestion7 A final question that has nothing to do with Yemen: it is noticed
that there is a discrepancy in Yemeni positions on holding an Arab summit to
deal with the Lebanese problem. What is Yemen's true position?

101
[Answer7 There is no distrepancy, unless this is a press hoax fabricated
by some foreign elements. Our position on the Lebanese south and the Leb-
anese problem is quite clear, namely. that this is a tragic problem which
has made our hearts bleed. Our position is clearly stated in all the
pronouncements we have made. We are concerned with Arab solidarity and
fully support the adoption of a unified position. If a summit meeting is
necessary to devise possible solutions for this problem, then we will be
the first to support such a meeting. I recall that Yemen Has the first
state to call for the holding of an Arab summit to discuss the Lebanon
problem. The conference resulted in the dispatch of the Arab Deterrence
Fnrce in Lebanon.

IQuestion/ There are presently several plans dealing with the security of the
region. The latest is the plan proposed by the Sultanate of Oman. How do
you view the security of the region, especially since Yemen is on the Red
Sea?

[Knsve57 in our view, Arabs--all Arabs-are capable of protecting their areas
if they stand together and cooperate militarily to protect the region. Re
have always been careful in our policies to steer clear of international
struggles and the maze of international politics, and not to expose Arab
waterways and straits to any kind of interference. The Arabs are capable of
doing so. and we here are shouldering our national and pan-Arab responsibil-
ities with regard to Bab al-Mandib.

925’.
C50: 4802 END

102