FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10679
23 July 1982

Worldwide Report

NARCOTICS AND DANGEROUS DRUGS

(FOUO 32/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
nor:

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers. periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Beadlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[) are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item. or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. “here no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarised or extracted. '

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Horde or names preceded by s ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Tiles within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies. views or attitudes of the 0.3. Government.

COPYRICBT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING WNERSHIP 0?
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
HORLDHIIE EPORT
NARCOTICS AND Dmseaous Danes

(?000 32/82)

Cameras

151A
AIBMIA

Pasport Device 'ro Foil Forgery. Help Ste- Dmg Inertia;
(stemen mm; m! Au. :8” ”)00000000000OOOOOOOOOOOO 1

covet-nun: Plan To Upgrade Dung Enforcement in SE Asia
(@111 Ayrh: m3 "381' “BTW, 28 Jun 82)............. 3

Briefs
‘n'aai Drug Officials
Police Drug Connection

#5

ENG KGG

Harbor bib lead to Large Heroin Base Seizure, Arrests
(80m mm‘mnc MT, 19. 20 Ma’soeesssssasoeeos 5

Drugs in Rice Flour Bags, by Tom Wis
Another Ship-eat Expected, by Sarah Hanks

Shipmeu any Forfeit Vessels Pond Carrying Narcotics
(scum GINA lemma Post. 25 Jul 82) 8

Increased Trafficking amuse: Peer of Police (brruption
(SOUTH aim mums INST, 29 Jun 82).. 10

Special Maia: Alerted, by hm: Darya-1i
mm 2olioeasn Arrested

New (to-unity Gmup Wages Offensive Against Drug Anbse
(lee Buenaventura; scum anus mum PM.
18 JD &)OOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO000.000.000.000.00.00.00.00 12

- t - [III - WW - 138 P0001

F60 0Cr~- l nee- ﬂ‘l' V
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

IRMA
Utter Prsdesh Minister Alleged to Be in Drug Racket
(PAmm. 12 Jm n).OOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOCO0.00.0000...
Briefs
Delhi Hndrnx Seizure
mwsu
Military Training bans in: Addicts
(m SIM-ITS “ms, 11 JD ”)00000000OOOOOOOOOOIOOOIOO
Secretary on Trial for Heroin Trafficking
(NW SM” TIES. 17 Jm u)CIOOOOOOOCOOO00.0.6000...
Heroin Scarce. Addicts Turn to Liquid Opiu-
(DORIBO BULLETIN, 12 Jun 82)...........................
NW ZBAIAND
Police Pear Nstursl Spread of Canine Photo in wild
(m EWING Pwr’ 27m&)OOOOOOOOCIOOOOODOOOOOOOOOOO
PAKISTAN
Heat Bland Historically for Narcotic Problsn
(max “11‘. 1 Jm m)IOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOCOOOCOOOOOOOOOOO
PHILIPPINES
Drugs with Ephedrine Ordered magnified-
(BULLETIN 10M, 3 Jul 82)..............................
Psydlotropic Drug Smggling hported
(BULLETIN mm, 2 Jul ”)00000000000000000000.0000.o...
Anti Drug Drive in Davao
(BULLETIN 10w. 5 J01 ”)0.esossooooessooosssosesoooses
Briefs
retro-Hide Drug Drive Stepped Dp
Morphine Ring under
SRI LANKA

Govern-sot Approves Drug Abuse Control Lon
(Gaitrs Heernsinghe; DAILY NEWS, 17 Jun 82).............

”WWWLY
‘EAIWD

Prisoner Bxdnnp lune Iii-mud by Grief Jmtiee
(Saturn Krnijitti Interview; nan NATION IBM,
21 JD ”)00900000000000OOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO0.0.0.0.... 28

Police Acmed of limp Can: I»
(”max Par. 27 JD a)..QOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO..0... 31

VIEW
Sentencing of Train Personnel Btibed by Dru; annular

announced
(GIAO mam VAN m. 20 Apr ﬁ).......................... 32

um “RICA
mun-muck: AFFAIRS

Colotian Official Discovered With (buine in lhxico
(EXQISIOR. 2‘ J0 a)...oeooooeeooeooeeoeooooeoContact... 35

33mm

hthndone Clinic for Addicts Still Stalled After 12 bathe
(m m“ Mm, m Jm u)IOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOI0.0.00.0... %

JAPAICA
Briefs
Destruction of Gaja Field 37
Drug ‘lheft Fro- Poliee 37
mnco
Briefs
Drug Lnboratoty Discovered 38

NEAR 331' N") KORE AFRICA
FOIOFHCIALUSEONLY

SlB-SAIIARM AFRICA

IWJRY (DB!

FINLAND

HUNG

MM

TUMEY

Briefs
Drug Traffic

"381' sum

Police Discover 6mg Snuggling Banish Pro:- Mark
(IBISINGIN 8mm. 10 Jill 82)....oo...””snowman...

Official a: Cmtml, Blintnstion of Addiction. ‘l‘rsffickers
(Francois Galen-bet Interview; 13 mull. 18 any 82)...”

Itelim Camected Heroin Treffickers Arrested on Riviera
(L'amlm’ 1am &)OOOOIIGOOOOOCOGIO'OOOQIOOOOOOOOOOO

Comcil Issues Amusl bport of Drug Abme Figures, Trends
(Thomas herner; W8 METER, 16 Jun 82)..............

Drug Deaths Increuing in Stockholn Ares
(Class bofgren; SVBNSKA MIMI, 7 Jun 82)............

Report Finds Situation of Drug Abﬁers Worsening
(moms Inner: DAMS mus, 26 Jlll 82)..............

Problem of Driving lhder Drug Influence Increasing
(Clues Lofgven; SVERSKA MIMI. 16 Jun 82)...........

Briefs
lbrphine Seizure

momauussotmr

61

43

67
69
51

53

$4
PA3$PORT DEVICE 10 P011. W. m? 8‘!!! new WING
Melbourne THE A63 in English 28 May 82 p 1
[Article by Stephen Hills]

[Text] GAMMA-metallic strips will be incorporated in Australian passports
to make them more difficult to forge and alter.

The strips will also allow passport officials to check the stated personal
details of the traveller against information in a centralised computer system.

The measure is part of Government attempts to halt abuse of passports by crin-
inals. including drug traffickers.

An interim report of the Royal Co-ission on drug trafficking. tabled in
Parliament yesterday. said passport abue was serious and ccontinuing. and
recon-ended wide-ranging measures to combat it.

The report of Hr Justice Stewart said he had grave doubts whether the Depart-
nsnt of Foreign Affairs knew how serious the problem of passport abuse was.

The conission is investigating the activities of alleged international heroin
trafficker Terrence John Clark and his associates.

Mr Justice Steuert said in his report it had become clear that illegal activi-
ties had been facilitated by Clarke's use of false Australian passport. lie
recur-ended automatic cancellation of passports held by convicted drug traf-
fickers. In no circumstance should production of a birth certificate alone
be accepted as proof of identity for issue of a passport. Passports should
not be issued en bloc to travel agents or by post. presently the case for
about two-thirds of passports issued.

Mr Justice Stewart warned that tightening passport-issuing procedures would
cause some inconvenience to citizens.

The Acting Foreign Affairs Minister. Senator Dame HArgsret Guilfoyle. told
Parliament that the Government would consider reco-sndations carefully.

She listed the steps the Government had taken since 1976 to eliminate abuse,
such as centralising and cosputerising records. and lasinating of passport:
to prevent alterations.
The Depart-ant of Foreign Afteire is believed to be unhappy with perte of

the report. A spokes-en for the depertnent eeid the report did not give enough
recognition to the steps thet had elxeedy been taken.

(:80: 5300/7565
COVERWT PLANS TO UPGRADE DRBG ”FORCED” IN S! ASIA
Perth THE WEST AUSTRALIAN in English 28 Jun 82 p 21
[Article by Cyril Ayrla]

”m“! immune-mum...“ u. drug-calm.

work In South-w m _
Thematic:- («M m. Hm “Ml-HOW!“

minimum m (hf In Our mutant-up.
mm me In teammate. u, m... .m-
Cmum mu am will to ~w. on M W
that m cm ”mm. on a
mud on m»: In ban tho m on»
“ma-In! wwm: Bangkok.) a: w- of
m m can 1
mm" {an mug-M '1: menu on be re

”um-2%“ «magnum mMWtAwn-
soon
Aumﬂononﬂnll. mm.

MAM‘“ mwmth nvmrevuledby
gm mum; at hr. cxpoﬂl to TM! wm Ammun-

"‘ ““2,“ help «an Gm Iml- um week that man-
°“""" “W um. lumldncelvemon

m‘ Tu W pug. heron! M 3'» “Gal-
Kt law“ .mmb”. m. .“M m”, dﬂl ll‘hwb". mm.
aYIAm-Uy Involved ml... “yams; Amelia. An «ﬂuted
In ”thaw and mr- 100 tonnes of hmln Is

- om! Bonn! m
I Intelligent "M “W“ to m Au.
“a W w I“ :mtog'w "I". Mm the CWT
the manhu- o! Maul and a“ ““0"”. to“... "on In 11,. .
mm“ "m ' 1:303. 13...“?6
Baum mp0? :3 Annulln’. dmm- owe":- Mill; on
W’ a New- ‘W Wk would on; ”Mt In
m an ' 5:: M noo- b‘ M h Bangkok command
maximum mm “mu mm (or man-

.-
a

C50: 5300/ 7565
mum

THAI om OMWena. 7 Jul (Mk-A group of Thai drug intelligence
officers arrived here today to begin e S-Qnth inteneive English course. The
course has been errsnged at the request of the Thai Govern-at, snd vill be held
by the Commalth Depart-en: of Bdncsbton English Division. A E: hid: level
of English cowetency is needed in the liaison between the Thai narcotics

sgencieo snd their Amtralian comterparte. [M91511 Bong long m in log-
lish 0916 an 7 Jul 82]

POLICE DRUG WIN—A court in Sydney has fond three new South Helen
police-en guilty of conspiracy. The charges followed sn investigation into

two marijuana plantations on a far- et Griffith in southern New South Wales.

It uss alleged that the tree detectives had tried to conceal the identity

of those involved in growing the nsrijuana end then obtained preferential
treat-eat for the drug growers vhsn they sppesred in--court. The three non

have been renanded in cutody for ecntencing at a later date. [Text] [38091511
Melbourne Oversees Service in English 08” Off 9 Jul 82]

680: 5110/5813
. 93.88 1583 .9. co.
.88 :5 KS 3.8.98 .ru
3:3 5?: :5 4.3.3.0
€1.98 2 :88 .33...
.3 3:21 8 .328. .

«stirring-.339
9338.85333-
23893933; ‘-
333.592.565.73
38.

sin .3 3:. .85.. :1
.2. 81.82... 3.3:...
may. 23 £8.

0.. 9383. 33:65:.
a 51-: 533$. .. :8

It; 3..an
Another Shipment: Expected

llong Kong SOUTH CHINA MORNING MT in English 20 Jun 82 pp 1, 9

[Article by Sarah Monks]

[Text]

Customs ofﬁcers are
awaiting the arrival of
a container veeeei sus—
pected of carrying more
drugs for the “sacks of
flour“ syndicate which
the smashed on
Fri 3 .

A more seizures heve
been made in connection
with a soft drugs syndicate

timulteneously meshed

«Hegedly involved in
trafﬁc-ting in the Tsimshao

lsutarea.

A total of 45 to of heroin
hate. earth 823 million if convert-
ed to number three hernia. tee
“(11.6“ from three eects of rice
flour after eeetoret omens
«whet! IJW he's in e Totve-
wan premieee from Fridey until
early veeterdev

Tam'm eatiutettio
theceereeot '9 106W“
ottheltheve ‘eentl been

chem! vitlreulmu d luv!
m be perpnee of
23m mm.

'01?“ng eppeevueotjean
q ney on y
mete

rm'or thee: deteleetl hove
been reieeeed up“! “I" M
' father eeeetriee by Custom

were led the other two "'0
“medicat-

At last heliot’the moo ﬂoer
been eeerehed in the Totnyen
etore m «rived oe e cute-net
mi from leaﬂet vil Still"

”he operetioe been utter ee
dﬁcer It the Km Chen cen-
teiuer Midi-covered. rm.
e routine leepeetien on Wed-ee-
ay.thetoeeoltheuehhede
eecendhyer.

“We ere expecting “other
ehipneet'vhieh my well eeeeeel
more Greg; for the wee syndi-

fetc.” the Deed. of

‘ tioe ere
mettle-t KS
"if-1'3: w I
of heroie here ie N
US" em node an
when 73 l; oi he}
feud on e content
8503870"-

The put tour at
tie-cried en the but
for the Cl! which t
its arm — the
time nee-me 4n}:
cesee It the sen: m

Intensive open
““4,sz .II
M: e mm
of more then 20
herd eat! no“ dre
end “meat from
eeteurrested.

m gm
troled ' "
cove! new 0
mm of new
and

up to m
KIM
H

no amp I! In! M an.
may ”gm; . Qu- 'chm

:01 watt

I‘J‘ﬂ‘l'U"

3-01 ms «35
aim war In!
'm'so'

1° h 9: “new
a: Main rm

aw: W

mum's-mum:-

no»!

wmonwuw-w
a
, “Managua!
Jean at to an «I uuv
mammal-09m
on"! 8,3!» I'm“ In

30:00pm
49»:-

ﬂ
WW
zoo {and u w
and aog'dw
mad mun

«mam.


INCREASED TRAFFICKING AROUSES FEAR OF POLICE CORRUPTION
Special Contagion AleIted
llong Kong scum CHIM MORNING POST in English 29 Jun 82 pp 1, 13

[Article by Renu Doryanoni]

10

[Text]

Police 8 ecial WWW.” am on New I.
4“}! “I“ I In maﬁa? ’mmo': “Mg...” m
hem: closely watch. M a «on sumo ”.m”
ed by the Independ- xwxuwg a." “WW...
ent Commission «maul-Juno mu'ma'?‘
A aim! 'Corruption - . “'9' ”W“ 0, o“- lCAC‘! «I
to lowing inoreased ”a: ICAC New on 3%‘1-"mw
dyug .tral‘ljcklng ac- him i m- y iumloo vau-u
"mm w New “az'm‘... .. ... magma.
kong. . mm «thorium ﬁlm.

ICAC amenipem rc- m M W '° W“ . 0 Th; “ff. :1
pom show «nous civl! mm.“ an autumn! doom
sew-nu m cabins in m on Cam no & [m be -
onthcinmuodoomp- Saviootohlnilc all» “(twain
lion opponunilks the ICAC cu. I: cud-o hat H mac .
trafﬁcking In: mm- m "' W “m g :71
ed. - cam — o more at- tartan HOW

“groan!“ in “panama-om» on load I)
Waugh-emu. ICAC . Ila-m ”gnu. 'c‘c‘n.
you w to Ibo out: also mm. db- m
coolant—{m m "3"?“er Wk“

Iui ind m ”mums: 3 mln- “M “" °
inﬂate “plinth: u' dorm ”“m wu‘:
who: a nil 0 MN: Gannonﬁvunm “CW 6:
meta moon. was. is {any m d an Wm

such! on, u: «not! a! in 5mm
“updating! mun and w m NICACHW
dmhuehmwho {CA ”Walk".- m
m was for man m “mhum
"mm-dam WMICACM ‘°° "a. w

The ac a . by Mum: Wu 5 u
'b‘h'nmdm oammsom 5| ”5:
I!“ N M “M “ “H'- "° CID. ..’ l
mmnmm ”'3" cm "I" m':

“Mm m
923%“! is]? ?

i .
5;}; °§§i§§§g if:
EE'§ E3}: ﬁg
2313’? ‘- J
NEH COIWNITY GRQJP MES OFFENSIVE AGAINST DRUG ABUSE

Hong Kong scum cam mum: POST in English 18 Jun 82 p 2

[Article by Lee Buemventun]

[Text]

RECENT um '30!“
”VI mud (hot on-

Iil «I ah 0| m
“.3" «a mu pu-
cm. a tad m In

Wu and! curtain

ﬁnish! in It. can-
mind: work an m
«rescuing the Namath
hmmch-miauCau—
Inc. the Auden cum
0! Connect and lb. W
at: Wm‘o Amati-lion, u
Am “all ulna.
due-W two the Eu-
lb! School: mm- and
"out” Intonation-l

School. 0 W and al.-
dcu not-mun; HKIS
m the w ' [one to-
ta'pd for-mo. (to con-
mun.

z
I
i

é
is
E!
m

E‘”
:E,
f;
:3

55"
9.

i
9?
$52

as:

8 3*"?! E
g5 S§%§E
ii: é-éEi-E-Ei
£4; zigzag

E.
3% giiigﬁiggéyg
gig is a: izs‘ﬁai
35333 33%? 55.3%
WWBHIMSTBWTOIBIIDIUGW

new Delhi warm in bglish 12 Jun 32 ppl. 7

[hcerpt] Pries Minister Indira Gandhi is understood to have sought informa-
tion fro- UP Chief Minister V P Singh on the alleged involve-ant of one of
his Ministers of State Hr Gulah Singh in alleged narcotics racket.

Hr Gulab Singh. who hails from Chakarata in Dehradun district is the Minister
of State in charge of [neon Division. The Central Narcotics Department unit
at Dehradun has registered a case with the local police against hi- and eight
others. including his step-brother Pooran Singh for illegal cultivation of

poppy and the manufacture of opium

Hr Gulab Singh was granted bail on Thursday by the additional chief judicial
magistrate of Dahrsdun. The charges against his have been registered under

the Dangerous Drugs Act.

Receiving a tip the Narcotics Depart-ant officials had raided a farm in Mr
Gulab Singh's village on which poppy was growing.

According to UP Congress-Icircles. the departesnt was tipped by the followers
of Mr Gulab Singh'a senior ministerial colleague. Kr Brah- Dutt, who also
hails from Dehradun.

Many Congress-I nen fro. UP say that the tipping off is nerely an extension
of the faction fight between him and Mr Brat. Dutt.

050: 5300/ 7036

ll.
BRIEFS

DELHI mm SEIZURE-d huge haul of nandrax tablets. weighing about 60 kg
and valued st about is 1.5 lakh was sade tron the roon of an rmc hotel in
Daryaganj by Central district police on Thursday. The three occupants of
the rooe. who had checked in about four days ago are aiseing. Police said
that the occupants had probably cone tron Boebey where they had been given
the tablets by a Pakistani national to be delivered to a Turk-an Gate resident.
The intonation was reportedly given by the roon occupants the-selves to some
officials of the Directorate of Revenue Intelligence who had visited than

a couple of days ago in connection with sons possible foreign exchange viola-
tion. Police detectives had been keeping a watch on the roon since Thuraday.
but when no person showed up. the too. was opened with a naster key. The
tablets were found in a big box. According to police, the tablets do not
have the narkings of the nanufacturing company. The Drug Controller has been
asked to examine the stock. Police are trying to trace the [then Gate resi-
dent Kalu to who. the tablets were to be handed over. and are also in touch

with noebay police to track down the Pakistani national. [Tent] [new Delhi
PATRIOT in English 12 Jun 82 p 10]

C50: 5300/ 7035
32

IUALA LUIPUI.
Mn. — My mum
an bob: ”no lull!-
Quy "Mal-a by no
”any omen- on n In.
Ion-M bun In {M

lulu-a
"labillnuo. p".
“nu-w.

Walla" llu-uu
A“... dual. I. n-

Iullbl- mum ‘-
mama-nub.
“Aw-”'5’...”

'«aﬁ..m....

up rend. (lo. the
mutt-on
I In"! scale." at.

E

Dull PIC-Ia
A” I.“ the In.
WWMGIIIN
aw°'::..“:::.::

I.
I m

M M the
m. In «gala:

tfgi‘irgitii
ﬁfiii ES
3 Rt? 35

16

"do to W
be the uncut d u
die-h. «man. the"
gums... Canine.»
00.. mm .06
nun-an.

‘l'h h our
working on the r..-
am all In.»
an d unu- Iﬂh tho

d M.

on. Pal.“
am do. an n to
load ultlouolt [or
in; “Or-0".“ to
M I m
we... tumult. w
a not on.

ho Ital-try bu.
Wm. not M

anus-lurch.“
MIC.
anllor. Dul-

l'ndol. M-hoh pn~
no!“ a cheque In
auto to he. Mn
“I” lulu-an. ﬂoo-

nnueu ol the

“:th w

raw.

mm I:
Inc: the lm
Yen ol the lit-CI-
and M
SECRETARY 0N TRIAL FOR HERO!!! TRAFFICKING

Kuala Lu-pur NEH STRAITS TIMES in English 17 Jun 82 p 13

[Text]

PENN“). Wod. - A
French who
met and hu-

“man mu. a man
here vhllc m was 0.
"canon VII

Io (Ind henln h a In;

given to her an

man. the Hub

was to“ to“ .
Snub!» Bu "co. :2,

use an in «mom

am not he- rm the

plastic I“.

when on.

oﬂleu'l
hand them much In“.
Mr but n It. um"
Custom. oﬂm.

SM and was the”
man omccn uld (he,
mum-ﬂed m: mm to
be hotel». the In
"shocked." up“! and»
mqucko broke am

”I an not put u
«amnianuvum
the um um than. I
monk I Mu Men and.“
me um

8M.- vu mung hot
dcloncc under 0.“
warm "2:.

are.
guﬂly m a chart. a w-
llclln‘ In Mann-pool
heroin It the Bayou la-
.qu humane“! union
on 1f.“ 11. . .1 hot
0 mum

roan-9|. It K.
Kumnrunonn. Button
um um cum to m
on Nov. u. am a OW-
IM and In,“ N the

cso: 5300/8329

Sumac an M on
:...u.nmmmm

lot In mu.

m mud in a
nlglu h. my!»
m-uuymmwm
Von-l All! the. m
to the ,ol.

“www.m-

gr
:2
*2.
i;
98!

if;

2
is
:s

3%
z
E

 

...-_.-—.‘

Onuouon and b
Ian-J.

Cont-0|
Beau-Ice I“ no 0 ~
ty to can
newsman-om
handled the In; In
though-"non“
Koala um: scam wumm in mud: 12 Jun 82 p 16

HERO!“ SCARCB. ADDICTS TURN T0 LIQUID OPIUH

. a n Em. .MW- amwamm
m mu m um «am» my»
ﬁmmm mmm mimm
-Wmmmwm mama.“ mmmmf m
thWLWMW WWW.” ”HMMMWM .2. Mumm
uﬁwﬁﬂmﬁmmm Wm M
u mm“ m “mwnmmamwmm

muduwm “mg

m a 2% Mwmmmmw
mm “Mm“ mum“ “mama.“
“mmgwmammm my 3w.“

18

5300/8329

CSO:
POLICE rm MTURAL SPREAD 0? WIS PIANTS Ill WILD,

Wellington m EVENING POST 1n anglioh 27 May 82 p 17

[Tat]

C50:

TAURANGA» May to
(PM — Police are con-
cenno noun up man.
bility that coonabis is
mtmungtoNQIZaﬂbnfs

idioms and ma
‘cpmdin; Notary.”

Already. oviooneo ha
been loud ol ntIul
germination ol cannabis

um irom plants in
romote areas. tlt'e Wm
County Council noxious
plants committee was told
yosmdoy.

(‘r B (Eamon no room-
lng to the committoo on an

's Noxious Plant: Olo
tom Institute contorencc in
Na ' rtlt'ts with.

ring the commence.
members oi the police on.
squad spoke about the con-
nabts problem. Inc said.

As wtil a: explaining
mt-titntls ol detect“ eon-
ccaleo cannabis plots [mm
the air. squad member:
.- ol tltc ol the

ant in New land and
tum that fluent“ ”M m
grotto; wt
0‘ '3 illustrate & extent
lovntl and dottoyotl 1000

5320/ 9136

V

mob tsl

land in “
nil. "Lat

min”:
mmm«

Seedlin

“Th
rid “mm.
W molly

mm ‘
sudhulﬂmﬂ
site oi“ union

"Ream

that while ct
cm “I on
mt

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/00: ClA-ROPOZ-00850R000500080053-0
VEST NAMED EISTORICALLY P09. NARCO‘HCS mum

Peshawar KEYBBR HAIL in English 1 Jun 82 p 3

[Text] Nearly two hundred years ago, in fact, soon after the East India
Cowany ’haharud" won the battle of lunar against Mir Qasin, the English-an
began the cultivation of opium in the rich lands of Bihar. It Ilsa purely a
Com monopoly \dxich utilised local labour in a any comarahle to the black
slaves of Anerica at that very tine. The product was then processed into

its various form for the purpose of taking in regulated doses and mking.
Practically ell the product was sent to china on British ships which plied
from Calcutta, giving the latter the first taste of prosperity on the any to
becoming a "City of Palaces." The first consigInsnt was sent in 1779 through
Canton. Gradually, as opiul Hes introduced to greater nudaers of Chinese
through well-organised "pushers," the deﬁed grew and the year 1819 saw its
largest exports frou India. By the tile the china Goverment realized the
growing popularity of opium use, it had already become a menace. A mﬁer
of hens were iaposed against its use. But this only promoted corruption

in the administration and even the soldiery. Efforts to steal the influx of
the poison at the source also taisfired as not only the East India Coqany
refused to stop supplies but took measures to defend its activities. In
Pebruery 1860 the British Covert-eat sent an expedition under near Ad-iral
George Eliot with 16 mrships to Bong Kong to bolster their efforts to poison
the whole of china, since earlier a representative of the Eweror, Lin Tee-
hsil had seized and destroyed 20,000 chest of opium in the Canton godouns of
the British. ‘l‘hus began the first of the three full-fledged acts of aggession
against China in which the latter got the worst of it and not only the opium
trade expanded, bringing in colossal profits to the East India Cowany, but
most of the ports and parts of China were opened to the confederacy of the

vhite powers.

A century passed during which the profits rolling in from the enslaved
nrkets of the Best enabled Europe and Britain to build a civilisation of
cosy luxury at the expense of the poison they sold and talk of ”hm
rights" and the "equality of unkind." But when the Second Horld 'Jar ended,
not only the posters had to loosen their stranglehold fron their former
colon‘ es, an era cane upon the. in which they got hoist by their own petard.
Opiun, nrijuana, hashish and other narcotics began their journey the other
Hey. what was just a stall trickle soon after the war became a flood. Drug
junkets bees. as much a part of the \diite an's civilisation as, their tail

20
coats and neckties. whatever anyone my call it, we see in this historical
episode the irrevocable working of Fate, its vengeance in the name of
husnnity. What was used as a forcible poisoning of a large slice of hu-nity
through arms turned back upon its perpetrators in such a slow process of
reversion that many of the wealthiest governments of the developed world are
hard put to stem the tide while they watch their children destroying their
on lives voluntarily and with their eyes fully open.

Drug peddling was introduced in the west by the Mafia and other organisation
of the powerful underground world of crine, trading under a super-law of
their own which brushed organised rule aside with contempt. New sources of
supply grew up in the East, two of them being Turkey and Pakistan. When all
efforts to control the unseen trickle which taken cmlatively was not less
than a flood, through law in their on lands, measures were taken to try the
bolting of the door at the source. when Turkey was asked to put a stop to
its cultivation of the poppy, it acquiesced against a stipulation of monetary
recompense which was promptly agreed to. For three years the farmers in
Anatolia waited for their mm rehabilitation for accepting their Governmsnt
ban and thereby loosing a lucrative productive activity. It did not come

as the compensation was utilised in other ways by their own Govern-ant and
then they took measures to defy the ban. Another source was Afghanistan
which automatically closed with the unleashing of the war of occupation by
the Soviet Union. Pakistan and Nepal remained. The MP Governor, Lieut
General Fazle Haq recently went to the United States to discuss the matter
of compensating the growers if they are to be forced to give up the poppy
cultivation. We are sure he has returned with a mat practicable arrange-
ment which would actually reach the parties concerned. At this juncture

we can only recall the callous brush given by the White powers to the hulnn
considerations in China during the last century and their own principle that
everything was fair in love or var. The trade in narcotics is one of the
powe.ful ingredients in a confrontation which does not have an scruples

in using nuclear or chemical weapons by the other side. Only if it could

be utilised as a cartel to beat all other cartels, not to gain financially
as in the case of oil, but political advantages, it could be an effected
screw of the weak.

(:80: 5300/5815

21
mules um! 3mm: mam uncussunm
Manila autumn mm! in English 3 Jul 82 pp 1, 9

[Text] Cough preparations containing ephedrine have been reclassified by
the Ministry of Health from over-the-counter (arc) drugs to prescription
drugs despite opposition from the Drug Association of the Philippines.

Ephedrine, an ingredient in soas cough syrups that produces nasal deconges-
tion and bronchodilation, has been found to have addictive effects if taken

beyond the prescribed dosage.

Hanufacturers and distributors of these drugs were ordered to withdraw stocks
of liquid coud: preparations containing ephedrine, ephedrine hydrochloride
and ephedrine sulfate froa retail outlets to put necessary changes on the
label.

health Minister Jesus Asurin ordered that the syiaol "IX" and the warning
"Caution: Food, Drug and Cosmetic law prohibits dispensing without a
prescription" Inst be indicated on labels on the cough syrups by Sept. 30.

He also directed the Food and Drug Administration to recall and cancel the
registration of ephedrine-containing pharlaceutical preparations as OTC
drugs.

Asurin feared that unless the availability of these preparations are
regulated, children under 12 years old in take these drugs without

consulting a physician my be at risk.

It was noted, however, that ephedrine preparations are safe and effective
as bronchodilators in adults in oral dosage of not aore than 25 nilligraas

(In) per unit every four hours.

Ephedrine, the FDA noted, produces stimulation of the central nervous
systea, wakefulness, elevated aood, moderately raised blood pressure and

quickened pulse rate with raised cardiac output.

It should not be taken by persons with coronary throdaosis, hypertension,
hyperthyroidism and close-angle glaucoma, the m warned.

22
It should be .ivcn with caution to patient. with organic heart dioeaoe,
cardiac docoqmuation or angiu. the m added.

Earlier, the FDA not with drug noutacturon ‘dlo tolt that “classifying
dough cyrupo would he a “advantage for legitinto users and reduce their

sales.

080 : 5300/5816

23
armorsonc owe smoomc arm
Hsnile summs room in English 2 Jul 82 pp 1. 12

heat] The Pood end Drug Adainistrstion blensd yesterdey the deficiencies
in iQort control assures in the nrious intermtionsl ports of entry for
the presence of psychotropic drugs in the illicit nrket.

The led: of fecilities end unpover to detect end confiscate snuggled drugs
contribute to the growing ebuse of psychotropic drugs in the country, ecting
PM chief Ceteline C. Senches seid st first notionsl workshop on the use end
nisuse of psychotropic substences.

Psychotropic drugs such es stimlents (eqithelines) end depressents
(bsrbiturstes) ere nedichlly used for psychiatric eilnsnts.

The Dengcrous Drugs Boerd (one) reported thst the non-nedicsl use and ebuse
of psychotropic substences is increesing in the country.

when taken indiscrilinetely, psychotropic drugs ny lend to heslth problens
such es drug dependence, drug overdose, hepetitis, infections coqlicetions,
neonstel problem end drug psychosis, Senches seid, citing ﬂorid neelth
Orgenisstion findings.

DUB chief of reseerch end statistics Estele Ponce noted thet during the
lest five yeers the lost co-only ebused psychotropic drugs in the country
were Velius, Hogedon, Delnne, Ativen, Artene, Belcion end Rivotril.

Senches noted thet the issuence of illegal prescriptions by sons doctors
end the negligence of sons pher-cists in dispensing psychotropic drugs
ere also along the fsctors “ch contribute to the ebuse of these drugs.

An overly tolerent ettitude tousrds the use of drugs, inedequete control
over their sele end distribution end la prescribing hesits Inst be checked,
eccording to Erik lngevics, director of the Coloto Plsn bureeu.

lle csutioned, however, that in controlling the svsilebility of psychotropic
drugs the needs of legitinte users Inst not be overlooked.

styer Pio Absrro, drug adviser o! the buresu, noted thst the incressing
ebuse of psychotropic drugs is elso e trend in other developing countries
but it is more widely ebused in developed countries since users ere closer
to the sources of supply.

 

24

m4. - («M lease
m1 owe 1mm III who
Manila suuz‘nn room in English 5 Jul 82 p a

[Text] Davao City-ﬂit]: the success of the anti-crine drive in the city,
Brig. Gen Pedrito de (hr-n, Region XI co-nder, enhanced that eqhasis
vill now be laid on the fight against the drug hence.

be Guann said that he vill reactivate the personnel of the oonstabulary
anti-narcotics unit (CA!!!) to check the spread of drug pushing and addiction
in the city.

The opening of classes, General De Gurnn said, is giving dope psehers a
wider field for selling prohibited drugs such as cough syrups, tablets end
marijuana.

Marijuana is the met co-on nudity in the drugs Irket because the
supplies ere locally grown. e directive has already been issued to station
co-nders in Region XI to intensify their caqeiu: apimt the sale of
drugs and nrijuana in their respective localities.

The Pc-m regional co-nder has received reports that the regent sale
of nrijuana in the city is being done in school caquses, disco pads and
beer houses, and slu- arees. It is not only the children of uell-to-do
fe'Iilies who snake urijusna but also of poor ia-ilies, he said.

De Guzman said drug addiction is e worse Issues than ordinary crine since
its effect on the individual and society is elnost pennant.

He said that he will tap organisations like the livenis to help in
fighting drug addiction. he is also seeking the help of ﬂat. Antonio

Hsbutas, archbishop of Davao end the religious sector in the camign
against drug addiction, particularly anon; the youth.

C80: 5300/5816

25
METRO-HIDE om: mun mm ur—vrcr GOV. M1 A. Hathay Jr. for-ed yester-
day action teens to keep watch on dope pushara and their contacte in bus eta-
tions. Hathay cited reports that has terninals were being used as neeting
place of pushers and drug users end traffickers. Prohibited drugs. such as
narijnana leaves. heroin and opiun. are reportedly being supplied by puehsrs
tron the provinces and the United States. cam ALSO reported that the cultiva-
tion of narijuana hee renained widespread in Central and northern Luzon. partic-
ularly in llnava lcija. lengnet and the llocos provinces. Constabulary enti-
narcotics agents swooped down recently on two narijuana plantations in llocos
Snr and uprooted nmo fully gran plants which they eaid Ins worth Pl.5
nillion. Hathay also ordered the Barsngey Operations Center to keep a close
watch on bsrangay officiale who are reported to be protecting drug eyndicates
in Metro Manila. 1113 NIL-m drive ageinst drug trafficking was pronpted
by the opening of clsssee. Reports have it that drug abuse is regent on
cequses. Hathay also salted Retro unila's drug control co-ittees to heat

up their drug enforcenant units to conhat drug ebuse on came“. Host of

the vice nyors head the drug control co-ittees in their respective cities
and towne. [Text] [Manila alumnus MIL! mass in ugliah 25 Jun 82

PP 1. 6]

MRPHINE RING moan-qt Philippine Air Force enlisted in is being hunted

so the aster-ind of a syndicate dealing in norphine. Two en the were
caught with 600 carton: of mrphinetartrete pointed the an out. [Excerpt]
[Manila mmrrmas mm amass in Buliah 8 Jul 82 p 4]

CSO: 5300/5816

26
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500080053-0

cavemen ”moves onus anus: comm. uws
Colombo DAILY news in English 17 Jon 82 p 1
[Article by China Heerastnghe]

[Text] WMuwmm

Wand mm
mum «It-wanna“
:‘M mm
mm In WWII
uncouth.“ “may...“
WM " am new
”‘th menu-um...
’1 WM mums-7w
mun-4mm «one: mum
ammuni- M m m
moan-Who. Mon. to n-
M M.“ m‘ﬁtm
W"¢""“"""’ mum“
““- Immuta-

cs0: 5300/5803

27

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500080053-0
PRISONER EXCHANGE ISSUE DISCUSSED BY CHIEF JUSTICE

Bangkok THE NATIW REVIEW in English 21 Jun 83 p 5

[Interview with Saneern Kreijitti. Chief Juetice of the Court of Appeals.

date and place not give]

[Text]

0: L0? main
the ago-g t IF
feature theUettslsutee
rattee arm will
“:0.“ lNl'l'lAufY
wtm'ttuututeaumm taxed
Alter eevetal tomde of talks, the
Intetloe Mhhtty drafted an wee.
mentand forwardedtt toaeotn-
gun?» at 03¢“,th Mttttetty. l
as n vocal
tothedtat‘t ”a“, m t
not commit eount to
candidate. Under thedzﬂ .many
Coeteettone Depen-

2
S
%

new
meat that foreign comets, to he
ﬁst'wawég “25°31'3-

c

to That jails. Ute drama! alto hone
exchanges of me eat of
foreign prteottete. The rail has
"59" mm? dupe-gum the
not 'co-try to Wowlth aa

toeoocledeut Vi
MMM&MIW'Q::

28

eottee hut w theoue-
postulate?

A: WHEN 1 mt to Ftatre ae
repreaentattvc ot’ the That Govern-
tnent to negotiate on a pact on jutt-
dtcal moot-tattoo of the two coun-
tt'tee tn late I980. I sensed that the
Freneh statute were qutte Interested
In the rug pmbletn. The coon
was aleo‘then cortetdeted outc -
nal eouee a outdated. Outﬁt; the
mutations. the French delegates
canned rttcttlat inﬁrm tn egg
e u prisoners tween t
two gnomes: However. our talks
were then tnconctttetve a: the Thai
Government had no policy on the

It «at not until teeentl that the
Thai Government more the For-
eign httntetry to tnotm to the
French Government that ye were
read to te on the heue.

Ftench are matte tntercsted
tn the tune because that's the
public optttton ot‘ the people tn that
county. Furthettnoee. the Euro-

n arliatnent h- ateo mottled
that member countries must ﬂy to
teach menu on prisoner swap
with tatlattd. The ntatthet of
French cottvteta In That jail: for
muoqeneﬁawte ehout 410.! a riotn-

e y . tete ore.
53'an on“??? French 90-
venunent ,to strike such apact tvtth

Wits tetherhidt.

e French authot'tttee
”pan .3 1'" “m
no
vtth M mmﬁuﬁ a pett-

tton to Hit la the
for aeven 93m #51;
to he amneetted. The
Punch Govenenent eetd thet the

cont/tote ehould he tepettmed I

were In bed heelth. But It

a: ”Mada“ 'tmpgwmpm'“:
VII 0|

on ut‘eheleeue ' oe

3mm end the 0mm Stetee
The: eleo em oyed etulht tectice.

"mg/mud I an. $3.
at on oe
on: grounds thet ehe wee bout
the one town ee Mme Mitttetn
um: ‘l'hetchet. Bntetn'e eat-Foe.
et't MIntetet Lord Centn ton te~
cently vbtted hete end t at that
hte moment would not how
done to hed the Beulah Pull-Item
not uqed the mmenttodoeo.
AefoetheU tedSteteeJdon't
remember how nteny US phonon
the eaventment hee requeeted us to
up! tlete.
0: HOW MANY cannula ﬁve
on to tench eeeh e
Whet tendeed do we

3‘

3

to decide counts to
ceddeeedl’oeeegethtloeetoentee
eechcontnc

{reached us Include Cenede. the
ntted Stem. ltel end Austnlte
holds ance. e VII newline
the Issue with «ex country vhkh

No mung/é eltulelll.

VII ue.

Prieonet mp osmium ete e
development or e conectlone
eyetetn. We heve to. teke Into eo.
count the mentality of coovtcte

”W In e totem: coun .
They could but hevtettedhy

relative: llloe In their moot-1m.

0f coune. the 11ml convicts?!“
it Europe end the United tetee
nti tbeteluctenttohcputln‘ntel
. but such pm could
ﬁt out countty othet llelde.
Ve could uee such e Mel to bomb
tot pottttcel. “wk...“cmdmmtﬂ'y
concesslons [tom out pettnete.
2: HOW codd It 5“:
:leeltnowt tecoutttl'y
went: to entet e peteonet peo-
mntc wtth us. we N at
certetn eutetence from the countey
h exchange to: out t to
hate the DWI". e might to-
queet the countty to putclt
teploce from us. end tween lte
ﬂautdel eld to booet the efﬁciency
of out police In cneltln; down on

nemotlcettemcldnp -
ltn exehenge of prime!”
tertegtount' to on exchange
bent tuo oeev.
:DON‘Tyou (M M the
pebonen could he eo-
onee they hove been ee-

29

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500080053-0

g.
:5

to?
ca:
23%

>é
35
E"?

a;
3?

hto eecount eno
eomtent Item to
team ee there a
done end cotnn
tenne foe pdeont
etence. the even
hee been eentenc
eontnent or $0 yt
eutuellyjaaetve o
yew-t .

Q: It PRISON
nut hove teeelet
theStchne Cont

d“ £8.11»:
en thepiltemt h
judicial ptoceedtt
counted wtth the
h then betled out.

0: WHAT”:
edventegeewevot
mrm PM!

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500080053—0
mmmwmwmmm mm “Mummmmm “mm,” mme mmm
a 3” mm m m 93% mm W M? 3m m
...- w. 3 mm mm :3 we
mmmmmwmovruﬁgmmwmwummmu Wm? mmmmmwmw. mmmwtmhmmmm
, . m m, . M m mam a. a, mm. “a... a mm“
mm mm mm mmmﬁw mm Wm“ mm m “mﬁmmmw
. m w. d c. .1 Mn...ch m... .m n Nu ..m bWWu
mm. mm “mm mm mmmmmmmmmm. mevmm mmmmmwm
mm“ am“: .mm meﬁwmmm may.” “mm
.mem: w: mmmmmmwnm M «F. H. “mm mm. maﬁa“.

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500080053-0

5300/5806

CSO:

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500080053-0
POLICE ACCUSED OP DRUGS. COVER UP

Bangkok am POST in English 27 Jun 82 p 3

[SOME policemen at Bong M and Tho Lol- station have intentionally
mndowonkcuumlnuforol‘ndrng ondmoothuthopmocnton
'cannot prosecute than. n special-(rode prosecutor with the Public

CSO:

WWNWCIH mdthumcum
mtuuww mm a“. Gown“ $733.; 5:
“MM”. The mood wand Dunnin- 3.1“. f" .1.
mathulhkond Newman». “Md"
no“ I." did lhil u‘ “ “homily!“ not In mmoﬂmﬂn.
M W hnnbntnﬂ- “‘- Com W Only Lei-U. VII.

cdvin‘ Nib. from or-

 

namental while Solis

now! 11». mm u»
..H.aamumm lawnmu: mum?”
trunnion“. in the m- Mama-nub. m bk. 3""
um’ncmllmwl annual-hilt Mn.
wwuwmdulw melatonin-old. 50:11.“. In calmer:
m, moan no. Inn! 0
only mm a M Tho Minn Do- ﬁVO-Whumn':
Mounting palm t I“ "to Po- m all-[d am
who on M the up.- “I bk": :2” “mu."
M m 0 . w m.
Poihoon minted tome Mal NMﬂW‘ and who on in .
an o! a N5. Umlo “Wham Mummy I
Common arrow don'o Glut. I. luv.“- Sub-Lt Ptovil thn
wanna tech-t mill-Own. canomdcmidon.
mum, with-ﬁn! aloud Hull. Pam In. due. boon
«anwwm My. thnﬂln
then. In their “dummy Polbun old-d that Romanian.
to the lnnwm 0.. rm' J33“ It: 0th.: Mm coo-
l“. "$233“ "I: Wow-Mm» “M ”m ‘5' 9""?
i Ill-WW and but m" bland aunt lun- hcn Invent»
3mm”. "no”. the unit neon! lo Hp MN I'm llr‘
Wm Wanton . Rn and
a. um um the do- WP'" “um
EVIDENCE pom Innov- vhkh I". 9".
pollen-non m Involvod M aid 0'“ W 4°“
and It has them to W 5“ 9‘5““
"mm. the n minding-m M ”‘ .t' ””“w
mmhunidooetl I Mahmud. ‘ “at.“ “."h
mam-twat!!! out-involving plus. at “WM”

cue hon the famed

5300/ 5806

31

llama at tho two on-
ﬂow.
SINGING 0? MI! PERSONNEL BRIDE” BY Dim SW82 WONG!)
Hanoi GIAD mm VAN TAI in Victim.” 20 Apr 82 P 5

[Articlea "PM the Case 'Acoeptixg e Bribe to Do Soothing not Penitted'”_7

[Text] Not long ego. the Hanoi mum People's Court me e mm of the
first instance for Nguyen Van ‘l‘uyen. train crew chief, am his scoonplices for
the case at accepting s bribe and ebusing their euthority to do eoeething thet
was not per-ittedureleese a. drug squalor.

This was s serious case that ocouued i-edistoly titer the precaution of the
law on the punish-eat for offer-its end accepting bribes (the law as promoted
on 20 my 1981 and 'ruyen end his woosplioes oo-ittod their cries on 23 Key 1981).
The scceptence oftbbribensenomnisedectsndmoftbperoomwho
«ﬁtted. the cries were persons or position end authority.

A su-ery of the ones follow»

At 103) hours on 23 My 1981. passenger train 122.0! which train crew chief
‘ruyenwes inoherse, wesst therenmanilroedststionpreperinsto go to
Hsnoi then three public security troops fro- !en Bed City arrived end requested
thet the tuin's (new coordinate with thee in inspecting the beans of the
peesengenoncsrnunberainordntofimsdnuemggler. After-the
inspection had been underway for sbout 10 nimtes on! the smuggler hed not been
found, the crew was ordered to deport, consequently. the three public secu'ity
troops bed. to disenbsrk. At the Viet Tri Stetion, train crew chief ‘l‘uyen
sees-bled s nunber of personnel. conducted on inspection to find the oontrsbend
snduncoveredboththedmsssuithesngﬂer. Tuyentooktheseueeiertothe
mmstthereuofthetninendhsdomoftm min'epersonnellock
uptl'as-uuledgoodsintheservioemincsrnunber 10.

Durinsthe trip to the Hanoi Reilroed Btstion. in the m oer, 'ruyen suggested
tomogreedtdththemeslertcconoenhisinegnsctinretmtorsbu-ibe

of15.000dongsndegreedtoeeetst1500hourethenextdsytodeiiverthedru3s
nulnoneytoeschoﬂzerstﬂntceporeryreeidenceofthemrkmwontteHanoi

32
train. Assistant train crew chief man, who was present when the incident
occurred, also agreed with Tuyen's solution.

In order to avoid detection by the responsible agencies, hxyen had one of the
train's personnel. Nguyen Dinh Th1, Jump hen the train Idth the contraband
at Phung ﬂung before the train entered the Hanoi Station.

Tuyen based the snount of the bribe on the "contribution" and knowledge of the
incident of each person within the work section and divided it along then. Turn
and Thi each took 3.000 dong, assistant crew chief 0am took 2.000 dong and

so forth.

The cries committed by crew chief Twen and the crew on this train was quickly
earposed. The court sentenced Tuyan to 7 years in wison. W and Thi to 1s
years in prison...

The acceptirg of a bribe to do sosething that was not penitted by train crew
chief Tuyen and the crew on train 122 raises setters that the various transport
units. especially the rail and river transport units, beginning with the work
crews on trains. lust think about and consider reunite their educational
activities and sensgeaent.

Is It,Still Less Than Thorouam?

From the opinions expressed by the director of the train crew section at the court,
it can be seen that the train crew section attaches very such importance to
teaching politics and ideolog and regularly organises phases of study and review
designed to hemten the spirit of responsibility and sense of collective
ownership. struggle against negative phenonens and so forth. However. fro- this
crine of a collective nature connitted by the crew on train 1.22, there can be

no other explanation and one would think that the mtter that has been raised lust
be examined by the various leadership levels of the train work section. Is

not our political ed\Ir- “Lon less than thorough. less than the ”dosage" needed

for persons who daily cone into contact with passengers. baggage and even noney
if not to say onesided? 0n the other hand, the organization of nanagenent,
especially regarding the role of the crew chief and assistant chief. the persons
who are in charge of the crew on the train, rust also be exanin'ed.

It has been learned that teas L22 consists entirely of persons who are still
youths. And, as the director told us, this tea: has long been taking any
positive contributions and was the hope of the section!

In actuality, the persons who were directly involved or dragged into this case
displayed the run nature of the youmn they easily nab sistalces but, once
they realise that they have nde a nistalue, they do not hesitate to admit it.
This was why the case was quickly concluded and the investigative agencies did
not have to expend such manpower; the bribe noney was quickly collecud in the

33
full aeount of the bribe and deposited in public mm. The preblea raieed here
is that in a good collective in which the person in charge has not been careﬂnly
exaaimd or selected and in which persons who are decadent are allowed to renain.
they have a sore than saall influence upon the entire collective and can even
lead a collective into criae. The crew on train L22, crew chief Tuyen and
assistant crew chief Quan are a clear era-pie. The capturing of the drug
smgglerbymemwontrainLZZwmﬂdhavebeenanachieveaentiftMyhad
reportedtteaatteraxriturnedallthewidenceandtlesmgglerovertothe
responsible agency. However, the crew of 1.22 did not do this and crew chief
myen led the entire teas down the path of cries!

This is perhaps a lesson in selecting "wists.” not only with regard to the
Hanoi train crew section, but to river an! ocean transport units as well.

The Struggle Is Still Sharp ani Coupler

Also fro- the opinions expressed by the director of the train crew section. it
is clear that the section always takes a stern attitude tonrd arri struggles
assimt every negative phemasnon scouring within its unit. Because of its
concern for protecting its corps, the section quickly uncovered the aistakee
wade by teaa 1.22. The Disciplinary Council of the section preaptly held a
nesting at the Yen Bai Train Crew Station to take disciplinary action against
the persons the had abused their authority. which provided favorable conditions
for the case to be quickly concluded.

And. not only in the case of train 1.22, the train crew section has regularly
struggled against person involved in negative phenceena and the Disciplinary
Council of the section has intensified its activities and so forth; despite
these efforts. negative phenonena still occur. of ihidl the case of ”accepting

a bribe to do sonethirg not pernitted" by the crew on train 1.22 is an exasple.
Clearly. the struggle against negative phenoaena in the Hami train crew section,
in particular. and within our sector. in general, is still very couple: and

very sharp; we camot be satisfied with the results achieved so far in the

struggle. rather. we must continue to wage this struggle on a sore regular
and determined basis.

0n the basis of the lesson learned from the case involving the crew on train L22.
it is hoped that the various units. especially the railroad and river transport
enterprises am units. will give thought to aspects of their political and
ideological education that are inappropriate. thoroughly scrutinise the
deploynent of persons in charge of leans of transportation. take detenined
steps to rsaove unqualified persons and age a strong struggle to repulse and
eventually abolish every negative phenouna.

7809
cso. 5300/5796
[Text] The PG! [Office of the Attorney General of the Republic] reported that
Joaquin Antonio Vangochea Pineda. assistant ahiniatrative mdersecretary in
the Ministry of foreign Relations of Coloabia, tried to introduce 9 kilos of
cocaine into lexico. The cocaine is valued at are than 180 nillion peace on
the narcotics black narket.

The diplonat, who arrived in Enrico City this past 18 Jme on Varig flight 872.
on being intercepted by federal officers detailed to the airport, showed
passport 14772 accrediting hin as a Coloahian Covernnent official. He asked
that his 1-unity be respected and that his suitcases not he era-ined.

The federal officials told his that they had to canine the baggage, because it
was known that on that flight an attapt was being nsde to introduce cocaine.
which irritated Vangochea Pineda. After telling the police that he would not

consent to such an outrage. he very angrily said that he wanted to telephone
his cheesy. Astoniahed at how perturbed the diplout was. the federal officers

allowed the official to go to a telephone. The diplaat took advantage of
this to escape.

Upon becoming aware of his escape. the federal officers, together with were
of the custons staff, and in the presence of the federal Public Ministry—that
was urgently called to the air terninal—as well as representatives of the
hbassy of Colo-his, Cristina Bribe de Luna and Carlos Jaine Osorio Isasa
proceeded to mine the baggage. In one suitcase they found a package of
polyethylene, with 5 kilogr-s of cocaine.

The Office of the Attorney General of the Republic ascertained that the Colo-Man
returned to his country the following day. 19 June, on Awianca flight 87.

8255
080: 5300/2327

35
HBTIIADONE CLINIC FOR ADDICTS STILL STALLED AFTER 12 MONTHS

Hami‘ton ma ROYAL cum: in English 10 Jun 82 p 3

[Text]

The mmiaed etpauion
ol Govetntnent'e methadone
clinic toe am addicte etlll
eltowe no tin cl going ahead
-— neatly a year aha the
ptoaalnme oollapeed.

Confueion and doubt ova:

the future at the Wine.
which ie held at St. 3m-
dan'e Hoenital. were con-
tinued would" by the hue.
oital'e medical dim. Dr.
Michael Radical.

Although the programme
hae been boletated by the
addition of new ataﬂ. it to
now treating only three
hetoin addict- - one leee
than when it cloaed lot near
admiae‘eone last July.

Not does. 0!. Redford
want to expand the. w
gamma until it ia
by adequate back-up
ecnioee. including ml-
iing. "Mothadone'uaattnent
without the ptopct back up
ecu-vim ie dangeroue.” be
eaid. "We have been eayina
am toe yean. We have onb'
continued with it in the
hope that the othet’ thlno
mld be built up.”

Dr. Rad‘otd. m. M
enieaed a ctiticiatn Iliad! in 0
letter to The Royal Gm
that while‘Oom-nment wee

CSO: 5300/7566

lpoala‘ddictaittvaadioene.
halt Mama
theuoductienoladoctot’e
note.

"l'ltievae'aovnetbinathat
walta'dtoloolatwbenve
cloeed down the new ad-
mieeione became;

foe about ﬁve at 10 daya
witllctltcyweeebeteaew-

"l‘itie ltae bottomed eince
Dr. Halal: anived' (ton

Daapitathe'loommtbe
methadone cllnic. the coon
dinator o't Government'e
dtua ptoxramne. Ml.
Bryant Richards. wee op-
tintiatic that other eel-vine
foe addicte had IW.

lie and hit oo-voekete
rams

DESTRUCTIOR OP GANJA nun—men. St. Ann. June 17 (Ero- our corre-
spondent) One-and-a-half acres of natured ganja and one acre of seedlings were
destroyed by the police at Cave Valley in a raid at Cedar Valley District.
three ailes froe Cave Valley. yesterday. llo arrest was nade. [text] [ling-
ston THE DAILY CLEANER in English 19 Jun 82 p 2]

DRUG mu ram POLICE—a large anount of ganja and. infer-ed sources eay.
hard drugs have been stolen fro. the Police narcotics headquarters. at Spanish
Town Road. in Kingston. The Cleaner has been unable to get official infornation
on the theft. the quantity and the hard drugs stolen. however. the Gleaner
has learnt that high-level police investigation of the theft is going on.
under tight secrecy. A line of the investigation being pursud. the Cleaner
understands. has to do with the death on Bay 13 of bat. Cpl. Wayne Anthony
Crawford, 27. of the Police Operations Ease. Spanish Town Road. Kingston.

and of Apart-ant 5. No. 7 Graha- Eeighte. Kingston 8. bet. Cpl. Crawford

had taken ill at a bar on Red Hills Road in ungston and then went home. the
Gleaner understands. The Police Infornation Centre eaid on May 17. that bet.
Cpl. Crawford fell ill at hone about 10 p.a. on Hay l3 and was declared dead
on arrival at the University hospital. Mona. [kcerptl [Kingston TIE DAILY
CLEANER in English 21 Jun 82 p 2]

680: 5300/7566

37
BRIEFS

DRUG LABORATORY Dim-ileum City. 26 Jun (”DIED—A clandeettne Labor-
atory for the nenufecture of opiu and heroin vea diecovered todey in Checela.
Sineloe. Renae]. Beredie Beltran end Joequin Berdie Leon, pruned to he the
ownere of the laboratory. were erreeted during the raid. The it-e eeieed
include aeverel apeciel producte for the proceeeing of opin- gu. ecelee and
other leh equip-eat ee well ae 2 state of heroin need an a ample for poeeible
eelea ebroed. (“.281607 henco City mm in Spenieh 2350 (341' 26 Jun 82]

680: 5300/2334.

38
ms mm A! SUEZ—An ottolpt to oouulo largo quontittoo of opt- out!
hoohtoh worth 1.3 ‘ union into tho country hoo boon thattod by pouco ot Snot
port. M Got-out voto orrootod ohoord tho ohip carrying tho moottoo. Polioo
hod roootvod roporto tho: intonation]. man; my hot! odtohod 1to todou-
quoo covortn; thou oct1v1t1oo to Ind“. Pouco (and thot o mm; you; hod
olroody cooooolod lorgo quantum of drop obootd tho "Tom” ot 3:3” port.
Ono of tho m occoqucoo woo roopoooihlo to loot tho ohip vhuooho otoppod

ot Snot port with: tho poooogo throoch tho Soot Con-1 on routo to more”. ‘lho
nee-911cc no to rocotvo tho 4mg ohtp-ooto to totm for $250,000 oooh A ponco
hod workod out o plon to win tho confidonco of tho oh19 crow m ocootuo; to
which officoro ptotondod to ho tho gong oooowltcoo ontruotod with rocotvm; tho
drug ohipoonto. Upon ordvol of tho ohtp ot Snot o group of hooto nth ponto-
oon oqutrrod with volkto-tolkioo took pooition. Thtoo ofﬁcoro hoordod tho our
cloning to ho tho gong occoopuooo ood thuo sonogod to «too tho dtup. -688
[foot] [Con-o In mm mm! in mm 27 Jun 82 p 2]

680: 5300/5019
BRIEFS

DRUG TRAFFIC-dies the city of Man becone the turntable for drug traffic in the
vest region? “to neighborhoods stand out-Avocatiers and loin. Have the po-
lice the resources to cope with the resulting criminal activity? In the opin-
ion of Co-iasioner Doukoure handou. the police are not effecting brilliant
coupe but rennin effective. he says that Koko is a drug storage area. because
there are a large nder of users there. The neighborhood thus has ﬁddle-en.
sons of who. have been cited and arrested. Sons young people also use phat-e-
ceutical products («obtained which cone tron Guinea. As to narijuana.
there are sources everywhere. For eagle. the police discovered a field of
narijuana in Doyaguine. a suburb of lien. The nature of Koko as a neighborhood
favors illegal trade. It is a populous area with streets which wind anong

the shops. In this quarter of ill repute. prostitution uists along with
sizable fanilies. whose shady norale create daily drama. here small groups
gather on Friday evenings. i'he ritual of distributing the drug and anoking
around a bend in the road has general acceptance. The enell of dope is in the
air. And at the approach of a stranger. the enokers disperse quickly. It

is therefore in this poor neighborhood that aura of all kinds about the
police--their corruption and inefficiency-winders. [Bxcerptallnbidjan
mmtn “arm in French 19-20 Jun 82 p 9] 5157

CSO: 5300/5809
POLICE DISCOVER 6AM mm W8! M nun:
ﬂehinki RISING!!! 8m in [ﬁnish 10 Jun 82 p 12
[Article: "Drug Seuggling Bing Diecovered in Ieleinki"]

[Text] A lZ-neeher drug ring. which hee nuggled according to eeti-etee 6-
7 kilo: from Demerk into Pinlend. wee diecloeed in neleinki. The ring in-
cludee nix Den end eix onen.

The narcotice police in Beleinki were given the one in the epring, but they
were not able to oonfiecete even 1 gr- of heehieh eince the ring hed already

had e ohence to dietribnte ell of it to the drug nerkete.

Police Inepector Toreti lookinen. director of the nerootice section of the
Helsinki Crieinel Police. etetee thet the ring -uggled heehieh fro. Copen-
hagen in the period between lurch end Dec-her of lost year. The druge were
brought in on et leeet 11 different tripe ueing verione porte end neene of

trmeportet ion.

The heehieh wee brought into the country in epproxinetely half kilo lote ei-
ther teped to the skin or concealed in clothing.

The drug ring hee operated on the organized principle of nployer-enployee.
The ring hee been under the etrict control of a SO-yeer old nen. who is pre-
oently serving a eentence for property crinee. The other neehere of the ring
receive peylent for enuggling end dietrihution. The count of the peynente

hes not yet been deter-med.

The drugs were eold in Southern Finland. in nelainki end Kynenleekeo. enong
other placea. The principle point of eelee we in Helsinki.

KOekinen cherecterieed the ring ee e ”ring of old lorde" since the oldeet
eale neeher of the ring in 52 yeere old. the hoee in 50. end his cloeeet ee-
eietent ie 46. On the other hend. the wo-en ere quite young. The youngest
of then ie a 17-year old girl. She wee ellowed to go free efter the hear-
ing eince her involvement in the ectivitieo of the ring wee confined to be

quite uni-e1. Alec another wonen wee ellowed to go free.

61
of the other Delbers sane are slready in prison and scue are being detained.

Court proceedings on the case have already co-enced. The actions of one
of the ring embers were heard before the isleinki Municipal court on Bed-

nesday. Police Inspector Koskinen states that the proceedinge are just be-
ginning and nay last a long tine.

Koskinen describea the struggling and sale of the hashish as professional.
Some of the people involved in the case have previously co-itted property
crime.

According to lookinen the 6—7 kilos of snuggled hashieh repreeents a signi-
cant anomt. Hashish costs approxiutely 50.000 narkkas per kilo so that
the value of the snuggled hashieh .0th to approximately 350.000 nsrkkas.

10576
050: 5300/2315

’42
OFFICIAL 0!! mt. ELDIINATIOII 0! ADDICTIOI. M1013”
Paris u: MATH! in French 18 May 82 p 16

[Interview with Francois Colcodet by Olivier Postel-Vinsy: ”Drugs Are One
of the Underlying Causes of Cri-a”]

[Text] (:harged by the nine minister with leading a
pensnent niasion in the fight against drug addiction.
the nagistrate proposes that banking secrecy be lifted for
persons suspected of trafficking. Charged by the prise
minister with leading the Permanent Mission for the Fight
Against Drug Addiction, Francois Colcodet has no easy
task. (to-pared to the rapid growth of drug consumption.
the nsana available to his are linited. A legistrate
specialising in financial affairs, he assigns special
ilportance to the repression of traffickars. In the
course of a press conference today. he is to report

on the work of this nission. He at with his.

LB 1mm: Judging by the latest statistics that have bees-e known (first
quarter of 1982). we are facing a heavy increase in drug consuption. Are
these preoccupying statistics a reflection of the econo-ic crisis?

Francois Colcoﬂet: The statistics must be analysed with an elenent of pre-
caution. The personnel of the Paris Police Prefecture assigned to the fight
against drug addiction. by the end of last year, was increased fron 60 to 60
persons. This is like violations of the traffic regulations: you discover
the. nostly when you put nore cops on the job. ‘nut does not ncessarily nean
that we now have lore of then.

The fact reeains that the nder of cases handled since 1977 increased consid-
erably and regularly. regardless of the type of drugs. The sost spectacular
develop-ant here concerns heroin, whose surveyed users in ’0 years increased
fro. less than 1.000 to alnost 5.000.

There is probably a link with the econonic crisis, above all if you realise
that drug use so-ehow has becone proletarianiaed. Until around the start

of the 1970s, drugs by and large were to be found along the universities and
the ritzy sections of town. That is no longer true. In Paris, the market
has shifted toward the sections of town in the east. Today, the typical user

43
is a young unemployed person or an apprentice who has not finished his
schooling. At the start of the 19708, taking drugs often involved a cultural
rite connected with the ideological crisis. Going down the steps of the
social ladder, the rite changed its nature.

[Question] Is the heavy increase in the use of cannabis worrying you as much
as the use of heroin and solvents?

[Answer] Yes. because. in overall terms, this inwolves the same phenomenon.

The number of cannabis users counted increased fron 2,500 to more than 6,000

in a years. Of course, cannabis is less dangerous than heroin or solvents.

The idea according to which it would be absolutely harmless however is no

longer generally accepted by specialists. Its repeated use seems to have an
effect on brain function. To tell you exactly what I think of cannabis, I

can do no better than to compare it to that national scourge which goes by the
nane of alcohol. Just as there are more or less alcoholic beverages. so there
are more or less strong varieties of cannabis. ranging fron herbs cultivated

in flower pots in our climate to preparations in the form of oil or concentrated
paste. Let us agree that. in spite of all precautions. we cannot bring the

use of alcohol in France under control since we record some 10,000 deaths per
year. It seems to me that an experience of this kind should make us very alert.
Just because we have one plague does not mean that we should have another one.

[Question] So you do not agree with those who are in favor of liberalizing
the sale of cannabis?

[Answer] I am very cautious on that score. Here again you must clearly
distinguish between the kind of talk you hear in certain circles and the social
reality of drug addiction. Even high society in Paris, for example, includes
several militant cocaine addicts. They are a little bit like athletes who
take dope to win. Now, these persons often shroud their liberal comments in
considerations concerning poverty and the right to pleasure. Their position

is at the very antipodes of that of the average drug addict. The latter lives
an experience of failure, of being on the sidelines, of being powerless. The
occasional use of cannabis hardly entails any risks for a well-placed individu-
al with a job, etc. But we could not say as much about a school drop-out who
is unemployed.

[Question] What scans of action are you envisaging? Repression?

[Answer] On that score. I would like to nake two main charges against the
preceding administration. The first one is that it was too much inclined to
consider the holdup as the number one crime which was to be given absolute
priority in terms of repression. The second one is that it let up in control
oVer the big pharmaceutical laboratories.

This heavy concentration on holdups overlooked the fact that drugs must be
considered one of the underlying causes of crime. To get drugs. you must have
money. when you do not have it, you have to steal it. lepressing drug
traffic and preventing drug use thus means attacking one of the main causes

of the tremendousincrease in theft and attacks, especially in Paris. The

66
iaportent thing is not to put drug addicts into prison since the only criae
they co-itted was to drug theaselvee (since that is a criae). But in this
risk of triggering a chain reaction, I find one more reason for us to be
particularly severe toward traffickers regardless of the type of products
they sell.

On that point. I think that certain pharaaceutical laboratories would he in
line for a little exaaination of conscience. Medications. like solvents,
often are a substitute for heroin. law. products containing aind-changing
substances have aultiplied wildly. Besides, there is illicit trafficking in
aedications. especially alphetaaines. aade in trance and sold in the develop-
ing countries-fron which they soaetiaes cone back to Europe.

[Question] But the bulk of drug traffic originates abroad just the sale. Can
we conteaplate an increase in the aeans of international repression?

[Answer] During international aestinge. experts are above all interested in
ways of seizing the goods of the traffickers. France above all insists on
improving police techniques. For exasple, we would like to have banking
secrecy lifted when there is suspicion. how. certain countries continue
bitterly to oppose this neasure. It is therefore clear that financial repres-
sion would per-it us and, l as sure. soon will per-it us to strike at a sensi-

tive point.

[Question] How do you conceive of nonrepressivs aeans in the fight against
drugs?

[Answer] Good inforaation is one of the keys to the problea. nadio and above
all television can play a considerable role here. Both for the good and for
the bad. Very aany young people began to sniff glue after seeing the film
about the children of Bogota. 0n the other hand, certain articles, certain

broadcasts did provide infatuation without getting anybody stirred up. It
would be necessary to increase the nuaber of well-Iade broadcasts and above
all to provide as much inforaation as possible for all journalists.

It is furthermore indispensable and urgent to give those who are in direct
contact with children, especially teachers and doctors, basic training and
pernanent background in the latter of drug addiction. The teacher is also an
educator. Be lust know what to do in facing a specific problem posed by a
child or a group of children. The GP has a special responsibility because it
is often he who is the first to see the young drug addict or his faaily and
because he has the power to issue an order. Now, the GP's presently do not get
any basic training worthy of that naae. As for pernanent training, which is
optional, it varies according to the regions. Soaetiaes there is nothing of
that sort.

[Question] Are you in favor of what is being done in certain conuntries of
northern Europe-in other words. forced care?

[Answer] No. The penal aspect is.one thing and the nedical aspect is another.
Of course, this is not the easy way out. But if one does not scrupulously
respect freedoas, even in the choice of therapeutic methods. than we will
experience what Orwell describes in "1986."

5058 as
080: 5300/2298
ITALIAN CONNECTED HEIDI! TRAFFICKBBS AIIBSTBD OI IIVIIRA
Peris L’HIMANITB in Trench 16 Key 82 p 16

[Text] lerseille police officers lest week broke up
severel seell rings which hed been supplying the Cote
d'Aeur with heroin. A score of trsffickers were
errested end 300 gross of heroin were seized.

After the streets which they were eble to coeplete lest week et Nice. Toulon.
end Herseille, police officers in herseille confireed the tendencies reveeled
severel deys ego by their colleegues in Paris. Drugs, perticulsrly heroin,
ere sbundent on the eerket end the prices that drug eddicts sust psy to supply
the-selves sro going down. '

Coneissioner Senguy, the hoes of the Msrseille SBPJ, for exesple, wee ehle
to stete thet the rings broken up by his outfits were selling 180 grass of
heroin per week insteed of the usuel 50 grass for this type of orgsnizstion.
These ere swell outfits eede up of two or three treffickers who supply e
clientele of drug eddicts who resell the stuff.

A score of persons were charged. These treffickers go their supplies in ltely
where the eefie, which controls the underground lsboretories, runs the treffic.
A certein Rudolph Cot, 39. frequently eede the trips between Herseills end
Itely. Two other rings opereted in the ease fsshion st Toulon wherees e fether
and son, the Ceietta [family], were opersting et Nice, directing e geng of 13
traffickers. The letter kept business sccounts showing treneections elounting
to Fr 120,000.

At Hontpellier, s young. 18-year-old student by the neee of Jecques 3.,

died Monday following a heroin shot. He hed been e drug sddict for e long
tine end hed injected himself with the drug nixed with leeon juice. He

died of pulnonery eebolisn. Two of his friends. who perticipeted in the ease
drug perty. ere in the serious condition in the hospitel.

At hulhouse. finelly. officers eseigned to the nercotice squed arrested three
traffickers. Their investigstion hed begun efter the deeth-due to overdose--
of e b-sonth pregnent, l9-yeer-old girl.

5058
€802 5300/2298
COUNCIL ISSUES ANNUAL REPORT 0! DRUG AIUSB FIGURES, TIIIDS
Stockhola pecans NTEETBR in Swedish 16 Jun 82 p 5
[Article by Tho-as Lerner: ”Drug Abuse Decreases-but lore Addicts Die")

[Text] Narcotics abuse along youths has decreased since the
beginning of the 1970's. That is shown by a report fro- the
Crime Prevention Council, BRA. But at the sale tine lore and
sore narcotics-related crises are being discovered and lore
addicts then before are dying of overdoses or sequelae.

BRA publishes statistics on criae in Sweden every year. The report-
"Nerkotikeutvecklingen 1982" [Drug Develop-ants l982]-bhatthecouncilprssenued

on Tuesday [15 June] is a aiailar report, but on the extent and develop-eat of
drug abuse.

The National Board of Education, so, regularly investigates how many eleaentary
school pupils have tried hash or any other narcotic.

The latest studies, which are reported innths IRA publication, reveal that the
abuse of narcotics has decreased since the beginning of the 1970's.

In 1971. 15 percent of all pupils in the ninth year of school answered that
they had used narcotics at sale tile. In 1981 the figure had dropped to 9 per-
cent. and among those who are entering the sixth year of school there are still
extreaely few that have tried any narcotics.

”But we perhaps should not yet draw too far-reaching conclusions tron these
studies. Sons pupils never answer the questions, and the social pressure has
also increased in recent years. It is harder to adult that one has used nar-
cotics today than it was 10 years ago."

So says Jan Andersaon, a researcher with 331's developeent unit.

SIPO [Swedish Public Opinion Research Institute] and FDA, the Defense Research
Institute. have also studied narcotics abuse along Swedish youths. FDA dis-
tributes questionnaires each year to the 50,000 young sen who are being called
up to enlist in conpulsory nilitary service.

‘7
rhc answers show that abuse within this group has increased somewhat since the
beginning of the 1970's. 8170 points out a sharp increase in drug abuse until
a few years ago. Since then there hes been a decrease.

Bsbjﬁrn Bsbjarnsson is working with narcotics questions as the National Police
Board.

"I believe the sischievous drug use among youths has gone down. It is not 'in'
to use drugs today," he tells DAGINSNYIETBI.

"But heavy use has not decreased. But neither has it increased in any drasatic
way .n

The Dal report also shows that sore drug addicts than before are dying of over-
doses or sequelae. But that does not necessarily mean that use of drugs has in-
creased.

Heroin. which has become commoner and commoner in the last few years. is easy
to overdose, and this can lead to involuntary suicide. Many drug addicts also

use dirty syringes and needles. and are therefore likely to be affected by in-
fections or other diseases.

Cocaine

In the National Police Board there is great uneasiness that cocaine may get a
foothold on the market.

"Cocaine may become the big narcotics problem of the 1980's if it spreads out

on the street froa the closed society in which it is used today,“ says Bsbjbrn
Esbjarnsson. "But hash can also cause problems, since the smuggling is being

done professionally today, as it formerly was not.”

The 883 report also shows that more and sore narcotics crimes are being detected.
That is due to the fact that the police have greater resources to devote to con-
batting narcotics and that prosecution practice has changed. The courts' ap-
praisal of narcotics crimes and nisdeseanors is considerably harsher than for-
merly.

Bo Svensson is a division head at 33‘. He thinks the report that the council
has produced is an important document.

"It shows that drug abuse is not leading at galloping speed to destruction, and
that politicians can sit down quietly and peacefully and discuss what needs to
be done. Drug abuse among youths has not increased, as many believed," says no
Svensson.

8815
CSO: 5300/2326
DRUG DEATHS INCREASING IN 810010101)! AREA
Stockholm SVINSKA DAGBLADBT in Swedish 7 Jun 82 p 7
[Article by Claes Lofgren]

[Text] During the first quarter of this year 28 drug addicts
died directly or indirectly from their drug use in the area
under the jurisdiction of the Stockholm county council. If
the trend holds, that means an increase for the whole year of
a good 7 percent compared to 1981.

"No definitive conclusion about the change can be drawn, however, until we know
the figures for the next quarter," says Chief Medical Officer Nils-Olof Danell,
who produced the figures.

Coapared to l975--when the study of the number of known deaths due to narcotics
addiction began-~the number has increased from 25 to 98 deaths in 1981. Hhether
the increase is matched by an increase in the total drug abuse is hard to say.

Probably the increase is due to the fact that heroin-—which came in among drug
users 6 or 5 years ago-is now beginning to carry off its victims. "Rapid
circulatory collapse with signs of pulmonary edema" is sometimes found in the
death certificate of a drug addict. The condition is called ”wet lung," and is
due to an overdose of heroin. The pulmonary circulation is choked off.

Increased Blood Pressure

Another acute and equally dramatic cause of death can be cerebral hemorrhage or

cardiac infarction caused by an amphetamine injection. "hen the amphetamine is

injected the blood pressure goes up from a normal 120-130 to 300 mm of mercury.

If the abuse continues, sooner or later a blood vessel bursts from the extremely
high blood pressure.

Other and less dramatic causes of death are contagious diseases which follow in
the wake of drug abuse: yellow jaundice, blood poison, pneumonia, and diseases
of the liver. A third category of causes of death is suicide, accidents. or
violence, which are probably more common among drug addicts than others.

59
Blood Clots Fron Potato Flour

Heroin costs about 2,500 kronor a gran at the user's level. For that reason
dishonest dealers dilute the poison with everything fron powdered sugar to talc.
Blood clots caused. for exasple, by potato flour have occurred.

A detailed study of the deaths in 1979 shows that half occurred in connection
with the injection itself. About 15 percent died of sequelae to the drug abuse.
The remaining 35 percent died fro- suicide or in accidents.

Danell' s study concerns drug addicts known to the police. He checks the county
council's death lists against the police register of known drug addicts. Thus
if anyone dies free drug addiction without being known to the police that case
does not get into the statistics. Markertal's studies in 1979 and 1980 show
that 29 and 28 cases respectively were not included in the original studies.

A noteworthy change in the latest figures for the first quarter is that the per-
centage of women increased fron sons 10 percent to ca. 30 percent. 0f the

28 who died, 9 were wonen. Along heavy users of drugs by injection there is
usually one woman to 10 wen.

8815
C80: 5300/2324
BIPOII FINDS SITUATION OF DIDG ABUSIRS HORSIIIIG
Stockholl ZAGEIS NYHBTBR in Swedish 2‘ Jun 82 p 8
[Article by Tho-as Lerner]

[Text] "Drug abusers' situation and their background is con-
siderably lore wretched than aany seal to believe. Our latest
repport shows that clearly.”

So says Orvar Olsson. chief secretary of the consission on the
Causes of Nancotics Abuse (030).

Today, Thursday, the UNO is presenting its sixth report to Karin $8der, ninister
of health and social affairs. The report takes up various theories on why a
person abuses narcotics and also reports current research in the field.

Harsh Childhood and Youth

"He consider it important to bring the question of the drug abusers' background
and life situation into the debate again," says Orvar Olsson. chief secretary of
030.

UNO has had 168 drug abusers interviewed who have at sons tine been in contact

with a care institution; The interviews underscore what several studies found

during the l970's-a narcotics addict alnost without exception has behind hie a
very difficult period of growing up.

Most addicts grow up together with only one of their parents or in a foster fan-
ily. The parents often drink too such or have other problels.

Many addicts have great difficulties in school and they begin to use alcohol
early. The Iajority of then cows in contact with reforl schools and social su—
thorities at an early age.

”The situation that the interviews and other studies show is considerably worse
than sany believe," says Orvar Olsson.

"Many have insisted in recent years that the environsent the addicts grow up in
does not differ free that of nor-a1 people. but a drug abuser allost always

grows up in a very poor environ-set; our investigation shows that."

51
Many Theories

There are a nusber of theories about why a person begins to abuse narcotics. A
nunber or researchers naintain that availability. i.e. how easy it is to get

hold of ”dope." leans lost. Others point to personality traits and character
disorders.

But there is widespread agree-on: that the years of childhood and youth seen a
great deal.

"An abuse of narcotics is usually based on the conditions during growing up.

But later there are a nunbsr of factors that determine whether a person begins
to abuse narcotics," Orvar Olsson says.

Hard To Quit

The LNO interview survey also shows that nany addicts have a hard tile getting
rid of their dependence.

"An inportant reason for this is that addicts usually associate only with con-
rades who also abuse narcotics. and that a drug addict often has a very hard
tine getting a job and a place to live," says Orvar Olsson.

A special study involving about 100 of the addicts interviewed. those who had
used narcotics for sore than 10 years, shows that a couples abuse is very con-
non, i.e. that drug addicts quite often use alcohol or other drugs to get high.

"The inportant thing is not always the narcotic in itself, but that the person

wants to get intoxicated, to flee fro- reality. Which intoxicant is used de-
pends on availability.

"The picture of the addict that stays with the drug he or she has fornsd a habit

of using does not fit with the picture shown by our investigation and others,"
Orvar Olsson concludes.

8815
080: 5300/2324

52
PROBLEM OF DRIVING UNDER DIDG INFLUENCE IICIIASIIG

Stockholl SVENSIA DAGBLADET in Swwdish 16 Jun 82 p 8
[Article by class LBfgren]

[Text] Swedish doctors cannot tell whether drivers suspected
of drunk driving have taken narcotics.

When a person is arrested on suspicion of driving while under the influence of
alcohol he is routinely exaained by a physician. lesidee taking blood and urine
saaples; the physician will try to deter-ine the degree of intoxication accord-

ing to a fornula. There are four alternatives, fron slightly affected to
highly intoxicated.

During the fall, on the initiative of the Crine Prevention Council (381) a
rsndon study of the blood and urine sanples fron drunk driving suspects was
done by the National art-inal Police Registry and forensic Laboratories (SKL).
svrusra DAGBLADBT reported the result earlier. which along other things shows
that nearly ‘0 percent of those who are apprehended and convicted of driving
while under the influence of alcohol have also used Iedicine and/or narcotics
in conhination with driving.

No Connection

0f the sanples tested, 16 percent showed traces of narcotics in acne fore. The
physicians' appraisal of the degree of intoxication of those under the influ-
ence of narcotics is inportant to the question of evidence; for those under the
influence of alcohol the concentration of alcohol in the blood is quite deci-
sive. Sowewhat unexpectedly. no connection was found between, for exanple,

high concentration of amphetamine in the blood and the physicians' appraisal
"highly intoxicated." Uhether this is because alphetenine in and of itself

has no negative effect on driving or whether Swedish physicians do not have suf-
ficient experience with drug addicts cannot be told iron the investigation.

8815
080: 5300/2324

53
manna SEIZURE-40cm” fore“ «120d none 53 kg: of bug orphan mauled
into Turhy 1n the launder. both: region 1!: “121'. Yukukov. District. ‘11:.
august: It. being conga. During the put 7 maths. ch. ”Mu-uric hm
uiud a total of 137 kn of but not-plum in Van and W. [12090635
Ankara mastic Sat-via in Turkish 1000 El! 8 Jul 82]

080: 5310/5433 END

~ 7-"