FOR OI-TICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10424

31 March 1982

Worldwide Report

NARCOTICS AND DANGEROUS DRUGS
(FOUO 15/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
ciee, views or attitudes of the U.S. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAMS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OHNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
WORLDWIDE REPORT
NARCOTICS AND DANGEROUS Danes

(FOUO 15/82)

CONTENTS

ASIA
AIBTRALIA

No 'Ihais Arrested at Sydney Airport.in Record Heroin Bust
(“3 Am, 19 J” 82).00....0.0.00.0...OCOOOOIOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO

Hm (merged in Huge Indian Heap Operation Gets Bsil
(m Am, 21 J” 82)..00....OODOIOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOIOOOOOOOOII

Heroin Snuggler Skips Bail, Sought by Police in Sybey
(m "381' AISTRALIAN, 16 Jan 82).............................

Briefs
Heroin Bust Inset

Heroin Smuggling Sentence
Drug Profits Smuggling
Policy on Overseas Arrests
'Hr Asis' Disclosures
Record Cannabis Bust
lbport on Drug Trafficking

BMW}!

Briefs
Snuggled (bins Seized

PARIS TAN

Refugees Reported To Be Active in Drug Trafficking
(uh‘r “.00d; ms “LI“, 1”: 82).OOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOIOI

- s - [III - WW - 138 POUC

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Briefs
Heroin Smuggling Bid Failed
Addiction Center in Karachi

Over 5 Hamds of (hares Seized
Heroin Seized, ‘lhree Held
Heroin Seized

Guru, Opium Seized

assume

PHILIPPINES

Tougher law To curb Rising Philippine Drug Anne
(Em nth ufr‘; m3 mu“, 2‘ hb &)oooooooooooooooooooooo *1

Brief:
Marijuana Pusher Gets ZO-Yesr Tern ~ 13

MILAN!)

u.s. Proposal To Svep Drug Convicts Opposed
(MT, 17 mt 82)....0000000000000oooooooooooooooooooooooooooo 14

New Guidelines Planned in ind-Opium Drive
(NATION mm, Z'M”)0.ooooso.oooooooooooooooooooooooooooo ls

Khm Sa-led Army ‘ro Strike Minorities
(NATION mm, 12*: 82).....0.00..OOOCOOOOOOOOOCOCCOOOO0.0. 16

Briefs
Heroin Snuggle: To 11.5. Arrested 17
Opium Snuggled Pro- laoe Seized 17
Hong Km; Guinese Smggler Jailed 17
Soldiers merged With anemicsl Possession 18
Drugs Seized in North 18
Antidrug Piduting in South 18
Harihuana Seized in G1ass Factory 18
LATIN ABHICA
BAHAMAS
Briefs
Cocaine Seized 19
BOLIVIA

LN Help To P131: Narcotics Requested
(all ”“310. 13“b82)....00000000DOOOOOOOOCOOOOOCOOOIDOOOOOOO 20

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Antidrug Official on Progress of Campaign
(Radio Illimni Network, 3 Her 82).............................. 21

Presidential Secretary Discmees Drug Traffic
(m, 12hr u)0000.0000000DOIIOOOOOOOOOOOIO..0.00.0.0000000000 22

Briefs
Cocaine Trsfficker on Trial 23
Drug Trafficking 23
ntidrug Personnel Dismissal 23
(bcaine Factory Discovered 21o
Argentine-Bolivian Border Clash 24
JAMAICA

Vessel, Crew of Four. 2 Tons of Marijuana Seized
(m MLY MR. 26 Rb 82)....OOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOIOOOIOOOO 25

lBX'IOO

Results of January-February htidrug Campaign in Zone 6
(EL soLmsmAlloA, 3 m ”)00000000000000OOOOOOIOOOOOOOOOI... 26

Poppy Plantations, Clandestine Laboratory Discovered
(BL SOL IE SINAIDA, 21 Feb 82)................................. 28

Seizure ad Instruction of Marihmna in Sonora bported
(BL ImmAL’2m&)OOOOOOOOI0.00..OOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOIOOOO 29

Briefs
Drug Ringleader Captured 30
Heroin mstributor Arrested 30
Drugs, Weapons Seized 31
Jail Officials Acquitted 31
Heroin Seized 31
Harihusna Fields Destroyed 32
0.5. Drug Traffickers (hptured 32

SIB-SW AFRICA
LIBERIA

Briefs

Herijuzns Seized at Airport 33

FOR OFFIGAL USE ONLY
WEST ME
”MARK

Minister to Nordic Concil: (hristimia Drugs rope Stopped
(Dms mm, 5 “If a).seeeeeeeeeeoeaeeseessoeeeeosoeesoe

0: “111 Close Down 'Pree Gity'
Lively Debate in Helsinki on Drugs, by Kan Huber:
maish l9 Snuggled lashieh to heting
Paper (Jo-lento on Nordic Narcotics, Editorial
Paper Sees Sign of New Pinneaa Toward (hristienia. 'Prea
Gity’
(Editorial: 33!].me um, 11 Her 82)..................

1’3le REPUBLIC 01' am

Hesse Social Minister on Heroin Use, ‘lherapy (haters
(lemma ALLBBINE, 17 Rb 82).........................

Briefs
Munich Opium Haul

FINLAND

Minister at Nordic Drug Conﬂuence Tells Country's Stems ‘
(“SINCE SMOMT, 2° Eb a)oesoneseeesoseeesoeoooeeeeeseso

FRAME

Interninisteriel Council on Drugs Established
(Jem’PI-erre “fut; L'HMIE, 8 Jul u)........oou.......

lype, Arrest, User Characteristic Statistics Smarized
(LB NUDE. 30 Jan 82, LB FIGARO, 28 Dec 81)..................

Arrests, Overdoses, Drug mes
Young Users. Immigrant malers. by Jean Peillsrdin

Solidarity Ministry Representative on Addiction Policies
(Francois Colconbet interview; LE mm, 30 Jan 82)..........

Police (brruption in Arrests, Confiscation kvealed
(Agathe basert; 18 mm. 9 Feb 82).........................

Ibdical Center Director Discusses Treat-ent, Overdoaes
(Christian 0010112311; 13 W03, 30 .131 82)...................

FOIOFFICIALUSEONLY
Hong Kong Glineae, Heroin Seizod at Rainy
(m Hum, 28 me 81)....OOOOOOOOOOOODOOOOOOOOOOOOOOCCOOOOOOOC S7

GREECE

Major Drug Trafficker Sought in Italy Arrested at Airport
(Know. 29 Jan &’ mum, ”J“ &)OOIIDIIOOOIOIIOOOOOIO s9

Syrian Drug Traffickar Arrested, by D. Stavropouloo
Arm Traffic Involwnnt

Details on Heroin Trafficker'o Arrest Provided
(“M 2 Feb u)..........0.......0...‘.............I.OCCIOIO 62

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
mo THAIS ARRESTED A? SYDNEY Jamar Ill mm HBROIN BUST

”elbomme m A68 in English 19 Jan 82 p 1

[Text]

SYDNEY. — Ten 'sm'a'n Noel:
of high-grade heroin «bed at

5 my airport were the
b heroin haul the.
m a Federal Police
made and were worth

”Arthompkltedupuul

r
gymWymﬁ?

%

hm

When-the Runs wore mod.

W'wnpped' maltco
thalofuw
kilogram

C50: 5 300/75 35

3'
a
a
i.
a

>
23
g
a
S

3?.
i
i
E

g
Ea
i

E
E
E!
:5

2%:

;
ei
is
sci
$2

:22
5

§§>
5%
g ~
35
g3?

g;
E;
g;

2 s
”4." .._ ...._mmm W...” M: 3
mm Whammm‘w mmmm mmww mummy... muw.

a MW... . .wmm
awn” m m memW m «WWW mmmruwmmmmm»
”mummwmw ”mmmmwmﬁm..mmm

mm “W. 3...... mm ..m human”...
mm..- mm. mama 3% ma mm... 3.."

.ﬂm Mm... .m “.mmmwmm.
m mmmmw mummmmw mmmmmw
m
m
m
m

mcmmmmmmmomnoncnsm

('1'.er

5300/7536

cso:
WIN mm SHPS 8811.. 8006!” BY POLICE IN SW

m: 3 Mm? 8:»
«mm» m. m m

Mmmm “WWW “WWW.
w...“ mummhwwmmm www.mu—umunwmowwﬂuwmma
3% mm, W _
m mam? mm“ Maw

 

“WM:

 

I.
'm

I!

Kmmmuwucm
00W

 

 

[Toxtl

Path m '25? Amman in M11”: 16 Jan 82 p S
m
hill:
BRIEFS

mom BUST mam-me SlO-Iaillion heroin haul in Sydney this week as just
the 'tip of the iceberg” in what federal Police claim is a successful co-or-
dinated operation to diarwt big syndicates operating in Australia. The of-
ficer in charge of the operation, Detective Inspector John Nheatley, said the
seizure of high-grade heroin was worth as such as the total amount of the drug
seized last year. It was the biggest single amount yet uncovered by rederal
Police. But he was more interested in his squed's behind-thracenee success
"understandably a big seizure grabs the headlines and everyme gets excited,”
Inspector meatley said. ”But the real success has been in arrests where no
drugs have been involved. Our efforts have been particularly directed towards
disruption of the major organisations to prevent thee bringing the drugs in.“
In the past eight maths hie squad had been responsible for the arrest of 30
"very significant“ figures in the drug trade. bet of those arrested had been
charged with conspiracy to import heroin. A detective in the NSW Drug Squed,
who wishes to remain moaned, told The Australian the quality of heroin being
sold on the street was already very poor, and was likely to deteriorate fur—
ther. (Canberra m MM in mun 20 Jan 82 p 2]

with intent to sell or supply it. ﬂuu Dung Nguyen (23), of Stbiaco, edeit-
ted before Hr Justice Kennedy in the Suprene Court that he had 35.09am of
cannabis resin. The court heard that Nguyen had escaped from Vietnam in 1977

DRUG PROPI‘rs Wham-h Thai an snuggled 8186,000-the proceeds
of illicit drug sales-wot of Australia, the City Court was told yesterday.
The police alleged that later 3.51:9 of heroin and 26.7kg of cannabis were
found at the men‘s brother-in-lav's house in Thailand. Mahaus Chowdury
(33), a guest-house manager in Ihailand, appeared before Hr Alexander Vale.
csu, seeking bail. Choudury has been charged with the possession, iQorta-
tion and trafficking of heroin on Decedaer 4 and 5 last year. Inspector ri-
Bgan, of the federal police, told the court that other people had been char-
ged and others would be charged in connection with drug iuporting. as said
that 28 false passports were used in a drug-Importing ring. In my, June and
August last year an. of $25,000, $71,000 and $90,000 had been taken tron Aus-
tralia in suitcases by Chowdury, Inspector Egan said. "the noney was proceeds
from drug sales.“ he said he did not know the quantities of drugs involved--
“but there are big amounts of heroin.” The Thai police had raided Chowdury’s
brother-in-law's house on Decanter 30 and found heroin aid cannabis. Theyalso
found 21 partly-completed boxes that were the type used to import drugs into
Australia." Inspector Egan said. Chowdury was arrested on Dec-Iber 27.
Cross-examined by Mr Terry O'Brien, for Chowdury. Inspector Egan said that no
heroin or big suns of money had been found in Dhowdury's hotel rooa'when he
was arrested. Mr Vale refused bail on the ground that Chowdury was an unac-
ceptable risk. [Perth THE NBST AUSTRALIAN in English 27 Jan 82 p 40]

POLICY ON OVERSEAS ARRBSTS—The federal Governunt yesterday warned it would
take a hard line approach towards Australians caught trafficking in drugs over-
seas. A spokesnan for the Minister for Abinistrative Services, Mr Newman,
said there would be no "super tolerance for people just bersuse they are Aus-
tralians in another pert of the world". he said that traffickers could expect
no help and no synpathy from the Australian Goverment and must accept penal-
ties handed down by foreign courts. He said the Government's attitude was
clearly spelt out in passport literature and if more Australians took note of
it "they would not be so ready to offer thenselvee. or be lured into acting.

as couriers for drug runners". The warning comes after the Government's recent
refusal to intervene in the case of Nillian Sinclair, 68, whose 33-year jail
sentence for drug offences is soon to be reviewed by a Thai court. The Attor-
ney-General. Senator Week, said of the case: ”The Government will not at-
tempt to interfere where the laws and procedures involved are applied without
discrimination against Australians.“ The Sinclair case has concerned civil
liberties lawyers because of the part played by Australian officials in the ar-
rest and trial of Sinclair. The president of the Law Institute of Victoria,

Mr Matt Walsh, has suggested the possibility of guidelines to control the giv~
ing of evidence by Australian officials before foreign courts. The guidelines
could limit the giving of evidence which would not be admissible in Australian
courts, he said. [Helbourne Tn! AG: in English 12 Jan 82 p 12)

'HR ASIA' DISCIDSJRES--Oonvicted New Zealand drug boss Alexander Sinclair,
Imown as Mr Asia, is said to be ready to spill all he knows about the interna-
tional drug scene to the Australian Royal Comission on Narcotics. Reports in
New Zealand say that members of the comission are now in mgland ready to in-
terview Sinclair. ibwover a Iondon press report claims that international
drugs bosses are so concerned at what Sinclair night reveal that they have put
a million-pound price on his head. They want him dead before he can talk.
Sinclair built his worldwide wire from a bus in Auckland. us has been
jailed for 20 years for murdering his former partner, Marty Johnson. An Aus-
tralia House spokesman in London is reported as saying: "we are conscious
that there are many people who don't want Sinclair to give evidence, and we
are trying to keep it to our chest". [Canberra THE AUSTRALIAN in alglish

14 Jan 82 p 2]

RECORD CANNABIS BUST-Melbournr-Victorian and federal police yesterday made
seven are arrests in cracking what they termed the biggest cannabis smuggling.
ring uncovered in Australia. They said the ring was the subject of a year-
long investigation, code-naud “Operation Capa.’ Based in south-east Asia and
operated here and in Britain, the ring was responsible for importing cannabis
valued ”in the millions.“ Police made public the operation yesterday after
three houses in Melbourne's eastern suburbs were raided. The dawn raids were
by 20 hand-picked police. Seven people-four men and three women-were being
questioned last night. The thistant Omissioner (crime), nr Paul Delianis.
said "operation Caps“ was a joint operation involving state police. the feder-
al police and the Customs Deparuient. he said the Caps task force was formed
in February last year after a lot of crime intelligence work. It worked in
parallel with an anti-heroin operation, revealed by police last week. Mr De-
lianis said the South-east Asian ring brought cannabis resin into Australia.
It sent nainly herbal cannabis to England. "It was a very carefully planned
operation because this has been a very professional ring,” Mr Delianis said.
Other snuggling operations uncovered in the past had involved large, single
quantities of the drug, but this ring was the biggest overall operation yet
uncovered, he said. as said the ring imported and distributed the drug. Po-
lice would not officially discuss the quantities of drug the ring was alleged
to have brought to Australianbut Drug Bureau officials said the total would

go "into the many millions of dollars". [Brisbane m COURIER-HAIL in Biglish
14 Jan 82 p 16]

REPORT ON DRUG TRAFFICKING-4M first report of the federal and New South
Wales joint police task force on drug trafficking is not to be made public
because of likely criminal prosecution against a number of people. A draft
press release said the report was tabled in federal parliament today by the
prime minister, Hr Fraser. The release said it was likely that criminal pro-
secution would be started against a number of individuals named in the report
for drug, conspiracy, perjury and passport offenses. [Text] [Melbourne
Overseas Service in English 0500 GMT 18 Mar 82 BK]

(:80: 5300/ 5681
BRIEFS

SHUGGLED OPIUH sum-Chittagong, Mar. 2--About 28 lbs of opiu narcotics
worth Taka l croro 2 lakh was rocovorod by tho Soa Customs Spocial Squd from
tho 'Banglar Haya' at Chittagong Port yostordsy. According to tho Oolloctor
of Custom. on tho basic of an inﬁorution cactus intolligonoo and managing
squad mado a thorough ooarch of tho msol, 'Bonglar Hayo' of. Banqladooh Ship-
ping Corporation sac and seized the narcotics tron tho library room. Custo-
also soizod throo, piocoo o: throo-in-ono radio-cassotto, no cartoons of
foreign brand cigarottos and nunbor of piocos of saroos from tho coiling of
the officers cabins. The Gusto-o collector doclinod to olaborato :urthor in
this nattor as invostigation was still continuing. novovor, nono was ar-
restoél. Tho ship arrivod at tho port the otbor day iron tho oaot coast of
Indian port mticorin. [Docca m m mum in mglioh 3 Ho: 82 p 1]

C80: 5 300/ 7022
mamasammuw1nnamnwnInowmrmnmxmc

1818de THE “081.1“ in English 1 Mn: 82 pp 1, 8
[Article by Athar Hasood]

[Text]

m
mm “mm“

”mum “mm
wax 1me mm
wmmmmwmmmmmm
MWWMMru Mmmmu
mm-mmmmmmwmmﬂ
“Mmmw t WWEW
ww.wmmmmmmWn
mmwmmm “mmMmm

“mew mm mmmu

w «mm mm
mmMMWMMWWumm “mm%

“mm
mmmw;

Mummmmwm m Mummwwmmw

my a

“mem u

h mnmnh thwmm WWWMW;

“.mmmmw m.mWn mm WWW
BRIEFS

mom SMOOOLING BID POILBD--CIA staff foiled a bid to smggle heroine

[as published] worth Rs. 100,000 on a actor-car at Hahdat Road on Friday.
The smggler Arshad Iqbal of Hiari Shah was arrested and his notor-car
LES S900 imounded by the Police. The heroine weighing 850 gran concealed
in the dash board was recovered and confiscated. The accused had brought
the narcotic from Bare in tribal area for mggling to a foreign country.
[Lahore THE PAKISTAN TIMES in English 6 Her 82 p 3]

ADDICTION CENTER IN KARACHI—A Drug Addiction Centre will be set up soon at
the Jinnah Post-Graduate hedical Centre for conducting an in-depth study of
various drugs and nodes of treatnent in different phases. A reliable

source told MORNING NW8 yesterday that the plans were already in the final
stages for undertaking this project. The suggestion for setting up the
centre was put forward by the World Health Organisation which he said has
comitted to provide necessary equiprnts for it free of cost. The centre
will be established in collaboration with the Pakistan Narcotic Board. The
source said that such a centre would be the first of its kind in Pakistan.
The plan will have to be approved by the Ministry of Health which will study
it thoroughly. The details of the functioning of the Drug Addiction Centre
have been worked out. It is hoped that the Centre would play in identifying

the drug addiction problems and suggest adequate treat-eat. [By Nurun
Nahar] [Text] [Karachi MORNING NW8 in mglish 26 Feb 82 p S]

OVER 5 mums 0P CHARAS SBIZRD-oA raid conducted by the Bartial Law author-
itiea and the police on three bungalows led to the recovery big haul of
charas and liquor in Halir yesterday. Bight persons were also arrested
during the raid. The contraband goods which included more than five naunds
of charas and 208 bottles of liquor worth about Rs 20 40 000 the sources
said. According to reports one Karin had hired three bungalows in the
Boston Race area in Malir where he used to run his narcotic dens. The area
police had arrested two of his narcotic pedlars on Hednesday and charas and
10 bottles of liquor were recovered from then. According to the break-up:
eleven kilos of chares and 39 bottles of liquor were seized and four persons,
Abdul Haheed, Ghulan Sarwar, Rabin Bus and Anwar were hauled up. In another
raid in a house five uunds of chares concealed under the heaps of stones
were seized and two persons shah Hoha-ad and Ferdouse Khan were picked up
from there. In yet another raid two persons, Asher Ali and Saeed Ahmed

were rounded up and a gun along with 16 rounds of cartridges and 169 bottles
of }iquor were seized. [Text] [Karachi mm: saws in English 6 Mar 82

p S
HBROIN SBIZED, THREE HELD—The Federal Investigation Agency (PIA) has smashed
an international gang of narcotics saugglers, consisting mostly of former PIA
employees dismissed under no 52, and recovered about eight kilograms of

fine quality heroin from then. Three persons, Shahid Haqbool, Arif Rare and
Abul Hassen, have been arrested by the police. Shahid and Arif were removed
from the PIA service under um 52 while Abul Hassan is still working in the
PIA. Another person, Nadir Ali Khan Durrani also a dismissed PIA employee,
escaped to London, official sources said. Moreover, three more sbsconders:
Abdul Ghafoor Butt. a forIIer security officer in the PIA; Choudhri Mohamed
Aslsm, a former driver in the PIA; and Mushtaq, a businessman and leader of
the gang are being sought by the federal police. [Excerpt] [(32le20
Karachi DAWN in English 20 Mar 82 p 8 GP]

HEROIN SBIZED-Karachi, 12 March (Staff Reporter)-The Liaquatabad Division
Police arrested two persons today and recovered froa their possession lo kilos
of heroin worth 100 million rupees. According to details, the superintendent
of police. Liaquatabad received information that a large quantity of heroin
had been brought into the area. The police then started surveillance of
suspects. Last night Jsuharabad police found two persons, Master Sultan and
Abdul Bari alis Rais, wandering around in a suspicious manner in the area

of Aisha Hsnzil. They were stopped and searched and 1% kilos of top quality
heroin, worth more than 60 million rupees in the foreign markets, was found
in their possession. According to the police report, Master Sultan lives in
New Karachi and Abdul Bari lives in Al-Azsn. Hester Sultan was said to be a
notorious drug dealer and has been arrested several tines before. The two
accused are being questioned. [Text] [Karachi JAM in Urdu 13 Mar 82 o 121

CHARAS, OPIUH SEIZBD-nlir Abdul Qayyun, District Excise Inspector of Peshawar
raided the house of one Kifayat Khan, son of a railway aployee, and
recovered 14,000 kilogram of charas and 800 kilogram of contraband opium.
The accused was handed over to the local police and further investi tion is
in progress. [Text] [Peshawar mask NAIL in English 4 Mar 82 p 6?.

(30: 5300/5682
TOUGHZR LA" 1'0 CURB RISING PHILIPPINE DRUG ABUSE

Islamabad 1'!!! MUSLIM in English 26 Feb 82 p 7

[Article by Em Ruth Zafra]

WWWW. mm .WWWWW WWWWW
m. .
WW . .

WW WWWMWW .WWWK .3331
max... 3.3%.. 3...... :3
”WWW” m2... 3
W n.WWW... Wm MWWWWWWW. .m.

www.mmm. .. .WMWWW . WWWWWW
WMWWWWW WWW-W WWW WW WWWWW

MtWWMMWW
WWWWWW WWWWWW WWWWWWWWW .WWW
“.mmwﬁ... .33.”.
W.W.W .WW..WW WWWW .W... WWWWWWW

“mm mama...“ “WT 5%”

“mm...“ W... «W.
3. W. 3.. .3... s... 3.... 3......

.m m. m. . «mm . WWWWWW ”Wumwumm MW” .mem WW.
W ummmmmmm? Wm WWW... uwnmmé .mmn. ”WWW

m m. $3.9”. .. www.mmwwx Wuwmmw Wm...“ m
3.33.... 3.. .3... 3. 3... 3...... ....
MWWMWWmom WW “wrmmmmwmmmmm WWWWWwWoWW WWW.”
mm m,” ﬁx mm» mm:

mm Wmummh WMWWMWWWW .mmMumem MMMWWN «MMMWMWMW

MWWWWMW“ mm me-mmmmwmumwmwm“ mun. mmmwmmmmmmmm

.mmmwwmwm Maw www.mm ”rm :3“ wwm ammmwwwm mm”

WWW mmﬁmmm NM: «um «um Wm“ mama“ mm. a. “raw
W“. E;

mem Emmmmwahm. .ﬁ. Wm“ mm

“M E w Em rm” m. a
umwm awn &.m9m% M#M&%
.mwmmmwgmé éaﬁ

mm WWW mm wwwmmau
mmwwmmm WWW“; “mm“? m am. m mm?“
with a Li swap.” h mam

5300/5683
sums

5mm PUSH!!! ms zo-m TERI-Jo: selling .50 north of marijuana three
years ago. a 29-year nan was sentenced yesterday to a mum prison
term of 20 years. Sentenced by the Manila circuit crin nal court for viola-
tion of Section 4. Article I! of the Mlic Act 6425 was Danilo L. 'l'ayson,
of 800 sto. Tones st., Saepaloc, Manila. 3. was also ordered by Judge Aunts
Q. Alconcsl to pay a fine or ”0,000. 'l‘ayson was arrested on Oct. 6, 1978 a:-
ter selling «:0 sticks of narijuana to a nether of the constabulary anti—ner-
cotics unit (cum) who posed as a drug user. His trial, Mover, was deferred
attarhewas ﬁomdtobeadrwdependenthinselfbythedangerousdruqs
board. The board ordered 'l‘ayson's continues“: at the drug rehabilitation cen-
ter in Taqaytay city from m, 1973 to February. 1980. In his decision.
Judge Alconcel said drug pushers are einilar to subversives as both “seek to
destroy the Republic.” ”These are dangerous criminals who are instruental in
the spread of drug addiction.” he said. [Manila mm MY in anglish

6 Mar 82 pp 1, 9)

CSO: 5300/4928

13
u.s. pnoposu. m sun nauc comic-rs opposes
3x170201 Bangkok POST in English 17 Her 82 p 3

[Text] A top narcotics officer yesterday expressed disagreensnt with a
proposal for the exchange of prisoners by certain foreign comtries.
Addressing nenbers of the American (latter of Comoros at a luncheon yester-
day. Secretary-General of the Office of the Narcotics Control Board ((1163).
Pol Haj-Gen Phao Sarasin said: "Drug traffickers are worse than murderers.
They should be kept in jail for a long tine—at least for 20 years becauu
they will never refrain from drug trafficking. They will return to the sane
business r.'.ght after their release."

He also noted that Thailand has nade several attemts to suppress the drug
trade and arrested nany drug smugglers. However, certain comtries still
want those convicted of drug offences back to their comtries. The United
States, Canada and France have proposed prisoner exchange treaties with
Thailand but the issue is still under negotiations.

Gen Phao disclosed that some 140 kilograms of heroin, neatly top-grade

No 4, were seized and 229 people arrested at Don Huang Airpost last year.
Most of the drugs were destined directly or indirectly to Hong Kong, Paris
and Amsterdam, he added. A total of 256 foreigners 28 nationalities were
also arrested last year on drug charges all over the country, Gen Phao said.

Gen Phao said opium crops produced in Thailand this year were a little less
than last year's record of 510 tons because of an musually long rainy season.
He also estinated that opium crops in Burns would total about 500 tons.

He explained that there are seven minority groups engaging in opiun trafficking
along the route stretching from Mae Sai District of Chiang Rai to Mae Hong

Son Province. Host of the trafficking was mder the control of the Shan
lhited Any led by Khun Sa.

Other groups are the Shan State Revolution Amy, Shan State Any Eastern,
Lahu National Liberation Arny, Us National Defence Force and the Kachin
Independence Arny with about 200 sen in each group.

C80: 5300/5680

14
new cmnarmes PLANNED m ANTI-OPIUH mm
nm20212 Bangkok NATIW mum in English 2 Mar 32 p 1

[Text] The gmmt is to revise guidelines for related agencies to
dissuade hilltribesaen from growing opium in the north, a senior government
official said yesterday. National Security Council (NSC) Secretary General
Squadron Leader Praeong Sunsiri said that Prime Minister Pram Tinsulanon

on 15 January set up a connittee to review the government's previous efforts
over the issue.

The comittse, which met for the first time yesterday, assimd the NSC
secretary general to draw up new guidelines and measures for the government
drive against opim plantation in the north.

Prasong said that the meeting discussed problems facing the government in
its efforts to eradicate the remaining poppy fields which totalled about
35,000 rai.

"Various government agencies concerned still face the problem of overlapping
responsibilities without adequate cooperation," he said.

he meeting, chaired by Deputy Prime Hiniter Gen Prachuap Suntharangkun,
also discussed policy and administrative problems which obstructed the task
to weed out opium cultivation in the north.

Prasong did not say when the next meeting of the comittee would take place,
but said that he would complete drafting the new policy and guidelines

"as soon as possible." "I will submit the new plan to the next meeting of
the comittee," said Prasang who is secretary of the comittee.

Other members of the comaittea include Armed Forces Grief-of-Staff Gen Rian
Dithabanchong, National Police Chief Pol Gen Suraphon Glmlaphram, the
director general of the Central Investigation Bureau and Secretary; General
of the Office of the Narcotics Control Board Pol Haj ken Phao Sarasin.

cs0: 5300/5680
noun SA-LED ARMY 'ro smm: mourns
BK120157 Bangkok tumor REVIW in English 12 m: 82 p 6

[Text] Mae Sot, Tak—A minority group leader said yesterday that between
500-700 Shan rebels led by Khun Sa are rallying in an area opposite Mae Ai
District of Chiang Mai in what he believed to be preparations for an attack
on two rival rebel groups.

Lt Col Sao Bseng Earn, who clained to be a representative of the so-called
"shan State Progressive Party," said Khm Sa's targets were tae strongholds
of Us and Lahu minority groups. Both targets are located near Nong Yawno,
a Burmese town opposite Ban Thadon of Pang District, he said.

Lt Col See, who was present during a press conference held near here by
representatives of seven minority groups on Wednesday, told the NATIw that
Khun Sa wanted to capture the two strongholds for his Shan United Army.

The two aforementioned minority groups have a total arnsd strength of about
500 men, he said. "We expect the offensive to start very soon," he said.

Lt Col Sea is also vice president of the National Democratic Prontna united
front binding seven minority groups which are fighting against the govern-en:
in Rangoon.

Bo Hya, who is leader of the Karen National Union, is its president.

Lt Col Sao also clained that Khm Sa, a wanted drug kingpin who fled a
recent nilitary offensive by the Thai Government, was also believed to be
present in the area [where] his forces were rallying.

They said Khun Sa was preparing to strike at four hilltribe groups which he

accused of supporting the recent Thai Government's offensive against him
at Ban Kin Tack in Chiang Rai.

080: 5300/5680

16
BRIEFS

EEROIN SMUGGLER To 11.8. ARRESTEb-A tour guide was arrested yesterday morning
at Don Huang Airport and charged with attenpting to smuggle 3 kilograms

of No lo first grade heroin out of the comtry. Chap Hongdzaturaphah, 31, told
the lbtropolitan Narcotics {hit (WU) police that he was only to deliver the
drugs to a Thai, whom he identified only as 'Leh' in Dallas, Texas. Ewever,
MU police said they believed diup was a medaer of a Thai drugs gang operating
in the United States and his passport showed that he entered the United
States may times before. Cyp was arrested while about to board a Thai
international flight to the United States yesterday morning. The drugs

were found in secret compartments at the bottom of the two suitcases he was
carrying. He was initially detained at the Crimes Suppression Division on
charges of possessing the drugs with intent to sell and attempted smuggling.
[Text] [31120303 Bangkok POST in English 11 Mar 82 p 3]

OPIUH SMmcLED TRON LAOS SEIZED—Loein‘lwo men were arrested yesterday in
Pak Chom District of this northeastern province after smuggling in 22 kilo-
grames of raw opium from Laos, police reported. Police said that they were
informed by Deputy Governor Hangkon Thongsuwan the! here would be opium
smuggled across the border from Laos to be delivered to a drug dealer in Ban
Nakhor Village of Teﬂon Pak atom yesterday. After being informed, a team of
Pat: Chom police, led by Chief Inspector Pol Lt-Col Prasoet Prieuwsnit, waited
in the village, police said. Police approached two men they saw pushing

a motorcycle and a wheelcsrt along a trial and they fomd 22.2 kilograms

of raw opium wrapped in newspapers in their wheelcart, police said. Arrested
were Hirat Halssi. 25, and Gwen Ratwongsa, who were later charged with
possessing drugs with intent to sell. They were detained in Pak 010m police
station, police added. [Text] [31(120303 Bangkok HORLD in English 10 Mar 82
P 3]

HONG KONG CHINESE SHUGGLER JAILED—A Bong Kong aminese man was yesterday
sentenced to 25 years in jail by the criminal court after being convicted

of possessing heroin for sale and attempting to snuggle the drug abroad.

(hay Wing-cho, 21, was arrested at Don Hung Airport on 110 November last year
as he was about to board a Lufthansa plane for West Germany; police found

405 grammes of heroin in a cardboard box lywss carrying. [Text] [31(190126
Bangkok POST in English 17 Her 82 p 3]

l7
SOLDIERS CHARGED WITH CHEMICAL POSSESSION—Chiang Mei-4‘10 soldiers attached
to the Defence Energy Department in Fang District were arrested yesterday and
charged with illegal possession of 182 kilograms of ascetic mhydrideu

a chemical used in heroin processing. At 11 an officials of the Office of
the Narcotics Control Board (ONQ), customs and Chiang Dao police intercepted
a pick-up truck driven by Chief Warrant Officer Thongsuk Bmprasoet and
Sargent Thongkham Hangphan at Chiang Dao checkpoint. Inside the truck

the officials reportedly mcovered five plastic bags containing the chenical.
It is not yet known where the two soldiers were heading. Last year the ONCB
declared districts bordering the Burmese and Malaysian borders as chemical free
zones. Four chenicals that are used in heroin refining—including ascetic
anhydride and ascetic chloride-were forbidden in those areas. Thongsuk and
Thongkham were last night detained at (ﬁxing Dao police station for further
questioning. [Text] [M90126 Bangkok POST in English 17 Mar 82 p 3]

DRUGS SEIZBD IN NORTH—Chiang Mai—About 260 kg of narcotics, including about
26 kg of heroin, has been seized here during the past 5 months, a senior
police official reported yesterday. Chimg Mai Plice Grief Pol Col Kasem
Sukphong said police seized about 26 kg of heroin, about 2103 kg of raw opiu-
and 1,525 litres chemical liquid needed for the refining of opium into
heroin during the period. Thirty-six persons were also arrested in connec-
tion with the seized narcotics during the period between 1 October last year
and 9 March, according to the provincial police chief. He admitted that the
seized narcotics was only "the tip of an iceberg." "A relatively large amount
of heroin has been smuggled out to foreign countries," he said. [Text]
[81(190126 Bangkok NATIW REVIEH in English 16 Mar 82 p 6]

ANTIDRUG FIGHTING IN SOUTH-dist Yai—Anti—narcotics force in this consercial
town is finding ways to increase the number of personnel and introduce new
equipment to fight against the increasing drug flow in thesouth. Pol Haj
Prssit Khlaimuk, a police officer directly in charge of the anti-narcotic
work here said ﬂat Yai had become one of the biggest drug trafficking centres.
He said the Office of the Narcotic Control Board (ONCE) was considering
increasing the size of the anti-narcotic force here to cope with the situa-
tion. An informed source said there were about five to six major drug
suppliers here but because of the consistent suppression by government
authorities ghey had been keeping a very low profile recently. [Text]
[BK190126 Bangkok NATION REVIEW in English 17 Mar 82 p 3]

HARIHUANA SBIZED IN GLASS FACTORY--Samutprakan—Hore than 3 tons of marihnana
was seized yesterday along with a number of guns and alllunition from a glass
tube factory in this provincial town about 25 kilometres from Bangkok,

police reported. Three men, including the factory owner, were arrested.
Police said a combined force of crime suppression division policemn and
customs officials raided the U.A.A. glass factory following a tipoff that

the factory had been exporting narihuana. The codained teen said they found
more than 3 tons of marihuana pressed into sticks and packed into cartons
inside the factory. 'Nenty items of equipment used in pressing and packing
marihuana, two Colt .375 pistols, a .38 revolver, a baretta 6. 35 handgm and
more than 300 cartridges were also found there, police said. The three
arrested men were identified by police as Adun Siwstthana, 310, the owner of
the factory, and two of his workers, Sonphong Philat, 32, and Sawst U-arin,
35. Police said Adun first claimed that the nsrihuana belonged to one of

his friends but later admitted owning it. He also admitted owning the guns
which he said were used to practice shooting, police added. [Text] [Bangkok
POST in English 9 Mar 82 p 5]

080: 5300/5680 18
sums

COCAINE SEIZBD—Cocaine worth $128.75 million was found aboard a twin-
engine Cessna 604 that landed at Bimini yesterday. The incident happened
when a U.s. custoas surveillance plane spotted the twin-engine Cessna
flying to Florida from the Bahama, an Associated Press report said. The
plane was followed to Lake Okeechobee where it began to circle looking
for its landing site. We suspect that the waiting off-loading crew
spotted our plane and signalled the Cessna by radio," said Jim Dingfelder
of the u.s. Customs. After that the Cessna turned around and flew towards
Bimini where the U.S. Coast Guard said it landed. The U.S. Coast Guard
saw two people run into the woods. They contacted the drug enforcement
agency who notified the local Bahamian authorities, said AP. The local
police and customs searched the plane and found 515 pounds of cocaine

on board-worth an estimated $128.75 million on the open market. The
plane was impounded and the cocaine flown to Nassau this afternoon.
[Text] [P1161230 Nassau TEE TRIBUNE in English 11 Mar 82 p 1)

C80: 5300/22 34
UN HELP TO FIGHT NARCOTICS REQUESTED
PY120037 La Paz El. DIARIO in Spanish 13 Feb 82 p 1

[Text] United Nations, 12 Feb (DPA)—'l‘he Bolivian albassador to the United
Nations in New York, Fernando Ortiz de Sana, today called on the governments
of the great powers to help his country combat drug traffic.

Ortiz de San: said that "there are some developing countries in the Middle
East, Asia and Latin America which have the misfortune to produce, due to
natural conditions, some of the basic material for making opium, cocaine and
other drugs.

"'lhis involves countries lacking in major resources," he continued, "but,

in contrast, it is the large urban centers of the rich countries that are the
sites of the drug markets, and it is from them that the Mafia collect the
billions of dollars with which it is closing the circle of crime, corrupting
governments and violating borders in order to promote this atrocious type of
business."

The diplomat remarked that if the international community wants to wage an
effective battle against "this moor of modern society, drug addition"
there is no doubt that the prosperous nations will have to provide the
necessary resources.

"We cannot do it," Ortiz de San: added. He said that "our comtries are
passing stiff laws against the clandestine manufacture and against the
illicit trafficking in drugs, and we are taking the most extreme customs
measures."

‘lhe ambassador also said that he was not asking a cent for Bolivia, but in
order to do away with the evil that does not recognize borders.

Ortiz de San: met late yesterday with the UN secretary general.

(30: 5300/2232

20
ANTIDRUG OFFICIAL on PROGRESS OF CAMPAIGN
”051234 La Paz Radio Illimani Network in Spanish 1100 GMT 3 Mar 82

[Text] Col Raul Gonzalez Ferry, director general of the National Council

for Struggle Against Drug Trafficking, has regretted that a group of peasants
in the Yapacani area has defied the laws which have been dictated for the sole
purpose of fighting the manufacture and trafficking of dangerous drugs.
Colonel (Gonzalez Perry) said that this situation is taming concern in the
organization under his leadership, adding that the breakers of the law will
be punished for their activities, since Yepecani is not an area that
traditionally produces coca leaves.

The executive in charge of the branch carrying out the struggle against this
evil, against which the government has undertaken a strong canpaign, stated
that the funds available to his organization will always rennin insufficient.
taking into account the large anomt of money at the disposal of drug
traffickers in the country.

He thaz said that the National Council for Struggle Against Drug Trafficking
is now engaged in the implementation of the program to replace coca planta-
tions, a basic stage in the enterprise of eradicating cocaine manufacturing.
He stated that this program is part of a developmt program which should be
supported by international organizations, as was said some tine ago. Colonel
(Gonzalez Perry) said that the preparation of the program was well mderway
and that its impleeentetion can be foreseen within the next 2 or 3 months.

He also confined recent reports by his office about an incident which had
taken place between drug repression personnel and peasants at (Ipiganta), a
place in Cochabanba Department.

(30: 5300/2232

21
PRESIIENTIAL SECRETARY DISCUSSES DRUG TRAFFIC
W190117 Paris APP in Spanish 0220 GMT 12 Mar 82

[Text] La Par, 11 Mar (AFP)--Juan Carlos mran, minister secretary of the
presidency, said here today that the United States has cosmlete information
about the problem of drug traffic in Bolivia and is seriously concerned over
its expansion.

Duran received the visit of 0.8. Massador Edwin Corr. who was accompanied
by Dominick Di Carlo, assistant secretary of state for international narcotics
matters. The minister secretary said that the government is highly concerned
about carrying out a massive campaign to fight this international scourge,
drug traffic.

In a brief statement Ambassador Corr said: He held a very frank and open
exchange of opinions on the problems of the drug traffic.

In answer to a question about the state of the fight against cocaine
trafficking, Duran indicated that although there has been no great progress,
several cases have been sent to the regular courts; the National Directorate
for the Control of Dangerous Stbstances has been reorganized; coordinated
work with the U.S. Drug Enforcement Agency (DEA) is being carried out; and
many cocaine factories have been destroyed.

He added that some progress has been made in the legal field with the approval
of a law on dangerous substances and drugs and that progress has been made

in the substitution for coca cultivation. In this regard, several experts
have indicated that Bolivia needs about $5 million to bring to completion the
substitution of crops for cocaine.

Duran said that Bolivia's international image on matters of drug traffic is
really bad; therefore everyone should cooperate in the struggle against the
drug traffickers.

Duran said that during his conversations with Di Carlo, the 0.8. official
said that there are possibilities of increasing international cooperation in
the antidrug campaign. as also indicated that the 0.5. Government has not
posed any conditions for this aid. he added that the 0.8. Government is
concerned at a possible increase of this illegal activity and that this should
not only be a concern of the lhited States but also of Bolivia.

In conclusion, he said that the government, through the Office for the
Struggle Against Drug Traffic, is studying the return of the armed forces
to the campaign against this illegal activity.

CSO: 5300/2232 22
BRIEFS

OOCAINE TRAPPICKBR 0N TRIAIr-La Par, 10 Mar (AFP)-It was reported here today
that Oberto Suarez Gomez, who is accused of being the main drug trafficker
in Bolivia, was included in a tidal opened at the request of the district
prosecutor. Suarez, whose children and wife have been detained in Geneva,
Switzerland for traveling with forged passports, is considered the most
important contact of the international cocaine Mafia in Bolivia. There are
11 other persons included in that trial. The United States has made clear
to the Bolivian Government that in order to completely normalise diplomatic
and economic relations, the traffic of cocaine must be eradicated from the
country. According to press ruors, Suarez is in Bolivia and he strolls
the streets with impunity. It is even said that he ha a fleet of airplanes
which allows his to move without any difficulty in the eastern and wooded
region of the cointry. It is presused that once all legal requirements are
fulfilled, the Foreign Ministry will request the extradition of the med>ers
of Suarez' family to face trial. [Text] (”171935 Paris APP in Spanish
2327 GMT 10 Mar 82]

DRUG TRAFFchmG—The Bolivia and U.S. Governments have expressed great
concern over the international scourge of drug trafficking and their intention
to combat it. Juan Carlos Durand, the presidential secretary general and
[acting] information ministery, made this statement at the end of a meeting
that U.S. Embassy officials held with President Torrelio. He said that both
parties expressed a desire to start a massive carpaign to ooabat this
international scourge md to eradicate it through joint undertakings. Durand,
who said that the struggle against drug trafficking has achieved significant
progress in the past 6 months, noted a series of laws and measures that have
been put in force in this regard. At the meeting that President Torrelio
held with U.S. Ambassador Edwin Corr, U.S. Assistant Secretary of State for
International Narcotics Hatters Dominick Di Carlop and Planning Chief

(Paul Glosow) they discussed this issue in detail, in addition to the need
for greater international cooperation to carry out a more effective campaign
against drug trafficking. [Text] (”121513 La Paz Radio Illimani Network

in Spanish 1100 GMT 12 Mar 82]

ANTIDRUG PBBSQINBL DISMISSAL-4A Par, 26 Feb (TBLAMMApproximstely 90 percent
of the personnel of the Cochabawa brmch of the Bureau for the Control of
Dangerous Drugs have been discharged for bullying peasants of the Chapare
area, according to an announcement made by prefect, Lt Col Guido Sandoval
Zanhrana. According to reports stbmitted by the peasants, the agents

23
indulged in excesses under the pretext of controlling cocaine traffic. They
confiscated Earn products and money from peasants of this department. the third
most important of the country. he prefect said that the' crime perpetrated
by the agents will not go unpunished and added that an investigation will be
held in order to conpensate the relatives of peasants who were killed during

a clash which cans about as a reaction to the bullying of the agents. The
prefect also revealed that 10 agents involved in various incidents are

under arrest. [Text] [Bumos Aires TELAH in Spanish 1930 err 26 Feb 82]

COCAINE FACTORY DISCOVERED—The Ranger Regiment last Sunday discovered a
clandestine cocaine factory in Monte Cristo, 110 kn from Santa Cruz. It has
been reported that 30 persons, who were not identified, were arrested and that
5!. kg of cocaine was seized. [PY151829 La Paz Radio Illinsni Network in
Spanish 1700 (31'1“ 15 Mar 82]

ARGENTINE-BOLIVIA" BORDER CLASﬁ--Salta (DYN)-A gun battle between a border
guard patrol and a group of smugglers ended in the death of one of the

latter, the arrest of 10 others and a haul of 6 kilos of cocaine and about
1,000 kilos of coca leaves in 20 sacks, border Iguard sources reported yesterday.
The clash took place early yesterday morning in Pocitos, a dense tropical
forest area on the border with Bolivia, and the latter were waiting for their
prey as a result of a tipoff from a Spaniard, who was arrested a week ago but
whose name was not given. [Text] [Bums Aires HERALD in English 18 Mar 82

P 11]

CSO: 5300/2232

\

210
VESSEL, CW OF FOUR. 2 TONS OF MARIJUANA 8312!!)

Kingston 135 DAILY CLEANER in English 26 Feb 82 'p 15

[Photo Caption]

[Text] Gm BOAT: this in the man. which was aeized by the coast guard

oftahore 'rrelawny on triday, rebruary 12. The (renal contained 4.000 lb. of
conpreased ganja with an eatinated atreet value of acne 08 $2-nillion on the

international Iarket. Three hearicane and a Jamaican were arrested and char-
ged with poaaaaaion or ganja, trafficking ganja and attempting to export ganja.
The three Americana who pleaded guilty to the ohargea were fined a total of
$11,500 each or an alternative antenna of three years. in the Resident nagia-

trete'e Court at Clark's Mn on February 15. the Juaican waa remanded in
custody to reappear in Court at a later date. the coast guard meal which
intercepted the “Halcyon" in in background.

(:80: 5300/7534

25
RESULTS OF JANUARX-FBBRDARY ANTIDRDG CAMPAIGN IN ZONE 6
Cu11acan EL SOL DE SINALOA in Spanish 3 Mar 82 p 5

[Text] It was during the first 2 nonths of this year that the greatest activity
was evident in the battle against drug trafficking, fro: the standpoint of the
destruction of plantations by fuligation; because it was that that tine that
the largest nunber of then was detected, possibly due to the fact that the
rain had by then ended and the dry season was still far off.

In making the foregoing statement, Hector Aviles Castillr, coordinator for
Zone 5 of the pemnent campaign against drug trafficking established on a
national level by the Office of the Attorney General of the Republic, said

that a progran is being devised, to be started within the next few days, which
is ained at intensifying the locating of plantations by all possible means, and
ut destroying then i-ediately.

He explained that the statistics that have been kept on this subject indicate
that the period of the greatest activity consists of the month of February;
noting that. this year, although this does not indicate that the situation has
become difficult, there was a considerable increase in the areas planted with
poppies in particular.

And, to corroborate his claim, he gave us the following figures:

January Harihuana and Poppies (Plantations)

1977 2,195 6,796
1978 72 2,961
1979 2 1,556
1980 93 863
1981 170 1,219
1982 22 1,666

February Harihuana and Poppies (Plantations)

1977 218 11,357
1978 211 3.832
1979 110 1,529
1980 26 1,260
1981 #0 2,502
1982 6 2,035

26
In this connection. Avilea Castillo explained that the fleet of six funigating
helicopters, five of which are for backup, with a anall airplane, will be
increased by four additional craft for fumigation; and that the reconnaissance
flights will also be increased, so as to have more potential for acting to
prevent harvests fron being Iade.

Returning to the statistics, the Zone 6 coordinator said that, during 1980,
1,676 poppy plantations were located, as were 236 narihuana plantations; while
last year the totals were 3,911 poppy and 877 narihuana plantations.

February Results

In cos-eating on the activities carried out last nonth, he noted that 67 persons
had been arrested, from when three long-barreled weapons and one ahort-barreled
weapon, plus seven useful cartridges, were seized, two clandestine laboratories
were discovered and four vehicles were confiscated. A total of 205 kilograms
and 23 grams of nerihuana, and 65 grams of poppy seed, were seized. As for

opiun gun, the amount found in the possession of those arrested was 2 kilograns
and 65 grans, and the heroin totaled 193 gram.

2909
C80: 5330/69

27
POPPY PLANTATIOIIS, CLANDBSTINB LABORATORY DISCOVERED
Culiacan BL 80!. DP. SINALOA in Spanish 21 Feb 82 p ’0

[Text] The investigations conducted by the Federal Judicial Police led them
to arrest Ricardo Ochoa Rojas and Nicolas Carranza Felix, who had been engaged
in growing poppies, an assignment given then by Severiano. Gutierrez Armenta,
who was also arrested subsequently.

According to reports obtained by 31. $01. DE SINALOA, the first two individuals
were reported by telephone, and on 13 February members of the policy entity
went to the Los Naranjos farm, in the township of Imala, where they were
located and captured.

During the course of the interrogation, the subjects in custody stated that.
on a site known as "La Quebrada del Rincon" in the same township, there was
a plantation. Upon going there, they indicated exactly the location. on 75
square meters, of plants already 1.0 centimeters tall, scattered at the rate
of six per square neter.

They also admitted that. on Isla Tacuiloli, which is located between the Los
Naranjos far- and the Bumaya River. there was another plantation on an expanse
of 5,000 square meters, with plants 102 centimeters tall, distributed in the
same proportion as on the former one. Both plantations were razed by the
Judicial Police.

In the sane statements. they noted that Gutierrez Armento had given them a
bottle containing poppy seed, and that they had agreed to plant it, so that
the product obtained could be later divided among the three of them.

It was on 17 February that Gutierrez Armenta was arrested, while traveling
along the International Highway, at the headquarters of the Ninth Military
Zone, in a red Datsun pickup truck with license plates TNK-63, showing the
well-known spiders.

Upon being interrogated. this person provided information that made it
possible to discover a clandestine laboratory located on the Agua Zarca
farm. The investigators went there and collected all the iaplements that
were on the premises.

2909

C50: 5330/71

28
SEIZURE AND nsmucnou 0? WA IN SONORA REPORTED

Hermosillo EL MARC-AL in Spanish 2 Her 82 Soc D p 6

[Text] Nogales, Sonora, l March-1he health authorities burned 200 kilograms
of narihuane valued at 1.5 million pesos which was turned over by the Federal
Public Ministry agency with'headquarters on this border.

The burning of the grass took place at 1200 hours on the grounds of the Health
Center, in the presence of its director, Dr Luis Cervantes Garcia; the admin-
istretor, Roberto Sanders Neva; the secretary of the institution; and Pbderal
Judicial Police agents who guarded the bags containing the 200 kilograas of
narihuana.

According to inforaation provided by Dr Cervantes Garcia, the injurious grass
was confiscated fro: the presuaed drug traffickers Enrique Celaya Suarez, Juan
Alvaro Marquez Nunez and Jesus Regalado, in connection with investigative action
on the part of the Federal Police entity's officers.

He renarked that the asrihuana. which was presuasbly to be aarketed in the
United States by its owners, was seized in the residence of one of the letter
in the Loans de Nogsles housing develop-eat in this town.

It was announced that those presuaed responsible were turned over to the Pede-
ral Public Ministry agency so that the charges stealing from the illegal busi-
ness night be brought against then, according to law.

The burning of the 200 kilograls today is the second occasion when grass
seized by the Federal Judicial Police has been burned thus far this year;

the first tine involving 63 kilograas confiscated in the town of Agua Prieta,
according to Cervantes Garcia.

Herihuana Seized in Ciudad Obregon

Ciudad Obregon, Sonora, l March--Today, the Federal Judicial Police confiscated
350 grams of narihuans in a washing and lubricating shop owned by Luis Carlos
Borboa, aged 23.

After questioning, Borboa admitted that he had turned over an equal amount to
an individual named Jose Luis Galaviz, aged 32, and another nsned heriberto
Rodriguez Urangs, aged 60, who were to be responsible for selling it. The
grass distributors attespted to obtain 26,000 pesos. All three were held in
cells, so as to ascertain where they had been procuring the product.

2909

cso: 5330/69 29
BRIEFS

DRUG RINGLEADBR “Pm-Luis Garcia Madrid. the head of the drug trafficking
ring broken up yesterday by agents of the Federal Security Office. who seized

a huge drug shipaent, has been caught. he was overwhelned and about to be
riddled with bullets on the site where he was apprehended. The least that

can happen to bin is to be held and, after the trial brought against him, be
"confined" behind bars for aany years. reportedly because, despite protection,
his participation and liability in these and other actions has been fully
confirmed. This individual was protected against acts of the Police Inspector‘s
Office, the State Judicial Police, the Prelininary Investigations Department.
and both the assistant and assigned agent of the Federal Public Ministry, but
not against the Federal Police. much less the Security Office. And, even if

he obtained this protection and showed us the docth indicating the protection,
we would have detained his, as we shall do at the first slip [that occurs, the: is,
unless he has already escaped. to Sinaloa, where that type of individual goes

to take shelter. "Bl Gordo" as he is also called, arranged for protection in
his behalf and that of his accoaplices, Gilberto Ontiveros Lucero, Magda Alicia
Garcia Madrid and Bertha Alicia Mano: Guerrero. [Text] [Ciudad Juarez 31.
W20 in Spanish 22 Feb 82 Sec 5 p 2] 2909

“£th DISTRIBUTOR ARRESTED—Rafael Amdor Valdez was arrested by were of

the Federal Judicial Police as a result of the investigations conducted by

that entity to locate the person responsible for distributing heroin along the
addicts in the state, which proved that this individual was one of the suppliers
of that drug. After being questioned. the subject in custody said that he had
actually been engaged in selling drugs to anyone who requested then. At the
tine of his arrest. he had in his possession seven snall alunim- foil envelopes
containing a total of 8 gram of heroin. The subject explained that he had been,
operating in this activity for sons tile, and gave the nsaes of his custoaers,
whoa he clained to know quite well. because they are complete addicts. The
Federal Judicial Police investigation is continuing, because an attth is
being aade to establish the identity of those engaged in aarketing the drug.

so as to ascertain its origin. and arrest those guilty of that illegal activity.
Meanwhile, according to the Federal Judicial Police, this individual will be
turned over to the agent of the Federal Public Ministry for whatever crimes
against health nay be charged to his, beginning with the possession and distri-
bution of drug products. [Text] [Culiacan BI. 80!. DB SINADOA in Spanish 22 Feb 82
p 8] 2909
DRUGS, VEAPONS SEIZEm-Ciudad Juares, Chihuahua, 19 February (Emmy-Agents
of the Federal Security Office, under orders from Condr Ramon Rodriguez,

seized 1.600 kilograms of narihuana, three kilogram of cocaine, sons high-
powered weapons and two drug traffickers. After a brief shooting confrontation,
they captured the drug traffickers Adolfo Quinonea Avila and his nephew,

Eduardo Vargas Quinones. Escaping than was Luis "Gordo" Garcia Madrid, the
right-hand nan of Bonifacio ”Bani" Contreras, who is currently serving a 7-year
tern in the local prison for the sane cries. The operation, which was organised
in Mexico City by Condr niguel Alden del Carmen, took place at No 5 Sierra del
Carmen Street, in the El Grenjero housing develop-ant located at kilonster 18 of
the Pan-American highway. [Text] [Piedree liegrae BL DIARIO DB PIEDMS NBGMS in
Spanish 20 Feb 82 pp 1, 2] 2909

JAIL OFFICIALS ACQU‘ITTED—The judge of the first instance in penal proceedings,
Hector Pablo Aguilar Osune, reported to KL MARIO e confirustion of the
decision for acquittal which arrived in that court yesterday fron the State
Superior Court of Justice. Fron Saltillo came the confirmation of the decision
for acquittal of the individuals tried for escape of prisoners, nansly. Guade-
lupe Martinez Ramos, who was serving as deputy warden of the jail at the tine
of the escape, and Doningo Vasquez llajsra, who holds the seas position; as
well as for the jail guards at the ties, Antonio Roses and Francisco Ramirez,
both of when were tried for escape of prisoners. The incidents occurred over
a year ago in this town. when the drug trafficker Ruben Fonseca succeeded in
fleeing during that escape. Other inmates also escaped at the tine through a
tunnel that they had made in plenty of time. They left free a side of the jail,
and it was in cell masher 9 that the tunnel was sealed. Yesterday, they were
notified of the confirnation of the decision for acquittal by the Superior
Court of Justice in Saltillo, Coehuile, which had been issued than by the judge
of the first instance in penal proceedings, hector Pablo Aguilar Osune, in this

town. [Text] [Piedres legres BL MARIO DB PIKDRAS NBCRAS in Spanish 10 Feb 82
Sec D p lo) 2909

mom SEIZBD—A heavy blow was dealt to the organized drug traffic yesterday,
when Federal Judicial Police forces seized 2 kilong of pure heroin with a
black market value of 10 million pesos, which was confiscated at the Health
Station located opposite the town of Benjaein Bill, Sonora. It was in the
fender of a Ford sedan driven by Mr Norberto Contreras Moreno that the agents
found the drugs, which had cone fron the state of Puebla and were bound for
the city of boa Angelee, California. The agent of the Federal Public Ministry,
Ernesto Avila Triana, showed three plastic containers, one of which held the
heroin concentrate which, according to the individual under arrest, was to

be nixed with other drugs and then sold. Avila Triana said that the campaign
against drug trafficking in Sonora is a permanent canpaign handled by Jaron
Juarez Jinenez, which is carried out by means of close surveillance on the
highways, in the cultivation areas and in the town itself, action which is
performed by nenbers of this police entity with the aid of trained dogs
called "Fritz“ and helicopters. [Text] [Bereoaillo EL MARCIAL in Spanish

to Mar 82 Sec A p 5] 2909

31
HARIHUANA FIELDS DBSTIDYED—-Gualuchil, Sin., 2 Marthe-Poppy and narihuana
fields were destroyed this past Pebruary by letters of the Fourth Infantry
Battalion. The planted fields were in the nountain range between the munici-
palities of Badiraguato and Hoeorito, in small areas Where corn was also planted.
Lieutenant Colonel Jose Beltran Antuna, deputy colander of the above nentioned
battalion. explained that 126 drug plantations were destroyed, but that it had
not been possible to arrest those who had planted the fields. [3y Rosario
Oropeza] {Text} [brine City 2x13315109. in Spanish 3 Mar 82 p 36-A] 8255 '

0.8. DRUG TRAPPIGLERS CAPTURBD—A 00-6 aircraft loaded with 6 tons of
marijuana crashed today while trying to make an emergency landing on the
Pan-American Highway, kilometer 26, southeast of Ciudad Juarez, Chihuahua.
Its occupants, U.S. citzens John Patrick Donahue and Brand Mayer Russel and

Julian Noriega Junior, a Colombian, were captured by state and federal
authorities. The trio confessed they had obtained the drug in Colombia and

were transporting it to the [1.8. black market. [M71038 Mexico City
NOTIHEX in Spanish 2225 GMT 15 Mar 82]

cso: 5300/2233

32
MARIJUANA 83mm A'r AmPOluk-‘No aura large suit cases 0: marijuana estimated
at $150,000 were Monday intercepted by the Joint security Forces of the Roberts
International Airport (an). The Oomander of the Joint Security l'orce at an,
Colonel Daniel Doe said that the luggage which arrived on board a Swiss Air
flight had been turned over to the ministry of Defense for disposition. Col.
Doe also stated that since the inception of the April 12 Revolution, more than
100 cases of drugs estimated at several nillion dollars have been seized and
turned over to the Ministry of Detense. Speaking in an interview Tuesday,

001. Doe said that the Joint Security Force is working assidiously to protect
and secure the "first international gate“ as well as to provide good relation-
ships for inconing and outgoing passengers. [Encerptl [lbnrovia DAILY 03m
in English 25 Peb 82 p 3]

C50: 5 300/5677

33
MINISTER T0 NORDIC COUNCIL: CHRISTIANIA DRUGS T0 33 STOPPED
0r Hill Close Down 'Pree City'
Stockholm DAGENS NYHETBR in Swedish 5 Mar 82 p 1

[Text] The Danish 'free city' Christiania will be
closed if hashish sales there do not stop. Danish
Minister of Justice Ole Espersen made this promise

at the meeting of the Nordic Council in Helsinki on
Wednesday.

In this way the Danes hope to put an end to the so-called hashish affair
which has disturbed the activities of the council for several days. The
main character. Danish Hember of Parliament Ole Henriksen, made a personal
apology on Wednesday. This was said in a written statement in which he
apologized and said that he regretted the incident.

Lively Debate in Helsinki on Drugs
Stockholm DAGBNS NYHETBR in Swedish 5 Mar 82 p 6
[Article by DH correspondent Kaa Eneberg]

[Text] Helsinki, Thursday-The debate in the Nordic
Council on Thursday became a lively demonstration of
Sweden's and Denmark's different views on hashish use
in general. and the 'free city' of Christiania in
Copenhagen in particular.

Danish HP ole Henriksen was a silent listener to the debate in the Finnish
Parliament. He created sensational headlines by smuggling hashish to the
Helsinki session, and in much of the media this has overshadowed the real
work of the council. The smuggling was intended to show that hashish can
be obtained at other places besides Christiania. He had purchased it in
Stockholm.

36
Ole Nenriksen had originally expected to speak during the debate, but was
forbidden to do so, probably by his own delegation. Many of them protested
his actions. Bis cause in the debate was carried by Margaret Auken. a
fellow member of the Socialist People's Party.

Hypocrisy

She and several other Danish speakers called the strong Swedish criticism
of the 'free city' hypocrisy.

”The hard drugs which create criminal conditions in other parts of Copenhagen
are not available there. But in Stockholm you only have to look out the
window at Sergels Torg to see hard drugs traded."

This was said by Bernhard Tastesen. Danish social democrat. Ne. together
with Auken, protested a proposal presented by Rune Gustavsaon (Center Party),
among others. that the council should continue actively to work for all non-
medicinal drugs to be prohibited in the Nordic countries. The proposal was
approved despite seven negative Danish votes.

Rune Gustavsson spoke in favor of preventive measures and more strict super-
vision. At the same time he said that he was not advocating more severe

punishment. The Nordic countries have agreed on a 10-year maximum punish-
ment 0

Maximum Punishment

But Norwegian Jo Benkow (Conservative Party) and Asbjorn Naugstvedt (Chris-
tian People's Party) did. Haugstvedt said that he favored the Norwegian
call for an increase of the maximum punishment from 10 to 21 years. Jo
Benkow said that the Nordic countries should use all available means—-pre—
ventive measures, more police activity and greater punishment-to make it
unprofitable for the international drug sharks to operate here. He said
that increasing the punishment would have a deterrent effect.

Danish Minister of Justice Ole Espersen (Social Democratic Party) argued
with Gabriel Romanus about Christiania. This happened after Romanus spoke
positively about Denmark's apparently demonstrating a greater understanding
of the Swedish criticism.

"Our view on these questions has not changed at all," said Bapersen, and he
emphasized that the Danish government regards hashish as a drug.

In a Danish newspaper interview recently Anker Jorgensen was quoted as de-
nying that.
Danish MP Smuggled Nashieh to Meeting
Stockholm DAGENS NYNBTER in Swedish 5 Mar 82 p 6

[Text] Police Chief Hans Bolmer of Stockholm has started an investigation

to clarify the hashish affair involving the Danish MP Ole Henriksen at the
Nordic Council in Helsinki. Henriksen risks prosecution in Sweden for his
conspicuous possession of hashish, and is suspected of a narcotics offense.

On Thursday Holmer sent a letter to his Danish counterpart and reported his
suspicions against Henriksen. He requested the Copenhagen police to ques-
tion Henriksen about his purchase of hashish at Sergels Torg.

Henriksen purchased some hashish in Stockholm, and exhibited it at the
start of the Nordic Council meeting in Helsinki. He wanted to demonstrate

that hashish could be purchased at other places besides Christiania in
Copenhagen.

Paper Comments on Nordic Narcotics
Stockholm DAGENS NYHETER in Swedish 5 Mar 82 p 2
[Editorial by SN: "Narcotics in Nordic Countries]

[Text] By a vote of 64 to 8 the Nordic Council on Thursday approved a pro-
posal for a more strict narcotics policy in the Nordic countries. The
governments were urged, among other things. to "work for a more uniform
judicial system." But this means, above all, that the Danes must tighten
up their practices when it comes to possession of small amounts of drugs.

This can be compared to a statement by the Nordic Council of Ministers in
Stockholm on 19 February. It said that it is unacceptable that "within
some areas of the Nordic countries it is easier to obtain drugs than it is
within other areas of the Nordic countries." The area alluded to is ob-
viously Christiania in Copenhagen.

Has the Danish government therefore been impressed by the Nordic criticism?
The debate in Helsinki did not give a clear indication. Danish Minister of
Justice Ole Espersen said that the criticism of Denmark resulted from the
debate in Denmark several years ago over the legalizing of hashish. He
said that the authorities are doing everything that can reasonably be ex-

pected to prevent the sale of drugs, even in Christiania. The police made
several hundred hashish seizures there in 1981.

But it is obvious that the authorities in Denmark are doing too little, and
that the relative passivity has something to do with the Danish attitude
that some kinds of drugs are more acceptable than they are in the other
Nordic countries. Danish Prime Minister Anksr Jorgensen said recently in a

newspaper interview that "according to Danish opinion, hashish is not a nar-
cotic."
Even though the Danish govern-eat declared itself to be entirely in agree-
ment with the other Nordic goveruents at the neetings in Stockholm and
Helsinki. there is an undeniable difference in attitudes. This is unfor-
tunate. since Demark lies across the road to the other Nordic countries.
and its input in the fight against drugs is indispensable.

Authorities in southern Sweden are disturbed over what is going on in
Copenhagen. The Social Services ministration in Hallo points out the
differences in attitude on the two sides of The Sound. In Copenhagen a
possessor of up to 100 grams of hashish is sometimes released with only a
warning, while in Seeden he would normally be indicted and punished.

The Social Services Administration has written that "70-80 percent of the
inhabitants of Christiania work at dealing hashish and related crines."
Host of the hashish in Halno cones frol Oopenhagen. and ”it is our inprea-
sion and that of our police that the availability of hashish on both sides
of The Sound has never been greater than it is now."

The Nordic Council has pointed out the problem. It remains necessary to do
sonething about it.

9287
050: 5300/2112

37
PAPER SEES SIGNS OF NEH FIRHNBSS TOWARD CHRISTIANIA. 'PRBB CITY'
Copenhagen BERLINGSKE TIDENDE in Danish ll Her 82 p 10
[Bditoriah "Oxristianie's Puture"]

[Text] In the flood of opinions and viewpoints conc\rning Christiania that
has grown larger and larger in recent months, the remarkable thing is that
the government has lacked a firm base. The minister of justice has pre-
sented views he probably regretted bitterly afterward. It is still unusual
for a minister to try and establish degrees of illegality. The other nin-
isters, especially the environmental affairs minister, have been restrained

and tongue-tied in the mounting debate.

The environmental affairs minister has had good reaon not to express his
opinion and his point of view. he has been hampered by the fact that the

architectural firm of Holler & Gronborg, at the request of the government,
has worked on a planning outline for the future of Christiania. The outline

has now been discussed at the Environmental Affairs Hinistry, after which
the minister prepared a report for 3olketing on the future uses of the
Christiania area.

The report contains at least two positive surprises. In the first place, it
is both positive and surprising that the main line of the report involves an
effort to make Christiania legal. Thus it says that it must be stressed to
the inhabitants that "the general laws of society must be observed in the
area." Buildings must be legalized, payment must be made for services
rendered, the businesses that exist there--including retail trade--must be
supervised as they are elsewhere in society. The other positive thing is
that the environmental affairs minister is not drawing the government into an
artificial construction in which it would be necessary to build up a large
administrative apparatus in order to run the future Christiania. Here the
government has refused to follow the proposals of the architectural firm
which--in the words of the environmental affairs minister--"appear extremely
complicated and would probably also require the establishment of special
legislation on Christiania."

Thus the government is now standing where it should have been all along:
with a demand that there not exist an enclave in society that is exempt from

38
the regular rules and obligationa. The government is also of the opinion
that normalization should be carried out in cooperation with the inhabitants
of Christiania. But presumably we can aaaune that if cooperation cannot be
vorked out or if it breaks down, the govermont'a position will not break

down too. The justice niniater'a attenpt to establish degrees of illegality
must now be brought to an end.

6578
C90: 5300/2171

39
HESSE SOCIAL MINISTER 0N HERON USE, THERAPY CENTERS
Frankfurt/Main FRANKFURTER WINE in Gernan 17 Feb 82 p 11

[Text] Hiesbaden. l6 February-Speaking in Hiesbaden. Armin Clause. the Hesse
social minister. referred to a change in the consumption of narcotics. lie said
that although statistics show a decline in the number of deaths from heroin in
the PRC. this was by no means cause for giving the all-clear signal in the
struggle against narcotics, for the nusber of heroin addicts is still rising
by about ten percent a year. In Besse alone there are an estimated 018 to
eight thousand young people addicted to heroin.

Clauss drew attention to the fact that even in the mid 1970's some had
already thought that the "drug war" had been won after narcotic crimes and
the nusber of drug victims declined. But later. he added. in the year 1979 a
new "peak" had been reached in the narcotic scene. The drug danger is far
from having been averted. he said. not least because a record poppy crop is
expected in the "Golden Triangle" between Burma. Laos and Thailand. The
international drug trade. organised in bands which have replaced the more
family-type operation of the Kurds. will make sure that the drug market is
soon stimulated again.

Unfortunately. Clauss lamented. research into the causes of drug consumption
is still in the beginning stages and for that reason no one seems to know
exactly what might best he done by way of prevention. There are 27 counseling
centers for drug addicts in Hesse and three additional centers are scheduled
to be added this year. They receive a meager 5 million marks from the Land
budget for their work. In Frankfurt alone drug counseling teachers who
were prepared for their work in a one-week course are active in 1&7 schools.
Experts compiled material with the aid of which the effects of drug use are
supposed to be indicated in the classroom. The Hiesbaden Youth Theater "Die
Baustelle" ["The Construction Site"). has set itself the same goal and is
going on tour this spring with the educational play "Carrot."

By going so far as to use rock music as a medium for conveying informtion on
the dangers of drugs Clause has. he says. caused people to shake their heads
at him both among experts and among the public. He plans nevertheless to
continue along this unconventional path, the social minister stresses, because

with rock music it is possible to address young people with whom there is no
other way of establishing a dialogue. The "rock house" in Hiesbaden with its
anti-drug program. is designed to establish such contacts.

4-0
There is space for long term treatment of 119 drug sufferers in Hesse. In
the near future space is planned for 326. Not all who allow themselves to
be treated do so voluntarily. Many are ”motivated" by the drug counseling
centers to allow themselves to be treated; others. Clauss reports. feel so
persecuted and pressured by police raids that they report for treatment.
Fron tine to time criminals are given the choice not to go to prison but to
the clinic in accordance with the motto "therapy instead of punishment" which
Clauss once in fact promoted but from which he is now backing off. In his
opinion the slogan night better read: "therapy is punishment."

Clauss shrugs his shoulders when asked how high the relapse rate is for drug
addicts after therapy. There is. he replies. no comparable treatment process.
It is only possible to help addicts to the extent that they can be taught to
live with their addiction. Too little is as yet known to be able to say this
or that person is cured because he has been "clean" for one year or four
years. All he can say is. "The nusber of those we help keeps on growing."

Help ranges from detoxification to occupational reintegration. A work center
for occupational rehabilitation of form: drug addicts is being built in
Frankfurt at a cost of 4 million urine in which 20 teaching and working places
are to be offered. Training is planned in the wood. metal and electronic
trades.

Something is indeed being done for addicts in Frankfurt but the netropole on
the Main has forfeited something of its truly dubious ninbus as the principal
trading center for narcotics. After the destruction of the "some" on the
so-called hash meadow the center of the drug trade has moved more in the
direction of the min station. In addition. however. new drug trading centers
in Hesse have sprung up in smaller cities. for example. according to Clause.
in Lisburg. in Schluechtern and in the zonal border region.

9827
C80: 5300/2198

41
mars

MUNICH OPIUM HAUL -- Police have discovered that a garbage can in a hm courtyard
in Schwahing has been serving a ring of opiu- dealers as a depository for narcotics
- or a "dead—letter drop,‘ as it is called in dealer jargon. Two labors of the
group and a customer were taken into custody last wedcend by detectives froa the
Bavarian State Criminal Police Office. Arrest warrants have been issued for the
three individuals, two nan and a wolan. The police had received a tip that the
group was using the garbage can as a drop. It was also ascertained that a package
containing 1.5 kg of raw opium had been deposited there. Investigators staked out
the courtyard. In a short time, 29-year-old Sigrid A. appeared, took the package
out of the container and handed it to a nan -- Klaus L. (28) — who had also entered
the courtyard intending to take possession of the drugs. The police nade their
move at that accent. The dealer and her custoaer were taka: for questioning to the
Bavarian state Criminal Police office on Haillingerstrasse. Snortly thereafter the
alleged head of the ring, the m-year-old Afghan citizen llasir A" was also tracked
down and arrested. Neither he nor his 'coworker' Sigrid A., by the way, lived in
thc Schwabing building whose courtyard they were misusing as a render-mus with
their customers. He probably uuggled the narcotics in tron the Orimt. According
to thc narcotics detectives, their find shows that the noting of opium scene to
be comin into st 1e in Munich. 01' course, heroin can also be produced tron raw
opium. Ziggy] ﬁnch momma zsmm in Oman 16 Feb 82 p 27 71.58

080: SEC/2E9
MINISTER AI NORDIC DRUG GONPERENCB TELLS COUNTII'S STATUS
Helsinki HELSINGIN SANOHAE in tinnish 20 Feb 82 p 11
[Article: "Finland's Drug Problem Still Small"]

[Text] Compared to Sweden. Denmark. and Norway Finland's drug-related crimes are
rather few. Since 1973 the use of drugs has decreased in Finland, but, on the other
hand. the number of drug-related crimes has been on the increase in recent years.

This statement was made in Stockholm where social, justice, and police affairs min-
isters of the Nordic countries met on Friday to discuss the Nordic drug situation.
Because of the government situation in Finland. our delegation was lead by Margit
Eskman, chief of the Social Administration.

The last meeting of this type was held 5 years ago. Since then the use of heroin,
psychotropic substances, and cannibis. among other things. has increased alarmingly
and it is also feared that the use of cocaine is becoming more prevalent in the

Nordic countries.

the Central Criminal Police have calculated that the actual number of drug users
in Finland is approximately 2,000.

A considerable number of Finns misusing drugs have fled to Stockholm or Copenhagen
where drugs are easier to obtain than in the Finland. In Sweden it is estimated
that the number of Pinnish drug users is approximately 500 and there is also a con-
siderable number in Denmark.

Last year a total of 955 drug-related crimes were reported to the police. However.
the number of investigated incidents was nearly 16,000. Small amounts of drugs
were confiscated in only 160 incidents.

In Finland drug-related crimes are preponderantly concentrated in one area: appro-
ximately half of the drug-related crimes investigated by the Ministry of Justice
were committed in the area of Helsinki.

Nearly all of the drugs in Finland were smuggled into the country. For example,
Swedish officials every week detain Finns coming from Denmark with small amounts

of drugs in their possession.

43
Prevalent Cause of Death in Denmark

In Denmark after traffic-related deaths drug abuse is the second largest cause of
death among youth. There are 6,000—10.000 drug abusers in the country. Last year
nearly 1,500 kilos of cannibis products (lushish and marijuana) alone were confis-
cated in Denmark.

In spite of more effective measures by the police and customs officials. it has
not been possible to prevent the increase in the use of drugs. This is a result
of the fact that the trade in drugs is profitable and highly organized. Also the
attitude toward drug users in Denmark is quite tolerant. While the possession of
drugs has been made a crime in all the other Nordic countries, in Denmrk an indi-
vidual may possess 5 grans of heroin or 100 grams of hashish for his own use.

The number cf drug abusers is also increasing in Norway according to officials.
Among individuals violating Norwegian drug laws lore and more are foreigners. Un-
like the other Nordic countries the police are detaining and confiscating more drugs
in outlying areas than in the capital city of Oslo.

Street Trade in Cocaine in Sweden

For example, the professional importing of heroin is being directed by foreigners.
In 1980 6,000 individuals were arrested in Rorway for involvement in drug-related
crimes.

It is estimated that 10.000--l~’o.000 people use hard drugs in Sweden. The use of
substances that stimulate the central nervous system is the most prevalent. Heroin
is easily available throughout the whole country and recently the street trade in
cocaine has also increased. The use of hashish and marijuana is very prevalent
also among youth.

According to a conittee studying the extent of drug abuse in Sweden approximately
200.000 people under the age of 25 have experimented with drugs at one time or ano-
ther. Hashish is the most prevalent. The umber of confiscations increased from
3.569 in 1979 to 5.972 in 1980.

10576
C80: 5300/2196

44
1mm councn. on m swarm
Paris L'HUHANITE in French 8 Jun 82 p 1“
[Article by Jean-Pierre Defsit]

[Text] The Council of Ministers on mm: noted to establish an inter-
ninisteriel council--heeded by the prise sinister-which will be responsible
for coordinating govern-out policy on drug sddiction. No setter how one tries
to grapple with the drug phenosenon, it sppesre in sctuJ. fact to be worsening
steadily. In any event, the govern-mt believes-according to the ststenents
nsde in the official conuniquenthst the sitmtion 'dennds vigorous notion."

The collection of dste which sre custonsrily enployed to sttenpt to acted-nine
the evolution of the treffic in, end consunption of. dmgs hes not yet been
”do public for the year Just ended. Scle figures are circulsting hers snd
there. however, end they are in end of themlvee disquieting.

The customs officials were the first to publish their belsnce sheet for 1981:
more than 3 tons of assorted drugs eeised st the Roissy end Orly sirports
slone. end 311 traffickers muted. The lstter had sttespted to introduce
into France 2,102 kilogrsss of heshish, 86 kilogrus of coosine, 22 kilogram
of heroin, 9 kilogrm of norphine, ‘0 kilogra- of opiul snd 33.000 tsblets
of smphetslines. 1111s represents, in i yesr. s. ,1qu of M0 percent for
cocaine and 20 percent for heroin.

At the Ministry of the Interior no definitive statistics heve been established
as yet. An upward trend in the sunbed- of arrests hes been confined. however,
both in drug use and in drug trafficking. It is therefore feared that the
drsnstic record of 1980--i?2 desths linked directly to drussnny be
spnrosched.

In my csse. all experts sppesr to agree in ssying thst there have never been
so any drugeuof every kind-~svsilsble to drug addicts. and oustols figures
suffice to indicate thnt the denmi continues to you. The decision of the
Council of Ministers is therefore in response to e. necessity. st the very
least. This "hesdqusrters" of the fight spinst drug addiction will consist
of various sinisters; its labors will be coordineted by the sinister of
national solidarity. Ilse Questisux. who-according to the official con-uni-
que--proposes to give priority "to a. vigorous policy of prevention.”

45
It goes without saying, however. that this decision cannot overshadow the

need for reinforce-mt of the fiat against the drug traffie itself. The
spectacular blow dealt artist-as he by the Rational narcotics Office against
a. "channel” established between Hong Kong and hris prover-if such proof were
necessarynthat our country is still the vietis of penetration by the big-tine
drug tmfice

Moreover. it is beconing increasingly obvious that the mious levels of gov-
ernment will henceforth have to cope with new for-s of drug addiction. he
use (which is following an upward curve) of glues am solvents. for exanple.
gives rise to motile-s that are uniquely difficult. ‘me several eulples that
have mde the front page to date (especially in the eastern part of France)
reveal that adolescents--ani sonetines snail children-are in this way being
weaned to the use of drugs. the hope new is that the action just taken will
enable us at least to hope that the overall problen will at lest be accorded
the full mm of attention it deserves from the govern-eat.

10992
(:0. 5300/2201;

46
TYPE. m. USER MRAGTHIISTIC STATISTICS mm
Arrests, Overdoses, m-ug Types
Paris LB sons in French 30 Jan & p 11

[Text] The statistics of the central Office for the Repression of the Illicit
Narcotics mm (cams), headed by Jacques banquet, indicate for the year
1981 a substantial increase in drug addiction. In 1980 there were a total of
10,958 arrests for dealirg or use, whereas the judicial police services
recorded a total of 13,850 for last year. In 1981. 180 internatioml traf-
fickers and 5&6 domestic traffickers were arrested. The increase in the
number of arrests for use and dealing over the figure for 1980 (an increase
of 2,900) equals the total of all arrests for use an! dealing in the 2 years
1969 and 1970. These figures strikingly illustrate the "flare-up" in drug
addiction over the past 10 years.

Most noticeable of all is the increase in the nusber of heroin addicts. In
1981 there were l“735 arrests for heroin use an! dealin, which equals the
total nulber of arrests for all drugs combined in 1977. In coming the
official records for heroin since 1970, we find fluctuation that are linked
to the incidence of police repression. In 1975. after the breakup of the
"French Connection," the heroin addicts represented only 5 percent of all
drug arrests. With the arrival on the mket of the Asiatic heroin in 1976.
however, the number of arrests soared am reached 36.3? percent of all arrests

in 1981 e

Arrests were more numerous in Paris than in the provinces, where they repre-
sented 10? percent of the national total and where they increased by 70 percent
over the figure for 1980.

In contrast. the nulber of fatal overdoses decreased in 1981. from 172 in 1980
to 1151 in 1981. The sale phenoeenon was recorded in the m [Federal Republic
of Gemny], whereas the masher of such deaths increased in Italy and in
Switzerland. Paris is also overrepresented, with 71 overdoses (approxintely
50 percent of the total).

The statistics have also disclosed a parallel increase-almond: in lesser
proportione--in oooaine me and dealing. The oanrabis ”business" is declining:

67
it represented, in 1981, only 1&8 percent of total arrests colpared to 71+
percent in 1980. These figures reflect a sore ulnarstaulim attitude on the
part of the police toward mere users. his year, heroin has accordingly
become the target drug.

In conclusion, the one-us report reveals a trend toward greater longevity along
addicts, nest of whom now reach the age of 30. All classes of society are
involved. The traffic is more diversified; the chamnls employed are more
numerous: and the products are lore diverse.

Young Users, migrant Dealers
Paris LB FIGARO in Hench 28 Dec 81 p 10

[Article by Jean Paillardin]

[Textl All the statistics denomtrate the fact that drugs are gaining ground.
In 1981 the number of drug addicts and dealers arrested in France reportedly
almost doubled by conparison with 1980. his spectacular increase is, more-
over, uore frightenirg still because for sole months the polioe--es cially
in Parisuhave to some extent forgotten the suckers of "H" [hashisn , for they
have much too much to do in connection with the dealers and devotees of hard

drugs .

Of evcry 100 addicts, 50 are heroin addicts (conpared with 15 percent in 1975):
heroin users all of whoa adnit that they were introduced to the "weed" before

tryirg the "powder.”

Much sore disturbing is the fact that the age of the dng addicts is steadily
declining. It is not unusual to emounter ill— and 15-year-old addicts, for
whoa the “Joint“ no longer suffices. They have had, in their possession, LSD
tablets pilfered ma their older brothers and sisters who have returned from
Am; uphetanines; Valium or other products on List "3" stolen from
pharlacies. They also inhale anything: other, 90-prcof alcohol, and even
rustine [leaning unknown] glue.

But when they have the means (and they fimi then) it is to heroin that they
are above all attracted. cocaine reninsu-no one really knows why--the
"stimulant" of certain lore ”evolved" circles, such as the world of ”show
business."

To all these explanations--which certain specialists will not fail, once

lore, to offer by way of "justifying" the formidable progress of the 'white
powder"--there is now added an explanation that is less scientific and polit-
ical hut logical in a way that is hard to contradict: nanely, heroin "walks
the streets.” It is bought and sold in the qmrters of Paris under the very
eyes of the passersk-y. Nothing is easier for a dung addict than to obtain his
daily dose in Belleville or HontIartre. Heroin is now openly for sale in
F‘rance--or nearly so.

This is true to such an extent that every day and every nidat the police of
the narcotics squadof the quay dee Orfevres who harass then are arresting

48
tens--yes, tens-~of "dealers" and drug addicts on the sidewalks. the traffic
is increasingly less cautious.

But the police-who are going all out to lake arrests-do not particularly
frighten the established dealer, who is in lost oases quickly set free to
reeule his trade. To quote the new boss of this antidrug squad, Police
Sunsrinten‘lent Marcel Ham-in (who proved hinself in liquidating the French
Oomection fro- 1971 to 19716 in Marseilles): "So long as the mtimrcotics
campaign is waged only by a handful of police an! cuetoss officers, and so
long as the courts do not deal sore severely with crininals and the government
leaves the borders open, heroin will continue to wreak havoc."

The new (and very productive) Iethods of Marcel hurin an! the inspectors of
Police Superintendent Christian Gallo to renal up the traffickers could prove
to be decisive, if only the authorities decide to support then other than by
nere pro-ices. Ninety-three percent of the dealers arrested are inigrants--'
the great majority of whom are Algerian: and Tunisians. and this lust be
understood, and it not be said, without fear of being accusui of racisa.
Above all, -t is necessary to know how to accept one's responsibilities and
draw the conclusions therefrom

10992
030. 5300/220u

49
SOLIDARI'I‘Y MINISTRY MATHS OI ANIGHON mom

Manson: inhench30Jan&pii
[Interview with Francois Oolooabet by mum Oolcsbasi]

Question] You have been sortixg out the drug dossier at the Hinistry or
lidarity for the past 6 aonths. “hat is your concept of your job?

[Answer] When has Queetiaux asked as to take charge of the drug problem.
she did not want a specialist but soaeons who had never taken part in the
various rites of drug addiction. I as a aagietrate. I use a judge in the
Paris courts. in the section that deals with drug cases. It is rather as a
generalist that I was selected. horeovsr, I as also an associative activist.
The minister wanted to start, in her ainistry. a soveaent based on ideas as
diverse as possible in order to approach this dossier Iron a new point of
view, in order to restore drug addiction to its place along other phenoaena
such as alcoholism, suicides, and highway accidents.... Fro- this perspec-
tive. it was essential that the Ministry of National Solidarity assuse the
leadership.

[Question] Does drug addiction, hoﬂever, have specific characteristics that
prevent it froa being aseiailated to the other "social plague?"

[Amer] I'd like to say first of all that the am; probles 1. a serious
phenosenon because of the number of deaths it causes and the nunber of persons
it affects. In 1981 the consumption of heroin continued to increase, but
that should not prevent us from seeing the overall drug proble- in its true
diaensions. What sakes drug addiction "special“ is the way in which publi~
opinion reacts enotionally and blindly: when talking about drugs, people are
too often talking about soaething else. Another these runs throughout that
does not concern drug addiction directly. The generational conflict, for
exalple, or the loss of moral values. I'd like to get rid of this double talk
and get people to understand this fact. Horeover, drugs have been a sylbol of
the sore per-issive. the sore liberal. alternative societies: "The drug
culture is the Left." people have been saying. This political approach has
led to a false interpretation of the problem. I have discovered that alsost
all the scientific treatises on the subject of hashieh-whether for or

against--are advocating a cause. a political concept.

50
[Question] By waving the scarecrow of the drug proble- it is certainly
possible that repression will be encomged. Is it true. then. that anything

goes in the effort to cure the drug addicts?

[Answer] We are extrelely vigilant in this connection. The 1970 law gave the
polf:e increased powers, an! it can be said tint in general they have not
abused then. 0n the other hand, it's a different story in certain halhtay
houses. There should not be any infringenent of the desooratic freedols in
these centers. even if it is done in the alleged interest of the addict. We
are going to establish a very strict control on this point.

The Efficacy of Prohibition

[Question] that is your view on the liberalization of certain drugs? Isn't
it paradoxical to prohibit such its. at a nosent when addicts are also using
legal products such as glue and triohlorethylene?

[Answer] I believe that prohibition can be sonewhat effective. Absinthe, in
the 19th century. was devastating in its effects. No one drinks it any sore
today. He can never know whether prohibition does or does not engender a
desire to break the law. As for liberalisation of heshish. the oonission
will not have to decide. It will prepare the dossier, but a desecratic polit-
ical debate is to be initiated and the young people thelselves will choose the
world in which they want to live. In any event. prohibition of these substan-
ces is justified. if only fros the stauipoint of the social cost they entail.
It is true that this social cost is not the sane for each drug but varies.

[Question] Nevertheless. isn't it annoyim that alooholiss is outside the
purview of your couission?

[Answer] The consission will study the latter, and it say sose day take
leastn‘es concerning alcohol.

[Question] Uhat leans will you use for the tile being?

[Answer] Our action should basically center on prevention. We believe it is
necessary to repress the traffic severely, but repression can never be the
ideal way. Reintegration is not a airacle renedy, either. A better know-
ledge of drug addiction must be dissesimted throughout society. What we
have in place today is too sonolithic. ‘Ihe health clubs in our educational
institutions, for ample. are resented as ssanstions of the administration.
He realize that the national education systen is perhaps not the best place
to dispense unofficial knowledge. hm! teachers are unaware that drug addicts
are entitled to anonynity or that one person in each school ministration is

in charge of the problems of drug addiction.

He would like to have drug infomtion sore widely dissesinated, particularly
through the association systen. The nesbers of the associations for aid to
drug addicts should be more active and should no longer defer to the ledia-
tion teens, even when the latter have outstanding credentials. He shall
finance the associations on the basis of the individuals who staff then, in

51
order that their participation in the reintegration effort can prepare the
way for genuine prevention. The ushers of the association must be better
informed. and sore dynamic. so that they ﬂy dieseainate knowledge of the drug
phenomenon. He shall also Ionitor the training of the Iediators, who should
have a general. basic eduoational backgound and participate in a continuing

training program.
[Question] All this will be very expemive.

[Answer] No: it will suffice to have a better distribution of the subsidies.
In any event, we are thoroughly penuaded that we will not provide a airacle
solution: but we will not be believable unless we clean up our on front yard,
unless the soverment'e own statesente regarding drug are tin-selves not
ubiguous. It is in this way that we will succeed in Iotivating public
opinion, in taking it better infer-ed so that a canon struggle can be
oerried out against drug addiction.”

10992
cso: 3300/2zou \

52
POLICE MUMON IN mas. wDI'ISGATION mum
Paris {Emminmnch9li‘eb&p12
[Article by Agathe lesser-t]

[Text] "here has been a great deal of exaggeration in

the way these letters have been presented," Gaston mfferre
declared: but the police yesterday took refuge in the
secrecy surrounding the Judicial inquiry.

The accusations brought on 7 February by the mm nu 19mm against four
police officers of OMB (Central Office for the Repression of the Illicit
Narcotics Traffic) caused the public prosecutor in Paris yesterday aornim to
open a judicial inquiry for corruption of civil servants. For his part, the
minister of the interior reacted Sunday by announcilg that the Office of the
Inspector General of Police had already taken over the case. But what exactly
are these four police officers accused of? Of havim allowed traffickers to
escape from the police, consciously an! by prior arrange-ant? Officially,
they are charged only with imprudent penetration of the underworld.

"Four inspectors of the narcotics squad tipped off the traffickers." It was
under this headirg that the JwRNAI. DU mum on 7 February stirred up a
strange kind of storm. Accordim to this weekly, Jean-Paul Gramsr, ”chief of
an operational group with the mrce,“ had for a .mnber of years been organi-
sing the flight of drug traffickers. hails that should have resulted in
arrests were frustrated. Operations that should have comluded with arrests
in flagrante delicto resulted in failure. Pun-ranged seizures of drugs were
rendered impossible at the last minute by cancellation of the delivery of the

drugs e

Worse still, the inspector reportedly did not act alone but in concert with
three of his colleagues: and it appeared even possible that after confiscating
heroin these police officers would sell it themselves. Police Superintendent
Francois he Houel. the then chief of OCRPIS (where the aforelentioned four
police officers worked) reportedly realized that these flights by traffickers
could only have originated within the ranks of his own service. He is said

to have related his suspicions to the an who was to replace his last 2 April,

Police Superintemlent Pramuet.

S3
Arpaillange-~"is covered in, am repnssed by. Articles 177 and followirg of
the Poul Gods."

Hhile at the Ministry of the Interior yesterday everyone was entrenching his-
self behind the secrecy sun-muniim the Judicial inquiry, and was refusing to
confirm all or part of the revelations lads by the mm. 110 pm.
Minister of the Interior and Decentralization Gaston Defferre was at the sane
tine in Marseilles talking about what people are now callirg the "narcs'
escapes.” "more has been a great deal of exaggeration in the way these
matters have been presented,” he opined. me truth is that for sole tile

and as for his successor. we were unable to contact his directly. we were
also told yesterday at the central blmeau of Judicial identity-where Jean-
Paul Granger is cm'rently assigned-«hat Gram: was "out for the day."

The SNAPC (Automnous Union of minclothes Police 0fficere)~-which is a
Ienber of the FASP, the Autononous Federation [of Police Unions]--wonders. in
a state-em; published late in the day, "at the lack of enthusiasm. on the part
of the administration, for expediting an investigation by the 101’)! [General
Inspectorate of mum PoliceJa" The union arr-it seen-“having great
difficulty in learning just what exactly their colleague Jean-hui Grams:- is
being accused of. They are also. to be sure. med at the tile necessary
(fro- h January to 2 February) to open an i uiry when in fact for Iany
months (the JOURNAL nu DIMANGE says 2 year-3

Meamhile. Jean-Paul Granger an! the three other police officers he has
allegedly implicated are officially accused only of "ilprudent penetration of
the underworld."

10992
:50. aaoo/zzou

510
MEDICAL (Em DIRBGI‘Q? 1113015333 mm. arm
Paris LEHONIB inPrenchBOJan& ppi. 11
[Article by Omistian Ooloubani]

[Excerpt-I The annual studies and statistics concerning the drug traffic and
drug use in France confirm, for 1981, the pessinistic report of the United
Nations Office of Narcotics Control to the effect that drug addiction is
spreading throughout the world. The year 1981 would appear not to have been,
in France, the year for change in this respect. The statistics of the
Ministry of the Interior. as well as the infomtion in the report of the
Harmottan sedical center in Erie. do not indicate any slackening in drug
addiction. even though the number of fatal "overdoses" is declining. On the
contrary: with the passage of tile the drtg phenolenon is expanding. It is
evolving, and changing in character. in accordance with the novelents of
society. the node of consunication anon; husan beings, their emotions and
their morality. Genuine problems nine their appearance-~problens that for-er-
ly were isolated incidents.

The drug addiction of young children, for caplet "They consume drantic
quantities of legal industrial and phernaceuticel products: but who is there
to speak out against the hsseness and cosplioity or which sone of these
dispensers of slavery and death are guilty?" wonders Dr Claude Olievemtein,
director of the Hmottan center. His annual report details the ravages of
self-ledication and organic solvents “which have becols a large-scale national
probles." but also describes the appearance of new products such as Burgodin.
a norphinized synthetic product which a Brussels doctor prescribes extensively
for thousands of French drug addicts. It is obvious that the "traditional”
substancesuheroin and cocainencontinue to be widely used.

To continue with the statistics: the Hanottan center in 1981 carried out
1.700 sedicel procedures more than in the previous year. anti the figures of
the Ministry of the Interior also indicate an increase in drug addiction.

These alarming statistics-and even though the situation in France is not

comparable to the situation in other Mopean countries such as Comm or the
Netherlands--should not prevent us front driving out the other denons that are
engendered by drug addiction. Granted that drugs are a ”phone." they should

not. for all that, becone an excuse for any and all policies or-even less--
for any ani'all actions. On this point, we read the opinion of Francois

55
(bloom-bet. who is in charge of the prowess of drug addiction for the Ministry
of Ihtioml Solidarity. Dr Olimstein [sic] likeuise deplones this fact.
"The year 1981,” he says, "was a. year of outrageous politicizatiom-scsmlous
politicizstionnof the drug pmblel." He recalls the Hontigny case "Where
drugs were used as an excuse for elployixg informersﬂsni the cupsigns by
"pro-fascist” groups who "exploit this dress in order to {ﬂatten the public.”

Just as ﬁne Questisux. minister of rational solidarity, did in her speech at
Strasbourg to the Council of Europe in Novelbsr 1980, 1k Glievenstein insists:

10992
(30 3 3300/2206

56
mm KONG amass. MOI“ SEIZBD AT ROIBBY
Pin-is LB FIGARO in French 28 Dec 81 p 10

[Text'] (APP) A channel for drug traffic fro: the hr Est to Fiance and The
Netherlands wns destroyed on Qiristns he in hris, leading to the seizin-e of
10 kilograms of virtually pure heroin hue.

According to Police Superintendent Jscquee Minuet. chief of the Gentnl
Office for the Suppression of the Illicit Nerootics Mic. nine aiinese fro-
Hong Kong who belonged to an orgnniution based in that city have been
arrested. The nine nen will be turned over to the office of the public prose-
cuter st Bobigny (Seine-Seint Denis) today; it an Jurisdiction in this case.

The cperstion carried out by the French police is a. follow-up to two previous
cases. which reportedly slso inplicnted Gxinese fron Hong Kong who belonged to
a. highly structured orgenmticn of the ease mture. It is also a. continua-
tion of a. whole series of undercover surveillance oped-ntione. Police superin-
tendent Minuet said.

Of the nine traffickers. four resided fron tile to tile in Puris to receive
the heroin, cut it with caffeine and then redistributo it to the French and
Dutch urkets. The others--who were celled the 'ants"--ehutt1ed beck and forth
betwun the Mi-hnlsyeisn border uni Hong Kong. kngkok (Milan!) and Emu-ope.

Fbllowing a series of "cseta of the net" by the French police. however. the
traffickers from Hong Kong becele lore cnutions.

In July. ueisted by the investigntore fro- the llntionsl Directorste of Gus-
tons Investigations (m). the police Arrested. in hris, 10 tralfickm of
Asistic origin and seized 10 kilogram of heroin. In Novenber. an Italian
who was bringing 3 kilogrsls of heroin in iron hngkok for the one Chinese
organization was intercepted at tho Eris-noise: nirport together with five
Asisn scconplices.

his series of arrests, surveillance operations, investigations end the coop-
eration of the Thai police via. the antenna that the french Central Office for
the Suppression of the Illicit Ndroctice Traffic hcd imtslled in Bangkok
made possible the Christ-es Ive operstion.

57
me traffickers had touni lore conplex circuits. however. ‘ihe five couriers
from Bunskok bed accordingly psssed throng: Copenhagen (Denmk), then Nice on
the Cote d'uur. before ending up in Erie, where their scccnplices united
then. They were nonetheless crested, for they bed been “endowed" from the
beginning by the French police, who had chilised vest lateral end hunn
resources for the occasion. ‘ihe 10 mom-s of heroin were conoeoled in
suitcases thst hsd folse bottons.

The heroin in question no elncet par-95 to 97 percent pure. It was to be
cut with caffeine ml resold. According to police ectintes, this heroin--
cut by 50 percent--cou1d be sold ct spproxinstely 250,000 francs per kilogram.

10992
cso. 5300/2201.

58
MAJOR DRUG TRAPPICKBR 3006!?! m ITALY ARRESTED A‘i‘ AIRPORT
Syrian Drug Trafficker Arrested
Athens AKROPOLIS in Greek 29 Jan 82 pp 1, 7

[Article by D. Stavropoulos]

[Text] The Hafioso leader of perhaps the largest narcotics network engaged in
supplying West Europe with heroin had his headquarters in Athens. Pros; here he
used to pull the strings of his labyrinthine illegal organization. However, for
roughly a month mw he has been held in custody at Korydallos.

The authorities have not made any announcement concerning this. But according to
reliable (and exclusive) information obtained by Ammus, silence is being

observed on the part of the authorities because the mafia is searching for him
everywhere, so that it can free hin.

Spotted in Milan

with utmost discretion, the Greek police is keeping in touch with the Italian
police so as to be able to go forward with the process of extraditing this
Mafioso figure to Italy, where he is wanted.

It seems that this case has moved forward very rapidly following the breaking up
in Milan of an international ring whose center of activity is in Athens. The
Italian police arrested 43 people, including one Greek whose name was not
announced.

As was learned, this gang had been bringing large quantities of heroin, norphine,
and cocaine into Athens via Il‘urkey. Each week, these narcotics were being conveyed
from Athens to Italy, in lO-kilogran packages, on co-ercial airplanes.

In Italy the head of the gang was (Raffaele Retsio), who was arrested in his
apartment. This apart-ant was a “cottage industry" for processing narcotics.
But the Italian authorities believe that the real leader is to be found in Athens.

It seems that their suspicions are sound ones. Because the Hafioeo in Korydallos
is the person they are hunting for.

59
'rrap Set at Bllinikon Airport

This Hafioso arch-smggler of narcotics is a Syrian. He was arrested at
Ellinikon Airport after being caught in the trap which had been set for him by
agents of the m [National Security Service] and the Narcotics Prosecution Police.

Earlier, the special narcotics prosecution service of the United States (0. A.
[? Drug Administration?” as well as the entire Italian police force had been
called in to help find and arrest him, because this Syrian smuggler had set up
and had put into operation seven illicit laboratories for the preparation and
processing of heroin in Sardinia and in Milan.

But he himself had his permanent residence in Athens, where he used to pass
himself off as a business magnate.

Upon receiving relevant messages from Interpol, the Greek authorities located him
and put him under surveillance.

In this way they learned about all of the associates with whom he used to arrange
the “orders“ from Greece and the shinents of the narcotics from the Middle East
to Europe.

He Told All

As soon as the Italian police learned that the Syrian arch-smuggler had been
spotted in Athens they came to Greece, and in cooperation with the Greek authorities
they drew up a plan for his capture.

The Syrian was indeed captured, and on being interrogated he confessed to a great
nutter of things.

Thus, the Italian authorities made use of this information and located the illicit
laboratories for processing herein.

In fact. just the other day they penetrated the Milan "ring," where they arrested
43 persons-~including, as we have written, many Italians, Syrians, and one Greek.

According to the information on hand up to now. this narcotics network has been
transporting enormous quantities of heroin. morphine, and cocaine to destinations
all over Europe. and it is considered by Interpol to be the largest in the European
sector. Byen now, associates of the gang leader at Korydallos prison are in Athens
still. These have been put under surveillance, because they are preparing sale
action, with the center of their activity being Glyfada.

Arms Traffic Involvement
Athens 'ro VIMA in Greek 30 Jan 82 p 7
[Text] The head of an international network for selling arms and large quantities

of narcotics in Italy was arrested by the police authorities at Bllinikon Airport,
shortly after his arrival from Bulgaria.

60
He is the Syrian (salakh Al Din Vakas), 37 years old, who was arrested by order of
the appeals court prosecutor, following a nessage {rm Interpol, with the charge
that he was trafficking in am and narcotics.

Vakas was connected with a Greek woman, who lives in Glyfada. Arte: looking for
him for days, the police authorities had lost his trail, and a group of policenen
began to follow the woman friend of the accused. 0n the evening of Wednesday.
this woman went to Ellinikon Airport, and after a short while she met with the
Syrian suspect, who was passing through Athens I'in transit." lie was going to
remain for 3 hours in Athens and then was to continue on his trip. Hithin this
interval the nan wanted by Interpol got a visiting permit to go into the city.

But he did not have tine for recreation with his friend. Salakh Vakas was arrested
as soon as he passed through the custous inspection. and he was taken to the
Korydallos prisons. Because he is being sought under a warrant from the examining
magistrate of. the courts of Trento. Trieste. Salakh Vakas is charged with
transporting weapons and narcotics to Italy. The weapons and the narcotics were
being sold in Italy by 50 colleagues of the Syrian.

The Italian authorities have requested the detention of Salakh Vakas until they
can send the documents for his extradition.

12114
C80: 5300/5370

61
DETAILS ON HEROIN TRAPPICKER'S ARREST PROVIDED
Athens TA NBA in Greek 2 Feb 82 p 12

[Text] Salomon-«Within the 2 years of his activity, Panagiotis Papadakis,
26 years old and a former jeweler, distributed heroin valued at 30 million drachmas
to the young people of Salonica.

Papadakis, known within the comunity of addicts by the pseudonym “Kouperakias,"
traveled 23 times to Istanbul in the last 2 years, bringing back large quantities
of heroin.

An extensive netowrk of "dealers" was delivering the narcotics to the marketplace.
Four of the gang steamers, Evangelos Ratartris, Khristos Mandousoudis, Kharikleia
Vasilaki, and Andreas Pyrsopoulos. are already in prison for dealing in and using
narcotics, while Dim. Koupanis, Panagiotis Kapsaskis, Potis Ploudos, and Nik.
Voulgarakis are scheduled for trial.

The spotting and arrest of Papadakis the other day was achieved following a
surveillance of 3 months. During his many months of activity, Papadakis managed
to slip away from surveillance by the police by changing his residence every
3 months and by frequently falsifying the license numbers of his automobile.
During the last 3 months, he was living in a luxury villa in Panorama. None of
his associates knew the address of his house or his telephone mmber. He would
always telephone them himself and designate a different meeting place each time

for handing over the narcotics.

From the confessions of his colleagues it emerges that the heroin was being
delivered mainly to "hangouts' located on Patriarkhou Ioakeim, Hitropoleos, and
Proxenou Koromila streets.

Pan. Papadakis, who is married to an Bnglishwoman and the father of a 2-year-old
boy, had been arrested in March 1978, along with his wife, his sister, Nikos
Kounados, and Savvas Khristoforidis, by the Turkish authorities at the Iran-

Turkey border for possession of has-”.ish.

The first four were set free after serving their time, whereas Khristoforidis
was sentenced by the Turkish court to 101 years in prison, which was finally
reduced to 36 years.

“The 'system' is to blame for my plight," said the narcotics wholesale merchant
to TA NBA yesterday, and he added that "I would never want to see other young
people caught in my position.“

12114 END
cso: 5300/5370 52