FOR 0mm USE ONLY

PRS L/10519

4 May 1982

Worldwide Report

NARCOTICS AND DANGEROUS DRUGS
(FOUO 22/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

MOMMUSEONLY
m

JPRS publications contain infomtion prinrily fro- foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also fro. news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those fro- Englisb-langnage sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and nterial enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original intonation was
processed. where no processing indicator is given. the infor-
I-tion was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar nanes rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Hords or ones preceded by a ques-
tion marl: and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. lines within itm are as
given by source.

11.. contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the u.s. Government.

COPYRIGII' MRS AND RECUlATIONS WERNING WHIP 0?
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
0F TRIS PUEICATION BB RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
WORLDHIII REPORT
NARCOTICS mo Dmeeaous Danes

(900° 22/ 82)
CONTENTS

ASIA

AUSTRALIA

Two Get Total of 12 Years in Jail for Heroin Trafficking
(THE HBS‘I'AIJSTRALIM. l3Har 82) ............................

Defunct Hogan Hand Bank Chiefs Called Drug Traffickera
(rm: ME, 19m 82) ........................................

Narcotics Bureau Report
International Heroin Dealing

Police Say Sunshine Coast low Play: Loading Drug Role ‘
(I!!! COURIER-HAIL, l9 liar 82) .....

Editorial: National Drug Campaign Reviewed
(Editorials!!! W m's DAILY, 6 Apr 82)

INDIA

Record Drugs Haul Hade. International Gm; Detected
0mm. 16 ”r 82) ooooooooooooooooooooaoaoaooeooeooooaooao

MALAYSIA

Drug Addiction Increaaing in Sarawak
(Jana Ritchie; In: STRAITS ms, 28 liar 82) ...............
FOR OFFICIAL US! MY

PHILIPPINES

Briefs
Ileroin Threat Noted

THAILAND

Reaction To Consul's Arrest In Chicago
(Bangkok Donestic Service. 2 May 82; mm m.

3 "I, 82) soeeoooooaeoeee.e-oo-eeeooooeeooeooeeo-eoseen...

Sitthi, Arun Co-ent
'NA‘IION nsvmr Editorial

LATIN AMERICA

RAMS

sumo

Drug Official Warns Of Increased Use Anong Youth
(”m-ms. 15 ”r 82) eoeeooeoseeeaoooeoeeooooosoooooee

Intergovernmental Cooperation In Drug Cases Discussed
(El. DIARIO DB mvo LABBDO. 30 Her 82) .....................

Six-Year Anti-Drug Caqaip Reviewed. Praised
(mm. 1‘ ”I 82) oeeooeaeeoaeoaseeaaeoooo-oeoeaoaeeaaeoo

International Cocaine Trafficking Ring Disbanded
(EL DIARIO DB mm mm. 27-28. 31 liar 82. 2 Apr 82) ....

Connections Disclosed
More Arrests Made
Eleven Beld for Trial
Probe Ends

Trafficking Ringleader Captured In Oaxaca
(u MARCIA!” 23 m 82) oeoeaoesoooooeeaoeoooooooosoeoeooo

torture 0f Captured Drug Traffickers Denied
(815 m. z ”r 82) ceases-eases...-eoaeeoeeeeecoco-soc...

Incineration 0f Colo-Dian Harihuana Reported
mmlm. 21m: 82) 0.0...0.0.0.0...OOOCOOOCOCOOOI...

traffickers Captured Hith Heroin Fro. Guerrero
(EL m. 26 ”I! 82’ 3 Apr 82) ooeoooe-eeeooeeesosoeooeeoo

Arrests Announced
Jailing Ordered

-b-

FOR OFFICIAL I138 ONLY
roe OFFICIAL use can

Drugs Pro- Peru Seized At Airport
(2!. MARIO n: mm mm. 7 Apr 82) ......................

Briefs
Vented Trafficler Captured
pun
State Enterprise ‘10 Control Coca
(ADP. 5 liar 82) ............................................
Briefs
larcotics Seizure
Drugs Seized
Drug ‘l‘rat f ickere Arrested
SUB-SAMBA! AleA
LIBERIA
Briefs
Harihuana Burned
VEST EUROPE
m
Dane Rand Nordic Police Drugs Representative to South Antics
(Anders Hiig; 3mm rams. 20 Apr 82) ..............
Police ln Provinces Bstnh'iish Separate Drugs Divisions
(mm 1mm, 23 Apr 82) ...........................
Briefs
Copenhagen Drugs Gangs Broken
Cocaine Seized At Airport
ITALY
Foreip undersecretary Proposal Por Belting Drug Traffic
(IL rm. 3": 82) .00...1.50.00.00.000‘.5000.0DOODOOOOOO
SWEDEN

Gang Smuled heroin. Used Funds To Aid Arnoian lbveeent
(5mm mm. 18, 25. 27 liar 82) ...

'Shoenaker' Gang Indicted. by Snne Olsson
Pmded Amnien Liberation Hove-nt, by Sune Olsson

Snuggled Drugs Through Lehman. hy Margit Silherstein
Bugle of Large-Scale Models Abroad. hy Hergit Silherstein

"C-

POI OFFICIAL 083 “LY
FOR OFFICIAL 082 ML!

Brlefs

Charged In unshish Smuggling
Telephone Tap P0113 Drug Sale

SWI‘I'M

Twelve Cocaine Smgglers Pro- South harm Arrested
(tgy.; m zuncm um. 27 Her 82) ...................

FOR OFFICIAL "SB OIL!
Two GET TOTAL OF 12 YEARS IN JAIL FOR mom TRAFFICKING

Perth THE REST AUSTRALIAN in English 13 Mar 82 p 26

[Text]

mmmmnmmumawunmm

byunChlndgSIanndsm

In the Supreme Court.
the judge sud he took
the View 9 ex-
pressed by the coun-
um the drug problem
slmldbeeﬂedwdbydr
(errant penalties.

John Kbn (19). o!
".1?th Bull-
ea gm W'°
zed Aunnlh as In em-

lmyeer mm .

i A Klan
tough! In the an
In Thailand h

' Craig Pan-id: Iain
125’. m.m at-
:tendam. o! K Wu.
'Wuubro. we: In
seven year: with
.mlnimuI-u sentence.
~ Lest moun- they won
convicted in a My uh!
o! sewn; hemln at Her
Ieylnonoherlutyur.
mm» was also row:
will, of en

(Huge. otha belch
inn ”0:333!qu

(och Path in um
um yen.

”HAVING

E

Outing the Mal. the
“th luld that the
pol had bro-ale
the delmlams “on a
house In Hurley when
new“! wu lam loan.

A detective and that
when he pulled up a
drive a sportseatet u: «
u: ugh"; the detenti-

WI
S

'

DEFUNCT RUG”: NAHD BANK CHIEFS CALLED DRUG TRAFFIC

Narcotics Bureau Report.

Helboume THE A08 in English 19 Max 82 p 4

, . . :m wam ...w.m.m w
my m? min wéwﬁm mm
a a

mu... “um—uuuunnﬂmnsﬂm m mwmm

Wmfwm Mﬁmwmﬂw ”mm
mm Magma”. yam. 3 WWW“
m mmmw WW: .3“ mwmmm Mm wwmxmw
m .mmwwmmma “wrww Mwmuwmmﬁmvm

1.. .s m..-.
wmmaurm mummamwm- .Wmmmwmg

[Text]

International Heroin Dealing

Nelbourne THE A58 in English 19 Mar 82 p 4

The Nu-
noun!
usual the
Ask M

Australia and America.

mama
amp tram

pa. Hand 5
mm can
South-m:

SYDNEY. —

Next]
$92!? . W ‘5'
rgsgsgiilgzﬁig!
:‘éﬁ: EEEEEEEE
POLICE SAY SUNSHINE 0016? M PLAYS W136 DEW ROLE

Brisbane THE coumm-mn. in English 19 Ha: 82 p 3

[Text]

RAMBOUR. - Th: 83m-
shlne Coast. WI!
Noon, was the 0:an of t
navy drug me. Mo
In: no low 013 chm. 8"
B. Clout.

at GM slid My Ibo
Sum; Cost to m
mulormcmolnmm.

alumni-rutmuouol
tmwmmummmm
accumulated-M.

Southcrn minim m

35%?

a 5:
a! 55%:
:EEEEQ‘
Eiaggzg
e :ﬁaaﬁ’!

E

589:
"gig?
E55321 i
iééé

' 3
E
EDITORIAL: NATIONAL onuc autumn nsvrztrw
Rangoon ms uotucm: PEOPLE'S DAILY in English 5 Apr 82 o 6

[Editorial]

[Text]

HE problem of dru abuse is an evil was appointed for them]: of compiling a
legey inherited mm the colonial report on the destruction of poppy planta-
past. When the whole of Burma trons, treatment of drug addiction and

became a colony with the fall of Mandahy Ievtsron end replacement of outdated laws.
in l885. the colonial regime stepped up its On the recommerrdatronsof the committee
opium trade with the sole aim of earning optum dens throughout the Shan State were
more revenues with utter indill'erence to the closed down and a crop substitution proa
consequences of the imposed evil. The mil,” W33, hunched With the arm Of
1878 'um Act esteblished government replacing oprum poppy with other cash
monopo y over the optum trade. In I905 trope. .
the government formed the Excise Depart- ‘.However. the drug alhrse problem
ment and demarcated .the territory east of assured more senpus proportronswrth the
Salwecn as opium report and allowed the image of e hr potent denvatrve of
local residents to abuse opium freely. theommherotn, In soon In 1971 The
Although the dangerous drugs were banned t ‘enfomed the , new Narcotic
from the other parts of the country. pro- law In I974 enhancing the punish-
titeers ran opium densirr most rmjor towns meat for dmemhted om The First
and corrupt excise odious turned their eyes Pytthu Hluttaw at ltsl-‘ourtr; Session held in
the other pray while the addict; wastedaway October I975 celled for a national campaign
and the vrce merchants fattened up gradual- to comb! the drug problem. The Ministry
ly. ' ‘ of Home & Religious Aﬂ’arrs appointed the
Alter. the country proclaimed inde- Central Narcotic Drugs Control Board the
pendenoetn I948, dugout-amt promised same year, with subcommrtteesmnder it
to banish dangerous drugs totally from the clnrhd Vllh dogs abuse prevention, treat-
whole country within ﬁve years and made ment and relahr'lttationiol‘ addrcts. purchase
enumherot‘antrdru; laws. ‘l'hedeedllne ﬁbrﬂymoptumanddmgahuse
howeverexptred with the declaredgodnoo prevention education. ~ .
Where near being ‘ reeliud. Aﬂer the Re- The Tatmadnw, with the cc-operation
Volutronary Councrl came to power I962, of them has been mean: on ran:
the problem oftheabusepfdenaierous drugs ampergns to suppress tiledmg by
was given serious attention. A committee (Immune pom MW- More than
36,700 acres of plantations were
wiped out between 1 75 and 1980. With
assistance from the United Nations Fund
for Drug Abuse Control, a mum-faceted
programme to control drug abuse and re-
habrlitation of the addicts is under way
since I976. -

The Party Chairman once pointed out
that .thc danmous drugs eon lead to extinc-
tion of entire nations. We must. therefore,
intensify the national campaign, raise the
publrc awareness for drug abuse revention
and attackthedrugabuse prolern‘w’th
renewed vigour until total victory is
achieved.
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500060032-5

RECORD DRUGS HAUL MADE, INTERMTIORAL GANG DETECTED

New Delhi PATRIOT in English 16 Apr 82 p 10

"m1 we Dilutonte of km... mung.” (D!!!) m m
Wmmtunwomlgmgofdmgmkmopenb
inglnlndiaandihmpemcoumﬂuvlmmgalmnot
a huge quantity of superior quality bullish at Delhi Alb
port aﬂythisweehnpomum.

in tho m m m

.thm‘M’h‘ MW m“ “N
mumuuum w
you than Rs ammo. gromnmNMSAw

manual-Mb
‘mmmdmﬂ autumn-mm»
mummmmw thﬂuOM.
The

N. m. “n. m h I m M
911:.“ a van-t3...» :3: Th: Delhi contact of

aﬂ W ‘1 a. “M‘ the ucketurt has to-

portodly amended after
no. mm mm... he heard of their donn-
"" .MWN‘ 1" Walla! tion. 11:. DRI has thrown

mm (M muum an.» it. netwide to cntch bin.

E
:3
g§§§;

I
c
in

680: 5300/7027

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500060032-5
DRUG ADDICTION INCREASIM IN SARAH“

Koala Lnnpur “ER STRAITS TIMES 1n Susi

[Article by Jules Ritchie]

'lucom “or In:
mum-m

”mama-u.
«cunts-mum
WWW-I
tuumbum—m
W cl no
unman-

[Excerpts]

dun-U.
CVO. 3y I." he
not“ in“ ﬂour];

mum
cradle“. llama;
m I“.

must.
and land“ Carl

Ind.)

However. “on“
pence to. m u m
uyndkue’n Open-um
and plan m ﬁnal
and broke lb. Poun-
ouur lalunlr
brutal "at. In A“
1011 my Mall“ 00
ml. mm: a M
my.

cso: 5300/8326

I. the blur. a:
mm mm M U!
CID ellct Auluut
Canals-loner mm:
In“ It". In; mu.
and My m the
I..«I|ﬂoﬂ In KL.
we!“ pp tn new
m

an In Penn; “a
Km «In cl M
van-Manu-
Man an)“ tor ho
”granulation”

a!“ '0' to
«you. .
' Nata-ulna“.

lent nu .- the am.
an...“ to Mount,
“cawcuunu-n-uua

kl m
In an at... I“

mm

“no of “no um

"I“ Ill NC“ .l 3.1“.
ct heroin. “03- at

”wounding-alga.-

p.
TM- lompotorlly
Ituuucd lac «In;

a
g
i

hum.

In "gun at
“In". no am."
autumn
u: M! Ibo unocc- d

13h 28 Mar 82 p 11

on
nn‘LuIrurtﬂlINI

W “3‘ MOW‘I:
\l t m out “an”.

"0 GI \bu It".
Pairing"; road on
BRIEFS

THO HELD on NARCOTIC CHARGBSuKatln-andu, April l3--A British national. Keith
Charles banana- has been arrested on the charge of collecting and selling nah
cotic drugs and things of archaeological importance. reports nss. Police
seized tvo k; of hashish and acne goods of archaeological importance. Like-
wise. Harishchandra Poudel a resident of Parhat district and student of Tribhn-
van University was arrested along with two In; of huhish at Basantpur, it was

learnt from the police. [Text] [lathandu m3 RISING NEPAL in English
lb Apr 82 p £1

C80 : 5300/5722
dangerous drugs hoard (DD!) disclosed yesterda . The board said that although
the country is not a lucrative heroin narket. it has been used as a transit
country by international heroin traders. Dope traffic was already observed
slowly picking up in Hanila, Dehu, and Angeles, the D03 said, adding law on-
forcers have seized 267 grass of heroin fro- three carriers since last year.
The apprehensions shoved that highly addictive heroin seized in the country
either cue tron Pakistan or iron Thailand. It was on the my to the United
States. The unlawful cultivation of asrijuane also continued despite inten-
sive drug lav enforce-eat efforts the previous year. the D03 noted. This has
led the not, the coordinating agency of all anti-drug ahnse activities, to
intensify its drive against the local drug problem. DD) Executive Director
tunnel Supnet underscored the need to step up preventive ensures, including
educational mpaigns against drug abuse. Suggesting that anti-drug education
be integrated into the school curricula. Snpnet also pressed plans to strengthen
the youth nobilisation progran this year. An intricate prevention strategy
involving a layered prevention sync with parents acting as the "first level
of prevention" and the schools as the "second level" will he carried out, he
said. Supnet added that the 003‘s present intonation thrust aim to lake.
people realize that "the best tiles to prevent drug abuse is before it starts."
[Text] [Henila mums row in English 10 Apr 82 pp 1. 91

10
REACTION T0 CONSUL'S ARREST ill CRICMIO
Sitthi. Arun (Jo-eat
“030626 Bangkok Doleetic Service in Thai 0530 GMT 2 Hey 82

[text] Deputy Foreign Miniater Am Phnwhoeg yeaterday told reportere at the airport

of the air force co-and headquarter-a. where he wee waiting for the return of Fri-e liiniater
Gen Prea Tineul-ion and hia party Iron lurope. that he did not know Thai Vice Oonaul

Sihadet Chidrwong in aiicego. who wee erreeted late laet week for hie inwlveaent in heroin
trade. A report fro- Osicego. however. aaid that Sihadet ia a 0-6 official of the Forein
Hiniatry'a under eecretery of etate office. Arm revealed that he had eleo heeo interned
about the arreat oi Sihadet hy the larcotice Control Board. and he later reported thie
utter to Foreign iiiniater Air Grief harehal Sitthi Suetaila.

hated it Sihedet would he called hack for my action. Ann replied that the Foreign
Hiniatry had allowed the [1.8. authoritiea to arreat Sihadet regardleaa of hie diploaetic
i—nity. which can alao he nullified by the United Stetea became the cffenae toot place
in ite territory. Therefore. the 0.3. law not he ohaerved.

thenrdiile. roteip Minister Air Oiief liarahel Sitthi Seuetaila told reportere upon hia
arrival at the airport yeaterday nothing that he had heen inioreed about :he arreat of the
'lhai coneul and inetructed the ihai cooeulate in Waco to notily the v.8. 60th that
it ca: talne legal actiona according to the 0.8. In! in thia cue.

'NATION REVIBU' Editorial
“030145 Bangkok NATION REVIBI in English 3 May 829 6

(Editorial: “The Diploeetic Pouch: new Did heroin Get Int") I I

[Tart] we the diploeat of a country ie caught in ilegrmte delicto it it aoatvhat aha-e-
tul to adnit that fact. but we helieve that the i'hei Foreign Miniatry hea heen correct

in cooperating with the Chicago police and the A-ricn drug enforce-eat agency to per-it
the arrest of Vice Conaul Sihedet Grindawong. who operated. according to the report. a
drug ring in the Chicago area and who w. obtaining high-grade heroin throw the use of
leloeetic pouchee. Thailand certainly aalvagea a lot of preetige in that the Ihei hheaey
in Hashington did not holler dmut diplonetic privilege hut quietly gave pernieaion for the
police to pick up Sihadet.

Nor-ally every coutry picka ite diplonate. to repreaent it abroad. according to a cer-
tain lie: of qualification -- the liat eight differ free country to coutry. hut the over-
all purpoee it to project the heat picture 0roed. lie aleo know that diploeatic peraonnel
are used hy certain cointriae for gathering intellipnce -- everybody have about the CIA.

ll
the me. the lilo ad nunrou others who do not go by my one hut try to be a faceless
as possible. There are certain countries thich prinarily specialise in nercial and
econonic intelligence and. let us face it: The old days of diploeatic courtesy ad agree-
nents by shaking hnds are gone. mis does not us: that the gathering of intelliunoe.
for whatever reuons. should be condoned. but it is a fact of life which every country
has to live with. Recently there has been a spate of activity by the [68 in Southeast
Asia and u all have learned to live with it. occasionally expelling sons and trying to
keep a watch on the suspicious.

hut what Sihadet ha dons does not not to the sort of activity the: will call for em
condemation and expulsion. Hhat Sihadet nd his ring have done. if the report is true.
is just an ordinary. despicable cries for his personal benefit. soeething perishable under
law in every country. and which sullies the fair face of ‘I'hailnd. Us do know that.
however careful the screening is. rotten apples do turn to in the barrel and the sooner
they are renvad md punished enewlsrily the better. He are glad the Thai Forein
Ninistry saw the wisdoe of it and we are also sure that it will cone up with the exposure
of all the details that are involved. Drug trafficking is a cri- we loathe second only
to rape and nurder.

The question whether Sihadet is to he tried in the United States or 'l'hailad. is not actually
prinary. The probloe for both the Porcine Ministry and ‘lhallnd's Office of Narcotics
Control Board is: “to put the heroin in the diplolatic pouches? Sihadet picked it up in
Chicago. but sonebody lust have put it in the pouches. So it is just not a single rotten
apple in the barrel. there is another one. This should be the prinary question in the whole
unsavoury episode. is a setter of fact Sihadet hi-elf night opt to he tried and iwri-
soned in the United States. it he is guilty. because the sentences there are lighter and

conditions in prison note tolerable. achiever. the other 'rotten apple' hasn't got such a
choice.

C80: 5300/ 2284

12
DRUG OFFICIAL WARNS OF INCREASE) USE WNG YOUTH

w.“ mu...“ mm: mm any mm.
$3 gm. “5%: J" Jam“
nu mu u «an “WWW a

“ﬂaw “NEW” www-mmmw :3 win...

£53m“ 1“; .3
MW. mammwmmmwm imam“ x.
. mm?” mum“ m mmwwm. WWWMW 9“?me

Bridgetown ADVOCATE-NEWS in English 15 Apr 82 p 2

[Text]
INTERCOM“. MIN 11' N06 CASES DISCUSSED
Nuevo uredonoumooamtvommomsmmhaohraz SechG

[Text] Arturo Cedillo. chief of the office in charge of investigations concerning
narcotics in Laredo, stated: "I sincerely congratulate the Mexican federal autho-
rities on the recent blow to the drug traffic dealt in the town of luevo Laredo.”

According to the state-eat nade by that official, despite the fact that arrests
were nade of persons residing in this tovn on charges of heroin trafficking, the
investigations have been respected and, indeed, the cooperation is continuing

hetveen the tvo parallel offices, in order to keep attacking the hateful black
market.

He added: "Re are quite well aware that this ring has been operating on such
higher levels. and as representatives involved in such a critical adssion we
are vorking in a highly respectful nanner, but helping each other insofar as it
is possible.”

Counting on the situation of this border insofar as the drug operations that
are under way are concerned, Cedillo renrked: "Unfortunately. luevo Laredo and
Laredo are serving as a lever or takeoff site leading to the United States for

the cars of the drug traffic, and we night declare these two tovns the victies
of such operations."

Cedillo also trade a parallel coeparison of the aforenentioned function as none-
thing geraane to Mexico. because the product that was discovered vas fro. South
America. and the contact use in Mexico. so as to ship it froe there quickly to
the large cities of the United States.

Cedillo declared: ”It is to be aasuned that the organization which was partially
caught Inst have been operating for sons tine. without the lhxicsn authorities
investigating or at least speculating on the large volt-e which it had taken
into the United States."

According to the chief of the Narcotics Office in Laredo, there is a bilateral
coordination hetveen his office and the federal office in “co; but it is
obvious that. up until now. no intervention has been possible. until the investi-
gations in Mexico have been cowleted.

lb
He also added that it is possible that the one lost iqlicated in this affair

has been arrested, noting that everything is contingent on what is deter-med
in the probes and procedures taking place in muco.

In conclusion. he eaphssized the Iutual respect that exists toward the work

being done in Mexico, adding that he and his legal staff are ready to cooperate
within the bounds of their official capacities.

2909
650: 5330/77

15
SIX-YEAR AMI-DRUG CMIPAIGII 3mm. RAISED
FLlSlZSl. Mexico City norm in Spanish 1330 our 1‘ Apt 02

llixcorpts] Noxico City. 1‘ Apr (MD!!!) -— Tho Iuican Attorney Gonoul's Offioo ahould
have oliainstod 95 porcont of tho cultivation of nrijma baton tho and of tho proont
shinistration. according to nomty Attorney Conoral Samol Alba uyva. “rho official,
who is in chsrxo of tho standing main against narcotic traﬂic. also said thst
noxico. for-orly tho springboard for ”tho drug aafia.’ ha nov bou- tho country that
appiios tho greatest resources to ond this coil business.

wring tho first you of tho pro-ant 6-yssr torn. 269 kilo“. of oocaino vsro soisod
and norc than 23.000 narijuana fiolds and 1.7.000 poppy fialds vsro dostroyod. low.
about at tho end of this othiniotration. only n kilos of cocaine hovo boon ooisod and
H.000 Iarijuano and poppy Holds hon boon destroyed in 1 yoar.

According to statistical data. iron 1 nocubor 1976 to 31 ﬂsrch 1982. 235.000 narijnsns
and poppy fislds hm boon dostroyod and 670 kilos of pure cocaine. thousando of tons of
Iarijuana. huhish and soodo hsvo boon souod along vith $0 aillion doprosaont ad
sti-ulant pills. plus 5.000 kilos of nthaquslm.

Hith tho "pilot plan.” in which tho any also participates. tho Attornoy Gatoral's
Office ha soixsd 3.000 voapono ad 3.500 air. land had uritins vohicloo. ad has
nrrostod 25.000 drug traffichors. 1.000 of who. vars forsipsrs.

080: 5300/2281

16
INTERNATIONAL COCAINB TRAFFICKING RING msmmtn
Connections Disclosed
lluevo Laredo 81. DIARIO DB nurvo LAREDO in Spanish 27 liar 82 Sec C p 6

[Text] A powerful ring of Colombian cocaine traffickers was broken up by the
Federal Judicial Police and lenbers of the Federal Security Office. The investi-
gation began with the arrest of two South Asericana in the city of Monterrey.
individuals who had contacts in Laredo for taking the drugs to the capital of
Texas and fro. there distributing then in the leading cities of that state.

Yesterday. during a press conference directed by the coordinator of agencies of
the Federal Public Ministry in zone ll, Carlos Aguilar Garza, as well as the
agent of the Federal Public Ministry. Ranon Guillerno Calzada Vejar,and the
regional Cos-lander, Jose Siordia Jinenez. the announce-ant was mde of the
disbanding of a ring of cocaine traffickers in which several neabers of the
custom guard of the first fiscal zone are inﬂated.

From the reports supplied by the federal officials, it was learned that the
confiscated drugs are worth nore than 25 sillion pesos. and were considered to
be of a very high degree of purity by Cour Siordia Jimenez. however. this
cannot be ascertained until the chenical test results and those of the analysis
have been subaitted by the Office of the Attorney General of the Republic.

Monterrey Contact

On 18 March, the Colombians Orlando Grenados Barrera and logo Luis ﬂoyos Fernandez
arrived in the city of lionterrey. luevo Leon, where they were to contact wars
of the custons guard, so as to be taken to this port, fron which they would carry
the cocaine to the United States.

In order to evade the vigilance of the Mexican narcotics officials, the two

Colombians swallowed snall latex bags each containing between 5 and 6 gram of the
drug, which they would defecate once they were on Haxican territory.

Before this operation, the two South Anericans contacted the Anerican wonan Jacque-
line Jacks-an Canavati, who cane fron brads, Texas, to Konterray, to purchase a
sanple of the drugs weighing approximately 3 grass. for which she paid 5.000
pesos.

l7
Jacqueline was accoapanied by a wonan of Spanish nationality, who when questioned
by the federal police said that her nane was hritsa Peres lluerta.

Both Jacqueline Jackanaa and the two Colonbians were the first to be captured by
agents from the Federal Security Office detailed to Honcerrey; and they were
placed at the disposal of the Federal Public Hinistry agent, Ila-on Guillerno
Calzada Vejar, for the pertinent interrogations.

"hen the federal prosecutor received the case, he 'i'equested the aid of the regional
cot-sander, Siordia Jimenez, who, leading his group, began the intensive investiga-

tions and succeeded in capturing the rest of the ring, and the probe ended on 22
March.

Laredo Contact

After a thorough investigation, the federal agents in this town nanaged to capture.
first, Alfredo Jackanan Botarsi, a native of Laredo, Texas, who, according to the
Federal Police reports, was responsible for taking the South Americans to the
United States and leading then to the organization‘s key locations.

lie, in turn. after being questioned, nentioned several persons who were also Colon-
bians implicated in the case; whereupon an arrest was sade of Diego Alfonso Dias
Vinazco who, together with the organization’s right-hand nan, Carlos Rivero Deten-
court, was responsible for receiving the cocaine in this town.

The latter pair had cone fron San Antonio, Texas, to take the cocaine to that
location, fron which, when cut, it would be distributed in Austin, Houston and
Miami.

when Diego Dias was arrested, he turned over half a kilogr. of pure cocaine which
he had concealed in the residence of Ala Gloria Roldan Robles, a resident of this
town.

The federal officials also reported that, in this town, an arrest was nade of
Carlos hilio Jackanan Saenz, alias "El Cocoy," who had arranged the cocaine
purchase with Carlos Rivero and Diego Dias Vinasco.

At the tine of the arrest of the two aforementioned subjects, they were with the
Colombian hernando Echeverri Holina, who, upon being questioned, clained to have
been engaged in transporting the cocaine fron Coloﬂia to this town.

Customs Officials Involved in the Cocaine Traffic

According to Carlos Aguilar Garza, as well as the federal prosecutor, liaison Guiller-
no Calzada and the zone ll co-ander. Jose Siordia Jisenes, the investigations
conducted to locate the nenbers of the drug trafficking ring revealed the fact that
several net-hers of the customs guard were involved in the utter.

They said that one of those arrested and under investigation thus far is Condr
Reynaldo Hernandez Pedrasa, who is closely associated with the drug traffic as a
contact in this town.

18
The infomnts clained that the custom officials had been used by the Coloabians
to evade the inigration authorities; because they contacted the guards and went
to Hontcrrey. fro- whicl~ they were accompanied by the "males.”

When they reached the checkpoint, the i-igration officials did not suspect any-
thing, because a guard would take charge of the situation.

It was also reported that several inspectors and guards 'are fugitives from justice.
having left their jobs as soon as they learned what had happened.

Orders To Kill Rivals

The Colombians who were arrested by the Federal Judicial Police agents said in
their state-ents to the prosecutor that there were rival trafficking rings in San
Antonio which. in turn, were fighting to obtain a bigger nsrket snong the Texas
cocaine addicts.

They also clained that they had orders from the ringleaders to locate the rivals
and eliminate then, or report then to the American narcotics group, so as thereby
to overcome then and lake better headway in the sale of cocaine.

In this connection, the coordinator of the agencies of the Federal Public Ministry,
Carlos Aguilar Garza, said that two rings of Colombian traffickers had been disco-
vered, which were operating by using this border port as a bridge. but that, unfor-
tunately, only one could be broken up. 0

Six Months of Cocaine Trafficking

Once the agency of the Federal Public Ministry conpletes the preliminary penal
investigation of those in custody. they will be turned over to the district court
where the legal status of each of them will be decided.

It was said that nany years of imprison-ant are awaiting them, because, according
to their statements, they have been engaged in this illegal business for over 6
nonths. having earned millions of dollars through the sale of drugs on the United
States narket.

It was said. tentatively. that l kilogram of already cut cocaine is worth $100,000:
and hence it was calculated that the drugs which the Colonbians had, upon being
placed on the underworld urket, would co-snd a price in excess of 25 million

pesos.
More Arrests Made
Nuevo Laredo El. DIARIO DB NUEVO LAREDO in Spanish 28 Her 82 Sec 0 p 6

[Text] The drugs seized by Federal Judicial Police agents from a ring of South
American traffickers with contacts in Mexico and the United States was described
by the experts in the Office of the Attorney General of the Republic as being
Colombian cocaine with a high degree of purity.

19
This inforaation was released yesterday, Saturday, by the Federal Public Ministry
agent, Ranon Guillerno Calzada Vedar. who added that the pertinent questioning of
each one of those arrested has already begun.

The prosecutor said that probably by tonorrow, or Tuesday at the latest, ".11 the
statenents will be coupleted and based upon their liability, they will be turned
over to the district court for continuation of the penal process to which they
are subject.

Hany Ngitives

Despite the fact that as soon as the Federal Judicial Police agents received orders
to investigate the drug trafficking being carried out by a powerful ring of Colon-
bians they hastened to nake several captures, nany of those responsible nanaged

to flee. and to date they have not been located by the agents in charge of the
investigation.

According to statements made by the federal officials, several neabers of the
custons guard fled, because they were iqlicated in the drug snuggling; but it
was clained that they will be strenuously hunted until they are found. so that
they say be tried fordrug trafficking.

in this connection it was said that Condr Reynaldo Hernandez Padraza has been
participating in the Colombian cocaine trafficking. became it was identified by
the South Americans as an active contact in this town.

But it will not be until tonorrow. lbnday, that the legal responsibility of the
custons coriander in this unlawful business is announced.

Others Arrested

The federal officials also said that, in addition to the eight persons originally
captured, six nore individuals have been arrested, both in this town and in the
city of Monterrey.

however. the latter were only held for questioning concerning their collaboration
with the traffickers, although it was on a snail scale and they had no contact
with the drugs.

Participation of the v.5. Narcotics Departnent

Upon the capture of the Colo-bians Carlos Rivero Detancourt (the organization's
right-hand nan). Orlando Granados Barrera, Diego Alfonso Dias Velasco, Hugo Luis
Boyos Fernandez. and hernando Echeverria Molina, the United States federal authori-
ties undertook a roundup in the entire state of Texas in order to capture the other
contacts of the organization scattered in the United States.

Insofar as the Mexican police investigations are concerned, they are nearly finish-
ed, and all that remains to be done is to find the fugitive custoas guards; and,
therefore, the completion of the probe will now be carried out by the American
police. to capture the rest of the ring not located in Nuevo Laredo or Monterrey.

a-
It was also learned that several suspicious individuals from Laredo. Texas, associ-
ated with the Jackaman Canavatis. are being investigated by the narcotics agents.
because they my be implicated in the Colombian trafficking ring.

Eleven ﬁeld for Trial

Nuevo Laredo EL DIARIO DE NUEVO LAREDO in Spanish 31 Mar 82 Sec C p b

[Text] Eleven persons belonging to the powerful Colombian cocaine trafficking ring
who were arrested recently by the federal Judicial Police were turned over to the

district court upon being found presumably guilty of «mining crimes agath
health; while Jacqueline Jackaman Canavati and Maria Isabel Perez Huertas were

released because no evidence was found against them to warrant trying them.

This information was provided yesterday by Ramon Guillermo Calzada Vejar. investi-
gative agent of the Federal Public Ministry. who added that, in preliminary penal
investigation 118/982. penal action was brought against the Coloabians Orlando
Granados Barrera, Hugo Luis Hoyos Fernandez. Diego Alonso Dias Vinasco. Carlos
Alberto Rivero Betancourt and Hernando Echeverri blina.

Also held for trial for crimes against health were Alma Gloria Roldan Robles,
Carlos Emilio Jackanan Saenz. Mario Vedi Flores. Alfredo Jacks-an Batarse. customs
guard Armando Santos Garcia and Counander Reynaldo Hernandez Pedraza.

Serious Crimes

The charges made by the federal prosecutor against the matters of the Colombian
cocaine trafficking ring are said to be very serious. and it is clai-ed that many
years in jail await each one of the accused.

In preliminary penal investigation 118/982. turned over to the district court by
the prosecutor, Calzads Vejar, the presumed guilt of the aforementioned individuals
for crimes against health in various degrees was established.

As for Orlando Granados Barrera and Hugo Luis Hoyos Fernandez (the prosecutor

stated). they were held for trial on charges of importing. possession. trafficking
and transportation of cocaine.

Diego Alonso Diaz Vinazco. Carlos Alberto Rivero Betancourt and Hernando Echeverri
Molina were turned over to the federal judge on charges of importing. possession.
trafficking. transportation and exporting of Colombian cocaine.

Alma Gloria Roldan Robles. a native of this town. was turned over to the judge
for her presumed guilt in comitting crinea against health in the degrees of
possession. trafficking. transportation and exporting of cocaine.

Carlos Emilio Jackanan Saenz was remanded for his presumed guilt in the degrees
of possession. trafficking and exporting. and Mario Vedia Flores. in the degrees
of transportation and exporting of cocaine; because. according to the investiga-
tions, the latter went to the city of Monterrey for the "males" Granados Barrera
and Hoyos Fernandez, and took them illegally to Laredo. Texas.

21
The neebers of the custons guard were renanded to the federal judge for their
presuned guilt‘in co-itting crimes agath health in the degree of cocaine

transportation. They are Reynaldo Hernandez Pedrasa and Armando Santos Garcia,
in addition to the Anerican. Alfredo Jackanan Baterse.

Crimes Ruled Out

At the beginning. the investigations conducted by the Federal Judicial Police were
also aimed at disclosing various crimes which had been attributed to the ring of
coca traffickers; but these suspicions were ruled out by the authorities when

the subjects under arrest were interrogated.

The prosecutor claimed that the accused consistently stated that they had entered

the country on 18 March. and hence it was inposeible to believe that they had
connitted any crime before that date.

Among the murders that the main ringleaders were presumed to have co-itted was
that on 7 December of last year. which tool: place in the Mguersa Hospital in
Honterrey. where an unidentified person riddled a drug trafficker with bullets.

Probe Ends

Nuevo Laredo 81. DIARIO DB NUEVO LAREDO in Spanish 2 Apr 82 Sec C p lo

[Text] Today. an announcement will be made of the decision of the third district
judge, Ricardo Rodriguez Villarreal, regarding the 11 persons who were held for
trial owing to their presumed guilt in cot-itting crimes against health in the
various degrees of cocaine trafficking.

The constitutional period of 72 hours will terminate today, and the federal judge
will decide on the legal status of the five Colostians and other persons who were
arrested by Federal Police agents for their presumed guilt of cocaine trafficking.

From the outset. it was claimed that the ones who will have the most difficulty
in extricating themselves fron this problen are the Colonbians Orlando Granadoa
and bingo Luis Iloyos, who were the first to be arrested with the drugs in their
possession.

The sane fate awaits their fellow countrymen Alonso Dias Vinazco, Alberto Rivero
Betancourt and Hernando Echeverri Molina; because the latter were held for trial by
the federal prosecutor for their presumed guilt of crimes against health in the
degrees of importing, possession. trafficking, transportation and exporting of
cocaine.

This will end an arduous investigation which lasted several days, on the part of
federal agents and narcotics officials of the United States. whereby it was
learned that several traffickers who belonged to this ring have now been located.

2909

o: 5330 77
cs / 22
TRAFFICKING RINGLEADER CAPTUREﬁ IN OAIACA

Oaxaca de Juarez EL IMPARCIAL in Spanish 23 Mar 82 Sec 3 p 6

[Text] Meabers of the Cuicatlan group of the crine prevention police have put an
end to the dreaded gangster and drug trafficker. baldeaar Cid. alias "Bl Vilaar,”

head of the ring which had been operating in settle-ants of the Oaxaca nountain
ravine.

Continuing the investigations. the police were able to locate the whereabouts of
this criminal. who has a black record of criae. having been head of a criadnal
organization of which Felipe Carrera Quintero. a gangster captured by the Judi-
cial Police in the town of Chiquihutlan. Cuicatlan. was a aesber.

It was found that he was receiving protection fron the Public Ministry agent in
Cuicatlan. Porfirio Felipe Echeverria Zarate. as well as free Pedro Rolando
Rodriguez Quero. who served as joint judge of the first instance in the sane
judicial district.

It was the judge himself who obtained a federal pardon for bin so that the
criminal was released when he was arrested in Move-her of the year before last.

when they were required to report to the district judge of this town on the
criminal record of Baldenar Cid. both the Public Ministry agent. Echeverria Zara-
te. and Judge Rodriguez Quero overlooked the fact that a warrant had been issued
for the capture of this criainal in penal case No 19/979. for the crises of
assault. robbery. arson and property damage to Francisco Navarrete and others.

According to the investigation nade by the reporter, baldeear Cid is a consul-ate
gangster. purchaser of stolen livestock and drug trafficker. his accoeplices
were nenbers of the Trovanala fanily of Siete Carros Teutila. who identified

hie as head of the ring.

There are reports which show that Merino Mendoza. Asael Munoz Rodriguez and
Constantino Cervantes Ruvinos are aeobers of Baldenar Cid's ring. but the police
are working to gather evidence in connection with their criainal activity and to

put then in jail.

23
For a long tine. he apreed terror and death in aettleaente of the Oaxaca ravine.
Nov. Baldenar Cid (in the photo) ia in jail. accused of eaaault, robbery and
damage to the property of another. He in head of a criminal organization whose
Ienbera have received protection from the Public Ministry agent, Porfirio Felipe
Echeverria Zarate, and from Judge Pedro Rolando Rodriguez Quero.

2909
C80: 5330/77

24
TORTURE 0P CAPTURE!) DRUG mans omen
NuevoLaredoBLl‘lAllAﬂAinSpaniahZAprdZ Sech'l

[Text] hedicsl certificates issued by Dr Rafael Losano. assigned to the coordina-
tor's office in the Office of the Attorney General of the Republic. and Dr Alfredo
Garcia Trevino, of the Social Rehabilitation Center [enrso]. associated with the
Investigation concerning the Colod>ian drug traffickers. and the Laredo and Huevo
Laredo residents indicated therein, state that they showed no signs of violence
on their bodies when they were brought before the Federal Public liiniatry or upon
their entry into the CERBSO. ﬂovever, there are other docunents signed by private
physicians using stationery fro. the prison infirnsry attesting to violence.

In their respective statenanta to the third district judges. the accused denied
having any participation in a crine against health in its various degrees, and
explained that, if they had sdnitted guilt at first it was "because they subjected
us to heavy pressure and physical torture."

It was announced in the aforementioned court that the legal status of those being

held will be decided aonetine this norning, upon the expiration of the constitu-
tional period. '

The head of the cmso. hector Garcia Trevino, rensrked that he was unaware that
any private doctors had used stationery free that institution. and i-ediately
ordered all of it brought to the adninistration; adding that. when he received
the accused. only one of then had an inflansd eye. claiming that ”he was all
right" and not cosplaining of any physical torture that he nay have been given.

It was announced in the district court that it will not be until the trial is

underway that personal encounters will take place and the captors will be called
to account for the differences existing in the atatenents ends by those in custody.

2909
080: 5330/ 76

25
lNCINERATIm 0F comm mum WED

Ciuded Jueres EL mmzo in Spanish 21 Her 82 Sec 3 pp 1. 2

[Text] Yesterdsy. st kilo-eter 17 of the Pen-Aneticen nighwey. 5.5 tons of eerilmsne
were burned as pert of this town's entidru; :eretion.

The event wss witnessed by the Peders1 Public Ministry sgent. Norberto Selines

Nevsrrete end the second district judge. Iseeel Ruiz. who certified the incinere-
tion of the drugs.

At exactly 1510 hours in the efternoon. personne1 fro- the federel Judiciel Police
and eeebers of the firefighting corps uloeded 310 begs which conteined the drugs
that hsd been brought free Berranuille, Colodie.

The eerihusns was seized e few deys ego froe two Alericsns end e Pens-enien, who
are being held by the euthoritiee for the crine of drug snuggling.

Upon being epprosched, Iseeel Ruiz, the second district judge. steted thet steps
bed been tsken to incinerste the drugs becsuse of the lee]: of suiteble specs for

storing then over en indefinite period of tine; end hence the east spp-opriste
action wee to burn them.

After the drugs had been incinersted. the firefiuxting crops mdertook the test: of
destroying the remains of the drugs which hsd not been entirely W by the
fire. to evoid "teeptstion" on the pert of spectetors who hed stood by to observe
the burning of the drugs.

2909
(ISO: 5330/ 76

26
TRAFFICKERS CAPTURE!) WITH anon: PRO“ mum

Arrests Annmlnced

Nuevo Laredo 81. KARMA in Spanish 26 Her 82 Sec 3 p 7

[Text] Federal Judicial Police forces deslt e heavy blow to the drug traffic upon

arresting several persons and also seizing a noderate anount of eerihuens and
heroin.

The coordinator of the Office of the Attorney General of the Republic. Carlos Agui-
lar. mounted the arrest of Romn Perez Jars end Cleotilde Roeen Salgsdo. fro.

when 150 grams of very pure heroin, of sufficient quality to be doubled or tripled.
were seized.

In her statements. Cleotilde been Salgado said that she had brought the drugs tron
Iguala. Guerrero; and they are presuned to be merely a eagle, to be used for
asking a larger transaction.

when the investigation was continued, an arrest was esde of Candide Salgado Dias,
an individual who claimed that the heroin was owned by his, disclosing that Roeen
Perez Jara and Rodrigo Cunan Barrsgan had supplied it in 'rlatepec. Guerrero.

‘l'he sane police forces arrested Luis de Jesus Vazquez Rodriguez on the highway
between Mexico City and Laredo. near this port. as he was riding in a bus of the
"White Star" line. with a suitcase containing about 6 kilograns of earihuana.

Jailing Ordered
ﬂuevo Laredo 81. KARMA in Spanish 3 Apr 82 Sec 3 p 5

[Text] Ito-an Perez Jara. Cleotilde noun Selgado and Candida Selgado Dias nede
their prelininary state-ant in the second district court; and. subsequently. an
order was issued for their officisl iqrisonnent as persons presuned guilty of
a crine against health in the degree of heroin trafficking, possession and trans-

por tation .

They were inforned yesterday. in the Social Rehabilitation Center. of the decision
of the second district judge. Carlos Chowell Cepeda. upon the expiration of the
constitutional period.

27
o and Candi
pun hero!
Guerrero a:
Perez Jan and Cleotilde were arrested by Federal Judicial Police forces with 150
grams of heroin in their possession which wae pron-ably a mle for a larger
transaction.

Later arrested was Candide Salgado Dias. who claiasd that be owned the heroin and
had purchased it tron Perez Jara and another subject na-ed lodrigo (ha-n Iarraaan,
in a town in the state of Oaxaca.

In connection with this case. the police said that they were extending their inves-

tigation to other parte of the country in order to find other crininala distributing
hard druga with whoa thoee under arrest had soee connection.

2909
(:50: 5330/ 76

29
DRUGS PM PERU SEIZED AI AIRPOKI‘
NuevouredoublmowmomminSpanish7Apr82SecAp3

[Text] Mexico City. 6 April (om—A large anount of contraband cocaine and LSD
acid worth nover 200 nillion pesos was seized by Federal Judicial iolice agents
at the hxico City international airport. and the Anerican drug trafficker, Ila-or
Janes Rios. was also captured as he arrived fron Caracas. Venezuela.

Gen Raul Hendiola Cerecero. director of the Federal Judicial Police, stated that
this individual was a nuber of the sane international drug trafficking ring which
was caught 2 weeks ago. also at the Mexico City airport. with two false-bottoaed
suitcases in which 10 kilogram of cocaine were concealed.

On that occasion. the drug traffickar was not apprehended. because when he
realised that he had been discovered. he chose to renin in Line. Peru.

The capture of Janes Rios took place this warning. when he arrived on Aeronexico
flight 620 fron Caracas. Venezuela.

Upon being through the international custoae inspection. the A-erican appeared
visibly nervous. and therefore the federal agents proceeded to search his. It
was then that they discovered that. in a suitcase and a handbag, both with false
bottons. he was carrying 6 kilogram and 300 gram of cocaine. as well as 22 doses
of LSD. which he was taking to aouston, Texas. in the United States.

"hen questioned by the police, the subject in custody said that. a week ago. in
Austin, Texas. he had net Janos Sexton. who proposed that he travel to Peru in
order to note the ship-ant to the United States. Since the pay was good, he
accepted the job.

For this reason. he went to Lisa. Peru. where he set a contact. naned Haich. who
turned over the drugs to his.

Since Janes Sexton had been inforned that there were two drug detector dogs at
the airport in Line. Peru. he decided to travel by highway transporation to Chile
and Venezuela. and then boarded a plane to Mexico City. so as to avoid being
detected by the dogs. llomver. he was captured in this city.

2909

cso: 5330/77
BRIEFS

amen TWINE Wit has been reported that yesterday earning the Pede-
ral Judicial Police arrested an individual nased Aureliano Caballero Salazar,
thereby conplying with a warrant for his recapture issued by the district judge
for crises against health. 0n the basis of an official senorandun which the
prison adninistration has in its possession, the subject under arrest was placed
at the disposal of the federal judge. Aureliano Salazar entered the Innicipsl
public jail at about 1300 hours. 2 hours after he had been arrested by Federal
Judicial Police agents under the orders of Condr Benito Estrada Village-es. The
federal agents the-selves took the individual in custody to the Innicipsl jail,
placing him at the disposal of the fourth district judge. who was the one who

had issued the warrant for recapture, accusing his of crises against health.
Moreover, the Federal Judicial Police co-ander told 51. BRAVO yesterday that he
and his agents having been carrying out their vigilance and investigation work
concerning federal crises. He stressed that strict surveillance is being kept in
order to impede. insofar as possible, the activity of drug traffickers who have
nade this region their favorite spot for mggling drugs to the United States.
Fortunately, as a result of effort this illegal activity has been declining. but
nevertheless it will be very difficult to eradicate it conpletely at any tine.
[Text] I“. Kata-ores EL BRAVO in Spanish 30 her 82 See A p 10] 2909

C50: 5330/77

31
STATE BTWRISB T0 CONTROL COCA
"162250 Paris ADP in Spanish 17“ an 6 lb: 82

[Text] Lina. 6 lbr (AFP)-‘l'he Peruvian Govern-ant today established new
powers for the State National Coca Enterprise which has a nonopoly of the
doeestic and foreign trade in coca and its byproducts (cocaine). and its
processing as well.

“the social statute just issued by the govern-est. establishes that the
enterprises rust also develop the processing of coca leaves and will have
sole responsibility for the cultivation as soon as the current plantations
are eradicated, to the extent justified by denand.

lhe enterprise aust also pronote the social, cultural and technical develop-
ment of its personnel; cooperate in the rural develop-eat of cones where

the program of eradication of plantations and crop stbstitution are carried
out; and finally, establish branch offices throughout the country or abroad.

The state enterprise—whose social capital amuats to 10 billion soles

($18 nillion)—aust also keep updated records of the coca ferns and producers
and indicate those far-a whose tenants do mt couply with the requirement to
sell all their crop to that enterprise.

The enterprise will also control the harvesting. drying and tramportation
of the leaves so that they may not be used for illegal purposes. It will
also receive the coca seized fron drug trafficking and will ask the
Interior Hinistry for the confiscated cocaine, to be used in industries or
for exports. .

Finally, the enterprise will also carry out research and testing activities
on the processing of the coca. and will punish those who violate the legal
dispositions in dealing with this product.

CSO: 5300/2283

32
BRIEFS

NARCO‘l'Ics SEIZURE—Investigative police have captured two drug traffickers
and seized 33 kg of cocaine. The seizure took place at the airport just
before the men were to take a Venezuelan jet headed for Bogota. The
detainees said their names were Luis Antonio Castillo Gumn. 52, painter,

and Pedro Daniel Flores Herrera, 60. [Line a. MCIO in Spanish
20 Feb 82 p A-lO FY]

DRUGS SEIZED—Civil guard personnel from the city of 'l‘ingo Maria have
disnantled a highly sohpisticated laboratory for cocaine processing in

the jungle of Aucayacu, where 5.5 kg of cocaine paste and five vehicles

were seized. Andres Leon Noriega. Mauro Leon Noriega, Cesar Mauricio Hesias.
Yonel ,Carrion Diego and l’rancisco Natividad Aparicio were reported arrested.
[Lina EXPRESO in Spanish 20 Feb 82 p 6 PY]

DRUG TRAPFICKERS ARRBTED-dhe police have carried out operations against
drug traffickers in Tulbes. The police have arrested Italo Aguilar Peijoo
with 2.6 kg of cocaine base along with Helquiadea Hunoz Oyola and

Gloria del Socorro Echevarria Araujo, a Colodrian citizen. who was found
with 1.5 kg of cocaine base. [Lina El. oomcm in Spanish 7 Her 82 p A-l8 PY]

CSO: 53m/2283

33
BRIEFS

MINA!“ Bum—Six suitcases of narijuana, eatinted at $75,000 was at the
weekend burned at the Defense Hiniatry on Benson Street in nonrovia. The drug
was abandoned by some unknown passengers at the Roberts International Airport
(an) on s Ghana Airways flight on March 20, while the second consiguaent was
brought on a Nigeria Airways flight on “arch 27 this year. ﬂaking results at
the burning site Saturday naming, BrigJGen. Robert G. Saye. who deputiud
for the Chief of Staff, Lt.lGen. Henry S. Duber, called on security forces at
the RDA to be note vigilant in tracking down criminals to ainiaise the sausag-

ling of dangerous drugs into the country. [Tart] [Monrovia DAILY OBSERVER in
English 5 Apr 82 p 10]

(280: 5300/5723
DANE NAMED NORDIC POLICE DRUGS WHEAT!“ 10 SOUTH AMERICA
Copenhagen BERLINBKE TIM in Wish 20 Apr 82 p 3
[Article by Anders Uiig]

[Text] Ivar Boys. coumissioner of police, will, today. race-rend to the Ministry
of Justice that a Danish detective inspector be posted at Lima in Peru. from
where a courier has just been arrested. carrying 5.5 kilos of cocaine. At the
same time. it has been decided who will represent the police authorities of the
Nordic countries as liaison officer with the Heat Gemn Criminal Investigation
Department at Viesbaden.

As far as BERLIMSKE TIDENDE has been able to ascertain, it will be Hogans Lundh,
37. detective inspector of the Copenhagen Narcotics Police. The police authori-
ties of the Nordic countries as well as the West German police authorities have
high hopes of this expansion of the close cooperation in the very area of combat-
ing drugs abuse. Hogans Lundh will be in charge of the exchange of information
and will create contacts among the police authorities of the countries involved
beyond the contacts already en'sting at the Interpol level. he day-to-day
chief of Interpol in Denmark, Harry Thomson, detective superintendent, and Arne
Baum, deputy comissioner of police, have visited Hiesbaden in connection with
the establishment of the new arrangement.

This arrangement was decided upon at theNordic level in 1981. At the same
time, it was agreed that Denmark would examine the need for, as well as the
feasibility of, stationing a Danish police officer as the Nordic contact man in
South America. from where large quantities of cocaine are smuggled into the
Nordic countries.

Kenning Dahlfeldt, deputy chief constable, and H. P. Sorensen. detective inspect-
or. have visited Lima, the capital of Peru, in connection with this task. They
had meetings with both the Minister of the Interior and the Minister of Justice
of Peru and carried on extremely positive negotiations with the chiefs of the
local police authorities. Subsequently, Ivar Boys, comissioner of police, has
decided to ask the Minister of Justice to arrange all of the formalities with a
view to sending a Danish criminal police officer to Lima.

"1 find it a sensible arrangement. in this way. to get to know the South American
continent and to get to follow the cocaine problems more or less from the moment
they emerge," says Ivar Boye. comissioner of police.

7262 35
050: 5300/2172
poucn m Hammers mm SEPARATE macs DIVISIONS
Copenhagen mm mm in Danish 23 Apr 82 p 3

[Text] The intensified hunt for narcotics dealers and narcotics smugglers will
a‘so lead to nine appointments and promotions of police chiefs both in Copenhagen
and in the provinces. The forthcoming appointments of chiefs of police are also
a sign that the drugs police must have a more independent position within the
criminal police forces of the provinces. In Copenhagen, the criminal investiga-
tion department has, for several years. had an independent drugs division.

That will now also be the case at Krhus where a detective superintendent and a
deputy detective superintendent will be appointed chiefs, while deputive detec-
tive superintendents will be appointed at the Aalborg and Odense criminal in-
vestigation departments. In Copenhagen, the deputy chief of the Mgs Division
will be promoted from police superintendent of the 25th class—the some as
deputy superintendents-to the 31st class. while still another superintendent
will be appointed. Bent Hansen will, no doubt, rennin deputy chief. 'Ihe chief
of the Trouble Spotters, Ove Nielsen, police superintendent of the 25th class,

will be promoted to the 31st class and will get a deputy superintendent as his
deputy chief.

Finally, a narcotics superintendent of police will be appointed within the Fly-
ing Squad of the- National Bureau of Investigation, which assists the mller
police districts in the provinces and coordinates the narcotics detection work
in the provinces. This is expected to be Preben Darkner. detective superintend-
ent. who will also be promoted to the much-coveted Blst class.

The forces of the larger police districts and the Flying Squad have already been
increased by well over 50 officers with a view to intensifying the narcotics
detection work. This. however, has been done for the time being through trans-
fers of staff from other task forces. l.l'he eaqaansion of the police force. fore-
shadowed by Minister of Justice Ole Espersen, may only be carried through over a
number of years. At the same time. an assistance arrangement has been carried
through between the Copenhagen police department and the so-called outer~ring

police departments. and grants have been made for additional technical equipment,
such as cars and surveillance equiment.

7262
080: 5300/ 2172

36
BRIEFS

COPENHAGEN DRUGS CAMS BROKEN—In two big police actions in Copenhagen last Wednes-
day and Thursday. the narcotics police arrested 15 people who have been charged
with smuggling of and traffic in narcotics. In connection with one of the cases.
a man from Helsingborg [SUEDENJ has. furthermore, been arrested. The arrests
last Wednesday followed a very intensive cooperation among the Scandinavian police
authorities. For 3 months, the narcotics police department in Copenhagen has had
eight officers engaged in the breaking of a gang which, under the leadership of
Finns. smuggled amphetamines into the country and sold them here. The police get
on the track of the gang at the end of 1981. and when it turned out that the gang
also operated in Sweden and Norm, the Danish, Swedish, and Norwegian police
authorities started cooperating on the case. It soon appeared that Finnish
citizens played a decisive role in the case, and the gang was, therefore, given
the name of "the Finnish Gang.“ The inter-Scandinavian police cooperation was ex-
panded to include Finland as well. last Wednesday morning, the police struck at
a number of addresses at Norrebro in Copenhagen. One Finn and four Danes were
arrested. At the same time, the police. at Helsingborg arrested still another Finn
in the same case. At the police action at Norrebro, the police found several
kilos of amphetamines. The police has declined to state the quantity found since
the case is being heard in camera. The persons arrested were yesterday sentenced
to 25 days' imprisonment by the judge on duty. last Thursday morning, in another
police action, the narcotics police cracked down on a Copenhagen hashish gang.
Nine people were arrested. Last night, the case was still at the stage of inter-
rogation. [Text] [Copenhagen BERLIRGSE TIDENDE in Danish 23 Apr 82 p 3] 7262

COCAINE: SEIZED AT AIRPORT-d total of 5.5 kilos of cocaine, which—if sold to
drug addicts in Denmknwould have fetched nearly 25 million Icroner. have been
seized by customs officers at Kastrup Airport. A 26-year-old Italian arriving
by plane from Iondon last Sunday night tried to snuggle the cocaine into the
country. He was arrested in a routine check when passing through customs from
the arrival hall. He was yesterday imprisoned for 2 weeks. hiring an inter-
rogation in the narcotics department of the Copenhagen police headquarters, the
Italian said that he had purchased the cocaine at Lima in Peru for 1.0.000
dollars. He said that the had travelled from Rome to Peru to purchase the
dangerous drug. On his way back. he had flown first to Rio in Brazil. from
there to Lisbon and on to London. and everything went well until the customs
officers at Kastrup asked to check the two elegant handbags of the Italian.
After the preliminary interrogations, the narcotics police are inclined to
believe that the cocaine was to be taken to Rome. It is true that the Italian
did not have a ticket to any other destination. but, during the investigation,
he mentioned that he was to travel on by train. If the cocaine, or part of it.
would have been sold in Copenhagen. the street price is at least 1,000 kroner
per gram. says Bent Hansen, detective superintendent of the narcotics depart-
ment. The cocaine seized has a strength of 90 percent. If the 5.5 kilos
which were seized are diluted to a strength of 20 percent, which is the usual
strength, the quantity will fetch approximately 25 million kroner. [Text]
[Copenhagen mumsxn norms in Danish 20 Apr 82 p 1] 7262

cso: goo/2172 37
FOREIGN UNDERSECRBTARY PROPOSAL FOR HALTING DRUG TRAFFIC
Rome IL TEMPO in Italian 3 Apr 82 p 17
[Text]

Why is it that here in Italy, despite the unquestioned success the
forces of law are claiming in this area, drugs are still claiming
new converts?

This and other hard questions were raised at a press conference called
by the Foreign Undersecretary, the Hon Hr Costa, where he presented a
voluminous file of data on this burning issue.

In his press release, Undersecretary Costa lists a series of basic
reasons why Italy has become a frightening center for the traffic --
not to mention the consumption -- of narcotics. He lists eight such
reasons, the most significant;ofwhich are, in our view, the first
(more widespread ties between organized crime, the camorra and the
mafia, and the drug traffic), and the last.(the large numbers of Ita-
lian citizens who - albeit for only short periods -- leave Italy for
the East to buy cheap Opium or opium derivatives for their own use

as well as for third parties). These “drug-buy commuters“ number at
least 20,000.

We shall skip over the other six reasons because, since they are tied
in with objectively insoluble problems (Italy's central location in
the Mediterranean, its very long coastline, etc.), and hence none of
the problem can fairly be laid at the door of either the legislature
or of the authorities responsible for prevention and repression of
the phenomenon.

The other two points, however, deserve more thoughtful consideration.
Here something can and must be done, if we are to stop the fearful
toll of drug-related deaths (237 in 1981) in our country from mount-
ing still higher.

As for the first point, obviously steps must be taken to “reclaim“
Italian society on both the moral and behavioral levels: the stag-
gering number of murders in Sicily and Campania that crowd the front
pages and IV screens is linked either directly or indirectly with the
drug traffic. One need only reflect on the fact that no fewer than

38
10,000 people were indicted for dealing, while the number of users,
according to Costa's file, must be at least 100,000. Here are sone
more of the figures Costa quoted: in 1980, six heroin-producing
laboratories were discovered; 200 kilos of heroin were seized (as
against 85 kilos in 1979), which is alnost as such as was seized in
the entire United States, as well as 267 kilos of norphia (1980) and
78 kilos of cocaine (1981).

On Costa's last count, the State can and must do sore -- and do it
better: it would suffice to keep a close eye on the more than 20,000
Italian citizens who yearly visit the drug traffic's 'hot zones.‘

We need, says Costa, more rigorous intervention in the area of issuing
(or withdrawing) passports. To stop the traffic in drugs 'at its ori-
gins," Costa advocates a network of Italian 'Jases Bonds" in the coun-
tries where the shipments start for Italy: Southeast Asia first of
all, followed by the Middle East and the Eastern Mediterranean; and
finally on the Andean slopes of Latin America.

Reportedly working on this project right now are the Ministries of
Foreign Affairs, Interior, Health, and Finance. The hope is that
anti-drug offices staffed by expert agents will be opened and support-
ed by enbassies and consulates in some 20 countries: the ones where
most of the opium, coca, and cannabis is grown. The model would be
the highly efficient DEA in the United States. Missing, as usual,

is adequate funding. To start with, Costa concluded, the operation
will be confined to eight or ten countries -- the "hottest'I ones.

0182

cso: 5300/2273

39
GANG am mom. USE) FINDS To AID mm “W

'Shoeeaker' Gang Indicted
StOCRholl SVBISKA mm in Swedish 18 liar 82 p 6
[Krticle by Sune Olssoﬂ

ﬁery The two sen closest to the leader of the so-called shoemaker gang were

indicted on Usdnesday. The gang is considered to be the eost dangerous drug
ring uncovered in Sweden.

The wife of one of the sen was indicted at the sane tine by county public prose-
cutor Jerry Hartinger. All three are Lebanese nationals of Athenian descent.
Only one of the sen is hinself a user of heroin. which was the gun's specialty.

A number of indictnents will follow successively: of the lain figure who is a
shoemaker in Sellentuna and a Syrian of Arnenian descent. of another few of the
key figures innediately 3mm hi- and of a large nunber or collaborators.
About loo persons have been arrested; 70-80. or wherever it ends. are suspects.

Soee people are still known only by their first naees. or described by their
nationality.

Bore Than 6.5 Kilogram

Durim 1%0 and 1%1 the three who were now indicted alone or with the help of
others illegally brought in and distributed sore than 6.5 kilograns of heroin
with a market value of appronnstely 6 nillion kronor. Couriers and recipients
made big profits. more are cases in which a single trip brought in 70.000 kron-
or net. when the purchaser in Sweden himself went to Lebanon. where the najor
part of the heroin cane fron. as a. courier.

In nost cases the narcotics were then delivered to the slwenaker in Sollentuna
end he in turn sold then to Swedish dealers and drug addicts. Depending on the
quantity of drugs bought. the prices were then ”0-1.000 honor per gran. A
heroin shipeent. which in Lebanon cost a few tens of thousands of kronor. in
Sweden becaae perhaps half a nillion.

Jerry ﬂax-timer thinks the whole gang of about 80 We say have snxmled drugs
worth very large suns:

60
"It is not impossible that in the last 10 years they may have brought in drugs
worth several hundred million honor to Sweden.“ he says to SVEIISKA ntGBLAM‘.

Specially Altered Shoes

The current indictment concerns two years. 1%0 and 1%1. but. as was said before.
there are ramifications which are still under investigation and there is reason
to believe that the drug ring has sold heroin in Sweden since 1978. lluch indi-
cates that the shoemaker gang sold several tens of kilograms of heroin in Sweden
and as a result made a profit of many millions. Honey. which then in all proba-
bility was snuggled out of Sweden.

The profession of the leader of the drug ringuone of the persons now indicted
is also a shoemaker-has not been without inportance. Sone of the heroin liter-
ally walked into the country right under the noses of inspectors at airports and
customs stations in Scania. The drugs were found between the soles and in the
heels of professionally altered shoes.

This was the case. for example. when a young woman came to Sweden from Austria.
She had 325 grams of heroin in the shoes. But bags with false bottoms. ciga-
rettes and cartons lined with plastic were often also used for transportation.
The couriers usually chose airplanes of trains. Conspicuous cars are entirely
absent fron the picture.

The sellers in Lebanon were usually acquaintances of the gang's couriers or per-
sons when they got to know through relatives or friends in Lebanon. A cannon
feature is the Armenian descent. This also applies to persons of other nation-
alities. includixg the woman who case from Austria and her husband.

Funded Armenian Liberation Movement
Stockholm SVENSKA DAGBLAIIL‘I‘ in Swedish 18 Her 82 p 6

[Krticle by Sune Olssop]

[Fug No one knows with certainty today where the shoemaker gang's millions
are. The police suspect. however. that the noney was used to finance the Arsen-
ian liberation movement.

The police know that the money was largely smuggled out of Sweden and placed in
Swiss banks. From there. transfers were made to the United States. among other

places .

The police have found statements of account showing such transactions. Once.
half a million was transferred to the United States without any problel. Another
tine one of the gang's suppliers himself went to Stockholm as a carrier. The
police were interested in his and he did not dare leave the country with his non-
ey. 300.000 kronor. The money was then sent to his through a Swiss bank to a
bank in Los Angeles. where he had gone.

It has been established that in certain areas of the Los Angeles region Arnenians

have invested in gasoline stations and restaurants. anong other thiws. And to
an extent which can be described as conspicuous.
This is where the Lebanese drug dealer went. and this is where he was paid by a
poor shoeaaker in Sollentuna. who sakes such a scant living that he is entitled
to welfare payaents.

The shoemaker is not alone. No excesses can be traced to anyone in the gang.
llost do not even own a car. There are no clubs in the picture. lost of those
who had pernanent residence in Sweden tried to earn a living by working.

Suspicious '

There are as yet unconfined suspicions that the drug trade has been a way to
finance the Arnenian liberation aoveaent. It could be that drug profits froa
Sweden and other incoae were invested in the United States for the long-rune
establishment of sources of income. These in turn are intended to pay the ex-
penses of the novenent. But even if these suspicions are unclear. it is a fact

that the heads of the gang have had foreign principals who took charge of the
aoney.

But it is also this phenoaenon which aade the shoe-eker gang so dangerous. lot
the connection to the liberation noveaent in itself. but the circumstance that
despite the nillion-lu'onor profit the nenbers of the gang lived so sisply and
operated so discreetly. Not even the top people could or wanted to act in a nan-
ner which has otherwise often betrayed aajor drug dealers once the police becane
suspicious. The gang nearly got away with it.

Snuggled Drugs Throw: Lebanon
Stockholn SVBISKA DAGBLAIEI‘ in Swedish 25 liar 82 p 8
[Krticle by Margit summeig

ﬁexg The 27-year-old Janitor and the 35-year-old shoesaker in Huddlnge. two of
the Iain figures of the so-called shoeaaker gang. nicely and obediently adnitted
that they had travelled to Lebanon in order to single heroin back into Sweden.
The Janitor. hinself a user. went along to test the quality of the heroin.

The trial in Sollentuna district court on Iedneeday was a quiet event which did
not correspond with the dranatic background of the aultiaillion-lcronor heroin
deals of the shoenaker gang. It involves one of the biggest drug rings ever in
Sweden. The nase of 'shoenaker gang" refers to the fact that in the center of
the heroin trade stood two shoenakers fro. Huddirge and Sollentuna. The herein
was snuggled into the country in the heels of shoes.

Years of Investigation

The shoenaker and the janitor were caught one Sunday evening on Gotgatan in
Stockhola after several years of investigation by the Huddime police. According
to district attorney Jerry nartinger. about 70 persons are involved. About ‘40
have been or are under arrest. anong then the Sellentuna shoe-alter. who is called
the ”spider in the net" by the district attorney. Ten persons have already been
sentenced to prison terms between 2 and 5 years.

102
curing Hednesday's proceedings the indicted shoemaker from Huddinge related how
he returned to Lebanon in order to exchange a 76-graa batch out of 100 grass of
heroin which he had bought on a previous trip. But the heroin was bad and the
"spider in the net” complained to his shoemaker colleague.

“Everyone laughed at ne for buying such bad heroin. That's why I went back to
Lebanon to exchange it.”

In Lebanon the shoamaker net the janitor who was in Lebanon in order. along other
things. to see a doctor about his drug habit. The two travelled together to the
city of Zahle. where the janitor had to test the heroin by sniffing. and he
judged it to be "average.” The shoeaaker bought 200 grams.

Special Heels

After that he bought two pairs of shoes. one pair for himself and the other for
the janitor. whon district attorney Hartigner preferred to call the "guinea pig.”
The heels of the shoes were removed and the shoe-alter eerie the cavity undea- the
heel a little larger in order to have room for 50 grass of heroin in each heel.
The district attorney asked my questions about the node of procedure. This in-
terest in the shoelaker's profession was received with a great deal of surprise
by the shoe-alter. who tried to explain that the preparation of the shoes was a
simple manual operation.

"I have worked as a sheemaker for 23 years. ever since I was 10. I took a year
off and that was to fight the war in Lebanon.”

With the sane professional background he had chasen a pair of shoes for the Jan-
itor which fit him perfectly. Some time later the two partners walked through
customs at Arlanda with 50 grams of heroin under each sole of the foot. The bad
heroin weighing 76 grass was returned to Sweden in a loaf of Arab bread. The
janitor received 55.000 kronor for his help. He used the noney to finance his
own habit.

At home in Sweden contact was made with the shoemaker in Sollentuna. "the spider
in the net.” He weighed out the herein in portions of 9 grams to each package.

"That turned into a lot of packages ." the district attorney pointed out.

”COunt them yourself! Divide 200 by 9!” the shoemaker urged his.

The shoemaker in Sollentuna took over the heroin and paid. according to the

sales he made. 700 kronor per gran to the janitor. who passed that on to the

Shae-alter in Huddinge. In Lebanon the heroin coat about 150 kronor a gran.
Bxaaple of Large-Scale hodels Abroad

Stockholn SVENSKA DAGBLAIEI‘ in Swedish 2? Her 82 p 9

[Article by Hargit Silberstein7

[Text] The shoe-alter gang is a typical exaqzle of the fact that narcotics crime
has changed character on the foreign pattern and has become firmly organized in
Sweden. It has thus become Inuch more dangerous.

n-e
This was the statuent by district attorney Jerry lartineer in his closing argu-
lentinthecaseaaaainsttvoofmelainﬂgmesottMso-calledsmeeaker
sane. which is suspected of having angled heroin worth sillions into Sweden.
He urged that the penalty be “as close to the mad-m penalty as possible'I and
lifetiae deportation. The Ian-m penalty for aggravated narcotics crine is 10
years. "Previously. foreign criminals delivered drugs to the Swedish‘bozders.
where Swedish distributors took over. But foreign crisinals have now established

a fire organisation in Sweden with wholesalers and retailers. as in any other
fire." Jerry lartinger said.

He believes that the ehoenaku- gang in Huddinge was the lame-scale wholesalers
and his partner. a 27-year—old Janitor. the “guinea pig." The last day of the
trial in Sollentuna district com-t turned into a leuthy affair which did not
end until about 9 Pl! Friday. The personal data alone. that is to say the person-
al baclground of these indicted. stretched into several hours. The 27-year-old
janitor and the 35-year-old shoemaker then talked about their background in war-
torn Lebanon. Sentencing has been set for 7 April. The indicted persons will
have to renain in custody until then.

119:9
cso: 5300/2261
resin
license plates nae stopped in Halno. [Index- the back Seat were near]. 11. kilo-
of camltis. The ma began his snuggling trips in 1978. [Fan 1&7
tockholu smsn mamm in Swedish 17 ha: 82 p g 119»

the telephone betght 1 kilogra- of alphetaaine fro. a drug courier under suspi-
cion in Copenhagen. the police were listenim in on the telephone. The call was
quickly traced and the Karlskoga man could later be apprehended. At first he
denied it but confessed when Interpol and the Danish police the for
21-. He has now been indicted by Karlakoga district court. Texg

Stockholm smsu mum in Swedish 27 lar 82 1) Q7 1198

65
TWELVE m mass m SOUTH AMERICA mm
Zurich ms zmzms 212mm 1n Ger-en 27 )hr 82 p 7
[Article by tgy.: ”Successful Strike Against Drug Dealers']

[Text] In cooperation with the Tessin police and Italian authorities, the
Zurich canton police carried out the biggest strike to date in Switnerlend
egainst international drug dealers. 0n ‘lhursday the Zurich canton police
reported that six amgglers froa South Ansrica had been arrested last Pri-
day at the Kloten airport, atteepting to enter Switzerland, three wonen and
two aen fron Bolivia and one wonan fron Chile. men they were arrested.
they were carrying a total of 16.7 kilogra- of cocaine hidden in their
clothes. 0n the sane day four are neabers of the gang—two nan and two
woaen-dwere arrested in Lugano on a tip by the Zurich canton police and 6.2
kilograms of cocaine was confiscated. ‘lhe alleged last two leaders of the
gang could be arrested in uilano.

Cocaine for Italian Black Market

The confiscated, high-quality cocaine. which was intended for the black
nrket in Italy, has a current resale value of 5.25 aillion Swiss francs.
The police assune that the gang, which had been in Zurich and Lugeno on
previous occasions. had already carried out several cocaine transports fron
South America to Italy. The conclusive hint that led to the arrest of the
international drug dealers cane fro. the Italian border police—the gusrdis
di finnea—in Kilano, which had been investigating cocaine couriers fro-
South Anerica for none tine.

Police Asking for Hitneaaes

The four wolen who were arrested in lloten and also the four gang neubers

arrested in Lugmo were carrying forged passports. Since it is assumed that
the drug dealers nainteined contacts with more of other gangs in Zurich
and Lugmo, the police is asking for help free the population. The police is
particularly interested in knowing where the accused were staying and what
places they were frequenting during esrlier visits. It is requested that
inforaation be relayed to the Zurich canton police. telephone nunber (01)
20-22-11 or to any other police station.

66
One week ago six drug couriers were arrested in Kloten by the Zurich canton
police. when arrested, the women were carrying forged passports. The names
of the drug smugglers are (top row, from left to right): Patricia de 130
Mercedes Pinochet (alias: Salas-Ibern Isabel), 23 years old; Trinidad

de Vasquez-Quellar (alias: Gonzalez Norm Beatriz), 26 years old; Ana
Valenzuela (alias: Maria Himmler-Lopez), 33 years old; (bottom row, fron
left to right) Gustavo Zeballos-Vaca, 23 years old: Magdalene Prada-Henscho
(alias: Sorta Maria Teresa), 27 years old and Jose Luis Vargas-Zarste, 25

y ears old.

8991
cso; 5300/2267 sun

107