FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10259
18 January 1982

Worldwide Report

NARCOTICS AND DANGEROUS DRUGS

(FOUO 3/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. "here no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the U.S. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSBIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10259

18 January 1

WORLDWIDE REPORT

NARCOTICS AND DANGEROUS DRUGS
(F000 3/82)

CONTENTS

ASIA

THAILAND

Gen Prachuap Orders Ban on (hmicals to North
(SIM “T. 11 Aug 81)....o-oooooooo-oo-ccouscous-cocoonoooooo

United States Said to Pressure mailand on Narcotics
(BAN HUANG, 17, 18 sep 81).0.00.00.00.00-Ooooosoloooooooosooo

ONCB Chief: Narcotics Violators' Property To Be Seized
(BAN HUANG, 2 A”: 81)....ooosooooooooooooouooo-oooooloooooooo

Cooperation With Burma Sought in Capture of Khan Sa
(Sm K‘T, 18 Aug 81)ocooooooooosooaoooooooonose-oooocooooooo

Burma-Thai Trafficking Ring Broken in Oxiang Rsi
(DAD sun, 17 Aug 81).cooneooooooosoooooooooocvcocooooooooooo

1011 93rd Division Trafficking Role, Links With Kriangsak luported
(Prachup; SIAM BAT, 20 Aug 81)..............................

Rewards Offered for Drug Kingpins
(““010“, 21 Aug 81)ocoooooooso.oooooooooooooooocooo-ooooooo

Lao Arrested With Opium in Nakhon Phenom
(DAD Sn“. 1 Oct 81)coo-00.00Doses-00000.00...ooooooooo-ooooo

Drug Trafficking Problem on Southern Border Discussed
(Pan Bandua; SIAM RAT SAPPADA "101M, 20 Sep 81).............

- a - [III - WW - I38 FOU‘

an..- amn- - Conn 0“" ‘1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CANADA

Survey Finds Use of LSD Soars in Ontario Schools
(Dorothy Lipovenko; ms GLOBE arm HAIL, 9 Dec 81)............

hot Provinces Oppose Softening of Drug Laws
(“13 MB: AND “‘5’ 9 we 81)oooooooooooooooooooosoooooooooo

Drug Seizure Called Largest in Windsor
(m2 "INK Sm. 2‘ Nov 81)....000OIOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO...

Briefs

Drugs Seized in Police Raids
Major Drug Raid

LATIN ”ERICA
(DwHBIA
Briefs
Cocaine Laboratory Discovered
Drug Confiscation
Drug Traffickerrts Arrest
PERU
Briefs
Cocaine Base Seizure
Drug Trafficker Band Disnentled
(bonine Dispatched by non
VENEZUELA
Briefs
Cocaine Arrest
REST EUROPE
DENMARK

Norway, Sweden Demand [2er tighten Drug Control
(Jorn Brandt; BERLINGSKB rumor, 8 Nov 81).................

Pressure From Norway, Sweden Hay Force Stronger Drug Lav
(ms mmR' 6 me 81).0......OIOIOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO0.0.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

FINLAND

mmestic Drug Problem Comared to Other Nordic Countries
(Irma Stenback; HELSINGIN SANOM, 17 Nov 81).................

New Prescription law To Control Narcotics in Effect
(Jaakko Iehtinen; UUSI scum, 17 Nov 81)......................

FRANCE

Briefs
Drug Seizure

NETHERLANN

lbthadone Distribution in Amsterdam Viewed
(Lotta Schullerqvist; MENS NYBE‘ER, l. Ike 8!) ............. .

NORWAY

Custom Service kports Big Increase in Drug Seizures
(Jarit Jahreie;ARBEImmLAm1t, 21 Nov 81)...................

Starting Approves Measures To (bmbat Narcotics
(mmsmN, 24 “)1! 81)....0-0000000.oooooeeooooooooo-osoooo

'Ihree Arrested in Hashish Smuggling use
(Amsm’ 26 ”v 81)....00000000000ODODOOOOOOOOOO'0......

SHEDEN

Customs Administration wants (blputers for Drugs Control
(8“ 01ofson;SVBNSKA “QUIET, m NOV 81)....oooossooosooo

Successful Police Offensive Against thers To Continue
(Per-Erik Lagerqvist; SVBNSKA DAGBLAIBT, ls Dec 81)...........

International Gang Broken; Smggled Heroin, Bashish
(Leif Dahlia; “(ENS METER, 8 Dec 81)......................

‘lhirteen Indians Accused of Smuggling Hashish
(DAQNS mun, ‘ me 81)ooooooooosooocoooooooooooooooo-aoco

hthadone 'Dest Likely 1b (bntinue Another 'ihree Years
(Lotta Schullerqvist; DAENS METER, 11 Dec 81).............

Briefs
Prison Drug Reid

UNITED KINGmH

Briefs
Record Heroin. Haul

-c-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
GEN PRACHUAP ORDERS BAN ON CHEMICALS TO NORTH
Bangkok SIAM RAT in Thai 11 Aug 81 p S

[Articles "Prachuap Orders Strict Ban 0n Sending Chemicals Used
to Produce Heroin to the North")

[Text] Prachuap has ordered that the smuggling of chemicals used
in producing heroin to the north resolutely be prevented. He
pointed out that this measure will reduce the amount of heroin.

Police Hajor General Phao Sarasin, the secretary-general of the
Office of the Narcotics Control Board, has revealed that General
Prachuap Suntharangkun. the deputy prime minister, has, in his
capacity as president of the Narcotics Control Board. ordered
that particularly strict measures be taken to prevent drugs used
to produce heroin. such as acetic anhydride, from being sent to
the northern provinces. where they can be smuggled to places that
produce heroin. He has also asked for cooperation from the
governors of Chiang Mai and Chiang Rai provinces and asked that
they implement measures to intercept such chemicals. It may be
necessary to set up checkpoints to keep chemicals from entering
these two provinces. If these measures succeed. this will stop
the production of heroin.

The secretary-general of the ONCB stated that. concerning this
problem of chemicals that are used to produce heroin. in addition
to preventing the smuggling or sending [of chemicals] to the north
to produce heroin, we will cooperate with Malaysia in suppression
activities because, in reality, these chemicals are brought in
across the Thai-Malaysian border. This resulted from discussions
between the two countries. At present. Malaysia does not have a
control law on chemicals used to produce heroin but they are
considering making such a control law. Thus. it is hoped that when
Malaysia has a control law on chemicals like we do. control
activities will achieve better results.

11943
C808 5300/4514
UNITED STATES SAID m PRESSURE 'nmmmn ON NARCOTICS

Bangkok BAN HUANG in Thai 17, 18 Sep 81

[Ta Ho Lo Column: "Opium Suppression Operations -- Never Ending
Operations";

[17 Sep 81, p 5]

[Text] There have been reports that the United States is putting
great pressure on Thailand concerning the narcotics problem,
eSpecially in the notorious Golden Triangle area.

Thailand must achieve some visible results in return for the
161 million baht that the United States has provided to help
suppress narcotics.

The United States wants Thailand to go in and clear the Golden
Triangle area by completely destroying all the poppy fields since,
this year, opium production in the Golden Triangle will increase. It
is estimated that the yield will reach 600 tons this year and.

most certainly. most of this will end up in the United States.

The United States wants to prevent this at all costs and so it
has been willing to give 161 million baht to induce Thailand to
intercept the drugs and not allow them to leave tho Golden
Triangle.

The United States feels that 161 million baht is a large sum of
money. But at most it can be used to destroy 1,610 rai of poppy. And
this still leaves tens of thousands of rai that can [produce

Opium] for shipment to the United States. And there are also the
Golden Triangle areas in Burma and Laos.

International police from the United States who take helicopters
to survey the Golden Triangle area see only beautiful forests and
mountains below without realizing what complex conditions exist
underneath this beautiful scenery. They think that Thai police can
easily go in with flame throwers and burn the poppy in the fields.
But things are not that easy.
The Golden Triangle is the capital of an international drug
empire. It is in an area where the borders of three countries
meet, the three being Thailand, Burma and Laos. The people who
live in the area of the Golden Triangle where Thailand, Burma and
Laos come together are stateless people belonging to various hill
tribes who have made a living growing pappy for a hundred years
(beginning when England started the Opium War with china). They
are allies of the Karens, Shans and other small tribal groups that
have risen up to win independence from the Burmese government. They
support the underground Free Laos movement, or Lao National
Liberation Movement, which is opposing the Lao government. And
they support the armed Ho Chinese who escort caravans and who are
former soldiers of the diSplaced 93rd KMT Division.

Concerning these armed groups that roam about the Golden Triangle
and whose main income comes from drug trafficking and the drug
industry, none of the three governments has been able to bring
these illegal groups, whose members number 1 million people. under
full control. At most, they have been put under very loose
control. Concerning the Karen and Shan independence movements in
particular, the Burmese government has been trying to suppress these
movements but there is as yet no sign that it will succeed in the
near future. Whenever a government carries on suppression
acitivities within its own country, these groups simply flee to
another country temporarily and this happens again and again.

Thus, using the power of the state to suppress and destroy

[these groups] cannot succeed. If they are to be suppressed, all
three countries must carry on suppression activities together. But
many political and other problems will be encountered.

without offense to these overnments, not one of these governments
has complete sovereignty n [its part of] the Golden Triangle. It is
true that the governments can go in but they must take in trOOps
(if the intent is to destroy the opium). And the opium in the
Golden Triangle is like water. For example, if the Thai

government completely destroys the opium.in Thailand's part of the
Golden Triangle, the Opium in Laos and Burma flows in to replace
it.

Thailand is a major source of opium and narcotics because, in the
sphere of communications, Thailand is more developed than either
Burma or Laos, and, therefore, the opium and narcotics flow into
Thailand from Burma and Laos, with Thailand serving as the gateway
to the world outside.

For this reason, Thailand has been condemned by the United Nations
over the matter of narcotics and it will not provide help since
Thailand is more develOped than Laos or Burma. Drug suppression
in the Golden Triangle, the capital of the world drug empire, is a

task of the_United Nations but the United Nations does not take
its reSponSibilities seriously at all.
Thus. the suppression activities have achieved nothing. Thailand
is like a person who is reaping the effects of his misdeeds. It
has to carry the world alone and this is not fair.

Drugs in the Golden Triangle cannot be suppressed using force;
there is no possibility of this succeeding. with the 161 million
baht of the United States . about 1610 rai of pOppy can be
destroyed. And this still leaves tens of thousands of rai. It will
be like burning grass, that is, after it rains, the plants will
come up again and will be even more beautiful than before.
Suppressing drugs in the Golden Triangle using peaceful means in
accord with the ideas and initiatives 0: the king looks as if it
is the correct way and the one that will achieve permanent
results. This way involves persuading the stubborn hill tribes to
abandon poppy cultivation and cultivate other crops instead.

Thailand is a poor country and so it must proceed slowly. The
United Nations and certain individual countries including the
United States have failed to give Thailand great help.

Thailand is carrying the burden alone (why must it do 30?). The
major problem is that the American drug market has raised prices
without limit. and those hill tribes that once stopped growing
poppy have started growing poppy again.

And a problem that is twice as reat is that those hill tribes
that were once content with their opium and small huts now have

a much broader knowledge of the world. Each family now wants a
house witha tile roof, a color television and a pickup truck. And
so they must turn to growing poppy.

Those officials who make plans for the hill tribes have a
headache.

[18 Sep 81. p 5]

[Text] Concerning the matter of the United States pressuring
Thailand to quickly suppress opium, I wrote about this yesterday
but there is still more to say.

Thailand has been a good "child" of the United Nations and
suppressed drugs in accord with the policies of the United Nations.
But Thailand has received very little from the United Nations in
return. True. the United Nations has given help but this help can
be compared to throwing three or four rocks into a chasm.

The drug problem in the Golden Triangle area is like a deep chasm
than cannot be filled with just two or three rocks. The drug
problem is an international problem, and it is not fair to throw
the responsibility for this on Thailand's shoulders alone. Turkey,
which produces an amount of Opium second only to that of the
Golden Triangle, produces opium openly without fear of anyone and
with no trouble.

My goodness, I would like the government to engage in this trade
just like Turkey does. Only then will the United Nations wake up.

Because of the political geography, the United Nations cannot exert
influence over Burma or Laos, which are jointly responsible,

along with Thailand, in the Golden Triangle area because in

the Golden Triangle, there are national liberation movements that
are fighting the two governments.

It is these national liberation movements that reveive their main
income from the opium trade, an income that is used for national
liberation. These various national liberation groups will fight
for the Golden Triangle like a king cobra fights for its eggs.

The eradication of drugs in the Golden Triangle can be done through
Thailand but the United Nations must provide large amounts of

aid. This aid must not be like setting up a laboratory in order

to write a thesis.

The idea of invading the area and destroying the poppies, an idea
held by some foreigners, it foolish. Bloodthirsty groups will rise
up to fight and this will turn into a political problem. This is
not a matter of 10 to 20 rai of marihuana in the northeast or near
Kanchanaburi which can be destroyed easily since everyone

involved is Thai.

Go ahead and burn it. After it is burned, it can be replanted. A
lasting solution to the problem is to use a soft stick for
persuasion and to provide help so that the poppy growers turn to
the cultivation of other crops.

Thailand has persevered [in its efforts] for more than 10 years
and has achieved some results. But because large sums of money
must be spent, it has been possible to carry out things in a
limited area only.

But after a single event in the United States, the results of the
past 10 years have been almost entirely ruined. Because the
United States is a wealthy country, peOple have greatly increased
the price of drugs. The hill tribes who had given up growing pOppy
have again started growing poppy because they receive a good
price.

America has inflicted real pain. To solve the immediate problems, a
bonus will have to be paid to the hill tribesmen who grow
substitute crops [in accord with] the prOgram and recommendations
of the officials so that they have an income at least equal to
that earned by growing poppy.

The United Nations must be the one to pay this bonus since
the Thai government does not have the means to distribute money
like that. If the United Nations turns its face and does not
help, no one else will. [This] must be left to fate.

It is time that the United Nations called on all member natioas
to help solve this problem instead of letting Thailand shoulder
this alone. In particular, the United States, which has the
largest narcotics market in the world. must take reSponsibility
too and not shift the responsibility to Thailand.

The Thai government should not be like a person with a venereal
disease who is embarrassed in front of the doctor. The government
must pressure the United Nations like a bull dog. that is. bite
and not let go. It must pressure the United Nations to become
directly involved in solving this problem. It must play an active
role in the program to reduce area used to grow poppy in the

Golden Triangle and surrounding areas. It must not act like an
invited guest.

However, the problem that is presently causing headaches for Thai
officials is that our hill tribes are no longer content with their
thatched huts. They want wooden houses with tile roofs just like
in the city. And they want a pickup truck under the house instead
of pigs. They also want a color television.

But growing other crops does not help to obtain a house and
pickup as fast as they can be obtained by growing poppy. What is
to be done? I interviewed a reporter about his views:

"Take a small nuclear bomb and drOp it in the middle of the
Golden Triangle. This will close the area for 20 years and solve
the problems." Satisfied?

11943
C503 5300/4526
ONCB CHIEF: NARCOTICS VIOLATORS' PROPERTY TO BE SBIZED
Bangkok BAN HUANG in Thai 2 Aug 81 p 16

[Article: "There will Be a Law On Seizing the Property of
Narcotics Traffickers"]

[Text] Yesterday (the lst), Police Major General Phao Sarasin, the
secretary-general of the Office of the Narcotics Control Board,
revealed that discussions are being held on making a national
security lav similar to those of Malaysia and Singapore in order to
use it as a tool in durg suppression so that better results are
achieved. At the same time. a lav on seizing the prOperty of

drug dealers similar to those in the United States and Australia

is also needed.

Police General Phao stated that, concerning the suppression of
narcotics dealers in Thailand, at the present time there are still
several problems and obstacles because usually it is not

possible to arrest the ringleaders and prosecute the case, which
is a matter of evidence. But in Malaysia and Singapore, they

have been able to arrest even the ringleaders since they have

a national security law. This law permits the arrest of people

if it is felt that these people are a danger to the country.
Malaysia in particular believes that drugs are the number one
enemy and that they are a greater danger than the communists. It
also feels that the drug dealers are a danger to the country. Thus,
Malaysia is using this law to arrest people and jail them for

2 years. Because Malaysia has a national security lav, drug
suppression has achieved better results, and it has been possible
to eliminate the entire network of drug traffickers, even the
ringleaders. Thus, if we have such a law, this will be good for
the suppression of the drug dealers.

Police Major General Phao further stated that, in addition to this,
in Australia there is a law on seizing the property of drug
dealers since it is felt . at such property was acquired illegally.
When a drug dealer is arrested, his prOperty is inspected to
determine how much he has and he must state, within 1 month, how
he acquired that property. If he cannot do so. officials seize
this property. The United States has a similar lav. The property
that is seized is used in drug suppression york. During just the
first 6 months after this law went into effect. U.S. officials
were able to seize property from drug dealers valued at $100
million. Thus, if we have a law similar to those of the United
States and Australia , this will similarly help us achieve better
results in our suppression work. At present, the Office of the

Narcotics Control Board is studying the laws of these countries
to see how suitable they are for us.

Police Major General Phao Sarasin stated in conclusion that we
have a control law concerning some types of chemicals that are

an important elanent in the production of heroin.and Malaysia

is interested in having a similar law because most of the
chemicals that the heroin producers use come from Malaysia. This
is because Halaysia does not have a control lav. Thus, it is‘hoped
that then Malaysia makes such a lav. this will help make it
possible to achieve better results in controlling chemicals -

used in heroin production than are being achieved at present.

11943
C308 5300/4514
COOPERATION WITH BURMA SOLBHT IN CAPTURE OF KHUN SA
Bangkok SIAM RAT in Thai 18 Aug 81 pp 1, 12

[Article: "Prachuap Discloses That the Reward for the Capture of
'Khun Sa' will Be Increased”]

[Text] General Prachuap Suntharangkun, the deputy prime minister.
has revealed that, at present, Thailand is cooperating with
Burma to capture “Khun 8a“ in order to resolutely put an end

to the drug trade since it is believed that he is the person
responsible for the widespread drug trade.

The deputy prime minister stated that while the two sides

have not yet been able to capture him, they will try to block
things in order to make things difficult for the drug trade. And
it is expected that, in the new fiscal year that begins this
October. officials will be able to increase the reward offered
for his arrest.

General Prachuap also stated that he has sent a letter of
commendation to the Region 3 border patrol police. who seized

the largest amount of opium -- 3 tons. He also affirmed that
there are definitely no narcotics refineries in Thailand. If

any are found, they will be seized imediately. Most of these
refineries are located in Burma in the Golden Triangle area, where
Thailand, Laos and Burma meet, since this area produces much
Opium. It is estimated that 500 tons were produced here last year
while only 30-50 tons was produced in Thailand.

11943
(:50: 5300/4514
BURMA-THAI TRAFFICKING RING BROKEN IN CHIANG RAI
Bangkok DAO SIAM in Thai 17 Aug 81 pp 7, 12

[Articles "Burmese Heroin Transported Into Thailand; Police
Intercept It"]

[Text] From an investigation made by Police Lieutenant Colonel
Chan Suwannaphap, the chief inspector at the Chiang Rai provincial
police station in Huang District, it was learned that heroin was
to be smuggled into Thailand from Burma by motorcycle. Thus.
Police Lt Col Chan Suwannaphap joined the police officials
stationed at the Mae Kok vehicle checkpoint. Police Warrant
Officer Subin Suthiprida, the officer in charge, and several other
policemen, searched the vehicles, especially the motorcycles,
coming from Mae Sai District in accord with what an informer had
told Police Lt Col Chan. the informer having said that heroin would
be transported into the city.

At approximately 1430 hours, two men on a Suzuki 100 cc motorcycle
drove up from the direction of Mae Sai District, just as the
informer had said. The police immediately asked to search the
raincoat that was tied to the gas tank in the front. They found
350 grams of Singto Khu Yiep Lok brand heroin hidden in the
raincoat. They confiscated this as evidence and arrested both men
as suspects. They were later identified as Mr Somchai Saengchan,
age 24, and Mr Prasit Khamluwong. age 24, both residents of
Village 1 in Pongpha Commune, Mae Sai District. Chiang Rai
Province.

Both men stated that they had been paid 5,000 baht by a man in
Thakhilek District in Burma to deliver it to a wealthy person in
front of the Chiang Rai Rama 2 theater. The value of the heroin
that they had been hired to transport was approximately 150,000
baht in Burma. The officials sent some of their men to go arrest
the wealthy person who was supposed to pick up the goods. but he
did not appear. He may have found out about things and fled ahead
of time. The two suspects and the evidence were turned over to
Police Lieutenant Bangkhom Sittisan, the officer 0n duty. for
further investigation of the case.

11943
CSO: 5300/4514

10
KMT 93RD DIVISION TRAFFICKING ROLE. LINKS "1TH KRIANGSAK REPORTED
Bangkok SIAM RAT in Thai 20 Aug 81 p 7

[Thoughts From the News column by Prachuapa "The Heroin
Refinery At Doi Huai Mak”]

Crext] Recently. there was a news report that Region 3 border
patrol police had seized a heroin refinery at Doi Huai Mak. which
is located about 10 kilometers to the west of Bin Taek Village --
a Shan village in Mae Chan District. Chiang Rai Province -- and
about 1 kilometer from the Thai-Burmese border.

The BANGKOK POST. which printed this story. revealed that this
refinery was capable of producing about 400 kilograms of heroin

a month. By seizing this refinery, in addition to seizing the
production equipment and various chemicals. 3 tons of cooked
Opium, which was being readied to produce heroin. was also seized.
Thus it can be said that this was the largest drug haul in the

past 10 years.

Because this heroin refinery was set up in a favorable location,
or in a place that was difficult to control.and because it was
guarded by Chinese soldiers of the 93rd Division. or no Chinese
as they are called. who were armed with modern weapons such as

M72 [grenade launchers]. antitank rockets and M60 machine guns.
the border patrol police had to send in forces by helicopter. But
it appears that there was heavy resistance by the Chinese soldiers
of the 93rd Division before they finally had to retreat.

Concerning the news of this suppression ac+5vity. or drug haul,

in reality this is a common event and not omething strange. But
concerning the seizure of this heroin refinery, besides the fact
that this was the largest case in 10 years, there are other things
that I think are worth noting. One is that Chinese soldiers of the
93rd Division were involved as guards for this drug production
operation. Prior to this, some newSpapers printed stories saying
that a group of Chinese soldiers of the 93rd Division had moved

11
from the north to mountain ridges along the Thai-Burmese border that
are about 4 kilometers from Sangkhlaburi District in Kanchanaburi
Province. These stories said that these forces of the 93rd Division
had joined Burmese minority groups and that it was expected that

a new narcotics trade route would be opened by an international
narcotics ring.

In fact, the matter of these remnant Chinese forces of the 93rd
Division who remained in the Thai-Burmese border area is a
problem that has troubled the government for a long time. In
particular. the Chinese soldiers of the 3rd and 5th battalions of
the 93rd Division who were unwilling to be repatriated to Taiwan
and who did not want to fight the military forces of the Burmese
government moved into the northern region of Thailand. The 3rd
Battalion chose to locate in the D01 Ma Angkhang area in Pang
District, Chiang Mai Province. As for the 5th Battalion, it chose
to settle in the area of Ban Pa Sang in Mae Chan District. Chiang
Rai Province. Later, it moved into the Doi Mae Salong area in
Mae Chan District, Chiang Rai Province. remaining there up to the
present.

Concerning the matter of the 3rd and 5th battalions of the Chinese
93rd Division settling down in Thailand. besides the fact that
this infringed on Thailand's sovereignty. it also caused several
other serious problems. For example, weapons and forces have been
secretely moved in and out of the country across the border, and
young Chinese men in Burma have been sought for training so that
they can be stationed with various units. People have been
smuggled out of the country to Taiwan and also into the country
from Taiwan.

The important problem is that when the Chinese soldiers of the
93rd Division_refused to return to Taiwan. Taiwan stopped
providing financial help and this forced this group to look for
money with which to support its peeple and military forces. Their
livelihood became the opium trade. They transported opium from
Kokong State and sold it in Thailand and Laos. They also
established illegal checkpoints and collected taxes from the opium
traffickers and from those dealing in other smuggled goods. It
once reached the point where they had a dispute with the
independent Karens over proprietary rights to jade goods and an
important Thai general, who has left government service and who is
now a successful politician, had to go and made peace between them.

But whether or not he received any compensation for this was not
revealed.

In the end. to solve the problems concerning the 3rd and 5th
battalions of the 93rd Division, in that period Supreme Command
Headquarters and the cabinet gave permission. with the approval
of the National Security Council. for the KHT soldiers of the 3rd
and 5th battalions and their families to live in Thailand as

12
refugees in those areas where they had been living. with one force
sent to live in the Doi Luang and Doi Phamon areas in Chiang Rai
Province. And they were permitted to make a living in those areas
stipulated by government officials. They were considered to be
ordinary people and not soldiers. In particular. the settlement
at Doi Salong was the largest. There. the Chinese soldiers and
their families numbered almost 3,000 people. They had schools to
teach both Thai and Chinese. Their open means of making a living
was agriculture. which included growing tea and cold-weather
fruits since Doi Mae Salong. which the Chinese soldiers of the
93rd Division had taken over. is more than 3,000 feet above sea
level and the weather there is cold all year long.

soldiers and their families on Doi Mae Salong is Mr Li Yui Chien. I
cannot remember his Thai name. Host of the children of the Chinese
soldiers on Doi Mae Salong have Thai names and study from Thai
books. , The Chinese soldiers who are still young have taken part
in fighting and suppressing the communist terrorists. That was the
policy implemented by Supreme Command Headquarters in that period.
Based on what has been revealed. it appears that many of them lost
their lives. It was apparently for this reason that Supreme
Command Headquarters established Headquarters 04 in Chiang Mai
Province and made it responsible for handling communications with
the Chinese soldiers of the 93rd Division, which had established
its base in Thailand. And it is thought that in return. the Chinese
soldiers took part in suppressing the terrorists. Therefore. they
were probably given special rights in return.

The th that they were iven in return was the right to carry on
their or ginal way of mak a living. which combined the
production and sale of narcotics. Because. if engaged in
agriculture alone to make a living, where could they have gotten
the money to spuuprt their military forces? There was once a news
item that said that a Thai general was living with the Chinese
soldiers of the 93rd Division and that these forces were engaged
in producing narcotics to the extent that dru s were sent to and
sold in Vietnam during the period when the United States was still
there. This resulted in 0.5. soldiers becoming addicts and drug
traffickers too..

Thus, when this major heroin refinery at Doi Huai Hak. which is
located between Doi Hin Taek and Doi Mae Salong. was seized and it
was found that heavily armed Chinese soldiers of the 93rd Division
were standing guard and that they fought to prevent the
authorities from seizing [the refinery]. this affirms or supports
the idea that the 93rd Division, which is still in Thailand. has
certainly not given up or ceased producing and sellin narctoics.
Furthermore, it is believed that a high-ranking official. or

13
general, may be involved in these activities. And if this occurs
at times. the border patrol police who go in to make the arrests
may be blamed rather than praised.

Those people who say that there is a special relationship with the
Chinese soldiers of the 93rd Division at Doi Mae Salong have to

be referring to General Kriangsak Chamanan, the former prime
minister and the new HP from Roi 3t Province, since he worked

at Supreme coward Headquarters for a long time. And when he was
prime minister. he went and stayed at Doi Salong so often that the
Chinese soldiers who lived there happily built a magnificent guest
house called Kriangsak's house. There is a sign there in Chinese
which in translation says that this house was built for General
Kriangsak Chamanan, the prime minister. a person who has
implemented wise policies and kindly allowed these Chinese
soldiers to live on 001 Mae Salong with the status of refugees.

Concerning the guest house on Doi Mae Salong that the Chinese
soldiers built for General Kriangsak Chamanan during the time he
was prime minister. I don't know whether this house was built for
the personal use of General Kriangsak because of close personal
relations between them or whether it was built in consultation of
his capabilities. that is, it was turned over to the government
and became gsovernment property. If it was built for the person
holding] th government position. I approve since t shows

that this is public property. But if it was built for his personal
use, even if was built out of great admiration. since he was

hold a political position. the prime ministership. I feel that
accept this house that others had built for his personal use was
wrong since some people may misunderstand and think that this was
a reward or repayment for something.

since government officials seized this major heroin refinery and it
appears that Chinese soldiers of the 93rd Division were involved
and even resisted the seizure. I would like to see the overnment
conduct an investigation to clearly determine whose ref this
was. who was involved and whether there are other such refineries.
Because if an investigation is not conducted in order to clear up
matters, I am very afraid that. one day. money from this drug
trade may play a part in politics or elections in Thailand. Who

11943
C80: 5300/4514

16
RBHARDS OFFERED FOR DRUG KINGPINS
Bangkok MATICHON in Thai 21 Aug 81 p 3

[Articles ”A Reward Has Been Offered for the Capture of ,the Drug
Kingpin Who has Great Influence in the North")

[Text] The Office of the Narcotics Control Board is prqoaring to
offer a reward of at least 100,000 baht for the capture of Police
Colonel Niran withayawutiXun. a narcotics kingpin in the north.

On 19 August. a news report from the Office of the Narcotics
Control Board (ONCE) revealed to HATICHON that the ONCE is
considering setting a reward for the capture of Police Colonel
Niran Withayawutikun. the comander of the [local office] of the
Comissioner's Office of the Provincial 3. From an investigation.

it was learned that he is involved in the drug trade in the north.
Now. he has fled.

"The latest news that we have received is that he is with the 93rd
Division at Doi Mae Salong. with Khun Sa or at 001 Lang. where
Lao St: has influence," stated the news source.

The news report added that the amount of the reward will be between
100,000 and 500,000 baht. The ONCE will submit this matter to the
committee for consideration one more time. This amount can be
compared to the rewards offered for other narcotics traffickers.
which include Lao Su, 900,000 baht, Li Ming, 600,000 baht. Mr
Phunsiri Chanyasak. 600.000 baht and Khun Sa. 500.000 baht.

The news report revealed that in sett this reward for Khun 8a.
or Chang Si Pu, an international narcot cs trafficker, General Pram
Tinsulanon. the prime minister, showed great interest and
resolutely ordered that he be captured. In addition. charges will
be filed that he has harmed national security.

11943
(280: 5300/4514

15
[Articles “Young Lao Man Who Transported Opium Across the Hekong
River to Sell In Thailand Is Arrested By Police“)

[Text From an investigation by Pollice Lieutenant Chirat

Phich tphai. the head of the special investigation unit at the
Nakhon Phanom provincial police station in Huang District, it was
learned that opium was to be transported across the border from
Laos at The Kho in Tha Kho Comune, Huang District. Nakhon Phenom
Province. Thus . at 2200 hours on 29 September, officials took a
force and hid in the area of the government pawn shop al the
bank of the Mekong RiVer on Suntharavichit Road in Huang D trict.
A man carrying a paper bag walked past and since he looked
suspicious he was searched.

In the paper bag. officials found two plastic bags of cooked
opium. each weighing 1 kilogram. Police Lieutmant Chirat put this
man on the back of his motorcycle in order to take him to the
provincial police station in Huang District. But after going
about 400 meters from the place where he was arrested, this man
used his chance to shove Pol ice Lt Chirat off the motorcycle and
fled with his handcuffs still on. But officials fired a warning
shot into the air. gave chase and arrested him. They then took
him and turned him over to Police Captain Wiraphong Somprasong.
the officer on duty. for investigation. He res identified as Hr
Somsanuk Anurak. age 25. who lives in Tha maek in Khan Huan
Province. Laos. Hr Somsanuk confessed that he was taking this
cooked opium to a trafficker in Nakhon Phenom city. This was just
a eagle and if they had reached an agreement. he would have
brought in at least 300 more kilograms. But before this happened.
he was arrested. The officials placed him under arrest for

further handling of the case.

11943
C80: 5300/4526

16
DRUG TRAFFICKDB PROBLEM 0N SOUTHERN BORDER DISCUSSED
Bangkok SIAM RAT SAPPADA HICHAN in Thai 20 Sep 81 p 43

[Comment Field column by Pan Bandua: "Drug Trafficking in the
Southern Provinces")

[Text] Based on a statement by Police hajor General Phao Sarasin.
the secretary-general of the Office of the Narcotics Control
Board (ONCE), concerning drug trafficki in Thailand in
particular. at present. much drug rmuggl is taking place in the
sou:l:l':{na and officials have been able to arrest many of these

C: 180

The thing worth noting is that. concerning drug trafficking in the
south. based on the arrests that have been made. almost all of the
drugs seized have been bars of morphine. Thus. we can assune that
there is certainly a heroin refinery in the south or on the
border with Halysia. If this assumption is true. the government
must take action to resolutely suppras this. The facts that
support this assunption include the following:

Thailand has resolutely prohibited acetic acid from being brought
into the country since this is an important acid that has long been
used in the refin of heroin. Also. stern action has been taken
against those who v olate the law. and there have been no
exceptions in the southern provinces.

But at the same time, Malaysia does not have any prohibitions
concerning such chemicals. Thus. drug traffickers who establish
heroin refineries in Malaysia can easil obtain this important
acid. Or. it is also easy to smuggle th 3 drug across the border
into the southern region of Thailand. Thus. it is urgent that
these two countries cooperate in suppressing the heroin refineries.

At present. in the Thai-Malaysia border area. where there are
other problems that have constantly had an effect. the problems
have begun to be solved because of having mutual understanding. In
particular, the Malaysian prime minister made an official visit to

17
Thailand and the Thai prime minister has visited Malaysia and this
has greatly improved relations between the two countries.

The narcotics problem that has arisen at present should not be

too difficult to solve if the two sides really cooperate with

each other. As for Thailand, this country is notorious for the drug
problelshere. and. therefore, steps must quickly be taken to

solve them.

One thing that should be done is to improve the efficiency of the
officials. Also. a good suppression measure is to investigate and
prosecute the cases of those who‘dolate the law. The only thing
is that swift action is necessary.

As for the actions of the present government, it is believed that
this government is honest and that it has certainly intended

to suppress drug trafficking in the country as much as possible,
even to the point of putting a deputy prime minister in direct
charge of this matter. If the sectors concerned cooperate fully.
the drug problems in the country will certainly decrease.

Drugs are one of the great threats to mankind. But they create
great wealth for selfish people. and they are like a weapon used
for political persecution. This is something that all countries
must make every effort possible to suppress for the future
well-being of society.

11943
CSO: 5300/4526

18
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000600020028-4

SURVEY FINDS USE OF LSD SOARS IN ONTARIO SCHOOLS

Toronto THE 611032 AND HAIL in English 9 Doc 81 p 1

[Article by Dorothy Lipovenko]

.Wmm

.mmmmWWWWWMW. www.mﬁm.mmmm...
WWW “mm WWW... a W ammmmmmmmma
”WWWMWW WWWWWWWWWMWE

E Mm.” “WWW use”.
W: WW. W... ”.WWW WWW.” WWW WWW.
MWWWWWWWUWWWMWWWMWW WmWMmWW
WWWWWNW “WWW... WW mm“... MWWWWE

m Wmmmm

5320/16

C50:

19

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00860R000800020028-4
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500020028-4

HOST PROVINCES OPPOSE SOFTENING 0F DRUG LAUS

Toronto THE GLOBE AND HAIL in English 9 Doc 81 p 3

mg

mm
mm

x

mmmmm

mm
.memm www.mm

Wm“
mmw
WWW”? ”mm
mm mm
ﬂaw.

mum

W

mum
www.mm WW

“mm M

mw.mmmmmur

an mm

5320/16

C50:

20

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500020028-4
Awmwvmu'

elm-pd may with In

ammo. mmaﬁ
mainwhunolicauybtho
mat drug aim in Win.

lioninmlhemhberydm-

{Igghm Scab» when
w t W
BRIEFS

DRUGS 8312. IN POLICE RAIDSa-Toronto—Tsn Metro Toronto people have been arrested
and nearly $l-nillion worth of drugs seized by mtro Toronto Police after a three-
month investigation. A drug squad officer said yesterday it use one of the largest
drug seizuns by Metro police in several years. In raids on several residences,
police found (“729 grams of hashish, 1.816 gram of hash oil, 653 grams of high-
quality (concentrated) cocaine and a snail amount of ssrijuans. with an estimted
total street value of $916,500. [Text] [Toronto TEE GLOBE AND HAIL in English

23 Oct 81 p 11]

MAJOR DRUG RAID-Huntsville, 0nt.--The Drills detachment of the RCMP, working in
conjunction with the Ontario Provincial Police. has seized more than 650 kilo-

grams of hashish and high-grade nsrijusna with a street value estinated at between
$3—million and SS-nillion. No Huntsville residents and a Toronto nan were

charged with possession of a nsrcotic tor the purpose of trafficking after a raid
on a house near here on Sunday night. [Text] [Toronto THE GLOBE AND HAIL in
English 17 Nov 81 p lo]

050: 5320/17

22
BRI BPS

COCAINE LABORATORY DISCOWW-Plorencia-P-2 agents have discovered a modern
cocaine laboratory in the heart of this city, the capital of Caqueta Department.
The discovery was made during a raid on the hone of (Libardo Gaitsn Pietro),

a wealthy businessman. [PA232030 Bogota Radio Santa Fe in Spanish 1730 err 23
Dec 81]

DRUG CONPISCATIONnThe Colombian police have dealt a harsh blow to the drug
traffickers operating in the various parts of the country. A gang was dismantled
and a 27-ton marijuana shipment was seized. The traffickers are (Ezequiel
Paredes Guerra), (Alfonso Marin Ramirez). (Hugo Perez), (Jose Gomez). (Miguel
Asierra Rodillo). (Pascual Arregozes) and (Hugo Perney Arregozes). [PA050325
Bogota Radio Cadena Nacional in Spanish 1730 GMT 6 Jan 82]

DRUG mmrcm's ARREST—National police in Cucuta arrested (Adolfo Marin
Pineda) and seized 1,600 mandrake pills. 2.200 marijuana cigarettes and 13,000

pesos in counterfeit loo-peso bills. [PA050325 Bogota Radio Cadena National
in Spanish 1730 GMT 6 Jan 82]

(280: 5300/2112

23
BRIEFS

COCAINE BASE SEIZURE--The Peruvian Investigative Police (PIP) of Callao last
night seized 60 kg of cocaine base worth more than 100 million soles near the
Jorge Chavez International airport. The PIP arrested Juan Manani and a minor
whose initials are P.D. [PY261332 Lima BXPRESO in Spanish 30 Nov 81 p 17]

DRUG TRAFFICKER BAND DISHANTLBD—-The narcotics department of the Peruvian
Investigative Police has captured members of an international gang of drug
traffickers who had set up a laboratory and cocaine leaf maceration tanks in
the downtown area of Callao. The police have arrested Carlos Hartinelli Castro
and Jesus Alfonso Duenas Isla but have not yet managed to capture Elsa Herrera
Briceno, who ran the above drug distribution center. [PY261332 Lima EXPRESO

in Spanish 27 Nov 81 p 34]

COCAINE DISPATCHBD BY HAIL-The Peruvian Investigative Police have disrupted a
drug traffickers' organization that dispatched camouflaged cocaine hydrochlorate
to Canada by registered mail. They have arrested Arena Ampuero. 26, who was

in charge of dispatching the mail, along with Octavio Choza Bondon, 2‘. Jaime
Raul Vega Tarazona. 23, and Jack Hilliam Arbildo Estrella, who were the leaders
of the organization. [PY202201 Lima BL COHERCIO in Spanish 11 Dec 81 p A-lb]

CSO: 5300/2115

24
BRIEFS

COCAINB ARREST-The netropolitan police arrested (Severino Cardoni), (Antonio
Cardoni) and (Antonio Bernandez) nest (231 Polvorin de La Pastors) Plaza. The
young nen were carrying 14 jars of cocaine. They are being questioned by the
(Totiee) intelligence division. The technical corps of the judicial police
drugs division will continue the investigation. [PA300136 Caracas Radio
Continente Network in Spanish 2100 GMT 29 Dec 81]

C50: 5300/2115
NORWAY, SHEDBN DEMAND DENMARK TIGNTEN DRUG CONTROL
Copenhagen BERLINCSKZ TIDENDB in Danish 8 Nov 81 p 7

[Article by Jorn Brandt]

[Text] Both the Swedish and Norwegian governments are putting pressure on Denmark
to implement a more restrictive narcotics policy.

Sweden's minister for social affairs and Nordic cooperation, Karin Soder, said to
BERLINGSKB on Sunday, "It is very important for combstting the narcotics problem in
Denmark, Norway and Sweden that we arrive at a common policy in the field. There-
fore, the Swedish government has proposed a ministerial level meeting, for example
in January 1982, to consider the problems."

Before that Karin Soder would like to have a special meeting with a representative
of the Danish government in preparation for the tri-partite meeting. The reason
is that, according to Karin Seder, Denmark takes a more liberal position towards
narcotics than Sweden and Norway, and that creates problems.

Karin Soder's position is supported by the Norwegian minister of social affairs,
Leif Arne Neloe, who says, "In Norway we are clearly more restrictive in regard
to narcotics than in Denmark. 1 am not going to involve myself in the policy of
the Danish Government, but it seems to me that such a meeting can be useful. For
example, I can mention that we in Norway are considering increasing the maxﬂman

punishment for serious narcotics crimes from 10 to 15 years."
Nordic Demand that Christianis be Closed Being Considered by Bolketing

Ritt Bjerregaard, the minister of social affairs, will answer in parliament the
demand of members of the Nordic Council's social committee that Christiania be
closed up. It is the Conservative social-political chairman, Agnete Lauatsen, who
is putting the question to the minister of social affairs. Recently, the former
undersecretary in the Norwegian department of social affairs, Per Nyhua, described
Christiania as the "Nordic center for narcotics trafficking and crime.“

Agnete Lauatsen says, "The other Nordic countries are demanding that Christiania
be closed up, which is quite understandable. Children and young people go to rack
and ruin, and Nordic parents must seek help through their embassies to get their

'children home from Christiania."

26
She now wants to know what the minister of social affairs is going to do as a
result of the Nordic complaints.

Members of all the parties in the Swedish parliament have demanded in a letter to
the Danish government that it close up Christiania.

In the letter it is stated among other things, "Christiania is a haunt and Nordic
center in the sale of narcotics to Nordic young people and consequently is a contrib-
uting cause to the narcotics market in Sweden." At the same time the signatories
are of the opinion that the existence of Christiania is in violation of the inter-
national narcotics convention of 1961, which Denmark signed, and consequently they
conclude their petition to the government by demanding "that the government of

Denmark close up Christiania and at the same time take responsibility for the
addicts in Christiania."

The letter was sent by "The National Association for a Narcotics Free Society."
which is a Swedish popular aovement against the misuse of narcotics. It has about
5, 000 members, many of them professional social workers. One of them, Melvyn
Lundholm from the narcotics section of Halmo's administration of social services,
was one of the speakers at a seminar for journalists which the Central Association
for Information Regarding Alcohol and Narcotics held. He said,

"Denmark follows a consistent and extremely liberal policy regarding narcotics, not
least when hashish is involved. In Denmark in practice the possession and smoking
of hashish, is not a crime, neither is the cultivation of cannabis. if there is no
intention to misuse or sell. This cultivation is quite extensive, and there is
much to indicate hashish grown in Denmark is exported."

Melvyn Lundholm criticizes the practice of the Danish police in issuing warnings
to people who have been arrested with up to 100 grams hashish in their possession,
and he continues with a passion to deplore the conditions in Christiania.

"The sale of hashish goes on completely openly in Christianiu. Sellers stand cal
offer their goods in open competition with each other in regard to the daily price,
quality etc, and. according to a resident of Christiania, most of the inhabitants
of Christiania support themselves by selling hashish."

Melvyn Lundholm is of the opinion that the Danish narcotic policy influences the
market in all of Scandinavia.

He said to BERLINGSKE on Sunday," by allowing open narcotics traffic in Christiania
the Danish Government is influencing the narcotics market in Sweden in a very ser-
ious manner. For example. it is easy for Swedish addicts to make good buys for
little money in Christiania and then sell the stuff in Sweden. Consequently. the
Swedish politicans must put pressure on the Danish Government in order to get the
Danish free city closed."

Restrictive Enough

According to sources close to the governemnt, people in Denmark are not particularly
pleased with the initiative of the Swedish social minister, Karin Soder, for a

27
Scandinavian narcotics meeting, as mentioned above. Inside the government it has
created problems as to whether Denmark should be represented by the minister of
justice, Ole Espersen. the minister of social affairs, Ritt Bjerregaard, or by the
minister of internal affairs, Banning Rasmussen; and it has created displeasure
among some Social Democrats.

Henning Rasmussen himself said to BERLINGSKE on Sunday, “It is true that the Swedish
proposal involves a long series of problems involving the jurisdiction of several
ministries, and we shall now consider from the Danish side how we can tackle it."

The minister of justice. Ole Esperaen. believes that the Danish narcotics policy is
sufficiently restrictive. but he naturally wants to consider the problems with his
Nordic colleagues.

The Social Democratic member of parliament, Bernhardt Tastesen. who was previously
chairman of the Folketing's social committee and who has been intimately involved
for many years with the misuse of narcotics. says." I believe a tightening of the
narcotics policy will create more problems than we had previously. For example. if
we intervene more in regard to hashish, we are taking a chance that the young
people will go over to harder stuff."

Without Blame

This view is supported by the cultural sociologist at the University of Copenhagen.
Jacques Blum, who has been involved with the problems of deviates, including
Christiania.

He says, "Christiania is not to blame for the Swedish problem. It has, like in
Denmark, primarily social causes, and I regard the initiative of the Swedes as an
effort to ship their problems with narcotics over the Oresund to Denmark."

“we have in Christiania almost overcome the hard stuff, but quite rightly not with
hashish which is sold relatively openly. But if the Swedes want to help the Danes
with the narcotics problem by having city areas closed down. they should rather
point to Vesterbro and Norrebro. It is there that the real problems are to be found,
and it is there that action should be taken. Not with a more restrictive policy

but with a greater social effort."

6893
CSO: 5300/2072

28
PRESSURE FROM NCRHAY. SWEDEN HAY FORCE STRONGER DRUG LA"

Stockholm DAGBNS NYHETER in Swedish 6 Dec 81 p 15

[Text] It appears that the Danish government is beginning to be impressed by the
harsh Swedish and Norwegian criticism of. among other things, the sale of hashish
in the so-called free town Christiania in Copenhagen.

The minister of justice in Denmark. Ole Espersen, said on Saturday that he can con-
template stricter laws against the possession of hashish if that leads to a re-
striction in hashish dealing.

Espersen said in an interview on Danish radio that he is positively inclined to the
idea of establishing fines for the possession of hashish in very small quantities
if that can limit the hashish dealing. Today in Denmark only a warning is given

if it is believed that the possession of heroin is only for private use.

The general view in Copenhagen seems to be that Espersen was just trying to get
votes since he is just now being severely pressed by several bourgeois parties who
want harder measures against both the conditions in Christiania and hashish in

general.

But a source within the Danish police believes that it is primarily the Swedish
and Norwegian criticism of Denmark that is behind Espersen's softer attitude.

An investigation was made public on Saturday indicating that 67 percent of adult
Danes want Christiania ended when its license expires. Thirty-two percent want
the "free town" to continue in the future. The Folkating will decide Christiania's

future next year.

6893
CSO: 5300/2099

29
MSTIC DRUG PMBLDI GIMPARSD ‘10 OTHER NORDIC COUNTRIBS
Helsinki HELSINGIN SAROMAT in Finnish 17 Nov 81 p 11

[Article by Iran Stenbsck]

[Text] A new drug wave is on its way to the Nordic countries. There are 500
Finnish drug addicts in Sweden and 5.000 in Finland. Does Finland have a drug
problen? By all means no, but there are Finns who do. The worst drug addicts

have moved to Sweden or Denmrk, because of easier availability of drugs. They
have noved there to die, because they do not know about places where they could

get help, in these countries any mre than in Finland.

We do indeed have quite a few people with drug problem: 5,000 drug addicts and
50,000 who experinnt with drugs. Drug pushing is happening all over Finland.

A new wave of hashish is sweeping over the Nordic countries and the hard drugs
have cone to stay. The United Nations are predicting that the 1980's will be the

worst decade of drug abuse ever.

The increase in international drug trafficking has resulted in drugs being snug-
gled even into Finland in various ways. Nobody can say with certainty whether

the drug mfia is settled in Finland, or if it has stopped in our neighbor coun-
try to the west.

'lhe golden triangle of Southeast Asia, Thailand, Laos and Burns, and nowadays
especially Iran, Afghanistan and Pakistan as well as ‘Durkey of Europe and soot
recently Mexico of South America produce per year hundreds of tons of illegal

crude opium and finished heroin for the drug markets of Europe and the United
States.

Based on the amounts of drugs seized, the main drug countries of Europe are the
Federal Republic of Germany, Holland, Denmark and Yugoslavia. According to
statistics the amber of deaths caused by overdosage of drugs is highest in the
Federal Republic of Germany. more than 600 per year.

Last year there were no deaths in Finland caused by overdoses of the so-called
hard drugs. thetanines and opiates (heroin. morphine). Last year the nutter of
suicides that were clearly caused by overdoses of osdicinal drugs was 160. In
the beginning of the last decade the nuaiaer of deaths caused by drugs was around

'10 each year .

30
The number of medicine abusers is currently estimated to about 3,000 and the
number is 200 according to official statistics. In the years following world
War II there were about 400 heroin abusers in Finland. In the late 1960's only
150 of them were living.

The Finnish people prefer to use liquor and medicines to kill thcas¢1\cs rather
than traditional drugs.

According to the new narcotics law that came into force in 1972 it is a criminal
offense to manufacture or let be manufactured, transport, trade, buy, sell. act
as an agent for, possess or use narcotics without permission. It is also a
criminal offense to give to someone else a drug prescription or another document
for which drugs can be obtained.

Our narcotics law is extremely strict, because it is only in Finland, Norway and
Greece, that even the use of drugs is a criminal offense. The longest sentence
for drug offenses in Finland is at the most 10 years, but in practice the jail
terms rarely exceed 3 years.

In Holland and Denmark it is even legal to possess hashish for private use. The
liberal drug policies of these countries are continuously subject for dispute at

the international meetings on drug abuse.

According to the history of drugs opium was grown in Europe already 6,000 years
ago and the Chinese used marijuana as an anesthetic 2,000 years ago. Already

Homer wrote about opium and Herodotos wrote about hashish.
The Drug Roulette

In 1967 drugs were seized in Finland for the first time and the narcotics group
of the criminal police was formed. Since then physicians and sociologists have

been writing about the drug situation in Finland without being able to clarify
whether we have a drug problem or not.

With the approach of an investigating journalist and with the support of a
"laudatur" degree, Sirkka Germain revealed in her report "The Drug Roulette Is
Going Around," that was published last year, that it is a fact which has been

observed for a long time: drugs are a serious youth problem in Finland.

Germain's book is the first investigative work to understand the Finnish drug
youth within the environment that they live in. How does a young person, who

has no job, who has no place to live and who is emotionally and physically
dependent on drugs, pay for his portion of drugs? Through stealing, of course.

"Finland has transferred its drug problem to Sweden and Denmark, where the worst
users of hard drugs are found. These drug emmigrants from Finland are truly
living outside society. Pleasant treatment cannot be received in Finland.

Aftercare does not exist. The authorities are pleased as long as these young
people are off their lists," seya Germain.

31
According to Germain there is a problem that is more serious than the physical
dependence of the drug youth. That is the social spiral. Many young people were
so young whéh they started to use drugs that they never had time to form any other
habits .

Hhile Germain was working in Stockholm she became familiar with the drug spiral
of the Finnish drug youth and the dead end street to which it leads. There is
no place in Sweden where the Finnish drug addicts could receive treatment.

In Finland the young drug addicts do not try to get help, because they consider
the treatment available completely useless. And even if the young addict would
get care in an institution, there would not be nuch chance thereafter to get a
job and a place to live. The drug roulette has started: treatment, jail and
then release.

"The young drug addict is always uncertain. He always lies about his past. Above
all, the young drug addict needs community life and since the established society

cannot offer that to him, the young person resorts to an artificial world of
drugs."

It is not possible to kill them either. And for what would these young people be
rehabilitated? For unemployment, to be homeless? The efficient society is only
interested in its productive members. The above litany was the standard answer
of the Finnish social workers, who had confessed that their work was wasted, when
Germain had asked them about the treatment of young drug addicts.

Stockholm

There are, according to statistics, around 500 Finnish drug addicts in Stockholm.
They are generally heroin addicts, they have escaped from prison and are wanted
by the police in Finland. It is estimated that there are even more Finnish drug
addicts in Copenhagen than in Stockholm.

According to the young drug addicts and also according to the police. it is easier
to commit burglaries in Sweden and Denmark, and it is also easier to get drugs.
This is one reason why the worst abusers of hard drugs have left Finland.

It is estimated that the drugs in Sweden swallow over 30 billion Swedish crowns,
in Finland more than a million Finnish marks.

Chief of the drug squad of the Central Criminal Police, police inspector Olli
Reckman, is of the opinion that we cannot speak about a real drug problem as
compared to the other Nordic countries. According to him, the situation has,

however, become worse, which is already shown by the fact that beside the hashish
wave, amphetamines have also appeared on the market this fall, as well as heroin

and LSD, which has not been seen for a long time. The criminal police has in the
last 3 years found four amphetamine laboratories run by Finnish people.

During the hot drug periods of the 1960's the average age of the drug abusers was

17 years. In the beginning of the 1970's even 13-year-olda became abusers. In
the 1980's the age range is higher up and according to Reckman the average age

32
is nowadays between 18-24. Individuals of minor age, who are still in school.
have joined.

According to Heckman it is relatively easy to get hold of hashish in Finland. ‘lhe
way to harder drugs usually begins with hashish and it is known that hashish make:
brain cells degenerate. As far as is known these cells are not restored.

Some week ago the Finnish customs seized upon a record amount of hashish from
Thailand that had arrived as air freight. Can this Last amount of over 50 kilo-
grams be a sign that the drug mafia is coming to Finland?

"It is possible, but it seems, though. as if the amount seized was not intended
for the Finnish drug markets. mybe it is again a matter of an effort to map out
such a situation." guesses Heckman.

'lhe Finnish drug squad is among the last police forces in the Western oeuntries
without the right to tap telephone calls. Heck-an suspects that there my be a
fear in Finland that the right to secretly overhear telephone calls would be used

for other purposes than the investigation of crimes. In the other Nordic coun-
tries secret overhearing of telephone calls is very rigidly controlled.

lhe secret overheating of telephone cells would, according to Heckmen, be a cans
to uncover the largest drug rings. The right to inspect diplomatic mail would
also be a welcome aid for the technically deficient police work.

A little less than half of the drug trafficking takes place in the capital includ-
ing the suburbs. According to chief of the narcotics office of the Helsinki crim-
inal police, Torsti Koskinen, the average drug abuser of the capital is between

20 and 26 years old and he uses a coshinetion of liquor, medicines and drugs. he
is a student and he is from the highest social group. The relative number of
women has increased sigxifieantly.

"lhose who get caught are generally drug distributors, not as frequently drug
abusers," Koskinen reminds.

"The Finnish unemployed. boneless, new imnigrant. who does not speak Swedish, is
at the first handshaking offered free tastes of hashish in Kungstradgarden of
Stockholm. This way the young person gets into the drug business. After the
hashish follows 'piri‘ or asphetamines and in case heroin is available, the
future drug addict has deterained his future." says editor Petteri Vaansnen,

producer of the drug report on television last Sunday, that stirred so much

cos-stion. Two Finnish drug addicts that live in Stockholm were interviewed on
the show.

A heroin addict can expect to live for 10 years on the average. Around 50 indi-
viduals die each year in Stockholm due to overdoses of heroin.

'lhe drug statistics depend on how active the police are. The police get inform-
tion about only around 5 percent of all drug crimes.

33
Last year 1,076 drug crinae took place in Finland. drugs were seized 164 tines
and there were 13 drug store burglaries. Bleven kilograms of cannabis were
seized and a few grsns of heroin. The Swedish drug police seized 719 kilogram
of heahish last year. ‘lhat is a trenendous difference as cornered to us.

heroin has an established position in Denmark end Sweden. According to the
Nordic Council the collaboration between the this: countries leaves a lot to be

desired with regard to the fight against the drug problen. ihe council has
actually reco-snded that the legislation be mde nore uniforn. that the police

and the custons get nore nenpower end that there be e reintroduction of the
requirenent that the passports be steeped for traveling fron one Nordic comtry
to another.

Drug Trafficking on the Streets of helsinki

Janka, 32. is one of the best known drug people in helsinki. He has spent 5 years
in jail for selling heroin and asphetanines, substances that he once used himself.

According to Janka, drug trafficking is taking place in Finland just like it did

in the past years. although it has moved from the streets indoors. There are,
however. exceptions, especially in the ace around the Brottaje. It is possible

to get hold of heroin, although of a low quality, as long as you know where to go.
when to ask.

”The police get their teeth into the eneteurs, the drip users. the school children
who saohe their first hashish joints as an experiment in the park of the Parlia-
nnt building."

During one period of his life Janka went through all the possible institutions
for treatment of drug abusers that there are in Pinlsnd. Jarvenpaa, Pena, the
Belsinki Youth Station, the Junes convene and the hsperia Hospital. None of
these helped.

"It was of course good to hang around in these places before getting before the
judges. the treatment institutions are worthless in Finland and the treatnent
series suffer fron lack of conpetence. The therapists talk about the lanb's head.
Of course they are a little bit clever when they try to extract couplexes and
iwotence. The biggest problen is that they know nothing about the drug addicts'
world.

Jaska has calmed down by now. As seen from the outside, his life seen to be in

order. he has a wife, and s firstborn, who is a daughter. What takes place inside
the former jeilbird, drug addict, the citizen who has been through hard tines.
is less predictable.

"Justice never wins in this world. Even inside the prisons the guards respect
only the 'big crininals,‘ swindlcrs and the like. 'l'o then a drug addict is sline
and you feel that."

After the Dolorex hassle the oldest drug addicts have, according to Jsska. died

like cockroaches. mose who used to use rex (Dolorex), are now alcoholics. Jesks
does not drink liquor himself. because it only gives you a bad posture.

36
Oso

Oso sits together with his girlfriend on a sofa in a basement roon in Eire. This
is where the people who vegetate get together. the defenders of budding youth,
representatives of the counterculture. the writers of the UUDEN AJAN AURA paper
and their supporters..

Oso is a 31-year-old former drug addict, who started his experimenting with
hashish during the golden age of the hippie movenent, he used euphetanines now
and then. as well as nedicines. Nowadays he snokes “only hashish" in the conpany
of good friends.

"th drugs? People becons alienated in this society. because people are not
allowed to live in accordance with their own nature. their own psychological
needs. No animal species destroys the earth like the human beings do." says Oso.

who has read Santeri Alkio philosophically. theosophically.

As a way to treat drug addicts Oso would like to use the old Nordic village
municipality as a model. wherein the drug addicts live together with other people
and work as nuch as they are able to. They would gradually reach the sane inner
world as they do when under the effect of drugs.

Oso and his friends do not support the use of drugs. Despite this Oso would like
to legalize hashish and marijuana. knowing very well what the large njority of
the Finnish people think of such a proposal. After'his years of drifting. suici-
dal thoughts and living under a boat. Oso has decided to get along with today's
society, although he has not adjusted to it.

3311

ﬁeli is a 55~year-old former heroin addict living in Helsinki. a for-er victim of
the Dolorex hearings. For decades Dolorex was the medicine abused by our drug
addicts. Now this disputed drug has been removed fro. the narket and it can no
longer be obtained from the spothecaries of Finland.

"I started using heroin together with my husband right after the war. In 1955 I
seriously tried to stop my heroin shots at Nikkila. where excellent therapy was
available. You could get insuline and good food at Nikkils. We did a lot of

skiing and the fanily was allowed to visit. It is no longer possible to gst any

good treatment. They are so devilishly harsh even at Nesperia."

In Heli‘s opinion Dolorex is not a narcotic. but an anesthetic. a pain killer.
Rex does not like you high. it helps and soothes.

"The Dolores trial was awful. We were not even allowed to defend ourselves. Old
drug addicts like us die nowadays while standing up. ‘lhe doctors give Diapsn
instead of rex, but it does not help at all. of course. They should have shot
then down instee 1, why torture old drug addicts."

The trial was such a hard blow for Bali that she decided to give up the hard drugs.
She has so far stood behind her decision.
Semi

Nina is sitting in the Old Church Park of Helsinki, the Plague Park. on a bench
beside a person with whom she has had the only hunn relationship in her life,

Sami. Some hours earlier he had met his friend in the restroom of the Erottaja
kiosk. The friend had returned from the Sweden shuttle ship and Sami had bought

s heroin shot from him with 1,000 marks.

In the middle of the street crowds of Belsinki! within a stone's throw from the
narcotics police! Just s hundred asters from the forur drug park and the drug

bar!

The narcotics advisory comittee could for a change take a tour around the Plague
Park that has been sobered up and then forgotten. around the Brottaja, the railway
station, a tour through Espoo, visit the Turku County Jail. Halaskillnadsgatan in
Stockholm, Christiania in Copenhagen and count on their fingers how many thousands
of Finnish drug addicts they see.

The Treatmnt for Drug Abusers ls Down and Out

The narcotics committee presented their ZOO-page-long report in 1969. The nar-
cotics advisory connittee, formed 2 years later, put together their proposal for

developing treatment for addicts of narcotics and medicines.

What has happened? Nothing. The lack of municipal treatmt places for drug
addicts is chronic.

In 1969 the psychologists' association joined associate professor Kettil Bruun
in his controversial opinion that only the possession of drugs for distribution
purposes, not at all the use of drugs, would be a criminal offense. The amend-
ment proposed by the comittee would, according to the psychologists, bring the
young drug addicts, who need treatment, into prison.

Has this actually taken place? Yes.

Nowadays about 10 drug addict patients. a fraction of the actual number, are
admitted to the municipal treatment institutions, the a-clinics, the youth
dispensaries and the psychiatrth hospitals each year.

Only the police records report several thousand pure narcotics addicts. In the
prisons about 50 problem narcotics addicts sit who are in need of treatment.

Reatment is not obligatory for e narcotics addict in Finland. A young drug
addict can, however, under the "direction" of the police and the social inspec-

tor, be passed on to an institution to sober up. Withdrawal treatmnt is usually
not practiced in Finnish hospitals. The Hesperia hospital in Helsinki admits.
in exceptional cases, one drug abuser at a time for withdrawal treatmnt.

’lhe Hesperia dispensary has for about 20 years provided so-called methadone
treatment, whereby attempts are made to get narcotics addicts to withdraw from

drugs through daily administration of a specific amount of drugs, usually

36
methadone mixed with juice. Methadone is the most common withdrawal and substitu-
tion drug for narcotics addicts used in the world.

Ihis fall three citizens are drinking Resperia's methadone juice. The number of
applicants for the juice line is severalfold larger.

If you study the actual numbers to evaluate the success of the treatment o'.’ the
young drug addicts, the person who has accomplished the most is the former
deacon, now someone who thinks he can make the world a better place, Aulis Jones,

chief of the Arkadia youth clinic and its founder.

Junes' group which for 12 years has been working in different locations of the
capital, nowadays centered at Linnunlaulutie, does not treat intoxicated young
people or young drug addicts with pills but instead with work and fellowship.

The work connunity of Arkadis consists of 10 people who make a living by
collecting rags and with flea market activities in the large old wooden building,
and they give each other support. Forty-five percent of the Arkadia individuals

have returned to normal life in society.

"Society's biggest mistake is to consider drug abuse a mental disease. The
Finnish treatmnt institutions want only customers who stay for the rest of their

lives in agreement with the model provided by the revivalist movements. That is
what is called mental hospitalization. The best treatment for the young drug

addicts is a system wherein they help themselves, sane fermers' ethics," assures
Junes.

According to Aulis Junes the drug-addicted poor have moved to Sweden and Denmark,
the wealthier drug addicts have moved to West Germany. Big news are the cannabis
products that are angled from the United States. Many a mother has called up

Junes, startled, when she has noticed that her child, who has been a student in
the United States. is using drugs when returning to Finland.

"Hare serious than the drug problem is the problem regarding where young people
live. It is a shame to put children into basements, since they are meant for
storing potatoes. Punks do not use drugs. To brand their hangout the Bat Cave

was sinply a craving for sensation on the part of the commercial press." said
Junes.

9662
C50: 5300/ 2090

37
NEH PRESCRIPTION lAH TO CONTROL NARDOTICS IN EFFECT
Helsinki 0031 $00“! in Finnish 17 Nov 81 p 11

[Article by Jaakko Lehtinen]

'[Text] There will be new regulations for prescriptions from the beginning of next
year. The altered prescription regulations or the directions for prescribing

medicine and delivery of medicine will make it significantly harder to prescribe
narcotics and medicines that effect the central nervous system.

There are changes also in the regulations concerning liquor and medicines that
contain alcohol.

Otherwise the regulations have been adjusted only when it has been proven diffi-
cult to interpret a regulation. according to a spokesman for the National Board

of health.

As in the past, the physician is allowed to prescribe medicines only to a person
whose disease he himself has diagnosed. The prescription should usually be given

in writing, but sometimes in exceptional cases, over the telephone.

The amount of medicine that can be prescribed may correspond only to 1 year of
treatment.

A new rule is that it is not permitted to use a prescription with the name of
the medicine printed or stewed onto the form.

It is enphasized in the regulations that the purpose of the drug should always be
specified on the prescription. There must be a very particular reason for such
a specification to be excluded.

Narcotics hast Not Be Prescribed Over the Telephone

The physician should always give the patient sufficient intonation regarding the

purpose of the sedicine. its use. its side effects and possible harmful effects,
for examle, the effect on driving.

In a telephone prescription the amount of medicine should be limited to the mini-
mum. Certain substances cannot be prescribed over the telephone, including actual

38
narcotics. medicines that require an original prescription, alcohol, medicinal
brandy, medicinal wine and rubbing alcohol.

Alcohol Prescriptions Hard To Get

The physicians no longer easily give out the alcohol prescriptions that the farnr
era in the country used to want--no matter how sick they might be.

Within certain limits the physician has the right to prescribe alcohol for the
patient "for external use."

According to the regulations alcohol can be prescribed only in cases when the
physician determines that he cannot prescribe any other substance because of the
possible side effects.

Concentrated alcohol (apiritus forte) should when possible be replaced by rubbing
alcohol.

Maximum 200 g Medicinal Brandy

The amount of alcohol prescribed by a physician must not exceed an average of
1.000 g per month based on half-yearly calculations.

The prescriptions for spirit. medicinal brandy, medicinal wine and rubbing alco-
hol remain in the spothecary. where they are stored for 10 years.

The physician should keep records about for whom, for what purpose. and how much
alcohol or other medicine containing alcohol he has prescribed.

The maximum amount of medicinal brandy that can be prescribed with one prescrip-
tion is 200 g. The amounts of medicinal wine and rubbing alcohol are not limited.

A bachelor of medicine can prescribe spirit and medicines containing alcohol
only to patients.

Strict Regulations for Narcotics
The new directions have special emphasis on narcotics regulations.
It is usually stated that when actual narcotics are prescribed the physician

should be especially careful. The drug must not be prescribed for a patient when
the physician does not know.

Narcotics should further always be prescribed in writing on a special narcotics
prescription form. 0n the prescription should also be included the personal
identification and the address.

Similar regulations apply to the prescribing of special medicines that affect
the central nervous system (the PKV special preparations).

39
Stricter Attitude Toward Feleificetions

Apothecary Pentti Saari of the University Pharmacy is of the opinion that it was
e necessary and pertinent nessure to reforn and adjust the regulations for the

prescription of drugs.
"Many useful and good nattere have been taken into eccount in the sands-eat."

Beceuee of the new regulations regarding the selling of drugs the wiguitiee
of the prescriptions are reduced end the patients get the right amounts of the
right nedicine with more certainty than before.

"Only practice will show whet effect the reforned regulations will have on pre-
venting the sttenpts to forge prescriptions. Such tricks are not unco-on nowa-‘
days.

“For exaqls in our phermcy a few felsifications per year are mcovered."
The Physicians' Handwriting Continues To Be a Problen

"The prescription written by e physicien is not elwaye clear and unambiguous, as
it absolutely should be." state physicians lien naukka and neikki nrppenen in
the newest issue of LMKARILEKTI.

"Unclear handwriting is often a fact. The matter is. however. often helped by
the fact that the physicians use a cleer steep to clarify the names." eeye
spothecery Sasri.

"When the nane of a drug is unclearly written the patient nay get a completely

different medicine than the one that the physician intended," Klaukka and
Karppanen point out.

9662
C80: 5300/ 2090

40
BRIEFS

DRUG SEIZURE—Nine kilos of drugs have been seized in Sete. Police have
arrested a Speniard who was transporting eight ki1oa of cannabis oil and one
kilo of resin concealed in the bodywork of hie car. He had cone on a car-ferry

from Morocco. The druga were worth about 350.000 trance. [LDO70256 Peria
Domestic Service in French 1100 GMT 6 Jan 82]

C80: 5300/2118

41
HBTHADONE DISTRIBUTION IN AMSTERDAM VIEWED
Stockholm DAGENS “YESTER in Swedish 4 Dec 81 p 36

[Article by Lotta Schullerqvist]

[Text] In Amsterdam there are up to 7.000 heavy drug abusers.
Heroin is sold at almost every street corner.

The authorities, in order to try to reduce crime, offer methadone--a synthetic
morphine--to addicts instead of the expensive. illegal narcotic.

Buses drive around between different places to where addicts can come and get
their daily dose. when the project is fully in operation, 1,000 addicts will get
methadone in this manner.

Amsterdam was at the beginning of the seventies a refuge center for the hippie
generation hashish smokers; the liberal Dutch narcotic policy permitted the open
use of different drugs.

"A few years ago the government realized that the soft line toward misuse was no
longer feasible. Addicts only increased. Robberies, thefts and prostitution made
the streets more and more insecure. Amsterdam's reputation as a tourist town was
in danger. In order to try to arrest this development, we decided to go in for a
big methadone progran," Due Pabiua and Etienne Bubsrts say. They work at the
Amsterdam's municipal health service administration and are responsible for
planning the methadone project.

Reaching Here

"With methadone we reach a larger segment of addicts than with individual-oriented
care which aims toward freedom from drugs. Those individuals who are not
motivated to end their narcotic addiction control their dependence on drugs
'through methadone and avoid using all their waking hours to hunt for heroin."

Methadone has been usediJlDutch narcotics care during most of the seventies, both
at institutions and by family doctors who write prescriptions for individual
addicts.

The first project using buses bringing methadone treatment to reach immigrant
groups who did not seek a doctor or other care was started a few years ago.

42
Later prostitutes received treatment this way since they did not generally seek
the usual care.

The bus program was expanded still further this summer. One thousand addicts
can now get their daily dose from one of the two buses which drive around between
definite “stops.“

A doctor's certificate or an examination and an interview at one of the sethsdone
program's four open correctional centers for addicts is required to get into the
program. There is no age limit and no require-ant to be clean of drugs to get
into the program, but on the other hand at least 6 years of addiction.

The individual who needs something more than methadone is referred from the buses
to the open correctional reception centers where there are. in addition to
doctors. POYChologists and social workers.

Must want To

”Abouthalfthe people who come to the buses ask for social help. But only a
fifth seriously want to end their addiction. we pin such of our hope on them,
but for those who don't want to, we can't do nore than give then methadone," seys
Ernest Boning, who is a psychologist and coordinator at one of the open
correctional reception centers.

One can be referred by the reception center to treatment or to some social help
organization. In Holland there is no socialized medicine. It is handled by
private foundations, often with church organizations behind them. The munici-
palities and institutions purchase the services of the foundations for the
citizens.

Such a foundation is "be Regenboog," the Rainbow. which conducts social field
work, provides narcotics inforastion. contacts parents and family, and after-care
for addicts. Marjolyn Keesmsat. a field worker, relates:

"He work primarily in the sddicts’ own environment and try to help then survive.
We take no responsibility for their lives but try to get then to do that them-
selves. Those who want to can stop the habit and get support, but wo don't try
to convince anyone--that is fruitless. To those people who want to be free of
narcotics, we try to give more comfortable life. among other ways by helping
them with methadone."

Harjolyn does not regard methadone as a narcotic but as a medicine for withdrawal.
Critical

The social workers can refer those people who want to stop their habit to a
treataent institution. One of the largest in Rolland is the Jellinek Center

which has a number of counseling, detoxifying and treatment clinics, and
after-care homes for both alcoholics and narcotics addicts.

b3
Erik Grannat works in one of the advising offices for addicts:

"We are critical in regard to the nethadone buses. There, a strong drug is handed
out free, and the drug abuser is allowed to rennin in his old environment. There
is no way of deter-ining if all who cone to the buses really need nethadone. It
happens that 16-15 year olds obtain methadone there and that is conpletely

crazy: it creates a strong dependence.

"Methadone is an effective way to keep addicts under control and to give the town
a nice appearance. But one is risking making thousands into legal addicts for
life. Politically. it is profitable to put all the noney in nethadone instead of
in the care which can really help addicts. It looks like sonething is finally
being done.

6893
C50: 5300/2095
CUS'IOHS SERVICE REPORTS BIG INCREASE Ill DRUG SBIZURES
Oslo ARBEIDERBLADET in Norwegian 21 Nov 81 p 9
[Article by Jarit Jahreie]

[Text] The Customs Service has so far this year confiscated 31 percent more
narcotics than for the sane period last year. The quantity is increasing fron

year to year. The year's confiscation has a value of about 5 million kroner on the
open market. The confiscation of liquor and wine has also increased over last
year's. And the gigantic confiscation at ﬂosodden is not taken into account.

That will make a big impact on the year's statistics.

”It can be naturally concluded that there is sore snuggling now than before. But I
hope and believe that the big confiscations are due to more effective inspection.
In any case, custon inspections have been increased," says consultant Vidar
Vestreng in the Customs Service to mammrr.

There were, in regard to narcotics. 166 confiscations by 31 October last year.
For the same period this year the number is 219.

The greatest increase has been in the cannabis group which includes marijuana and
hashish. Here it has doubled in couparison with last year. The cannabis
confiscations anount to just under 5 nillion kroner on the open market. There has
not been any noticeable increase in regard to "hard stuff" like heroin. Thirty-
five grans have been confiscated up to now. According to police figures, a gram
of heroin costs 5000 krone: on the street.

"It was not long ago that a confiscation of 10 to 15 grams of hashish slide the
press. Today it is nothing to talk about any longer. Five to lo grens is
unfortunately a daily occurrence," Vestreng says.

"Where do nost of the confiscations take place?"

"On the ferries, first of all the Dennark boats, and after that air and nail. I
have the inpression that small quantities do come from neighboring countries. but
the greatest part cones from far away. The biggest confiscation this year was in
Bergen. Here, we got 9.7 kilograms which came from Brazil. Five grams was
cocaine, which at the consent is little known in Norway, and which we hope we can
keep outside our borders, "Vestreng says.

45
Hard Liquor and Wine

In regard to liquor the Customs Service had confiscated about 6,000 liters hard
liquor and 6,000 liters wine before the gigantic confiscation last Wednesday

at Neaodden. Last year the corresponding figures vere 5.100 liters hard liquor
and 2.100 liters wine.

"The confiscation at Nesodden has not been totaled up. but it will involve probably
about 10.000 bottles. I cannot really recall our coming across such a large
quantity in recent tines, and the confiscation will naterially affect the year's
statistics, "first consultant Vestreng says.

"Is it largely small-scale smugglers you apprehend, Vestreng?"

"The number of confiscatione as of 30 Septenbsr was 14,000. It is largely people
who try to take in three to four bottles over the legal quota. He confiscate the
largest quantities on freightera and fishing boats. There are perhaps 8 to lo
‘nan on board who take along about 100 bottles for distribution. 0n the whole,
quite a bit is struggled in along the whole coast, "Vidar Veetreng says.

6893
(280: 5300/2093

46
STORTING APPROVES MEASURES TO COMBAT MCOTICS
Oslo APTENPOSTHU in Norwegian 24 Nov 81 p 11

[Text] The Storting yesterday gave a green light to the government: New strong
efforts will be ends to get at the narcotics problen. A new all out campaign
against narcotics costing five million kroner will be put into effect. Mona
Rikke, the minister of justice. infer-ed the Storting yesterday that the tough
plan against narcotics which the Storting's judicial comittee has requested will
be formulated by the undersecretary's consittee which will handle child and youth
questions.

The Storting granted late yesterday evening an extra appropriation totaling
some 17.8 nillion kroner to the current year's budget for the narcotics measure.
The funds will be used in the aforenentioned tough canpaign, to increase the
rescurces of the mnicipalities, for the police and the prison systea to have
increased funds. at the sane tine that the Customs Service will obtain funds for
new technical equipment to hinder the snuggling of narcotics into Norway. The
Storting voted unanimously for the proposed appropriations.

Mona Rokke, minister of justice. and Helen Bosterud (Labor). chairperson of the
Starting's judicial connittee, emphasized that steps nuat be taken on the
preventive level if young people are to be prevented from toning in contact with
narcotics. The cabinet minister pointed out that such serious urine follows in
the wake of narcotics. including prostitution.

All substances are dangerous. Like her fellow party nsnber Morten Steenstrup,
who is chair-an for the natter in the Starting, the ninistar of justice pointed
out even anall doses of hashish are dangerous. They both maintained that the
tough campaign which is to be initiated strongly enhasises this.

6893
080: 5300/ 2903

47
THREE ARRESTED IN NASHISN SHUGGLING CASE
Oslo APTBNPOSTEN in Norwegian 26 Nov Bl p 13

[Text] A Norwegian. an Englishman and a Canadian women are in custody after the
narcotics police in Oslo uncovered a hashiah ring in the capital last month. Nine
other people were arrested and placed in custody as minor distributors, but they
have now been set free. The Englishman is charged with having brought about 10
kilograms of hashiah into Norway from Pakistan. while the Norwegian has confessed
to selling the hashish. The woman denies she is guilty. They are all indicted in
accordance with paragraph 162 of the criminal law, the so-called "professional
paragraph."

It was in the beginning of October that police investigators began to keep a watch
on an apartment in Oslo, and on 21 October the police struck and searched the
apartment. Two kilograms of hashish was found there. At the same time, nine
people visiting the apartment were arrested, including the Englishman who is 36
years old. The apartment owner. a 32-year-old Norwegian. was also arrested.
Except for the Englishman, the other visitors were regarded as minor distributors.
They came to the apartment to get stuff for further sale and for their own use.
They were aged 20 to 35.

The Englishman had with him a kilogram of hashish when he was seized. He was
living at a hotel in Oslo, and the police found. during a search of the room, an
additional 4.7 kilograms of hashish. During the search of the room of a 63-year-
old Canadian woman who lived at the same hotel, the police found 122,500 kroner
in cash. most of it in Norwegian kroner but also some British pounds. The woman
admitted that she was safeguarding the money for the Englishman but says that she
did not assume that it came from the sale of narcotics. The money is payment for
the two kilograms of hashish which was confiscated in the Norwegian'a apartment.
The police have also examined the bankbooks of the Norwegian but they have not
found anything which they can connect with the narcotics sale.

The Englishman admitted at the hearing that he has smuggled in about 10 kilo-
grams of hashiah from Pakistan. He flew from Pakistan to Amsterdam and from there
on to Fornebu. The hashiah was hidden in a trunk with a double bottom. He said
he fixed up the trunk himself and it took him a couple of days to make the

double bottom.

68
The 32-year-old Norwegian is known to the police and he has previously been
sentenced to prison but not for narcotics violations. The Englishmen hes not
been previously sentenced in Norway, but he was, together with two countrynen.
arrested in Paris in 1973. They had then in their possessioa 2b kilograms of
hashish. The Canadian woman is unknown in connection with narcocics. She stated
she was in Norway on a vacation and by chance net the Englishman. I

Heshish is now sold in Oslo on the street for 100 kroner per gram. while it is
sold in larger quantities to minor distributors for roughtly 1.0.000 kroner a kilo-
grsn. The matter is under continued investigation, and for the time being indict-
nents have not been nude.

6893 .
C80: 5300/ 2093

109
cusrms ADMINISTRATION WANTS CGIPUTERS FOR DRUGS CONTROL
Stockholm SVENSKA DAGBLADE'I‘ in Swedish 30 Nov 81 p 9
[Article by Sune Olofson]

[Text] The customs administration has been waiting for 5 years for two computer
terminals to be used in the fight against narcotics.

Customs wants to place one terminal in its central administrative headquarters, the
other at the liason center in Stockholn. This request was already made in 1977.

The customs administration is, in light of the extent of narcotics mggling, asking
the government that four additional data terminals acquired and placed in the cus-
toms stations in Helsingborg, Arlsnda, Kalmo and Goteborg.

The customs administration wants all six to be tied into the national police board's
data register. This would mean that the customs personnel would have direct access
to the police register of individuals under suspicion in connection with narcotics.

Quick Information

"We need quick intonation in now and than hard-pressed situations," says section
chief Sigvard Palkenland, chief of the customs section in the general customs

administration.

"A steady stream of travellers comes to our country. Many of them bring along
narcotics. The customs administration has difficulty catching these people without
access to quick data control."

There exists within the national police a certain reluctance to divest themselves
of the reconnaissance support which their register of charges possesses.

"At the same time, we realize that society must make its fight against narcotics
more effective. We shall investigate the advantages and disadvantages involved in
this. I am in principle in favor of the proposal, "says Police Chief Holger
Romander.

”It is our intention that only customs officials concerned with crime will have
access to the data information," says Sigvard Falkenland.

50
The cost of the six terminals is estimated to be 185.000 kroner, the operating costs
325,000 per year.

The data term .nals thus check not only persons but also the recipients of goods, and
firms. The question of respecting the integrity of the people is thus vital.

The Question of Integrity

"Just as soon as anyone asks for data there is alunys someone who will jump 'up and
talk about integrity," says Tord Rorhamn, chief of the customs administration's data
processing section.

"Here it is a question of the integrity of the narcotics nuggler or the health
and future of our children. The politicans have never taken a stand on this
question."

The government. the department of comerce, will have to decide this question after
a reply from the national police.

"The goverment regards increased cooperation between the police and the customs
administration as necessary if we are to solve the narcotics question," says
Minister of Comerce Bjorn Holin. "Since we are at the monent working on the budget,
I can not say whether the customs administration will get its data terminals,~ but

it is the government's intention to give priority to the fight against narcotics."

6893
050: 5300/2097

51
SUCCESSFUL POLICE OFFENSIVE AGAINST P1388338 TO CONTINUE
Stockholm SVDlSkA DAGBLADET in Swedish 4 Dec 81 p 15
[Article by Per-Erik Legerqvist]

[Text] The Sweet long police offensive, above all in Stockholm, Goteborg and Mslmo
in pursuit of sellers and buyers of narcotics. has resulted in so many confiscations
that the participants in the extensive sweep are anticipating good progress next
year.

"Then we will be in a better situation in regard to the external conditions. Then
a large part of the business will be outdoors. We have been handicapped, since
most of the dealers conduct business indoors." says Tony Lindstrom of the national
police board.

Last autumn the national police board urged all provincial police chiefs and the
police chiefs in Stockholm. Goteborg and Malno to go into action to get at the
minor peddlers of narcotics.

"we have noted a tapering-off," said Holger Rounder, the national police chief.
Unknown in Goteborg

The first offensive began on 15 October in Goteborg, where bsrs. youth centers.
schools and the hangouts of addicts were above all the objects of raids.

"I am suprised that, to a large degree, a completely unknown clientele was involved,"
says Police Commissioner Lennart Lindnsn in Goteborg, after 140 pushers had been
apprehended. with fewer than 108 of than under 20 years of age. and very few over
30.

A total of 85 seizures were made in Goteborg. Bashish and amphetamines were chiefly
confiscated.

Victims in Stockholm

"We anticipated the national police board's directive.‘ says Police Superintendent
Olle Iersson of the Stockholm police. "Already in the late steamer we formed s

52
narcotics group of 30 people, whose job, among other things, was to destroy the
market for pushers. The group aimed at the victims."

In Stockholm at present the umber of incidents is just under 10 a day. A normal
number for this time of the year, according to Larsson.

Intensive Action In Haho

Halmo started its narcotics offensive on 2 November and it ends today, I. December. '-
It has been 5 exceedingly active weeks.

"we have had a total of 16 men in actim," comiseioner Nils-Erik Lindheim of the
Hslmo police relates.

Since the majority of the police is relatively new recruits and young, the comando
action has been called "mini search."

Raids have been made against hangoute of narcotic addicts, schools, recreational
parks and discoteques. The results are regarded as completely satisfactory.

Since the start Commissioner Eolgar Herven has seized several kilograms of canabis
and hashish, as well as goodly amounts of liquor and stolen goods, worth millions
of kroner.

"Shaken Up"

"There is no doubt that we have shaken up the pusher connections considerably.
'Hini-aearch' has indeed done a job.

'Hini-search' will now be reduced for a while. But since it is a matter of manpower
available in the Halmo police, a new action could be mounted with very short notice.

"We shall have a lot going after the new year. The difference will be that this
time we won't make announcements when we push the start button."

6893
C80: 5300/2097

53
INTERNATIONAL GANG BROKEN; SHUGGLED HBROIN. HASHISH
Stockholm DAGENS NYHETER in Swedish 8 Dec 81 p 5
[Article by Leif Dahlin)

[Text] At about 3 o'clock on Sunday afternoon on 24 August last year two surveil- ~
lance officers from the Buddinge criminal police knocked on the door of a young
Syrian in an apartment in Plemingsberg. The man Opened the door and took a com-
pletely uncooperative attitude towards the visit of the police.

They explained to him that he was to be questioned concerning peddling narcotics to
school youth in Flamingsberg and by the Buddinge hospital.

The surveillance men, who regarded these events as a routine, could not in their
wildest fantasy have imagined that their action would be the beginning of one of
the most extensive narcotica' cases that has been unravelled in the country.

Since then 16 months will soon have passed, and ths~police have not yet seen the
end of the tangle with links to India. Syria, Lebanon, Morocco. Colombia, England
and Holland.

There have been up to the present 80 arrests. Sixty-five of them have led to
imprisonment. Some 50 people have been sentenced. One has received an 8-year
prison sentence. another 7 years, a third 6 years, a fourth 5 years, and others,
imprisonment for varying years. Only one has been released.

The gang dealt in considerably larger quantities of narcotics than could be ,roven.
and it is not exactly crumbs: 7 kilograms of heroin, between 200 and 300 kilograms
of marijuana and cannabis and 2 kilograms cocaine, with a so-called black market
value of more than 40 million kroner.

The chief of the Huddinge criminal police, Commissioner Gunner Bellgren says.

"It actually began with our getting telephone calls from concerned parents in the
Flemingsberg housing area. School children were buying narcotics with their
allowances."

The interrogation of the young Syrian began on 25 August 1980. He denies any crime.
The investigators found in his apartment a passport issued to a Swede. The photo-
graph waa torn out. The police was successful in finding the Swede at an address
in Skane. He adnita to knowing the pusher. and the suspicion of the police that
the pusher had been selling hashish to young people in school was strengthened.
The pusher began to make admissions. and it was soon apparent that he was working
together with a number of his countrymen in the southern suburbs. Arrests occurred
one after the other. By the middle of September sane 20 people had been arrested.
The trail leads further to two Lebanese brothers, and in the middle of October the
police strike. One hundred thousand kroner in cash were found in the brothers
apartment in Huddinge.

The brothers had previously gone into a bank in Holland. They opened a bag contain-
ing 600,000 kroner. The bank assisted them in putting the money in a Swedish
account. The money was used later to purchase trucks and motors which were shipped
to Lebanon and sold there at a large profit.

Huge Cargo

In connection with this raid three others were arrested in absentia. They are wanted
internationally, suspected of trying to smuggle lo tons of marijuana into the United
States. The men are also said to have had plans to smuggle large cargos of narcotics
from Colombia to Europe in specially-equipped vessels.

Around 10 October the police found a hiding place for narcotics in a cellar in
Trangsund outside Stockholm. Large wooden boxes which had been shipped in con-
tainers on a ship from Colombia to the free port were empty. No hundred kilograms
of marijuana were on the narcotics market.

Only DAGENS NYEETER carried the news on 15 October, and one of the individuals in-
volved who had not yet been apprehended got the shakes when he saw the headlines.
A later transcript of the investigation reads:

"0 even remembers that on the day when the headlines stated that the police had
found the hiding place in Trangsund he was on the way to a cafe near his work
together with a. They looked at the headlines. and when they entered the cafe.

a read DAGENS mm. H became 'greatly wrought up.’ 0 had to order B's break-
fast. 0 asked 8 if this was the same grass with which a was involved and got back
a nod. I! was morose because they had not gotten rid of the boxes.... Later on the
same day 0 went hone to I! after work.

"He hears B and G then talk about the marijuana. he says that he has to travel to
Copenhagen inediatsly to telephone from there the contact man in Colombia. To the
question as to why he had to go to Copenhagen to telephone. ll replies that a call
must be ordered. and I! does not dare do so in Sweden. 0 than realizes that the
call involves stopping further shipment of marijuana."

A Ton of Narcotics

Comissioner Gunner Hellgran continues:

"The shipment which was stopped after the men becase frightened by the headline in
DAGENS NYHETER involved a ton of marijuana. The men, who are now serving 7 and 5

year prison terms respectively were also found guilty of this premeditated crime.

It was fortunate that this big quantity never came here, worth, by the way, tens
of millions of kroner.

55
0n 2 December three Erodes were apprehended at King's Bend in Huddinge. They were
going on a ski trip :0 Italy. All are involved in the marijuana smuggling. The
police obtained at the hearing information that the gang was involved with cocaine.

The trail led further to a gang of Englishmen who established themselves in the
heroin market. Already 2 years ago one of them came here. is rented a villa in
Akers Runo. A Swede became his closest sales contact. With sole rights the Swede
sold 5 kilograms of heroin to the Englishman.

At one o'clock at night on 2 June this year the police raided the villa in Akers.
Three Englishmen were arrested, and 8 kilograms of hashiah were confiscated.

These men made so much money in their dealing that they planned to buy an apartment
house in their own country. Their intention was to live off the rent. At the pre-

trial hearing-the legal proceedings have just begun--the police begin to suspect
two Englishmen in their home country.

One of them is out on bail of 200,000 kroner in anticipation of the extradition
action in January next year. One of the Swedish investigators believes he has
evidence that the men smuggled large quantities of heroin from Rolland in specially
constructed bags.

During the whole investigation the police and prosecutor ammnuted between Huddinge
and Visby. The first contingent was placed in the prison in Visby because of space
considerations. For practical reasons of investigation, more and more have been
added so that the Buddinge police 'reservad' almost all the cells in the Visby
prison in the course of a year.

One of the Englishmen already arrested purchased in November 1980 half a kilogram
of heroin in Amsterdam. He put the narcotics in a rubber tube in a so-called tube-
less tire on his motorcycle. Then he drove the long way to Jonkoping.

When he was going to take out the contents of the uninflated inner tube. he found
to his grief that the rubber, plastic and heroin were in one jumble. He called his
countrymen in Akers Runo. They traveled to Jonkoping to determine that the man was
not lying. Again back to the villa in Akers Rune. They cooked the whole mess,
filtered it, and produced a heroin product which was purer than the original.

Secret Letter

Just as the investigation concerning one of these Englishmen was almost complete,
the personnel in the Visby prison found a letter. The police suspected that the
people put there have had mail contacts. A 'house search' was conducted in the
prison, and the internal mailbox was found-the front shaft of a test bicycle in
the exercise raom.

Fifteen letters were found, and from them it was apparent that some of the imprisoned
individuals have also smuggled hashish oil from Morocco to England. that they were
trying to recruit Swedes as hashish pushers since the market for hashiah products

is so good in Sweden. The letters also showed they communicated in code, and it

was decided that the first individual who served his time was again about to take

up his narcotics dealing.

56
He would contact the next one to be released and so on.

One of the men, in addition, traveled to Holland and purchased there 16 kilograms of
cannabis for 15,000 kroner per kilogram. cash.

Pop Stars

On the periphery of this tangle there are stories as to how an internationally
known pop star purchased marijuana from the gang. Other disclosures led to a known

singer and a prominent Swedish politician being punished. Both purchased narcotics
for their own use.

The surveillance men who knocked on the door of the young pusher in Flemingsherg on
that Sunday afternoon in August last year have today piled up, in the hearing rooms
of the Visby prison and the police station in Pittjs, folders with thousands of
pages of inquiry reports.

"And that is not the end," says one of the investigators. "If we can only get here
the two Englishmen whom we have requested he extradited. a number of new depriva-
tiona of freedon can develop on the home iront. There are many highly interesting
pieces left in this investigation."

6893
C80: 5300/2099

57
THIRTEEN INDIANS ACCUSED 0P SHUGGLING EASHISH
Stockholm DAGENS NYHBTER in Swedish 4 Dec Bl, p 10

[Text] Thirteen Indian citizens, all men between 35-60 years of age, were indicted
on Thursday in the district court in Sollentuna for the felonious smuggling of goods
and for felonious narcotics crimes. The district prosecutor. Lennart Nilsson, main-
tained that the men had possession of a total of 40 kilograms of hashish which was
smuggled in suitcases from India to Arlands.

In connection with the so-called people smuggling from India to Western Europe, the
customs administration sharpened its surveillance at Arlanda. Practically all
passengers on the Polish airways "Poleki Lots" plane from New Delhi were checked
very carefully, and the first confiscation of narcotics was aada on 21 September.
Then six men arrived with a large quantity of hashiah and a week later four more
men and a man who had registered at a youth hostel in Stockholm were apprehended.

One of the leading figures. who was arrested in sbsentia. came to Sweden on 29
October. He was apprehended 5 days later in Uppsala. as is accused of having
made at least four smuggling trips from India.

On 22 November a 60-year-old man came to the police and reported the loss of his
hand baggage. He had come by air to Arlanda the same day. The police learned
that the man was going to visit the top leader and was therefore suspect. The
next day the lost baggage was found.

The suitcases had been sent with the wrong plane. Fifteen kilograms hashish was
found in one of them. Like the others. the 60-year-old man is under arrest. He
JQuSCJ any crime and says he was going to hand over the suitcase to his fellow
countryman in Uppaels.

The trial began on Monday in the district court in Sollentuna.

6893
C80: 5300/2097

58
METHADONE TEST LIKELX TO CONTINUE ANOTHER THREE YEARS
Stockholm DAGENS NYBETER in Swedish 11 Dec 81 p 8
[Article by Lotta Schullerqvist]

[Text] The methadone treatment of drug addicts should continue 3 more years as a
trial project, according to a proposal of the medical delegation. This involves a
reduction in comparison with the proposal of the national social welfare board for
a 5-year trial period.

On Thursday the government decided to hand over the controversial question regarding

the future of the methadone treatment to the medical care delegation of the depart-
ment of social affairs for further consideration. The delegation, which in its

preparatory study advocated that the treatment should continue at a reduced level,
will continue tie work after the new year. Until further notice there will be a
halt in taking more people into the methadone program.

A Tightening Up

The controversial treatment with methadone (a morphine substitute which is given to
addicts) was started at the end of the sixties at Ullerakers hospital. A group of
experts has, on behalf of the national social welfare board, carried out the treat-
ment. which has been criticized strongly from many sides and decided that it should
continue on a limited degree. for 150 to 200 patients at the most. The treatment
should also be changed from a trial basis to a regular medical specialty, central-
ized at the Ullerakars hospital. The group proposed that the treatment should be
evaluated after 5 years.

The question was then forwarded to the government and was first studied by the
medical care delegation which also took the position that treatment should be
allowed to continue. But there was to be a slight tightening-up; treatment would
encompass at the most 150 patients, and it should be evaluated after 3 years.
Treatment should be offered in a restricitve manner, and the national social welfare
board should watch the operation and see that an evaluation of the program is ready
within the 3 year period. and not be made afterwards.

The minister of social affairs, Karen Seder, who in general supports the delegation's

preliminary proposal, states that the government should take a position in regard to-
methadone treatment.

59
Evaluation

"It is a question of resources. and the medical service board has the responsibility
for such matters. We are not in the habit of conuidering methods of treatment or
individual medicines in the government.

"Personally, I think that it is important that a careful evaluation be made. Three
years is a suitably long tine for obtaining a picture as to how rehabilitation is
going, if addicts are being successfully freed from both addiction and methadone can
live a normal life." Karin Soder says.

6893
C80: 5300/2097

60
BRIEFS

PRISON DRUG RAID—Stockholm. 8 Dec—Anphetanines. syringes and injection needles
were confiscated in the third raid in a short tine at the prison in Harnosand. Pour
young people have been arrested. They have admitted that they brought in narcotics

to an acquaintance in the institution. On 11 November a bigger confiscation was
made than the latest. At that time, 39 bass for amphetamines were found in a cell.
[Text] [Stockholm DAGENS mm in Swedish 8 Dec 81 p 7] 6893

CSO: 5300/2099

61
BRIEFS

RECORD HEROIN HADL-London. 6 Jan (APP)-British customs officials backed up by
police, seized a record 87 kilos (over 190 lbs) of heroin in l981-twice the
amount for l980—a customs report revealed today. Approximately 80 percent of
the heroin, worth 16 million pounds (28 million dollars), was intended for the
British domestic nsrket. The total value of soft and hard drugs seized last
year was close to 53 million pounds (over 100 million dollars). A total of
1,359 people were arrested for drug snuggling. But the report said seizures of
cocaine fell by 62 percent compared to 1980. Customs officials explained the
drop by a change in taste among Britain's drug users. [Text] [NCO61627 Paris
AF? in English 1232 GMT 6 Jan 82]

CSO: 5300/2117

62