I-‘Oll OFFICIAI. USE ONLY

JPRS L/10215
24 December 1981

Worldwide Report

NARCOTICS AND DANGEROUS DRUGS

(FOUO 59/81)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the U.S. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
NORLDNIDE REPORT
NARCOTICS AND DANGEROUS DRUGS
(9000 59/81)

CONTENTS

ASIA

AUSTRALIA

Queensland Site of Drug Activity; Stiffer Laue Sought
(Peter Morley; THE COURIER-HAIL, 8 Get 81) .................

Police in SA Investigated for Involvement With Drugs
(THE AGE, 9 wt 81) 00......0.0.I.DOOOOIQOOQOOOOOOOIOOOOOO0.

Briefs
Clerical Disguise
BURMA
Briefs
Haynwo Opium Seizure
Morphine Block Seized
Heroin Seized in Lashio
Ipilem Opium Seizure
HONO KONG

Police Smash Heroin Importation Syndicate, Arrest 10
(SOUTH CHINA MORNING POST, 11; Nov 81) ....

Addicts To Try Out Experimental Drug Suprenorphine
(SOUTH CHINA MORNING POST, 18 Nov 81) ......................

Briefs
Plvc Kilos Heroin Seized

-a- [III-WW-138F0t

ran am” . v I «er rum V
H“! (WHQ'IAI Us!" UNIS

INDIA
Forty Percent of Opium Production Sum gled Out of Country
(THE WING PEOPLE'S DAILY, 2 Nov 81) OOOODOOOOOOOIOOCOIOI
NEW ZEALAND
Record 17-Year Sentence Imposed for Drug Trafficking
(THE WING POST, 13 NOV 81) o00.00.00onoonoeooooooaonocco.
PAKISTAN
'Nefarious Business of Narcotics' Discussed
(JANG’ 9NOV 81) COIOOIIOIOOOOOOOOIIOUOOIOOOOIIOIOOCOODODCOO
Cul tivation, Trafficking, Abuse of Drugs in Pakistan
(“MI"T’ 15, 22 Get 81) 0..0.00.00.00.00...IOOOOOOCOOOOOO
Briefs
Contraband Drug Seized
Aid To End Poppy Cultivation
Heroin Seizure
LATIN AMERICA
MEXICO
Comutation of Trafficker ‘ s Sentence Criticized
(EL DIARIODENUEVO LLB-Em, SROV 81) OIOOOIOOOIOIOOIDOIIOOO
Briefs
Poppy Destruction Activity
Heroin Laboratory Destroyed
Pill , Inhalant Danger Cited
Pills From Chihuahua, Aguascalientes
Nogales Drug Problem Described
Sonora Antidrug Drive Results
NEAR EAST AND NORTH AFRICA
EGYPT

Briefs
Narcotics Worth $50 Million Seized

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
“’3 001111“ {'5} UNI \

SUB-SAHARA" AFRICA

KENYA
Briefs
Nigerian Convicted
NEST BURCH
DDMARK
Two Indicted for Snuggling (he One-Half Tons of Hashish
(Bent Bsk Andersen; BERLINGSKE TIDENDB, 20 Nov 81) ..........
NBTHERLANIB
Briefs
Heroin Seizure
SNEDEN
Justine.~ Minister Approves Dogs in Prisons To Stop Drugs
\Hilly Silbershein; SWSKA NEW, 23 sep 81) ooooeoeooco
Reporter Describes Police Action Against Hashish
(Hilly Silherstein; SVENSKA DAGBLAM, 1 NOV 81) essence-eve.
Police Expect 'Price War' in Heroin as Supply Increases
(Hilly Silberstein; SVENSKA DACBLADBT, 2 Nov 81) ............
Police Act To Stop Smuggling of Anphetardnes From Netherlands
(Leif Dnhlin; DAGDIS NYHBTBR, 6 Nov 81) .....................
Cami ttcc Urges Hidden Microphones, TV in Drugs Fight
("lliy SHDOI'SCG‘IYI; SVENSKA DAGBLAM, 12 NOV 81) oeeoeoI-eeo
TURKEY

Armenian Heroin Smugglers Said To Finance Terrorism
(l'asw T1mul.; HURRIYET’ ”wt 81) 0......DOOCICIOOOOOOOODOOO

Police Claim Success in Controlling Narcotics Traffic
(Emin Ozgonu1;HURRI¥ET, 2 Nov 81) ........... .. .............

Joint Operation Uncovcrs Narcotics Smuggling Ring
(UfUK GUIdcmir; CUHHURIYET, 2 Nov 81) cocooooooeocoueooooeooo

UNITED KINGDOM

Cannabis Gang Sentenced to Jail Terms
(13" "Pnry; THE DAILY TELmRAP". 27 NOV 81) cocoon-00000.0...

-c-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
QUEENSIAND SITE 0? DRUG ACTIVITY; STIFFER LAWS SOUGHT
Brisbane THE COURIER-HAIL in English 8 Oct 81 p 3
[Article by Peter Morley]
[Text] The State Government will consider a move to jail

ﬁrst offence drug growers and peddlers for at least five
years.

Thoma-nun”! NW
Moywlrl'l‘ennl (.NI’BAI'b
M am" who am am. norm
mount“: ound 4m:
muumunonhuuuu: can

“Munoomtmt

mu "unable to: drug mm
won.

out night the Premier. It mello-
ammo Oahu-tron“ have to
mammmmnmyouuu
m an auction mm ”jun
mwbodtnosunoa.‘

According lolr‘rennLlhoquou-
annual: nummoaurenulow'

no... novtncn to chum helicopter:
mun Indoa to on“! out amp to m
mm

a. told (no Joint pom. mount
humor tho mmcmu
man no: mdmgbuununpo-
“to W our! «Imus snow
ammln

IMO aroma Autumn-dozen
am“. making It Inmate the!
now no land “In m um nu
wanton revolver.

In a mu amnion. no mo-
poood that (In: olunm should be
lulled to! "veto lo nan-Mona: the

mum too“ be m: to moon 1‘1"

or with In we can

lilo mmn led to 0 12mm 41:-
mlon In which amounts Ion cru-
ktud (or known: Icahn! (Inn And
ml mm: tw an“: ottences.

Ito-nor. Hr Nelle-mm and
In: M! tho mun of ”none: and
m m In obenm At an» no...

mmmamngmmtm-

taunt. pollen and («1M mu mn-
monummmumm

Alon- nunnyotnpaoentmm
Momrcuytobwtwumtto:
Juntaloohodmndlmnd.

mmom autumn“:
Mano-numthowthmmdu
mung m for m M-

urmmwmummm
noun 0! the country and w you
mum was obviously
and to ban: In mun-a and Into-
Monument.
monnummam.
mammals» nbuoonootor um
Ilr Dione-Peterson um um mil.
noun W in obmly a
mum and moors an. a. ma
mnmnoocnoobmmm
mahoullhem
MNtMMWth
Mummvwmtuoﬂm’
mmnnmuumnonm-
“tonununodmtnmc.
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP82~00850R000500010013-1

POLICE IN SA IWESTICATED FOR INVOLVEMENT WITH. DRUGS

Melbourne THE A68 in English 9 Oct 81 p 3

[Text]

(380 :

South Aunmlian polloe and m"
(2mm LIV Mﬂmené‘mﬁn.
magma; on: a -
InvolvemenK n m. 93mg
ruckus.

mun; manna mm
In expect“ tho upon
man may to be

5300/7515

r3

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDPOZ-00850R00050001001 3-1
BRIEFS

CLERlCAL DISCUISB-—A man who disguised himself as a Roman Catholic priest to try
to snuggle 19 kg of cannabis resin through Custﬁas in April, 1980, was sentenced
to six years jail in the District Criminal Court yesterday. Leon John Greentree,
33 fishmonger, of Gazelle Street, Glenfield, had pleaded guilty to importing and
possessing cannabis resin at Sydney in April, 1980, and false pretences in July,
1980, Judge Goran said it may have been his ill-fortune, that his luggage was
carried on to Melbourne in a flight, and when recovered it had already been in-
spected by Customs officers. The drugs were found and the officers "were waiting
for you." Greentree had then carried out an "elaborate" false pretence to obtain
$2,000 from a motor vehicle dealer to pay his legal expenses, the Judge said. He
was sentenced to five years on the drug charge and an extra 12 months for false
pretences with a non-parole pericd of two years. Judge Goran said but for Green-
tree'a severe handicap following some "shocking injuries" the sentence would have
been much harsher. Greentree had gone to New Delhi. India. taking with him the
garb of a Catholic priest. and then bought the cannabis resin kilogram by kilogram
from a taxi driver, the Judge said. [Text] [Sydney THE SYDNEY HORNING HERALD in
English 8 Oct 81 p 10]
BRIEFS

HAYMYO OPIUH SEIZURE-—At 1800 on 30 October, Inspector U Tin Maung 21 of an
intelligence unit of the Haymyo people's police force, together with a police
squad and ward people's council nenbers, raided the residence of Dew U at

No 102 on Cherry Street. A search in the compound of the house uncovered 10
balls of raw opiun weighing about 10 vies [36 pounds] hidden in a clump of
bamboo trees. Dav U, 60; Ma Nan Htan, 28; Ha Kauk, 3k; and Haung Haung Aye,
alias Ye Chan, alias Gyan, 36; all of when were involved in the case were
charged under sections 6.3, 7.3 and 10.8 of the narcotic drugs law by the
Hayuyo police station. [3K060640 Rangoon HYANHA ALIN in Burmese 16 Nov 81 p 6]

MORPHINB BLOCK SBIZED--At 11030 on 16 “water, police station officer I! Aye and
a police squad searched the fourth floor of building No 96 on Lathe Street,
Rangoon'e Lathe township, and found a norphine block weighing 2 viss [7.2 pounds]
and worth about 30.000 kyat neatly wrapped in paper and inside a leather brief-
case belonging to bow Yu Yin, b3, and Dev Aye Sein, 30, of Rho-man village,

Shan State's Kyaukne township. The houseowner U Main Kaung, 62, and the two
women were charged under sections 6.8, 10.8 and 11/16.D of the narcotic drugs
law. [BK060640 Rangoon HYANHA ALIN in Burmese l6 Rov 81 p 7]

HEROIN SEIZED IN LASHIO--Under the orders of the National Intelligence Bureau,
the No 9 intelligence unit of the Criminal Investigation Departnent, in coopera-
tion with Lashio township people's council, seized 56 kg of brown heroin worth
420,000 kynt fron the residence of (Ban Pawk Shane), alias (Lawk Shone). on
(Kokang Kyaung) Lane. Zone 6 of Hard No 12 in Lashio at 1930 on 19 Noveaber.
Arrested were the owner of the drugs, (Lawk Lu), alias (Li Tae Pu); his wife (Ah
Heik), alias (Cho Cho Win); the wife of houseowner (Ban Pawk Shone), (Law Kyauk
Se); and (?her) sister (Ha Khin Aye). Upon receiving information that (Lawk Lu),
alias (Li Tae Pu), was planning to sell 33 kg of brown heroin at a price of
7,500 kyat per kilogram, surveillance was placed on his house in Zone 6, Hrrd

No 14. (Lawk Lu) took the prospective buyer to the house of (Ban Pawk Shane),
where he dug up 33 kg of brown heroin placed in a drum and buried behind the
house. While the heroin deal was being made, the arrest was node. A search was
conducted in the house and a further 23 kg of brown heroin and 5,900 kyat
obtained from drugs sales were also seized. The four arrested persons were
charged under sections 6.3. 7.3 and 10.8/11 of the narcotic drugs law by the
Lashio police station No 2. [BKObO6bO Rangoon Domestic Service in Burmese

1330 GMT 30 Nov 81]
mum (II’IIIH :ﬂ-ZU'JIRI-l- -(|u u Nuw-nllm . uullmrll [on o-mn'urnurd stopped and searched,
at [he w-utvrn emmncu to Lone-n. a busnregistration No Kiln/988 and driven by

Shve Nunpiying between Loileu and Taunggyi. Pound hidden in a bag of coal on the
bus were 6.2 viss [about 15 pounds] of raw opiun. The owners of the opium, driver
Shae Nu and Nyunt Haung, were arrested and charges were filed spinst then by the

Loilen police station under sections 6.b and 10.b of the Narcotic Drugs Law. [Text]

[BK111265 Rangoon HYANHA ALIN in Burmese 2 Dec 81 p 6]
POLICE SMASH HERO!" IMPORTATION SYNDICATE, ARREST 10

Honq Kong 500T" CHINA MORNING POST in English 14 Nov 81 p 1

[Text]

Numlics Ilium ofﬁm
madly smashed n Km
‘3 imputation and dimi-
baliu name and an“
I .

Atom 60 mm —
About )0 on an! at an N-
un's “mull - veto inc
voiced in tout simultaneous
Is: in :(owhoa mm a
‘ 4mm imam.

Oﬂ’ucen belim they in”
m lb: backbone of l?
mm to mating t o
“mum " ulw on
a no :1 mm m
uillulnrp uniﬂu.

Dunn and u quad! at

rhuulin worth a t
I momma
Nahum-dad.”

gm of wasted in:
uwduﬂdm I
IN on or m limo ol’
Iﬂmhwkw.
“dmm aid [he «yam lo
mmmm mp

(3%”..de
l I t
bum" in Kowloon.

They Lama m of tho
muted mt: alto and u
m

In n’roid on want. at

III-l3 Allin Road. 1'31!»

mmmydoﬂbﬂ
mod a con I. u u
MMTaKotTui.
ADDICTS TO TRY (”'1' EXPERIMENTAL DRUG SUPREIDRPHINB

Hong Kong SOUTH CHINA MORNING POST in English 18 Nov 81 p 14

[Text]

The Action Committee
Against Narcotics has ap-
proved the etperirnental
treatment of local addicts
with a new drug. the Com-
minloner for Narcotioa.
Mr Peter Lee. said yester-
day.

Clinlcal trials urine hu-
prenorphina inatead of
methadone will begin early
next ar.heuitll. he

” eare writrt t o-
eol now —- satin: dow'rt'he
rules and oonditlona ol‘ the
trials.“ Mr Leonid

The trials will involve a
“double blind" sittmlan to
relate the elleeta ol the
m with some patient! get-
(Ill. buprenorphine and
alga perhape a placebo. he
ea . .

The use 0! haprenorphlne
wae recently recomroended
by a narcotics treatment and
rehabilitation mlteot to
the Medical and Health De-
partrnent.

Dr Robert Net-roan said
earlier thie month that ho-

'ae can be dlaeoltirt-
nod abraptly with few. if an .
withdrawal palne whereas t
sudden ttoppaeo of tnetha-
doae treatment than eevere
«comfort.

He said beprenorphine hae
been atedicd oneeetvely t“
the Uaited States and Europe
for aboat two can. It ha!
been found to n no MI
ellacta. It It alto vi“! hulk

CSO: 5320/9104

able at an analgeeic drag.

mineﬁe-

“Government
with the World Health Dr-

'tlon.Netttyear.ltvlll

hetdlaThailand. ,
“Toda .lnthac deo-
adeeon 20th .ve

see that. worldwide. t m-
.r d thla' 'I‘ l
(drug hddietloe) have roach-
ﬁpeglemnd f the
a tin; a

social lahrlr‘and entity of
nation

"We have seen that no
man or ma ls Immune to
this dreedl‘al acorn: avert
the appropriate eonblaatlw
of ¢ireaetetanoe and oppor-
tunlty.’ Mr Lee eald at the
Mummy.

There are however "r-l
lndlatlorw" of oonulaeteat

oltheprohlerute Hoaehoae.
heaald.

mhmldruaaaid. '

Dr Haaarrat Hanaln.
who-Ha theta.
leader a ‘ eoaraa.

qr". ' for‘tr'aat-‘
aeaatedlo
ea aad eoelal'prgbleat
BRIEFS

r'Ivr: 1(st HBRDIN SEIZED--Police seized five kilos of heroin when they arrested a
couple on a motorcycle after an accident in Shamshuipo yesterday. Emergency Unit
officers signalled a motorcycle to stop after the rider had disobeyed traffic signs
at Nam cheong Street near Laichikok Road, Shamhuipo shortly before 8 am. The cy-
clist sped away and after a chase was involved in a collision with a taxi. The
cyclist, aged 30 and his woman pinion rider (18) , were arrested after a bag con-
taining 13 packets of heroin was found in the girl's handbag. m the Island, three
men wanted in connection with blackmail and drug offences were mated in an anti-
crine swoop in Wmhai yesterday morning. A suspected drug pedlar was also enong
those arrested. They were amng 863 people stopped and questioned by Wand-mi po-
lice in a major anti-crime operation. A total of 191 people were taken to Hanchai
Police Station for questioning. Police said 28 were detained for further inquiries
while 38 others suspected of connitting various offences were allowed bail. [Text]
[Hong Kong SCXJ'I'B mum MORNING POST in English 20 Nov 81 p 25]

C50: 5320/9104
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP82-00850R000600010013-1

'- FORTY PERCENT 0? OP IUH PRODUCTION SHUGGLED OUT OF COUNTRY
Rangoon THE WORKING PEOPLE'S DAILY in English 25 Nov 81 p 7]

[Text ]

CSO :

5300/0910

A UN! nm cgency
7nd, baud on o study
on production in
Mandqu Dimict. in
Mndhyn Produh Sate.
MM 3 AciA' I large-I
opium-pmducing centre,
cadopiurn worIlI cbout
soc million In (so
million US dolrn III) we.
smuggled ouI Io
Fatima and Ncpc l
IbI the porn of Bom-
bay. cdm Ind Rhuba-
necwu.

The report aid 1 record
ceimn: of now kilo-
grammes of contraband
opium Iva mode inMnd-
hya Pndcch clone this
year.

The opium-producing
cent": are situated In Ihe
three lame nanb lndicn
clue: of Mail» I Pnduh.
llI'IIr Pmlcsh yInd Knit.
ulIan “my I thee
account [or about
cent of the world [Induc-
Iion.

Smugzlntl lndion opium
In: den finding II: way to
Sri LInluI and MouIiIiuI.
an agency aid. quoIing
Minister
Finance SS Sieodia.

The “cage. yield of

um. can known to
0‘l‘IlIclI Izold". per hectare

of State for'

in I}: may bod ruched
“Budge-Nomi” cﬁcm
Ibo Government Nougat:
nepmmu gm
per cent of the pIodueIioII.
the not being mauled
cm. the cgency added.
Smuggling '3 carried
out in three

saw “"130wa

wherecnd.ﬁoeliy.bndcd

over In {orego mu.

ium Wen.
cording Io the

phm to impede III role In
polm oonIIibII-
Iing fund: Io local and
parliament“)! elections.
PoliIiciuu cullivued them
for money and paid back
through fytvoueo. it aided.
The Narcotics Deport-
InenI believed than. one
incentive- to
was the low Government
pmcutem'ic'ohte price
opIum. depmment
felt an could be
reducedI Inc pIice quld
be incrwed by It least
no In 30 per cent.

NAB/APP.

”-

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007102109: ClA-RDP82-00850R000600010013-1
RECORD 17-MR SENTENCE IMPOSED FOR DRUG TRAFFICKING
Wellington THE EVENING POST in English 13 Nov 81 p 14

[Text]

AUCKLAND, Today (PA). -' The financier and organiser of an

Auckland-based drug ring, and the 26-year-old woman who distributed the
narcotics from her Avondale home. were sentenced to 17 years and 12

years jail respectively, by an Auckland ngh Court judge today.

Appeamg' ‘ before Mr Justice.
Holland were Colin James Prat.
ll. a company director of am-
sborongh and Glenda Fake
Menzies. unemployed banlt tel r
at Mondale.

Prat had earlier admitted one
count of in: ' heroin. three
counts oi int morphine.
one count of conspiring to import
heroin. one count ol conspiring to
supply heroin and two counts of
supplying morphine and heroin.

' rges

Men-ea had been found guilty.
' wee

up the non I'M] a 300‘
dealol andabtllty.
He used a caller to travel to

mum to amend
that man's men: com-
pletedwhenheleltthenarootia
naanAkNeIhalandaircrnitor

eotly." he still.

Thelonaatttermotlmprtaon-
ment' inNe'Zealandiar

adrugoieneewasldyeatslora’

ii
‘ 3
t

ember. last '. the courier
11“”de

bonnet."
'NEFARIOUS BUSINESS 0? NARCOTIC9 DISCUSSED
Karachi JANG in Urdu 9 Nov 81, p 3

[Text] In spite of the complete ban on liquor, opium hashish, and other narcotics,
intoxicated and stoned people are arrested everyday, or large quantities of narcotics
seized. From this, it is very clear that these drugs are being prepared inside the
country and also being smuggled in. According to a report, tincture which is
prepared for Police Foundation hospitals, after being transferred to the druggist,

is sold at a much higher price. Former Inspector General of Police and Chairman of
the Foundation Haji Habib-al—Rahman has admitted that prior to this report a similar
kind of complaint about another drug was received. Consequently, the Foundation
stopped its manufacture. The residents of Pathan have complained that liquor, hashish,
opium and mandrake is being sold openly. The people involved in this nefarious
business make catcalls at women, they tease people by brandishing liquor bottles at
them, and they are making children mandrake addicts. Nobody has the courage to stop
them because good citizens dare not quarrel with these hoodluns.

It is a coincidence that bOLh these reports have been received simultaneously.
Otherwise such reports arrive every day. The reality is that in this situation, not
only criminals but also the police, people from the Excise Department, and respectable
members of the coumunity are involved as well. Without them, this business could not
be conducted. From the preparation to the sale of these drugs, many stages are
traversed. In the face of all the restrictions and bans, all these stages are easily
bypassed. We were amazed at the logic of stopping the Ianufacture of a drug in the
Police Foundation inasmuch as it cones out and is used on the street for addicts in
the public. If a similar thing is proved about tincture, then its manufacture will
also be stopped. Now the question arises as to what will the hospitals and the
patients do who need it as well? It is like preventing the grinding of flour in a
flour mill where the miller chooses to adulterate the floor.

we demand of the govurnment that it keep a strict watch over this nefarious business
of drugs and in whatever area such business may he conducted, the police and the
Excise Department people should he held accountable for it and punished severely.
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/0ﬂ09: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500010013-1

CULTIVATIO“, TRAFFICKING, ABUSE OF DRUGS IN PAKISTAN

Lahore VIMOINT 1n Bigllsl't 15, 22 Oct: 81

[15 Oct 81 pp 22-23]

[Text]

THE lLLlClT production of
opium in Pakistan, despite strict
controls by the Government, had
for quite some timo exceeded
that of the infamous Golden ‘l‘rl-
angle on the borders of Thailand.
Laos and Burma. But. its large-
acala conversion into heroin, a
faster-thannricipated increase in
the smuggl'mg oi the drug from
Pakistan to Europe and the Unit.
ed States, and the discovery oi
Pakistani heroin addicts are caus-
ing considerable concern to nar
cotics control agencies. There
is a well-founded tear that the
country could become a major
source of heroin for the interna-
tional market. it has already
taken a lead over its opium-pm
ducing neighbours —- Turkev.
Afghanistan and inn—commonly
known as the Golden Crescent,

The hull: oi the rising produc.
tion. according to narcotics con-
trol agencies. comes irom ram
shackle laboratories that have
sprouted in the socalled tribal
belt along the border with Afghan
istan. it is believed that there are
about 20 such labs and that
each can produce up to no kilo
grams of pure heroin a munth
The people who reﬁne the opium
in crude makeshift labs in the
tribal belt are believed to be
collaborating with dealers from
Thailand. They usually work to
speciﬁc orders atd move irom

12

one village to at
detection.

it is. ot course.
trafﬁckers alone in
to heroin; gang; I
smugglers have 004
cheap prices and t
fat proﬁts. In the
to come here in a
and 'hashish’ sourc
dealing in heroin
pelice have picked
dozen ioreigners
were involved in
“the Pakistani ct
most experienced
“carriers“. usually
or three local inl
good experience
through security t
ce patrols. The tr
make straight to:
the trthal belt. wh
sidered a major dt

Indian transit poll

lndia has been
portant transit pd
clearing house int
opium-based drugs
and heroin. irom,
angle as well ea
scent. india is a
cauldron for drug:
and lenient attl‘
laticns in india an.
kers in large nuln
other and equally

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500010013-1
Edi-C II‘ all it"s-E. G- 1...“!

no. 603855.; 2:712: so
39.33 :95 com: .322. 3..
7:. 333:3. .3.» v8.5. 3.
3262.8 8923 as. 532. F
F3”... :1 ..u no «so» can :3
«33. 3518532... 9:. 32.
.5. no: no. 393.. 3 9.2 .09.
2x. 33.... 26.9.83. 23..
Esau t5. manna-:3: :2
32.5. :03:- nn: .3 cos-r. a.
503...:— 3533 3.. o 3333.
52‘. .91 013 2 eh. «
T3380 0 kn. baa Santana E
9.3—3 3.. Fm. « Mal—8.98 -
.6. 0., .o :5 Ch. 2... cm. a
“3898: u .6. won—”=0 o.
#265 8.. :58 p macs-.2. . 3:.
32.. 192.23.. :3 2.3.2....3
3.3.. 32.2.3. :5. :23 .22.
.0 or; 2. 5.2.03.2. .72 50
1.3.0 5:335. .683... .a.
coin («2.2. 9... a... «8.. :3
1:...» 32.2. .o 35.3.. .5 E...
.593 out: .333. 432......

90.2... :5 935...“...2. o. :99...
02.3 0. wow. a. $3. :33 :26
.2... 0352.2... 03.323 3..
can 3.95.7.9: >2. :33»...
mac... n no»... >..... 39.73....
.3. 8... v5.98. 2... 2:2 8.
can.» 0. 3.. 92.3.5 .35». 2......
:3 3.3.3. 032 393.2. a".
32.658. .33. .so 2... 3.3.2.
3 332.8 :8 3.2.2. .o :3...
:3... o u
9.... .3: 32.3.3 » 3.3.6.8...
:3 :3 3 30.98 :3 3.2.3
no.2. 2. 3 a2».3.....o=..:.
«:53 32:32.... 2:. :5 tan.
newton—a: W 22359.... taro...
“pawn.— 2... 52:83... > E23
3 r263 3. =3 32.03250...
23... :3. 3 232: :33 .3
52: a :83 Ede—a. 3535.5
own... 8 .3 3.62.» 33. 5...
32-3 .32.; “8 no... .u 9:.
33.: can» on :5 2;. .38 33.
3...: 932?» mu 5.: = 2.2.83.
:3: 8 2838 u an: .a a .33..
an»: .3! so an. 8 :33» 3
33:: 1:. :3 33a 0. :3
£35.. ”a In 2.3 3.. £9.32
8:26.... :5 2.3»— 26832....

5.3 :32 26 .6 .3. :3: .3
53—087; m: :3 2G (:96
..35=.o&:3.. :3 23:3 8
:1. «In: lira—\a :- «ti 4!

23:55. 133.»... on 9. .3 .3”
533 1.3 .333.

.9 :3 55:03 3-3 r03. :3
can?! 39 c. 2.838.. 25
61.3. 3.. 2.33:... 3:33..
:8 c3.— 8 nun—«8 . .2. .2...
<83. 38.. 983....» :3 2.?
33.3.: :62... 8.2. 32.33.
3:: 038 3.. «on: «3.... .23..
2—. 2.x. 82.2.3 .2. 2353
:38 33. £55.... 83333
a... can :2».

30:63 «.353

A... 2.23.. E .32... ~33:
9-. 52. a :5 a... 2:. .23..
La..- REE. 33.. 05.... ~39
same, goes on, and gets degrees".

‘A‘ began to smoke 'hashisb'
during his ﬁrst year at the univer-
sity. becoming heavily addicted
in his final year. He explained
that h. lilred ‘hashish‘ because it
"softens his competitiveness, ag-
gressiveness and combativeness".
traits he would like to get rid of.
tie connected these symptonts with
his family. which he described as
very achievement-oriented; his
father is a successful physician.
he has a brother who is a Grade
20 ofﬁcer.

‘A’ saw his father as authorita-
tive and dominatlo. at home. ad.
ding that his father wanted to
see him a “very successful" man
in life whereas he saw the com-
petitive side of himself as “mean-
ingless". He agreed that using
drugs had played a large part in
his etforts to resolve the difficul-
ties he had with his family. and
those aspects of his fa.her lhal'lte
so “dislikes in himself”. .

‘0', a twentyone~year~old. clean~
cut. final year student, has been
on mandrix for six months and
has built up a ten-rupeeJ-day
habit.

‘8' connected his introduction
to mandrix with his relationship
with a young woman he saw in
his first year at the university,
although he does not understand
how or why woman and mandrix
came into his life at the same
time. , .

The relationship ended and his
mandrix use subsided. But his
involvement with another wo
man. 'X', has led to taking mand-
rix in greater amounts than eve.-
oefore. He says he would like to
marry ‘X' but his family circum-
stances do not permit it in the
near future.

His mother fought constantly
Over his father‘s drinking and the
family‘s lack of money. He descri-
bed his mother. who works in a
hospital. a 'miserable woman' who
throughout her life had is: light
for her children‘s future. .

‘8' dreams of himself as the
passive spectator of his own ac-
tions. He sees his life as deter-

1?

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02109: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500010013-1

mined by fat
eeive anythit:

in; of his 0
Emotional at

'C' is we
dent. with
academic ca
posed her
feeling the
pertent for
ever, insists
in the unive
sity, she
classfellow
posed the
ed he; that
abandon he
tried to met
versity, ‘C' s
to be anotl
sists that r
'get her awa
make her it

For a few
under the 1
ing pillk N
on vellum t
ing and 1
(“housing he
mother's |
and renunci
pleasure.

So far,
only, from
their conct
creasing use
ed some t
menace. Bu
no reliable
their rec
anti-drug c-
exercise it
study has l:
to find the
tion.

The Pak:
Board. afte
bltion of d
established
and tehabil
centres are
Hyderabad,
war, Chamt
to and Gill
tres have I
effective. F
ponse of ti

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP02-00050R000600010013-1
drug; in the country,

Ptesentls. at the Drug Treat-
ment Centre. Mayo Hospital.
Lalwte. there are only it» pati-
ents who are mlntained on opium
tablets supplied by the Eula
and Taxation anthorltlu. This
ﬁgure is negligible in View of
the total numnet of opium addicts
even in Lahore. The test. of
course. ate continuously getting
opium and other drugs (mu
0th “tomes". Dr. ljaz Holder
suggested that there must be cen-
tres at evety ditttlet. headquarters

as the majority of opium addicts
belong to the rural mat.
BRIEFS

CONTRASAND DRUG SEIZBDm-About 600 kilograms of secobarbital, a psycho-tropic sub-
stancs,to the tune of Re 30 crore in the foreign undervarld, was seized yesterday
by the special checking squad of the customs in a surprise raid. Packed in 20
suitcases the contraband drug was booked from Salzburg, Austria, and was destined
for Lahore in different names under the declaration of old and used clothes and
personnel effect. The 1971 UN convention on psycho-tropic substance control re-
stricts its use and it is abused by converting it into capsules for narcotic ad-
dicts. Preliminary investigations have made important revealation which can lead
to arrest of certain important anti-social elements. Meanwhile, the Harbor (Cus-
toe) Board of Revenue, 6. Ashraf Jehangir, accoupanied by the Collector (Preven-
tive) Mohamed Akbar yesterday inspected the seized contraband and appreciated the
customs performance. [Karachi BUSINESS RECORDER 3 Dec 81 p l]

AID 'ro END POPPY CULTIVATION-delansbad, Dec 2--United Nations Fund for Drug Abuse
Control (UNPDAC) will provide Pakistan 4.2 million dollars as support to expand its
efforts to eliminate opium poppy cultivation in the Buner area of the North-West
Frontier Province (MP), under an agreement, signed here today. The Pakistan
Narcotics Control Board (Puts) will implunent this programme in co-operation with
the United Nations Development Program (UNDP) . [Karschi BUSINESS RECORDER 4 Dec
81 p a]

HEROIN SEIZURE-Custom authorities in Karachi have seized eight and 1/2 kilograms
of heroin powder from a cargo vessel. The raid was carried out when the vessel
was about to depart for its destination in Western Europe. Estimated cost of the
heroin powder on the international market is stated to be about 85 million rupees.
[Karachi Domestic Service in Urdu 0200 011‘ 11 Dec 81 BK]

080: 5300/6572

19
COMMUTATION OF TRAFFICKER'S SENTENCE CRITICIZBD
Nuevo Laredo EL DIARIO DH NUEVO LAREDO in Spanish 5 Nov 81 Sec D p 3

[Text] It is only a matter of hours before the doors of the municipal jail will
open and offer a release to one of the most dreaded gunmen and drug traffickers,
who terrorized the population of Nuevo Laredo during the Mafia period.

lh is Pedro Gaytan Elias, no less, who had been sentenced to 17 years in prison
in various trials, including those for murders and drug trafficking on a large
scale. He served only 9 years. and the rest of the sentence was commuted,pas.a
result of his attorneys' appeals to the Supreme Court of Justice.

Gaytsn Elias, who was one of the most powerful members of the underworld organization
on this border, had entered jail in 1973, following the intervention of Salvador del
Toro Rosales; and since that time the battery of defenders began using influence
"above" until they achieved more flexibility on the part of the justice system
regarding the penalties that had been imposed on him.

Despite the fact that the convicted individual had led a dissolute life. upon enter-
ing jail he was appointed head of several floors; and it night also be mentioned
that while inside this jail he dealt in drugs and was even the brains of the lower
echelons of the powerful organization that had been destroyed by the arrival of the
federal groups.

hsrthermore, when Federico Carraaco Gomez confessed to the series of crimes that he
had committed. in Guadalajara. he named Pedro Gaytan Elias as the one who had ordered
the execution of Comdr Everardo Persles Rios.

Understandably, the release of this Mafia member will result in other prisoners
accused of these same crimes not taking long to leave prison, because it is known
that nearly all of them are millionaires, and belong to the cells of the notorious
Mafia octopus which operated on the border.

Of Hhat Use Has the Effort of Del Toro Rosales?

The record that was left in this town by Salvador del Tbro Rosales, by fighting
barehandedly to destroy two international drug trafficking rings which had spread
terror almost on a national scale, was not backed by the federal justice system;
because despite the fact that he jailed the most dangerous members of these crime
syndicates, since the latter had enough means to silence the high courts, the
majority of them succeeded in recovering their freedom within a short period of
time; which causes one to think that the anti—underworld effort expended by Del
Toro was of no use.

2909
C50: 5330/56 20
BRIEFS

POPPY DESTRUCTION ACTIVITY-~Since the weather is favorable for the poppy growing
cycle, the Ninth Military Zone has intensified its activities relating to the
CONADOR (Marihuana—Poppy) plan and, according to reports, it is in the southern part
of the state that the Mexican Army forces have been most active in destroying plan-
tations, reactivating this campaign. This infatuation was provided by Brig Gen
Javier Vazquez Felix, commander of the Ninth Military Zone, to BL SOL DE SINALOA,
explaining that the activities are under way from Coaala to the very boundary with
the state of Nayarit, toward the south, and with Durango. toward the east. He said
that the activities also involve the vigilance associated with the Federal Law on
Arms and Explosives. whereby pistols and other weapons are taken from individuals
who are found to have them, so that they may first prove their legitimate ownership
as well as showing the permit for carrying them. In this connection, Gen Vazquez
Felix said that the gun confiscation in the mountain area and in locations in the
southern part of this capital has made it possible to reduce the formation of gangs
acting in that region in an attempt to commdt crimes against the citizenry. With
regard to the number of plantations destroyed, the commander of the Ninth Military
Zone stated that. according to the reports received to date, more poppy than mari-
huana plantations are involved, and they are continuing to be discovered in the most
remote areas, where the Army troops are going to destroy those plantations. He
concluded by saying that the instructions from the Secretariat of National Defense
are to continue the action aimed at destroying all the plantations which are discover-
ed, without pausing at any time, until that activity has been minimized to the
greatest possible extent. [Text] [Culiacan EL SOL DE SINALOA in Spanish 23 Nov 81

pp l, 6} 2909

HEROIN LABORATORY DESTROYBD--The destruction of a clandestine laboratory, with the
seizure of 85 grams of opium gum, and the arrest of four presumed drug traffickers,
constitutes another success for the action being carried out by the Office of the
Attorney General of the Republic in the permanent battle against crimes affecting
health. Reports obtained by EL SOL DE SINALOA from the No 6 coordinator of the
permanent campaign against drug trafficking indicate that the second commander of
the Federal Judicial Police, Manuel Espindola Martinez, with forces under his
command. succeeded in conducting this operation in which positive results were
accrued from the investigations carried out to identify those who were dealing in
drugs. Hector Aviles Castillo, head of the coordinating entity, reported that. in
Culiacsn, Pedro Sarabia Garcia and his brother, Loreto, with the same surnames,
were arrested along with their respective wives, Teresa Dis: dc Sarabis and Julia
Diaz de Sarabia, who had been helping them in their illegal activities. Having

21
confessed that they were engaged in the purchase and sale of opium gum, and in
processing that drug to convert it into heroin, the individuals under arrest pointed
out to the investigating agents the place where they had concealed 85 grams of a
dark substance with a penetrating odor, which is apparently opium gum, and also
indicated the site where the laboratory in which they had been processing those
drugs was located. The place where they had concealed both the processing equipment
and the drugs themselves was located on the El Potrero farm, in the municipality of
Cosala. where the investigators went together with the arrested subjects so that
the latter could show the exact spot where they had hidden all the laboratory
equipment and the opium gum. [Text] [Culiacan EL 501. DE SINALOA in Spanish 20 Nov
81 p 6] 2909

PILL, iNHAMNT DANCER CITED--Nogales, Sonora, 23 November-80 long as there is no
legal provision controlling the sale of inhalants and certain toxic pills, the
health authorities will remin powerless to solve the problem of the drug addiction
among the youth confronting this border. This statement was made by the nead of
the health center. Dr Luis Cervantes Garcia, who noted that inhalants such as thinner,
and resistoi in all their varieties, and other chemical components which can be used
for drug addiction purposes, are not controlled by the Health Code, and hence their
sale in hardware stores, lumberyards and other comercial establishments takes place
without any restriction. As for druggista, Cervantes Garcia said that the entity
for which he is responsible is acting with all the authority granted it by the
Health Code to punish those who sell products without the necessary prescription.
He added that certain toxic pills have been found without control, and they are
sold without any prescription and used for drug addiction purposes, primarily among
the young population. In this situation, the health authorities have remained
dissociated from the problem besetting the population on this border, because there
is no legal provision authorizing the institution to exercise stringent control over
the sales, he remarked. Cervantes Garcia noted that this means that drug addiction
resulting from the use of inhalants and pharmaceuticals will continue to increase,
but that the means will be sought to stop it and to control the sales of these
stimulants. [Text] [Hermosillo EL lHPArRCIAL in Spanish 210 Nov 81 Sec D p 1] 2909

PILLS FROM CHIHUAHUA, AGUASCALIENTESuliost of the pills used by addicts as drugs
are coming from the capital of Chihuahua and from Aguascalientes. Large. heavy bags
are being sent from those locations by air, on trucks and by train. This admission
was made yesterday by Saylo Reyes Vargas, who has been engaged in supplying local
addicts for some time. Today, he promised to identify the individuals who are
making shipments from the south to the north. He made this statement after Ramon
Corral Anayo had identified him as the person who was selling "everything": whites,
reds and yellows. Whatever pill anyone salts of him, Saylo will sell. [Text]

[Ciudad Juarez El. FRONTERIZO in Spanish 11 Nov 81 Sec 3 p 2] 2909

NOGALHS DRUG PROBLEM DESCRIBEV—Nogales, Sonora--Today, the head of the Youth Reha-
bilitation Center disclosed that, although a 70 percent reduction in the drug
addict ion indexes for Nogales may be claimed over the past 2 years, because of its
population this municipality still ranks as of the leading locations in the country
in this respect. Dr Romero Garza Ayala explained to El. IMPARCIAL that, although the
indexes are still alarming. the problem has been declining because of the disappear-
ance of fatal drugs such as heroin, cocaine, morphine and other heavy drugs. He
noted that, during the past 2 years that he has served as head of the Youth Rehabi-
litation Center, there has been evidence of a disappearance of those types of drugs,
and the drug addiction has become limited to a group addicted to tranquillizsrs and
marihuana, a kind of addiction which is a little less dangerous. As for the

reasons for the disappearance of the hard drugs, he said that he did not actually
know them. and confined himself to saying that there may no longer be plantations,
or those engaged in drug dealing may have been arrested. Among the most dangerous
tranquillizers currently used among the lower classes he cited prodoline, which is
not controlled by the Secretariat of Health and Assistance, adding that its misuse
could cause phlebitis, thrombosis and embolism, even if it were not taken regularly.
He based the reduction in the drug addiction indexes on the fact that, 2 years ago,
the number of patients treated with special therapy by the Youth Rehabilitation Center
had been 10 per day, and that now the average is about 15, but per month. He empha-
sized that the therapy used by the Rehabilitation Center's medical-technical staff
is among the most advanced, and is bringing good results, because it is evident that
the drug addicts are becoming reintegrated into society as normal persons. [Text]
[Hermosillo EL IMPARCIAL in Spanish 28 Oct 81 Sec D p 1] 2909

SONORA ANTIDRUG DRIVE RESULTS--Nogales, Sonora--As part of their program of activi-
ties to prevent the commission of crimes in the federal jurisdiction, between January
and the present, the detachment of Federal Judicial Police agents in the northern
section of Sonora seized approximately 650 kilograms of marihuana, 25 kilograms of
heroin. 600 grams of hashish and 200 grams of cocaine. All the foregoing was accom-
plished in various actions involving a minimum of 125 persons arrested and about 60
vehicles confiscated in their jurisdiction. During the same interval, 35 warrants
for arrest for various crimes were implemented. with approximately 50 persons located
and brought before the federal authorities on the following charges: counterfeiting
of money, smuggling of oil and diesel fuel, smuggling of weapons(35 pistols and one
high-powered rifle were seized), and other foreign items on a small and large scale.
The foregoing figures were officially supplied to BL IMPARCIAL today by the PJF

group chief, Francisco Alejandro Hernandez, upon searching the files of the cases
resolved during his administration. When asked about his imminent transfer to

the town of Mexicali, where he will assume the position of Federal Judicial Police
group chief in the capital of Baja California Norte, Francisco Alejandro Hernandez
explained that, during his stay on this border, he had attempted primarily to combat
all types of crimes against health, owing to the often irreparable damage that they
represent to the society. Commenting generally on the work accomplished, he remarked:
"It is not a record, nor anything like that, but rather efforts which it is our duty
to make in order to prevent and eliminate federal crimes." [Text] [Hermosillo,BL
IHPARCIAL in Spanish 31 Oct 81 Sec A p 16] 2909

C50: 5330/56-57

23
BRIEFS

NARCO'I‘ICS WRTH $50 MILLION SEIZED—Ceiro, 15 Dec (NF-The border guard has hauled
a 12-ton consignment of narcotics worth nearly $50 million being snuggled at Egypt's
Mediterranean coast. Major-General Faruq 31-Sahn, commander of the border guard,
said the motor boat being used by the smugglers was seized carrying 12 men including
five Turks. [Text] [NCl60600 Cairo HENA in English 1926 GMT 15 Dec 81]

C80: 5300/2094
BRIEFS

NIGERIAN CONVICTED—-A Nigerian has been sentenced to nine months imprisonment

by Nairobi Chief Magistrate's Court in Kenya for trafficking in Indian hemp.

The name of the Nigerian was given as Benjamin Folusho Cyimih. Informed

Police sources in Lagos disclosed that the convicted man who was described as

a student was jailed for being in illegal possession of three kilograms of
Indian Hemp. He was said to be serving his jail term in the main prison yard

of Nairobi in Kenya. it was known in lagos that the Nigerian High Commission

in Kenya is taking steps to ensure that the Nigerian was released before his
jail term ends. However. it was further understood that he could only be released
before his jail ends if he maintains good behaviour while in the prison. [as
published] ContLCted, a senior police officer attached to force Criminal Inves-
tigations Department (CID) Alagbon Close confirmed the story. He frowned at

the attitude of some Nigerians who, he said, were in the habit of trafficking

in Indian hemp abroad. The police boss added that the Nigeria Police will con-
tinue to cooperate with the police authorities of any country where Nigerians
were caught for trafficking in Indian hemp. He said that such people have done
serious damage to the image of the nation, and warned Nigerians who travelled
abroad to desist from trafficking in drug or they would have themselves to blame.
[Text] [Kaduna NEH NICERIAN in English 12 Oct 81 p 9]
THO INDICTED FOR SHUGGLINC ONE ONE-HALF TONS OF HASHISH
Copenhagen BERLINGSKE TIDENDE in Danish 20 Nov 81 p 10
[Article by Bent Bak Anderson]

[Text] Two men, charges as ringleaders in the importation and distribution of one and
one half tons of hashish in Denmark, will be brought to trial in Nibe early in 1982.

A total of 53 persons throughout Denmark have been indicted in connection with the
case. Some of them have received prison terms ranging from 8 months to 6 years.
The two ringleaders are expected to get somewhat stiffer sentences.

Nibe police tracked down this narcotics gang about a year ago and the first arrests
were made last February. That concerned two couriers who with the aid of two cars
picked up a load of almost 80 kikograms of hashish in Arnheim, Holland. They were
followed to the Danish border, first by Dutch and then Nest German police. When they
arrived at the border, Danish police took over.

The cars were stopped near Nibe and police found almost 80 kilograms of hashish inside
the vehicles' rebuilt gasoline tanks. The ocuriers are supposed to have told police
they received 30,000 Dutch sudden, or approximately 90,000 Danish kroner, for making
this trip.

Thanks to Danish police, the close cooperation between the two Danish ringleaders and
a 60-year old Dutch hashish dealer from Arnheim was abruptly terminated. Hhile

Danish police went into action in Denmark, their Dutch colleagues arrested the hashish
dealer, who has now been sentenced in Holland.

The street value of tho smuggled hashish is about 50 kroner per gram, or approximately
75 million kroner for the entire load.

The hashish has been sold throughout Denmark. in Norway and to some extent in northern
Germany. One reason for the smooth distribution of these goods throughout Denmark is
that one of the Danish ringleaders and his fiance are from North Zealand where they
have many friends who helped distribute the hashish.

Pniiro do not want to conjecture whnt profit the ringleaders themselves made on the sale

of hashish from their summer cottage in North Jutland. It undoubtedly was in the
millions.
BRIEFS

HEROIN SBIZURE——The Hague, 18 Nov--Police said Tuesday they had detained five
Pakistanis and 12 Dutch citizens, including three women, after seizing 21 kilo-
grammes (46 lbs) of heroin hidden among frozen prawns shipped to the Netherlands
from Pakistan, tho Hague police said Tuesday. A spokesman said the heroin,

with a street value of about 21 million guilders (8.6 million dollars) was
packed in bags found In 70 boxes of prawns which arrived at Amsterdam's Schiphol
Airport last weekend. NAB-REUTER [Text] [Rangoon THE WORKING PEOPLE’S DAILY
in English 19 Nov 81 p 5]
JUSTICE MINISTER APPROVES DOGS IN PRISONS TO STOP DRUGS
Stockholm SVENSKA DAGBLADBT in Swedish 23 Sep 81 p 8
[Article by Hilly Silberstein: "Petri Promises Dogs Against Drugs in Prisons"]

[Text] Norrkoping. Ten new narcotics dogs will be trained
to sniff narcotics in the country's prisons. This was dis-
closed by Minister of Justice Carl-Axel Petri during a visit
at the National Correctional Administration on Tuesday.

It is expected that the administration will make a decision shortly on the train-
ing of the dogs that is estimated to cost 1 million kroner.

At the same time, the justice minister made a carefully phrased positive statement
about ideas of placing Sweden's most dangerous prisoners in special prisons.

On Monday. the home leave commission proposed that approximately 75 of the pri-
soners that are considered the most dangerous in the country should be placed in
special wards at the institutions at Osteraker and Norrhoping.

Petri wants to wait until the circulation period for consideration of the proposal
has expired before he comments on the proposal but he emphasizes that it contains
many interesting viewpoints.

"I don't rule out that it is necessary to isolate dangerous criminals. It can
also be an important means of indicating how seriously we look at the narcotics
problem in the prisons." said the Minister of Justice when he held a press con-
ference along with Bo Hurtinson. director general of the National Correctional
Administration.

Difficult Narcotics Proof

The problem of narcotics at the institutions dominated the press conference. This
question has. among other things. been discussed hotly in the debate section of the
SVENSKA DAGBLADET. In an article contributed by Professor Niels Bejerot, Bejerot
maintains that the situation in the prisons is extremely serious. Bo Hartinson has
not found the situation to be that alarming.

"Unfortunately, it is impossible to know who is right. The truth lies probably
somewhere in between," said the minister of justice solemnly.

28
"But the fact alone that narcotics are found within the prison walls. is enough
for us to react."

Earlier estimates show that approximately 3,700. one-fourth of the country's
prisoners, are narcotics abusers.

During the debate, a judge. anon; others. naintained that it was meaningless to
sentence people to prison as there is so much narcotics to be found on the inside.

"I have been a judge myself and I know how difficult it is to sentence people to
prison if one knows that it is the first time they are confronted with taking drugs.
But the courts must, however. sentence according to the country's laws," said

Petri.

"Kunla Better"

Director-General Hartinsson was positive on sore points of the ideas set forth by
the home leave couission.

"In 1974 a new law was passed that increased the right of the inmates for leaves,
visits, correspondence, etc. But now changes are necessary. The nature of crime
has changed with the increasing narcotics problem.

On the other hand, he is skeptical about a number of the most dangerous criminals

being placed in Osteraker. The Kuula Prison is a better alternative. thinks
Hartinsson.

9583
C50: 5300/2077

29
REPORTER DESCRIBES POLICE ACTION AGAINST HASHISR

Stockholm SVENSKA DAGBLADBT in Swedish 1 Nov 81 p 9

[Article by Hilly Silberstein: "Local Narcotics Police at Work: Car Chase
and Comforting in the Fight Against Narcotics")

[Text] Drug trafficking flourishes at a discotheque in the
center of Stockholm--at a dance place that is frequented by
what one must call children. The patrons are often 15 to
16 years old. It is Friday night and the police pick up
one pusher after another. '

SVENSKA DAGBLADBT has followed the work of the narcotics police in central Stock-
holm. Their task is to tackle the drug traffic at the street level--to pick up
the small-time pushers.

We begin at the Johanneshovs ice stadium. Many are high. ﬂow some of the audience
will be able to appreciate the Styx concert is incomprehensible. But they are high

on alcohol.

"Occasionally they use hashish so their eyes roll like balls. But tonight it is
quite calm," says one policeman.

Ten plainclothes policemen are on duty there. They find some who smoke hashish and
take down their names.

"He could also see how a number of them smoked after they had sat down in their
seats. But it is difficult to move in on them." says a young policeman who has
just graduated from the police school. It is next to impossible to guess his
profession as he walks around there with his long hair and worn denim jacket.

Discotheque Hatched

At nine o'clock everybody gathers at the stadium. The plans for the evening are
made. Who will stand where. Codes are decided soihat the police can talk on the

communication radio without being discovered.

One discotheque is to be watched closely. Two weeks ago a pusher was picked up
there. Presumably, new dealers have filled the gap.
One policeman stands with binoculars and television and studies the drug trans-
action. He then gives orders to the civilian cars that have been deployed:

"An applicant on his way towards you." a
That means that a buyer is on his way.

It is not only hashish that is sold outside this diacotheque, but also ampheta-
mines and heroin.

-It has become more common that lS-year-olds take amphetamines. That means
that they do not inject it but take the pills.

We stand at one of the streets where a buyer or a pusher might show up. The
engines are turned off and it becomes cold in the damp, rainy night.

Hashish in the 80-Card

"It is a hard job," says the criminal inspector at tne wheel." He have 30 hours
overtime each month. But this is a dedication. I have children of my own. Then
one reacts much more to how the young people sink down into the drug scene;

and at the same time there is a big shot standing around the corner just getting
fatter."

A call from the policeman with the binoculars. "Hearse on its way." This is a
coded message implying that a car is on the way with youngsters who have bought
drugs.

The policeman makes a swift maneuver and presses the gas pedal all the way. Soon
we are in a chase. The youngsters do not suspect anything amiss. Our car is
unmarked.

When the police signal beckons them to stop, they become frightened.

Quickly the policeman figures out who the two are suspected of buying the drugs.
Expertly he leans into the car and picks up an 80-card that had been thrown on
the floor. There is the hashish.

Two youngsters, lb and 18 years old, are brought into the car for interrogation.
Yes. they admit it.

"Why do you do this?" asks the policeman angrily. "Don't you know how dangerous
it is?"

They nod and say yes.

"No, you do not. If you did, you would never have bought it. Those who sell the
hushish have also the other stuff--amphetamines and heroin. The drug dealers,
the living dead at the Sergel square, also started on hashish. "That will not
happen to me," they reasoned. "Quit while you can," says the policeman and takes
down their names and addresses.

31
First Time

During the evening we hear one report after another on the radio about narcotics
purchases. A few pushers are caught and brought to the criminal office.

In an interrogating room sits Stefan (not his real name). He has been arrested
for pushing hashish.

"Yes, I have been here before. when I was little," says Stefan. Now he is 15
years old.

"You are not too big now," groans the interrogator.

Stefan admits that he bought a matchbox filled with hashish for 500 krone: outside
another discotheque earlier in the evening. Now he wanted to make 200 kroner.

"I had tough luck. This is the first time I have sold drugs." he says desperately.

he does not smoke hashish anymore himself. "I quit this summer when I heard Lasse
Stromstedt tell how dangerous it is."

"But you think nothing of throwing others into destruction?" asks the interrogator.

"One only thinks about onself. No, I do not have a bad conscience. I need money
to go out and eat and stuff.

Dare Not Speak

Stefan tells how things began to go downhill in school during sixth grade. But
now it was time to reconsider. "Otherwise one becomes a regular here."

"Do you have any stuff at home?" asks the interrogator.
"what, are you going to my house? No, I have nothing."

But when Stefan hears that there is going to be a house search he falls apart.
He starts to breathe heavily. The tears start to fall down the cheeks of the
15-year—old boy as he says:

"I lied. I am sorry. I lied. I have hashish at home. Quite a lot."

Thus the true story comes out. Stefan has hashish worth approximately 30,000 kroner
atlmme.

"where did you get it from." wonders the interrogator.

Then Stefan becomes even more scared. "I cannot tell. Then they will cut my
throat. 0r run me over with a car. No, I dare not tell you."

At one o'clock during the night, five plainclothes policemen go to Stefan's apart-

ment. It is imperative to work fast. so that the girlfriend cannot be warned and
flush the hashish down the toilet.

32
"Please. be quiet, so that you do not wake up my father and my mother," begs Stefan.

Trust ing Parents

But that does not succeed. Soon the mother comes out in her robe and asks wide
awake:

"What is going on? What are you doing? Who are you?"
She is hartbroken. She cries when she sees all the hashiah and the money.

"You see, I did have a reason to worry." she says to her husband." He must go
away f row the city. But who wants to have anything to do with him when he does
something like this?"

"He do not have tho. means to give him a lot of pocket money. The society makes
the children like this...And we were going on vacation the day after tomorrow,"
she sobs.

The policeman is transformed from criminal inspector into a counsellor or a fellow
being. He sits down with the parents; tries to settle things and comfort. Stefan
does not abuse drugs anymore himself. He still has a chance...

It is 2 o'clock in the night. The workday should have been finished a long time

ago. In the dreary fall rain. the police go home to get some sleep. In eight
hours a new workday will begain.

9583
cs0: 5300/2077

33
POLICE EXPECT 'PRICE HAR' IN HEROIN AS SUPPLY INCREASES
Stockholm SVENSKA DAGBLADET in Swedish 2 Nov 81 p 10

[Article by Billy Silberstein: "llashiah Hazard a Fact in Sweden: Twenty Tons
Smuggled in Annually"]

[Text] The hashish hazard the police has feared for a long
time is now a fact. Sweden is overflowing with hashish.
Approximately 20 tons are snuggled into Sweden annually.
Hashish has also made its way to the well-to-do-. Rashish
has begun to replace the sherry glass at Better parties.

During the last ten years, the amount of hashish confiscated has increased by
300 to 1000 percent. That does not only mean that Customs and police have become
more effective. Sweden is a very interesting mrket for the large narcotics
syndicates. There is plenty of money here. He also have the reputation abroad
of having a relatively liberal penal system.

Each year, hashish worth 1 to 2 billion kroner in resale is smuggled into the
country. That is just as much as the comunity pays for 6,000 to 12,000 long-
term hospital places during one year.

A farmer in Lebanon gets approximately 8004.000 kroner for one kilo of hashish.
When it reaches Sergei square in Stockholm, the price is up to approximately 70,000
kroner.

Can Be Bought Everywhere

0n the average, more than 80,000 doses are smked day in and day out-«during the
whole year!

According to Division Chief Esbjorn Eabjornsson at the National Police Board,
there is not a community in the country where hashish cannot be obtained.

The generous supply has quickly shown results. A study made by the National
Board of Education last year showed that every fifth lSo-year-old in Sweden had

smoked hnshtsh. One out of every 20 does it regularly.

Presumably the proportion is higher among older youths-who have not been studied
by the National Board of Education.

3h
The pushers know where to go. Often they hang around the high schools and junior
colleges.

According to Lars Cernerud, chief school physician. hashish is mld in the
vicinity of more thn every fourth high school or junior college in Stockbln.

Replaces Alcohol

He believes that the smoking of hashish got an undeserved lift as a result of
the campaign against alcohol last year.

"The youngsters got the message. They understood that it was dangerous to drink.
But unfortunately, many went over to hashish, which they thought to be an alterna-
tive witlout any danger.

However, the abuse is no longer just a problem among the youngsters in the schools.
The hashlsh has also made its way into the circles of the well-to-do.

The police say unanimously: "Hell dressed men in suits and ties and carrying
briefcasos, pull out their bank cards, withdraw money and buy hashish.

Pipe at the Party

The pipe has begun to replace the glass of sherry at better parties, according
to Chief School Physician Cernerud.

Professor Nils Bej erot:

"I have met law students who say that they use hashish. Tlose are the people who
in the future will be sitting in judgment of possession of only hashish, for

example. ..

Therefore, an unrest prevails over a new debate of legalizing hashish. There is
a great risk that the well-to-do, with other political resources than the young-
sters, will begin to lobby for the legalization of hashish.

Such a discussion would be devastating, say the police as well as researchers
and educators. That would bring about greater abuse.

The signs are already there. This spring, a flyer was distributed in Stockholm
with the message: "Hake hashish legal!"

In a motion to the Federation of Moderate Independent Students, FMS? (which does
not belong to the moderate coalition party) it states:

"I propose that FMSF work for the legalization of narcotics with regard to both
consuuption and sale at market price."

Easier to Get hashish Than Alcohol
A short visit to a junior college in Stockholm yields quick intonation: The

smoking of hashish has become extremely cannon. "It is easier to get hold of
hashish than alcohol. . ."

35
"Certainly the smking of hashish is eel-non," says the first student we meet. He
has tried it once himself. In the United States. But nothing happened and he has
mt tried again.

Earlier it was smoked at parties held by the gang. "But when I discovered that,
I quit going," says 16—year—old Erika Ljung.

"I nought about trying," says another student. "But then I heard from a policalan
who was here how dangerous it was."

Alcohol has becoac less cannon at parties. Often it is either no dmgs--or
hashish.

Grows in Flowerpots

In the student hall, one floor down, sit a 15-year-old girl and a 16-year-old
boy. They have just started eating.

Hell, it happens that they snake. Approximately once a mnth. Someone buys and
then he shares it.

"Where do you buy it?"

"Many go to christiania in Copenhagen. Others. grow it in flowerpots here at hone."
Although both of then smoke, they have different views of the risks involved.

"God made grass, man made alcohol," says the boy, cocksure.

Also Fungus

"But God also created fungus which is dangerous?"

"Yes, that is correct, but alochol is chemically crested by man."

The girl, on the other hand, is sore afraid. "Actually, I always want to say no
thanks, but that is very difficult. If you sit there without being high when

everybody else is. it is no fun."

She has friends who have sucked for a long time. They are absentees and slow.
"Those who smoke become drained and tenacious."

"If you call someone who has smoked for a long time and ask: "Shall we go to a
movie?", they often say that they do not feel like it. They only want to snake
grass," he adds.

The salvo] nurse does not know of any hashish problems.

SVENSKA DACBlAm-t’l‘: "But we have talked to a number of students. All say that
there is a lot of smoking at parties."

36
“We can never go by gossip. We must see ourselves what it is all about before we do
anything. It is difficult to get into what the students do during their leisure
time. They are, after all, more or less grown up.

In the School Yard

we also visited a high scl~o¢l in Stockholm. Host of the students are 13-16 years
old. We do not meet anyone win has smked hashish. But all have pals who have
done it.

We are told a few times that students snake in the school yard.

"It has also been tried to sell hashish here," says a 14-year-old. He has never
been at a party himself where hashish has been smoked. we just drink.

They also say that it is not difficult to get hold of hashish.

"They appear in the subway or on the street and ask if we want to buy. It is easy
to get hold of grass."

Fight About Heroin Expected

The narcotics situation is only getting worse, say the police, which is expecting
a price war in the hero in narket soon. That means large quantities of narcotics.
Lower prices. Increased abuse. . .

The narcotics smugglers have become more and more sophisticated. The police
measures lead to countermeasures by the dope rings. Constant escalation takes
place.

Customs does not have a ghost of a chance of controlling everybody who travels
to Sweden. All types of narcotics can be found here now. Such is the mrcotics

situation in Sweden now:
Fourteen Year Old Pusher

Haahish: brought into the country in enormus quantities worth 1 to 2 billion
kroner in street-value. llaahish is used by ever lore and ever younger people.
One week or so ago, the police caught a 14-year-old pusher who was selling to
finance his own habit.

(bcaine: Has become popular with the "in-crowd," among the well—tn-d). In the
United States it has also reached the hardier drug addicts on the streets. Sweden
follows the United States in the narcotics arena. The police therefore expect
that cocaine will also become a more common drug here.

Heroin: Today it can be found in large quantities. Division” Chief Esbjorn
Esbjo rnsson at the National Police Board expects a price war.

when earlier there was a poor harvest in the ao~called golden triangle in South—
east Asia, Turkey stepped in as a supplier to Sweden.

37
Now hath can export to Sweden. That means a price war...

Amphetamines: Supplies have increased in Sweden. There was a shortage when the
big time dealer Karl Pauksch was arrested and when the laws became stricter in
iblland. But mu it can be found in large quantities again. A great deal of that
is manufactured in Sweden.

Difficult to Spy
Division Chief Esbjornsmn is not optimistic about the future.

"We are far too often in much with language groups that we need interpreters
for. It is therefore difficult for us to spy on then. Hhen they are arrested,
we have great difficulties untangling the mess," he says.

"we will never get rid of the narcotics PID blen. The goal is to keep the abuse
within reasonable limits. The only inspiration of hope is that a change of
opinion takes place. Now everybody-~regardlesa of political affiliation-as
totally against narcotics. That is important.

9583
C80: 5300/ 2077
POLICE ACT TO STOP SHUCCLINC 0F AHPHETAMINES PROM NETHERLANDS
Stockholm DACHNS NYHETER in Swedish 6 Nov 81 p 10

[Article by Leif Dahlin: "Narcotics Epoch Before City Court: Smuggling Indict-
ment Hay Solve Murder of Narcotics Pusher"]

[Text] A narcotica epoch passed before the Stockholm

City Court on Thursday. The prosecuted in a case involv-
ing smuggling of ten kilos of amphetamines is the brother
of a murdered narcotics dealer and a member of the notor-
ious Dutch Peter's Gang, a 61-year-old cafe owner, a close
friend of the dethroned (2) narcotics kingpin Karl Paucksch.
At the hearing were representatives from the Embassy of the
Netherlands, the Dutch Press, the National Criminal Nar-
cotics Department and the Stockholm Homicide Department.
The presecution is wholly based on circumstancial evidence.

The police have handled the brother of the deceased narcotics dealer with “kid
gloves" during the 4-month long detention period. The man may actually be sitting
there with important information about who committed the murder of his bnother and
his good friend in an apartment in Stockholm in November l979--a few days before
the armed mail robbery at lkrhelnsgatan where many policemen were shot and wounded.
Both mail rubbers. who were sentenced to very long imprisonment, used a pistol
that also was used during the killings in the apartment.

The police know that one of the murdered men had a telephone conversation from

a telephone booth in Soder with Karl Paucksch in Holland one week before the
murders. Shortly afterwards, Paucksch was arrested in Holland by the west German
police, and as recently as in the beginning of July this year he was freed after

a short prison sentence. Only a few weeks after his release, the Dutch friend and
the cafe owner traveled to Sweden.

Customs had noticed earlier that the‘cafe owner had made many trips by car, and
when he arrived in Helsinghorg on 13 July it was decided to search his car. Not a
trace of narcotics was found. The National Criminal Surveillance was notified and
the car was under surveillance all the way up to the Esso Motor Hotel at the

Kungens intersection on route 5.

The surveillance people saw the Dutchman leave his car and enter the btel where
he changed his clothes. He returned to the car. Suddenly a Ford Fiesta drives

39
up slowly. Bo'h drivers make eye contact and blink their lights. The Dutchman
enters the other car. he is carrying a briefcase. The car drives down towards

the parking lot. The driver is identified as the brother of the murdered narcotics
dealer. Tat driver goes out of the car, opens the trunk, picks up a plastic

hag filled with 240,000 kroner worth of one hundred kroner bills, and puts the

money inside the car. The police rush forth with drawn pistols and arrest the
men.

The car is searched. Not a trace of narcotics. But the police are convinced that
the cafe owner brought in at least 10 kilos of amphetamines in four separate
incidents during 1980 and 1981 and that the Swede was the receiver.

indications

In order to strengthen the prosecution, the public prosecutor, Birgit Hallberg,
has collected material for evidence that is based on observations made by the

, Dutch Police regarding the cafe owner's doings, that he earlier was sentenced

for preparation of narcotics; possession and ingredients for manufacturing
amphetamines: actions during the visit to Stockholm; combination of numbers on

a piece or paper curreSponding to the figures in the Swede's telephone number;

the visit of the Swede to Holland this summer, where he, among other things, met

a woman wh: is close to the Peter family. Furthermore, the prosecutor will ques-
tion one or the hitch policemen who worked on the case and one of the surveillance
people who caught the man.

The Swede and the Dutchman are represented by two lawyers, Sune Heller and Gunnar
Berg. Both question if the circumstantial evidence presented so far will suffice
to get them sentenced.

The men deny all guilt. The cafe owner says he acted on behalf of a man he does
not know, and the Swede says he had been given instructions by a man he knows but
whose name he does not want to disclose. He does not know if he would have
suffered the same fate as his brother if he had not followed orders.

The Swede's spontaneous comment at the arrest was:

"The 2h0,000 kroner I handed over to the man, who then was unknown to me, was
money for an unsettled ear deal for my dead brother's account.

ﬁvrr since the death of my brother and his friend 1 have been worried that some-
thing might happen to me. After all, it was 1 who first discovered them. Both
had been shot in the hnek of the head. in a way I am glad that I was taken into
custody. I Imve felt safer under the circumstances."

"so you accept the assignment of taking clone to quarter of a million kroner to
lkea near the Hﬁsn "it"! Hotel and to deliver the money to a person you do not
know?"

"I unly knew that he Hus to be there in a car and i could recognize him because he
would he hvlding o hottle of whiskey. i drove slowly towards the hotel and made
runluet with a man who seemed to be waiting for someone. He entered the car and
we blinked the lights at each other. He was carrying a bag and a bottle of
whiskey.

ho
The whiskey hottlc became a central issue during the interrogations during the
first day. Earlier the Swede had said that the bottle was in the bag when the
IMtchman arrived. in other words, the prosecutor was of the opinion that a
whiskey bottle as a signal was pure fabrication. Finally. the parties agreed that
the bottle had been in view about 5 to 10 meters away from the car and before the
mltchman entered the car.

"Saturated" Market

The Swede has earlier been sentenced for serious narcotics offences. He said
that he no longer dealt in narcotics and the cafe owner said that he had no
notion of what the courier assignment involved. He has earlier been sentenced
for selling 25-30 kilos of cannabis.

whether Stockholm's Criminal Assault Division ever will be able to sort out who
committed the double murder depends to a great extent on the outcome of this
case. it is possible that the Swede will gradually become softer and tell what
he knows. One of the commission members has said that he never can drop the
murder case.

Who was it then who handed over the 240,000 kroner to the Swede? According to
infonnath)n, the ﬁlllce now work on the theory that the assignment coordinator

may he a man wh) is serving a long-term prison sentence for having smuggled over
100 kilos of amphetamines. some in cable drums, {rem Holland during the mid-
scventies. This man's eventual connection with a banker involved in a bank swindle
a few yars ago, the police have now "put on ice“ but not forgotten.

And the amphetamine manufacturing in Holland continues. The market in Stockholm
is “saturated."

9583
630: 5300/2077

bl
comrmas URGES HIDDEN MICROPHONES, TV IN DRUGS FIGHT
Stockholm SVENSKA DAGBLADET In Swedish 12 Nov 81 p 7

lArticle hy Hilly Silhcrstein: "Proposal in Fight Against Narcotics Offenses:
Sorrel 1V-Cnmerns uud Hicrophonus"]

[Text] It will he easier for the police in the future

to fight against narcotics offenders. They will be able
to enter apartments and install microphones. Secret
television cameras will also be installed in public places.

This proposal was made today by the National Committee for Coercive Means.

According to regulations that apply now, television cameras for surveillance are
only allowed with a permit from the county administration. A sign must notify
that a camera is installed there.

"As the poliCe already today are allowed to hide with a camera and investigate,

I.

we feel it is natural to say yes to hidden television camera surveillance, says
Sigvard Helin, assistant justice of appeal, who is secretary for the committee.

Strong Suspicion

The conditions are that there exist suspicion of offenses. Television cameras
will primarily he used in the fight against narcotics.

A majority of the committee wants the same regulations that apply today about
wiretapping. This form of surveillance will only be put into effect during

serious suspicion of an offense.

Kerstin Andersson. member of parliament (Center Party), has reservations about
this point, along with another member of parliament. They do not feel that the
demands need to he so strong for the police to be allowed to conduct wiretapping.

“The narcoties offenders have no compassion whatsoever with young people. There-
fore the police must have greater opportunities. I have talked to many people
who feel that i am right," says Andersson to SVENSKA DAGBLADET.

Today. the police are not allowed to use wiretapping by deploying microphones.
But under suspicion of a serious offense, for example for narcotics, or in the case

h2
of an offense against national security, wiretapping will in the future be
allowed after a court decision.

That means also that the police can secretly enter apartments, offices, etc.,
to install microphones.

This type of wiretapping is considered necessary, among other things, because
more and more offenders have become careful and do not dare talk with their fellow
offenders on the telephone.

Already before the committee had presented its work, criticism has surfaced, such
as from the National Federation of Drug~Free Society. In the periodical
NARKOTIKA—FRAGA Nils Bejerot and Jonas Hartelius write:

Thren t Against Refugees

"if the police are allowed to enter homes and install microphones, the risk exists

that this right will be used indiscrhninately for generally 'checking out' what
people are doing.

"The possibility of wiretapping night he used against politically undesirable
groups, refugees and other special groups.

"Instead of incorporating new technical measures, it should be made more of a
risk to possess even smaller amounts of narcotics 'for personal use.‘ Then the

guilt for narcotics offenses will rise with the corruption," write Bejerot and
Hartelius.

9583
C50: 5300/2077

1:3
Keork Vartanyan, the leader of the heroin smuggling gang formed to supply money to
Armenian terrorists, was caught together with the rest of the gang after a long
chase

[Text] Stockholm--A group charged with the function of funding the expenses of the
Armenian terrorist organization, ASALA [Armenian Secret Army for the Liberation of
Armenia], was uncovered as a result of extensive efforts by the Swedish police.
Ninteen Armenians and 5 Swedes were detained after they were caught with 5 kilograms
of heroin, 1 million Swedish krona in cash and several weapons.

The capture of the leader of the group, Keork Vartanyan, and his aide, Dirsn
Zanazanyan, both Syrian citizens, took place like a scene in gangster movies. The
police, which was aware of the broad cooperation between the gang and the terrorists,
besieged Vartanyan's home with about 20 security men armed with automatic pistols.
The too Armenians were captured following a brief skirmish. The police letter
announced that the two Armenians were armed.

According to the official announcement, the captured Armenian group had been under
surveillance by police for the past 3 years. The police increased its surveillance

L-h
of the group and the case attracted intensified attention following the capture of

the “Huharrem Sar" group, a narcotic smuggling organization known as Sweden as the
"Turkish Mafia."

The members of the gang have been under surveillance by 20 detectives around the
clock for the past 6 months. However, the extreme cautiousnesa of the group members
delayed conclusive action by the police.

Keork Vartanyan Led a Modest Life

The mastermind of the group, Keork Vartanyan, came to Sweden in 1973. According to
a statement made by the police, Vartanyan established contact with the Armenian
society in Stockholm shortly after his arrival in the cauntry. He became very active
soon after that and succeeded in gathering Armenians--particu1arly those from Syria
and Lebanon-around himself. It is believed that the seeds of the gang were sown
in those years and that at the beginning they were dealing only in the smuggling

of hashish. Later the gang entered the heroin business following the establishment
of that drug in the Swedish market. It is believed that the gang has been making
sizeable profits for years. The 5 kilograms of heroin captured alone has a market
value of 15 million Swedish krona (around 350 million Turkish liras). 0n the other
hand, it is significant that Vartanyen led a very modest lifestyle.

Honey Sent to Switzerland

The Swedish police as well as Prosecutor Jerry Hartinger, who is in charge of the
case. are certain that the large sums of money obtained from heroin trade were being
smuggled into Switzerland through various channels. It is also believed that there

is a close link between Vartanyan and certain Armenian organizations in France. Italy,
west Germany and the United States.

A small shoe repair shop in the Kunasholmen district of central Stackholm functioned
as a "front for Vartanyan. Everyone who has known Vartanyan had the impression that
he was a reclusive and quiet person who minded his own business. It is claimed that
this deceptive appearance made the work for the police twice as hard and that, as a
result, years had to pass before conclusive action could be taken.

Vartanyan Refuses to Talk to Police

The police found itself in an unexpected situation when they began questioning the
suspects following the capture of the gang. According to information received,
Vartanynn has not said anything since the time he was captured; he is not responding
to any of the questions asked. '

According to the Swedish press the links begween the captured group and Armenian
terrorist organizations will be probed more extensively and efforts will be made to
uncover facts. One point abOut which nobody seems to have any doubts is the fact
that the money obtained from the sale of heroin to Swedish youths at high prices
was being used to kill Turkish diplomats.

Meanwhile, it is reported that Swiss. West German and 0.5. intelligence services.
which were interested in the activities of the Armenian heroin gang captured by the

h5
Swedes, have contacted the Swedish security police. These intelligence services
which assume that the noney obtained from heroin snuggling use being used to finance
Armenian terrorists want to share interaction with the Swedish police.

Meanwhile it is claimed that the Swedish secret police. 8820, is intensely inter-
ested in the case and that it is conducting a probe of its own independent from

the narcotics police.
POLICE CLAIM SUCCESS IN CONTROLLING NARCO’I'ICS TRAFFIC
Istanbul llURRIYET in Turkish 2 Nov 81 p 3
[Report by 8min Ozgonul]

[Text] The Turkish police has scored its most significant success so far in the war
it has declared against narcotics smugglers, and the delivery of narcotics through
Turkey has been brought to a halt. It has been learned that narcotics smugglers
have stopped delivering their merchandise through Turkey on grounds that it has
become "too dangerous" as a result of the effective measures taken and that they
are now rerouting the opium and morphine base obtained from the Far East and the

Middle East through Syria and Cyprus onto Europe.

The battle that the Turkish police has been waging against narcotics smugglers for
a long time has produced results with the support of international organizations
also working in this area. The delivery of opium and morphine base. so far done
with the aid of HR trucks, has now been rerOuted as a result of an increase in the
number of narcotics departments and latest model equipment given to the police. It
has been learned that Turkey's name has been erased from the vocabulary of narcotics
traffic and that as a result the smugglers have redrawn their maps. According to
the new arrangement the opium and the morphine base which is to be taken to Europe
for transformation into heroin is procured from Far Eastern and Middle Eastern
countries and brought into Syria. The merchandise is then transported to Cyprus by
air and sea and then to European ports again by air and see.

9588
CSO: 5300/5323

11?
JOINT OPERATION UNCOVERS NARCOTICS SHUGGLING RING
Istanbul CUHHURIYET in Turkish 2 Nov 81 pp 1. 9
[Report by Ufuk Guldemir]

[Text] Ankara--Iniormation obtained from a narcotics smuggler who has been cooper-
ating with the west German Narcotics Police has led to the uncovering of an inter—
national smuggling ring.

The information gathered was sent to Turkey on condition that the none of the smuggler
cooperating with the German police be kept secret. The General Secretariat of the
National Security Council passed the information to the Ministry of the Interior and
the Ministry of Customs and Monopolies in September. A Joint Commission formed by

the two ministries at the request of the General Secretariat of the National Security
Council is now in operation.

' Acting on the information received from abroad the commission is concentrating on
22 names and 3 groups:

Kenan Golge (currently under custody at the Selimiye barracks in connection with
another smuggling case);

Selahattin Clareoglu;

Former Istanbul Curator of Museums (first name unknown) Of'lular;

Ata Yeailtas (Kenan Colge's communications man abroad);

Ozkan Ccdim;

Erdal Bvirgen (the person who turns the acid anhydride used in the manufacture of
heroin into powder);

lhsan (last name unknown);

Cevdet Danaci (a former official of the Izmir Narcotics Bureau);

Galeri Nur (uses its clothing store as a front);

Pertev Molny (businessman);

Etcm Genc (operates a gambling establishment abroad);

All Cuvenir (also know as Yanik Ali);

Hasnn Pendikii'

Levant Acur;

Omer Ari (works on the Istanbul-Netherlands-Britain axis; member of the Longon group;
salesnun for Of'lular);

Sena Beyer;

Ercil Subnsi.

1:8
According to information received from the General Secretariat of the National
Security Council the organizers of international smuggling from Hanover are:

Ali Guvenir (organizer between Iran and West Germany; his contact in Iran is a
businessman of Armenian origin);

Hetin Coskuneren (cash courier on the Italy-Britain-Hetherlands-Iran—Heat Germany
axis);

Erdal Evirgen (responsible for the distribution of the goods in Host Germany after
their arrival through Iran and Netherlands).

it has been determined that the Selahattin Cizrelioglu mentioned in the list is of
no relation to former Diyarbakir Senator Cizrelioglu. The information received from
the General Secretariat of the National Security Council mentions Selahattin
cizrelioglu as "former Bitlis Senator." However. Cizrelioglu is a former Diyarbakir
senator .

Former Senator Cisrelioglu responded to the questions of the CUHHUHIYBT correspondent
on the issue:

[Question] Your name is also mentioned in the list.

[Answer] Very strange. I do not know anything about it. But wait a minute. Sev-
ernl other such incidents happened in the past as well.

[Question] What other incidents?

[Answer] 1here is another Selahattin Cisrelioglu around. I came across his name
here on a number of occasions.

[Question] Where did you come across his name?

[Answer] I was in Diyarbakir in 1977 working on elections. At the time I was
senator but I was working for my colleagues running for the House of Representatives.
Around that time your paper published a news item to the effect that someone named
Selahattin Cizrelioglu was running as a candidate from Konya for a seat in the

House. I was a senator from Diyarbakir at that time. So who was this Selahattin
Cizrelioglu? Immediately I called the [party's] Konya Province Chairman. He told
me that Selahattin Cizrclioglu was a worker in Germany. Later, this person lost

the election and could not go to the house.

[Question] You said several incidents. Are there others?

[Answer] During the 1974 administration Pehim Adah and Korkut Ozal, both ministers
at the time. told me during a cabinet meeting that someone called Selahattin
Cizrelioglu visited them. They asked me if I knew him and I told them I did not.
[Question] Is there another Selahattin Cizrelioglu in your family?

[Answer] No.

[Question] Then someone used your name and title.

[Answer] I guess so.

9588
cso: 5300/5323 h9
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007102109: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500010013-1

CANNABIS GANG SENTENCED T0 JAIL TERMS
London THE DAILY TELEGRAPH in English 27 Nov 81 p 3
[Article by Ian Henry]

['l‘cxc]

ROBERT MELS, 43, millionaire drugs boss
of the Racecourse Set, gave a wink and a

nod to his smuggling associates as he was
jailed for 10 years at the Old Baile! yesterday.

Mills. an oil-course bookmaker and moehorse
owner. who masterminded a brilliant £40 million
cannabis smuggling operation, heard judge thruutn
LOWM'. QC, explain that he had no powers to forfeit

the gang's vast drugs
proﬁts.

But he did line the ﬂatn-
boynnt Mills £250,000.

”The roan power: In
limimt by Acts ol Parliament.

"PJtltamtnl had not con-
totnplnlrd a ran- on "I“ sale
when the various natuten
wort- matted.

“ l .1In lmwvv-tr able to new
1 Eur

“I! h rlghl Ind nechmrv
In "in t'ti~ lu'ttaltv lo ttmkr
~m'v tltuu lllllﬂl'\ dot-s mi:
Il‘lllJitl In tho lwnrlil ul 4 cun-
ntlul ll‘f‘llll mt his n-lrnv-f'

'l‘ltv i:u|:n l“|’lﬂlﬂMI "l
luu- in "in l‘.l\l‘ nu punt-rs
nl ltlllrlllll’". nur have I .Il'|\
lmwvr tn tztlw mnnrv Itnm am-
hank ltrotln'. wilt-rm” ll mu
lw.

Ill‘lmr «mlrmin: tit mom-
lwrs u! the limits gang. the
tmlm- uid he had taken into
tnmidrrnttnn that rnnnnhit was
:1 Plans ll drul—drnlint In
heroin "ult'ult kills it usilv
mtm- min-n than dealing in
t'annabu "

Foreign accounts

In a four-year period the
llacvcounr Set nntnuetl n
multimillion pound torlnno.
much nl nbirh is now behaved
to In- melted away in ton-eign
bunk ‘Jl‘tollllll.

A Scotland Yard spokesman
said later lit" the jut] 9. had
made it clear the ﬁnrs n was
.mpminx more meant to he
mitistir because the penalty in
“ml of .t fine was only 12
month imprisonment.

None or the mulinu rial
gave ewlanaitcns to the court
0] what had boomed to the
Milk 0! their fortune made
from a reputed 2| drux unnu-
linx IIlI‘N [mm North lrica m
Tatiana ”I)‘. I Secluded South
(‘nrnislt cove. 'ntry prolused
llMt tltpir urn-lit» ltad boa-n
t'alt'll ”7:“.

Mr tloom Simpson. 0C.:
di-lt-ndin: Milli til Watlnrd -
“.M, Ilrntlon. reluted a sun-
gntmn in the Dan: Tum-ant;
_\I‘\ll‘ldl\ that Milk was among: .
tlmw who had money hidden In
«11.4 Swiss bank mounts.

50

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500010013-1
.32. r: a; .33. £2.53».
2:. 5.3.. u... c. in: M... 5.7....
...:..:.... mo:...i...:o... .3 ...
«2.? .5... Agar/an 08...:
E. i .553... 2.6... 21.5?
72.: 2.... .......a....... a»???
u... .A ...=............. 5....an. ...o..
F... :3. :25 .5... 7...... .3
=3... .23.

.55.... .35.?! 3. a. .03....
2:... 1...} =92... :35 >_...:.
1...... ........§.:.. 5.3 7...... .2.
.5. .32 .2. >438: ...=..
.5... my... a. 5.3325...
12.1.3.1... ..u..... is. .32. a
u. 32.... {5.2.3 2.3.3....
3.. =3 <82.

Dill-ii Lu url L I.D|LDDu

 

... :l.t.:l.. :l: